Numerus Infaustus.

A SHORT VIEW Of the Unfortunate Reigns OF WILLIAM the Second. HENRY the
Second. EDWARD the Second. RICHARD the Second. CHARLES the Second. JAMES the
Second.


-- sine Caede, and Sanguine pauci
Descendunt Reges, and sicea Morte Tyrrani.
London: Printed for Ric. Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Church
yard, 1689.

LICENSED.

June 25. 89. J. Frasier

TO THE READER.
MEeting accidentally the other Day with a Passage in Heylins Geography which
he sets down in these words. p. 225. I will present you with a fatal
Observation of the Letter H. as I find it thus versed in Albions England.

Not superstitiously I speak, but H this Letter still.
Has been observed ominous to Englands good or ill, etc.
A sudden Conceit darted into my Thoughts (from the Remembrance of former
Reading) that such Kings of England, as were the Second of any Name, proved
very unfortunate Princes both to themselves, and to their People, Whereupon I
consulted the English Chronicles, and out of them I have drawn a summary
Narration of the Lives and Reigns of Six Kings. For the Matter of Fact I have
faithfully adhered to the History, and yet I have not transcribed their Method,
Style, or Language.

The Writing of this was an Entertainment for afew of my idle Hours, and
perhaps the Reader may be pleased to divert himself for a few Minutes, in the
Perusal,

Numerus Infaustus.
THE LIFE and REIGN OF WILLIAM the Second, Nicknamed RUFUS
THE First William gained England by Conquest, and bequeathed it to the Second
by Will. By his Invasion he usurped the Right of his Cousin Edgar; and by his
Legacy he infringed that of his Heir. He put out Harold the unlawful Possessor
of the Kingdom; and put by Robert his Lawful Successor.

William the Second of that Name, of fewer years than his Brother, but of
greater Interest in the Inclinations of his Father, with hasty Steps ascended
the Throne, entering the Royal Palace at the wrong Door. He indear'd himself to
the one by the resemblance of Humors, and the roughness of his Temper; and
overreach'd the other by the Credulity and Easiness of his Disposition: Giving
no more deference to the Obligation of Promises, than to the Right of
Primogeniture. His Vows to God, his Word to his Brother, and his Engagements to
his Subjects, were all plighted with a like sincerity, and with the same
Integrity observed, and maintained. He was positive and sturdy, and that passed
for Valor; He was crafty and politic, and that was reported for Wisdom: He
was accounted Religious, when he pursued his own Temporal Advantages, and was
reputed profane, when he invaded the privileges of the Church: He was
immeasurably covetous, only in Order to the being unreasonably profuse; and
under the pretense of Religion he committed the greatest Acts of Enormity and
Impiety. His incontinency was not taken notice of, because he could not
transgress the Vow of Matrimony; and though in speculations and Disputes he
seemed concerned for Religion, yet by his Actions he appeared to be a practical
Atheist. The course of his Life was turbulent and uneasy; and the manner of
his Death violent, and untimely.

He was no sooner mounted on the Throne, but troubles arose to discompose his
quiet. Robert his Eldest Brother highly resenting this great Injury, to be
justled out of his Seat by the partiality of his Father, and the Incroachment
of his Brother; began to think of some timely Expedients for the Recovery of
his Right, and being assisted in his pretensions by several of the Nobility in
England; as Odo Bishop of Bayeux and Earl of Kent, Roger Montgomery Earl of
Shrewsbury, Hugh de-Grandemenil, Robert Moubray Earl of Northumberland, William
Bishop of Durham, and diverse others of the Clergy, and Nobility (who raised
great forces, and possessed themselves of many considerable places) the King
was constrained to compound for his Peace, by an assurance of three Thousand
Marks per Annum to his Brother during Life, and the Reversion of the Crown of
England after his decease; and by a Solemn promise to restore to the people
their Ancient Laws, and to indulge them the Liberty of hunting in his Forests.
By these condescensions he dissipated the present Storm that impended over his
Head, and gained some short Respite from his growing Troubles.

This Tempest was hardly allayed in the South, but fresh Clouds began to gather
in the North. Malcolin King of the Scots thinking it a fit Opportunity to
purvey for himself, and enlarge his Borders, when his Neighbor was imbroyl'd
with intestine Commotions; makes a sudden and furious incursion into
Northumberland, over-runs the Country, burns and destroys all before him, and
returns home laden with the spoils of the Inhabitants, without the least
hinderance, or opposition. And tho it was not long, before King William was
sufficiently revenged on his Invader, whom he reduced to the necessity of
paying the Ancient Homage due to the Crown, and to give assurance of his future
fidelity by New stipulations; yet such an enterprise could not be accomplished,
without a vast expense of Treasure, and a great loss of Men.

The King (who was very prodigal of his promises, but slow and penurious in the
performance) neglected the payment of the Composition made with his Brother
Robert; whereupon he makes his Application to the King of France; who presently
furnished him with considerable supplies, by which Assistance he assaulted and
took several Towns in Normandy; and by his success obliged King William again
to raise a powerful Army, and to transport them into that Country; where tho by
his crafty Address he avoided the Effusion of Blood, and the consumption of his
Forces, yet he wasted his Treasure, and purchased a Truce with the King of
France, by the mediation of Money.

And now all things were calm and quiet, but not long so; the Sky began to be
overcast with gloomy exhalations, and troubles arose upon an occasion as
unusual, as unnecessary. Malcolin King of the Scots was a generous and
magnanimous Prince, and being at Peace and full Amity with his Neighbors, he
undertook the Toil of a Journey as far as Gloucester, to pay a Royal Visit to
his Ally and Friend the King of England: Who either out of a Humor, Pique or
Pride, would not vouchsafe so much as to see him; which Barbarous return to the
Civility of the affronted King did so exasperate him, that he posted back to
his own Country, made ready a powerful Army with all Expedition, and again
infested Northumberland, Ravaging through the Country without Comptrol, and
enriching his Followers by the Ruin and desolation of harmless and unconcerned
people. And though in the prosecution of this design he lost his Life, and the
Life of Edward his Eldest Son, and his whole Army entirely Routed and Defeated
(being drawn into an Ambuscade by Robert Moubray the Kings Lieutenant) yet King
William suffered a great diminution of his Honor and Fame, by so unhospitable
a Refusal of a common Respect to his equal in Degree and Title.

The King, who was never happy in any long intermission of those distempered
Fits that shook him, fell now into a snarp and dangerous Paroxysme. The
VVelchmen taking Notice of the Kings incessant Troubles and Distractions; to
gratify both their Revenge and Avarice, entered the English Borders, and
making use of such Advantages as naturally attend a surprise, they became
Masters of many Towns and strong Holds, committing all manner of Outrage and
Hostility, exercising that Malice, which they bore to the King, upon the Lives
and Estates of his innocent Subjects. The King with great industry and care,
got together a handsome Army, with which he marched in Person toward them,
promising to himself an easy and a cheap Victory: But he was disappointed of
his purpose, and forced to retreat with all speed to London to compose an Army
of greater strength, and Number. In the mean time to increase his perplexity,
Robert Moubray Earl of Northumberland, (who had done him such signal Service in
repelling the Scots, and destroying their King) finding himself disregarded,
and no competent Honor, or Reward designed for his singular Merits, began to
be Malcontent; and joined in an open Conspiracy against his Lord and Master.
But the King reinforced with an Army far stronger than ever he had imbodied
before; took, and imprisoned the Earl, and entered the Welsh Territories,
where not being able to provoke them to the Decision of a Battle, he persued
them with Stratagems, Erected many Castles and Forts, that so by degrees he
might become Master of the Country: But they retreating to the natural
Fortifications of Woods, Mountains, and inaccessible passages, did so baffle
him in his Attempts, and so harass and tire out his Soldiers, that he thought
it most advisable to withdraw from the Enterprise, and to commit the further
prosecution of it to his Lieutenants, who in time utterly subdued those Naked
and Wild people, but not without horrible Instances of Cruelty, and Barbarity.

Thus we have seen a Man advanced to a Throne, invested with Regal Authority,
surrounded with all the external Glories, and Felicities of a Diadem; yet
denied the inward satisfaction and Tranquillity of a quiet and peaceable
enjoyment of his Acquisitions. Hitherto we have observed, how Invasions from
abroad, and distractions at home rendered his Life uneasy: Let us now take an
Account of his immoral, and irregular Actions, which made his Person
unacceptable, and his Reign unfortunate to his Subjects.

He assumed to himself an immoderate and Licentious Power to supply his
necessities by the detriment and spoil of others. And because in his Time the
Clergy was of all Ranks of Men the most opulent, he found them the most proper
Objects of his Rapine, and Oppression. When any Bishopric, or Abbey became
vacant, he presently seized the Revenues into his own Hand. He kept the Sea of
Canterbury four years to his own use, and would have done it longer, but that a
desperate Sickness put him into a Fit of Devotion; for being at the brink of
Death, and ready to expire, he resolved to commute for his Intrusion, by the
donation of those Livings, which (as he thought) he could no longer detein, and
hastily conferred the Archbishopric of Canterbury upon Anselm, and and the
Bishopric of Lincoln upon Robert Bloet: But no sooner was Health restored, but
his old Inclinations returned, and no other Tokens of Repentance appeared, but
a Remorse and Sorrow for parting with two such rich Morsels; for he never
desisted from importuning and tormenting the two poor Bishops, till he squeesed
good Sums of Money from Anselm, and five thousand pounds from Bloet.

He kept in his Hands at one time three ^^^^opricks (Canterbury, Winchester,
and Salisbury) and twelve Abbeys; all which he set out to Farm, and gathered
the Profits of them into his own Coffers.

Being obliged to pay a great Sum of Money to the King of France, he found this
Invention to procure it; He pretended a resolution to make War, and a sudden
irruption into Normandy, in order to which he levied twenty thousand Men (by
Press and other coercive means) who being drawn to the Sea side, and ready to
imbarque, he ordered it to be signified and made known, that because he could
more commodiously levy men in Normandy (without the Toil and Charge of
transporting) whosoever would pay Ten Shillings toward the raising of such
Forces, should be excused from going on that Expedition, which proffer was so
grateful and plausible to the Army, that there was hardly any man that did not
greedily comply with the proposal. He added extortion to Usury, took up Money by
indirect Courses, and employed it to unjust purposes; he would not supply his
Brother with Money (tho upon a pious undertaking to the Holy Land) without a
Mortgage of his Duchy of Normandy; and he could not raise it but by exactions,
and compulsory Loans, so that to advance the Sum, the Bishops melted their
Plate and the Temporal Lords destroyed their Tenants.

Spiritual Preferments were not given, but sold by Auction, and he received
from Thurstan Five Hundred Pounds for the Abbey of Glastenbury; and fell out
with Anselm, because he would not give a Thousand Marks for being made
Archbishop of Canterbury.

He arrogated to himself the Glory of Building Westminster Hall; but His
Subjects were at the Expense, who believed, that he reared that Fabric only
for a pretense to lay a heavy Tax upon the People, and was a great gainer by
the Project.

If the Priests transgressed by carnal deviations from the strict Rule of their
Profession, the Penance was in the Purse; and a composition with the King was
as effectual, as a Sacerdotal Absolution. And because he received very great
Profit by particular Indulgences given to the Jews, he encouraged the Relaps of
such as were converted to Christianity, accounting it no matter to be Followers
of Christ, so they were but Benefactors to him.

Among other Faults laid to his Charge, it is worth observing, that he is noted
for imposing excessive Fines upon diverse of the Nobility, for small offenses.

Having by his Avarice and Severities wearied his Subjects, and disposed them
to seek for Safety and Liberty in other Countries; He unexpectedly issued a
Proclamation that no man should depart the Realm without his License, for the
purchase of which he did not care to lose a Subject. While Promoters,
Informers, and such sort of State-Caterpillars were his principal Favorites,
and Partakers of his Grace and Bounty.

He had a mind to be reputed an exact Observer of his Word and Promise. And
perhaps he was so in matters of small Importance: But when Profit and Advantage
came to be weighed, Self-interest soon turned the Scale. He made a solemn
Agreement with his Brother Robert, to bequeath the Crown of England to him; but
it does not appear, that he remembered the Engagement, or ever had an intention
to be just to his Word. When he was pressed by an intestine War, and by the
Loyalty and Valor of the English rescued from the Rebellion of his Norman
Followers, he promised a restitution of their Ancient Laws, and an indulgence
to some Privileges which were much valued by the people of those times; but
with the necessity the obligation ceased, and he became a Bankrupt of his Word
and Promise. As little did he regard his Promises to God his Creator, for being
dangerously sick at Gloucester, and despairing of Recovery, he made a Solemn
Vow, that if he were restored to his Health, he would lead a New Life, and give
over all his disorderly Courses, but the restoration of his strength was
accompanied with the return of his former vicious inclinations, and he became
ten times more the child of wrath, than he was before.

He is reported to be very lascivious and incontinent, but in regard he did not
defraud his own Wife, (having never been married) and was not observed to
debauch the Wives of other Men, he only passes for a simple Fornicator, and
even in that not at all curious, not entertaining a select Concubine, but
promiscuously trucking with any Woman that came in his way.

To show how conscientious he was in matters of Religion, take the words of Sir
Richard Baker in his Chronicle of England, p. 35. He appointed a Disputation to
be held between Christians and Jews, and before the day came, the Jews brought
the King a present, to the end they might have an indifferent hearing; the King
took the present, encouraging them to quit themselves like Men: And swore by
St. Lukes face (his usual Oath) that if they prevailed by Disputation, he would
himself turn Jew, and be of their Religion. A young Jew on a time was converted
to the Christian Faith, whose Father being much troubled at it, presented the
King sixty Mark, entreating him to make his Son to return to his Judaism;
whereupon the King sent for his Son, commanding him without more ado to return
to the Religion of his Nation: But the young Man answered, he wondered his
Majesty would use such Words; for being a Christian he should rather persuade
him to Christianity: With which Answer the King was so confounded, that he
commanded the young Man to get him out of his sight. But his Father finding the
King could do no good upon his Son, required his Money again. Nay (says the
King) I have taken pains enough for it; and yet that thou may see how kindly
I will deal, you shall have one half, and the other half you cannot in
Conscience deny me.

In one Act he showed himself a Tyrant, and an Atheist, for fifty Gentlemen
being accused for Hunting and killing the Kings Deer, he caused them to be
condemned to the Trial by Fire, which they escaping untouched by the miraculous
Providence of God, and he thereby defeated of his greedy expectation by the
Confiscation of their Estates, fell into an outrageous Passion, and cried out,
How happens this! is God a just Judge in suffering it? Now a Murrain take him
that believes it.

But vengeance from Heaven soon overtook him that did not believe it; for the
King (though warned by Dreams and other uncommon Presages, of some approaching
Disaster) appointed, a Hunting in the new Forest upon the second of August.
When the day came, he began to be perplexed with the remembrance of those
ominous Bodings, and stayed within till Noon: But having at Dinner driven away
all care and fear, by drinking himself into hardiness and security, he mounled
his Horse, and eagerly followed the Chase: shortly after Sir Walter Tyrrel, a
Knight of Normandy (to whom the King at their going out had given two Arrows
very strong and sharp, telling him, That he knew how to shoot to purpose)
having a very fat Buck in view, and at a convenient distance to be struck, let
fly an Arrow, which glancing on a Tree, or else grazing on the Back of the
Deer, reached the King, hit him in the Breast, and he immediately dropped down
dead.

Thus fell Nimrod the mighty Norman Hunter, destroyed by that very sport in
which he took such excessive delight, violently brought to death on that
occasion; by which he had deliberately designed the destruction of many others;
and in that very place where his Father had depopulated so many Town, and
ruined so many Religious Houses, for the accommodation of wild Beasts, and to
gratify his own inordinate pleasures.

THE LIFE and REIGN OF HENRY the Second.
THOUGH the Accession of Henry the Son of Geoffrey Plantagenet Duke of Anjou, to
the Crown of England, be not branded with the unsavory Terms of Intrusion, or
Usurpation; yet whosoever will impartially revolve the Chronicles of those
Times, may modestly conclude, that he jumpt into the Throne over the back of
his Mother. Maud (commonly styled the Empress) was the only Daughter and Heir
of Henry the first, and tho she was an Empress, and afterward a Duchess, yet
she could never arrive at the Station of a Queen. Stephen usurped the Crown,
and kept it from her; and Henry her Son confirmed the Disseisin, by compounding
for his own Succession, without any regard to his Mothers Title. Whether she
was locked up in an unknown Prison, or estranged by Banishment, or secretly made
away, it were a great Presumption in me to assert, since the Writers and
Historians of those days make no positive Determination in the matter: But that
she was civilly dead, that no Notice was taken of her Right and Legal Claim to
the Government, after she had so unsuccessfully contended with King Stephen,
nothing can be more manifest. Henry her Son was a young, active, and Valiant
Prince, very potent, endowed with great possessions, and in expectation of
greater Additions: He was in his own Right Duke of Anjou, in Right of his Wife
Duke of Guyen and Earl of Poietou, and in Right of his Mother, Duke of
Normandy, and presumptive Heir to the Kingdom of England. This greatness of
Estate added to the Greatness of his Spirit, and buoyed up by the Hopes of a
far greater augmentation of his Fortunes, pushed him on to set up for himself
in a competition for the Crown of England; to the Achievement of which many
accidents concurring (as the untimely Death of Eustace the Son of King Stophen,
the melancholic despair of his Mother the Empress, upon her improsperous
contest with Stephen, and the Loss of her Brother, and other her fast Friends)
he came to a composition with King Stephen, and a perfect Reconciliation was
made between them, choosing rather to succeed him by Adoption, than to wait the
natural Descent of his Inheritance by the Death of his Mother. Whether a
Prophetic foresight of the short Period prescribed to the Reign of King
Stephen, or a secret design to catch some opportunity to accelerate His own
Investiture, prompted Him on to this Accommodation, lies only within the
compass of conjecture; but so it fell out, that his Possession by Survivership
was not long Prorogued; the Agreement being made in January by mutual consent,
and consummated in October following, by the Death of King Stephen.

Henry the Second being now actually King, disturbed by no Competitor, or
Pretender, might with all affluence of Honor, Wealth, and Pleasure, have
enjoyed his Kingdom in profound Peace; but in despite to Fortune, who hitherto
had Courted him. He created Troubles to himself, and was the unlucky Author of
his own misery. For tho the Rebellious Insurrection of the Welsh, in the first
Year of his Reign, did somewhat discompose his quiet; yet the Issue of it did
only tend to aggrandise his Name, to make him more revered at Home, and more
awfully considered abroad. But the Expedition into Scotland was the product of
his own injustice: Stephen his Father by Adoption had granted Cumberland, and
Huntington shire to Malcolm King of the Scots, and Maud his Mother had given
Northumberland to the same: Henry disdaining to see his Kingdom Cantonised, and
grudging that such considerable Parts of it should be dismembered from the
Body, and become the Patrimony of his Neighbor, demands the Estate by a
military Claim, and marching thither with a powerful Army, repossesseth himself
of part of these alienated Lands, and voluntarily relinquisheth the rest.

The same restless Humor prompted him to persecute his Brother Geoffrey. For
his Father on his Deathbed bequeathed the Dukedom of Anjou to him, but with
this limitation, that so soon as He should become King of England, he should
deliver up Anjou to his Brother Geoffrey: And for the further assurance of it,
he obliged his Lords to Swear, not to suffer his Body to be buried, till his
Son Henry had taken his Oath exactly to perform it. Henry solemnly binds
himself by Oath to perform his Fathers Will, but afterward as wickedly breaks
his Vow (having obtained a Dispensation for so great an Impiety, from his Holy
Father Pope Adrian) and entering into Anjou with an Army, took from his Brother
(who was in no Capacity to resist so puissant an Invader) not only the Country
of Anjou, but some other Cities also, which his Father had absolutely given him
for his maintenance, which unnatural Treatment had so fatal an operation on the
poor Duke, that within a very short time it broke his heart.

And now Lewis King of France began to find him a costly and hazardous
diversion; for having not well digested the affront put upon him by King Henry
in marrying of Eleanor his divorced Queen, and seeking all occasions to
demonstrate his Resentments, he became an open Abettor of Raymond Earl of St.
Giles, with whom King Henry had a Controversy about the Earldom of Toulouse.
Hereupon the Litigants began mutually to arm, and great forces were raised on
both sides, but being just ready to join in a bloody Battle, a Peace was
concluded by the Mediation of Friends.

And least matters should be wanting to propagate new cares, and interruption
to the progress of his Felicity; by an over fond and unexampled Indulgence, he
assumed his Son Henry (then seventeen years of age) into a Partnership in the
Throne; whose arrogant behavior, and picgant Repa^tee at the very time of his
Coronation, administered just cause to the King to repent his rashness. For the
King to do honor to his young Colleague, at the Coronation feast would needs
carry up the first Dish to the Table; which the Archbishop (who had performed
the Ceremony) observing, said merrily to the new King, What an honor is this
to you, to have such a waiter at your Table? The other replied, Why? what great
matter is it for him, that was but the Son of a Duke to do service to me, that
am the Son of a King, and a Queen? Neither was it long before the King was
sensibly convinced of his weakness. For the young King having imbibed some
mutinous Notions of discontent from the insinuations of the French King, and
being animated by his advice and assistance, began openly to oppose his Father.
For an aggravation to the old Kings misfortunes, Eleanor his Queen enraged with
jealousy, and not able to endure the sight of so many Concubines to which her
Husband had given up himself, she not only incenseth her Son Henry to proceed
in his Enterprise, but secretly persuades Richard and Geoffery, two other of
her Sons, to join with him against their Father, encouraging them to expect a
more liberal maintenance from their Brother, than their penurious Father did
allow them; by these Instigations they repair into Normandy, and join
themselves with their Brother, who growing more insolent by their assistance,
returned a haughty and imperious answer to a kind and loving message from his
Father, disdaining to lay down arms, unless he would first lay down his
authority, and resign the Kingdom. To shuffle matters into the greater
perplexity, Lewis King of France began to form a League against King Henry, and
having called together the great Lords of his Kingdom, and inveigled William
King of the Scots, Hugh Earl of Chester, Roger Moubray, Hugh Bigod, and other
the Accomplices of his Son, they all joined in an Oath to aid and assist the
young King with their whole power, and thereupon in one day they began their
Attacks, the French invading Normandy, Aquitain, and Britain; and the King of
Scots Northumberland. The old King in a short time disincumbred himself from
these Exigencies, and triumphed over all his Enemies; but new troubles like
Hydra's Heads, sprung up every day to arrest his Tranquillity; and he had no
sooner made a Truce with his Son Henry, but the defection of his Son Richard,
who had possessed himself of a great part of the Province of Poictou, obliged him
to transport an Army thither, and by the influence of it to reduce him to
obedience. But the splendour of his success was darkened with a sensible
misfortune, Henry his Darling, the copartner of his Empire, but the Excrescence
of the Throne, ended his Competition with his life, to the equal content and
sorrow of his Father.

Within a while Richard his Heir apparent, revived his former discontent,
relapsed into the old fit of Rebellion, and drew along with him his Brother
John, with many more of his Fathers Adherents, and Followers, who all joined
with Philip King of France (the Inheritor of his Fathers Crown, and his
animosity against King Henry) he presently formed an Army, and (least natural
affection should prevail above conceived Injuries) with all speed and vigor
laid Siege to the City of Mentz, in which King Henry was then personally
present; who apprehending himself to be in great danger, and unwilling to fall
into the hands of such Enemies, secretly withdrew out of the Town, and escaped.
But the Town being taken (the place of his Nativity, and in which he took great
delight) he became almost distracted with grief and passion, and in the
extremity of his rage uttered this blasphemous expression, I shall never
hereafter love God any more, that has suffered a City so dear to me, to be
taken from me. Indeed this inconsiderable loss made a mortal Impression on his
spirits, bereaving him of that vigor and Majestic grace which accompanied him
in all his actions, so that he tamely condescended to seek a Peace at their
hands, to whom before he scorned to vouchsafe the favor of any conditions; but
when he came to understand that his beloved Son John was in the Conspiracy
against him, he fell into a fit of fainting, and died within four days.

King Henry was the Author and instrument of his own misfortunes; He came to
the Crown in peace and quiet; but never enjoyed it in content or satisfaction.
He was an ungrateful Son, an indiscreet Father, an unnatural Brother, an unjust
Husband, a niggardly Master, a fickle Friend, a severe Enemy, a valiant King,
but too penurious.

His Actions were great and renowned, but smutted with the tincture of
notorious Vices. He dealt unjustly with the King of the Scots; and to his
cruelty extended to his Brother was added a manifest Perjury.

He made his Son a Rival in his Throne, and took many strange Women to be
Rivals in his Bed. As his Wife was divorced from her other Husband, so was his
conjugal love estranged from her.

His Partiality to his Sons is too manifest, while he fondly gave to Henry a
share of his Crown, and subtracted from his other Sons a competent
maintenance. But these contrary causes produced the same effect, his Indulgence
to one, and his Niggardliness to the rest, provoked them all to be Rebels
against him.

His Incontinency is so evident, that it supersedes all the misprisions of
Jealousy: His close Amors with the fair Rosamond were palpably detected by
the industrious curiosity of his Queen; but his incestuous dalliance with the
Spouse of his Son, has left an indelible blot upon his memory.

His carriage toward Thomas Becket, while alive, speaks him brave, and
magnanimous; but his mean submission to a sordid Penance at the Tomb of that
saucy Prelate, discovers plainly that Superstition was predominant in him
beyond a sense of true Religion.

Parsimony, which is commendable in men of lower ranks, was a vice in him; by
it he lost the love of his Children, and disobliged his Subjects, while by
Taxes, Confiscations, Seizure on Bishoprics and Abbeys, and other avaritious
practices, he lived poorly, only that he might die rich.

THE LIFE and REIGN OF EDWARD the Second.
EDWARD of Carnarven was the Eldest Son of Edward the First, and succeeded his
Father in the Kingdom of England. He was in his Person handsome; in his
Conversation acceptable; in his Inclinations not extremely Vicious; continent
beyond any of his Predecessors; not given to grind his Subjects by hard
Taxations, or to enrich himself by their Impoverishment. He ascended the Throne
with the Universal Joy and Acclamations both of the Nobility, and the People;
the way to it was plain, and the Seat easy. He had the Advantages of an
extraordinary Education, the example of an Illustrious Father and a Victorious
King; an early initiation in the Business of State, a happy opportunity to
understand the Art of Reigning, by commanding the Realm, and presiding in
Parliament, during his Fathers absence. When he took the Reins of Government
into his hands, he was neither in his Nonage, nor Dotage; the Kingdom stood in
no need of a Protector because of His Minority, nor an Administrator, because
he was super-annuated. He was just ripe for Rule, and all circumstances
concurred to make the Conclusion of his Reign as prosperous as the beginning.

Notwithstanding all these happy Prcludiums, never was there a Prince more
unfortunate, never was there a Life perplexed with more Disasters, or a Death
attended with sharper Instances of Misery and Horror: being persecuted by his
Subjects, deserted by his Qeen, deposed by the People, and inhumanly Murdered
by wretched Miscreants.

He began his Reign with a rude and irreligious contempt of his renowned
Fathers Will, and dying Commands, which as it gave just cause to the Subjects
to suspect his Veracity and Constancy, so it appeared an ominous presage of his
future Calamities, and Desertion by Heaven. For whereas his Father had expressly
charged him, never to recall Pierce Gaveston from Banishment (who had been the
Pandar to the young Prince's Lusts, and the Debaucher of his Youth) he
immediately sent for him home, heaped Honors and Riches upon him, and grew
scandalously fond of him. His Father settled his Quarrel with Scotland upon him
by Entayl, requiring him to carry his Bones about with him through that
Kingdom, till he had subdued it: but so little Veneration had he for those
Glorious Relics, that he neither took them with him in a Military Procession,
nor regarded their quiet Sepulture; but rather to affront them, he entered into
a Treaty for his own Nuptials, before he had solemnized the Funerals of his
Father. The Old King had obliged him to send his heart to the Holy Land, with
Sevenscore Knights to prosecute the Holy War, and two and thirty Thousand
Pounds (a mighty Sum in those Days) which he had gathered for that Pious use:
But he not only neglected his Fathers Directions, but in plain scorn and
despite to his Commands, he prodigally squandered it on that same Gaveston,
from whose very sight he was precluded by his dying Father.

I shall not need to divide the History of his Life into several Acts, I may
recite it, as it was, in one Scene of Trouble and misfortune. The revocation of
Pierce Gaveston from perpetual Exile was very displeasing to the People; His
admission to the highest Honors and Favors about the Court, did smartly
aggravate their just Resentments; but his Pride and Ostentation at the Marriage
of the King in France (where the Four Kings and Four Queens, were seen in all
their Pomp, besides the King and his Bride, yet he was observed to excel them
all in Bravery) had so sensible an Operation on the Lords of England, that when
Edward, and Isabel expected to be Crowned, in the presence of many Princes, and
Noble Persons, they boldly went to him and briskly told him, how haynously he
had transgressed his Fathers Will in recalling Gaveston, to which since they
were Cautioners; they would see it performed; and unless he would remove
Gaveston from Court and Kingdom, they would not suffer his Coronotion to
proceed. King Edward, confounded with this stinging Declaration, gave them
satisfaction, and solmnly Swore to do what they desired, in the next Parliment,
and so the Coronation proceeded: In the solmnizing whereof the King again
provoked the Lords to Discontent, adding the honor of carrying St. Edwards
Crown before him, to the other Titles he had conferred on Gaveston; which urged
them to enter into Consultation, how to contrive some plausible way to restrain
the Violence of the Kings Affection which in a short time took affect. For
Gaveston not content to engross the Kings Favor, and dictate his arbitrary
Orders through the Kingdom, encroached on the honor of the Nobility, and
placed opprobious Nicknames upon diverse of them, who therefore did not only
envy him for his undeserved Advancement, but mortally hated him for his
un-sufferable Insolency. It was not long before a Parliment met, who
unanimously press the King to apply a Remedy to their Greivances in the Rere of
which they urge the Banishment of Gaveston: The King seeing no safety in
expostulation, consents to their Demands, and the several Articles (like those
of the Council of Trent) are enjoined under an Anathema, and pain of
Excommunication: Hereupon Gaveston was sent into Ireland, but as the Chief
Goovernour, not as an Exile; where after he ^ad stayed a while, and acted
things much conducing to his Reputation, King Edward, not able to endure his
absence, or indeed to live without him, remanded him home, and married him to
the Sister of the Earl of Gloucester; but Gaveston was incorrigible, his Power
exceeded all Limits, and his expenses all possibility of supply; the Kings
Revenue was wasted, the Queens maintenance retrenched, and all diverted to the
accommodating the Luxury of the Favorite. The Lords began to ferment in a new
Coffeehouse, and repairing to the King, positively told him, if he did not
immediately remove Gaveston out of the Court and Kingdom they would rise in
Arms against him, as a perjured King. But he, after he had strugled a while
between Love and Fear, condescended to his pertual Banishment, making his
return a capital Offense, and so to be proceeded against, if ever found in the
Kingdom. Gaveston once more is dispatched out of England, and goes to France,
where finding no safe Abode, he past into Flanders, and there meeting with no
secure shelter, he secretly returns to England, relying on the immovable Favor
of the King, and the interest of the Duke of Gloucester. The bewitched King
received him with transports of joy, and slipping out of the sight of the
Lords, and all other Observers, betook himself to York, carrying his beloved
Minion with him. The Lords hearing of it, make after him, and choosing the
great and potent Earl of Lancaster for their General, sent a Message to the
King to deliver Gaveston into their Hands, or at least to send him peremptorily
out of the Kingdom. But being abused by evil Counsel, and disregarding the
Message from the Lords, he marched from place to place, seeking a sure refuge
for his dear Favorite, refusing to stay with the Queen, who with tears begged
his company, and lodged him in Scarborough-Castle; which being furiously
assaulted by the Confederate Lords, Gaveston thought it best to render himself,
desiring only the favor to be allowed once to see the King's face, and the
King reciprocally asked the same. Gaveston was sent under a Convoy toward
Wallingford, but being intercepted by the way, and forced from his Guard by the
Earl of Warwick, after long deliberation his Head was struck off at a place
called Blacklow. In the mean time the King of Scots taking notice in how
unready a posture Affairs were in England, how the King remitted all case of
the Government to Gaveston, and that he gave himself up to Luxury and
Licentiousness, in a short time, and with little or no opposition, reduced
almost all Scotland to his obedience; and encouraged by that success. He entered
England, burnt, and took several Towns, and being encountered with a splendid
Army raised by King Edward, more resembling a Court, than a Camp, and
consisting of a hundred thousand men; he with an Army hardly amounting to
thirty thousand, utterly overthrew and defeated them. This misfortune was
followed by the loss of almost all Ireland, and the treacherous Rendition of
Berwick, which yet King Edward was in a fair way to recover, had not the Earl
of Lancaster discovered his immoderate kindness to Hugh Spencer the younger,
(whom he had substituted and embraced in the room of Gaveston) and thereupon
withdrew his forces from his assistance. These Crosses were accompanied with
the loss of Northumberland, whereof all the Towns were taken, or burnt by the
Scots, and an incredible number of Prisoners and Cattle carried into Scotland;
King Edward in vain attempting to seek a Reprizal, and at last forced to pass
over all hopes of satisfaction, by the conclusion of a Truce. The unhappy King
postponing the affections of his Subjects to the fond love of a Darling,
advanced Hugh Spencer to the highest pitch of Honor and Favor, committed all
Affairs to his sole Administration; he (in perfect imitation of his
Predecessor) servilely complying with the Kings Humors, and arrogantly
insulting over the Lords. They to remove this insupportable Nuisance, continue
in Arms, confederate together, and send a peremptory Message to the King,
requiring the confirmation and execution of the Articles formerly granted,
otherwise threatening to constrain him by force of Arms, and accordingly
assembled a mighty body about Dunstable, where the King then lay; but by the
interposition of the Prelates, an Accommodation was made, and all things agreed
to their mutual satisfaction. Soon after a Parliament was called, wherein the
King complained that the Lords had taken up Arms, had murdered Pierce
Gaveston, and done him many other Affronts; they on the other side justify
their Proceedings, as not undertaken against, but for the Preservation of his
Person, and the punishment of the public Enemies of the Kingdom; but the
Queen, with the Prelates and the Duke of Gloucester, found an Expedient to
qualify these heats; the Lords became humble Suitors to the King for his Grace
and Pardon, and he receives them kindly, as dutiful and loyal Subjects. But
this Reconcilement not being founded in sincerity, was but of a short duration:
The two Spencers, Father and Son, became intolerable in their Covetousness,
Oppression, and Arbitrary disposal of all Affairs; wherefore the Earl of
Lancaster with diverse other Lords, entered into a new Confederacy, binding
themselves by Oath to live and die together, in the maintenance of the Rights
of the Kingdom, and to procure the expulsion of the two Spencers. In pursuance
hereof, they gather a great Army, march to London, and insist stoutly on their
former demands; to which once more the King is induced to condescend, by the
mediation of the Queen and the Prelates, and by public Proclamation the
Spencers are banished; but in a short time after the Edict was revoked, they
recalled, and restored to their former place and authority. The wind ^^gan now
to change, and by a strange caprichio of fortune, the King got the Ascendent
over the mutinous Lords, conquered them in Battle, slew many of them in the
Field, and put many to death, by the Sword of Justice; but so soon as the heat
of Revenge was a little qualified, repented of his proceeding.

Hitherto the miserable King received only slight wounds in the extreme parts
of his Body, now he received a stab at the Heart. The Queen enraged to see her
Husbands love diverted upon upstart Favorites, and disdaining to be a Pensioner
to their pleasure, found a plausible Excuse to repair into France, where (to be
revenged on her Husband for his neglect of her) she continued in too scandalous
a familiarity with the Lord Mortimer. The King being advertised of it,
commanded her to return, and she delaying to come, he proclaimed her, and the
Prince (who was at that time also in France) Enemies to the Kingdom, banished
them and their Adherents, and strongly guarded the Seas with three Fleets, to
intercept their passage. The Queen by the help of Foreign Friends, got together
a considerable Army, and landed near Harwich, and was presently reinforced by
the conjunction of the Earl Marshal, the Earl of Lancaster, the Earl of
Leicester, and many other Lords and Bishops. The King was astonished at the
News, being utterly irresolute what course to take: He had no Counselors about
him, but the Spencers, London was not to be trusted, his Army was wavering, the
people from all Counties flocking in to the Queen. In this perplexity he
secretly withdraws from the Court, attended by the two Spencers, and a very few
others, and being disappointed of his Retreat to the Isle of Lundy, He hides
himself in the Abbey of Nethe; where within a short time he was taken, his
Followers all apprehended, and the two Spencers publicly and ignominiously
executed, and himself committed to the custody of the Earl of Leicester. After
Christmas a Parliament was called, wherein it was agreed to Depose the King,
and set up his Son, who refusing to take the Crown, unless his Father would
freely resign it, the poor King as tamely surrendered the Scepter, as he had
before unworthily weilded it, and having formally renounced and abdicated the
Government, and the Speaker of the Parliament, renounced all Allegiance to him,
in the Name of the whole Kingdom, he was taken from the Earl of Leicester (from
whom his Enemies thought he had too kind usage) and being hurried from place to
place, and wearied with all manner of severity and indignity, wasted by
starving, tormented by noisome stinks, and attempted by Poison, he was at last
barbarously and inhumanely stifled to death between two Pillows. The Murder
being disavow'd by the Queen, the Executioners of it fled, and died miserably.

THE LIFE and REIGN OF RICHARD the Second.
IF Magnanimity, Valor, Piety, Gentleness, Liberty, and other Heroic and
Princely Qualities, were communicable by Generation: if virtue could be
intayl'd; If the gifts of the mind descended by Inheritance, or were demisable
hy Will, or inseparably annexed to the Body; no man could ever have a juster
Pretension to Glory and Fame, than Richard the Second, the only Son of that
incomparable Hero, Edward the black Prince, and grand Son of that most
illustrious and victorious Edward the Third. But Children do not always
resemble the Features of the Father, to the great shame and scandal of the
Mother: Wit, and Vigor are seated in the Brain; and Children are not begotten
by the Head.

Richard was a Child at the death of his Father; and never acted like a man,
during his own Life. A Crown was too heavy a Load for his tender Brows, and the
Reflection of its Brightness daizled his Eyes.

The Transactions of State, during his Minority, are not to be the Subject of
my Recital, since the Event of all Affairs that were prosperous, is to be
imputed to the Conduct of his Guardians; and where any Accidents interrupted
his Prosperity, it ought not to be attributed to his misfortune. I shall
therefore pass over such Occurrences as are recounted by Historians, during his
pupillage; and begin my Remarks, at that Period when he assumed the Regal
Government.

And first he deposed the Lord Scroop from his Chancellor-Ship, because he
refused to seal some extravagant grants made by the King, and receiving the
Seal from his Hands, he kept it for a certain Time, and with it sealed such
Grants and Writings as he thought fit, at his own absolute will and pleasure.

His Army sent against France, commanded by the Bishop of Norwich, was not very
prosperous; but laying Seige to Ypres, as they past through Flanders, were
forced by the Power of a French Army coming to their Relief, to raise the
Seige, and retreat. And tho the Bishop advised the King to lay hold on that
Opportunity to try the Fortune of a Battle with the French, and he pretended
over Night to be in a mighty have and Eagerness to engage in that enterprise,
yet in the Morning the Humor was off, and consulting his own ease and safety,
he appointed the Duke of Lancaster to go on that Inployment, who spinning out
the Time with dilatory Preparations, till the Bishop was returned, the Project
was disappointed, the undertaking came to Nothing; and the Dispute was ended in
a short lived Truce.

Neither did the Expedition into Scotland, tend to the Honor of the King, or
Advantage of the Kingdom: for the Scots having made Incursions into England,
taken, and burnt diverse Towns upon the Borders, and enriched themselves by a
general depredation of the Country. The Duke of Lancaster with the Earl of
Buckingham was dispatched with a mighty Army to repress them: but having entered
Scotland, and not being able by any Art, or Stratagem to provoke the Scots to
Battle, they returned without obtaining any further Satisfaction, then a
suitable Revenge in burning, and destroying many Towns there. And tho a truce
was made with the Scots; yet without any Regard to the Stipulation, they again
entered the Borders, and took Berwick.

But now the unfortunate King began to form Plots against his own honor and
Quiet; for being incensed against the Duke of Lancaster (whether upon real, or
upon imaginary Provocations) a design was laid to have that great man Arrested,
and arraigned of Treason before Sir Robert Tresilian, chief Justice (tho by the
Law of the Land his Trial ought to have been by his Peers) and it is easy to
imagine what would have been the Issue of such irregular Proceedings: but the
Duke having timely intimation of the mischief and contrivance against him;
withdrew himself opportunely to his Castle of Pomfret, where he stood upon his
guard, till by the laborious travel and powerful intercession of the Kings
Mother (tho by reason of her Corpulency she was most un-fit for such an
Employment) the King was pacified, and reconciled to the Duke.

The Scots still meditating Revenge and the French King still ready to foment
the quarrel, prepared for a fresh Invasion of England, and receiving auxiliary
Ayds of great Number and strength from the French, once more entered the English
Borders. King Richard receiving Advertisement of it, with great Speed raised a
mighty Army, and marching in Person at the Head of them, entered Scotland,
burnt Edingburgh proceeding without Control, but could by no means draw the
Scots to Battle; they in the mean Time to divert the Kings progress, made a
descent into Cumberland, and Besieged Carlisle; to the relief of which the King
approaching with so formidable an Army, obliged the Scots to retreat into their
own Country, and upon their Recess the King returned into England, bringing
with him neither Honor nor Advantage by so fruitless an Expedition.

After these things (and some other passages not so directly appertaining to
the History of his Life) King Richard began to hasten his own Destiny, and by
Imprudent Actions, pernicious Counsels, and an Arbitrary Assertion of his
indisputable Prerogative, to kindle those Flames of Mutiny, and Discontent,
which never were extinguished, but at the Expense of his own Blood, and the
Loss of his Crown. Robert Vere Earl of Oxford and Marquess of Dublin was his
Darling, and Michael de la Pool was his Favorite: The first a Gentleman of
commendable good Parts, he created Duke of Ireland (tho he himself was but Lord
of it) the other a man of mean extraction, he made Earl of Suffolk, and
Chancellor of England; both very obnoxious, and not accomplished with such
Merits, as might advance them in Titles, or Offices beyond the Ancient
Nobility, without Envy, or Obloquy. These Wicked Counselors set a false Glass
before the short sighted King, and abused him with erroneous representations of
his own sufficiency, absolute Authority, and uncontrollable Power: Insomuch
that in a Parliament then called, the King began sharply to expostulate with
the Lords, and by an undecent Comparison with the Freedom of their Tenures, to
Challenge to himself an unquestionable liberty. This haughty Carriage of the
King, exasperated the Parliament, and fermented them to such a degree of
dissatisfaction, that instead of consenting to grant him a Subsidy toward his
Wars, they fell foul upon the New Chancellor, and never gave him over, till
they obtained a severe Judgment against him to the Forfeitures of his Life, and
the Confiscation of his Estate. The adverse Party were highly nettled at these
proceedings, and being pushed on by Revenge, and Malice, they combined in a
horrid Design to Murder the Duke of Gloucester, and such other Lords as
crossed the King in his extravagant Courses; which Flagitious Plot was to be
perpetrated upon an invitation of them to a Supper in London: Sir Nicholas
Brember the former Lord Mayor was a prime Instrument in this Enterprise; but
the King imparting this matter to Richard Exton the present Mayor, and
endeavoring to make him an Accomplice in the Action, he would by no
persuasions be induced to consent to so vile an Attempt, and thereupon they
desisted from the further prosecution of it. Notwithstanding this, and many
other untoward passages, a Subsidy was granted to the King under certain
Limitations; but the Parliament were so disgusted; because the King had
respited the Execution of the Judgment against the Chancellor, that they
positively declared, unless the Chancellor were removed they would proceed no
farther in a Parliamentary Course. The King hereupon grew Choleric, and
plainly told them, he would rather apply himself to the French King for
Assistance, than submit to his Subjects: Yet upon good Reasons offered by the
Lords, a great change was made in the Ministers of State, and particularly the
Chancellor was removed: and so desirous were the Lords and Commons to have the
Duke of Ireland excluded from the Kings Presence, that they were content he
should receive thirty Thousand Marks, on condition he would transport himself
into Ireland. But no sooner was the Parliament dissolved, but the King recanted
all his condecensions, revoked all Orders against the Chancellor, the Duke of
Ireland, and the rest, and received then into higher Favor, than they were in
before. And though the Earls of Arundel and Nottingham performed a Noble exploit,
hardly to be paralleled in History, yet their Service was disregarded, and
their persons slighted, because the Duke of Ireland gave them no countenance:
By whose contrivance a New Plot was laid to destroy the Duke of Gloucester, and
the easy King surrounded with Parasites and corrupt Judges, suffered them to
pursue their extravagant practices, and Two Thousand Persons were at once
indicted before Sir Robert Tresilian the Chief Justice. He then propounded
certain Queries to Robert Belknap Lord Chief Justice and other Judges, which
they soon resolved, in defiance of the Law, and the privileges of Parliament.
And notwithstanding he stood in such ill Terms with his people, yet a way was
found to pack Juries in London, and Indictments were found of many Crimes
against some of the Lords: Whom having a design to persecute, he summoned the
Judges, Justices, and Sheriffs of the Kingdom, that he might be informed, what
power of Men they could assure him of, to serve him against the Lords: And
intending shortly to call a Parliament, he tampered with them to have no Knight
or Burgess chosen, but such as the King and his Council should Name. But
finding by the Answer of the Sheriffs, that they could not raise any Forces
upon such a pretense, nor infringe the Ancient Liberty in Elections to
Parliament; the King and the Duke of Ireland sent into all parts to raise men
in this Quarrel against the Lords, consulting on some Devices how to entrap
them. The Duke of Gloucester being advertised of this, had a secret Conference
with the rest, and assembling a numerous Body of Men, stood upon their Guard,
and sent Commissioners to the King, requiring such Traitors and Seducers as
were about his Person, to be delivered up to them. The King was advised by the
Duke of Ireland, the Earl of Suffolk, and others about him, to offer Calice to
the French King, to procure his Assistance against the Lords; and with all sent
to the Mayor of London, requiring to make an estimate of how many able men
might be raised in the City, who making Trial of what could be done on such
occasion, received this Answer from the People, that they would never fight
against the Kings Friends, and Defenders of the Realm. In the mean time the
Earl of Northumberland interposed with his advice, and persuaded the King to
send for the Lords under safe Conduct, and friendly to expostulate with them;
to which the Lords consented, upon Oath given by the Archbishop of Canterbury,
and the Lord Chancellor, that no Fraud, or evil practice should be used
against them: But being ready to come according to appointment, they received
intimation of an Ambush laid to entrap them, and so desisted. If the King was
privy to this Plot, he was guilty of an Action most unworthy of a Prince: But
the Conspirators were certainly known, yet not called to Account for it. After
this, upon a more secure Conduct from the King, the Lords presented themselves
before him, and after some choleric contest a Reconciliation was made, and it
was concluded that all matters should be heard and regulated in a Parliament,
speedily to be called. Hereupon the Favorite-Lords were highly dissatisfied,
and plainly told the King, they would not hazard their appearance at such a
meeting; and so the Duke of Ireland, and the rest of that Faction withdrew from
Court, and absconded. But the King not able to brook their absence, ordered an
Army to be raised for the safeguard of the Duke of Ireland, and to reconduct
him to his Presence; who being encountered on the way by the Earl of Derby, he
fled and escaped by leaping into a River, but after two or three years died
miserably in a foreign Country.

And now the Lords, having got matter enough against the King, at least to
justify their taking up Arms, marched directly to London with forty thousand
men, and some of them going to the King in the Tower, they showed him the very
Letter which he had writ to the Duke of Ireland, to levy an Army for their
destruction; as also the Letters writ to him by the French King, importing a
safe Conduct for him to come into France, there to do Acts tending to his own
dishonor, and the prejudice of the Kingdom; which being done, they civilly
retreated, upon the Kings promise to come next day to Westminster, to concert
all matters; but the fickle King altered his mind, before he went to Bed, and
discovered his purpose to avoid the meeting next day. The Lords being
advertised of this, sent a peremptory message to him, That if he did not come
according to his promise, they would choose another King, that should hearken
to the faithful Counsel of his Lords. The King sensibly touched with this sharp
message, gave them a meeting, and they positively insisting that the Traitors
so often complained of, should be removed from the Court, he at last with much
reluctance consented to their Desires, and so the whole Nest of Vipers was
dissipated, some expelled the Court, some bound by good Sureties to appear and
answer, and some committed to Prison. When the Parliament met, they proceeded
roundly, the corrupt Judges were arrested in their Seats of Judicature, and
carried to the Tower, for acting contrary to the Agreement made in the
preceding Parliament; the Duke of Ireland, and the rest of that Crew, cited to
appear and answer to certain Articles of High Treason, and for nonappearance
banished, and their Lands and Goods seized to the Kings use; Sir Robert
Tresilian was hanged, Sir Nicholas Brember beheaded, several others executed,
and the Judges condemned to die, and the King obliged by Oath to stand to such
order as the Lords should set down. Some years after, upon a Riot committed in
London, the King seized on their Liberties, and took away their Charter, which
could not be restored till they paid a Fine of ten thousand pounds.

I intend a compendious Abstract, and not a complete History; therefore I
studiously omit the recital of many Transactions and Occurrences coincident
with this relation, as not having a direct and principal concernment in the
Estate and Life of King Richard. Unstable Fortune had the Ascendent over all
the Affairs of the poor King, and the course of his Reign was imbroiled with a
strange Vicissitude of prosperous and adverse Accidents. The Duke of
Gloucester, and other Lords, entering into a combination to seize upon the King,
the Plot was detected, and their lives taken away for the assurance of his
safety. A Parliament was called, wholly conformable to the Kings will, they
that opposed him were banished, confiscated, and executed, and the whole power
of it devolved on a certain select number of Commissioners, to the great
prejudice of the State, and a dangerous example to future Times: a Pardon was
granted to all the Subjects, except fifty, whose Names not being expressed, he
kept the Nobility under an awe, that if any of them offended him, they might
come under the notion of exempted persons; and thus the King seemed secure
against all mischances.

But an unforeseen Accident, grounded on a very slight occasion, produced an
extraordinary Revolution, by which the whole frame of Government was unhinged,
and that Cloud which at first appeared but of the bigness of a hand, soon
overspread the sky, and dissolved in a tempestuous shower of Blood. The Duke of
Hereford was banished the Kingdom for six years, and several Persons of Note
and Quality, either by voluntary withdrawing, or a compulsory Exile, went
beyond the Seas. The Duke within a short time was advertised that his Father
was dead (and thereby he became Duke of Lancaster) and that King Richard had
seized into his hands all the Estate descended to him by his Fathers death. And
meeting often with the Archbishop of Canterbury, then in Exile, and mutually
lamenting the deplorable condition of England, the enormous actions of the
King, and the Impossibllity of ever reclaiming him; they began to enter into
Consulation, by what means best to get him removed; and in the very Nick,
Solicitations came from several Parts of England to urge the Duke to hasten
over, and to take the Government upon him, promising all ready Assistance to
that work The Duke presently grasped the Opportunity, and without further
Deliberation prepared for his Return, and with a very few Lords and Gentlemen,
and about threescore Persons presently put to Sea, and landed in Yorkshire,
which was no sooner known but several Lords, and great Numbers of the Gentry
and Common sort, flockt into him. And tho he was invited to come and take the
Government upon him, yet he pretended no other cause, but to take Possession of
the Inheritance, descended from his Father, and most unjustly seized and
detained by King Richard. His Forces increased daily, and a mighty Army was got
together, and all the Kings Castles forthwith surrendered to him, many of the
Kings Friends were Arrested, and some put to death. All this while King Richard
was in Ireland and for six weeks (by reason of contrary Winds) had no Notice of
the Dukes Landing: After which time wasting many days in a dilatory
Preparation, he landed in Wales; but hearing that all the Castles from the
Borders of Scotland, and Bristol, were delivered up to the Duke of Lancaster,
that the greatest Part of the Nobility and Commons were joynd with him, and his
principal Counselors taken and executed; he fell into absolute Despair,
dismissed his Army, bidding every one to shift for himself, and the next Night
stole away, and got to the Castle of Couwey. The Duke proceeded on his March,
and every day some Lords and Gentlemen of account came in to him, and having
proferred Conditions to the King with which he seemed to be content he agreed
to meet the Duke, but upon his Journey was seized by an Ambush laid for him, and
carried to Flint-Castle. Thither the Duke came, and carried the King with him
by easy Journeys, to London, and the next Day lodged him in the Tower.
Presently a Parliament was called by the Duke, but in the Name of King Richard,
aad many heinous Crimes laid to his Charge, ingrost and sum'd up in three and
thirty Articles for which the Parliament adjudg'd him to be deposed from all
Kingly Honor, and Princely Government; thereupon the King by a formal
Instrument made a Solemn Resignation of his Crown and Authority, making it his
Request that the Duke of Lancaster might be his Successor, and in token thereof
taking the signet from his Finger and putting it upon that of the Dukes: Which
being reported to the Parliament, they approved of it and appointed the
Sentence of his Deposition to be publicly proclaimed.

We have followed this most unfortunate Prince to the last Scene of his Life;
but the manner of his death is so variously reported, that it is hard to pitch
upon that Author, on whose credit we may safely rely. It is most certain that
he did not long Survive his Resignation, but being carried to Leeds, and from
thence to Pomfret, soon after a Period was put to his Life, and Miseryes
together, in the three and thirtieth year of his Age.

If he did not imitate, his Father; yet he resembled His Mother, and was the
Goodliest Person alive. His Disposition was good; but corrupted by Education,
his Inclinations prompted him to Virtue, but were perverted by Flatterrers, and
Evil Counselors. Crafty men made Advantage of his Credulity; and he was ruined
by too strict a Constancy. If he had not been deficient to himself; his Opposer
had not so easily prevailed, his Timidity apeared in not fighting for his
Crown, his Moderation in the Surrendered of it, and his Courage in surviving the
Loss.

THE LIFE and REIGN OF CHARLES the Second.
IAm now engaged in a difficult Task, divided between Truth and Respect, being
to describe the Life of a Prince, who (contrary to the custom of the World) was
better spoken of while he lived, than he has been since his Death. His Fame had
suffered a great diminution by succeeding so admirable a Father; had it not
recovered by the prospect of such a Brother, who was to be his Successor. If in
the Lives of former Kings any mistake was committed, the Records and Ancient
Writers must vouch the Relation, and the present Age cannot confute it: But to
give an Account of a Life so lately ended, requires an exactness beyond my
Reach, wherein the least Trip overthrows the Credit of the Reporter. To
enumerate the Virtues of a Prince, without taking notice of his Failings, is
but to flatter his memory, and deceive Posterity; to reckon up his Vices,
without intermingling the mention of his laudable Actions, is but so sully his
Fame, and deduce no Benefit to the Curiosity of Observers. I resolve to tread
lightly on his Grave, and not press too hard upon the Heels of Truth. I may
pursue my Topic, in recounting the Instances which justly denominate him
unfortunate, and Note the Errors of his Government, without reflection on his
Person.

That he was of extraordinary Parts, that he had a quick mercurial Wit, a great
insight into the liberal Sciences, and even the mechanical Arts no man will
deny: He had a piercing, if not a solid Judgment, his intellect was
comprehensive, if not profound.

His Lenity and Clemency were very conspicuous, and recommended him to the
Love, and Praise of the Spectators; yet it so fell out, that such egregious
Acts of Severity and Injustice were exercised upon all sorts of men, as will
puzzle Posterity to comprehend the meaning.

In his time no Man had the Reason to set a Value on himself for any promotion,
nor no man had cause to despair of a preferment: The Cards were daily shuffled,
and unexpected chance turned up the Trump.

Upon all occasions he professed a great Zeal for the Protestant Religion, yet
every day that profession lost ground. Popery was not allowed yet it hovered
among us: The Frogs did not cover the Land, yet the Jesuitical Vermin swarmed
in every Corner: Though the Papists were not sheltered by a legal Indemnity, yet
they grew numerous and confident upon the expectation of an approaching Jublie.

His Brother and Successor had a mighty Ascendent over his Genius, catching at
all opportunities to gratify his Ambition, and propagate the Faith; while the
other indulged himself in pleasure, and avoided the fatigue of Government.

There are so many living Monuments of his Incontinency, that if I forbear to
mention it, I shall render the Truth and Impartiality of my other Remarks
suspected. It is usual with Kings and Princes to prosecute prohibited Amors,
but so great was his generosity, that he thought it a disparagment to manage a
secret Intrigue. His Liberality was so extraordinary, that he spared not to
give a Thousand years purchase for a Moments Fruition.

He lost the Love of his Friends, by too fond a Love of his Brother; and by too
stiff a Refusal to consent to his Exclusion, he endangered the Interest of his
Family, and gave a shock to Monarchy it self.

The first and greatest misfortune that befell Charles the Second was, the
Cruel and Ignominious Death of his Father, that incomparable Charles the First,
Sentenced to die, and publicly Executed before his own Palace, by a Jancto of
flagitious men, garbled out of a Parliament by the Usurper. From his Fathers
Martyrdom to his own Restoration, was one continued Scene of misery, and
sorrow. In the year 1648 Charles the First was deprived of Life by his Evil
Subjests, his Friends looking on, and not able to prevent it: In the year 1660.
Charles the Second was brought to the Throne by his Good Subjects, his Enemies
looking on, and not able to hinder it: The one an inhumane Action, and
unparalled; the other wholly surprising, and miraculous: In the one no Blood
shed, but that of the King himself; in the other not one Drop of Blood drawn,
even of the meanest Subject.

Charles the second was then beyond the Seas, and succeeded immediately to the
Right of three Kingdoms, but did not actually possess them for many years. And
now behold a King truly unfortunate! His Father barbarously destroyed, and he
in no capacity to call to account the bloody Actors of that Tragedy; three
potent Kingdoms usurped by violence, and by force detained from him, and he not
able to put in a claim for his Right, or contend for the recovery: His Enemies
insulting in their success, abjuring his Title, and metamorphosing a glorious
Monarchy into an Anarchical Commonwealth: His Friends harassed, imprisoned,
plundered, sequestered, executed, no man daring to own his Allegiance, or
capable to contribute advice or aid toward his Restoration: Himself a deserted
Exile, wandering from one Princes Court to another to seek for shelter and
subsistence; while the subtle machinations of the Usurpers did not more
sensibly aggravate, and advance his unhappiness, than the improsperous Attempts
of his loyal Subjects to compass his Restitution. In Scotland the Heroic Acts
of the most renowned Marquis of Montross, (who with an inconsiderable handful
of men traversed the Kingdom, and performed such Exploits, as may justly
denominate his History the Moral of a Romance) only ended in his destruction,
while he became a sacrifice to his Enemies implacable malice, and a glorious
Martyr for Loyalty, but with an irreparable detriment to his Masters cause. In
Ireland the most Noble Duke (then Marquis) of Ormond was so successful in his
Undertakings, that he had reduced the whole Kingdom to the obedience of the
King, except Dublin, and Londonderry, to the first of which having laid a
close Siege, and beleagured it with a Royal Camp, he was disarry'd by a fatal
Sally from the Town, his Army totally routed, and himself obliged to a hasty
and hazardous escape; which disaster was followed by the Rendition of Drogheda,
and many other considerable Towns, and after a faint Resistance the whole
Kingdom was subjected to the Triumphant Conqueror, and the Interest of the King
wholly exterminated. England was so manacled with the Chains of an armed Power,
that they could not budge; the Royal Party, than called the Cavaliers, were
debarred the liberty of meeting at home, or stirring abroad, their persons were
disarmed, their Houses ransackt, and their Estates brought into the unmerciful
Inquisition at Goldsmiths Hall; in some corners of the Land small Parties
started up now and then to exert their Loyalty, and manifest their Allegiance,
and the King was received into the Island of Jersey, but by a Fleet sent
thither by the Usurping power, soon compelled to forsake it; so that these weak
struglings like the last efforts of Nature, tended only to diminish the number
of the Kings Friends, and to heighten his Infelicity. In the year 1650, the
King was invited into Scotland, landed there safely, received with all the
demonstrations of joy and satisfaction, and solemnly proclaimed King. But to
disturb his Tranquillity, and interrupt the calm fruition of his new acquired
Sovereignty, Cromwell (that victorious Rebel, who in the space of one year had
reduced almost all the Garrisons in Ireland, and Caesar-like made a complete
conquest of that Kingdom only by walking through it) is dispatched into
Scotland, who in July entered that Country with an Army of sixteen thousand men
effective; the Scots were not idle on their side, but formed an Army consisting
of six thousand Horse and Dragoons, and fifteen thousand Foot, a party of whom
attempting to beat up the Enemies Quarters about Musleburgh, surprised the Out
guards, and routed the first Regiment that opposed them, but were so warmly
received by the rest, that the Commander being wounded, the whole party was
disordered, and pursued to the Army, and the whole Camp in danger of a
surprisal, had not the King himself unexpectedly appeared in person, and
stemmed the Torrent. But in September following happened a fatal decision of the
dispute at Dunbar, where the Scots Army reinforced to above twenty thousand
men, and presuming on a certain Victory (having enclosed their Enemies beyond a
probability of an escape) encountered the English Army, then decreased to the
number of twelve thousand, and with much courage and gallantry charged them;
but the hand of God was in it, their whole Army was routed, four thousand
slain, and nine thousand taken Prisoners, with the loss of three hundred on the
Invaders side: After which the Kings Interest in Scotland declined daily, the
Enemy getting advantage by the Dissension between the Court and the Kirk-party,
and Cromwell by springing of Mines (but more by corrupting the Governor with
money) had Edinburgh-Castle surrendered to him, the taking of which was followed
with the loss of many more Garrisons. Nevertheless the Scots were neither
daunted in their Courage, nor deficient in their Allegiance, but proceeded to
the Coronation of the King, and he to the calling of a Parliament, and having
got together a good Body of an Army, it was thought best that the King should
give Cromwell the slip, and make a sudden descent into England, leaving him to
take his swing and range through Scotland; to make this Enterprise the more
hopeful, the Earl of Darby and many other Loyal persons began to peep out of
their Recesses, and to use all Expedition to join; but a malignant
Constellation still influenced K. Charles his Affairs, some of his Abettors
were intercepted, some routed, and the Earl of Darby, discomfited, and many
Persons of Quality and resolution taken Prisoners. At last came on the dismal
Engagement at Worster, that critical Arbiter of the Kings cause, from whence we
may date the depression of the Monarchy, the exaltation of Anarchy, and
Confusion of Governments. I take no Pleasure in descanting too long on so
unpleasant a Theme; in a word the King was defeted, his whole Army given up to
death, or captivity, except a very few, with whom he made his Escape, and after
some weeks spent in lurking, disguising, shifting, and un-easy traveling, he
arrived safe in France. The King was now actually divested of his three
Kingdoms, his Enemies victorious, in Possession of his Right, and usurping the
Regal Authority, under the Disguise of other Appellations: and how soever the
grand Apostates from Loyalty daily crumbled into Factions, and Divisions, and
the Supreme Authority frequently changed its Dress, and put on a new Face; yet
all concurred in the detestation of King-Ship, and an abjuring the Family of
Stuart. To recount the transactions of the Junto at London, or the Exploits of
their Legions, through all the Dominions subjected to the Common wealth of
England, might prove a tolerable Entertainment for the Reader, but I have no
Inclination to admire their Policy, or cry up the Fame of the Protector: My
Business is to observe the disastrous Fate of an Exiled King, and (there being
yet no exact Memoirs transmitted to us of his Foreign Adventures) to Sum up his
Misfortune in a nine years Banishment, by noting how miserably he was
abandond', thurst and kept out from the Possession of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, and all the Dominions and Territories belonging to them, a Pensioner
to Strangers, and all Designs of his Friends at home, or his Allies abroad
frustrated, and baffled.

But when the Almighty Governor of the World had so long scourged the Royal
Family, as to his wisdom seemed sufficient, and all the Practices of human
Strength and Invention were rendered ineffectual; in a sudden and unexpected
manner; without Means, without Contrivance, without the Success of a Battle, or
the operation of any Stratagem; the Repulican Babel was over turned, the King
restored, and peaceably seated in the Throne of his Ancestors.

From his Restoration he Reigned more than twenty four years, and I wish I
could say happily. But not being blessed with a legitimate Issue, he was
continually teas'd with the Encroachments of an impatient Heir: Having
misapplied his Revenues (which were vastly increased beyond all that was given
to his predecessors he was by his Necessities induced frequently to call
Parliaments, and by his evil Councils as often prompted to dissolve them: his
gentle Disposition inclined him to an universal Indulgence; but the malevolent
Insinuations of self-interested men misled him to a Connivence at extraordinary
Severities: The Papists hated him for avowing so much Favor to the Church of
England; and Dissenters blamed him for a suspected Propension to the Church of
Rome: His constitution was happy; but by his irregular courses he raised
Batteries against his own Health, and he might have lived longer, if he had not
lived so fast. The Indowments of his mind were admirable; but his immersion in
Pleasures over-shadow'd his Reputation: The prolonging of his Life had given an
Adjournment to the Mischeifs that quickly assaulted both Church, and State; but
one Sort of Men thought he lived too long: whether any hand, but his own,
contributed to the accelarating of his Death, I have no warrant to make any
Asseveration; Let the future Writers of History adjust that matter to the clear
information of Posterity. All I have to say, is the News of his Death was
published, before there was any Report of his Sickness: He died of an Apoplexy
the Sixth of February 1684, and the whole Body (whereof he was the Head) was
presently seized with convulsive Motions.

THE REIGN OF JAMES the Second.
THE Reign of James the Second was so lately begun, and (by the mercy of God)
so soon determined, that every man's Remembrance of it may justly supersede the
Trouble of a Repetition. There needs no Art, nor Arguments to convince the
World, that he was more unfortunate than all his Predecessors; and every
impartial Observer will allow, that he was the principal Engineer, that sapped
the Foundations of his own Happiness.

If he had arrived at the Throne by an indirect Road: If he had gained it by
Conquest, and owed his Title to the Umpirage of the Sword: If he had come in by
Intrusion, Invasion, or Usurpation; by Craft, or Violence; by Force of Arms, or
the prevalency of Pensions: If he had justled out the true Heir, or supplanted
the lawful Pretender, or out-stript his Competitor by the aid of the people, or
over-topt his Opposers by the Assistance of Foreigners: It had been no wonder,
that the Crown had tottered on his Head, that his Seat had been uneasy, and
his Government Short lived. But when his Title was not disputed; when he was
saluted King by an Universal Acclamation; welcomed by the Addresses and
congratulations of all his Subjects; his Revenues settled and augmented; his
Enemies subdued, and his Throne established by a Loyal Parliament, and a
submissive people; his Ruin must necessarily be imputed to himself; and all his
misfortunes undeniably accounted the Result of his own miscarriage. So that
while the Histories of all Ages and Nations do abound with Examples of the
Strange, Cruel, False, and unnatural Methods used by ambitious men to gain
principalities, King James must remain single upon Record; as the only Person
that wilfully and industriously dethroned himself. We read of aspiring men,
who have dissembled, changed, and complied with the fashionable Religion of the
Country, to insure their possession: But it is without president, that a Prince
quietly settled in his Throne; courted by his Neighbors, Obeyed by his
Subjects without reserve, or distrust; not grudged, nor affronted in the
private Exercises of his own persuasion; should be so intoxicated by the Fumes
of Zeal, to attempt the subversion of the general Religion current through Three
Kingdoms, established by Parliament, and incorporated so into the Laws, that
the Religion of the Nation is the Law of the Nation; and to obtrude upon his
Subjects a way of Worship as dissonant from their Humor, as repugnant to their
Conscience; a way exploded by the former Age, and detested by this; and so
forseit his Right to the Imperial Crown of Three opulent Kingdoms upon a
fallacious assurance of a Reprisal in Heaven; is such a stupendous Act of
supererogation, as may serve to supply half the Roman Catholic Church with a
superfluity of Merit.

On the Sixth day of February 1684 Charles the Second put off mortality, and by
his Death revived the Languishing Hopes of the Popish Expectants. He departed
about Noon, and in that very Afternoon James the Second was proclaimed in
London and Westminster, by Order of the Council: To convince the World, that
howsoever the Parliament labored to Exclude him from Succession by political
Ordinances, and by a Course of Law; yet, that Design not being accomplished,
they would not so much as hesitate, or demur upon the right of his Inheritance.
He on the other side saluted them graciously, promised to imitate his Brother
in his Tenderness to the people, Celebrated the Loyal principles of the Church
of England, and past his Royal Word to take care to defend, and support it. The
Collection of the Customs, and the Duties of Tunnage and Poundage (which were
annexed to the Crown during the Kings Life) were continued de been esse, till
the Meeting of a Parliament: All Men were Quiet, and Contented, and he was
Congratulated with Addresses from all parts of England, testifying a ready
Obedience to his Commands, and devoting their Lives and Fortunes to the defense
of his person, and the maintenance of his prerogative: His Accession to the
Crown was Solemnised with great Acclamations of Joy through the Kingdoms of
England, Scotland, and Ireland: Ambasladours from Foreign Princes, and States
arrived daily, presenting their Complements of Condolence for the deceased
King; and their satisfaction in his Assumption of the Regal power: On the
Twenty third of April, the King and Queen were both Crowned, and at his
Coronation he took the accustomed Oaths to maintain the Laws, and the
established Religion: No King ever Ascended the Throne with less Opposition,
Disputes, or preluminary Cautions; none was ever attended with more apparent
circumstances of Felicity; or had a fairer prospect of becoming Glorious at
home, and formidable abroad. The Parliament of Scotland having prevented him in
his wishes, and out done all their Predecessors in a redundancy of Zeal and
Loyalty: A Parliament met also at Westminster, to whom the King reiterated his
assurance of supporting the Church of England; preserving the Government in
Church and State, as by Law established, and a resolution never to invade any
Man's property.

In this very Juncture, when the King had so endeared himself to the Parliament
by such Gracious Expressions, and they reciprocally Courted him with all
dutiful respect, the unfortunate Earl of Argyle (whose persecution was
unparellel'd, Attainted for Treason, before the Law that made it so was
promulgated; and condemned only for scrupling to take the Test, which in a
short time after, it was a Capital Offense to subscribe) Landed in the
Highlands of Scotland, and set forth a Declaration to justify his undertaking,
and to renounce all Allegiance to the present King; who immediately
communicated the Intelligence he had received to the Parliament, and both
Houses without delay expressed their Resentment in Raputres of Love and Zeal,
with protestations to stand by him with their Lives and Fortunes against all
Opposers, and particularly the Earl of Argyle; and to demonstrate, that it was
no Complement, they presented him with a Bill, for settling the Revenues on him
for Life, and resolved on an extraordinary supply for these incident Occasions.
While these matters were transacting. News came to the King that the Duke of
Monmouth was Landed in the West of England (an unseasonable Landing for that
unhappy Gentleman! when the Parliament was Charmed with the good Words, and
amused by the great and gracious promises of the King) with a small party, but
every day increasing; who presently were proclaimed Traitors, and the King
imparting the News to both Houses, they forthwith in a transport of Loyalty
reassure him that they will stand by him with their Lives and Fortunes against
the Duke of Monmouth, and all other his Enemies, and with an unusual Expedition
they past two Acts to augment his Revenue, by a New Imposition on Wine,
Vinegar, Tobacco, and Sugar; and to secure his person, an Act of Attainder of
the Duke of Monmouth. It was morally impossible for such inconsiderable parties
to effect their purposes: the Parliaments in both Kingdoms were unanimous,
almost all people relied on the King's word, not doubting but he would continue
a Defender of the Faith, tho he was not a Professor. And so the event proved,
for within a few days or weeks at most, the whole Enterprise came to nothing,
the forces in each Kingdom were routed and dispersed, the Duke and Earl both
taken prisoners, and both executed on the Scaffold.

Violent Hurricanes tear Trees out of the Ground; but the shaking of small
winds make the Tree take deeper Root; the quenching of an intestine Rebellion
always sets the Prince some steps higher, and depresseth the subject as much.
The Parliament had now sat long enough to do the Kings Business, and the King
had Business to do not fit to be entrusted to the Parliament; whereupon it was
adjourned to the fourth of August, and from thence to the ninth of November. At
which time being reassembled, the King made the first discovery of his claim to
a dispensing Power, telling them plainly, that he will not want the Services of
such men whom he accounted faithful, but would employ them in the Army, tho
they were not qualified according to the late Tests: The Parliament modestly
and civilly expostulated this unexpected resolution in an humble Address, and
proposed an Expedient to moderate the Extremity of the Law, purely to gratify
the Desires of their Prince; but this did not sound well in the Ears of the
Court, some other measures must be taken, and so the Parliament was Prorogued
to the tenth of February, and here we may bid them adieu, having after several
Prorogations been dissolved, as a company of inflexible stubborn Protestants,
who would not tamely comply with the King's Arbitrary pleasure. Several
Noblemen, and other persons were now indicted and tried for their Lives, some
escaped by the merit of their ingenuous Defense, some were respited from
Execution, and some suffered Death. The Earl of Clarendon was sent Lord
Lieutenant into Ireland, that the Protestants might be cajoled into a lavish
credulity, till matters were ripe for their Destruction. An Army of twenty
thousand men was raised, and encamped at Hounslow-Heath, because the Militia
was not found to be useful; and the late Invasions of Monmouth and Argyle were
a sufficient warning to the King not to be taken again unprovided. But the
erecting of a Popish Chapel in the midst of the Camp, and the open and daily
celebration of the Mass there, (together with the setting up Convents of
Friars, and Schools, and Seminaries of Jesuits in several places in London, the
unclean Beasts crossing the Streets, and entering their Arkby couples) began to
startle the people; and the Dispatch of the Earl of Castlemain to Rome as an
Ambassador to the Pope, and the entertaining a Nuncio from him, gave a mighty
Umbrage of offense to all considering men. That strict Injunction by Law for
every man that exercised any Office, to take the Oaths and Test, was a great
Barricado against the Preferment of Catholic Candidates; the Judges must be
consulted (or rather directed) how to apply some Remedy, and they to their
eternal shame, made false Glosses on the Text, betrayed the Law, the
impregnable Fortress of English Property, and skrew'd up the Rules of a
circumscribed Monarchy to an Absolute and Despotick Government, to command
without control; and to he obeyed without reserve. But the putting a muzzle
upon the old Laws to keep them from biting, was not enough to carry on the
work, without introducing some Innovations; wherefore a Commission was given to
certain persons to order all Ecclesiastical Affairs, with an Authority and
extent almost unlimited, and a Non-obstante to all Rights and Privileges. The
first Essay made by this exorbitant Court, was on the Bishop of London (a
person noble by Birth, and high in Office, reverenced, and beloved by all men
for his Candor, Moderation, and many eminent Virtues) whom for a frivolous
matter, without color of Law or Reason, they suspended from his Episcopal
Function.

It was now high time to recall the Earl of Clarendon from the Government of
Ireland, that the Sword might be put into the Hands of the Earl of Tyrconnel.
To enumerate the mischiefs that have accrew'd to the Protestants by his
Administration, would require a Treatise by it self; let it suffice to say,
that in that miserable Kingdom Popery was predominant, and bare faced
Mass-houses set up in every Town and Village, the Corporations changed, their
Charters condemned, all Offices Civil and Military conferred on Papists, the
Act of Settlement (which the King had so seriously promised to keep inviolated)
infringed, and eluded, and Gentlemen dispossessed of their Estates by erroneous
Judgments, the Protestants disarmed and dismounted, such as were able to remove
forced to fly; and such as stayed behind subjected to all the Insolences and
Barbarities of Slaves vested with Authority.

To Scotland strict and severe Orders were sent to restrain all
Field-Conventicles, and in England the Dissenters were indicted, fined, and
imprisoned. And yet within a short time after, a general Indulgence was
published to all Persuasions, with a counterfeit saving to the Rights of the
Church of England; the King being made to believe, that since he was secure
from any Opposition from the Church of England (they lying quietly entrenched
under the Blinds of Non-resistance, and Passive Obedience) if he could but cast
a mist before the eyes of the Dissenters, and muffle their hands, and charm
them into a supine security; the desired Reformation might proceed gradually
without Interruption, and after a while the Doors might be opened, and Popery
let in with a full Breast. But they were grossly mistaken in their Politics:
The illegal proceedings against the Bishop of London, seconded by the Arbitrary
and most unjust persecution of the Vice Chancellor of Cambridge, and the
ejection of the President and Fellows of Magdalen College in Oxford, and the
intrusion of professed Papists in their rooms, opened the eyes of all sorts, and
quickly taught the Dissenters what they were to expect (whose Toleration was
Temporary and precarious) when such open Invasions were made on that Church
that was firmly established by Law.

But unless the Jesuits and Popish Counselors had been self murderers, and
conspired to overthrow their own Designs, by their imprudent and precipitate
actings, they had never abused the poor King by such pernicious advice, to
attack the Church of England in the persons of the Bishops, who were the
Reverend Fathers of it; to lay such a snare before wise and religious men, as
must endanger their safety, or prejudice their Conscience; and because they
presented an humble Apology by way of Petition (a privilege allowed to all men
by the Laws of God and Nature) imploring to be excused from being made
Instruments to countenance and publish the monstrous Assertion of an absolute
and dispensing Power; they were committed to the Tower, Indicted of
Misdemeanor, compelled to plead, tried by a Jury, and fairly acquitted upon
their Trial, to the shame and confusion of their Prosecutors; and to the
unexpressible joy and satisfaction of the whole Nation.

The King hoping to establish that by a Law which he could not bring to pass by
his will and power, proposed the calling of a Parliament; whom that he might
form to the Standard set out by the Popish Cabal, he condescended to such mean
shifts, and such indirect practices, by forestalling Men's Judgments, and
preingaging them against the Liberty, and indifferency of their Votes, and
turning Men out of their Employments, who would not abjure the natural Freedom
of their Reason, that in mere Decency and Respect, I forbear to enlarge upon it.

Neither will I any more than make mention of the Intrigue about the Birth of
the Prince of Wales: Great pains have been taken to offer convincing proofs to
the World of the Legitimacy of that Child; whereas there is nothing so hard to
be proved, as a Business of that Nature: And the suspicion of an Imposture has
made such an Impression on common belief, that an Act of Parliament in Favor
of the Birth would hardly reconcile the people to a Submission.

The bloody Executions in the West of England, upon the unhappy Abettors of the
Duke of Monmouth, exasperated Multitudes of People into Discontent, and Mutiny:
but when it was reported, that the King had given the Lives of so many wretched
men by whole sale to his Servitors to be retail'd by them for Lucre and Profit;
the whole Nation was affected with that unexampled Barbarity, and became
seasoned with a secret Aversion to his Government.

The furious Drivers of the Jesuitical Plots began too late to be sensible of
their mistaken Policy: they had stretached the Prerogative so high that is
began to crack; they had by their damnable Counsel hurried the unfortunate King
to the Brink of Ruin: The Sky began to thicken with Clouds, and Thunder was
heard a far off. Wherefore they began with all have to tack about to unravel
that work which with so many hands and such indefatigable industry they had
been knitting. Suddenly and unexpectedly a Proclamation issued to summon a
Parliament with Exclusion of the Roman Catholics; soon after the Charter of
London, and all other Corporations was restored: The Suspension of the Bishop
of London taken off: The Vice Chancellor and others of Cambridg, and the
President and Fellows of Magdalen-Colledge in Oxford reinstated in their
Places; The monstrous Commission for Ecclesiastical Affairs dissolved; a
Proclamation set out carrying the Face of a general pardon; but Squinting at
and Indemnity to Papists. All men were filled with wonder at such a hudled and
surprising Alteration; that the great Ministers of State should so poorly
truckle to the Satisfaction of the People; that the King should send for the
Bishops and court them, from whom a little before he would not endure the
Address of an humble Petition. But the Riddle was soon unfolded, and the wonder
was turned into an Exultation of Joy at the miraculous Revolution of Affairs.

The Lords Spiritual and Temporal and the Prime Gentry of England, sadly
resenting the Invasion on their Religion, Liberties, and Properties observing
the arbitary and despotical proceedings in Scotland, beholding Ireland wholly
given up to Popery, and Slavery, and their own Ancient Laws and established
Religion subverted by him, who had so often and so solemnly promised the
maintenance and Protection of them; they began to consult of some proper and
effectual means to divert the impending mischiefs, and to assure the
restitution of their ravished Freedom. To this end they made application to the
most illustrious Prince of Orange, the Champion and Protector of the Protestant
Religion, imploring his Aid to rescue them from Oppression and Slavery, and to
save their Liberties now expiring and at the last Gap. He with a Bravery and
Generosity, not to be matched in any History descended to their Relief, and
(postponing all his own Interests and Advantages) with the hazard of his
person, and the consumption of a vast Treasure, landed in England, not with a
mighty Army, least it should look like an Invasion; neither with too small a
Party least he should seem pusht on by a Necessity, or engaged in a desperate
undertaking. The King had a great Army on Foot, which was quickly increased by
a considerable Addition. And with appearance of great Resolution, and
confidence of Success, he marched from London: But he soon found by a fatal
Experience, that the Hands of his Subjects were directed by their hearts, in
which having forfeited his possession, he was to expect no Service or
Assistance from them. On the contrary the Lords and Gentlemen, from all parts
of the Kingdom flocked in with their Arms and Horses to join their Deliverer,
and many Trops and Regiments of the Kings Army deserted him, not enduring to be
mingled among Papists, or be obliged to fight against Protestants. The King in
this Perplexity was wholly irresolute what course to take; at last he posted to
London, where missing his Popish Favorites (whom Fear of Punishment, and the
Terror of an evil Conscience had utterly dissipated) he did not think it fit to
trust his best and truest Subjects, but secretly withdrew himself in a
Disguise, and being by a strange Accident discoverd, he was reconducted to
London; from whence, at his own desire, he was attended to Rochester: but not
being able to live without the Ministration of Priests, and Jesuits, he slipped
away to the Sea side, and saild for France, voluntarily, and without constraint
abdicating the Government, leaving the Throne vacant, and the Body of his
People, without a head.

Here ended the Reign of James the Second, too violent to last long. A Prince
who (when he was a Subject) had the Reputation of being a valiant Leader, afirm
Friend, and an immovable Observer of his word and Promise: But the Assumption
of a Crown, the Flatteries of a bigoted Queen, the desperate Counsels of a
Popish and Atheistical Cabal, with a blind Persuasion of meriting Heaven, by
the Adventure of all he had upon Earth, has exposed him to Censure, and
represented him under a contrary Character.

Perhaps he is absolved from the guilt of his personal vices by his Confessor,
and he shall be acquitted of the Remembrance of them by me, I have so great a
Reverence for those of his nearest Blood, that I shall not by the Blots of my
Pen imprint a Stain on his Memory, or diffuse the Tincture on his Posterity.

The Conclusion.
Thus you have a brief Epitome of the unfortunate Reigns of Six of the English
Monarchs. Of Which the First Broke his Neck; The next Broke his Heart; And
every one of them Broke his Vows to God, and his Promises to his Subjects. The
First of them came to an untimely End; The second died with Trouble of Mind;
The two next were deposed from Government, and violently put to Death. The next
died suddenly, to say no more of it; and the last dethroned himself, lives
miserably, and in all human probability will not die happliy. One of them was
struck to the heart by an Arrow; another by Grief; two perished by the Hands of
cruel men; The next died of an Apoplexy; I guess the Fate of the last, but I
will not take upon me to prophecy.

I wish, all those who desire to be called Protestants, would understand their
own happiness (and joyfully and thankfully acknowledge it) to live under a
Protestant King, and a Protestant Queen (a Blessing rare in these Kingdoms, and
not known for many years past) God grant them a long and prosperous Reign,
attended with all the Instances of Glory and Felicity; that under their
auspicious Influence true Religion may flourish, and detestable Popery may for
ever be banished out of their Dominions.

FINIS
Books lately Printed for Ric. Chiswell.
THe Case of Allegiance in our present circumstances considered, in a Letter
from a Minister in the City, to a Minister in the Country.

A Breviate of the State of Scotland in its Government, Supreme Courts,
Officers of State, Inferior Officers. Offices and Inferior Courts Districts,
Jurisdictions, Buroughs Royal, and Free Corporations. Fol.

Some Considerations touching Succession and Allegiance.

A Discourse concerning the Worship of Images; preached before the University
of Oxford: By George Tully Sub-Dean of York, for which he was Suspended.

Reflections upon the late Great Revolution: Written by a Lay-Hand in the
Country, for the satisfaction of some Neighbors.

The History of the Dissertion; or an Account of all the public Affairs in
England, from the beginning of September 1688. to the Twelfth of February
following. With an Answer to a Piece called, The Dissertion discussed, in a
Letter to a Country Gentleman: By a Person of Quality.

K. William and K. Lewis, wherein is set forth the inevitable necessity these
Nations lie under of submitting wholly to one or other of these Kings; And that
the matter in Controversy is not now between K. William and K. James, but
between K. William and K. Lewis of France, for the Government of these Nations.

An Examination of the Scruples of those who refuse to take the Oath of
Allegiance, by a Divine of the Church of England.

A Dialogue betwixt two Friends, a Jacobite and a Williamite; occasioned by the
sat Revolution of Affairs, and the Oath of Allegiance.

An Account of the Reasons which induced Charles the Second, King of England,
to declare War against the States General of the United Provinces in 1672. And
of the Private League which he entered into at the same Time with the French
King to carry it on, and to establish Popery in England, Scotland, and Ireland,
as they are set down in the History of the Dutch War; printed in French at
Paris, with the privilege of the French King, 1682. Which Book he caused to be
immediately suppressed at the Instance of the English Ambassador. Fol.

An Account of the Private League betwixt the late King James the Second, and
the French King. Fol.

The Case of the Oaths Stated. 4to.

The Answer of a Protestant Gentleman in Ireland to a late Popish Letter of N.
N upon a Discourse between them, concerning the present posture of that
Country, and the part fit for those concerned there to Act in it. 4to

An Apology for the Protestants of Ireland, in a brief Narative of the late
Revolutions in that Kingdom; and an Account of the present State thereof: By a
Gentlemen of Quality ^to.

A Letter from a French Lawyer to an English Gentleman, upon the present
Revolution. 4to

Scriptorum Ecclesiasticorum Historia Literaria a Christo nato usque ad
Saeculum XIV. Facili ethodo digesta. Qua de Vita illorum ac Rebus gestis, de
Secta, Dogmatibus, Elogio, Stylo; de Scriptis genuinis, dubiis, supposititiis,
ineditis, deperditis, Fragmentis; deque variis Operum Editionibus perspicue
agitur. Accedunt Scriptores Gentiles, Christianae Religionis Oppugnatores and
cujusvis Saeculi Breviarium. I(...)untur suis locis Veterum aliquot Opuscula
and ^ragmenta, tum Graeca, tum Latina hactenus inedita. Praemissa denique
Prolegomena, quibus (...)ma ad Antiquitatis Ecclesiasticae studium spe(...)ia
traduntur. Opus Indicibus necessariis ^uctum. Autore GVILIELMO CAVE, SS. Theol.
Profes. Canonico Windesoriensi. Accedit ab Alia Manu Appendix ab ineunte
Saeculo XIV. ad Annum usque MDXVII. Fol. 1689.


