THE CHARACTER Of an Honest, and Worthy Parliament Man.
I Hope the Reader will not be so unwife, as to expect that I should here
entertain him with a Pompous Enumeration of all those Imaginary Virtues,
wherewith the Romantic Modellers of a Platonic, or Utopian Commonwealth,
adorn their Paper Senators; when the Character even of a Real Cato, would be
altogether as useless in our Times, as it is rarely found to be practiced; and
consequently as little regarded now, as he himself was by the Corrupt Age
wherein he lived: Not but that our Nation has of late produced as Great Heroes
as any Antiquity can boast of, yet it cannot be imagined that they are to be
found in every little Town or Borrough.

As for my Honest and Worthy Parliament Man, all the Qualifications that I
desire to find in him, are only such as it would be the greatest affront
imaginable to any English Gentleman to think him destitute of: That is, that he
should be a Man of Sense, Integrity and Honor. Let him but follow their
Dictates, and then all the duties which we may reckon, or think of, to be
incumbent on him; will be as easily performed by him, as they are demonstrable
to be the obvious, and Natural Consequents of such Principles.

As for his Religion, he is a sincere, as well as open Profess^r of that which
by our Laws is now become Essential to his Office, I mean, that of the Church
of England: Nor is he of it because it is Established by Law, or that he was
bred in it; but before he settled his Opinion, he maturely examined its first
Principles, and found them agreeable to the Divine will, and Right Reason, he
discovered the Folly and Errors of those who oppose any points of its
Doctrine: And being thoroughly satisfied in the Fundamentals, for its
Discipline, he entirely submits himself to the Judgment and Authority of those
to whose Conduct and Discretion the Government of the Church has been in all
Ages committed.

But though he be a zealous Churchman himself, yet he is so far from Persecuting
those who Dissent from the Established Religion purely for Conscience sake, that
he is ready to pity their weakness, have Compassion on their Infirmities, and
express the greatest Tenderness imaginable for their Persons, whenever that
time shall come, when it will be his chance to meet with those, whose scruples
arise rather from a real defect in their understandings, than some Worldly
Interest or desire of Filthy Lucre, an Obstinate, Peevish, or Self-conceited
Humor, or the vain glorious Spirit of Contradiction.

As for his Sentiments in State Affairs, in which next to his Religion, his
greatest desire is to be Orthodox; before they fixed, he always tries them with
the Touchstone of Reason; and consequently thinks it Lawful for him to be a
Latitudinarian in Judgment in Relation to Civil Matters: I mean so far as not
to expect to find an Infallible Judge, amongst either Torys, Whigs, or
Trimmers. He takes up Opinions upon trust from no Party, nor condemns any,
because they are of it, who differ from him in other things: And therefore he
could not but smile, to see in our late Times of Dissension, so many in all
outward appearance Honest, and thinking men, continually jogg on, like a Gang
of Pack-Horses after the Leaders of their several Parties; and tho they wander,
after these Blazing, butdeceitful Lights, into never so many Crooked and by
paths, yet with an Implicit and Blind Faith, still believe themselves to be in
the right way.

For his part, his only aim is at the Honor, Safety, and Interest of his
Country: On this Mark, he keeps his eye constantly fixed; nor can the dreadful
Frowns of an Enraged Prince, or the horrid Clamours of a possessed Multitude;
ever be able to remove him from his point. He finds that his beloved virtue
brings such solid, tho invisible rewards along with her, that he is equally
insensible to the promising smiles of fawning great ones that would tempt, and
the terrible menaces of the Fiercest Demagogues, that would force him to
forsake her. He can securely, without any Fear of Infection, deride the folly,
and pity the madness of those who forfeit their Honesty, to found their
happiness, upon the unstable Basis of Court Favors, or Popular Applause.

He truly enjoys all that Freedom in his Actions, which he thinks his Duty to
procure for, and defend his Contrymen in. He is wholly a stranger to the
servile Ambition of gaining the favorable Opinion of others; nor can he tell
what it is to fear the Censures of any: He is Directed, Influenced, or Biased
by none; And whilst he is engaged in his Countries service, he thinks the most
Glorious Epithetes the World can fix upon him, are those of a Rigid Inflexible
Ill-natured Honest Man.

When he discovers that any have Designs contrary to the Public good, let
their Authority and Power be never so great, he opposes their Opinions, with
all the Courage and Zeal his generous Principles can furnish him with; without
any respect to their Persons. But when the time comes, wherein the right side
shall turn uppermost, as after all Revolutions it ever will at last, he is then
so far from trampling upon his fallen Adversaries, tho he becomes, I mean as a
private Man, most tender of the Persons without any Respect to their Opinions.

He is altogether unacquainted with that base and degenerate Passion called
Hatred: Yet there is one sort of Men whom he thinks worthy of the utmost Degree
of his Contempt and Scorn; I mean those false and Treacherous Friends, who have
formerly gone along with, nay, much before him in the same Cause; those
pretended Zealots for their Country and Religion, who for their own Paultry
Interest, or some by ends made it their business to set us together by the
Ears, with their nosy Clamours against Popery and Slavery: But when the danger
was become real, and just hanging over our Heads, when our Church and State
were designed for immediate Ruin, with the same Mercenary breath servilly
offered themselves to be employed as Tools, in the Destruction of them both.
These he conceives ought to have a mark put upon them, as the worst of
Traitors; he takes them to be the vilest of Men, or rather (to use he
expression of one who perhaps may think himself cocern'd, here) to carry
nothing of men, that is, English Men, but the shape.

But I now find my self necessiated, to take my hand from off the Tablet, lest
instead of completing the Portraicture of an Honest Parliament Man I should
insensibly touch upon them, who deserve another Character. My intention then
being like my Honest Patriots, willingly to offend no man, I shall take my
leave of him at present, with this Remark only, That a Nation where such as he
preside, at the Helm, will without doubt be altogether as happy, as if it were
Steered by Plato's Philosophizing Governors, or Governing Philosophers.

FINIS.

