The Charge of Subduing the Irish-Rebellion in 1641.
An Account of what subduing the Rebellion of Ireland, begun the 23d of
October, 1641. has cost, and what Damage the Protestants there have sustained
thereby, and what Lands have been forfeited and disposed of to Adventurers,
Soldiers, and other English, and what to the Irish, and now in their
possession: Abstracted out of the Accounts of Moneys in the Exchequer, during
such time as any regular Accounts were made up, and by probable and rational
Estimates, for the time in which no Accounts were kept, by reason of the
general Rebellion and Confusion, and out of the Surveys, Deccrees, and
Settlements, made by His Majesty 's Commissioners, for executing the Acts of
Settlement and Explanation in Ireland.

l. s. d. l. s. d. l. s. d. I. MOneys received and issued from the 6th of July
1649, to the 1st of November 1656, being 7 years and 4 Months, according to an
Account thereof, remaining as a Record in the Auditor-General's Office in
Ireland. Transmitted out of England, in specie 1566848 13 4 3509396 17 0
22191258 3 0 Assessments in Ireland 1309695 14 11 Rents of forfeited and
sequestered Houses, Lands, Fishings, etc. 161598 8 7 Tithes sequestered 135524
3 2 Customs and Excise 252474 18 10 Preys of Cows, Horses, and other Goods,
taken from the Rebels, and for other casual Revenue 083258 18 Money issued in
England toward transporting Armies, raising Recruits, buying and sending over
Provisions of all sorts for the Army, and other Moneys issued by Warrant from
the then Council, or the Committee of the Army in England, which was not
accounted for in Ireland, the Warrants and Accounts being never transmitted
thither, of which there is a Reference in the account of Record, in the
Exchequer above mentioned, which is estimated to be as much, if not more, than
the above sum of 3509396 l. 17 s. 0 d. In that all Cloths, Linen and Woollen,
Stockings, Shoes, Boots, Horses, Saddles, Arms, Ammunition, Tents, Bread,
Cheese, and other eating Provisions, were sent from England, and the Price
thereof deducted from the weekly Pay of the Army, and not brought to Account,
and so estimated as above 3509396 17 The Charges of the Armies in the several
Provinces of Ireland, from the 23d of October 1641, the time the Rebellion
broke out, to the 6th of July 1649, from whence the Accounts is stated, as
above, being about 7 Years and 9 Months, when no regular Accounts were or could
be kept, by reason of the Confusion in which the kingdom was by the Rebellion,
there may be by probable Estimate added, without any Allowance, for Provision
of all sorts after the Rate of what was paid the Army after the 6th of July
1649, when Provisions were deducted 3760068 The Loss of Rents for 14 Years,
from October 1641 until the Year 1655, reckoning the Land but at 12 d. an Acre
yearly, is 7608264 l. 6 s. and reckoning all the Corporations, Houses and
Tithes, but at a Moiety thereof, comes to 11412396 9

Besides the Loss by the Devastation of Houses, Orchards, Gardens,
Improvements, Household Stuff, Corn, Cattle, and the impairing the value of Land
unto that time, not to be estimated, but in reason to be accounted, as much as
before is computed for all others Charges, Losses and Expenses, if not much
more, the same extending to the whole kingdom.

II. By the Surveys of Ireland, there is in Ireland, as forfeited by the
Rebellion, and belonging to Protestants not forfeited, of Plantation-Acres,
accounting 21 Foot to the Perch, and 160 Perches to the Acre, in the respective
Provinces, the quantity of Land hereafter mentioned.

Acres Acres Leinster 2603520 10868949 Munster 3255874 Vlster 2777875 Connaght
2231680

The which Lands are divided and distributed, as by the Surveys and Records of
the Records of the Court of Claims will appear, as follows:

To the Portestants, and others, that proved their constant good affection,
including the Bogs, Loughs and Mountains in Ireland, 6110292 10868949 To
Adventures 396054 2717549 To the Officers and Soldiers 1442839 To the Officers
that served his Majesty against the Rebels in Ireland, before the Year 1649
278041 To his Royal Highness the Duke of York, as Regicides Lands 111015 To
Protestants, on Provisoes by the Acts of Settlement and Explanation 383975 To
the Bishops for their Augmentations, of which some have possession 118041
Reserved to His Majesty as un-disposed, upon the account of Lewis Dyke and
Thomas Conyngham, being set out on fraudulent Adventures 14006 Left of course
Lands un-disposed, the Title to the greatest part whereof was doubtful 73578
Restored unto the Irish upon Decrees of Innocence 965270 2041108 Restored to
them by special Provisoes in the Acts of Settlement and Explanation 408083 Set
out upon their Transplantations of Connaght and Clare, over and above what is
confirmed to English Protestants, who purchased Interests there from the Irish
667755

So that the Irish, notwithstanding the Rebellion, and their great complaints
of losing all their Lands, are restored unto, and possessed of, almost one half
of all the Lands formerly accounted forfeited by the Rebellion. Besides, that
the 2717549 Acres granted to the English, has cost as before (besides the loss
of Hundreds of thousands of Men murdered by, and killed in subduing the said
Rebels) the sum of 22191258 l. 3 s. 0 d. And accounting the said 2717549 Acres
to be worth 12 d. per Acre, one Acre with the other yearly, they will come to
135876 l. 9 s. which for the Purchase thereof, at 10 years Purchase comes to
1358764 l. 10 s. After which Rate the Lands, granted to the English and
Protestants are not the 15th part of what the Money expended in subduing the
said Rebellion would have bought, accounting the Devastations and loss of many
Thousands of Men's Lives for nothing.

ADVERTISEMENT.
The History of the Execrable IRISH-REBELLION, Traced from many preceding Acts
to the grand Eruption the 23d of October 1641, and thence pursued to the Act of
Settlement 1662. Printed for Robert Clavell at the Peacock, and Charles Brom
at the Gun near the West End of S. Paul's.

London, Printed for R. Clavel and Chapter Brom, at the West End of S. Paul's, 1689.


