NEW EXPERIMENTS UPON THE VIPER BY M. CHARAS.


NEW EXPERIMENTS UPON VIPERS.

Containing also an Exact DESCRIPTION Of all the Parts of a VIPER, The SEAT of
its POISON, AND THE Several EFFECTS thereof, Together with the EXQVISITE
REMEDIES, That by the Skilful may be drawn from Vipers, as well for the Cure of
their Bitings, as for that of other Maladies.

Originally written in French By M. CHARAS of Paris.

Now rendered English.

Multa Patres olim: Nos plurima, plura Futuri
Invenient; Cupidis nec porta negata Novorum.
LONDON, Printed by T. N. for J. Martyn, Printer to the R. Society, at the Bell
in S. Paul's Churchyard, and a little without Temple Bar. 1670.

THE Preface.
MAny will perhaps wonder, that after so many famous Authors, Ancient and
Modern, who have written of VIPERS, I should yet undertake to labor in an
Argument, which in all likelihood they should have exhausted. But if reflection
be made on the many wonders, that are found in the Body of this Animal, it will
be easily granted, that it cannot be inquired into with too much exactness, and
that it is not a work, that can be finished at one or two sittings.

What Observations have been left us by knowing men, although they be not
carried to their perfection, may be very useful to those, that are come after
them, to make them discover what had escaped their diligence. And without this
aid, I should not have had the confidence of undertaking this Work; in which I
have proposed to my self three main things, that may much contribute to the
illustration of the History concerning Vipers. The first is, to examine sundry
Observations of the Ancients, which have hitherto passed for true, though most
of them are not so. The second, to give an account of other Observations, which
have been unknown to our Predecessors. The third, to find in the Viper, which
causes so many mischiefs, Specific Remedies against its Biting, which had not
been discovered before, and may serve to overcome many troublesome Distempers,
which the ordinary Remedies were not able to conquer.

The Enterprise, certainly, is bold; and, I confess, I should never have
compassed it, what hope soever I might have conceived of it, had I not been
assisted by some knowing Physicians, whose light has been very helpful to me.

Their Modesty permits not, I should here name them; it suffices the Public
to know, that a good part of the rare things in this Treatise is due to them.
They had the kindness to meet often at my House for the space of three months,
and there to see made exact Dissections of Vipers, which by my care were
brought to me from all Parts of this Kingdom; and to see also Experiments tried
of their biting, upon diverse Animals, and to examine their Bodies, immediately
opened after their death, to discover the true cause of it; and to prescribe
Remedies, answerable to their Conjectures, and to take notice of the success of
the same.

In dissecting all these Vipers, we were willing to see the parts, which
Authors have taken notice of, and which have also been represented in the Books
of some of them: And comparing them with the Natural ones, that were before our
Eyes, we found great omissions of very considerable parts; an introduction of
some imaginary ones, and representations and scituations of several that were
ill designed, and ill enough placed. It was thought fit, I should endeavor to
perform something more accomplished: And Monsieur Bosse, whose skill and
dexterity in the Art of Designing and Graving is known and esteemed of all the
World, in things of a far sublimer nature than the Anatomy of Vipers, being
happily present at one of our meetings, and taking great pleasure to oblige his
Friends, expressed from that very time, that he was very willing to second my
intentions: And having received from me a sufficient number of Subjects, has
taken the pains to design them after the life, and thereupon to grave all the
considerable parts of this Animal. In a word, I have omitted nothing of what
might render my Design answerable to the wishes of all Learned and Curious men.

Now as those, who, speaking of a matter that has been often handled by
others, cannot but must often repeat again, what has been already said of it;
I thought, I was not to scruple to enlarge my self a little, that I might not
give an imperfect Anatomy of the Viper, of which it was fit enough to describe
as well the great number of the true parts, that have been known to our
Ancestors, as the new ones, by me found after them.

I say nothing of my way of Writing. From a person of my profession, you are
not to expect the Elegancy and Purity of our Tongue. I thought it enough for
me, to deliver my self clearly and intelligibly, which is, in my opinion, all
that could be expected from me.

For the rest, I think, I am the first, that has given to France a Treatise of
the Viper in its Native Language. Those who understand no other Languages, may
think themselves obliged by it, in regard they would else have been ignorant of
abundance of things, that deserve to be known. Farewell.

THE TABLE Of the Titles of all the Contents in this Book.
Anatomy of the Viper.
Chap. I. GEneral observations upon the Viper. Description of the Viper. Chapter
II. Of the Parts which present themselves first of all. Of the exterior shape
of the Viper. Sect. I. Of the skin of the Viper. Sec. 2.
Chapter III. Of the parts of a Vipers Head. Of the Vipers Nose. Sec. 1. Of the
Skull. Sect. 2. Of the Brain. Sec. 3. Of the Eyes and their principal Parts,
and of those that serve for Hearing. Sect. 4. Of the Bones of the Head that are
articulated to the Skull. Sec. 5. Of the Teeth. Sec. 6. Of the Nerves, Veins,
Arteries, and Muscles of the Head in general. Sec. 7. Of the Salival Glands of
the Viper. Sec. 8.
Chapter IV. Of the other Bones of the Viper, and of the principal parts that
depend therefrom. Chapter V. Of the other internal parts of the Viper. Of the
Tongue. Sec. 1. Of the Windpipe, and the Lungs. Sec. 2. Of the Heart and
Liver. Sec. 3. Of the Gall and Pancreas. Sec. 4. Of the Weasand and Stomach.
Sec. 5. Of the Guts, kidneys, Fat, and a Coat wrapping them up under-neath.
Sec. 6.
Chapter VI. Of the Organs of Generation in a Viper. Sect. 3. Of the parts of a
Male. Sec. 1. Of the parts of Generation in a Female. Sec. 2. Of the Generation
and Birth of Vipers. Sec. 3.
The Explication of what is represented in the first Cut. The Explication of
what is exhibited in the second Cut. The Explication of what appears in the
third Cut.

Experiments upon Vipers.
Chapter I. A Biting of a Viper happn'd to a Man. Chapter II. Experiments of Vipers
upon diverse Animals. Experiments on Dogs. The Biting of a Dog in his Ear.
Another Biting upon a Dog. The Biting of a little Dog. Another Dog bit in the
Tongue.
Chapter III. Experiments of the Biting of a Viper made upon Pigeons and Pullets.
Chapter IV. Of the Poison of a Vipers biting, and of its operation. Chapter V.
Experiments of the yellow liquor contained in the little Baggs of the greater
Teeth, made on several Animals. Chapter VI. Experiments of the Gall, Eggs, Guts,
Heads, and the Blood of a Viper made on diverse Animals. Chapter VII. Sundry other
Experiments made upon Vipers. Chapter VIII. General Reflections on all those
Experiments.
Remedies drawn from Vipers.
Chapter I. Of the different choice that may be made of the parts of Vipers. Chapter
II. Of the Use of the parts of a Viper, as to its Nourishing virtue. Chapter III.
Of the Virtues of several parts of a Viper in Physic. Chapter IV. Of the Powder
and Trochisques of Vipers. Chapter V. Of the Viper-Salt of the Ancients. Chapter VI. Of
the Volatile Salt of Vipers; of their Fixed Salt, and of the other parts that
are separated by Distillation. Chapter VII. Of the Fixation of the Volatile Salt of
Vipers. Chapter VIII. Of the virtues of the Volatile Salt of Vipers, and, of what
other parts are able to do, that are separated by Distillation. Chapter IX. Of the
way of using the Volatile Salt of Vipers. Chapter X. Diverse Remedies or
Compositions, of which this Volatile Salt is the Base or ground.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 13. line 6. read seen on. p. 29. l. 8. r. and that. p. 95. l. 27. r. and
the want of goodness. p. 120. l. 5. r. the bitten animal would be. p. 126. l.
12. r. twice through, for, twice in the daylight. p. 163. l. 12. r. adapt. p.
165. l. 1. r. with Salt and Dill. p. 172. l. 1. r. Simples be in.

depiction of skeleton and various bones of a snake depiction of the
reproductive organs of a snake depiction of the internal organs of a snake

THE ANATOMY OF A VIPER.
General Observations upon this Animal.
CHAPTER I.
I Know not, what ground the Ancient Writers upon this Animal had, to say, that
in the Copulation, the Male did insert his Head into the throat of the Female,
and there emitted his seed, thence falling into her Matrix, where she first did
form Eggs and then Young Vipers: That the Female, finding a titillation from
the emission of the seed, snapp'd off with her teeth the head of the Male, and
so killed him; and that the Young Vipers, being ready to be brought forth, did
pierce the Womb and the sides of their Damm, to make a passage for themselves;
so that by killing her, they revenged in some manner the death of their Sire.

I confess, that this Story, or Tale rather, having neither reason nor
experience on its side, I cannot take the part of those Authors. I esteem, that
a Viper, which is a kind of creeping Serpent, is indeed procreated by the
conjunction of Male and Female; but this is done by means of the Organs
designed for Generation; of which we shall make a description in their proper
place, and which this Animal has common with all others, and that more in
number, than most Animals.

The Viper differs from other Serpents, not only in this, that it creeps more
slowly, and jumps not; but chiefly herein, that its little ones receive their
perfection in the womb, and come forth alive after the usual manner; whereas
the Femals of other Serpents lay Eggs, which they incubate, and hatch, either
in the Sun, or in their recesses,

The Viper is by many taken for an Image of malice and cruelty; but in reality
she is guilty of no such thing, if she be not hurt or vexed; for, if she be,
she becoms furious, and bites very piercingly: but she never assaults Man or
beast, except she be angered. And if at times it happen, that she bites some
person or other sleeping in the field, certainly that Body must have thrust or
otherwise hit her; for else she would never have bit him.

It may very well be said, that by that means the Stratagem of Annibal
succeeded, when he caused a quantity of earthen Pitchers filled with Vipers to
be thrown into the Ships of the King of Pergamus, his Enemy; in regard that on
the one hand the Pots being broken, did hurt and anger the Vipers, and stirred
them up to bite whatsoever was within the reach of their teeth; and on the
other, the sight of these creeping Creatures, scattered about here and there in
the Ships, frighted the Soldiers and disordered them, so that they could not
fight.

Mean time a Viper attacks and kills those Animals, which she means to devour
for her nourishment, as Spanish Flies, Scorpions, Froggs, Mice, Moles, Lizzards
and the like; which she swallows whole, after she has killed them with her
bigger Teeth. The smaller prey she sends down whole into her stomach; the
bigger she partly lodges in her stomach, partly in her weasand.

There can hardly be made any perfect digestion in the Stomach of Vipers, both
because the heat is there not well united, by reason of the great aperture,
there is at the mouth, where the Oesophagus or Weasand ends; and because they
have not moisture enough to help the fermentation and the Concoction of food.
But yet this hinders not * the conveyance of the Juice and of the finest part
of the swallowed animals into all the parts of their body for nourishment:
Which is not performed but in the space of many days, during which, the
excrements and superfluities of the nutriment are carried into the Gutts,
whence the grosser parts of them are cast out again by the mouth. This we have
lately observed in a great part of the body of a Lizzard, which a Viper vomited
up twelve days after she was taken; where we saw, that, of the head and of the
fore-leggs, and of that part of the body contiguous to them, and which could
conveniently be placed in the stomach of the Viper, there rested little more
than the Bones; but that a great part of the trunk, together with the
hind-leggs, and the whole tail, were in a manner in a condition, as if the
Viper had swallowed them that day, as appears in the 2d Figure. But we were
surprised, among other things, to see, that the parts, which could not enter
into the stomach, and had remained in the Oesophagus, had kept so long well, I
mean, without suffering any alteration in the skin; although those underneath
had contracted some lividness, which perhaps was an effect of the venemousness
of the biting.

Vipers can live for many months without any food, and after they are once
taken, they eat no more, living then only upon the Air, they take in. And
although they be greedy enough of Lizzards, when at liberty, yet I have found,
that having thrown Lizzards alive into a barrel, wherein I kept a good number
of living Vipers, and leaving them there whole days and nights, the Vipers did
no hurt at all to the Lizzards.

The Substance of Vipers is viscous and compact, and perishes not but very
slowly and difficultly. Their Skin is scaly, which defends them from the
injuries of the Air, and makes that the Spirits unite themselves so firmly to
the body, that it is hard for them to quit it; and we see, that they remain yet
many hours in the Head and in all the parts of the trunk, after it is flead,
emptied of all the gutts, and cut in many pieces: And this is the cause, that
the motions and windings so long continue in them; that the Head is able to
bite, and its biting as dangerous, as when the Viper was entire; and that the
Heart, even after it is pulled out of the body, and severed from the other
inward parts, keeps its beating for many hours. Whence it may be concluded,
that the Viper, which is composed of parts so closely united together, and in
which are found such perfect Spirits, can impart to Man what it has most
accomplished and in so great abundance: So that we need not wonder, if we find
the remedies, we draw from its body, are of a not-ordinary virtue.

A Viper voids not much excrement, and what she voyds is not offensive, whereas
that of Snakes stinks much, and has the smell of stale and corrupt Urine.
Neither have we ever found any ill smell in opening the vessels, wherein we
used to keep Vipers alive, unless some viper or other had been dead and
putrifyed. For my part, I have never received any inconvenience from any ill
air, which some pretend to issue forth at the opening of those Vessels.

Vipers make no holes in the Earth to hide themselves in, as other Serpents do;
but ordinarily they hide themselves under stones or old ruins, where they may
be often found heaped up and wound together in clusters. When it is fair
weather, they love to lurk under bushes and tufted plants.

They commonly couple twice a year, the first time in the month of March; and
they go with their young ones 4. or 5. months; which being perfect, come forth
one after another by the common opening of the Matrix, and in great number,
even to twenty and twenty five. They draw out with them, in coming forth, a
small tegument fastened to their navil, like an afterbirth, which the damm by
little and little separateth with her tongue, as they are born one after
another.

Vipers cast a skin every Spring, and sometimes even in Autumn: which has
occasioned a belief, that they have a virtue, able to make young again, and to
preserve the strength of those, who use them either for a preservative or a
remedy.

THE DESCRIPTION OF A VIPER
CHAP. II.
Of the Parts, which present themselves first.
SECT. I.
Of its external Figure.
THe Vipers, Males and Females, that we have in France, being of their full
growth, are in the middle of their body a good inch thick; but that of Females
is bigger, when they are with young, especially when the young ones are ready
to come forth. They are commonly two good foot long; and there are some, that
are somewhat longer. Their head, which is flat, has a kind of border round
about the edges of its upper part, and in that they differ from Snakes, which
have all that round bared and taken down, and the Head sharper and narrower, in
proportion to their Body.

The Head of a Viper is in all an inch long, and toward the top thereof it is
7 or 8 lines broad; and then lessening by little and little, it is not above 4
or 5 lines broad about the Eyes, and 2 lines only about the end of the Nose.
It is about 2 lines thick.

The Neck, taken where it begins, is about the bigness of a man's little finger.
That of Males is ordinarily a little thicker than that of Females: Yet there
are some of the Females, which, when full, appear to have a Neck even thicker
than that of Males.

The Tail of Males is always longer and thicker than that of Females, because
it contains the parts of generation double; and in their Interstices there are
also two small bladders somewhat long, serving for a reservatory of their seed,
which make their Tail bigger. This of the Males is about four fingers square
long; but that of Females not much longer than three. The upper part of the
Tail of Males is, at its beginning, about the bigness of their Neck, and ends
sharp, as does also the Tail of Females. Neither of them stings, nor have they
any venom in them.

SECT. II.
Of the Skin of Vipers.
NO Vipers are seen, but they have their skin spotted: but the ground of the
color is different enough; for sometimes it is whitish, sometimes reddish, in
some it is gray, in others yellow, in others tawny. This ground is always
speckled with black spots, or at least much darker ones than the rest; they
appear like different ciphers or characters, ranged in spaces, even enough, and
answering one another, especially on the top and the sides of the Body. Some of
them are also upon the Head, and among the rest, two in the form of Horns,
which take their rise between both Eyes, and open themselves and reach toward
the two sides of the top of the Head, and are sometimes 4. or 5. lines long,
each of them, and half a line broad. Opposite to the middle of these two
horns, there appears a speck of the bigness of a small Lentile, being shaped
like the Iron of a Pike: And this is that, which is, as 'twere, the first and
principal of all these specks, seeming to guide them all along the Backbone.

The Skin is all covered with Scales, the greatest, strongest and most
considerable of which, are those under the whole Body, and some under part of
the Head. Their bigness and force is necessary for them, to fortify the Viper
in the place that is feeblest and least capable of defense; besides that they
support the Animal, and serve it, instead of feet, for creeping, and for
carrying its Body to and fro. These great Scales are always of the color of
Steel, from one end to the other, and different from those of Snakes, which are
commonly marked with a yellow color. They open, and stick, according as the
Viper will recoyle, or stop. The extremity of these great Scales is, as 'twere,
sowed beneath the other little Scales, which cover the whole Body. Those under
the Head, reach in their breadth toward the two Jaws; they are lesser,
streighter and softer than those under the Belly, and terminate at other
smaller Scales, which go on to cover the whole undermost part of the Head, and,
beginning their ranks toward the ends before, continue them at the sides of
those ranks as far as toward the bottom of the Jaws.

From the beginning of the Neck unto the beginning of the Tail, there are as
many great Scales, as there are vertebraes or Joints of the Backbone; and as
each Vertebra has on each side a Ribb, each Scale meets by its two ends the
points of both, and serves them for a defense and stay: the same abuts also on
each side at the end of one rank of little scales, wherewith the rest of the
Body is covered, and it seems, that it is placed there to receive them. These
small scales are admirably well ranged, they lying upon one another, and
representing each as 'twere half a round toward their extremity. Their ranks
appear always sloping, whether you look on them from the right side to the
left, or from the left to the right; some what after the manner of the ranks of
small Slate, that are cut in a half round, in some places seen in olthe tops
of houses. These Scales are more or less great, according as the part of the
Body, they cover, is greater or lesser. The Symmetry of them is always very
exquisite and even; and is suitable to the great Scales, united to their ranks
beneath. There are also observed on the top of these Scales, and all along the
Back, many fine and distinct Lines, passing straight along from the hind-part
of the Head unto the end of the Tail.

The Scales, that are under the Tail from the beginning of it to the end, are
divided, and yet they appear united and ranged in the middle by a very orderly
and pleasing compartment; and their bigness goes diminishing in proportion with
the Tail.

The Skin of the Head is also covered with small scales, and at the end of the
Nose turned up, and so on, even round about, as far as toward the Eyes, in the
manner of a swines-snout.

There are observed only six openings in the Skin of a Viper: the biggest is
that of its Throat; the other four are those of the two Nostrils, and of the
two Eyes; the last is that, which is at the lower-most end of the Belly, where
is the beginning of the Tail, which incloseth not only the hole of the Gut for
voiding the excrements, but also those of the organs of Generation, as well of
Males as Females. This last opening is shut by the last of the great scales,
which is advanced in the form of a half round, and opens in falling lower at
the time of copulation, as it also does at the time of the young Vipers being
cast, and of the excretion of their dung. The Throat opens and shuts at the
will of the Animal; the Nostrils remain always open, and the Eyes have
Eyelids to cover them upon occasion. There is no aperture in the skin to give
any passage for Hearing; Nature, it seems, serving herself of the apertures of
the Nostrils for that purpose.

Vipers ordinarily cast their scaly Skins twice a year, under which they are
furnished with another, quite formed, which at first appears much fairer, and of
a more vivid color, than that which is cast off. And there is also insensibly
forming an other new one, against the time it is to serve, when that which now
covers it shall be severed from it: So that a Viper has at all times a double
skin; and all these skins, though furnished with scales, are notwithstanding
transparent, being held and looked on against the daylight.

This External description might be sufficient for those, who shall desire no
more but to know how to discern Vipers from other Serpents, but the Anatomical
Description of all the parts under the Skin will be much more satisfactory and
more necessary for those, who shall desire to know exactly all the good and all
the ill in a Viper.

CHAP. III.
OF the Parts of the Head OF A VIPER
SECT. I.
Of the Nose and Nostrils.
BEginning at the extremity of the Head there are the Nose and the Nostrils.
The former is made up of a Bone some what Gristly, furnished with some ends of
Muscles, that come farther off, and are accompanied with some small veins and
arteries. This Bone is also covered with the scaly Skin, turned up, as was said
above, at its extremities. There are two pipes, in the two sides, that form the
nostrils, which have each a small and round opening on the right and the left
side, before, and the proper nerve, which coms down from the forepart of the
Brain unto their Orifice, and communicates to them the objects of smelling. The
same Pipes serve also to receive two small Nerves, which issue each from the
lateral part of the Brain, and serve for Hearing. This gristly Bone has
several Angles round about, and is articulated by two strong Ligaments within
and about the hollow and anteriour part of the Skull; which hinders not, but
that it is a little flexible in this Articulation.

SECT. 2.
Of the Skull.
THe Skull is found hollow in the forepart of it, and represents the shape of
an Heart in this Cavity, when the Bone of the Nose is separated from it. There
are two points advancing, which in part embrace that Bone; it is in the
superior part surrounded with a small border, advancing in the fashion of a
Cornishe; it is notch'd on both sides, where the Eyes are situate, and there
forms their round holes, of which the hind-part reaches out to a point, to
which answers that before. The whole Skull in all its parts is of a very
compact and hard substance. There are three principal Sutures in the part
above; the one, which may be called the Sagittal, which divides longwayes the
part above the two Eyes; the second, which may be termed Coronal, divides the
Skull across behind the two Eye-holes; the third, separates it also cross-ways
near the beginning of the Backbone. In the Surface of the upper part of the
Skull, may be observed the figure of an Heart well represented, seated in the
middle thereof, which has its basis near the Suture Coronal, and carries its
sharp end toward the hind-part of the Skull, which is severed by the third
Suture.

There is also another great Suture, round about the nethermost lateral parts
of the Skull, by which it may be divided into two bodies, an upper and lower.
This latter is made in the form of a turned back, going long ways, hollow in
the middle, and representing the shape of a Culter, which has a kind of little
wing on its sides, and whose point advances beneath the middle of the Eyes. Its
latter part descends as far as the bottom of the Palate, where it has in its
lower part a point descending in the form of an overturned hillock.

All the Sutures of the Skull are so well united in their conjunction, and so
strongly connected, that it is very hard to distinguish them, and yet more to
separate the parts of them without breaking them, unless the Skull be boiled in
some liquor.

SECT. 3.
Of the Brain.
THe substance of a Vipers Brain is divided into five main Bodies, of which the
two first are oblong, each of the size and shape of a grain of Succory-seed.
They are seated long-wayes between the two Eyes; and it is from these Bodies,
that the Olfactory Nerves do proceed. The three other are in the middle part of
the Skull, and under that figure of the Heart, of which we have been speaking.
Each of these Bodies is near as big as a grain of the Seed of Milium Solis, and
represents almost the shape of a Pear, the point of which is turned toward the
forepart of the Head. Two of these Bodies are seated in the upper part
long-wayes, and one on the side of the other; the third, which is a little
less, is placed under the middle of the two, and may be called the Cerebellum,
or little Brain.

The Spinal Marrow seems to be the same body with this last, although it have a
separate place in the hind-part of the Skull. It is of a substance somewhat
whiter and softer than the Bodies, we have been just now speaking of, and of
the size of a small grain of Wheat. It produces a Body of the same substance,
which extends it self long-wayes, and passing in a strait line thorough all the
Vertebra's or Joints of the Backbone, terminates at the end of the Tail.

The Bodies of a Vipers Brain are covered with a coat, thick enough, and
sticking fast enough to them, which may be called the Dura Matter.: It is black,
whence it has happened, that some Authors, not taking the pains to look under
this Tunicle, have affirmed, that Vipers Brains were black. Under this Dura
Matter, each Body of the Brain, separately, has also a little membrane
involving it, which may be termed the Pia Matter. There are observed some small
interstices betwixt these Bodies, and even in the Body of the Spinal Marrow,
which might pass for Ventricles: And I doubt not, but that, if the Subject were
a little bigger, we might observe in it most of the considerable parts, that
are to be found in bigger Animals.

SECT. 4.
Of the Eyes, and their principal parts; as also of those, that serve for
Hearing.
THe Eyes of Vipers are very quick, and their aspect is exceedingly fixed and
bold. They have their Nerves, Muscles, Veins, Arteries, Apple, Chrystallin,
Uvea, Cornea, Eyelids, and the other parts, like enough to those of the Eyes
of other Animals.

The most considerable Nerves are the Optic, which parting from behind both
the Eyes, do meet together and conjoin laterally at the beginning of the Little
Brain, and there make as it were the figure of an X, and opening themselves
after this conjunction, they encompass that little Body by the sides thereof,
and render themselves at the beginning of the Spinal Marrow, which receives
them.

The smallness of all the other parts being such, as that it makes their
examination difficult, and we having not been able to find any thing particular
in them, I esteem, that as it would be very troublesome to make Researches
thereof, so it would be to no purpose, to make a description of them.

The two upper Bodies of the Brain send each from their lateral forepart a
small Nerve, which piercing the Skull, runs along the Temples, where it joins
it self to the Salival Glands (whereof we shall speak hereafter) and following
them, it passes under the Eye, where it divides it self into two branches, of
which the chief inserts it self into the Bone and the Conduit of the Nostrils,
to serve for the Sense of Hearing, and the lesser descending toward the Teeth,
called the Dog-teeth, it ends there, after it has divided it self into several
branches.

SECT. 5.
Of the Bones of the Head, that are jointed to the Skull.
ON each upper side of the middle of that Heart, which is seen above in the
Skull, there is a little flat Bone, a matter of a line and an half long, that
is firmly articulated to it, which following and adhering to the same side of
the Skull as far as to its hind-part, becomes to be articulated anew to another
flat Bone, longer and stronger, and forming there as 'twere an Elbow. This
latter Bone goes downwards, and is strongly jointed to the inward end of the
lower Jaw; in the middle of which articulation, the upper Jaw terminates, and
is there jointed, but not so firmly, because it has other articulations, which
the lower has not. These Bones, which are like Clavicles, serve both for a
support to the Jaws, and to open and shut them; and for this purpose they are
assisted by the Nerves and Muscles, which Nature has provided them with.

There is also at each advancing end of the Eye-hole a little flat Bone, being
about a line and an half long, which is strongly articulated with the root of
the Dogtooth, and by its other end is also firmly jointed to the middle of the
upper Jaw, as well to support it, as to make it advance together with the great
Tooth, when it is raised to bite.

The upper Jaw is divided in two, before, and is separated, by the gristly
Bone, from the Nose, where its two ends are articulated on each side. These two
Jaws are much more inward than those below, and the great Teeth are seated
without their rank and at their side, tending outward, and do serve them for a
defense. They are made up, each of one only Bone, that is about six lines long.

The lower Jaw is also divided in two. These Jaws are annexed, before, one to
the other, by a Muscle, which opens or shuts them at the pleasure of the
Animal; and they have no other articulation but that, we have spoken of about
their inward end, viz. with the Clavicle coming down from the Skull, and with
the inward end of the upper Jaws. Each of these Jaws is composed of two Bones,
articulated together toward the middle of the Jaw; that which is before,
embraces above and below that which is behind, and can bend it self outward in
this place, when the Viper will bite, and is a little curved inwards toward its
extremity; and it is upon this Bone alone, that the lower Teeth are fastened.

SECT. 6.
Of the Teeth.
THe Opinions of the Ancients have been very differing about the number of the
great Teeth of Vipers, and most have held, that in this the Female exceeded the
Male, and that the plurality of the great Teeth was the chief mark, whereby to
distinguish her from him. I have been careful to inform my self about it, and
have taken pains to grovel with a great deal a patience in the gums of
innumerable Vipers; but all being well examined, I have not found, as to this
point, any true difference of one Sex from the other, but sometimes more,
sometimes less Teeth in one and the other. I have casually met on each side
with two great Teeth fixed, placed very near together, and on the side of one
another, as well in Males, as Females; but in most of both Sexes I have found
only one, fixed on each side, covered, to two thirds of their height, with a
Tunicle or Bag sufficiently thick, filled with a yellowish juice, which is
transparent and pretty fluid; and in this Vesicle, in the midst of this juice,
and under the great and main Teeth, a differing number of Teeth ill set, some
longer than others, and all hooked, of which I have counted, in several Vipers,
from two to five, six and seven, on one and the same side, under the self-same
Tooth, and in the same Bag.

These great Teeth are only in the upper part, standing on the side, and
without the Jaws of the Animal, where they are like Bulwarks. They are about
two lines long, hooked, white, hollow, and diaphanous throughout, as far as to
their sharp point, which is very subtle and exceedingly piercing. They have
many little Cavities toward their Root, in which the other Teeth are planted.
These Teeth commonly remain lying along the Jaw, and their point appears not
but at the moment the Viper will bite; for then it raises them, and advances
them jointly with the upper Jaw, drawn by the Bone, which at one end is
articulated in the middle of it, and at the other, to the root of the great
Tooth.

The yellow liquor, contained in the Vesicle, serves not only to moisten the
ligaments, and to make them fit for the bending of the Teeth, but also to
nourish them, and to make those grow, that are there as 'twere in a Nursery,
and are, if we may say so, in expectation to serve instead of the many Teeth,
whether these come to fail in their force, or fall out of themselves.

All the Jaws, both upper and lower, are fortified with bent Teeth, that are
hollow, pellucid and sharp, as the bigger Teeth, but that they are much
smaller. Their number is uncertain enough, whether it be, that Nature produces
sometimes more, sometimes less of them, or that that fineness makes them apt
to break. There is little difference, as to the number, in those above from
those below. Ordinarily there are eight Teeth in each Jaw, but at times I have
found nine, ten, eleven in each. Those that advance most, are a little bigger
than the deepest; and just as those below answer in situation to the
Dog-teeth, that are above them, they have at the end of each side one Tooth,
that is a little bigger than all those of the other Jaws, and another, lesser,
at the side, at the end of the part bent inwards.

There is a great difference in the Teeth and Jaws of Vipers, from those of
Snakes: for, these have no Dog-teeth; and although their Jaws are all divided
in their foremost part like as in Vipers, yet they exceed them in the number of
Jaws, and in the number of Teeth; for, they have four Jaws above, and two
below; two of those above are situated all along and close to the rim of the
Lip, and serve for a defense to the two other Jaws, that are seated in the same
place, where those in Vipers are. Besides, I have counted 13 Teeth in each
exterior Jaw above, and as many in each of the Jaws below, and 20 in each
superior inward Jaw; so that I have counted of them to 92 Teeth in one Snake,
and all these Teeth are bent, fine, hollow, white and transparent, like those
in Vipers.

SECT. 7.
Of the Nerves, Veins, Arteries and Muscles of the Head in general.
THe chief Nerves in the Head of a Viper are, first, those of which we have
spoken, namely those of the Smell, the Sight and the Hearing. Besides, there
are those of the Taste, that which may be called the sixth par vagum, which is
afterward distributed into all the vital and natural parts; and those, which
issuing from the Spinal Marrow are carried through the whole habit of the Body.
There are also many Nerves, that go from the inferior part of the Brain, and
pass through the Skull, but by reason of their subtility and fineness, it is
hard to follow them to their insertion.

There is yet another Nerve that is considerable, which proceeds from the
Skull, behind that of Hearing, which leaves, in the space between, a small
Apophysis, or Process, or Knot, in the Skull, and which, descending along the
Clavicle, runs upon the superior Jaw, and is inserted in its middle; then it
goes on in the middle to its extremity, and distributeth it self into all the
Teeth, fixed there.

The Head has also its Veins and Arteries, which coming from the Liver and the
Heart, distribute themselves there into an infinity of branches, by which all
those parts are bedewed. It is also provided of many Muscles, at the sides and
below the Skull, and about the Clavicles, and superior and inferior Jaws,
that serve not only to fill up the Cavities of the Skull, and to cover the
Bones that are articulated there, but to give motion to all the parts that need
it: to which also the Nerves contribute their share.

SECT. 8.
Of the Salival Glands of a Viper.
THe Opinion of the Ancients, That the seat of the Vipers poison was the Gall,
and that from thence it ascended into the Gums, by vessels odly enough fancied,
has seemed to me too far from all probability to follow it. I therefore
thought, that that particular did very well deserve a strict enquiry, and that
it was of moment to discover the Truth thereof. On the other side, the curious
Observations, made on this Subject by Signor Redi, a Florentine Philosopher,
whose merit is known and esteemed by all the Learned, seemed to me, as to all
those that have seen and examined them, not only reasonable and possible, but I
was altogether persuaded of the candor and ability of that illustrious person.
Upon his Account and Relation, I never scrupled to taste often of the gall of
Vipers, as well as of the yellowish liquor, contained in the bags of the Gums;
and I have found in both the Truth of what he has observed thereof, namely a
great bitterness, and a great sharpness in the Gall; and the taste of a Saliva
or Spittle sufficiently flat, and approaching enough to the taste of the Oil
of sweet Almonds, in the yellow Liquor of the Gums.

These great differences of the qualities in the one from the other, made me
believe that there was a great diversity in the matter of them, as well as in
their source; and I believed at first, following Signor Redi, that there might
be Salival Vessels in Vipers, as there have been lately found in Man, and
diverse other Animals; so that after many researches, made with attention and
patience enough, in many Vipers Heads, I discovered at length such Glands,
proper to form this juice, and to convey it to the Gums; and after I was well
persuaded of it my self, I showed them to diverse of those knowing Physicians,
that had met at my House the last Year. These persons had a mind to see with
their own Eyes, and after they had well examined the parts which I showed them,
they not only found them true, but they there also saw a greater number of
smaller vessels, than had appeared to me, of which some, that are Arteries and
Veins, pass above the Glands, and others, that are Lympheducts, run below: so
that they judged, that I could confidently assert and describe these Glands,
which I call Salival, and which they had acknowledged together with me; though
Signor Redi durst not speak positively of them, because he had not discovered
them, neither had they been described by any Author of their knowledge, nor by
any one of mine.

These Glands are found in all the Heads of Vipers, both Males and Females;
they are seated on both sides, and joining to the Skull, in the hind-part of
each round of the Eyes, and at the same height with them. There are many small
ones joined together, which may be called Conglomerate Glands, which are easily
distinguishable by their form and color, which is different from the Muscles,
neighboring to them, and of which there is one, that may be called Temporal,
which in part covers them by its extremity. This heap of Glands appears there
of the bigness of the neighboring Eye, and extending it self in length,
continues its progress in the Orbite of the Eye, below, and in part behind the
Eye. Each Gland has its little Lymphatique Vessel, which parts from it as from
a little Teat, and goes disgorging it self into a greater Vessel, that runs all
along and under these Glands, and passes into the Vesicle of the Gum, and
terminates in the midst of the Articulation, which the root of the great Teeth
makes with the advancing corner of the said Orbite, and with the little Bone,
which by its other end is articulated in the middle of the upper Jaw. This
principal vessel, which, being considered alone, is very little in appearance,
but is not so in effect, seeing it receives the discharge of all the small
vessels, that come from each Gland, empties it self into the Bag of the Gums,
and carries thither that Salival Juice, which may have qualities approaching to
those of the Saliva or Spitle of man, or of the foam or drivel of diverse other
Animals.

The Nerve, which serves in the Nostrils for the faculty of Hearing, runs for
some space along these Glands, which are also, as I have already said, small
Veins and Arteries.

But having well considered the substance, quality, and situation of these
Glands, we judged their formation not to be in vain; but that their Use, in all
likelihood, was to receive the humidities both of the Brain, the Eyes, and the
neighboring parts; and that their discharge was very convenient and even very
necessary to the parts, which receive that liquor, as well for moistening the
ligaments of the great Teeth, and to keep them in a condition of bending, at
such time when the Viper will bite, and to increase the Teeth, which Nature
has made and set in the midst of this Juice.

For the rest, examining and tasting the Glands as well as the Juice, we found
a Taste altogether like that of the Gums, which Signor Redi has described,
namely very near the taste of the Oil of Almonds, without any bitterness,
though it leave, a while after, a little acrimony in the mouth, such as may be
discerned in all kind of Spitle.

As to the small Glands, which Signor Redi has observed at the bottom of the
Vesicles that contain this Juice, I can say, that I have with great care and
diligence searched them, and that, it is true, I have there found the
appearances of Glands, but having opened them, I saw nothing in them but small
teeth which were fastened there, and are of the number of those, which I have
called Expectants, without finding any thing of a Glandular nature there, nor
that did, in the least, approach to the shape, substance or qualities of the
Glands, which I have been describing.

The Viper is not the only among Serpents, that has Salival Glands; for I
have also found of them in the Head of Snakes, which Glands were heaped
together longwayes, and situated near each outward upper Jaw, serving them for
a defense, in a manner, as the Dog-teeth do to Vipers.

These considerations, supported by many Experiments, made by us, and to be
related hereafter, have induced me to call these Glands Salival, and to ascribe
to them the very source of that yellow Liquor, which has been so much decryed,
and with-all so little known, and is nothing else, but a pure and very innocent
Spittle. I hope, that those, who shall take the pains of carefully examining,
after me, these Glands, and this juice of the Gums will not stick to give me
their suffrages.

CHAP. IV.
Of the other Bones of a VIPER, and the principal Parts, thence depending.
THe great number of Bones, which rest in the Body of a Viper after those of
the Head, consists only in the Vertebra's or Joints of the Backbone, and the
Ribs. These Joints begin at the hind-part of the Skull, to which the first is
articulated; the other are ranged consecutively, strongly joined to one
another, and they continue to the end of the Tail. Every Viper, both Male and
Female, has an hundred and forty five Vertebra's, from the end of the Head to
the beginning of the Tail, and Two hundred and fourscore and ten Ribs, which is
the double number of the Vertebra's; to each of which there are articulated two
Ribs, one to each side, which are bent, and do embrace the vital and natural
parts of a Viper, and each point whereof rendevouses at one of the ends of the
great Scale under the belly, which is fit for both; so that there are as many
great Scales under the belly, from the end of the Head unto the beginning of
the Tail, as there are Vertebra's, consorted by their two Ribs: Besides that,
there are twenty five Vertebra's from the beginning of the Tail to the end
thereof; and those Vertebra's have not any Ribs, but, instead thereof, little
Apophyses, or Processes, which lessen in their magnitude, as the Vertebra's do,
tending toward the extremity of the Tail.

There are four great Muscles, very firm and very long, which take their
origin from the hind-part of the Head, and descend, two of them on each side
of the Spinal Processes, one joining to the Spine, and the other to the side
and a little below the first, which it accompanies all along unto the end of
the Tail. There are also two great Muscles of the like length, which are
fastn'd to the inferior part of the Vertebra's, and accompany them from one
end to the other, as well as the superior ones. We also observe, on each side,
as many intercostal Muscles, as there any Vertebra's, serving for the same use,
that those of other Animals do, which sever the Ribbs from the place of their
root unto their point All these Muscles are also accompanied with veins and
arteries, as well as the greatest.

CHAP. V.
Of the other Internal parts of a Viper.
SECT. 1.
Of the Tongue.
THe Tongue, which the Viper darts out and draws in often and very quick,
presents her self first of all. She is placed between the two Jaws below, and
composed of two Bodies, fleshy, long and roundish, and terminating in very
sharp and flexible points. These two Bodies are contiguous, and adhere to one
another all along, from the place (...) their root as far as to the two third
parts of their length. The inward half of these Bodies is of the color of
flesh, but the other half, I mean that which is often thrust out, is of color
blackish.

The Tongue may be, in all, an inch and an half long. Its root begins half an
inch lower than the bottom of the Throat; and it is firmly annexed, below the
Neck, to two tendinous bodies, which are two or three lines long.

There are some Vipers, whose Tongues have three points, and some also, that
have four. These points, though often darted out, prick not, nor hurt any body;
though perhaps they may frighten the ignorant. They chiefly serve Vipers to
catch these small creatures, which they have a mind to devour. The Tongue is
envelop'd by a kind of sheath from one end to the other.

SECT. 2.
Of the Windpipe and the Lungs.
THe Windpipe has its beginning at the entrance of the Throat, where it
presents a hole in an Oval, raised on high, and having as 'twere a little beak
in its lower part. It is composed, at its entrance, of many gristly rings,
joined to one another; which continue about the length of a good inch, and fall
into the right side of the Viper, where they meet with the Lungs; and from that
place you see no more but the half rings turned upside down, which being joined
on both sides to the membrans, that depend from the Lungs, and which are
annexed to it below from one end to the other, being assisted by the said
Lungs, serve for Respiration, and continue their rank and their connection, as
far as to the fourth part of the Liver, which lies under it; as well as the
Heart. The Winde-pipe is in all eight or nine inches long; and at the place,
where its half rings end, it is united with a membrane, which attracts and
receives the Air, as far as to the beginning of the intestins, where it forms,
as it were, a roundish bottom of a sack.

The Lungs, being joined to the Windpipe, and making with it one Body, are
consequently situate, as it, on the right side. They begin, where the whole
rings of the Winde-pipe do end. They are made in the form of a Net; they have
no Lobes at all, they are red, very clear and very vivid, of a substance fine
enough, sufficiently transparent, and a little rough. They are fastened by
Membrans to the upper part of the imperfect rings; being seven or eight inches
long, and about one inch broad; and all over embroidered with veins and
arteries.

SECT. 3.
Of the Heart, and the Liver.
THe Heart and the Liver are also seated on the right side of the Viper; and
before the Heart there is, about the third part of an inch, a little fleshy and
flattish body, of the bigness of a little pea, which is filled with water; this
little body is placed under the Lungs as well as the Heart and the Liver, and
is suspended by the same membrans, which support it: it may be taken for a kind
of Thymus or kernel, and may serve for the same uses.

The Heart is seated about four or five inches below the beginning of the
Lungs; of the bigness of a small bean: it is somewhat long, fleshy, and
encompassed with its pericardium, which consists of a sufficiently thick
tunicle. It has two Ventricles, one on the right, the other on the left side:
it also has two apertures. The Blood, which comes from the vena cava, enters
into the right ventricle, and being passed into the left, issues thence by the
Aorta, which presently is divided into two great branches, one of which ascends
into the upper parts, and the other, passing below the Oesophagus or Wesand,
and taking its way sloping, subdivideth it self afterward into many other
branches, which spread themselves and are carried to all the parts, to the very
end of the Tail.

The Liver is a fleshy part, of color redbrown, seated half an inch beneath
the Heart, and supported by the same membrans: its length and breadth are
unequal enough, but the greatest Livers, I have seen, are five or six inches
long, and half an inch large. It consists of two great lobes of which the right
descends a good inch lower then the left. These two lobes are bedewed by the
vena cava, which seems to separate them all along into two bodies, and which
makes even a separation in their lower half, running in their interstice, and
serving to join them together in one body: The upper half of the Liver is
continued, and cannot be divided but by cutting it asunder.

The Trunk of the vena cava is divided into two branches in its upper part, of
which the main and biggest ends in the Heart, and the other passes under the
Lungs, and from thence into the superior parts. This Vein in its inferior
part is divided into many branches, which descend into all the parts below.

A Viper is destitute of a Diaphragme, there being no solid traversing tunicle
at all, that severs the vital parts from the natural: yet it may be said that
that fine tunicle, which depends from the Windpipe and the Lungs, and goes down
toward the Intestins, and there forms, as 'twere, the shape of a sack-bottom,
may in some manner peform the function thereof.

SECT. 4.
Of the Gall, and the Pancreas, which the Ancients called the Spleen.
THe Bladder of Gall is situate an inch below the Liver, and on the side of the
bottom of the Stomach, and it leans to the left side. It is almost of the shape
and bigness of a small Bean lying flat.

The Gall is very green; its taste very bitter and sharp; its consistence
approaching to that of a Syrup not much boiled.

I have found in the Bladder of Gall but one outlet by a small vessel, which
issuing from the inward side of its upper part, is bent from its origin, and
descending, and adhering, even in its beginning, to the internal part of this
Bladder, is afterward divided into two branches, of which the principal and
directest, passing through that Body (which the Ancients have taken for the
Spleen) runs into the Intestin, which receives it; and the other lesser branch,
turning about, seems to remount to the Liver, but dividing itself into many
small branches, becomes so indiscernable, that it cannot be followed any longer.

It is not here, that I will refute the opinion of the Ancients concerning the
Venomous quality they have ascribed to the Gall; I leave that for another
place, where I shall endeavor to maintain the Balsamique quality of this
Juice, and show, that it is free from all kind of poison.

The Pancreas or Sweetbread, which all Authors have called the Spleen, is
placed near and a very little below the Gall, and on the right side of the
Viper. It is of the bigness of a good Pea, of a seemingly fleshy substance, but
indeed Glandular. Considering its situation (which is close to the bottom of
the Stomach and toward the entry of the Guts) together with its kernelly
substance, it makes me believe, that it is rather a Pancreas than a Spleen: but
yet I leave the decision of it to those, who shall take the pains to examine it.

SECT. 5.
Of the Oesophagus or Weasand, and the Stomach.
THe Oesophagus takes its beginning at the bottom of the Throat; its situation
is on the left side, and its passage directly on the side of the Lungs and the
Liver, as far as to its union with the orifice of the Stomach. It is made up of
one only membrane, very soft, and easy to be extended, and which may be
swelled even to the bigness of two inches. It is this part, which first
receives the animals, the Viper has killed with its great teeth, and swallowed
whole, it being proper for that purpose, both by its large capacity, and by its
length, which is of a good foot.

The Stomach, which is next, is as 'twere sowed at its bottom, and seems to
make but one Body with the Oesophagus; but yet is much thicker, and composed of
two strong coats, one within the other, and sticking to one another. The
thickness of its coats makes, that it cannot be swelled to the same bigness
with the Oesophagus; for it cannot much exceed the bigness of an inch. It is
between three and four inches long; its orifice is sufficiently large, as well
as its middle, but the bottom of it grows streighter, and is commonly very
close and firm, not opening it self, but to eject its excrements into the
Gutts. Its internal tunicle is full of rugosities when it is empty, and in it
there are very often found little worms of the length and thickness of small
pins. The Stomach is seated on the left side, as the Oesophagus; but the bottom
of it is turned toward the middle of the Body, to empty itself into the first
Gut.

The length and capacity of the Oesophagus, and the largeness of the entry of
the Stomach, are very well accommodated to the-nature of the Viper, which sends
nothing chewed to the Stomach, but swallows Animals whole for its food; and
when some of them happen to be longer than the depth of the Stomach, part of
them stays in the Oesophagus, until the Stomach have extracted and sent away
the juice of the parts devoured, which it could hold; after which it receives
those that stayed in the Oesophagus. But this requires a good space of time, in
regard that the Stomach is not closed, and cannot gather any considerable heat
to make a speedy digestion.

SECT. 6.
Of the Intestins, kidneys, Fat, and a Tunique wrapping them up below.
THE Intestins of Vipers are situate in the midst of the Body, under the
Backbone, and immediately after the bottom of the Stomach. I have only
observed three of them, of which the first and narrowest may be called the
Duodenum; the second, which is larger, and full of many windings, may be called
the Colon; and the third and last, the Rectum, which also is very large and
very straight; and has its aperture below and near the beginning of the tail,
at which the Excrements pass away.

These Intestins have, at their sides, Testicles, together with their vessels,
both of the Males and Females, and the two bodies of the Matrix of the latter,
which we shall speak of hereafter. They contain also the kidnys with their
vessels, which part from thence, and are accompanied of their veins and
arteries, as also all vessels serving for generation; and the Intestins
themselves are not destitute of them.

The kidneys are placed below the Testicles; they are made up of many
glandulous bodies, contiguous, and ranged longwayes, one after another. They
are commonly two inches and an half long, and two l^nes and an half large upon
the round, which is a little flat. They are of a pale-red color. The right
kidney is always seated higher than the lower in both sexes. They have also
their Ureters, at which they discharge the serosities near the extremity of the
Intestin.

All the Intestins, the Testicles, and the kidneys are covered with a very
white and very soft Fat, which being melted has the form of Oil. At times
also there is seen in some Vipers a little Fat about the Heart, the Lungs, the
Liver, but especially close to the Gall, and near that part, which some take
for the Spleen, and others for the Pancreas. All these parts are wrapped about
with a strong Coat, that is firmly fastened to the extremities of the Ribbs,
which might pass for the Epiploon, if the Fat were joined to it: but as the
Viper, which is a kind of Serpent, passes not but among the imperfect animals,
I shall not determine the name of this Tunique, to which the more Intelligent
may give what name they shall think most proper.

CHAPT. VI.
Of the parts of Vipers, that serve for Generation.
SECT. 1.
Of the Parts of the Male.
THE Male has two Testicles, which are somewhat long and roundish, and sharpen
a little toward both ends. Their color is white, and their substance
glandular. Their length is unequal, the right being longer by an inch, than the
left, and this also somewhat less in thickness. They are not thicker than the
quill of the wing of a great Capon. Their situation is different; for, the
right begins near and beneath the Gall, whereas the left begins about eight
lines lower than the right. They are both suspended in their upper part by two
strong membrans, coming from below the Gall, and are ordinarily covered with
fat, which makes them hardly discernable, by reason of the likeness of color
they have with this fat.

From the midst of each of these Testicles, from the inward part, one may see
issue forth a little Body, long and slender, solid enough, and even somewhat
whither than the substance of the Testicles, which descends, and is fastened to
them all along as far as to their lower end. It may be called the Epididymis.
There appears at the end of each, the beginning of a small stradling vessel,
that may be called spermatique because of its office; which is a little flat,
very white, and shining enough, and commonly filled with seed, having the form
of a milky juice. This vessel is sufficiently delicate, and winds in its
passage, after the shape of many Ss joined together, very pleasant to behold.
From thence it descends between the Intestin and the kidney, whose Ureter it
follows unto the hole of the last Gut, at which the Excrements pass away. It is
also accompanied of veins and arteries from one end to the other, as well as
the Testicles, and it cease to be winding a little before it comes to the
aperture of the Gut. Each of these two spermatique vessels comes to rendevouse
at its proper receptacle of seed; of which there are two, that may be called
Parastates, which are like white kernels, each of the length, bigness and shape
of a grain of Carduus benedictus seed. These kernels are seated longways below
and between the two natural parts: they are always full of a milky juice, and
altogether like that of the spermatique vessels, just now described: and to
furnish for ejaculation at the time of the Coitus, they transmit the seed,
which they contain, into the ejaculatory pipes of the two natural parts,
neighboring to them.

I may say on this occasion, that those who have taken these two Conservatories
of seed for other Testicles, have much deceived themselves in the opinion, they
have entertained, that, there being two natural parts, there must also be for
each of them two testicles: But their substance being quite different from the
true testicles, by us described, and their office being to receive, and not to
form, we do not acknowledge them but for Parastates, which by little and little
receive the Seed, sent thither by the Testicles, and reserve it, and keep it
ready for the time of copulation, and to perform that in a moment, and
seasonably, what the spermatique Vessels would not be able to execute so soon,
nor so well, because of their length and windings.

The Male has two Penes's altogether alike, which being pulled out are each as
long as the Tail of the animal. Their origin comes from the extremity of the
Tail, under which they are seated all along, the one by the other. They go
increasing in bigness, as the Tail does; at the beginning of which they end,
and they have their issue near and at the side of one another, and close to the
opening of the Intestin, which makes in a manner their separation.

Each of these is composed of two long and fistulous bodies, seated together
one by the other, and which join toward their top in one body, which is
environed with its prepuce, and has its Muscles Erectors, as many other
Animals have. These parts are within full of many stings or pricks, very white
and hard, and very sharp, so set, as that they have their sharp end variously
turned; of which the bigness and thickness answers to the place of the natural
part, where they are set, so that as the top is bigger and thicker, the said
stings are so too; and they advance and appear not but when the prepuce, which
covers them, shrinks down at the time of the animals disposition to the coit.

These natural parts are ordinarily hidden, and they swell not, nor come forth,
but for the coit; unless it be, that, the animal being taken, they be forced
out by pressing them; for in that case one may see them both come forth
equally, each about the thickness of a date, and of the length of two thirds
thereof, and their top is altogether covered and quite beset with these pricks,
like the skin of a Porcupin; and these stings retire and hide themselves under
the prepuce, when one cease to press them.

The issue of these two parts is environed with a very strong and thick Muscle,
to which the skin is firmly fastened, and in such a manner that it is very
difficult to separate it therefrom: which same Muscle serves also to open and
shut the Intestin.

SECT. 2.
Of the parts of the Female Viper, that serve for Generation.
THe Femal Viper has two Testicles, as the Male; but they are longer and
bigger. They are seated on the sides and near the bottom of the two Bodies of
the Matrix, and the right is higher than the left, as it is in Males. Their
Substance and color also are very like them. The right is about one inch and
an half long, and two lines and an half large; the left is something less. They
have their Epididymis, and their Spermatique vessels, that convey the seed into
the two Bodies of the Matrix, and which are much shorter than those of the
Males. Yet I observe, that these Testicles appear not always such in all
Females, especially in those that are emaciated, either by sickness, or by long
keeping; for, their Testicles shorten, streighten, and dry, like as in those,
whose Eggs are already great; having observed, that in these the Testicles are
much shortened and dried up, as also that they are descended lower, although the
right be always found higher than the left.

The Matrix begins in a body pretty thick, which is composed of two strong
tunicles, and which being seated above the intestin, has in the same place its
orifice, which is large, and does easily dilate, to receive at one and the same
time, by the same aperture, the two Penes's of the Male, in the Copulation.
This Body is about the bigness of a nail of a middlesized finger, and is
divided very near its beginning into two small baggs open at the bottom, and
framed by Nature to receive and embrace the two members of the Male in the
coit. Their interior coat is full of rugosities, and very hard, as is that of
the whole body, which we have spoken of; so that she suffers, and also feels
pleasure from, the pricking of the little stings of the Male's members, without
being hurt thereby, although their points be very sharp.

The Matrix begins by these two little sacks or baggs to be divided into two
bodies, which ascend each on its side along the kidneys, and betwixt them and
the intestins, as far as to the bottom of the Stomach, where they are
suspended by ligaments, which come from about the Liver, being also sustained,
from space to space, by diverse small ligaments, that come from the Backbone.
These two bodies are composed of two tunicles, that are soft, thin, and
transparent, being one within the other, Their beginning is at the bottom of
those two small bags, which embrace the two members of the male, from whence
they receive the seed each from its side, to breed Eggs of it, and so young
Vipers, by the conjunction of their own seed, which the testicles send thither.

These two Bodies of the Matrix do very easily dilate themselves, that they may
contain many young Vipers, unto the time of their perfection: notwithstanding
the opinion of some, who have affirmed, that the Matrix of a Viper had but one
only body; that it was seated in the middle, and all along the Backbone, and
that there were in it distinct Bodies to hold the Eggs, and the young Vipers,
which bodies were dependants of this Matrix. But, I believe, that the ground of
their mistake has been, in that those true bodies of the matrix being very
delicat and very transparent, especially when they are swelled and distended by
the Eggs, or the Vipers, by them contained, have not passed in their opinion
for true bodies of the Matrix, and that they have taken for it the intestins,
which are seated in the middle, and appear pretty bigg and thick, and seem to
make but one and the same body with the first thick body of the matrix, under
which the beginning of the first intestin is fastened and seated.

The Viper is not the only animal, that has her matrix divided into two like
Bodies, equally placed each on its side, and along the Guts, which separate
them; for I have observed the same thing in many Snakes, which I have opened
purposely to know the truth hereof.

SECT. 3.
Of the Generation and Production of young Vipers.
BY the particular description, we have made of the parts serving the Viper for
generation, is is easy to renounce all the Fables we find in Books, concerning
the copulation of Vipers, and the production of the young Vipers: so that I
shall not trouble the Reader any further with them, but only intimate, That by
the means of the insertion of both members of the Male into the two baggs of
the Matrix; by the ejaculation of the Seed, made of them both together, into
the two bodies of the said Matrix, which are united at the bottom of the baggs;
and by the concurrence of the Femals own seed which her testicles emit at the
time of the coit; the Eggs are first formed in both the bodies of the Matrix:
that each is covered by its little tunicle; that the Eggs of each body of the
Matrix are altogether wrapped up in one common membrane, commonly called the
Ovarium; that all is enclosed in its proper body, the Matrix; that the Eggs
there take their increase; that the young Vipers are there formed and
perfected; that thence they come forth one after another by the same passage,
where the seed of the Male went in; and that they are produced alive, as many
other animals, without any need of the intervention of the dam's death.

We can assure the truth of all these particulars, having verified them by an
accurate examination of all the parts, at several times, and upon a great
number of subjects; and having seen the extension and swelling of those two
bodies of the Matrix, even at the time when the young Vipers were perfected and
ready to come forth; and lastly having seen the passage free, by which they
were to come abroad, and the young ones actually produced without any danger to
the Dam.

We have noted, that the right body of the Matrix of the Viper is ordinarily
fuller of Eggs and young brood, than the left; that the number of Eggs is
pretty unequal; that at times there are twenty or twenty five, sometimes but
half so many; that the young Vipers take their form and perfection in the Egg;
that there they are seated and entangled diverse ways, and after a very
pleasant manner; that they have each within their Egg a kind of afterbirth
depending from their Navil, by which they draw their food; that in coming
abroad they train it after them, and in part are encompassed with it; and that
their Dam frees them thereof, and cleanses them by licking them when they are
born.

But although we have, as exactly as we could, described all the inward and
outward parts of a Viper, both of a Male and Female; yet to the end that all
may be the better understood, we shall address the Reader to the following
Schemes, wherein he may see the same parts, we have just now described,
represented and drawn to the life, together with their explication in the
Tables accompanying them; hoping, that he will there find satisfaction.

The Reader is desired to take notice, that, having on the Frontispice of this
Book represented two Vipers, a Male and a Female, conjoined tempore coitts, and
there being in the exterior part of their Body no considerable difference in
the one from the other, but in their Tail, of which the representation may be
seen separately in the second Figure; I thought it needless, to exhibit the
whole Figure of a Male by it self; and have contented my self to have engraven
the Female in the state she is at the time when she produces her young ones,
which is that, which seemed to me the most considerable for her exterior
Figure.

He will also find no fault with the Situation, in which the Viper is
represented in the Cut, at the time when her young ones come forth, since that
besides the Symmetry, which has been there industriously observed, it was also
intended to show therein the parts, that seemed very necessary to me, and that
could not be represented elsewhere.

The EXPLICATION of what is represented in the first Scheme.
A A A. The Female Viper, bringing forth her young Vipers, exhibiting the
lowermost part of her Body; where you may see the great Scales, on which she
creeps.

B B B B. Four young Vipers, each in one of the corners of the Cut, appearing
wreathed, and in the same posture and situation, wherein we have seen them
alive and ready to come forth; two of which appear without cover, one covered
with its Coat, and the other having a piece of its Afterbirth depending from
its Navel.

C C C C. Four other young Vipers, within the ^ound, which the Viper forms;
one of which appears creeping, and clear of its Secundine; the other having it
yet depending from its Navel; the third coming forth and training along with it
the Secundine; and the last wrapped about by it, and in the state, wherein it
was, when ready to be born.

D D. A part of a Female Viper, represented open under the belly long-wayes,
and turned upside down, from the place of the Gall, unto the Orifice of the
Matrix.

E. The Gall.

F. The Pancreas or Sweetbread, which many have taken for the Spleen.

G. The bottom of the Stomach.

H. The beginning of the Intestins.

I. I. I. The Eggs contained in the two bodies of the Matrix, but being found
in a far greater plenty in the right, than the left body.

K. A part of the last Gut.

L. The Orifice of the Matrix, and of the Gut.

M M. The two little Baggs, which join to the beginning of the two bodies of
the Matrix.

N N. A part of each of the Kidneys.

The EXPLICATION of what is represented in the second Scheme.
A A. The first half of the body of a Male Viper, flead, turned upside down,
and open under the belly from one end to the other, containing

B B. The Windpipe.

C C. The Lungs.

D. The Thymus or Kernel.

E. The Heart.

F. The Liver.

G. The great Vein, called Vena cava.

H H. The Oesophagus or Weasand.

I. The ascending branch of the Aorta.

L. The descending branch of the same Artery.

M. The Stomach.

N N. The other half of the Body, in the same condition with the first,
containing

O. The bottom of the Stomach.

P. The bladder of Gall.

Q. The Pancreas, or, according to some, the Spleen.

R R R. The Intestins.

S. S. The Testicles, together with their Epididymis.

T T. The Spermatick Vessels.

V V. The Kidneys.

a a. The Tail of a Male, to which are annexed the parts that follow.

b b. The two members of Generation, as they come forth at the time of the Coit.

c c. The two Parastates, or Conservatories of the Seed.

d d. The two Spermatique Vessels.

e e. The two Testicles.

f f. The two Epididymes.

g g g. The Guts.

h h. The two Kidneys.

i i. The Tail of a Female, to which are joined the parts following.

l l. The Orifice of the Matrix.

m m. The two small Baggs.

n n n n. The two bodies of the Matrix.

o o. The two Testicles with their Epididymes, and Spermatique Vessels.

p p. The Intestins.

q q. The two Kidneys.

r r. A great part of the body of a Lizard, of the same length and bigness, it
was vomited up by a Viper, many days after this had been taken.

s s. The rest of the Head, and the rest of the Forelegs of the same Lizard,
cast up at the same time.

t t. The Oesophagus, that had contained the said great part of the Lizard.

u u. The Stomach, that had contained, and by little and little extracted the
juycie substance of the rest of this Animal's body.

The EXPLICATION of what is exhibited in the third Scheme.
A. A whole Sceleton of a Viper.

B. The Head having its Throat closed, represented with a part of its Neck.

C. The Head having its Throat in part open, flead on its side, and there
presenting the Salival Glands, together with their Lymphatick vessels, above
the great Teeth.

D. The Head without Neck, represented with the Throat open.

E. Another Head without Neck, more open, and distinctly showing all its
internal parts that can be there represented, and which may be easily
understood in reading the places, where I speak of them.

F. The whole Skull of a Viper.

G. The inferior part of this separated Skull.

H. The conglomerate Salival Glands, represented with their Lymphatick vessels,
a little bigger than the natural, to make them the better to be understood, and
as well as their smallness permits.

I. The same Salival Glands; the two Eyes with their Optic Nerves; the five
bodies of the Brain, and that of the Spinal Marrow, adhering together, severed
from the Crane, and represented by the face above.

L. The same bodies joined together, represented by the face below.

M. Diverse great Teeth, some by themselves, some in their bag, others
accompanied by the Teeth Exspectants, which are set beneath them in the same
bag.

N. The upper Jaw articulated to a small bone, which by its other end is
articulated to the root of the great Tooth.

O. The lower Jaw, consisting of two bones, and articulated to the lower bone
of the Clavicle bent like an Elbow, which depends from the posteriour lateral
part of the Skull.

P. The Lungs with the Windpipe without the body.

Q. The Heart in its Pericardium or enclosing Membrane.

R. The Liver separated in two Lobes by the Vena Cava.

S. The bladder of Gall, with the vessel that carries its juice into the
Intestins.

T. The Pancreas or Sweetbread, which some take for the Spleen.

V. The Intestins.

EXPERIMENTS ABOUT VIPERS.
CHAPT. I.
The Biting of a Viper, happened to a Man.
IN the Month of June of the year 1668, I procured a great number of live
Vipers, Males and Females, to put the design in execution, I had purposed to my
self; Which was, to know in truth all the good and all the evil, a Viper was
capable of. I was happy enough in exciting the Curiosity of many intelligent
Persons, and amongst others, of some Physicians of my acquaintance, very
knowing and sagacious, who were pleased to take the pains of coming to my house
every day, to assist in these experiments, and to impart to me their directions.

The first Meeting of all proved a sad one by a surprising misfortune. A
certain Forrainer, drawn to see our Experiments by his own curiosity, felt in
his own person, contrary to his expectation, a great part of the grievous
accidents, which may be caused by Vipers, and furnished us, sore against our
wills, with an Experiment, which was followed with circumstances too
considerable to be suppressed; and I thought my self obliged to recite them
first of all, because it was not only the first, but the only, that has
furnished us with more remarkable things, than all the rest.

This Gentleman, of 25 years of age, had been by chance the day before at my
house, when five or six douzen of Vipers were brought thither. He would needs
see them immediately, and I, being desirous to satisfy his Curiosity, drew out
of the Vessel one of the Vipers. He was not contented to see her, but took her
in his hand, and kept her there for about a great quarter of an hour, suffering
her to turn and wind herself about his hand and arm, the Viper not so much as
offering to bite him. Then he tied her about her neck, and so having hanged
her, pulled off her skin, and emptied her of her Guts to examine them. I am
assured, that he would have been soundly bitten at that time, if the Viper had
been vexed; but not having been so, and being pleased to breath another air
than that of the Vessel, where she had been long shut in, she let herself be
tied, after which she could not do that mischief, which certainly she would
have done, if she had not been tied.

But this proved quite otherwise the next day; for this stranger being come
again to my house at the hour of the Assembly, he saw one of the Vipers upon
the Table, which had been held a long while between Pincers, and was much
angered. He would take her with his naked hand, though he was earnestly warned
to forbear, it being represented to him, that he had been too bold already the
day before. He had no sooner taken her in his hand, but she turned her head to
bite him, and with one of her great bent teeth, she laid hold on the lateral
inward part of his right thumb, a little above the situation of the nail. The
pricking appeared no more than that of a pin; and it seemed to us not deep, and
on the surface we only saw a very small hole with a very little redness; so
that it was not discernable but by its color. There was not upon, nor about
this little hole, any sign of that yellow liquor contained in the baggs about
the great teeth, and which is wont to be shed upon the wound, when a Viper
biteth deep; yet the pricking caused some pain to him at the very first, but
the finger swelled not of it, no intumescence appearing but some hours after,
as we shall relate more amply in the sequel.

It was found proper to scarify the part wounded, and to make strong ligatures
above the place bitten, both to stop the effects of the Venom, and to discharge
the wounded part of the same; but the Patient opposed these means, not
believing them necessary; and he could very hardly be persuaded to endure any
scarification; after which, he endured also an iron spatule very hot and heated
over and over again, held very near to the pricked place; which was done, to
keep the pores open, and to fetch back and draw out some part of the poison:
Mean while, we made the Patient take two drachms of Theriaque in half a glass
of Wine.

In less then half a quarter of an hour after the pricking, the patient felt
some debility, and called for a chair; he waxed at the same time very pale, and
his pulse was found very low, very quick, and even interrupted. These accidents
were followed by convulsive motions, and by a stifness of his whole body, and
chiefly of his neck, and the muscles of his head: he then also complained of a
very great pain toward his Navil; and there appeared a coldness in his extreme
parts, and in the whole face, which was covered with little drops of cold
sweat: his lips also were swelled, especially the lower. And finding himself
urged by the pains about his Navil, and a disposition to go to stool, he rose,
and having voided some excrements, he vanished away, and at the same time
vomited not only all the Theriaque he had taken, but all he had eaten at
dinner, which was yet un-digested. We made haste to succor him, and found him
so feeble, that he was not able to go up again to the chamber, whence he was
come down. And in regard his pulse continued weak, low, quick, and unequal, and
his swoundings frequent, as well as his cold sweats, it was thought seasonable
to give him a dram of Viper-powder in Theriacal and Carduus Benedictus water,
and to apply to him a great Plaster of Theriaque upon the Heart and Stomach,
but he soon rejected what he had taken. One also came to give him some of the
Orvietan, mixed with new powder of Vipers, but he vomited up that also, and
desired to be put upon a bed, and to have other help administered to him. During
all which time, he neither wanted his senses, nor the use of reason,
notwithstanding all the feebleness of his Body; and he had had great aversion
to the Orvietan, having no faith at all in it, and not consenting to take it,
but out of respect to some of those that were present, who had pressed it upon
him.

This vomiting not giving time to the remedies to convey and communicate their
virtue to the noble parts, it was judged very proper to have recourse to the
Volatile Salt of Vipers, because that being very volatile and exceeding fit to
be quickly conveyed to all the parts, even the most remote, the Patient might
thence feel the effects with more speed and efficacy, than from all the other
grosser remedies, which having been rejected as soon as they were taken, had
not had time to be made effectual by the stomach, nor to impart their virtue
where need required.

We therefore caused to be dissolved a dram of this volatile Salt of Vipers
in Theriacal and Carduus water, and gave him about a quart of this mixture; he
kept it a little while, and then cast up a part of it, mingled with store of
phlegm very viscous. We made him take another like quantity of the same
mixture, which he also kept for some time, and then vomited up, what might have
remained of it in his Stomach, and amongst it much phlegm. We continued to give
him still more of the same composition as fast as he vomited it up; and there
were also given him several Clysters, to appease the violent and stubborn
pains, which he felt about his Navil.

His lips remained still swollen, his pulse naught, and his sweat cold, as well
as his faintings continued very long; but having persisted in the use of the
Volatile Salt of Vipers, his vomiting ceased, and he kept the eighth dose in his
belly, which was given him about four hours after he received the mischief: the
symptoms lessened from that time, the cold began little by little to retire,
and gave place to the natural heat, which appeared sufficiently about five
hours after the pricking; his pulse returned, and was even and strong, but
somewhat high.

It was about ten of the clock at night, that the most troublesome accidents
disappeared, the Patient was happy in his unhappiness, in being speedily and
rationally succored. I left him not, before his mortal accidents had ceased;
and then he was carried to his lodgings, whether I accompanied him, and he was
put to bed; and by the advice of those persons, that frequently visited him
during his distemper, I made a mixture of one dram of Confection of
Hyacinthe, and of as much of the Confection of Alkermes, and of one ounce of
Syrup of Limons, and of four ounces of Carduus-water, which was given him at
three times, from three hours to three hours. There were given him Citrons to
smell to, and from time to time some slices of them sugared. He took good
broths, and drank ptisan made with Scorzonera-roots, and the shavings of
Hartshorn, mingled with Syrup of Limons, he also drank sometimes a little wine,
and there was dissolved of the Confection of Alkermes, sometimes in his broth,
sometimes in his ptisane.

This is a thing remarkable enough, that during all the great accidents, his
finger was not changed, and there appeared not any swelling upon it, but that
began, when those accidents ceased. In the mean time, the pains about the navil
continued, though they were in some little degree abated; which obliged the
Physicians often to prescribe him Clysters. His belly was a little stiff, but
not swelled; his tongue was whitish, but not dry; his eyes faint and wan; his
countenance pale, and his lips still swelled.

The swelling of the finger extended it self that night over the whole hand;
which was often anointed with the Oil of Scorpions, composed by Matthiolus, and
mixed with the Queen of Hungarie's water, but, notwithstanding this anointing,
the tumor passed onto the arm the next day, with pain and redness, and advanced
to the Eye. It was thought fit to apply fomentations made with the roots of
Angelica, Imperatoria, Carlina, and Aristolochia, and with the tops of
Scordium, Centaurium, Wormwood, St. John's wort, Calamint, boiled in White wine,
and withal to continue the anointing with the said Oil of Scorpions among
these fomentations. Although this was done with great care, yet there appeared
no great effect upon it; the Patient was squeamish, and once vomited up even
his broth; but this vomiting continued not. He always used the same internal
and external remedies, and the same food; but although he found his other limbs
in a good condition, and his pulse very equal and moderate, nor had any
drought, heat, or pain in the rest of his body, yet was that of the Navil
obstinate; and the swelling and the redness of the hand and arm still
increased; and from the beginning of the third day, it had seized on the
shoulder of the same side, and descended to the armpit, upon the whole breast,
and all the neighboring parts, and even the whole region of the Liver,
notwithstanding the continual use of the fomentations, and the Oil of
Scorpions.

All these considerations, joined to the hot season, wherein we were, made us
apprehend, lest the gangrene should strike to those parts. It was believed,
that, since the outward remedies which had been judged most expedient, had
proved successless, recourse must be had to internal ones; which induced the
Physicians to give him, in the evening of the third day, a dram of the root
of Contra-yerva in powder, dissolved in cordial waters, with as much confection
of Alkermes: but we saw no abatement of the redness, swelling, or pain; on the
contrary, we observed, that the swelling seemed to seize on the left side.

After we had well examined all things, we found it very necessary to return to
the use of our first inward remedy, which had struck the great stroke, and had
had a manifest good operation; I mean, the Volatile Salt of Vipers. This was in
the morning of the fourth day after the biting. So we gave him half a dram of
that Salt, dissolved in four ounces of Carduus water, and we ordered that he
should be well covered, to make him sweat. This medicine did work according to
our expectation and desire; for the Patient not only did sweat abundantly, but
found a very considerable amendment in all the ill Symptoms that had remained.
His pain about the navil was almost not sensible; the tumor of his Lips, and
that, which was in the region of the Liver, Breast, and under the Armpits,
vanished, and that of the shoulder, Arm and Hand was much abated, as well as
the redness and pain.

We thence judged, that we should certainly cure the rest; and to compass it,
we gave the next morning to our Patient a like dose of that Volatile Salt of
Vipers, which made him sweat again very largely; the pain of the Navil ceased
altogether; the swelling of the shoulder was wholly gone; and that of the whole
arm and hand was yet much more abated, as well as the redness and pain. And not
to leave the cure imperfect, though the patient found himself exceedingly
amended, we gave him the next day another such dose again, and the day
following one more, whereby the whole swelling, all the redness, and all the
pain of the arm, hand, and the finger itself, were dissipated; Mean while there
was applied to the finger a little plaster to cicatrize the incisions, that
had been made there, and which were healed three or four days after. Which did
not hinder the Patient to go abroad, and to do his business, as well as if he
had never been bitten by the Viper.

Those that shall read this History, and examine all the circumstances of it,
the several and surprising accidents of the biting of the Viper, which we saw,
and the effectual operation of the remedies, employed to remove them, will
therein find ample matter to exercise their reasoning upon, and will soon
judge, that we had cause, accurately to inquire, as we have done, into all the
parts of a Viper, to know them well, and what they can do; to make a great
number of Experiments upon all its parts, and to apply ourselves to the
preparation of the excellent remedies, that may be drawn from the body of this
Animal.

The Extraordinary effect of its Volatile Salt, in stopping and in overcoming,
first of all the Venom, which so violently exercised its tyranny over the
natural heat, and all the noble parts, and which doubtless would have
altogether triumphed over them: the activity, penetration, and force of the
same Salt, going to find out the poison, and expelling it from the remotest
parts of the body, where it had fortified itself, and whence it endeavored to
regain the place it had lost, and where, in the mean time, it seemed to despise
the ordinary most powerful remedies. All this, I say, is sufficient to make it
to be wondered at; and men will, doubtless, averr, that the ill, which Vipers
are able to cause, and which every one may easily avoid, is nothing in
comparison of such a remedy, as the same Vipers can furnish, and which may
serve, not only to heal their bitings, but also to overcome many other
obstinate diseases, against which the ordinary remedies perform nothing; not to
speak of many other good preparations, made of Vipers, which we intend to
describe hereafter.

EXPERIMENTS Of the Biting of Vipers, upon other Animals.
CHAPT. II.
Experiments upon Dogs.
THE effects, that are surprising, are wont sensibly to touch the Minds of Men;
and they are they, which excite the Curious to inquire into the Cause of them;
and although this do always precede those, yet it would not be known, and we
should not so much as be aware that it was, if the effects thereof did not
first appear. Being therefore to treat of the Biting of Vipers, we hope, it
will not be thought amiss, if we begin with the recitation of the Experiments,
by the Examples of its effects. And not to be tedious to the Reader; having
reviewed all that has been experimented at my house, both the last and this
year, I shall confine my self to what I think deserves most to be communicated,
what serves most to our purpose, and what may give most satisfaction to the
Curious.

One of the most considerable Experiments was made on a Dog, which was bitten
by an angered Viper at the upper lipp. The dog was not much moved at it at
first, but little by little grew sad, and his jaw began to swell: a little
while after he vomited up the last food he had taken, and dunged. Then some
bread, flesh, and water being offered him, he would touch none of it, he
remained in a prostrate posture without complaining, the place of the pricking
waxed livid, and this lividness extended it self to the neck, and as far as the
breast, as did also the swelling. At length he dyed, but not till forty hours
were past after the biting. His belly appeared not swollen, and without we
observed nothing extraordinary but the tumor and lividness in the part
pricked, and thereabout. The Dog being opened after his death, we found in the
tronc of the vena cava a little blood curdled, and we noted, that the rest of
the blood, in this place, in the heart, and every where else, was of a dark
color, and of a very ill consistence, as if it were blood in part dissolved
and corrupted. The Stomach appeared of a darkish color, but the Mesentery and
the Gutts were darker. We found no alteration in the Heart, Liver, Lungs, nor
the Spleen; all these parts being of a very fine color, and in their natural
condition.

The Biting of a Dog at the Ear.
THis Dog howled from the time he felt the biting, and continued his howling
for half an hour; then he ceased to howl and to complain. The place pricked
waxed livid, and swelled, as also did the Neighboring parts. This dog vomited
not, but voided some excrements, which seemed natural. He would neither eat nor
drink, no more then the first, and he soon dyed, having lived no longer then
twenty four hours after he had been bitten. We saw outwardly nothing un-common,
but the lividness and swelling at the neighboring part, and thereabout. But
having opened him, we found all the inward parts in the same condition with
those of the former dog. It Is true, we did not find in this dog any coagulated
blood, neither in the heart, nor the vena cava, nor else where, but it was of
an obscure color, and of an odd consistence, and in a visible disposition to
coagulate.

Another biting of a Dog.
WE had a Dog bitten by an irritated Viper at the tip of his Nose, the dog
howled, when he felt himself bitten, but was soon appeased, falling to lick the
place pricked, and to scratch it with his paws. He lay not down, but continued
for some time in that exercise, and went up and down in the chamber. The place
bitten became somewhat black and blew, but swelled not; and a little while
after the dog drank and eat, as if he had never been bitten: The lividness
disappeared little by little, and the Dog was as well as ever.

The Biting of a little dog.
A Young Puppy, but 7. or 8. days old, was bitten in the leg by an enraged
Viper; the dog began to howl as soon as he was bitten, and so continued till he
dyed, which he did one hour after. The part pricked was swelled and livid, as
in the former, and the animal being opened, we found nothing extraordinary in
his body, save only some lividness in the Stomach and Gutts, and some
blackishness and ill consistence in the blood, as in the others; for all the
other inward parts appeared to us very sound.

Another biting of a Dog.
WE caused also another Dog to be bitten under the Belly by another angered
Viper. He howled presently, but that lasted not long. The place bitten swelled
much, and was very livid, and the tumor and lividness reached over all the
natural parts. This Dog drank often, but would eat nothing, and was always in
this condition without growing worse. Two days after, to be more certain of
the thing, we caused him to be bitten again, and that twice, near the same
place, where he had been bitten at first. He again howled much, and the
swelling increased, and extended it self over the whole belly, as well as the
black and blew color; but it went no further; for the dog often licked his
wounds, and drank store of water, and at last fell to eat, so that without any
other remedy, but his tongue, all the swelling and blew color vanished in five
or six days. And the dog was in the same condition, he had been in before he
was wounded.

Another Dog bitten in the Tongue.
THis Dog gave us some trouble; for he defended himself a great while, before
he would let out his Tongue; but yet at last he received therein a deep bite by
an enraged Viper. At first he howled extremely, so as to be heard afar off, and
so continued, tossing and tormenting himself for half an hour together, and
then dyed. We opened him also, and although the Heart, Liver, Lungs, and Spleen
were in a very good condition, his tongue was exceedingly livid; his mesentery
covered all over with black spots, some of which were blacker then lentils,
under which there was coagulated blood; the Stomach and Guts were also blacker
than those of all the others. The blood very black, and beginning to coagulate
in the heart, and in the vena cava, being also of the consistence of blood
curdled and corrupted.

This last Experiment gave us great satisfaction, informing us fully of the
effects of the venomous biting of a Viper, and showing us, that the poison goes
not directly to the noble parts, seeing we never observed any alteration
therein, but that it is chiefly the blood it works upon, since it corrupts the
substance thereof, coagulateth it, or separateth its parts, disturbs its
circulation; and at the same time hinders the communication of the Spirits
through the whole body, depriving the noble parts of them, as well as of the
pure blood, which was wont to bedew them, and destroying them indirectly, by
causing this privation of Spirits and of the good liquor, whence depends their
subsistence.

We also found thereby that the progress of the venom of a Vipers biting
principally depends from the place bitten, and from the bigness of the veins or
arteries, which the teeth has lighted on. For, the tongue of the Dog being
full of veins and arteries, it is no wonder, if the Venom, meeting with them,
and finding in them a large way, very short and very free to triumph over the
bitten animal, did soon produce its effects, and caused death much more
speedily, than that, which met only with small, slender and winding branches,
by which its way was straighter, more about, and longer; though it failed not
to do execution at last; which it would have done sooner, if the passage had
been freer.

We may judge by the effects of the venom of the Vipers biting in those dogs,
and especially in the last, that the vomiting, and the extreme pains about the
Navil, which befell the Gentleman, above discoursed of, proceeded partly from
the blood which was coagulated or disposed to coagulation in its course, and
which could not freely circulate; and partly from this, that the spirits, which
accompany the blood in the circulation, finding obstacles in their passage,
endeavored to make way for themselves, and to that end, doing violence to the
lateral parts in their way, caused in those places the extreme pains, which the
Patient felt there; which might also be augmented by the blood, that probably
was coagulated out of the great vessels, and might be dispersed in the form of
spots in the Mesentery, or elsewhere, just as in the body of the Dog.

We may conclude also, that the cold sweats, the convulsions and the faintings,
wherewith the Patient was molested, came from nothing else, but the defect of
the ordinary commerce of the spirits with the noble parts, and from the
goodness and purity of the blood destinated to bedew them.

Concerning the success of the remedies employed to cure the said Gentleman, we
shall declare our thoughts thereof in the sequel of our Experiments, after we
shall have given proofs sufficient to support them.

As to the Dogs, that were cured by licking the wound, I think that that was a
good means to recall and draw back the venom; and I am much of their opinion,
who believe, that if the person bitten, or some friend for him, should for a
good while and strongly suck the wound, it would be cured, provided that the
teeth of the Viper have not lighted upon some great vessel, whereby the
progress of the venom may prevail over the force of sucking. I am also
persuaded, that these sucked and recalled Spirits are incapable to annoy him
who sucks them, partly because they have been weakn'd by the action they have
been upon, partly because they are then destitute of the instruments proper to
convey and second their action, to wit, the teeth of the Viper.

CHAPT. III.
EXPERIMENTS Of the Biting of Vipers, made upon Pigeons and Pullets.
THE Experiments made upon these Animals have likewise been very useful to us,
to know the effects of the Biting of Vipers, which have been very like in both.

We caused a Pigeon and a Pullet to be bitten by a vexed Viper, almost at the
same time, in the most fleshy part, namely in that under the breast. We soon
after observed in both a very thick and extraordinary beating of the heart,
which went on still increasing, and in such a manner, that both Pigeon and
Pullet were dead in less then half an hour. We soon opened them, and found in
both of them a little blood coagulated in the heart and the vena cava, and all
the rest of the blood blackish, disposed to curdle, and as 'twere turned and
corrupt; but the Heart, and Liver, and all the inward and outward parts of a
very good color, and in a very good condition, save that a little lividness
appeared upon the place bitten.

We have frequently observed the same thing in many Pullets and Pigeons: But it
will not be amiss, here to relate the different success in two Pigeons, we
caused to be bitten equally and in the same place by an angered Viper. One of
them we made to swallow the weight of about half a crown of Theriack, a moment
before it was bitten, giving nothing to the other. The former being bitten,
went to and fro in the room, so as not to show any sign of illness, but the
latter was dead in less than a quarter of an hour We afterward caused the
former to be bitten again in the leg; and then it grew sick by little and
little, and dyed half an hour after. We found the place of the first pricking
much more livid, then that of the Pigeon, which dyed in a quarter of an hour;
and even more then the place of the leg, which was bitten afterward. We judged,
that the vexed spirits unable to penetrate into the body, defended by the
Theriaque, had wrought upon the outward part, and round about the place bitten,
where they had coagulated the blood, and caused the lividness; whereas the like
spirits, having met with no resistance in the other Pigeon, had gained and
wrought upon the inner parts, having left and as 'twere despised the place, at
which they were entered. We also wondered not, that the Theriaque, which had
vigorously repulsed the Spirits introduced by the first bite, could not resist
the latter but for half an hour, and that at last it was forced to yield, in
regard that the number of the enemies was great, and being weakn'd by the
conflict, it had but now endured, had not force enough to bear up against the
new assault of the latter.

We did also prick several times, and pretty deep, dogs, pigeons and pullets,
with the long teeth of Vipers, some pulled out of the throat of dead ones,
others out of such as were alive. There was also one of the company, who
handling a dead vipers head, had a mind to prick his finger, and actually did
so, with one of the great teeth, so that the blood issued. I also my self
thrust into my hand one of them, and so deep, that a piece of it remained more
than half an hour in my flesh; but in all this we found not the least
appearance of venom, nor any ill, but such, as might be caused by the pricking
of a Pin, or some such thing.

We also deplum'd a Pigeon at the most fleshy place, and holding with both our
hands the jaws of a Viper open, and making her raise her great teeth, we
pressed both the jaws at once against that fleshy part, and caused the teeth
deeply to enter into it, and ordered the matter so, that the yellow liquor of
the Gums had time enough to pass into the wounds, which the teeth had made. We
at the same time saw, that the blood issued out of the wounds, and mingled it
self with the yellow juice, which remained there. We had then ready a little
stone, come from Portugal, which those of that Country call the Snake-Stone,
being pretty black, shining, roundish, and flat, about the bigness of a French
piece of five Sols, but three times thicker; which we presently applied to the
place bitten, which was covered with blood, and with the yellow liquor mingled
therewith. The stone immediately was fastened to the wound, and we perceived
nothing, extraordinary in the Pigeon. We might have believed, that this safety
of the Pigeon was due to the virtue of this Stone, which they would assure us
was infallible against the bitings of Vipers and all kinds of Serpents, if we
had not some days before tried the like Stone upon a Pigeon, bitten in the
same place by an angry Viper, and if that wound had not been followed by the
death of that Pigeon, a quarter of an hour after. We thought, this very well
deserved another experiment; and having still the same Stone by us, which
seemed to have saved the former pigeon, and such another, which the Lord
Ambassador of Spain had trusted his Physician with, we by one and the same
enraged Viper caused to be bitten two Pigeons of equal bigness and fleshiness,
each in the same place, well freed from its feathers. The blood was seen upon
both wounds; but there appeared but little of the yellow liquor. We soon
applied both the Stones, one to each Pigeon; they presently stuck fast to the
places pricked; but we saw immediately in both a very high and thick beating of
the heart, which was followed by the death of both Pigeons, which happened at one
and the same time, in less than a quarter of an hour.

We had also a mind to know, whether the Venom, that had so much force upon the
blood, were also able to make some ill impression upon the noble or solid parts
of the bitten animals, which parts appeared to us very fair and very well
conditioned. We gave also a Pigeon, dead of a Vipers biting, to be eaten by a
Cat that was very lean, which fed very greedily upon it; and the same did
afterward eat many more, and Pullets also; upon which she grew very fat, so
far was she from finding any inconvenience thereby.

Moreover we had a desire to learn, whether one and the same Viper was able to
kill by its biting diverse animals wounded, one presently after another; and
whether the Venom was exhaustible, so that the animals, bitten last, might be
free from its mischievousness. To know the truth hereof, we caused to be bitten
five Pigeons one after another, by the same Viper, which we angered every time
she was to bite: All these Pigeons soon dyed; and we particularly observed,
that the last bitten dyed first of all. And as to the Blood, and all the inward
and outward parts, they were in a manner alike with those of the Pigeon, that
was bitten first.

The various Experiments, we have been relating, do insensibly oblige us to
deliver our thoughts concerning the Venom of Vipers, and its operation. We
think this to be a proper place to declare ourselves here, and afterward to
employ the rest of our main experiments for the defense of what we shall have
advanced upon this Subject.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Venom of a Vipers Biting, and its Operation.
THE Antiens, prevented by the opinion, that there were very few parts in a
Viper, that were exempt of poison, have but very slightly examined them. And as
they esteemed that the Choler of the Viper did much contribute to the Venom,
believing, that the seat thereof was in the Gall, they there also settled that
of the poison, and imagined, that the taste of the Gall, very sharp and very
bitter, was an argument of its malignity, and that the veins and arteries,
which pass near the Gall, and may be followed as far as into the jaws, and
appear the same through the whole body, above and below the Gall, were the
pipes, which Nature had purposely formed to carry the juice of the Gall into
the Gums, and that it was that liquor, which caused all the mortal Symptoms,
and death it self.

But they have not considered, that this Choler of the Viper resideth not in
the Gall; that the Galls of innumerable other Animals have a taste very
approaching to that of a Viper, and yet are not venomous; that the veins and
arteries, which pass near the Gall, and seem to part thence and extend unto the
Gumms, and all the parts of the Body, are vessels designed, only to convey the
blood, which have not their origin in the Gall, and which cannot carry a juice,
which they could not receive: that there is not any taste of Gall in all those
imagined Vessels, no more than there is in the liquor of the Gums, nor in all
the rest of the Body above the Gall: and that in the whole Bladder of Gall
there is but one vessel, that is any thing considerable, though it be very
slender, which issuing, as we have said, from the internal side of the upper
part of the Gall, descends (so far is it from ascending) and discharges it self
into the first intestine, according to the description we have made of it, and
conformably to the Figure, that may be seen in the Cut.

But not to stay upon principles so slightly established, and ill maintained,
forasmuch as we have on our side a great number of Experiments, upon which we
are grounded; We say, That the Gall of a Viper is not at all Venomous, but that
on the contrary it contains a Virtue, that is Balsamic and cleansing, and very
proper for many good uses; that there is no Vessel, which carries its juice to
the Vesicles, that are about the great teeth; that the yellow liquor, therein
contained, is in all things very different from that of the Gall, excepting
that they are both equally free from Venom; that that yellow liquor is
gathered, and formed by the Salival Glands, above described; that it is carried
into those Vesicles or Baggs by the Lymphatick vessels which part from those
Glands; that this juice is nothing but a pure and plain Saliva, of which we
have already observd the use; and that this juice contributes nothing to the
venomousness of the Biting; since, being tasted and swallowed (as we have often
experimented) it does no hurt neither to man nor beast; and since also, being
put upon open wounds, and upon incisions made in the flesh, the same being
rubbed therewith, and mingled with the blood, it annoyes nothing at all:
notwithstanding the judgment of a person very intelligent, and particularly in
this subject of Vipers, woe assures to have made a great number of Experiments;
which being contrary to ours, the great opinion we have of the abilities and
the sincerity of that famous man, has obliged us to employ the more care and
exactness, and to confirm ourselves, by a very great number of Experiments,
which have always been found alike, in the truth, we here assert, and of which
we shall make evident and irrefragable proof.

We say further, that there is no other venom in all the other parts of the
Body; and more, that there is none even in the great teeth, if the Viper be not
alive, and the biting not accompanied with vexed and enraged Spirits. The hurt,
which the teeth does, when the Viper biteth, consists chiefly in that it opens
a door to the angered Spirits, without which irritation the Biting of the teeth
is not mortal, and ought to be no further considered then for the deep and
direct wound, which a tooth, so sharp, so long, and so slender, of any other
animal whatsoever, might make. In which circumstances, the great number of
Experiments, by us made, has rendered us knowing; in regard that we have
observed a quite manifest difference in the Biting of a Viper angered, from that
of a Viper, which was made to bite by holding its jaws, and by pressing its
great teeth into the body of some animal: because this forced action serves
rather to make the Viper retain its spirits, then to let them out; for which
the freedom of the animal is necessary, the spirits not being able to part, but
the imagination and the Choler of the Viper must immediately precede and thrust
them out. For this way of biting, by holding the jaws, and thrusting the teeth
into some animal, although it emit more of the yellow liquor upon the part
bitten, than the biting made by an angered Viper, left to it self, is not
followed by any sinister accident, and is healed like a simple wound, whereas
the other is attended with death, in case we want means of preventing it.

The effect therefore of the venom being altogether of a spirituous nature, and
not working but according as the spirits are more or less iritated and push't
on, and according as they find more or less free passage, we have reason to
impute it to the exasperated Spirits, having found no footstep of it, neither
real, nor apparent in all the visible parts. But the better to maintain this
our assertion, we shall here give you our thoughts concerning the action of the
enraged Spirits.

These Spirits then, push't on by the choler, which the Viper had conceived,
finding the apertures, made by the Teeth, follow their inclination, and as it
is their property, to advance and penetrate, they at the first seek out all
ways for it, and they advance more or less, according to the facility or
difficulty, they meet with. Thence it is, that the Biting is much more
dangerous, when the teeth light upon the greater vessels, than when they only
light upon Flesh, or the little branches of the veins and Arteries. So that the
vexed Spirits of a Viper, meeting with the blood and Spirits contained in the
vessels of the bitten animal, push and press them to make way for themselves,
and embarassing the particles that compose the blood, cause there a coagulation
or confusion, which disturbs the ordinary Circulation, and by this means
hinders the communication of the Spirits, to the principal parts, from which
depends their subsistence and life. And by reason of this privation they must
succumbe, either for having been attack't in their fort by these vexed Spirits
and infected by them, or rather because these spirits of the Viper have made
themselves masters of the avenues, and obstructed the passages, by which the
blood and the spirits were communicated to them.

We conclude therefore, that the imagination of the Viper being irritated by
the idea of revenge which she had framed to her self, gives a certain motion to
the Spirits which cannot be expressed, and pushes them violently, through the
nerves and their fibers, toward the cavity of the teeth, as into a funnel; and
that from htence they are conveyed into the blood of the animal, by the
opening, which they have made, there to produce all those effects, of which we
end eavour to give a reason. Others, more able than we, may perhaps carry their
reasoning farther.

For the rest, some have thought, that those enraged Spirits have in them a
secret acidity, capable to coagulate the blood, and to hinder the Circulation,
whence the mortal accidents proceed. But since that this acidity may have been
produced in the mass of the Blood by its own parts, which come to be dissolved
and severed, when they are tainted by the venom, and since corruption slides
into it, as into milk, which sowreth and corrupts of it self, without mixing
any acid thing therewith; it is not necessary to search for a coagulating Acid
in the Spirits of the Viper, which cannot be perceived by the taste to know the
truth of its existence therein; and that the less, because that Acid may be
naturally formed in the Blood of the animal bitten, without looking for it in
the Viper, as if it had come from thence.

How-ever this be, we must agree herein, that this irritation in the phansy or
in the spirits of the Viper is the main cause of the activity and piercingness
of its venom, and that without it the biting would not produce such surprising
effects, as those are, of which we have related so many Examples. Nor is a
viper the only animal, whose biting is mortal: Dogs, Wolves, and Men
themselves prove that; and not to go from our Subject, the biting of Serpents,
of which the Viper is a species, is more or less malign, according to the
nature of their spirits, and especially according as they are angered and
exasperated.

It seems, that Cleopatra was well instructed in this matter, when she,
intending to kill herself, commanded to be brought her two Aspes in a
fruit-basket, and pricked them with a golden needle, which she pulled out of
her hair-dress, and made her self be bitten immediately by one of those Aspes
in the right arm, and by the other, in her left breast; knowing (as a famous
Author says) that their natural fierceness and cruelty was not sufficient to
execute well what she desired, and that it was needful, this pricking should
serve to provoke the spirits to bite to purpose, and to render the wound
mortal; if at least it be with their biting, as it is with that of our Vipers,
who also have this particular quality, that not only they are soon angered, but
that in the very moment of the irritation they bite with a strange swiftness;
which speaks much the subtlety and impetuousness of their spirits, whence
depends their strength and activity. We observe also, that in distilling Vipers
bodies, we thence draw very subtle and very penetrating parts, and in much
greater quantity, in proportion, than from any other animal.

In the mean time, the obstacle, which these irritated spirits of the Viper
give to the communication of the spirits of the animal bitten, nor the
coagulation, or confusion, which they cause to the blood, are not of that
force, that specifique remedies should not master them, and restore the animal
unto that Condition, wherein it was before it was wounded. Which is that, we
shall prove in the sequel by diverse Experiments; where we hope to show in what
manner the remedies do overcome the powerful action of those enraged Spirits.

CHAP. V.
EXPERIMENTS Of the yellow juice, contained in the Vesicles of the great teeth,
made upon diverse Animals.
IN the design, we had, well to try all things, we pursued our Experiments, and
to be well assured of the quality of that yellow liquor, which has been
believed so dangerous, we caused to be bitten, by six angered Vipers, separately
and several times by each of them, a slice of bread, and so much, that it had
well exhausted and retained all the yellow liquor, contained in the Gums of
these six Vipers: At the same time we gave this slice of bread to a fasting
Dog, to eat, who was no more inconvenienced thereby, than if he had eaten a
piece of dry bread, that had imbibed nothing of this juice.

We have also often made diverse Pullets and Pigeons to swallow pieces of bread
dipped in the same liquor; and we can assure, that none of these animals had
any mischief thereupon.

I my self had the curiosity to taste of this juice, which I have diverse times
done in the presence of many persons, without washing my mouth before or after.
And several Physicians also have tasted of it themselves, both to know the
taste, and to be assured of the harmlessness thereof; and it is certain, that
they were no more incommoded thereby than myself.

And because it has been believed, that this juice, being thus tasted and
swallowed by Men or other Animals, that had no wound nor Ulcer in their mouths,
nor in their stomachs, was indeed harmless; but that it was quite another
thing, when it did accompany a Biting, and entered into the openings made by the
teeth and that the same being put upon an Ulcer, a wound, or a simple
excoriation made on the skin, was mortal, and failed not to produce its effect,
three or four hours after it had been put upon the wound; and that as well upon
Men, as all other sorts of Animals, without exception; we resolved also to make
many Experiments upon this account.

I can therefore say, in the first place, that I have tasted of it my self, at
such times, when my mouth was excoriated, upon which I observed, that even my
spittle was a little tinged with blood, without having perceived any acrimony,
or extraordinary heat. We also made a Trial upon a Pigeon, which we wounded
under the wing, and in the leg in the same moment of time; and we let into each
wound some of this yellow liquor, which we just before had drawn from the gums
of two enraged Vipers; then we re-joyned the skin, well to enclose the said
liquor, and we bound both wounds over with a band, that nothing might run out.
We can assure, that the Pigeon felt not any inconveniency from it, and that we
even found upon the wound, made on the leg, a coagulated drop of the juice,
round, and of the same color, as we had put it there, and the blood of the
place dried, and that, soon after, both wounds were dried up, and healed of
themselves.

We also made the like Experiment upon a Cat, which we purposely wounded in the
leg, but he received no harm at all by it. We have also often experimented it
upon Pullets, and other Pigeons, but always with the like success, and without
any offense to the Animals.

The same trial has been thrice made at three several times, and even twice in
one day, upon a dog, whom we had wounded on purpose toward the bottom of the
Ear, where he could not lick his wound; and no mischief at all followed upon it.

We cannot but add here an Experiment of the mortal effect of the enraged
Spirits, without any intervention of the yellow liquor* We made a Viper several
times to bite upon a slice of bread, by pressing every time its jaws against
the bread, and we did this so often, that not only that juice was altogether
exhausted, but that the blood began to come out of the gums. At the same time
we vexed the Viper, and made it bite a Pigeon in the most fleshy part; and we
observed, that indeed the effects of the venom of the biting were not so quick,
the Pigeon not dying but an hour and an half after it had been bitten; but then
we found also, that the teeth of the Viper were in a manner covered with the
crumbs of the bread, from the force of its having bitten at it, and that that
had hindered them from making a deep entrance, and that having half stopped up
the pores of the tooth, a good part of the angered Spirits could not come forth;
so that the death of the Pigeon could not follow so fast, though yet it happened
without any mixture of the juice which had been altogether emptied.

CHAPT. VI.
EXPERIMENTS Of the Gall, Eggs, Intestins, Head, and Blood of Vipers, made upon
diverse Animals.
WE have made several Dogs and Cats to swallow the Galls of Vipers, sometimes
whole, sometimes burst, and dissolved in some liquor, and sometimes six,
sometimes ten, sometimes a dozen at a time; but they never found themseves ill
after it, no more than the Pigeons and Pullets that had swallowed some of it,
and which we had also wounded, and afterward rubbed with the Gall of a Viper:
for this Gall served them for a Balsom, the wounds being the sooner cured
thereby; so that we can justly declare the gall to be free from all venom, as
well as the yellow liquor, and even inculcate here what we have already said,
that the galls of Vipers have particular virtues in them.

We can say the same of the Matrix and Eggs of a Viper, and of all the
Intestins, of which we often have made good quantities to be swallowed by Dogs
and Cats, some of which have eaten thereof with greediness, when they could
light upon it; and none ever has felt any trouble after it. On the contrary, we
have tried, that having caused to be bitten, at the thickest place of the Ear,
by a sufficiently vexed Viper, a young Cat, very lean, that had but just before
eaten the Eggs, the Matrix, and all the guts of a Viper; the biting had almost
no effect, and there appeared nothing but a very little swelling, and a very
inconsiderable lividness in the place bitten.

We have further made many Dogs and Pigeons swallow the Heads of Vipers, newly
cut off, and yet living, having only cut with Sizers the point of their great
teeth, least in passing down they should bite the throat, or the inward parts
of the animals, that were to devour them; but we have not observed any thing
after it, that was extraordinary, in all those creatures.

We had also a desire to find, Whether a Viper, being eaten by an Animal, which
it had bitten before, would be cured of that biting. We therefore caused to be
slightly broyled the head of a Viper, which had on it a part of its neck, newly
severed from the body; and we made a Dog to be thrice bitten at the Ear by a
well enraged Viper, in such a manner that the blood came out at the three
places pricked. We soon cast before him the head and neck, broyled, and yet
hot. The dog, that was hungry, and felt not so soon the effects of the bitings,
immediately seized on the head, bruised it between his teeth, and swallowed it
down: after which we stayed a pretty while to see, whether the three bitings
would prevail over the devoured head and neck; but the Dog was free, except
some blewness and a little tumor, he had at the places bitten, but which little
by little vanished in three or four days.

We made also a dog to be bitten three times in the same place, and without
broyling the head of the same Viper that had bit him, we cast it to him, hoping
that he would eat it, because he had not eaten any thing for many hours before;
but the dog would not touch it. Upon that we bruised and stamped that head in a
mortar, and so crammed it down the dogs throat; rubbing also the bitten places
with the blood of the same Viper: which done, we expected the success; which
was, that this head, raw and bruised, and if you will, assisted by the blood of
the Viper, being applied to the part bitten, had produced the same effects with
the former, which had been so slightly broyl'd; in regard that this dog was
free, excepting those inconveniences the former suffered, and was, after that
as sound, as if he had never been bitten.

If these two Experiments had been made, before that Gentleman, above
discoursed of, was bitten by the Viper, we should have been in much less
anxiety for his preservation. But it was enough, that we were able to secure
him from the dangerous effects of the biting, by ways grounded upon reason,
and by remedies, that were more proper for such persons, as could not well
resolve to eat the bare flesh of Vipers.

CHAPT. VII.
Several other Curious Experiments made upon Vipers.
WHereas we gave but little credit to what diverse Authors have assured to be
true, namely, that the Head of a Viper bruised and applied to the biting of it
would heal the same; we made a Pigeon to be bitten in the most fleshy part of
its body, well freed of its feathers, and we cut, bruised, and applied to the
place bitten, the head of the same Viper, that had wounded the Pigeon, and took
care to have it held upon it with a hand. We also cut the head of a living
Viper, and had it slightly broyl'd, then bruised and laid hot to the wound of
another Pigeon, which had been newly bitten in the same place, to find, whether
by the heat of the broyling, the parts of the head being more opened, and the
spirits more set at liberty, they would work better; but the success was not
more beneficial for one Pigeon, than the other; for they both dyed half a
quarter of an hour after they had been bitten; and their bodies being opened,
we found in them, what we did in others, killed by Vipers, namely a blackish
blood, in part coagulated, and half corrupted, in the heart and the great
vessels; but we took notice, that there was less black and blew about the place
bitten; which was perhaps all the effect, that these bruised heads had
produced, which had not been able to carry their virtue any farther.

It is not so, (to say that on the by) with the pricking of a Scorpion, which
being bruised on the part stung, serves for an Antidote, and cures: for which
this reason may be alleged, that the venom of a Scorpion, not working so
briskly, and not piercing with so much quickness unto the inward parts; the
Spirits, that issue from the bruised Scorpion, have leisure to make way for
themselves, and to go and find out the venom, to join with it, and to make it
come forth; whereas the venom of the Viper goes immediately to taint the mass
of the blood, and the parts which it bedeweth; as was apparent in our
Gentleman, who had no pains nor swelling in his arm, but after all the other
accidents; contrary to the operation of the Scorpions Venom, which, before it
passes further, acts upon the part pricked by benumming, cold, and tension,
or by inflammation, and very great pains; as those Authors, that have written
thereof, and the persons, that have been pricked by them, do assure.

We have found very true, what Signor Redi has said of the effects of the
Essence of Tobacco upon Vipers; That, running their skin through with a thread
dipped in that essence, and leaving the thread in the skin, the Viper dies in
less than a quarter of an hour, and becomes as hard as brass, but soon after
supple and plyant. We have also tried, that a little piece of Tobacco in the
roll, held in the throat of a Viper, and the smoke of Tobacco blown into its
throat produce the like effect, but a little more slowly; and that both do
cause convulsions, and extraordinary contractions in a viper, which are
attended with death; and that, when all the other parts of the body are
deprived of motion, the heart yet beats about half an hour after; and that
Tobacco, or its essence, kills Snakes as well as Vipers. I know not, whether
this will do with other animals, since, having run a thread dipped in the essence
of Tobacco, into the skin of the under-belly of a Dog, he immediately howled
very much, and continued so to do for half a quarter of an hour, running round,
then lying down, and then rising again, and in the mean time purging above and
below, and voyding excrements more liquid then ordinarily. He would eat
nothing, and only drunk now and then a little, after which he vomited; but
this was all the trouble he had, which insensibly went away, and soon after,
without any other accident.

We have vexed a viper, and made it to bite another viper, which on purpose we
held within the reach of its teeth. But although she opened her throat, and put
her self into a posture of biting, yet she refrained, and sunk not her teeth
deep into the body of the other; which moved us to thrust them our selves by
pressing her jaws; but the bitten viper received no inconvenience from it. Yet
we have observed, that a viper which was made to swallow some of the essence of
Tobacco, and which we yet held by the neck with pincers, did bite herself; but
as the essence alone failed not to kill her, so there was no reason to impute
her death to this kind of biting, which was probably an effect of the
convulsive motions caused by the essence of Tobacco.

We also pierced twice, in the daylight, with the point of a penknife, the
head of a live viper in the midst of the Brain, from the top to the botom; one
thrust long-wayes, the other cross-wayes, and in such a manner, that the blood
run out both above and below; but notwithstanding, the viper, being let loose,
crept about as before, and as if she had not been wounded; but she still lost
blood by the wounds, and at last dyed at the end of an hour, but her heart did
still beat and continue to do so two hours after. Which Experiment sufficiently
argues the extraordinary vivacity of the Spirits of the viper.

We have also put into a glass-vessel, a living viper, together with three live
Scorpions, and there left them together four days; but found them in the same
condition, in which they were, when we put them in, though there be Authors
that assure, that these Animals kill one another, being shut up together in one
and the same vessel. Mean time a viper will kill Scorpions, as well as
Lizzards, and other animals to devour them and feed upon them, but that she
does only, when she is at liberty, and not when imprisoned; for then she
cease to take food.

We have likewise found the contrary to what Authors have affirmed of the
Waspe's attaching a Viper, and that the former would fix its sting into the
head of the latter, and quitted her not, till she were dead.

Diverse Authors have assured, that all the remedies, which are reputed
Alexiterial, or Preservatives against poison, did kill Vipers, by their virtue
contrary and opposite to their venom. To be certain hereof, we forced a Viper
to swallow half a dram of Theriaque, dissolved in Carduus Benedictus-water;
and having laid her aside, we perceived not any change in her, except that the
surface of her skin appeared for a while a little moist; but she grew more
vivid upon it, and more ready to bite than before.

We had also a mind to know the effect of Spirit of Wine upon a Viper. We
therefore made one swallow about a drachme of it; which thereupon was presently
stunned, and then fell into strange agitations; but seeing that that ceased
little by little, we gave her another dose of the same quantity, which not
only caused in her the like agitation, but afterward made her almost
un-moved, and so inebriated her that she seemed to be half dead. She remained
about three hours in this condition, but at length she began to stir again, and
was like the former, more brisk, and more disposed to bite than before. We put
also a living Viper into a bottle almost full of Spirit of wine, and we saw,
that she turned to and fro therein, now swimming on the top, then in the
middle, and by and by at the bottom of the bottle, and that she resisted a good
hour, before she was choked therein.

We caused likewise a Viper to swallow some sugar, part of which was in powder,
and the other part dissolved in water. She kept the whole for a while with her,
but afterward vomited it up; and having laid her aside, to see, what would
become of her, we found her dead four and twenty hours after.

We have often spit into the throats of many Vipers, even when we were fasting,
but they soon after cast up our spitle, and had not any hurt thereby; though
there be Authors affirming that Vipers become tabid or consumptive thereby;
which yet may very well happen, not from thence, but rather from the abstinence
and sadness, after a long imprisonment.

Many Authors have mentioned, that Vipers have a great Antipathy to Ashwood,
and that, if a live Viper were put within a round, made, one half, of the
leaves of Ash, and the other half, of kindled coals, the Viper would rather
expose herself to be burnt, then to come near the Ash-leaves. But having made a
whole round of such leaves, which had about three foot in diameter, we put a
Viper in the midst, which presently hid herself under those leaves.

Whilst I had live Vipers in my house, several Women with child came to me,
some designedly to see them, others without having any such thought, and even
being surprised at, and abhorring the sight of them; but none of them having
been inconvenienced by it; so far were they from miscarrying thereupon, as
certain Authors would bear us in hand they would do. Not that such a thing may
not chance to happen to some woman or other extraordinary fearful, and of a
temper so delicate, that a much less occasion might produce such an effect; but
that ought not to pass for a general rule.

We have often pressed some Vipers, both Males and Females, at the place, where
be the Parastates, or the Bladders containing the seed, namely under the tail,
and near the openings, which serve for generation; and have so much and so long
pressed them, that a white liquor came forth; but we never perceived there any
piercing or ill-sented smell, no more than we did in opening those Parastates
with a lance though we held our nose close to it: which is also directly
contrary to what some Authors have assured thereof.

CHAPT. VIII.
GENERAL REFLECTIONS Upon all we have experimented.
THE great care and attention used by us in the Experiments, we have hitherto
described, and in those, we have thought fit to suppress, has made us to
profit of all the occasions, that presented themselves; and we have taken
pleasure to observe all the effects, that have appeared to us, and carefully
examined them, and inquired into their causes afterward, that we might make
our reflections thereon.

The Biting of the Viper, which happened to the Gentleman Stranger, began to
furnish us with much matter; and at that time we knew the Venom by its effects,
which seemed to proceed from a very slight cause, it being nothing but a little
pricking, and only the cut of a tooth, which was not any thing deep, and the
ill of which did not seem to us increased by any of the yellow liquor of the
Gums, the innocence of which was not yet fully known to us. In the mean time
the mortal Accidents came on in great number, whilst continued vomitings
hindered the effect of the remedies, which could not be kept in the Stomach, to
communicate from thence some of their virtue to the parts affected. It was well
enough known, that there was something very subtle, very quick, and very
powerful in this Venom; and it was also presumed, that that resided in the
Spirits; but the nature of it, or by what means, or how, or on what parts it
acted, was not known so well.

Yet we must avow, that on an occasion so pressing, so dangerous, and so
extraordinary, we could not take our measures better than by having recourse to
the Volatile Salt of Vipers. The cause being subtle and spirituous, there was
required a remedy of the like nature, that might be able to make haste to find
it out, to join with it, and to draw it to the extremities of the body, and to
make it come forth by the ways, it had opened for it. But then, the continual
vomiting demanded the aid of such a remedy, that could work in a moment, or
execute at least by several takings, what it was not able to do at the first.
The happy success, which attended the use of this Volatile salt of Vipers,
acquainted us with the sufficiency thereof, and showed us the mastery it had
over the malignity of those Spirits. It also begot in us a desire to know
aright, in what manner it produced such good effects, and to be enabled so to
discourse of it, as that others might have no reason to reject our sentiments.

We esteem therefore, that this Salt, by its subtle, volatile and piercing
quality, is very proper to dissolve the coagulations of the Blood, and to sever
the parts, which therein were congealed or fixed, (if we may so speak) and
caused the disorder and confusion of its motion; that it performed this in the
Blood of the said Gentleman, which it restored to its former condition, and so
gave again to the parts the free communication of the Spirits, which they had
lost. We believe also, that this Volatile Salt, by the facility it had to hook
and fasten it self unto those vexed Spirits, as being of the like nature, did
easily join with them, and drove them to the extremities of the body, drawing
them forth through the pores of the skin, and issuing out with them by the way,
it had opened for them.

The Ligatures made about the place bitten, the Scarifications, and the
approach of the well heated iron-spatuls to the wound, were to serve to stay
the impetuousness of those irritated Spirits, and to give them an outlet at
these openings, rather than that they should go farther: And the exhibition of
the Theriaque, the Viper-powder, and the like, was to conduce to drive them
back, as it might have done, if these remedies had stayed in the Stomach. As
also the Epithemes of Theriaque upon the Heart and Stomach might have served
much, if the action of the enraged spirits had been more slow, and if at the
time of their application those spirits had not been too far advanced.

But the Use of this Volatile Salt was to carry the Bell, as it did, from all
the other remedies; and those, that were employed afterward and in the
intervals of its exhibition, were nothing, if we may so speak, but Soldiers
assisting their Captain; such as the Confection of Alkermes and of Hyacinthe,
which were very proper to fortify the noble parts; as also were the Syrup of
Limons, and the Decoction of Scorzonera, and the shavings of Ivory.

The Slices of Citron, which might seem to some by their acidity capable to
augment the coagulation of the blood, were not given till after the Volatile
Salt had used its force to dissipate it; and they served to recover the
Stomach, debilitated by continual vomiting, and by their acidness to restore
the lost appetite, and to help the concoction of the aliments, and their
distribution into the parts, that had need of them. Besides that Citrons have a
specifique virtue against the poison of Vipers, if we will believe those
Authors, that have written of it; and is a great friend to the Heart and the
other noble parts.

The Anointing with the Oil of Scorpions of Matthiolus, and with the water of
the Queen of Hungary, made upon the swelled parts, and the application of
Alexiterial fomentations, should in all appearance have served much; but the
sequel showed, that there was nothing but that Volatile Salt, which could make
those angry Spirits surrender, and so was to take the honor of all.

The Experiments, which we afterward made upon a great number of differing
Animals, have given us a much greater knowledge of the effects of Vipers-poyson,
of the parts on which it works, and of those that seem to be exempt from it,
though at last they do succumbe: We have set down the most considerable of
them, making some reflections on the biting of several Dogs, done by Vipers;
but there remained still for us to discourse, Why and How the parts of Vipers,
being eaten, can stop and overcome the Venom of their biting.

We say therefore, that all the parts of a Viper abound chiefly in Volatile
Salt, which in distillation is found partly alone; partly in the form of a
Spirit, which properly is nothing but a Salt dissolved in some portion of
Phlegm; and partly in the form of an Oil, which also is but a Salt mix't
among the unctuous part of a Viper. We say also, that in the digestion, made in
the Stomach, of the parts of a Vipers body, that have been swallowed down, this
same Volatile Salt, which they contain, is separated, and afterward
distributed to all the parts that need them; especially if of these parts there
have been swallowed enough, to furnish that quantity, which is necessary, of this
Salt; and so we need not doubt, but that this Salt will produce an effect like
that of the Volatile Salt, which was given to our Gentleman bitten; Unless it
should be said, that this same Volatile Salt of those parts of a Vipers body,
which have been swallowed, being of the same nature with the irritated Spirits,
attracts them to it self, and by this union changes their malign quality, and
so tames them, that they have no power over the bitten Animal; which, in my
opinion, is hard enough to conceive, and perhaps established upon unsolid
foundations.

We hope, that among the many Experiments, those of the Five Pigeons, bitten
one after another, by one and the same Viper exasperated, and of which the last
bitten dyed first of all, when the Viper was most vexed, and most exhausted of
its yellow liquor; and that of the Pigeon bitten by Viper, which we had caused
to bite several times into bread before, and that even till blood came forth,
to the end that the Juice might be well emptied of it, and which
notwithstanding was followed by the death of the Pigeon; These Experiments, I
say, will prove on one hand, that the yellow liquor contributes nothing to the
poison; and on the other, that these incensed Spirits, assisted by the openings
which the great Teeth had prepared for them, are the sole and true cause
thereof.

The wound, made by a Viper not vexed, whose jaws were held in, and whose teeth
were at the same time thrust into the body of a Pigeon, which also was
accompanied with store of the yellow juice, and yet not attended with any ill
accident; as also the pricking, made by the great teeth, pulled out of a live
Viper, or by such, as stuck yet in the head of a dead Viper, and did no hurt at
all, do sufficiently confirm this truth, viz. that the cause of the Venom is to
be imputed to the Spirits enraged, and not to any other thing or parts in the
Vipers body.

I have not undertaken to reason upon all the Experiments, we have made, as I
have done upon the Bitings, both because that is beyond the Sphere of a man of
my profession, and because I designed only to confine my self particularly to
the wounds and to the Remedies able to heal them.

For the rest, if in the Treaty concerning Theriaque, which I have lately
published, I have advanced any thing not consonant to what I have declared here,
touching the action of the Venom, I am to be excused therein, forasmuch as I
had not then had the occasion, well to know the nature and the effects of the
Bitings of Vipers, and referred my self to the most approved Authors about it.
But yet all we have there said, derogates in nothing from the preparation of
Vipers for Theriaque, which we have there laid down, and which was in that Book
our main design, as well as to reform several other preparations, that seemed
not reasonable to us: That which now remains to be done by us, is, to speak of
the Remedies to be drawn from Vipers, which may serve to heal their bitings,
and to cure many other evils.

THE REMEDIES EXTRACTED FROM VIPERS.
CHAPT. I.
Of the different choice that may be made of the parts of a Viper.
THere is nothing in Nature, to which can be given more justly the title both
of Aliment and Medicine, than to a Viper, since it affords equally very good
Nourishment and very good Remedies. It also has in its Body not one part,
which is not very useful, and of which Artists may not draw something that is
good; their chief difference consisting in this, that the substance of the one
is more or less close, then that of others. Yet, as in all Bodies of Animals,
there are parts preferable to others, so we may make a distinction of those in
a Viper, especially if we mean to eat them, or to reduce them to powder, to
take it at the mouth, alone, or mingled with other medicaments.

In this case, it will be well, to use only the Heart, the Liver, and the
Trunk, I mean, the Body emptied of its guts, without head and tail. Not that,
if you would make use of the head and tail, any ill would attend it, or that
you need to fear any ill quality in them, no more than in all the other parts
of the body; but the Heart, Liver and Trunk are chosen, as those that are most
esteemed, and which are taken before the rest, out of the body of such Animals,
which men use to feed upon. Those also, that would nourish themselves with
Viper-flesh boiled and seasoned, may do well, in eating of it, to separate the
bones thereof, and to leave them uneaten: but if they bruise them between their
teeth, and swallow them down together with the flesh, they would afford them a
like, and even a stronger nourishment than the flesh: for, we have found by
Distillation, that the Bones yield the same parts, that the Flesh does and even
in greater quantity. For the same reason, the Bones of the trunk are not to be
cast away, when you will prepare the powder of Vipers, and that the rather,
because they are in that way very easy to swallow. One may also very usefully
dress the flesh of Vipers with their own fat, as one would do with butter, or
with the fat of other animals. The Skin it self, if men would, might be boiled
and eaten with benefit; but that it would not be so savory, as the principal
parts we have been speaking of.

As for the Chemical preparations, all the parts of Vipers may be therein
employed, and I would not except from them the Stomach it self, nor the
Intestins, if they were well cleared of Worms, and all Excrements.

I also know no difference, as to goodness, of one Sex from the other, although
most Authors have prescribed the use of Females: On the contrary, if there be
any such difference, I would prefer the Males to the Females, when these are
full of Eggs, and big, forasmuch as then they are too much wasted for the
feeding and increasing of their Eggs.

As to the Seasons, in which they are to be taken and used, I almost equally
consider the Spring and Autumn; for the times wherein men need them, ought to
carry it in the behalf of those who have a mind to feed on them. But care must
be had to choose such Vipers, as are bigg, fat, vigorous, and active; and not to
keep them very long after they have been taken, because they grow leaner and
lesser every day, both out of Melancholy, and want of food, which after that
time they use not to take. I also make no difference between those Vipers of
France, that are bred in one Province, and those of another; for those of
Poitou and the neighboring parts are as good as those of Dauphine and about
Lions, and in other places. The place therefore is not to be considered but for
the quantity, and for the convenience of getting them, in regard that they are
not wont to be found in maritime places, which are the only, that Authors have
disapproved for Vipers, upon the belief, that the flesh of Vipers, taken in
them, did cause thirst, by reason of the saltish food, they met with there.

CHAP. II.
Of the Use of the parts of Vipers, in respect of their nourishing Virtue.
THere is scarce an Author, that has written of Vipers, but affirms, that in
several parts of the World, many persons, and even whole Nations, have fed, and
still feed upon the flesh of Vipers; in so much that in great and costly
Entertainments, they made exquisite and very considerable dishes of it. There
are also, that have alleged for an example some Nations, which by the use of
Viper-flesh, have extraordinarily lengthn'd their life, even to 140. years. It
is needless, to insert here the testimonies of Antiquity on this subject; the
Curious may find them in Books. We content ourselves to affirm, that many
persons do still use it at this time in diverse Countries, whether it be from
Custom, or to satisfy their appetite, or by the Advice of knowing Physicians,
and that upon occasions they find wonderful effects thereof. I also doubt not,
but that the use of it would be more frequent among us, if the virtues of
Vipers were well known, and if one could dislodge out of the mind of people
the horror and natural antipathy, they have against this animal. For the taste
of Viper-flesh is very like that of Eeles; whence it is, that in some Countries
Vipers are called Eeles of the Mountain; and one finds something in them even
more savoury than in Eeles. I know persons, who well knowing the most inward
parts of Vipers, have out of merriment, and in company, made good meals of
them, and found it very savory meat. But those that have too much aversion from
this kind of food, may find very convenient ways to benefit themselves by the
virtue of them, so as not to be diverted from it by any abhorrency of the
animal: for they may feed Capons and Pullets with the flesh of Vipers cut in
small pieces, which those Creatures eat very greedily; and continuing for some
time to feed them therewith, it will certainly communicate the virtue of the
Vipers to the body of those Animals; which may be eaten, as we eat other
Capons or Pullets, the taste of which will be very savoury, because that of
Viper flesh is so.

Neither ought we to doubt, that the qualities of Vipers pass into the bodies
of those animals, since there are innumerable others, the flesh of which has
not only the virtue, but even the taste of the things, they are fed with. The
flesh of the Birds, that live on Juniper Berries, and of those, that live only
upon Olives, has not only their qualities, but also their taste and
bitterness, and that so highly, that one can scare eat them. In the Countries,
where Silkworms are bred, it is observed, that in their season, which is
chiefly in the months of May and June, the Eggs of Hens, that eat those Worms,
have a taste and smell of them, as well as their flesh; insomuch that nice
persons feed their Poultry a part, and hinder them from eating any Silkworms.
It may be taken notice of, to this purpose, that it is a custom to give to
Nurses the medicines, which young Children cannot be made to take, to the end
that their virtue may pass from the body of the Nurse to that of the Child; and
it has been often observed, that the Urine of the Babe has had the sent of
the Druggs the Nurse had taken.

But yet some might phansy, that Animals cannot take the good from the good
parts of the things eaten by them, but they must at the same time receive the
impressions of the ill ones, that are there; and it might even be objected,
that Lizzards, Scorpions, Cantharides, and the other Creatures, on which Vipers
do feed, should impress in their bodies the ill qualities, they have, as, among
the rest, the Cantharid, its Caustique quality. But notwithstanding all this,
the Experience we have of the harmlessness of Vipers-bodies, and also of their
good qualities, furnishes us with a contrary argument, sufficient to destroy
that phansy; and it teaches us, that the stomach of Animals converteth into
good all the ill qualities, to be met with in the bodies, it receives to
digest; and that it uniteth and appropriateth the good ones to the very
substance of the Animal that has eaten them: Whence it comes to pass, that it
is as 'twere transformed, or at least very much changed by those good
qualities; and is upon that account capable to communicate them to other
animals, into whose stomach it enters to be there digested. We say besides,
that there are diverse Examples of Bodies, that would be altogether poisonous in
the stomach of men, which yet serve for food to, and fatten, other animals,
which afterward yield good nourishment to men. Such are Hellebore and Hemlock,
which nourish and fatten Quails and Goats, which afterward are usefully
employed for the nourishment of men; and this is it, what Lucrece has very
well observed in these Verses; Praeterea nobis Veratrum est acre venenum,
At Capris adipes and Coturnicibus auget:
Quippe videre licet pinguescere saepe Cicuta
Barbigeras pecudes; homini quae est acre Venenum.


But those, that have no aversion from Vipers-flesh, may take of them the
Heart, the Liver, and the Trunck, and having washed them well, they may then
accommodate them to their own taste in the dressing. Where they are to take
care, not to make the flesh too hot by too much spice* especially pepper; but
yet they are allowed to put to it some aromatique herbs, as Garden- and
Wild-Thyme, and the like; or a little Nutmeg, Cinnamon, Cloves, to raise the
taste. They must also avoid the fault, committed by the Ancients, whipping and
vexing the Vipers, before they killed them; least this irritation should cause
some ill impression in their body, which by it self has no venom at all in it.
Let them also not cast away the broth, wherein the Vipers have been boiled,
because it retains the greatest virtue of them. Neither do I see, why one
should stint the quantity, or limit the time of the use of it; that depending
from the degree of the illness, and from the constitution of the persons, that
will make use thereof. And although we know Vipers to be a very Alterative
Medicine, and that their chief use is only for their Medicinal qualities; yet
if taken as an Aliment, there is no danger at all to eat of their flesh, or to
drink of their broth, somewhat more or somewhat less. It is also to be
moderately salted; and those that have any of the Fixed Salt of Vipers, shall
do well to employ it. You may also add to it some of its Volatile Salt, if you
will have the Flesh of Vipers work more powerfully.

As to the Virtues of Viper-flesh, according to the consent of innumerable
Authors, whose opinion is supported by reason and truth, confirmed by many
Experiments; we can say, that they are very great, and that there is no Animal
in Nature, that affords such and so many: And we wonder not at all, that the
Ancients have so frequently employed Vipers in their Hieroglyphics, and
adorned their Medals with them; thereby to design very advantageous things for
the public, and for private men; forasmuch as this Animal is very capable to
furnish them. For the use of it preserves the natural heat in a very good
temper, it repaireth the same, and restores it when it is altered; it yields a
very good food; helps digestion by its heat, which is not excessive; it retards
old age and prolongeth life, by a property, which Vipers have, to maintain in
good plight the whole habit of the Body. Whence it is, that many have believed,
that both Staggs and Eagles, induced to it by a natural instinct, eat all the
Vipers, they can meet with, and that it is upon that score, that their life is
extraordinary long.

There is also adscribed to Vipers, and not without reason, a Renewing virtue,
capable to make young again; which they tacitly show, by casting their skin
twice a year, and renewing themselves by the cover of a new skin. This, joined
to the subtle parts, of which the Viper is composed, and to its lively and
daring aspect, testifies it to be pertinent enough, that Authors have
attributed to it the virtue of clearing and strengthening the Eyes.

Vipers have also a very particular virtue of Cleansing the whole Body, and
particularly the Blood, and of expelling through the pores of its skin all the
superfluities: Whence it may be inferred, that they are very proper to cure the
Itch, Tettar, Erysipelas or Saint Anthonies fire, Measels, Small Pox, and the
Leprosy it self, the use of them being long enough continued; though I cannot
well believe what Galen says, That the Wine, wherein one only Viper is
choked, is able to cure so great an Evil, and which does not so easily yield
to remedies.

Vipers also may, by removing all the impurities and obstructions of the Body
and skin, cause beauty therein; and upon this account it is, that many Ladies
in Italy use them for their ordinary food.

By the good nourishment, they yield by the purity they give to the blood and
to all the parts, and by the liberty they give to the Spirits to do their
functions therein, they are a great relief to persons in a Consumption, and to
those that are emaciated by long diseases, and wasted by tedious Fevers. There
are even Authors, who assure that the use of them is capable to cure the
Venereal disease; for which we doubt not but they may serve much, if they do
not altogether cure it.

Their mundifying virtue, joined to the Alexiterial, makes them also very
proper to expel all sorts of poisons, and even the Plague it self and all
contagious diseases. They are also very contrary to all putrefaction, which
commonly is the matter and source of most maladies; whence it comes, that those
who use them, are not subject to diseases, unless they live irregularly, which
is able to destroy all the good, which the use of Vipers might afford.

We might here specify many other sicknesses, that might be cured by the use of
Viper-flesh; but we think not fit to do so, since the general virtues, which we
have noted, may suffice to make men apply the use to many particular Evils,
that may need it. Yet we shall describe, in the Chapter ensuing, the uses and
Virtues of the parts of Vipers, taken as a Medicine, without any great
preparation.

CHAP. III.
Of the Virtues of several parts of the Viper, and of their Use in Physic.
THE Virtues, which the Flesh of Vipers is able to communicate to those, who
eat them for nourishment, are doubtless very considerable; but they are not the
only ones, that Vipers are endowed with; and not to allege superfluous
things, we shall confine our selves to the principal Virtues, of which we have
experimented the greatest part.

It is very certain, that the Head of a Viper, broyled and swallowed, heals
the biting of that animal. The Heart and the Liver may do the same. Reason and
Experience have confirmed it; and therefore in an urgent occasion those parts
may be very usefully employed. The application of the Blood of a Viper to the
Biting, as also that of its Head bruised, are neither to be rejected, nor is
that of the Entralls: but these applications alone are not capable to cure it;
for, the subtlety and quicness of the Spirits carrying them with great speed
into the body, there must be used internal specific remedies to repulse them;
and you may also very pertinently repeat (at the mouth) the use of the head,
heart, liver, and the other parts of a Viper, without fearing to take too much
of them, because those parts can never do hurt, and they always produce some
good effect. They may also serve for all sorts of venoms and poisons, and
against all sorts of contagious and epidemical diseases.

Diverse Authors assure, that the Head of a Viper, hung about the neck, has a
very particular quality to cure the Squinancy and all the distempers of the
Throat; and that the Brain of a Viper, wrapped up in a little skin, and likewise
hung about the neck, is very good to make the Teeth of children come forth;
which effect others believe to be due to the great teeth of Vipers. If we had
experimented it, we could then speak with more certainty. The remedies are
easily practicable, and withal harmless; wherefore those who need them may make
trial of them.

Some also have affirmed, that the Liver of a Viper, swallowed, keeps one from
being bitten either by this Animal, or by any other serpent, and that the
powder of Vipers has the same efficacy. But we must not rely upon their
report; we only believe, that the Liver swallowed is capable to heal the
biting of a Viper; like the heart, flesh, and other parts, of which we have
spoken; and that it may much facilitate the delivery of Women with child, as
does the Liver of Eeles.

The Skin of a Viper is not altogether destitute of virtue; for besides that it
is also, as they say, very good for the delivery of women, making a garter of
it about the right leg, it has a very singular virtue for all the distempers
of humane skin: And although all the other parts, eaten, may work the same
thing; yet, that we might have benefit from all, we have experimented, that the
Viper-skin does perfectly heal the inveterate mangie of Dogs, making them eat
it boiled or raw. It might also be said, that the specks in the Viper-skin seem
to signify the marks of the itch or mangy, or, if you will, of the leprosy,
which the scales of the skin represent yet better, and so tacitly express its
virtue.

Some have believed, that the Gall of a Viper applied, can heal its biting; but
we give no credit to it, no more than to the application of its bruised head.
But this we judge, that it is proper for the wound of the biting, only as it
is for all other wounds, and for ulcers themselves, having a great abstersive,
mundifying and cicatrizing virtue. It is also very good for the weaknesses of
Eyes, above all, for suffusions and films, being taken inwardly, or applied
outwardly; so far it is from doing them hurt.

The Fat of Vipers has very great virtues; for, besides that it is very good
in the dressing of the Viper-flesh (as has been said) it is able also, taking
a dram of it, to give great relief in Epidemical diseases, and to expel the
venom thereof. It is also very useful to facilitate the travel of women; and to
dissipate the swellings of the throat, anointing it outwardly therewith. It
also much relieves Gouty persons, and serves to resolve nodosities. It unswels
all hard and inveterate tumors, and even those that proceed from Venereal
diseases; and for this reason it is, that Jean de Vigo has used it in the
Plaster which bears his name. It is likewise very good for Burnings, pustuls,'
and all distempers of the skin; and lastly, it is very powerful against all the
illnesses of the Sinews, and of great virtue for the parts attackt by the
Palsy. We might also add many other virtues, adscribed by Authors to other
parts of the Viper; but we forbear, because we have not experimented them.

CHAPT. IV.
Of the Powder and Trochisques of Vipers.
SInce we do not always meet with persons, who, having need to make use of
Viper-flesh, are disposed to eat thereof; it is very necessary to have ready
such remedies, that be as well accommodated to the inclination of the Patient,
as fitted to remove the malady. The knowledge, which Physicians have bad of the
great Virtues of the Viper, joined to the difficulty, met with in the point of
pleasing Patients, has obliged them to search for diverse Preparations, in
which the Ancients did not well succeed; and if we would bind ourselves to
their way of preparing the Powder and the Trochisques, we should loose the
principal virtue of the Viper, and retain only the most useless. For, in the
opinion, which they entertained, that there remained always some venom in the
flesh of the Viper, if it were not freed therefrom by some preparation or
other; their practice was, to put the flesh of Vipers in some earthen pot, and
having luted it, to set it in a Bakeoven, after the Bread was drawn out, and to
leave it there, till this flesh was reduced to powder. In which preparation the
best of this flesh, which is the Volatile Salt, was certainly dissipated. They
also made several medicines with this powder, mixed among other medicaments
diverse ways; of which we need not to enlarge. We shall content ourselves, here
to set down a preparation of the Powder of Vipers, which shall be grounded on
Reason, and shall retain all the virtues of the Viper; easy also to prepare,
and very convenient for the Patient to use.

Take then toward the end of April, or in the beginning of May, such a
quantity of Vipers as you please, Males and Females, choosing big ones, and such
as are fat and vigorous, and using none of those Females, which are already big
with eggs; and then prepare those, you shall have thus chosen, as follows:
Without whipping and vexing them, cut off, with a pair of sizers, their heads
and tails, flea them, and empty them of all their entrals, of which you are to
separate the heart and the Liver; and lay aside their fat for its peculiar
uses. Wash the trunks of the bodies, the hearts and livers in clear water, and
after that in white wine; then dry them with a very clean linen cloth, and
having put the hearts and livers again into their trunks, tie all the trunks
with small pack-thred, each at one end, and hang them up in the air in the
shade, and leave them there, till they be well dried; which will be in three or
four days. After that, cut these trunks into small pieces, and stamp them in a
great Brass-mortar with an iron-pestle, and searce all through a very fine
hairsive, and so keep it for use. This is the right Powder of Vipers, which
contains all the virtues; to which may be added a drop of Cinamon-oyle, to give
it a good scent.

There are some, who, to make this powder would have the trunks of Vipers cut
in pieces, and put together with their hearts and livers in a Glass-cucurbit,
and this covered with its head and luted, and so placed with a recipient, in a
very gentle Balneum; thereby, continuing that warmth for three days together,
to draw the phlegm of Vipers, accompanied with a small portion of the Volatile
Salt, and to keep this liquor apart; and then to take out of the Cucurbite what
shall remain there, and of it to make the powder of Vipers.

But, besides that this method is troublesome enough; that the fire of a
Balneum is not sufficiently strong to send forth enough of the Volatile Salt,
at a time when it is not yet loosened from its subject; that it is
notwithstanding too much so, not to emit insensibly some small portion, which
would afterward be wanting in the Powder, and which also may exhale out of the
water; besides also that the Vipers are in danger to be too much dried in the
Cucurbite, and even to be there roasted in part: We esteem, there is cause to
prefer our Preparation to this, in regard it is much easier, and, without any
destruction or alteration of the good parts of Vipers, carries away all their
superfluous and useless humidity.

You might notwithstanding follow this way in part, if you should desire to
have good Viper-water; but then you must increase the fire of the Balneum, and
finish the distillation in much less time, and yet take heed not to hasten the
fire too much at the latter end, least the water smell of the Empyreuma or
burning. You must also, after you have taken out the parts of the Viper, that
rest in the Cucurbite, put them into a glass-retort well luted, and set this
into a reverberating furnace, dapt and exactly lute to it a great Recipient,
and give it a fire increased by degrees, and hotter about the end, to obtain
the Volatile Spirit, Salt, and Oil, that could not rise by the fire of the
Balneum; which are to be separated and rectifyed, as we shall say hereafter.
Then take a portion of this Volatile Salt well rectified, and dissolve it in
distilled water, and keep it carefully in a well stopped bottle, as an
excellent remedy; of which you may increase or diminish the dose, according to
persons and occasions; and according as you shall have dissolved more or less
of the Volatile Salt in it.

Upon this occasion, I thought fit to advertise those, who distill Capons,
Partridges, slices of Veal, or other parts of Animals, in a Glass-limbec (as
the custom is,) and who employ for that purpose the fire of a Balneum, or that
of Sand or Ashes; that by a moderate fire they cannot make rise almost any
thing but useless phlegm; and that, not being able to increase the fire without
making the distilled water smell of the Empyreuma, they would succeed better,
if in this they did, what I was just now saying of the water and volatile Salt
of Vipers; and if they joined their water with the volatile Salt of the
distilled Animals, in which resides the chief virtue. Those, that have no mind
to take so much pains, shall do better not to give distilled waters to their
Patients, as the custom is, since they have no virtue at all, if none be
communicated to them by the volatile Salt of the Animal,

As to the Trochisques, the Ancients have as ill invented, and as ill ordered
them* as the Powder. For, not to stay to blame here (as I have done elsewhere)
the whipping, which they used, and which was not only useless, but also very
noxious; I shall say in a few words, that the decoction, they made of the body
of the Viper in Water, with Salt and Anise, till the flesh would sever from the
bones, which they afterward cast away as well as the broth, was not a
Preparation of the flesh of the Viper, but rather a destruction, since it was
made to leave its principal virtue in the broth; and that they weakened it yet
more, by incorporating it with very dry bread, of which the proportion of a
fifth to four times as much weight of flesh, though but little in appearance,
came yet to a moiety, since that four ounces of this flesh, and one ounce of
bread (which was so dry that it could not be lessened) make only two ounces of
Trochisques, when they are well dried. This we have more at large examined in
our Treatise of the Theriaque; and because their fault is very easily
understood, I shall insist on it no farther; nor on their reasons for making
use of Boiling to correct a malignity in the flesh, (of which there is none)
and to be able to sever it from the bones, which they believe naught, or at
least unusefull, which yet are very good; forasmuch as all their reasons are
sufficiently refuted in the same Book, and because they are yet more so, by
what we have established in this.

And although it be not always necessary to make Trochisques of Vipers, since
we might be without them; yet there being some use of them, and to preserve
their name, you may take a little Gumm Arabique, very white and pure, and
reduce it to powder, and infuse it in good Malvasy, till it be well dissolved,
and the wine somewhat tinged thereof: then take of the powder of Viper,
prepared as we have lately directed, and incorporate it with a sufficient
quantity of this gumm'd Malvasy, braying them together in a Marblemortar with a
woodden-pestle, and so reduce the whole into a somewhat solid paste; whereof
make Trochisques, of the size and shape you please, and dry them in the shade
upon a hair-sive.

I said, that we might be without Trochisques, because that having the Powder,
which they are made of, that may suffice for our uses; but there is one
inconveniency in the Powder, in that it will scarce keep any considerable time,
espeally if it be not well stopped up, and if, besides; some art be not used to
hinder the breeding of worms in it: Whereas Trochisques, being made complete by
the addition of Malvasy, and by the close compression of the parts of the
Powder, they are not so easily penetrated by the Air, nor so subject to
corruption. The Trochisques being dry, they may be slightly rubbed over with a
little Balsom of Peru, which will give them a good scent, and help to preserve
them.

The Use both of the Powder and Trochisques is excellent and alike; but the
Trochisques are to be reduced into powder, when they are to be used. Neither of
them have an ill taste, and they contain all the virtues, we have ascribed to
the Flesh of Vipers, as having lost nothing in drying, made without the heat of
the Sunbeams, but a superfluous moisture, which could serve for nothing but
corrupt them, if it had remained. They may be given in cordial waters, broths,
wine, or some fit decoction, or you may make Bolus's of them with Syrrups,
Conserves, or Cordial Confections, or turn them into tablets with sugar.

Their main effect is, to purify, open, penetrate, and to drive to the
extremities of bodies all venom, corruptions, impurities, superfluities, and
they may be very beneficially used in many occasions for diverse maladies,
without the fear of any ill success. For both have this quality, that they do
always some good, but never any harm. Their dose is from a Scruple to a dram
or two; and they may be given to all ages, and sexes, and at all times.

CHAPT. V.
Of the Salt of Vipers made by the Ancients.
AMong many different Preparations of the Salt of Vipers, made by the Ancients,
of which we find the descriptions in their Books, there is none more famous,
nor that has been longer in use, than one that is very ample and much enriched
by many Alexiterial remedies; whence it is also, that they gave to this Salt the
name of Theriacal. But having considered this pompous Preparation, we do not
wonder, that a much esteemed Author has not given it his approbation, since we
cannot find any thing in it, that is according to rule or reason, no more than
there is in the rest. We find, that the sentiments of that Author proceed from
an understanding so judicious, and so knowing, that we cannot but subscribe to
them, almost in all: For, in the Calcination, they used, there remained nothing
but the fixed Salt, which contains but very little virtue; Vipers, as all sorts
of Animals, having but little of Fixed Salt, whereas they have much of the
Volatile, which soon rises in the Calcination, and carries away with it the
principal and the most essential virtue of the Animal. They were also much
mistaken, when they thought, that four Vipers, which they burned with forty
pounds of Sea Salt, or Sal Gemmae, or Sal Ammoniac, (as some would have it) and
with a great quantity of Simples, should communicate great virtues to these
Salts and these Coals. For in the Calcination, which they used to make in an
earthen pot luted, with its cover on, and yet in one place pierced, the Volatile
Salt of the four Vipers would certainly fly quickly away; and if it had stayed
(which yet we do not grant) and there had been half an ounce of it (which is a
quantity beyond what the four greatest Vipers could yield,) what, I pray, would
that be to 40. pounds of Sea Salt, and to many pounds of Coals, more than a
small rivolet mingled with the Ocean? But as to the fixed Salt, four Vipers are
not able to afford half a Scruple of it.

It Is also certain, that both the Sea Salt and Sal gemme, do not perish in the
Calcination, but still remain there. But if ordinary Salt Ammoniac be employed,
the Urinous and Volatile part, which is in that Salt, will not fail to make its
escape, as well as the Volatile Salt of Vipers, and there will only remain the
fixed Saline part of the Salt Ammoniac, mix't with some terrestrial parts; which
is that, we find in the Distillation, after we have driven out all the
Volatile Salt, of which afterward, changing the vessel and the fire, we draw
an acid spirit, very much approaching to that, we draw out of Sea Salt, by
ways almost like these.

Artists know also, that Herbs, Wood, Horns, Bones, and other such like
matters, if they should be calcined in an earthen pot, luted and covered,
though a hole were left in the cover, would always be afterward found in the
form of very black coals, although they had endured a great fire; and that the
Salt cannot be separated from them, unless they be calcined again in an open
vessel; or they being reduced to ashes, the Salt be then severed from them by a
Lixivium, and by Filtration.

On which occasion we relate an Example of an imperfect Calcination, which is
naturally made in the Earth about the Summer-Solstice, of the end of the root
of many Plants, and among others, of Mugwort and Plantatin; on which end, the
subterraneous Fire, or, if you will, the Fire of the Sun, working, and yet
being surrounded by the Earth, (which is to the root what the earthen pot,
luted, is to the Vipers, and to the Mixts, that were shut up with them) burns
it and reduces it to coals, but cannot turn it to ashes. I have often found
this to be true, and lighted upon a little coal at the end of the root of those
Plants, at the time abovementioned.

So that, although the Fixed Salt of the added be Simples in the Coals, yet it
would have been more proper, and more methodical, to have quite calcined those
coals to reduce them to ashes, and so to draw from them and to purify the Salt
for use, than to make people swallow the gross, earthy, and useless part of
these coals.

Those Ancients added to this pretended Salt calcined, the powder of many
Alexiterial Druggs, which not being divested of their virtue by any
calcination, may communicate, and even alone furnish the greatest part of the
good qualities, by them ascribed to this Salt. And it is upon the account of
these principally, that the name of Theriacal may belong to it, which
impertinently would be attributed to the Vipers, since they have lost their
prime virtue in the Calcination.

This Preparation of Theriacal Salt does sufficiently show us, that the
Ancients did not take pains to know the inward parts, of which mix't bodies are
compounded, and that they did not well know the nature of the poison of Vipers,
of which they imagined they should be infected by the fumes proceeding from
their Calcination; although none could come from them, when there was none, as
we have made appear. And although the smell, as well of the Vipers, as of the
Simples, were troublesome, whilst they burned, yet they were not therefore at
all venomous.

The little knowledge, which the Ancients had, and many Moderns still have, of
the nature of the two Salts in Vipers, has led them into a great fault, viz.
to calcine the bones of Vipers, to draw from thence, as they thought, the true
Salt of Vipers, which they were not at all like to find, after they had
dissipated it by Calcination. The first fault has drawn after it a second; for
the small quantity of fixed Salt, they found in them, not much satisfying them,
carried those, that had no great sense of honor or conscience, to a very great
abuse, which was, to mix among those calcined bones a great quantity of
Sea Salt, to dissolve this Salt, and and to boil all together in water, to
filter and coagulate it, and to sell at a great rate this Counterfeit salt for
true Salt of Vipers.

But, to accommodate ourselves to those, who, intending better, will make no
ill use of it; and to furnish them with a pleasing Salt for those, that may
desire it for ordinary use; we shall here deliver the way of preparing a Salt
of Viper, that shall have much virtue; the method of which shall be very easy,
and the use very convenient.

Take three dozen of great Vipers, well chosen; cut off their heads and tails,
flea them, and empty the bodies of all their entrals, and wash them well,
together with the Heart and Liver: Boil all together in ten pints of common
water, so long till all be perfectly boiled. Then strain it, and squeese well
all the parts; and in this decoction dissolve four pounds of Sea Salt; and
carefully filter it; afterward, coagulate, or, if you will, chrystallize this
Salt, which will be found white and abounding with the virtue of the Vipers,
and of no ill taste at all; which you may use in all things as common Salt.

And to show, that these boiled and squeesed parts have left much of their
virtue in the Decoction, and yet that they have not left all, and that still
there remains some of it, principally in the Bones; lay them abroad, and dry
them, and then distill them, and you will draw from them, especially from the
Bones, a Volatile Salt and oil, but in much less quantity, then if they had not
been boyld.

If you would have a Viper-Salt of more virtue, and that might even be called
Theriacal, you must proceed after the same manner, as has been lately set
down; but in stead of Seal-Salt, take a like quantity of Salt, drawn from
Alexiterial and Theriacal Plants, as the roots of Valerian, Imperatoria,
Angelica, Leaves of Scordium, the little Centaurium, Carduus Benedictus, and
the like. It Is true, that this Salt is a little more displeasing to the taste
than the former, but it may produce more considerable effects, and be used in
extraordinary occasions.

These sorts of Salt have indeed good virtue, and are convenient for lasting,
especially the two first: But the Volatile Salt has something more particular,
and considerably better: the properties of it are innumerable, and it is an
Epitome of the excellent qualities, contained in Vipers. We shall now speak of
its Preparation, as also of the Phlegm, of what is called volatile Spirit and
Oil, which accompany it; and of the Fixed Salt, which remains after
distillation, mixed among the terrestrial parts; and that done, we shall treat
of their virtues and usefulness.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Volatile Salt of Vipers, and the Fixed Salt, and other parts, which are
separated by Distillation.
WE make here public our Preparation of the Volatile Salt of Vipers, with the
more frankness and cheerfulness, because we esteem it one of the best Medicines
in Physic. It Is true indeed, that some Authors have already spoken of it; but
there is none, that has described it with more exactness, than we, nor that
has more desired, that every one might, according to this Method, obtain for
himself and his occasions a remedy, which goes beyond many others, to say no
more. We hope, that our way of proceeding will be well received by all, and
that, if there be any that shall find fault with it, they will be such only,
who are unwilling to communicate what they have, and often wrap it up under the
name of Secrets.

Take only the Bodies, Hearts and Livers of Vipers, or, (to have the more
benefit of all) add to them the Heads, Tails, and skins, and generally all the
parts of a Viper; of which you will have a care to take away all the Excrements
and Worms, as also the Eggs, that may be in the Matrix of the Females. Small
and great, Males and Females are of the same goodness, as also the Salt is,
that shall have been drawn from all the parts of the Body. Dry in the shade all
these parts separately, then cut them into bits, and fill with them your
Glass-limbec up to the neck, which is to be well luted. Put it in the midst of
a Reverberating furnace, proportioned to its bigness, cover it with its head,
and shut the Register of it; Fit to the Limbec a Glass-recipient, which must be
very large; and lute well all the joints. Then begin to give a small fire,
which continue for about two hours, so that the Limbec be heated gradually, and
the Phlegm begin to distill into the Recipient. Afterward increase the fire
gently unto a second degree; and give a little opening at the Register, and
continue the same fire likewise two hours; then increase it, opening the
Register yet more, and so continue two other hours; at the end of which you are
to give it the fire of the last degree, quite opening the Register, and you
must continue to drive the fire, till no more come out of the Limbec, and the
Recipient be all obscured by the Volatile Salt, which will stick to its sides,
toward the bottom, and to the upper part. Then let the vessels cool, and the
Furnace also; after which you are to un-lute the Recipient, wherein you will
find the Phlegm, that part which is called Spirit, the Volatile Salt, and the
Oil mingled together; except a part of the Volatile Salt, that may yet adhere
to the upper part, and to the sides of the Recipient, which you may dexterously
take away, and, if you will, keep for use, as it is. This Volatile Salt, Spirit,
and Oil, are so penetrating, that you are not able to hold your nose over it.

Power out, what you find in the Recipient, into a Gloss-Body, which must be
large, tall, broad below, and whose figure goes up straightning toward the
orifice; to which you must adapt a Glass-head, that is to have somewhat a high
body, and large, and a very straight mouth, and proportioned to that of the
Glass-body. Lute the joints exactly with paper and starch; put the Body in a
Sand-bath, and sink it down as low as the matter reaches; fit a small
Recipient to the beak of the Head, and lute that also: kindle under it a very
gentle fire, and order it so, that the Sand and the Glass-body may be heated
gently; after which you may increase it a little, but only so as to make it
strong enough to drive up the Volatile Salt; which, being dis-engag'd from the
parts of the Vipers bodies, rises easily. It will be sublimed, and stick every
where to the inside of the Head, like a Chrystallized Snow. There will arise at
the same time a little of the Spirit, which is properly nothing but a portion
of the Volatile Salt, having carried up with it a little of the Phlegm, that
will run into the little Recipient, and of which even a part will congeal into
Chrystals. You must always be careful in managing the Fire; for how little
soever you increase it, the Phlegm will rise with some of the Oil, and they
will dissolve and hide the Salt; and then you must recommence the
Rectification; but governing the fire well, when you shall see the Head well
lined with Salt, which will be very white and very Chrystalline, you must then
un-lute it, and take it off, and lute on an other head, instead of the former.
You are to take out the Salt, as soon and as well as you can; and to enclose it
in a strong bottle, with such a mouth, that the Salt may pass through it, and
which may be exactly closed, without which the Salt will easily fly away. Mean
time, you are to continue a like fire under the Glass-body, and when no more of
that Volatile rises, you are to desist, and to take out of the head the Salt
there gathered, and keep it as the former. Your Sand being cold, take off the
Glass-body, and decant from it the remainder through a great Glass-funnel,
covered with paper for filtration, held over some vessel. All the Phlegm will
pass thorough the Paper; but you will find some Oil there, that cannot pass,
which you may make run through the Funnel into a bottle, having pierced the
paper with some convenient instrument.

Those that shall desire a high and much more perfect Rectification of this
Volatile Salt, may make it in manner following. Take two pounds of Ivory
calcined to whiteness, and reduced to a fine powder; which is to be mixed with
four ounces of this Salt. Then put all into a new Glass-Body, of the same shape
with the former. To this let there be adapted and luted a blind Head, or such
an one, the extremity of whose beak is well stopped (for that is useless for
this purpose, there being no phlegm; and if there were, the calcined Ivory
being a dry Body, and in part spungy, would lick and retain it, as it would
also the Oily part, that might happen to be among the Volatile Salt:) let there
be given to this Glass-body a moderate Fire, with the same cautions as before;
the Salt will quickly rise, and stick to the Head; where, the Sublimation being
ended, you will find it in the form of Chrystals, white like snow; which you
are to put up and keep in a bottle exactly closed, to use it upon occasion.
This Salt thus rectified smells not of Fire, and has nothing but its own
natural strong and penetrating scent.

There may perhaps be found Artists, who will take it ill, that we have been so
large and so particular in exactly setting down all the things, that are to be
observed in preparing and rectifying this Salt. But it is not for them, that we
have done it, but for those, who not knowing it will be glad to learn it. We
have given them sincerely the true means used by ourselves; which they may also
practice in preparing and rectifying the Salts of the parts of all Animals.
Those that have any tincture of Chemistry, will here find enough to teach
themselves; as we have done, and do daily. Mean time they must not be offended,
that there remain with us upon this subject such things, which could not be
said, nor well comprehended but by those that have labored a great while in
this Art. Intelligent persons, that shall examine our proceeding, or have a
mind to experience the same, will find our ingenuousness, by finding the
success of all we have made them expect, together with the facility, we give,
of the Operation. They will also find, that our way of filling the Retort as
far as the neck, is more proper than that of leaving a third part empty, as
some would have it, in the Distillation of the Bones, Horns, and other dry
parts of Animals; although those, that understand it, practice it not but in
matters that will melt, and may break the Retort, or let something run out by
the beak, when it is filled too high. But in dry substances, as are our Vipers,
and the Horns, and Bones of Animals, Crabseyes, Stones, and the like, it is
enough to leave this neck empty, to give vent to the parts raised from the
matter, and that are to go into the Recipient. They will also acknowledge, that
our way to leave the Oil among the other substances, when we will sever them by
subliming and rectifying them, is not without reason, in regard that the Oil
has commonly with it much Volatile Salt, which leaves it, and afterward rises
in the Rectification.

We esteem also, that this Preparation will be preferred before many others,
that are operose and have little method in them; and, among others, before the
Rectification, which some pretend to make by the addition of Spirit of Salt to
the Phlegm, and to that which is called Spirit, and to the Volatile Salt: which
instead of rectifying this Salt, and of making it purer and better, changes its
nature; and instead of subliming it to the Head and the top of the Body (as
they have pretended it did, after the Phlegm was risen,) the Spirit of Salt
rises it self in its first form, in its smell, color and taste, leaving at
the bottom the Salt, which is there found like fixed, having the taste and the
other qualities of the Spirit of Salt, but being lessened of two thirds of its
weight. That kind of men have filled Books with many Preparations they
understand not, nor have experimented: For, forgetting, among other things, in
the process of this, such methods as are absolutely necessary, and without
which they do nothing, they promise impossible successes, and putting the Cart
before the Horses, they fix the Salt when they pretend to sublime it, and so
very unadvisedly prostitute themselves to shame and confusion. For, instead of
rectifying first the Volatile Salt (as more intelligent men might have taught
them, of whom they had borrowed this Preparation) and of subliming it, and of
separating it by this means from other parts; they laboring to disguise the
Process, have retrenched the main and most necessary part of it, and employed
at the very first that method, which they should have observed to fix it,
believing that that would sublime it; not considering, that having by that
means inverted nature, the success would prove answerable to it. I set a side
their unwarrantable practice of adding a pound of lukewarm water among the
substances found in the Recipient, after the first distillation, since it is an
Augmentation, not only useless, but troublesome, of that Phlegm, which must
needs be separated.

Now, although one part of this Salt, remaining in the Body of the Limbec, may
yet afterward become Volatile, by mixing it with some Lixiviat Salt, and making
it to sublime; yet that is not done but with a new and very great loss of its
weight; nor is the taste of it better than of that, which shall have been well
rectified according to the method, we have before described; since the Lixiviat
Salts, by reviving it in part, give it as displeasing a smell as the former. We
may further add here, that the use of tall and strait-neck't Bodies is much
more proper for this Rectification, than the use of Matrasses with long necks,
myself having experimented, that the Phlegm falls back again more easily, and
that the Volatile Salt rises purer in the Bodies of our fashion; of which the
Figure may be seen on the Title page, where also is that of the Retort and the
Recipient, for the first Distillation.

Now although the same men, that have given us cause to reprehend them, have
affirmed contrary to truth, that there is no fixed Salt in the parts of
Animals: To prove that there is, and to benefit by that of the Viper; Take what
shall remain in the Retort, commonly called the Caput Mortuum, which you will
find of the form and color of Coals; calcine it in a Furnace, or, to save
expenses, in a Potters Oven, till all become white and of the form of Chalk,
pulverize it well, and make it boil in a competent quantity of water, that may
receive and dissolve the Salt; filter it, and make it euaporate and consume.
You Will find at the bottom a coagulated Salt; though in a small quantity, and
such an one, as that of five pounds of Viper-bones well calcined, we have
obtained no more than three ounces of fixed Salt. This Salt has a very sharp
and poynant taste; it is Lixiviat, and approaching enough in diverse regards to
the fixed Salt of Tartar. You Will find on the Filter the Terrestrial part,
stripped of all its virtue; which then may justly be called Caput Mortuum. And
thus you will have the Phlegm, that which is called Spirit, the Volatile Salt, the
Oil, the Fixed Salt, and the Earth; into which all the parts of the Viper have
been reduced in their separation.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Fixation of the Volatile Salt of Vipers.
ALthough the Volatile Salt of Vipers have in it, to speak truth, nothing
offensive, but its strong and piercing Smell, and that those, who shall take
into their mouth the weight of a good number of grains, cannot receive from it
any other trouble but that of this Sent, which yet soon passes away, this Salt
leaving afterward a saline and very agreeable taste; yet notwithstanding many
persons, offended with the piercing odor, which is first perceived in this
Salt, and besides dissatisfied with its easy Avolation, unless it be extremely
well closed, have endeavored to fix it, and so to free it from this smell, not
considering that this smell cannot be altogether separated from this Salt, but
its virtue must be so too, and that the fixation changes its nature: And
instead of contenting themselves to rectify it well, thereby to carry away, as
much as may be, the adventitious smell, which it may have acquired by the
violence of the fire by the first distillation, they have sometimes altogether
destroyed it, and have dealt with it, as if one would deprive Musc and
Amber-gris of their good sent, and Coloquintida of its bitterness; and many
compounds of their operations, which would not be what they are, if you should
robb them of the least of those parts that compose them.

We say therefore, that after the Rectification of this Volatile Salt, (such an
one as we shall set down beneath,) the best and surest preparation would be, to
do nothing else to it, but to make it to be used in that condition, only mixing
with it things accomodated to the Patients taste, or with such other remedies,
as do not change its nature, nor make it loose any thing of its force or virtue.

If the Fixed Salt of Vipers were capable to arrest and retain the Volatile,
there were then nothing to be said against this fixation, because having been
both formed jointly and in the same body, they have no aversion to, but rather
are able to help one another; But this common origin, and this friendship which
they have contracted, whilst they lived together in one and the same subject,
hinders them from destroying one another, and makes, that what is Fix can nor
will change the nature of the Volatile. And indeed, although you mix them
together, and that the quantity of the Fix be five or six times greater than
that of the Volatile, and that they may also lodge with one another; yet they
both equally keep their nature and virtue, and they may be separated by fire,
and manifest at all times their several and distinct virtues. But this hinders
not the taking one Salt among the other, nor that the Fix should not then
borrow somewhat of the subtilty of the Volatile, the better to penetrate the
Entrals and Vessels, to open the more vigorously the obstructions, and to expel
the impurities, it meets with, by siege or urine; and that, on the contrary,
the Volatile Salt, helped by the Fixed Salt, should not carry away and drive out
through the pores of the skin or other ways, the more gross and more viscous
parts of the humors, that perhaps might have escaped its quick and subtle
operation: For which uses, both Salts may be mixed together upon occasion,
without undertaking an impossible fixation.

But especially, the fixing of this Volatile Salt by Quicklime cannot pass with
all Artists but for an operation altogether destructive to it; and it is that,
which is most of all to be avoided, because not only it carries away the smell,
taste, and virtues of this Salt, but quite changes its nature, and converts it
into its own, by petrifying the same.

The Fixation of this Volatile Salt, by the Spirit of Salt, although it seem to
destroy it and change its nature, in that it carries away the smell and taste of
the Volatile Salt, may notwithstanding be admitted rather than the other, in
regard that the Spirit of Salt, by preserving the virtue it has to open all
the obstructions of the inward parts, working upon the Volatile Salt, may
appropriate to it self something of its virtue, especially that which is able
to second its action, and to expel together with it, by urine or other ways,
the most tenacious and most stubborn humors. Those that would expel the humors
by these ways, may usefully prepare it after this manner.

Mix four ounces of the Volatile Salt of Vipers, well rectifyed, with four
ounces of Water; put them into a Glass-Cucurbite Somewhat high, of a narrow
mouth, broad and flat toward the bottom, holding about two pints. Fit to its
mouth a Glass-funnel, the end of whose pipe is very narrow: Lute the funnel
quite round about the orifice of the Cucurbite, so that there may be no other
aperture but that of the end of the funnel. Then power, little by little, and
drop-wise, some Spirit of Salt well rectified upon the Volatile Salt. At first
there will be a conflict betwixt them, which will cause an ebullition, but that
of a short duration. Continue to power upon it of the same Spirit of Salt,
gently and leisurely, according as you find the ebullition cease, and by
intervals stir also the Cucurbite; and repeat this so often, that at last there
appear no motion any more, and the Spirit of Salt have as 'twere mortified and
fixed the Volatile Salt. Then place the Cucurbite in some receptacle furnished
with Sand; fit to it a head, lute it (though at the beginning that be not
necessary) and by a slow fire draw away all the moisture of the Spirit of Salt,
and of the Volatile Salt, which will rise almost insipid. Continue the fire
still, and when you shall perceive a taste of the Spirit of Salt in what shall
be distilled, change the Recipient, increase a little the fire, and drive it
(yet without too much violence,) until there distill no more, and that the Salt
remain at the bottom of the Cucurbite altogether dry and of a gray color.
You Will find in the Recipient a Spirit of Salt of the same taste, of the same
color, and of the same force it had when it was powered upon the Volatile Salt;
but you shall not find any part of the Volatile Salt risen to the head, nor to
the top of the Cucurbit, as some have given out it does, without having
experimented it, as we have done. The gray Salt, found at the bottom, is but in
a small quantity, being lessened almost of two thirds: It Is taste is very sharp,
biting, and much differing from what it had before it was fixed, and as 'twere
mortified by the Spirit of Salt. After this you may dissolve this Salt in
water, filter it, and make it evaporate, and letting it cool, you will find at the
bottom a small quantity of Salt coagulated in the form of Chrystals. Power out by
inclination the water swimming on the top, to have the Salt by itself, which
you may dry in the Air, or the Sun, or over a little fire. You may also make
good use of the Salt that shall have remained in the water that swam a top, by
making it evaporate in part, Chrystallizing and drying it, as the former. You
might, if you pleased, very well omit luting the Funnel upon the Cucurbit, when
you will power the Spirit of Salt upon the Volatile Salt; forasmuch as we have
found by experiment, that in the operation of the Spirit of Salt upon the
Volatile Salt, there rises nothing but phlegm, that has neither virtue nor
smell; although the same persons, that have erred in many things in the
rectification of the Volatile Salt, have feared they should loose therein a
Volatile Spirit, which was only in their imagination: And the luting, which we
have advised, was only to prevent peoples belief, that a part of the Volatile
Salt might have escaped that way.

But although this Volatile Salt appear fixed, and remain as such at the bottom
of the Cucurbit, after distillation, yet there is a part, which retakes its
former nature, and becoms Volatile again, if it be mixed with Salt of Tartar, or
with some other Lixiviate Salt, putting them together in a subliming vessel.
For these Lixiviate Salts, being of a nature contrary to acid Salts and
Spirits, do mortify them and retain them to themselves, and let go the Volatile
Salts, which the acid spirits had, as 'twere, mortified and fixed, and all that
was Volatile in this seemingly fixed Salt, rises in a white form, and has
almost the same taste and the same other qualities of the Volatile Salts well
rectified. Yet you will also find there a great diminution of its weight, so
that it will be more advantageous to keep it in the condition, it was in before
this last sublimation; the greatest advantage of which is, to come to know,
that the fixation, that has been made by the Spirit of Salt, although it have
as 'twere changed the nature of the Volatile Salt, and hid its diaphoretique
quality under that of the diuretique, yet has not quite destroyed it, since
there is some part, that can retake its pristine form and virtue.

This Salt thus fixed possesses the virtues of a Spirit of Salt concentred,
but they are found augmented by those, it has borrowed from the Volatile Salt.
Those, who would only carry away, by urine or siege, the superfluous humors of
the body, may usefully prepare and employ it; but those, that shall use the
Volatile Salt well rectified, without changing its nature, nor diverting its
action by any fixation, will find therein such effects, as will be
incomparably more apparent and more sensible, and will not waste of it so much.

CHAPT. VIII.
Of the Virtues of the Volatile Salt of Vipers, and of what the other parts,
separated by Distilla on, may perform.
THE Volatile Salt of Vipers is to be considered, as a Sun, as well among the
parts, that rise by distillation, as among those that rest in the Retort; there
being none among those that are come over, but have borrowed from it almost all
the virtue it can have; nor any of those that have stayed, but have need of it,
or are useless without it. The Phlegm that rises first, carries always some
part with it, without which it would produce no effect. That which is called
Spirit, is nothing else, to speak aright, but a Volatile Salt, which in the
distillation has been followed by a little Phlegm dissolving it, and giving it
the form of a Spirit: which may be showed by the Rectification, wherein that
saline volatile part is separated, raised, and coagulated into a white and
chrystalline form, and leaves at the botom of the cucurbite the moisture that
had changed its nature, and is nothing else but phlegm. We say, on this
occasion, the same thing of what many Authors improperly call the Volatile
Spirit of an humane skull, of Hartshorn, and of other parts of Animals, they
being nothing else but Volatile Salts mixed with phlegm, which they afterward
quit, when they are rectified. The Oil also would have but very little virtue,
if it borrowed no Volatile salt, and if it retained not in it a good part
thereof, as may be observed in the Rectification: for, if the Oil were
measured, or weighed, before it is put among the rest into the cucurbite for
rectification, and if it were weighed again after that all the Volatile Salt is
risen, it would be found much diminished in quantity, and in strength also,
because most of the Volatile Salt, which had joined it self to it, has been
carried away by the rectification. So those, that separate the Oil from the
other parts to rectify them, and who use it not but for wounds or ulcers, and
to take away superfluities, do doubtless not know it aright; for it is also
endowed with other virtues more considerable; of which we shall speak in this
Chapter. The Fixed Salt, which rests in the Retort, mix't among the terrestrial
part, although it is to be put in the rank of Lixiviat Salts, and possesses
few other qualities, but those of Salt of Tartar, yet retains something of the
nature of the Volatile salt. And those, that have considered this Salt as a
Caustic, have had good success with it, without knowing its nature, seeing they
imputed it to the malign parts, which they believed to be in Vipers, whereas
they should have ascribed it to the nature of Lixiviate salts. But this Salt
being taken at the mouth, will be much more effectual, if you mingle some
Volatile Salt with it; this Caustique faculty not hindering but that it may be
taken safely and beneficially in appropriated liquors, as many other lixiviate
Salts are.

The Terrestrial part has nothing in it, that deserves to be considered, and
it may justly be called Terra mortua, Dead earth, after it is freed from its
fixed Salt. So that all the parts, that rise by distillation, as well as those
that cannot rise, are of small force, or altogether useless, without the
Volatile Salt. It is therefore upon good reason, that we attribute to it the
principal virtues, which a Viper can furnish.

The similitude of substance, which the Volatile Salt of Viper has with the
spirituous parts of our Body, conjoined to its subtle and piercing quality,
makes, that accommodating itself to their condition, and finding all liberty
in its actions, it produces all the effects, it is capable of, and penetrateth
without any opposition into the most secret and the most remote parts of the
Body. It has this peculiar, that thought it act as a Soverain, and find
nothing of resistance to its dominion, yet it exercises it not as a
Conqueror, nor as a Destroyer, but rather as a Restorer of the places and
parts, where it passes; and although all its courses be extraordinary (...)
precipitate, yet they are so well (...) and so well directed, that no part
(...)ody misseth them, and that none of (...) is unuseful, but rather very
beneficial to all the places, where it passes.

Now since the flesh, the heart, the liver, and the other parts of the Viper,
taken as an Aliment, or as a Medicine, may serve for the cure of many maladies,
and produce very considerable effects; it is not at all tobe doubted, but that
this Salt, which is the most subtle and the most potent of them all, is
something more sublime and more efficacious. And we are assured, that if it
were well known to us, it would pass for an almost Universal medicine; men
would be careful of preparing it, and we should see it often prescribed by
Physicians, and find it succeed in innumerable obstinate diseases, that are but
seldom and difficultly cured.

To Judge well of the Effects, which this Volatile Salt can produce in our
Bodies, we must know its manner of operation, which is, to open, to comminute,
to attenuate, to pierce, and to drive to the extreme parts of the Body, and
through the pores of the skin, all the impurities, and all the strange bodies,
that can get out by those ways. Further, it is an enemy to all corruption,
very friendly and very agreeable to our nature, which it assists and fortifies,
enabling it to expel, not only by the pores of the skin, but also by siege
and urine, and by all the Emunctories of the Body, the superfluous humors,
which molest it: Whence it comes to pass, that it produces admirable effects
upon a thousand occasions, curing a great number of sicknesses, or at least
giving great relief therein, even in those, that are most refractory, and most
difficult to cure; such as are Apoplexies, Lethargies, Convulsions, Palsies,
and many other maladies, believed to have their source in the Brain. It is also
a great relief to the Distempers of the Breast, as Swoundings, Palpitations of
the Heart, Difficulties of Breathing, and Pleurisies. Besides it particularly
unstops the Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, Mesentery, and other parts of
the lower Belly. It dissipates all inward impostumes, in their rise, and
dislodgeth secret and unknown pains, which have their origin in the Spirits. It
helps digestion, the purification of the mass of the blood, and its
distribution to all the parts of the Body, and resolves and prevents
coagulations: And so being an Enemy to all corruption, it is very proper for
all sorts of Fevers, caused thereby; as for most intermittent Fevers, and
particularly Quartans. It also works powerfully in the distempers of the
Matrix; and is a remedy to all the vices of the skin, and to the Leprosy it
self: but above all, it is specifique against all Bitings and stingings of
venomous creatures, against all venoms and poisons, if they be not corrosive;
for in that case, recourse must presently be had to Vomitives and to Unctuous
things, after which it produces good effects. It has a particular virtue
against the Plague, against all Contagious diseases, and Epidemical ones, such
as are the Measels, Small Pox, and the like. In a word, the Inductions, we can
draw from the great number of Experiments, we have seen of it, at different
times, oblige us to affirm, that its virtues goes beyond what can be expressed.
And those, that shall make reflection on what we have said of it, will be able
to apply and use it beneficially to many other sicknesses, which to enumerate
would be too prolix and too tedious.

In the mean time, we cannot forbear to relate here a very remarkable
Experiment, made upon a Gentleman, who suffered about a month since, a violent
and continual pain, doubled and redoubled, at the right part of his front
pretty near the Temple: the end of a finger might cover the place of the pain;
there appeared no redness nor swelling, and there was perceived no hardness.
Yet the pain, though it was, as 'twere, fixed in a point, was communicated to
the other neighboring parts, so that the Gentleman could not chew, nor so much
as open his mouth to take down a little broth, but with extreme pain, though
hunger urged him. The Physicians, that saw him, had used several means to
relieve him, and, among the rest, Venae-sections in the arm and foot; they had
purged him often; they had employed frictions of his neck and shoulders; they
had applied to him Vesicatories, and Snailes, behind his ears: they had caused
his temporal artery to be opened, and drawn from him ten or twelve ounces of
arterial blood, and then cauterised the Aperture; they had also prescribed him
powerful Sudorifiques, which were continued many days morning and evening, and
had made him sweat very copiously; and the Patient himself, of his own accord,
being extremely pressed by the violence of the pains, caused one of his upper
teeth, which was very sound, to be pulled out, hoping thereby to give some vent
to them: But after he had used all these means in vain, one dose of the Volatile
Salt of Vipers, given in wine, removed presently all the pain, which caused as
great a wonder in the Assistants, as satisfaction in the Patient. This so
surprising effect, which demonstrateth better, than all reasons, the force and
efficacy of this Volatile Salt, may also conclude the discourse of its Virtues.

There remains now, that we say something of the virtues of the Oil, which
rises by Distillation with the Volatile Salt, of which it also retains a part.
Its strong sent is the cause, that it is not often employed; whence it comes,
that sometimes it is more advantageous to the Preparer, to profit by the
rectification of the Volatile Salt, which it has, than to keep it in its
condition for Patients that shall use it notwithstanding its strong smell and
ill taste. This smell is so intimately sticking to it, that there is no
rectification, able to remove it. But we make herewith known to all those, that
shall be able to comply with the use of it, that it is one of the best and most
efficacious outward remedies in all Physic, provided it be made use of, when
it is yet endued with its Volatile Salt: For it opens, attenuates, resolves, is
abstersive, and admirably cleansing; and we know, who have experimented it,
that the continued anointing with it, accompanied with the internal use of the
Volatile Salt, produces admirable effects in the parts laboring under the
Palsy, and deprived of motion, and even in those, that are dried for want of
the communication of Spirits and nourishment. A little Sponge imbibed with this
Oil, carried in a little box pierced, and often smelled to, is very good in the
time of the Plague, to keep off the ill Air, and to fortify the Brain, and the
noble parts. It is also good to make it to be smelled, to put of it in the
nostrils, and to anoint the Temples with it, in Epileptical Symptoms, and for
those, that are troubled with giddiness, and have their Brain charged with
vapors or phlegm; for it gives them vent, and dispels them powerfully. It has
also a considerable effect against the suffocations of the Matrix, and against
all sorts of worms; in which case, some drops of it may even be given at the
mouth, in wine, or broth; and the hollow of the stomach anointed therewith. It
visibly dissipitateth all outward contusions, and serves much for inward ones,
and especially for those of the Head. It resolves tumors and hardnesses,
giving issue by the pores to such matter, as can transpire, digosting the
gresser, and bringing them to a laudable suppuration. It is also abstersive and
cleanses all sorts of Ulcers, and heals all the distempers of the skin, even
the most stubborn, provided the internal cause thereof be removed. In all which
evils its effects are yet more quick and powerful, if it be enforced by the
internal use of the Volatile Salt, which, in a word, is that, which gives it its
main virtue.

We shall add, on this occasion, that the Ancients valued very much their Oil
of Vipers, which they prepared several ways, some by infusion, some by the
decoction of Vipers in Oil of Olives. If they had rightly proportioned the
quantity of Vipers with that of the Oil; if they had added thereto what
moisture was necessary; and if in this they had employed some good method, this
Oil might produce good effects, and we should approve of it, and refer our
Readers to it. But finding nothing regular in all the Preparations, by them
described, we thought good here to set down one, according to all the rules of
Art.

Take about the end of May, or the beginning of June, a dozen great Vipers
newly taken, cut each of them into seven or eight pieces, and put them into a
well glazed and strong earthen pot: power upon them three pounds of Oil of
Olives, and one pint of white wine; cover the pot well, and make it boil over a
gentle fire to the consumption of the moisture. Then strain all, squeeze out
the Vipers well, and keep the Oil for use. In the mean time, fear not (as the
Ancients did) the Vapors, that may issue out of the pot during the decoction;
for the Vipers, as we have said, have no poison in all their body. This Oil,
thus prepared, has not, it is true, all the strength and virtues of the
distilled Oil, of which we were speaking a little before; but it may very well
serve for an ointment in all the distempers of the skin, in contractions of
nerves, in rheumatismes, and in many other evils.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Manner of using the Volatile Salt.
ALthough it be impossible to specify in particular all the ways of Using the
Volatile Salt of Vipers, no more than one can well enumerate the sicknesses,
that may have need of it; Yet, in some degree to satisfy those that may desire
it we shall make here an Abridgment of a good part of what we have seen
practiced by Physicians, that perfectly know the qualities and proprieties of
this Salt, and use it daily to the great benefit of their Patients.

You must first know, that its piercing Taste hinders it from being given
alone, and that it must be mix't, now with some Aliment, as in broth, the yolk
of an egg, a roasted apple, a little jelley, etc. sometimes with Medicines, and
that innumerable ways, which partly depend from the humor and disposition of
the Patient, but chiefly from the wit, knowledge, and discretion of the
Physician. For this Salt calls for a Physician, that has sufficient ability to
know and measure its force and activity; that is intelligent and versed in all
Maladies, to be able beneficially to employ it in those that require it, that
knows to choose a favorable time and occasion; and to mix it pertinently and to
good purpose with such things, as may not change its nature nor divert its
operation, nor subvert the indication, he shall have taken. So that it is
necessary, to be equally assured of the genuine and methodical preparation of
the Salt; of the knowledge of its qualities and virtues; of the nature of the
distemper, of the condition, temper, and strength of the Patient; of the
fitness of its exhibition among aliments or appropriated medicaments, and of
the occasions and the time, in which it may be usefully employed. And when a
due regard has been had to all these circumstances, men will not fail to find
very good effects of it. But that those, who are not accustomed to make use of
it, may not unawares find in it effects contrary to the nature of this Salt,
we have thought ourselves obliged to advertise them, that they must above all
things avoid mixing them among Acids, and especially among Spirit of Salt,
Vitriol, Brimstone, and the like, which would fix it and destroy its operation.
To find therefore facility in its exhibition, it may be taken in distilled
waters, or ptisane, or such decoctions as are appropriated to the disease; as
also in Juleps, Emulsions, or Potions diversely composed. It may also be mix't
in Conserves, Extracts, Confections, and the like; as also in Lozenges and
Opiats, diversely made according to the nature of the distemper, and the
intention of the Physician; It is also mingled with Purgatives, Sudorifiques,
Aperitives and Diuretiques; and no less, with its own fixed Salt, and such
other Salts, as are not contrary to it. It is also given in Wine, and among
certain Mineral waters. It may be administered to both sexes, and to all ages,
at all times and hours, between meals according to the nature of the disease,
and the intention of the Doctor. It may be taken, if one will, several times in
a day, and even at night; and the use of it may be continued for a good while.

As to its dose, that is different, according to the occasion, age, temper and
humor of the Patient, and the nature of the distemper, and the reiteration
made of it: For, the dose is to be much less for those, who take it often in
one day, and continue the use of it, than for those, that take it but once in a
case of need. Sometimes it is esteemed sufficient to give 6. 8. 10. or 12.
grains of it; but on certain occasions we may give 20. or 25. grains, and
sometimes, half a drachme, and even a whole drachme. But discretion and skill
is to be used; without which, this Salt, as excellent as it is, may produce
effects quite contrary to what the Physician and the Patient might expect from
it.

CHAPT. X.
Diverse Remedies or Compositions, of which the Volatile Salt of Vipers is the
Base or Ground.
WE had not undertaken to describe the virtues, nor the Uses of the Volatile
Salt of Vipers, no more than of the Fixed Salt, and of the Oil that rises by
Distillation, if this our Book were only written for the skilful Physician, who
perfectly knows all, and especially the parts that may be drawn from the Viper.
But being desirous to do a good office to such persons, as have no knowledge
thereof, or that knowing it in part, have need to be directed, especially in
the exhibition of this Volatile Salt; we thought good to conclude this Book with
the Receipts of the chief Compositions of which this Volatile Salt may be the
Ground, which are not found in Books, and may produce Effects worthy of this
Salt.

And knowing, that there are many curious persons, who having a great esteem
for the Viper and its uses, make preparations thereof in private, following the
Receipts they find in Books, which sometimes are well, sometimes ill
prescribed, or ill executed; West all impart to them an Elixir of Vipers, that
shall be of great virtue, pleasant to the taste, of easy preparation, and of
long duration.

Take four douzen of Hearts and as many Livers of Vipers, dried in the shade,
and reduced to powder; two drachmes of good Cinnamon, half a drachme of Cloves,
grossly beaten: put them into a strong glass-bottle, holding about two pints.
Power on it a pound of the Queen of Hungary's Water, a pound of Melisse-water,
half a pound of Orange-flower-water, and half a pound of Rose Water. Close the
bottle exactly, and expose it to the Sun for forty days; after which dissolve
in the liquor a pound of fine Sugar, and pass all through a clean bagg. Put up
this Elixir in a Bottle, and add to it half an ounce of the Volatile Salt of
Vipers, well rectified, twelve grains of Levant-Musk, and as much of
Amber-gris. Close the bottle exactly, and you may keep this Elixir, to use it
in time of need, from half a spoonful to a whole. You may take of it in the
morning upon an empty Stomach, and at all hours, according as necessity shall
require. This medicin is very good and very convenient: It is not only proper
against all Poisons, against the Plague, and all Contagious and Epidemical
diseases, but it also fortifieth all the noble parts, preserves the Natural
heat in good condition, and by this means the use of it conduces much to
preserve Health, and to prolong Life.

The Elixir following deserves also to be communicated to the Public, as a
medicine that is not common, and is very available, not only for the
Sicknesses of men, as well in the Brain, as the stomach, and all the noble
parts; but also very particularly, for most of the diseases of Women. I shall
give you here the Description of it. Take an ounce of good Saffron, as much of
fair Myrrh, as much of Aloes Socotrina, and the same quantity of White Amber;
a dram of the Extract of Opium, and as much of the Extract of Castor. Mingle
your Extracts in a little Spirit of Wine; pulverize all the rest; and put
altogether in a Glass-Body: power upon it three pounds of Spirit of wine
tartarized; place the Body in a Bath of Ashes; fit an Head to it, with its
Recipient, well luted together: Give it a moderate fire, and draw from it about
the moiety of the Spirit of Wine; then unlute your vessels, decant the
tincture, that will swim above your powders, which will be found very much
imbued with all their qualities; and keep it by itself in a bottle well-closed.
Power the Spirit of Wine, which you have drawn off, upon the remainder in the
Body; Fit again to it the Head and the Recipient, and draw again from it the
half of the Spirit of Wine. Decant again the tincture swimming a top, mingle it
with the first, and keep it likewise. Cohobate for the third time the Spirit of
wine, drawn off, upon the remainder in the Body; proceed as before, and power
off the tincture swimming a top, and mingle it with the former: then filter all
three together, and power all into a strong Vial, adding to the whole an ounce
of the Volatile Salt of Vipers, which will easily dissolve in it; keep the whole
thus mix't and well closed. The dose may be from ten to sixteen drops.

We shall yet add to this an Opiate of great efficacy for most distempers of
the Brain; and it is this. Take half an ounce of the Extract of the root and seed
of the male-Paeony; and of the true Misseltoe of the Oak, and of that of
Betony-flowers, and of that of Clove-gilly-flowers, the same quantity of each
of them; three drachms of the Confection of Alkermes of Mesue, three drachms of
the Volatile Salt of Vipers, one drachme of the Volatile Salt of Succinum, two
drachms and an half of prepared Pearl, and as much of Crab's-eyes prepared;
three drops of Cinamon-oyle, and as much of the oil of Mace: Mingle all
according to Art, and make an Opiate of it, and keep it in a pot of Fayence (a
sort of fine white Earthen pots) well closed. The dose of it may be from a
scruple to a drachme.

You may also make, in the following manner, an opening and laxative Opiate,
that shall conduce to the cure of sundry long and stubborn diseases, especially
of those that are caused by several obstructions of the parts. Take of the
Conserve of Tamarisk-flowers, of the Conserve of the Flowers of Genista or
Spanish-Broom, of that of Mary-gold, and of that of the Male-peach flowers, of
each six drachms; half an ounce of the Volatile Salt of Vipers, as much of the
Extract of the ordinary Iris root, and as much of the Extract of Rubarb; two
drachms of the fixed Salt of Vipers, as much of the Mineral Bezoar, and as much
of the Salt of Wormwood; a drachme and an half of Rosin of Scammony, and as
much of the Extract of Coloquintida; and a drachme of the powder of Cinnamon.
Mix all these things together, and adding to it, as much as needs, of the Syrup
of Succory, compounded with Rubarb, you shall make an Opiate of it, the Dose of
which may be from one drachme to two, and even to three for stronger Bodies.

There may also be made Pills, that shall have a virtue near the former in
efficacy, to be taken in a less quantity. Take of the Extract of Aloes, made
with the juice of the cleansed flowers of Violets, of the Extract of Rubarb,
and of that of the Levant-Sena, of each two drachms; as much of the Volatile
Salt of Vipers, as much of the Rosin of Scammony, and as much of the Gumm
Ammoniac in drops; one drachme of Mineral Bezoar, and the like quanitty of the
Fixed Salt of Vipers. Reduce all into a mass of Pills, of which the dose shall
be from half a scruple to two scruples.

Those, whose stomach shall be troubled with tenacious humors, such as could
not be carried away by Purges, or other remedies; those, that have a
nauseousness, and are subject to troublesome resentments from the Stomach, may
to good purpose use the following powder.

Take of Coriander-seed (that is not prepared with Vinegar, according to the
ill way of the Ancients, but such as is sold in good shops,) of Anis-seed, of
sweet Fennel-seed, of the root of Lickorish well scraped and dried, of each
half anounce; three drachms of the Volatile Salt of Vipers, and as much of
Crab's-eyes prepared; two drachms of the Fixed Salt of Vipers, and as much of
well-chosen Cinnamon. Bring all to a fine powder, and add to it its weight, or
if you will, double its weight of fine powdered sugar. Close this mixture in a
Glass-vessel, or in one of the fine white Earthen pots, and close it carefully.
You may take of it, at a time, from half a spoonful to a whole, according as
you have put more or less Sugar to it. You may also add to the powder some
drops of the Oil of Anis, and of the Oil of Cinnamon, and even of Musk and
Ambre-gris.

This Volatile Salt is to very good purpose mix't among the Sneezing powders;
for besides that it penetrates exceedingly by its activeness, it also
discharges the Brain powerfully, and withal fortifieth it. It may be mixed
with the powders of Betony, Marjoram, Rosemary, Arabic, Staechas, Sage, and the
like, not putting but a sixth part of our Volatile Salt among these powders.

Those that would have an Opiate, proper not only to fortify the Heart, the
Stomach, and all the noble parts, but also to expel all kind of Venom, and all
the impurities of the mass of Blood, and of the solid parts, and to make them
issue out at the pores of the skin, or at the other emunctories, may prepare
very beneficially the following Opiate.

Take two ounces of the Conserve of Gilly-flowers, one ounce of the Confection
of Alkermes, ambred and musked, six drachms of the Volatile Salt of Vipers well
rectified, half an ounce of the Confection of Hyacinth, as much of the
Electuary of Diascordium, three drachmes of the Mineral Bezoar; and of Pearl
prepared, of Crab's-eyes prepared, of the Extract of Angelica, and of that of
Carlina, of each of these the same quantity; two drachms of the Salt of Carduus
Benedictus. Mix all together, and reduce it to an Opiate, by adding to it some
Syrup of kermes, or the Clove-Gilly-flowers, as much as needs to give a good
consistence to the Composition: Which you are to keep close for your occasions.
You may take of it, for a preservative, half a dram, at a time, in Wine, or
broth; but in urging sicknesses, you may take of it a whole drachme, and even
two drachms.

Those that will use the Oil which has been drawn by Distillation, may either
employ it all alone, or mingle it with an equal quantity of Unguentum
Martiatum, and even add to it Oils distilled of Rosemary, Sage, Lavender and
the like.

Those, that shall well consider these Receipts, will find therein not only a
fit proportion in the dose of all the particulars, but also great cautiousness
in mixing nothing with them, that may destroy or change the natnre of our
Volatile Salt; which is the thing, most to be avoided in the exhibition.

We might here add many other Compositions, of which the Volatile Salt of
Vipers may be the Ground; but we have contented ourselves to deliver these for
examples, knowing, that there may be found diverse others, good enough, in
Books, and esteeming, that it is better to prepare them upon occasion according
to exigency, and following the Receipts, which able Physicians may prescribe
thereof.

We have also explained ourselves sufficiently in all particulars. We would
have been more large, if we had not apprehended we might exceed our bounds, and
undertake things, which might be thought to be beyond our reach, and to belong
only to knowing Physicians.

Those that know well to prepare this Volatile Salt of Vipers, and to unite it
well with the Volatile parts of Plants, and with the Sulphurous parts of
certain Minerals, that are friendly to our nature, may say, that they have made
some progress in their Profession. We labor daily, and wish our selves able in
time to impart something to the public, that may be more accomplished.

FINIS.

