speakers addressing a crowd (...) ^ter Days at hand my (...) (...) Down (...)
(...) shall be Mayor or (...)

THE CHARACTER OF A WHIG, Under Several DENOMINATIONS.

To which is added, The Reverse, or the Character of a true ENGLISHMAN, in
Opposition to the former.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by the Booksellers of London and
Westminster. 1700.

THE CHARACTER Of a Sour, Malcontented WHIG, etc.
OF all Men living, they are the fittest Persons to delineate their their own
Accomplishments; for when a Sour Whig describes a Jesuit, he is drawing his
own Picture, and they act as uniformly, as if the Soul of the Ignatian Tribe,
did Transmigrate after Death, into the Bodies of that Stickling Party.
Contradiction is their Original Sin, the Peoples Ignorance supports their
Cunning, Interest is the Dagon they both Idolize, and give them but Power to
their Wills, they would Bridle all Mankind, and Ride them into Sedition here, and
to Hell hereafter. A Sour Whig has more Shiftings than a Weezle, more
Doublings than a Hare, more Shapes than Proteus, changes Color ofter than a
Camaelion, and Mercury may more easily contrive a Manteau for the Moon, that is
always Increasing or Decreasing, than any Pen circumscribe this Multifarious
Animal in a General Character; and therefore I shall take the Machine into
Pieces, and show him in variety of Colors, Shapes and Postures: And first as

A Busy, Impertinent, Intermedler in Government: Or,
AN Empty Politician fit for nothing, but to make a Common Council Man at
Goatham, to Drown the Eel, or Hedge in the Cuckooe. A Sucking Coffee-house
Statesman, a Little Great Man of no Business, that wanting Employment of his
own, troubles all the World with his Idleness. He is haunted with a Spirit of
Government, and wants nothing but a Call into an Office, to show his Rare
Qualifications in turning the World Upside Downward. Ingratitude, and Dullness,
will for ever be his Character: Which with a Mixture of Confidence sets him up
for a Patriot, which in our Modern Phrase, signifies nothing else but a
Stickling Disgusted Fop, that thinks he deserves some good place or other,
which Heaven and the King knows he is not fit for. He pities the World that has
no greater Insight into his Parts, and like the Chynoises, thinks all the World
is Blind but himself. He is engaged in a Confederacy with Hypocondriack
Clubbers, to admire one another, who think they have as much Wit as they want,
and more than ever they will have. He is Eternally Vain, because he is never
Thoughtful, and that Vanity makes him fancy himself of an Unfathomable
Capacity, as Wine makes the Beggar think himself a Man of Quality. He is a Lump
of combustible Ignorance, whom the least Spark of News kindles in a Blaze of
Unlikely, and preposterous Conjectures; and then the rest of the Rooks and Daws
take Wing, and fill the Town with Incredible Fears, and Invisible Dangers. His
Talk is like Benjamin's Mess; five times more than comes to his share. All are
Fools that are not of his Opinion, but he esteems him a Man of extraordinary
Wisdom that applaudes his Conjectures, and puts him upon Laughing at his own
Shadow for want of a more Ridiculous Substance. His Religion is but the Visor
of his Policy, and whatever Virtue he has, Craft is the Keeper of it. All his
Discourses are Obscure and Enigmatical, like the Devils in the Delphick Oracle;
you may understand his Words, but never reach his Meaning. The Corruption of
Reason was the Generation of his Wits, and the Spirit of Lying and Slandering,
is the height of his Improvement. He is a perfect Enemy to Monarchy, for want
of an Office, and hates every Courtier, because he is not one of the Number. In
short, he is a kind of Sucking Traitor, and the older he grows in his
Discontents, the more is the Government endangered, by his Misrepresentations
of Public Actions. He creeps by degrees from want of an Employment, to advance
a Lawless Liberty; from Petitioning to Remonstrating; from questioning the
Power, Wisdom, and Capacity of his Superiors, to seizing the Administration,
into the Hands of the Populace. His Maxims in Government are contradictory to
Common Sense, and ruinous to the Monarchy. He Asserts the way to make a King
Great and Glorious, is to give him no Money; that the means to support Foreign
Alliance, is to Impoverish the Exchequer, and the best way to keep the
Government upon the Wheels, is to weaken the Axle-tree; so that the Whigs, and
their New Associates, the Jacobites, having been long troubled with the Spirit
of Contradiction, the Devil of Nonsense is got among 'em also. Humor them and
you Disappoint 'em. Every Newfangled Notion, thrusts out a former Exception,
and give 'em full possession of what they Ask, and they soon grow weary of the
Toy they Whimper'd for. They Declaim against Arbitrary Power, and yet Usurp it;
against the Prerogative, and erect an Imaginary Power above it; against
Grievances, and yet Promote them; against Mismanagements, and yet produce no
Instances of their Being. They carry Liberty, and Religion, upon the Tip of
their Tongues; but dare swallow neither, for fear they should choke them. They
complain against Ill Ministers to color a Faction against the State, and to
Enslave Free Subjects under the Arbitrary Impositions of a prevailing Party;
but I fear I have kept them Company too long, and therefore will pay a Visit to

The Hypocritical Preaching Whigs under every Denomination.
WHom I will describe in their Educations, Postures, and other topping
Qualities, that recommended them to a Deluded People, and raise their F^rtunes
in the World. Some of them, whose Abilities could not among Understanding Men,
advance them above a Groom, a Porter, or a Thresher, have gained a more
comfortable Maintenance (their Port considered) than an Ordinary Bishopric,
and all a better Allowance than the generality of the Orthodox Learned Clergy.
They are at little or no Expense in their Education. Pretended Gifts supply the
Defect of Learning and Knowledge. The latter are the leisurely Effects of
Labor, Sweat and Reading; the former are only strong Impulses, and Fortunate
Incomes which gives a short Turn upon their Trade of Preaching. A heavy
Phlegmatic Blockhead, that could never get Learning enough at School, to
enable him to undergo an Examen for Admission into the University, let him have
but a strong Aversion to the Labor of a Mechanic, or the Industry of a
Tradesman. That is, let him be Damnably Lazy, and enriched with a convenient
proportion of Duncery, it is a good Call to the great Affair of Holding forth
among the Brethren; then let him Board a while at Mr. Alsop's, Mr. Doelittle's,
Mr. Meade's, Mr. Cyffin's, Mr. Pen's, and now and then take the Air at the
Phanatick Academies of Newington, Croydon, Hammersmith, or Nettlebed: Wear a
Black Jump, and his Hair, and Ears, of the Smectymnian Standard, to show him a
Divinity Intender; it matters not whether he Read any Authors, Sacred or
Profane, provided he takes Notes, or stand Gaping upon a Form, or Stool, to
receive a Measure of the Light, that an old Squeaking Tubster is scattering
among the Juvenile Fraternity. Let him but Repeat in the Afternoon, till the
Pit, Boxes, and Galleries are full, and till he has attained a just Confidence
in Speaking in Public, and a Profound, Engaging, and Learned Method in
Managing his Postures, Sighs, Groans, and Grimaces. Then up starts the Ah Lard
Stripling into the Pulpit, or other Mouthing Place; and though he be as Fat as a
Porpus, his first Text is, O my Leanness, my Leanness: Or, I am not ashamed of
the Gospel; though by his Uncouth and Ignorant Managery, the Gospel is ashamed of
him. Age, Example, and Practice, improves him in all the Arts of Mimical
Gestures, Affected Tones, Shuffling his Cloak; Fingring his Band, Coughing with
an Emphasis, Spitting with a Grace, Folding, and Unfolding his Handkerchief
according to the Original, and Wiping his Mouth a la mode de Lake Lemain; and
now he has gained the Reputation of a Soul-saving, Heaven-gaining, Sin
destroying, Hell-confounding, Pious, Precious, Zealous, Painful, Preaching
Brother. From these Improvements he at length arrives at the height, and
perfection of Mimickry, and gives Laws to all his Inferiors, for a Pedantick
Behavior, in carrying on the Work of the Day, to the Satisfaction of the
Beloved Secret Ones.

The Demureness of his Looks in the Desk, Sanctifies his Incoherent and
Heterodox Expositions on the Chapters. When he ascends the Pulpit, and puts on
his Praying Face, he Drawls out his Words, as if they wanted Fellows, and must
be Hemmed up from ^is Lower Venture, before he could be furnished with a
Prologue. Th^^ in a Low and scarce Audible Tone, as if the Griping in his Guts
had caused a Grumbling in his Gizzard, he s^ys, Lard we dare not Open our (...),
And Winks for fear ^f t^lling of ^ies.


In naming his Text, he turns over as many Leaves in his Bible, as if Chance,
or Inspiration must direct him to it; and that he knew not whether the Text wa^
in the Old or New Testament, that he must H^ld forth upon. The Text being
found, he Leans and Reaches over the Pulpit, as if he would take off the Wigs
and Head-Dresses of his Under Auditors, for the easier Entrance of his Doctrine
into their Perrioraniums. His one and twenty Points are Tagg'd with Wry Faces,
for want of Reading; his Reasons, with Railing, for want of Argument; and the
labor of all his Preachments is chiefly in the Lungs, and all he made of them
himself, was the Faces. His Actions are all Passions, and his Words
Interjections. He cajoles his Congregation in Bemoaning and Sainting 'em, and
shows his own Parts, in Blowing his Nose with abundance of Discretion. At
Application-time, he stands bolt up-right; with his Arms on Kembow, like the
Ears of an Iron Pot, which makes him look very Magisterially, and fastens the
Uses of Reproof in the Sculls of his Auditors, like Hob-Nails driven into the
Posts of a Gallows; then he shifts the Scene into a loud thick clapping of his
Hands, which serve to the driving home, and clenching the Farthing Tack of an
Argument. After this he stretches himself forward on the Pulpit-Cusheon, made
of a Sisters decayed Velvet-Petticoat, which he sometimes Hugs in his Arms, as
if he was in a Rapture; then in a Zealous Fury, Thumps the Dust out of the
Cusheon, into his Eyes, which makes him Weep and Wink affectionately, for the
Backslidings of the Zealous Party; then falls to contracting and expanding his
Arms, as if he had been Swimming, and all to show himself a Painful Preacher.
By and by he Weaves from one side of the Pulpit to the other, in a Use of
Consolation, and contracts the Muscles of his Face, into an Obliging Grin;
which raises the Drooping Spirits of his Auditors, into Ecstasies of Joy, and
Stomachs to their Dinners. Lastly the Hats of the Congregation being all of a
sudden turned a-wry, like Ballad-singers in a Country Fair; but with the open
side to the Tubster, lest what goes in at one Ear, should go out at the other,
gives you notice the Holder forth is falling into his concluding Prayer; where
he Winks, Kneads the Cusheon, and is in as many Notes, as a pair of Bagpipes.
Sometimes in a deep hollow Grumble, lik^ ^he noise of a Stone rattling down a
Well; ^n a loud Stentorophonical Bawl, which is presently raised into a high
Scream, upon the Key in which a Nice Lady Squeaks at the sight of a Frog; and
by and by a Maudlin sort of a Whine, in which he continues so long, till the
Tears drop from his Nose, and he Sweats like a Greasy Hostess in Dog Days, and
would have Brayed longer, if the Clock, and Chimes of his Guts crying Cuboard,
had not stopped him.

This Exercise of his Lungs, and his Auditors Patience being over, happy is the
Man, and more happy his Wife, that can have the Favor of this Heavenly Man's
Company at Dinner. In the way home, the Disciple thanks the Good Man for his
Pains, commends his Voice, and his Memory, but not a Word of the Sermon: For he
slept all the time as soundly, as if he had heard a Carnal Dean or Bishop. The
Wife sends the Apprentice before, to warm the Towels to Rub him down, and that
a Tankard of Sack may be ready to Drench him, for fear his Grease should be
Melted. These accustomed Necessariums being ended, the Cropsick Holder-forth
approaches the Table, with fear there should not be Food enough; and Reverence
to the Mistress of the House, and her Chinse Gown and Petticoat, then blesses
the Quaking-pudding, because Esau sold his Birthright for a Mess of Porridge;
the Leg of Mutton, because he might pull the Pope's-Eye out; the Shoulder,
because David was a Shepherd. The Capon, because Peter was converted by a Cock;
and the Custard, because it was a Scapegoat from the Lord-Mayor's Table. Now
he lays out himself sweetly, upon the Creature Comforts, and shows his
Abilities in Eating, opposed the Miracle in feeding five Thousand; for if he
had been a Guest at that Meal, there would not have been so many Fragments
left, as would have Dined a Sparrow.

From stuffing his Paunch at the Citizens, he returns to air his Lungs, and
give himself Breath in an Afternoon's Exercise, where he speaks more with Ease,
than a wise Man can hear with Patience. In the Morning he was a Son of Thunder,
but for fear of displeasing their Haughtinesses, and losing his own
Contribution, he must now be a Son of Consolation; and therefore knowing their
Inclinations to Democracy, preaches up Popular Doctrines, such as Baxter and
Jenkins begun the Civil-War with: The Liberty and Power of the People, and the
Privilege of Rebelling, if ever the Prerogative of the Crown should check the
Licentiousness of the Conventicle: For then the Hydra may, in their Opinion,
set up against Hercules, and, if possible, fetrer Monarchy it self. By these
Preachments the Old Bell-wethers of every Disloyal Flock, from the infamous
Title of Traitors were dignified with that of Saints, and wallow'd in Wealth
and Wickedness. Having thus played the Parasite to a Popular Ambition, he Acts
the same part as a Preacher, and has a Salve for every Sore, and an Excuse for
every Sin, till none at all is to be found among his own Peaple; and if any of
them should complain, he has Crumbs of Comfort for the Hungry; Sips of Sweetness
for the Thirsty; Crutches for the Weary; Porter's-Blocks for the Heavy Laden;
Apples of Gold for the Poor; Iron Chests for the Rich; High Heel'd Shoes for
Dwarfs in Duty, and a thousand other Knick Knacks to seduce the Easy and
Ignorant Multitude; and therefore they seldom or never apply to their Hearers
Reasons, but to their Humors and Fancies; and instead of taking pains to enable
themselves to Speak Sense, for the improvement of the Understandings of their
Congregations, (which good end, if attained, would put their Craft in danger to
be set at naught) they take the readier way of Addressing to their Passions and
Tempers, and thereby rendering themselves Masters of their Weaknesses, and
lesser Inclinatious, they secure an Implicit approbation of their Words and
Actions; and when this is once achieved, the poor Disciple is miserably Ridden
into all Incoveniences. Nothing must be too good for the Men of Cap, Cloak and
Handchercheif over the Band. If he is Cropsick, out comes the Rich Jellys, Dried
Sweetmeats, Cordial-Waters, and the Lady Moore's Drops, to supply the place of
the Bitter Draught, Cow Piss, or a Pepper Posset; besides, something must be
laid down in hand for Entrance, a constant Rent for a Pew, Provision for often
Visits of the demure zealous Canters, who must never be dismissed empty
Bellied, nor empty Handed, for fear he should shake the Dust off his Feet, and
leave a Curse behind him. From hence the Senior Soph adjourns to some other
Rich Members of the Faction, where his first Salutation is, Peace to this
House, but is sure to raise a War in the Family before his departure, that may
gain him the opportunity of another Visit, a Privy Purse; and a large stuffing
his Paunch to Reconcile them. To these may be added, Repeated Contributions to
Itenerate Apostles, that want Booths to hold forth in; and what is more than
all this, the continual Drainings on the Wives part: So that a Wealthy
Disciple, that is duly qualified with a zealous silly Wife, is a good Farm to a
Cunning, Canting Tubster.

His Conversation in mixed Company is, Railing against the Episcopal Clergy, as
Papists in Masquerade. Against Human Learning in Sermons; and highly commends
(what is truly) the Foolishness of Preaching. A significant Ceremony frights
him into a Frenzy; a Discourse of Order and Decency is a Mark of the Beast, and
turns him Topsy Turvy; and rather than not be Singular, if other Men go to
Heaven upon their Feet, he will (for Contradiction sake) take the other way upon
his Head. He loves none of the Prelates but Bishop Fox, whom he Applauds for
writing his Book of Martyrs; but more for his Discretion in keeping himself
from being one of the Number of those that suffered the Pains and Perils of
Fire and Faggot. Simulation, is his Sanctity; Gain, is his Godliness; and all
his Actions are governed by a kind of Political Wisdom, abstracted from the
Rules of Conscience and Religion. In short, he seems one of the holiest Men
Heavenward that you can meet with, but the Illest Man among his Neighbors in
the whole Parish. A Reverence is due to the very appearance of Piety; but
whenever we find this Holy Man to Godward, to be no better than Ferg -- n, a
Juggling Knave, among Mankind, that is the very Hypocrite we find Stigmatized
among the Scribes and Pharisees in the Gospel; and as such we'll leave him to
take a view of

The Factious, Seditious, Illiterate Whig Lawyer.
WHo came to Town recommended from the Scattered Churches of the Whigs in
Hibernia, Equipt in a kind of Kent-street Mourning. A Frize-Coat, as tattered
as a He-Goat. A Hat well Blockt, but scarce half a Crown to it. His Doublet and
Breeches so alike, that a Dark Morning was enough to make him mistake the one
for the other. His Stockens without Feet, like a Chandlers drawing Sleeves, and
he durst not trust them off his Legs, for fear of Crawling from him; and in
short from Head to Heel, was a thing made up of so many several Parishes, that
you would have taken him at first sight for a Frontispiece of the Resurrection, and
inquired of him, how the Whigs were disposed of in the other World; but a
Collection, and his Uncle's Charity having Rig'd him into Christian Shape, and
a small charge in pounding Tobacco-Pipes, and mixing them with the Juice of
Lemons, and Fullers-Earth, to take out the Stains of his Wild-Irish Education,
he soon brisk'd up into a Confident Thing, as like a Man as a Boyish
Bog-Trotter could arrive to. His early Pretenses to Zeal, Ignorance, and
Nonconformity, show he sucked in the Principles of Sedition with his Mothers
Milk, and that in him were all the Seeds of Mischief, only they wanted forming;
and therefore it was soon resolved upon the Question, that having all the
Requisite Qualifications of Lelap^: Snarling at the Poor, Fawning on the Rich,
and Glavering with all he could but get a Mouldy-Crust by, he ought to be hewed
out into Log called a Lawyer; which being primed with Impudence, and gilded
with Hypocrisy, might in time be a Pillar to support the Whigs sinking Cause,
and raise it to the height of Forty One, to Forty Eight. To accomplish this End
having already the Gifts of a Whig, and the Graces of the Leviathan, he never
gave himself the trouble of Studying the Liberal Arts, to qualify himself for
a Man of Sense; but for want of Learning entitles himself a Man of Business. He
never drudged Seven cold Winters, and as many sweaty Summers, in reading the
Statutes, collecting Reports, digesting Cooke's Institutes, and forming
Commonplace Books; but entered at the Backdoor of an Attorneys Clerk, to set
up for a Counselor. He put his Name, it is true, in the Burtery-Books of the
Temple, but with a Resolution never to trouble the Society, with Mooting Cases,
Dancing in Masquerade, Revelling at Christmas; or so much as Eating a Commons
in the Hall; but as a shorter cut to cheat the World, Pinnion'd himself like a
Gizzard under the Wing of an Experienced Petty-fogger of the Party, where he
learned more of the Litigious part of the Law in a Year, than he could have
done without the help of such a Tutor, by studying in the Inns of Court, or
Chancery all his Life time. By this Arsward Method he was able to walk without
a Goe-Cart, or the help of Leading-strings; and was more expert in Holding a
Candle to the Devil, than those that have studied the Point with more
remarkable Austerities: And no wonder, for all these kind of Whigs manage
themselves by Trick and Confederacy, and have a nearer way to Ruin the World,
than all the rest of Mankind. The Vogue of being a Conventicler, gives a
greater Reputation to any Lawless Professer, among the Party, than Seven Years
Study in a University: For being Litigious in their Natures, as well as
Practices, no thing is ever thought to be well said, or done, 'till it is
stamped with the Opinion of an Almighty-Headed Dul-man. As ill used the Study of
the Law is no Liberal Science; but a mere Mechanical Mystery, introduced into
the World, as one of the great Grievances of Mankind; attained without
Speculation of the Understanding, or the Assistance of an illuminated Genius,
but is a mere Heap and Chaos of undigested Forms and Fallacies, practiced to
squeeze Money out of Litigious Fools, to fatten a Crew of Miserly Muck-worms,
of which our new Law-Intruer is a President.

Sighing at a Conventicle, having Cough'd him into a Vessel of Grace, and
taking Notes at Dicks, or the Grecian Coffee-House, having Ear-mark'd him for
an Antimonarchist, which are the only Testimonials to Recommend a Confident
Opiniatre to the Practice of the Law, and make him Pass Mnstre, among the Holy
Brethren. This Nitt of the Law, soon swells himself into an Elephant in his own
Conceit, and though he knows not the difference between the Nodder and the
Noddee, Nor a Deed in Tail, from a Declaration of Ejectment, yet by Learning a
little Phanatick Address, a Busy look, and a Starched Behavior, he grows as
Demure and Dull as a Recorder, and wants nothing but a Barr-Gown, to Cheat the
World cum Privilegio. A Friend being made to the Approbator, who greasing him
in the Fist, gets his Hand to a Testimonial of the Block-head's Sufficiency;
and by promising his great Acquaintance among the Quarrelsom Whigs, would bring
many good Grists to the Mill at West minster, he is called to the Bar, and
passes among the Crow'd by an Authentic Transmigration, from an Illiterate
Pettifogger, to be called a Councellor learned in the Law. The First News of
his Dignity is published among the Sister-hood, who Simper at his Preferment,
in hopes to lick their Lips in a Bowl of Beveridge, to Handsel his cast Gown
and Cap, and to wish him good luck at the next Goal Delivery: Whilst the
Bastard Son of Parchment struts among the Women, like the Major Domo, of the
Turkish Seraglio. Every Street, Lane and Alley in the City, receives his Visits
with his Gown on, and his great Business there, is but to show it. If he has a
Companion in his Walk, he makes as much Noise with Clattering out Law, as an
Inceptor in his Slap Golochia's. Instead of turning over Books in his Study, he
exercisies his Gifts on his Bed-maker, and Commits Fornication with the Dust of
his Chamber, to gain her good Word for an Able Practitioner. He Traverses the
Walks of the Temple, more duly than a Penny-less Alsation, and on the same
Errand too, to see who will show their good breeding in Inviting him to Dinner,
but is often disappointed. To force a Trade, he once bought a Sheep's- Head,
Horns and all, of a Butcher, for for his Sunday's Dinner, and desired him to
give him a Receipt for the dressing of it; which while the Butcher was
Dictating, a Dog runs away with his Staring Quarter of Mutton; and the Mob
crying out, Lawyer, Lawyer, the Dog has stolen your Sheep's-Head; and he seeing
him so far Eloped, that he could not Attack the Criminal, and have his Body in
Arcta Custodia, to appear next Term Coram. Dom. Reg. apud Westmonasteriensis,
he said, let him go like a Foolish Cur as he is, 'twill do him no good, for I
have the Receipt, and he knows not how to dress it; besides I have a good
Action at Law against his Master, of Trover and Conversion, by which I shall
gain Costs of Suit, and Treble Damages. Many Terms together he Trudged to
Westminster, without any Cause for his going thither, unless to see and be
seen among the Monkeys and Lap-Dogs, and Walking-Trees, that come thither to be
sold, as he to be Hired for a Rat-catcher. But this not succeeding, a more
hopeful Stratagem enters his Lawless Perricranium, and he immediately puts it
in Execution. He frequents Conventicles and Lecture Sermons Devoutly, makes an
Interest among Attorneys, Solicitors, and that Herd of filthy Swine that the
Devil entered into; and the Crawling Vermin, worse than all the Plauges of
Egypt, Splitters of Causes, and Affidavit Devils, that make no more of Swearing
upon the Holy Bible, than of laying their Lips upon Renald the Fox, or the
Seven Wise Masters. For these Vipers never sting one anather, though they gnaw
their way in to the World, through their Dams Bellies. This Confederacy, and
giving Attorneys leave to make use of his Name, when they wanted a Counsels
hand without a Fee, as they often do, and letting them go Snips in all the Fees
they bring him, quickly brought him into Vogue, especially among their own
Party, who always Measure Right and Wrong, by their Interests; like the Turks,
they call every thing good or bad, by the Success that attends it, and every
Man a Proficient in his Art, that Boggles not at doing any thing they would
have him: In which our Lurcher has as considerable Qualifications, as any
Lawyer in Kent or Christendom. That which prevents many honest Men from being
Lawyers, viz. a Scrupulous Conscience, and an inflexible Honesty, never hinders
him, for he carries no such things about him. His Soul is mere Sense, and as he
has no knowledge of Virtue, so while he is engaged among the malcontented
Whigs, he has no occasion to make use of it. He has a Brass Towel, and a Steel
Countenance, and never wants so much Patience in his Green Bag, as to be
discouraged at any Undertaking, and never cares whether a Cause be Good or Bad,
so there is but money to be got by it. He is a sworn Enemy to Arbitrators and
Umpires, and the words Peace or Agreement, he looks upon as Apochryphal, and
ought to be torn from our Bibles, and Strife and Contention inserted in their
places. He has a kind of a Seafaring Conscience, that Sleeps more quietly in
Hurricanes, Storms and Tempests, than in a Popular Peace and Tranquillity.

These Qualifications and Advantages Records him a Saint in the Whiggish
Calender, though, in truth, he is nothing but a Feind with a Glory about his
head, to dazzle the Eyes of a Bifarious Mobile, though it answers the Design,
increases his Practice, multiplies his Clients, and fills his Empty Pockets.
The First day of the Term finds him Trotting on Foot to Westminster, in a
Dagled Gown, a Dangling Wig, Papers in his Hand, a Bag under his Arm; and a
Cluster of Durty Country Clients, like Burrs Sticking to the Rump of our Paris
Garden Pleader. In addressing to the Bar; he bids an Eternal farewell to his
Modesty and Conscience, as Starving Notions, next door Neighbors to Beggary,
and supplies those Vacancies, with Confounded Jargon, Billingsgate Rhetoric,
and a large Stock of Impudence. His Prologue to the Farce, is, May it please
your Lordships, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, for want of a better, I am of
Conncel for the Plaintiff A, in an Action of Assault and Battery: Setting forth
that the Defendant B, Simul cum C. D. E. F. G. with Swords, Staves and Knives,
Wounded, Hurt and Maimed us, in a Principal Member of our Body, Anglice our
little Finger, and put us in danger of our Lives, and hopes of a Hundred Pound
Damages. This my Lord, we could have proved Temp. praecur, by Twenty Witnesses,
Bon. et Legal. Hom. But Nineteen of 'em being Dead, or knowing nothing of the
matter, we shall Trouble the Court but with one. Cryar, call Mr. Bartholemew
Brass Girdle, Inholder, Anglice an Alehouse Keeper, where the Quarrel began
with Ale, and Ale would have ended it, if the dextrous Management of the
Country Common-Barreter, had not brought it in a Cloak Bag behind him to London.

Another Artifice to bring more Game into the Net, is, by Clubbing with a Non
Con Holder-Forth, and taking a House between them conjunctim et Seperatim, with
a Convenient Room next the Street to Pray in, which Toles in Disciples to the
Tubster, and Clients to the Lawyer. Simeon and Levi, now join Hand in Hand, to
promote each others Interests. Law Stalks for the advantage of Non Conformity,
the Directory Setts for the benefit of Cook upon Littleton, and both like
Monkies, crush their Fondlings into nothing, by Hugging and Embracing them in
the Arms of Flattery. Popularity is always the Nurse of Self Designs, and our
brace of Beagles, being Masters in that Art of Dolt catching, they pursue it
with all manner of Craft and Industry. In Vacation time, when their Bellies and
the Town are Empty, these narrow Soul'd Wretches make frequent Visits among the
Whigs, to save charges at home; for they keep a House would starve a Cat, and
the Rats and Mice have deserted it, and taken Sanctuary in the Church to mend
their Quarters. Now they set up for Peacemakers, and reconcile all Differences
and Disputes among those that have no Money, at the Price of a Supper for
themselves, at the Expense of both Parties. If a wealthy Whig be sick, the
Holder-forth goes to visit him, and being paid for Groaning by his Bed side,
persuades the Decumbent to send for our Whig-Lawyer, to make his Will, and set
his House out of Order, which he will be sure to do, to all Intents and Purposes;
by making so many Ambiguous Clauses, and dubious Proviso's in the Will, as,
after the Testator's decease, shall make his Relations spend the Fee-Simple in
Quarreling about the Title, and consume their Legacies in Suites with the
Executors, where our Man of Law is sure to be of One, if not both sides,
because the Belphogor that raised the Devil is the fittest to Lay him. In
making the Testament, he is obliged in Gratitude to put down Five Pounds for a
Funeral Sermon, no matter whether the Sick-man desires it, or not, it is but
skipping that Paragraph when he reads it over; and by these underhand Arts
they Claw and Cram one another, in the Language of an Old Phanatick Poet: One
Good Turn another Eeches,
Mend my Coat, I Will Patch thy Breeches.
And that every Whig-Bird may have the plucking off of some Feathers from this
languishing Fowl, toward making himself a Nest, the Medicaster Nomlas must now
be sent for, with his Rosy crucian Pantarva's, and then Consummatum est; you
may write upon the Dying-man's Door, Lord have mercy upon him.

Thus the Whigs engrossing all the Arts of Money-catching among themselves, our
Lawyer is soon grown Rich and Opulent, and so Stiff and Proud, that he would take
it for an Affront that the Most Christian King should call him Cousin.

By this time he has purchased himself a Country-Seat, which he never intends
to pay for, and Tuckled himself to a Wife, an Attorny's Daughter, that he bred
up himself by hand to make her fit for his Humor, which is as Cross and
Peevish, as ill Nature can make him. Among his Country-Neighbours he Reigns
with more Cruelty than Nero at Rome, and the least Offense that is given him,
or his Doxy Sara, Ruins whole Families. If a Horse commits a Trespass, but one
half hour, upon his Premises, the Price of a Writ, and a London Journey on the
Beast must commure for the Damages, with many Hats and Scrapes, and God bless
his Worship into the bargain. If a Cow does but look over his Hedge, a Quarter
of her Fat Calf, and the charge of a Latitat ad Respondend A Predict, in Placit
Transgress, must compound for the Offense, or Take him Jailer. The Country
Wives so dread his Tyranny, that they Sew Shoes, on their Poultries Feet, for
fear the Grim Sir, should commence a Suit against their Husband, for their
Geese going Barefoot, and wish that Term time might last all the Year, since
they can have no quiet but in his Absence, but are forced to Worship him as the
Indians do the Devil, because he should not Devour them. But of all in the
Vicinage, within the Reach of his Power, the Vicar of the Parish, is sure to
feel the weight of this Parchment Squires Displeasure, though the Poor
Ecclesiastic present him with more Tyth Pigs and Geese, than he can afford to
eat in his family, to purchase his own Peace and Quietness. However, his Innate
Aversion to an Orthodox Clergyman, and a Man of Sense and of a Genercus
Education, will not suffer him him to be Just, nor Civil to a Man of that
Character; and therefore disparages the Vicar's Preaching, though he never came
to hear him, and teaches his Parishioners how to defraud him of his dues by
Tricks and Quarks in Law, to support an Interloping Seditious Canter; but he is
stole up to the Term in a Stage Coach, and thither I must follow him, for being
long since made a Knight, for being a Tool in the hands of a Duke, to revenge
his quarr^l on an Innocent Neighboring Gentlem^n, and now growing near hi^
and; it is time for him, one would think, to lay aside halting between Attorney
and Council to vex the World, for if he consult his Honor or Fame, it is hoped
he will amend, and make Restitution to those he has injured causlesly;
especially since having Ruined many Families, and sent Innocent Children a
Begging; the Curse is fallen upon himself, and his own, and that which was got
over the Devils back by the Father, is in a fair way of being Pissed against
the Wall, or spent under a Whore's belly, by his two Ungratious Sons, that are
become the greatest Rakes and Debauches in the World, and not fit to be named
where Virtue has a being; but instead of repenting, the Old Ape grows worse and
worse; spends his time in watching his Wife, his Money, and the Cupboard; is
Retained in every Cause, only, to Annay the Enemy, perplex the Cause, and
confound the Court with Noise and Nonsense; and let him enjoy his Humor in
adding Oppression to Covetousness, Violence to Injury, Impenitence to
Wickedness, while he Lives; and then he needs not grudge to go to the Devil
when he Dies; and so Farewell Old Istra Daukes, and Levol Duncery.

A Bold, Treacherous, Whig Attorney.
IS an Animal descended from the Plough Tail, swept out of the Shop, or kicked
from a Justice of the Peace's, or Lawyer's Clark into Gentleman, to scandalize
the Profession of honest and fair Practicing Attorneys: Monstrum horrendum
inform ingens cui lumen adeptum. A Writing-School is the height of his
Education: Latin is his utter Aversion, and therefore cuts it off in the
middle, for fear it should accuse him of breaking Priscians Head, and crack his
own Credit in the Country, where for want of being a Scholar, he has taken
great pains to make them believe he is one. Frequenting Conventicles has made
him bold and saucy. His demure Looks initiated him into the acquaintance of
Precisions, and writing Bills, Bonds and Acquittancs from Presidents at the fag
end of an Almanac, has made him impudent enough, though but a Pen-feather'd
Prig, to call himself an Attorney, and to eat the Bread and Cheese out of
Practitioner's mouths, that are Regularly Qualified for that Employment. He
began to look toward the Law, by Soliciting for Criminals at the Quarter
Sessions, where the favor of his Master Justice, who went suips in his Fees,
gave him the Reputation of a Man of Knowledge. Thence like a Butter-fly
Adulterated into a Maggot, he became an Attorney in Wapentake, Leete, and
Hundred Courts, and at last by employing an able Entering Clark, commences an
Attorney at large, without being able to Read a Writ, or distingdish a common
Process from an Execution: And the People always favoring every Limping
Professor of their own Creation, he is sooner employed than a Clark fit for his
Business. He has little more in him than Garbage, and the Shape of a Man, and
when you have beheld his Leather- Ears and Shabby Outside, you have seen him
through, and need employ your Discovery no farther. His Reason is merely Whig
Example, and his Actions are not guided by his Understanding; but he sees what
other Men of the fame Cut do, and it is his whole Business to immitate them. The
chief Burden of his Brain, is the Whiggish Carriage of his Body, and setting
his Face in a Frame of Nonconformiry, advances his Renown among the Crop-Ear'd
Brethren of Bands and Bugle-Cuffs, who will go to Law with their Fathers,
rather than this Mushroom Brother of the Quill shall be destitute of
Employment. Among Knowing Attorneys, he looks a Tripe-Man's Asss, loaded with
Offal and Excrements; but among the Vulgar Try, like a Sage Common-Counsellor.
All his Discourses are Maxims in Law, and Definitive Decrees, with a Thus it
is, and thus it must be; but will never humble his Authority to give a Reason
for it, unless he stumbles on a Text to his purpose, and then he proves it by
Dint of Scripture. Al^ his Words are Hebrew Characters; if he says he will do
any thing for you, it is as much as if he had Sworn he would not, and you must
always Spell him backward before you can Read him. He has neither the Theory,
nor Practice of the Law; but his own Villainous Arts excepted is wholly steered
by the Compass of his Entring-Clerk: He is at best but two steps above a Fool;
a great many below a Wise and Honest Man, but the Phanatick Knave has
predominancy over all his other Faculties; and so he is less dangerous in the
appearance of a Devil than a Saint. If he says he Loves you, be sure he hates
you; for he has the Art of Laughing in your Face, whilst he is designing to cut
your Throat with a Feather. All that are so weak as to trust him, he is sure to
betray them; will spoil a good Cause by his Treacherous Management, and Sell
the best Clyent he has to his Adversary, when he has made the most of him. In
London he frequents all the Seditious Coffee-houses to find out Quarrels, or
make 'em, and at the Price of a Penny gains a Pound in setting Friends at
Variance, and under pretense of knowing something of the matter himself, or
having managed the like Cause for another, first kindles the Coal into a Blaze,
and then gets Money on both sides to quench it. A Conventicle is his Exchange,
where he hears the News of who is at Law, and there he employs his and the
Devils Brokers, Solicitors and Splitters, to keep up the Market of Quarrels at
Common Law, till he can bring the Litigious Fools into Chancery, and be the
Factor to sell both the Parcels by Commission at the Price of Who bids most by
an Inch of Candle. The Mayors and Sheriffs Courts, and the Marshalsea, are his
lesser Mints, for Coining Causes of Actions, where he Squeezes his Clyent for a
while, and then by a Writ of Habe as, removes Corpus to the Jayl and Causa to
be new Alloyed by a Melius Inquirendum at the Melting-house at Westminster. He
knows nothing but the Guts and Querks of the Law, and in that is so great a
Proficient, that he seldom fails of Success, for where he cannot Snap the
Adverse Attorney, he supplies all the Defects by Repeated Affidavits, and
prolonging Suits by these Tricks and Shifts, at last makes them ready for
Arbitration, where a Shoulder of Mutton and a Capon, and some Nasty Red, buries
a Cause in an Hour, that if the Clyents had not been quite exhausted, might
have lived seven Years longer, and run another Wild-Goose Chase through all the
Courts in London, Southwark, and Westminster, by the Dextrous Management of our
Upstart, Ignorant, Knavish Attorney. In the Country a Conventicle is his
Chimical Elabaratory, where from Calves-Brains, and the Gall of Dissenters
Spleens, steeped in the Sour Milk of the Miss applied word, he extracts Aurum
Potabile and Edibile, which fixed in his Pockets, serves for all other
purposes. Here he takes Notes from the Holder-forth against the Bishops, and
Fees from the Auditors to cheat the Parsons of their great Tithes, and the
Vicars of their Grunting Offerings, to Thatch the Boors heads with Bob Wigs,
and Ring the Sister Married Sowes on their Thumbs, and the yet Unexercised
Shoates on their Middle Fingers. Like Pick Pockets, he haunts all the Markets
and Fairs in the Country to get a Prize; and if his other Gins and Lime Twigs,
does not catch the VVoodcocks by day light, at night he makes 'em Drunk, and
sets them a fighting to create Actions of Battery, and so gets double Fees, as
Witness and Prosecutor, and when he has Wracked 'em sufficiently himself, turns
'em over to the Lawyer for Execution. Two Desks and a Quire of Paper set him
up. Sighing and Dissembling in a Conventicle got him Practice; and he laughed
at their Credulity in his Closet. Strife and Wrangling made him Rich, and he is
thankful to his Benefactors by Cherishing them. His business would never give
him time to cast away a thought upon his Conscience; therefore as he has lived
by Cheating Men, now approaching toward the Grave, he intends to Cheat the
Devil also; for having Early given him his Soul to assist him in getting Money,
he he has now disposed of it by Will another way, without relation had to the
Prior Grant, and says, if the Devil should make his Claim at Doomesday and
Recover, he had yet a Trick left to Reverse Judgment, but whether 'twill hold
or not I much Question, and know not how to send to have Mr. Sim's Opinion in
it, who by this time is able to resolve the doubt infallibly. There is still
more filth in this Dung Cart, which I dare not stir, for fear of Infecting the
Air, and poisoning Mankind; and therefore all I shall adventure on at present,
is, to tell my Reader in Sober sadness, that the Practices of such Lawyers and
Attorneys, as I have been describing of, are so foul, and their Numbers so
many, that in the Opinion of all sober Men, they are become Nusances, and
Plagues of England.

The Juggling Whig Physician
IS a something made of every thing, and signifies nothing; for let a Wretch be
never so Miserable, his Birth never so mean, his Fortune never so Low, his
Person never so despicable, and his Parts never so Contemptible, and the
Senseless Creature scarce worth any thing on this side Hanging; yet among some
sort of Men or other, he passes Muster for a good Physician, which lays and
Indelible Blot upon the more Judicious, when they are commended by comparison;
but this is not the insignificant centure of the Vulgar only, for the
Universities also have but mean opinions of this sort of Amphibious Animals.
When their Students Merits will not entitle them to an Election among the
Learned Tribes of Mathematicians, Astronomers, Divines, Civilians, nor
Musicians, their Tutors Reprobate them to the Study of Physic: To have
business at Bed-sides, to Converse with Close-stool-Pans, and Urinals, and to
live and Thrive by other Peoples Sickness; so it is abroad in the World, if a
Farrier is too great a Dunce to live by his Blooding Stick, Drenching-Horn, and
taking out the Soles of Foundered Horses; let him but lay aside his Leathern
Apron, put on a Plush Coat, talk of Acids and Alkaly's, tell the Men they are
troubled with the Spleen, and the Women with the Vapors, though he employs no
other Medicines for the Cure of them, than he did for his Horse Patients, yet
he is soon called an Incomparable Physician, whose success answers his
Celebrated Judgment; and if to this Example, we add the Number of decayed
Gentlemen, Lame Surgeons, broken Apothecaries, Confident Mechanics, Seventh
Sons, Strawling Mountebanks, Licensed Quacks, Sharking Empericks, Pox
Pretenders, with all the goodly Gang of Midwives, and Skilful Women, one would
be tempted to think 'twas unnenessary to study that Faculty, and that the whole
pretense is a Cheat, since all Man and Womankind were Fools enough to make
Physicians. Their Names you see are Legion, and since it would be the Works of
an age, to describe all the Pretenders; I shall only account for the Heads of
the Herd, and bequeath the Hides of the rest to the Tanner; and first I will
single out,

The University Toping Whig Physician.
WHO having the Annuity of a Younger Brother, and but the Learning of an Elder,
a Latudinarian in his Life, and at best a Septick in Religion; finding his
Income would not answer his Expenses, he resolves upon espousing some
Employment; and being told by his Tutor, that the Practice of Physic was the
easiest, and oftentimes the most Advantageous, for the use he intended it. Our
Gentleman immediately sets his Face toward the Physic Garden, and by taking a
Turn there now and then, with an Herball in one Hand, and a Woman in the other,
he soon Commences a Botanist. His next Step is to the Anatomy Lecture, where he
has the Patience to hear all, and the good Nature to carry away nothing, but
what he brought with him, Confidence and Ignorance, a Torn Gown to show his
Standing, and Money in his Pocket to treat the Reader at the Tavern, to show his
Understanding. From the Tavern he returns to his College, and covers the Table
in his Study, with Galen, Hypocrates and Aristotle, for the sake of his
Problems. Next in order, are laid open Veslingus Bartholinus and Riolanus, and
Contemplating a while upon the Naked Gentlefolks, goes to sleep upon his Couch
to improve his Contemplations, and thence to Barnwel to put his Notions into
Practice; where an unhappy accident, produced a good Effect, made him
experience a Cure upon himself, before he practiced upon others; and gave him a
greater opportunity of Reading, than ever he allowed himself before, since he
saw the University; being emancipated from the Surgeons hands, and at
Liberty, all his Discourses smell of the Gally Pot, and his Chamber converted
into a Slaughterhouse of Dogs and Cats, to improve himself in Anatomy, and
give him the Name of a Student in Physic! Never did Man take a degree to
lesser purpose, for he was Doctor without the Charge of the Sham Dignity, and
it added nothing to the Credit of his Learning afterward.

From Cambridge he removes to a City or Market Town, and with a Degree upon his
Back, sets up for killing Men, Women, and Children, Secundem Artem, and makes
his practice a Confirmation of the Hebrew Idiom, where the same Word signifies
Physicians, and dead Men, and were no way beneficial to the public, but by
Usurping the Office of the Plague, War, or Famine, in ridding the Nation of its
Infectious Inhabitants. Physicians time out of mind were all accounted Beasts
by Degeneration, if St. Luke, and a few others, had not been exceptions from
that general Rule, and to wipe out the reproach of Athism, our Mr. Doctor,
being no further from an Atheist, than from himself, saw a Necessity of
Engaging in a Party, and making a Show of Religion to advance his Interest, but
where to fix was the Question. The Church of England party, he knew were for
the Learned in all Professions, and there his Cake was Dowe; but knowing the
Whigs were all styles, and Props to another, and that the Skin of an Atheist
was as fit for the Shoulders of a Phanatick, as if it were made for him, it
soon determined his choice, and now fall down Atheist, Rise up Nonconformist,
till he is able to reassume his proper Character. That is, till he has made his
Fortune, and is so much above the World, that he can scorn and Laugh at all
below him. Hypoorisy is now his Theme, and, with the help of the Devil and his
Agents he soon acquires perfection in it, and Mimicks a Precisian as exactly,
as if Ferguson had been his Father, a Jesuit his Grandsire, his Mother a
Quaker, and all his Relations Independents. He patiently bears the Reproofs of
the Female Sex, when they bring him Patients, and promises Reformations. If a
Sister tells him she hear's he is a Great drinker, he answers he is of a Hot
Constitution, and very Thirsty, but for time to come, he would drink Water with his
Wine, to allay the Scandal. If another repimands him for being a continual
Smoaker, he says (with some Emotion) he will go home and burn all his Pipes and
Tobacco. If his Cravat be a Size too Long, there is enough o'th own to make it
Shorter, and so banters, befools, and humors them both at once, and sets them a
Gossiping from House to House, to cry up the Skill of their New Convert, and
Pump Guineas into his Pocket, till they have made him as Proud as Lucifer, as
Salacious as a Pampered Cardinal, and as Insolent as a Baud in a Brandy Shop.

The Decayed Gentleman Whig Physician.
HAving Squandered away his Patrimony, and wearied out his Relations and
Acquaintance, by thrusting in his Elbows at the lower end of their Tables, and
borrowing Money out of their Pockets, finding his Hawk, his Gun, and his
Setting-Dog, the Inheritance of Spend thrifts, and younger Brothers, will no
longer maintain him, he begins to Study the nearest way of making others
greater Fools than himself, and having long hung in the balance of several
Opinions, without throwing his whole self into either Scale, at last resolves
to be a Whig in General, so that no party shall call him absolutely their own,
and yet all live in hopes of his Conversion, from a Sharking Rake into a
Dissembling Hypocritical Reformist. Having gained this Point, in being thought
a Whig in General, and seeing himself that the World had Casheir'd him as a
Needy, Troublesome Intruder, now clas'd again in a more hopeful Predicament,
like a Man a Drowning, fastens upon any thing next at hand; and among other of
his Shipwrack'd Qualities, having happily lost Shame and common Modesty, he
borrows a Shillings of his Brother's Footmen, buys him a Urinal, and with a few
unintellible Receipts, found after her Death in his Grandmothers Closet, among
other precious Receipts of Distilling, Surgery, and Cookery, he sets up for
an Emperical Physician, and stumbling on a Cure by chance, or being by, when
beneficial. Nature relieved her self, he was Slander as the Agent, and
immediately gets the Reputation of an Excellent Physician; and all sorts of
Whigs cry him up, in hopes at last he will espouse their Interest, and credit
their Barn with the Company of a Doctor.

Now he thumbs Culpeper's English Physician, and his London Dispensatory, and
having retrieved as much Latin as will compound a Bill for a Purge or Vomit,
that names him as Learned, as if he had been a Member of the College, or had
bought a Degree of Doctor at Leiden, or Mentpelier. He is a very vain Creature,
but above all things hates to be thought so, tho from Head to Heel he is his
own Crier, and makes Proclamation of it. The Professors of all other Crafts,
are commended, or decryed, by a veritable Character; but Physicians are safe
under every Denomination; for the Good please some, the Bad others, and the
Worst have their Admirers. The Doctrine of Fate and Predestination, is his
great Assylum, for when with his Inartificial Slaps and Emperical Nostrums, he
has emptied his Patients Pockets, and exhausted his Vital Spirits, he leaves
him Gasping, saying, His Time is come, God will have it so, cover him up, and
send for the Parson to give him his Viaticum.

The Mechanic, or Scoundrel Whig Physician
IS a mixture of Broken Tradesman, Decayed Serving-Man, and Discarded Horstler;
Party per pale Black Coat, and Blue Apron, who from curing Cut-Fingers, Kib'd
Heels, or from administering Tobacco Clysters to cure Horses of the Bottes,
falls to practicing upon Men, to get the Women new Husbands, and upon Women to
recruit their Husband's crasie Credit, with another Marriake Portion; and in
this kind of Piking both Sexes over the Perch, succeeds so luckily, that he
soon arrives at the Honor of being called a Physician. He has no Learning, can
scarce write his Name, but is well stockt with what serves his Purpose better,
Invincible Ignorance and Impudence, for which he is indebted neither to Men nor
Books, for they were Born with him, and he has only fortified them by Use and
Custom, and so there is as much difference between what he appears, and what he
is, as between a Hot Whore in a Vizard Mask, and a Natural and well-tempered
Beauty. However he has his Excellency, and that is in Holding forth sometimes
in a Conventicle, and especially in conjuring with a Urinal, and shaking it
into a wonderful Discovery of the Patient's Distemper; when all experienced Men
in Physic know, that this Pretense is a common Cheat, and no certainty at all
to be gathered from it, though you glare in the Piss-pot till you are blinded
with the Steem of it; and yet so abominably fond are the deluded Mob of these
Proceedings, that instead of communicating their Diseases to the Doctor by an
Intelligible Messenger, or Writing, they Piss their Minds in their Water, and
hazard their Lives on an Ambiguous Answer, which he Pumpt from, and returns
back by her that brought it.

In this Cheating Bubling Trade, our Mechanic by his Pump, Screw, and Knavish
Arts of Confederacy, has gained more Credit than is due to such an Illiterate
Ass, who by peeping in the Urinal, presumes to tell you whether a Holy Sister
be gravidated, the Sex in the Womb, who got it, the Parties Name, the place
where she lives, and even what Religion she is of, with other Secret Diseases
belonging to Women, not fit to be mentioned but in their Bedchamber. If you
send your Urinal to this Piss Prophet, you must resolve to be sick, for he will
never leave handling it, till he has shaked it into a Disease. If he visit a
Patient, he tells him his Distemper will be Nothing, and at the same time tells
all his Relations, he cannot escape without a Miracle; so that if the Patient
recover, after the Urinal-Jugler has sentenced him to Death, it is imputed to
his powerful Remedies, and if he Dies, it cries up the excellency of his
Judgment in Fortune-telling, and that knew well enough what would become of
him. See this Impudent Hangman standing at a Sick Man's Bed side! How
Magisterially he looks, saying, All is well, when his Patient is Languishing by
the Medicines he has given him. If the Poor Man complains he is scorched with
Heat, It Is all for the better, Nature is casting out the Heat to cool the
Vitals: If he says he is benumbed with Cold, and Aguish Shiverings, It Is a good
Sign, he knew his Juleps would quench that extreme Fire: Nay, when the Patient
is almost dead, and has lost his Speech, he says his Fever is at extremity,
and leaving him; and then steals off, and leaves the Patient Dying, with
abundance of good Signs and Tokens. The Sick Man's Friends stop him, to see the
Fit over. No! He cannot stay, Death and he have a Quarrel, and must not meet
for fear of Blows, when he was only afraid the Corpse should Bleed, because the
Murderer was present.

The Traveller, or Strawling Whig Physician.
HAving Idled away a Hundred and Thirty Days, and Nine Hours beyond Sea, and
brought Home a Fool at last; to quench the heat of his Phanatick Zeal and
Lechery, he takes himself to a Wife without a Fortune, for a Cooler; and then
as his last Shift, the poor Devil professes the Practice of Physic to maintain
her. Here the Medick and the Mendicant are united in the same Person; and we
may treat him like the Medicaster in Plautus.

Grip. Number Medicus quaeso es?

Lab. Imo adipol una litera plus sum quam Medicus.

Grip. Tum tu Mendicus est?

Lab. Titigisti Acu.

And so like the Physician Eudemus, is only qualified for a Pimp to some Right
Honorable Personage, or to drudge out his Days in Misery. It Is a Wonder among
all the Dissenters that he should want practice; being Whig Born, Whig Bred,
Whig by Education, Whig by Practice; and as a Meritorious Act for the Propation
of the Species is ingeminated into the Right strain of Factious Breeders, who
seldom fail to promote the Interest of their Party. He has also made an
Interest among all the Noncon Tubsters, to promulgate his Abilities among all
the Qualmish Sisters; which like Pocky Bills plastred upon Pissing Posts, cry
Work for a Mender of Mangy Skins, Ulcers, or Fistula's in Ano. He is also at
Fee with Bowds, Midwives, and Mercenary Nurses. He runs about with News and
Lies against the Court. Hangs at the Fagg-End of Whiggish Lords. Speaks Cramp
Words to the Ladies, stands Bare to the Chamber-Maids, Caresses the Footmen,
but is such an egregious carry-Tale, and Liar; such a common Makebate, and
Dissembling Hollow-hearted Fawing Hypocrite, that he is fit for no Company but
his Brother Notsallows, with whom I Will leave him, till he that owns them both,
shall call for 'em.

The Blustering Pendantick Poetical Physician.
IS a greater Proficient in Rhiming than Reasoning, and understands quantity in
Verse, better than in Pharmacy; for though one be his Trade, the other next to
Courting and Drinking is his Business. He sets up for a Physician, by
affronting Galen and Hypocrates; for a Gentleman in abusing his Betters, and
for a Wit by showing his want of Manners. He Rakes into other men's Lives, and
stains their Learning and Reputation, makes them look like himself. By Sordid
Flattery, and Vile Abuses, he strives to get himself a good Name, though all in
Vain, for he has a Bad one already, that will last him his Life time. I know
not whether to call him Papist, Churchman or Whig, being Specializ'd by no
Name, but qualified for the worst of all, which I would not gratify him in, if
any other appellation could render him more infamous. The Mischance of being a
Scholar, has made him a degree and half above a Madman, and nothing but a
severe Bedlam Course can bring him to his Senses. The Press is sometimes his
Mint, for want of a Paltry Patient, and Stamps him now and then a Sixpence or
two, in reward of the base Coin his Poetical Pamphlet. He is an Ubiquitarian in
his Walks, and may be found any where, sooner than in his Study. He has much
time lying by him, and knows not how to spend it; and were it not for the
Tavern, the Playhouse, and the Bawdy House, he would die for want of
Employment. In Physic he acts like a Fencer, and kills Men in Teirce and
Quart, and then like a Poet, covers their Groves, and his own Misdoings, with
an Epitaph. He is very familiar and frolicksom with his Apothecary's Wife, and
because the Doctor is Agent, the Apothecary must be Patient, whom he makes
amends, by writing long Bills, and keeping his sick Patients in long diseased
Sheets, to do Penance for the Doctor's Lechery. His Practice is wholly among
the Female Sex, whom he Ogles and Bunters in the Pit, and wire-draws them into
Sin, that he may share in their Gains, by curing the Diseases that attend it.
To recommend himself to the Ladies, he has always a Distich ready, in
commendation of their Lap-Dogs, and often wishes himself in their Places. He
pulls off his Gloves to show his White hand, Laughs at all things, pleasant or
serious, to show his White Teeth, and throws back his Wig, to show his Ears
are on, and well adjusted. Sometimes he Sings, to delight the fair Sex, and
sometimes Sighs to declare his Passion, or that the Devil keeps a
Dancing-School in his Pocket, whom the Women are obliged to eject, by the
appearance of an Angel for a retaining Fee, against they have occasion to be
Sick, or lie from their Husbands. In short, he is Duplices Professiones, both
Merry Andrew and Mountebank, and all his Art is Delusion; and if he is
displeased with that Character, he must thank himself; for as he began to Draw
without occasion given, so he is like to put up without other Satisfaction.

The Astrological Whig Physician.
THAT has Twelve Houses of his own in Heaven, and never a one upon Earth, to
Eat, Drink, or Sleep in, is a mere Insect of Idleness, a Stationary Gipsy, a
Maggot bred in Lily's Nose, or Gadbury's Posteriors, and smells as Rank of Fool
and Knave, as the Bub of a Partridge at Pairing-time. He cannot be rankt among
the Whigs in point of Religion, for he has none at all, and 'twould ruin his
Practice of Figure-flinging to be thought to have any; and therefore must be
placed among the Politic Whigs, that fright the foolish World with incredible
Fears, and invisible Dangers; that talk of nothing but Earthquakes,
Blazing-Stars, Dreadful Comets, and raise such Predictions from them, as will
gratify the Itch of a Seditious Party, and kindle Combustions among a
mal-contented People, who delight to hear of Revolutions and Disturbances,
rather than enjoy a continued Peace and Prosperity. This Sot pretends to know
every thing, but what concerns himself, and in that is the ignorantest Ass in
the Kingdom. He knows (if you have so little sense to believe him) all the
Transactions in the Starry Regiment, can Calculate the Fate of Kingdoms, and
calls himself a Privy-Councellor in the Superior Regions; but knows not when
propitious Jupiter will oblige him with a New Pair of Shoes, or Mercury bring
him Money to mend his Old ones. He can direct other Men to find Hidden
Treasure, while himself wants repairs both at Heels and Elbows. He knows all
the Intrigues between Mars and Venus; but not the Chandler that Cuccolded him
for a Farthing worth of Oatmeal. He knows who broke his Neighbor's House, but
not who laid his Tail at his own Door. He knows all your wants and wishes, and
can Infaliblly resolve all your doubts, by a Horary Question. If your Wife or
Miss, be Six Months gone with Child, he can tell you, that in three more, in
all probability, she will be Delivered; and if your House be ready to fall on
your Head, that it is time to remove to another. He knows all the Grand Secrets,
and Occult Qualities in Nature; as why a Fly should have Six Legs, and an
Elephant or Dromedary but Four! why a Cat when she is pleased Erects her Tail,
and a Dog Wags his cross his Stern? Why Crabs go backward, and Lice move
forwards? With other useful and wonderful Phenomena's. If the Question be in
Physic, he knows all your Distempers as perfectly by his Astrological Scheme,
as if he had traveled through your Stomach and Guts to Supervise your
Intrails. He can Cure All Diseases though a Hundred miles off, by Sigills, Charms
and Telesmans; but is ready to drop to Pieces with the Pox, and cannot Cure
himself. In brief, among all the Fry of Fools and Knaves, Sharks and Cheats
that pretend to be Physicians, the Astrologer is the most incurable Coxcomb,
and errantest Imposter: From others you have something for your Money, but from
him nothing but Death and Damnation for Deserting your God, and ^he Directions
of his Holy Oracles, to Consult with the Devil by Proxy.

The Chimical Whig Physician.
IS an Extract of Enthusiastic Fopperies; the Essence of a Formal Hypocrite;
the Quintessence of a Broken Tradesman; the Elixir of Ignorance, distilled from
the Acida Insipida of Paracelsus's Nose in the height of his Lunacy, when he
boasted of making Man Immortal, and died himself at Two and Thirty: All these
Petrified in the Lake Lemain, at length produced the Lapis Infernalis of a
Chimical Physician; which gilded over with the Deceit and Saintship of a
starched Whig, has advanced many Impudent and Illiterate Mechanics to the
Dignity of Doctors, and they think it as much their Due, as if they had
Learning to deserve it. The most remarkable of them all, is the Canting,
Confident Whig nomlaS, who by obliging the Ignorant, with a Heap of Corrupt
Translations and Family Pills, has worked himself into an Estate, by sending
his Brother Whigs on Dead Men's Errands. He has Rummaged all the Treasuries of
Nature, to find out the Gas sive Ens Sulphuris, which he gives in large
quantities to his Brethren, that by accustoming their Bodies to the use of
Brimstone here, they may better endure it in another World; for so Mithridates
made himself Unpoysonable. By Eves dropping a Conclave of Newington
Philosophers, he has attained the Art of making Eeles of Horsehair steeped in
Water, and will oblige the Royal Fishery with the Process, for the good of the
Subscribers. By Indefatigable pains, and continual Study in Hidden Sciences, he
has grop'd out the Mysterious Art of Coschinomancy, Anglice the Seive and
Scissars, and intends to publish it next Term, as a Supplement, to help sell
his Practice of Physic; that the Impression may not be converted (like his
other Works) into Wast Paper. How much are we obliged to this Semi bovemque
Virum, and Semi virumque Bovem, half Quack, half Tubster, or Kirleus and B --
ges blended into an Individuum Vagum. He that shows the height of his Learning,
in Canting, Snaphling, and commending himself and his Medicines in an
unintelligible Dialect: Which must be attributed to the Heat of his Furnace,
and the Fumes of Piss, Sutt, and Sulpher, which have Exsiccatted his Brains,
and sense cannot be expected from him, till they have been Refrigerated in the
Ditch side Auqasduct. He has more Quixotisms in Chimistry, than Prince Butler
in Politics, or his Brother Dick Stafford in Divinity: Is as near gaining the
Philosophers Stone, as Van Helmont the Universal Medeicine, and nothing but
Fleet-Ditch stands betwixt him, and Mountains of Diamonds. All his Medicines
are Hermetical Preparations, and to name them looks like Conjuring. He has an
Essence of the Sun, a Milk of the Moon, an Extract of the Seven Stars, the
Humidum Radicale of Metals, the Balsom of Flint, the Magistery of Pearls, the
Elixer of Life, the Rosy Crucian Pantarva, and the Soul of this World, and that
in the Moon: All which are to be sold in his Elaboratory, at the price of your
Lives and Fortunes, if you swallow them; and will keep good (if ever they were
so) as long as a Whig can retain a Secret, a Poet keep Money, or nomlaS himself
within the Bounds of Truth and Honesty, who is no more to be believed, when he
boasts of his Cures, than the Devil if he should expound upon the Gospel; but I
have taken more pains with him, than he is worth, and therefore must set him
aside, to make room for.

The Stately Methodical Whig Physician, or
A Grave Sir in a Gilded Chariot, with two Laced Liveries, to bespeak his
Grandeur, and raise the Price of his Visits, who boasts that with Opium, and
Jesuits Powder, he can cure all Diseases, which he but Pallitates for a time,
and then sends them to sleep with their Fathers. He enters your Chamber with a
Close Mouth, but an Openhand, for like Balams Ass, he will not speak, till he
has seen three Angels; and then leaving a Scrawl to his Apothecary, which he
can Read but cannot Construe, the Don is in have to go to a Conventicle, but
has ordered his Lacquey, to call him out again as soon as he is set, as if to a
Patient; when 'twas only to Bubble the Congregation into an Opinion that he is
a Man of Great Practice, and the Holder-Forth takes the Hint, and prays aloud
for his Success: Which in the Modern Phrase of Physicians, is crying Work for
the Tinker. For this Service the Non Con has his Dinner with the Doctor, and
they drink Wine so long, till both their Noses are as Red and Fiery, as if they
had been made by a Drunken Smith, that after he had Forged them, forgot to
Quench 'em, and then the Vultures take their Flights for New Quarrey, to make
work for one another. Among one Hundred of these Methodical Quacks, you shall
scarce find five Rational Physicians: Their Ne plus Ultra in Acute diseases are
Jesuits Bark, and Opium. In Chronical Distempers, the Milk Diet, the Steel
Course, and Mineral Waters. As for Purging, Glystering, Blistering, and
Bleeding, they are fortuitously Directed according to the Doctors Caprichio;
and lastly the Cordial Course, which is Spirit of Hartshorn, and Spirit of
Piss Succinated. Now for Physicians, who pretend to be Medici Legales
dogmatici, Rationales, and Very Methodici, and yet tie up themselves only to
five Spurious Remedies, is as much Muntebanking in their Coaches, as vending Or
vietan on a Stage is. Our Patient is now in a Course, and as the Dutchman says,
being Shipped with the Devil, must go over with him; however, finding the Vessel
is over-laden with Bark, a Consult is desired to drive out the Jesuit; who
after laying their Learned Heads together, seeing the West Indies would not
afford them a remedy against the Jesuits Bark, the East Indies shall, and now
comes in the God Stone, though they neither know what it is, nor the use of it,
it must be thrown at the Jesuit. The Consult are agreed, being all in a
Confederacy, to employ none but those of the same Gang. Flectere Si ne quo,
Superos Acheronta movebo. He can but dye, and therefore they take the
opportunity of making Experiments, at the cost of the Patients Life; and these
Doctors having the Supreme Authority of Physic, none dare question 'em, for
fear of falling into their Physic Inquisition: Whereas another would have been
hanged for half the Barbirity they used against him: For these and many other
Reasons, (I suppose) the Babilonians Herodot l. 1.
Banished all Professors of Physic out of their Dominions; and Rome Bodinus de
Republ. p. 513.
likewise kept out all Physicians Six Hundred Years together, and in that time
enjoyed a greater degree of Health, by the Natural Dictates of their Reasons,
and Experience of Familiar Remedies, and Regulating their Diet, than ever they
did since their Admission; and therefore I shall pray with Parson Ball, at the
tying on of his Sword, pray God I may never have occasion to use them, for to
live Physically is to live Miserably.

An Amphibious Latitudinarian, Aldermanlike Whig.
IN the Country he wears the Title of a Right Worshipful Sir Something, that
Sprung up from Nothing; but being laid Cross the Shoulders with a Knighthood;
his Horn is exalted above his Neighbors. His Father was a Man of good Stock,
though but a Grasier; he bought the Land, and his Son the Title; and the next
Generation returns his Family into their Original. His Study is the Fashion of
his Clothes. His Religion Whiggism, which like French Pottage is made up of
every thing. A May Pole is his apt Resemblance, which is Rootless for want of
Principles, Sapless for want of Wit, and Fruitless for want of Charity, with a
Weather Cock on the Top, changing with every Wind of Doctrine; who being now
levelled with the Ground, I must seek his Counterpart in another Place and
Station. In a City our Latitudinarian has clim'd up into Alderman; and being
wrapped in Furr, and tied to a Gold Chain, becomes Venerable in his Authority,
and Right Honorable among the Whigs, for his Native Instability, and
Neutrality, and his Pliableness in Bending either in the House of God or
Rimmon. To show he is of no Religion, he professes to be a Friend to all, and
thinks there is not a Pin to choose, between the Bible and the Alcoran! He
would be wholly a Christian, but that he is something of an Atheist, and would
be wholly an Atheist, but that he is partly a Christian. He would be a
Churchman, but for the Severities of Mortification, and the Doctrine of
Restitution, and cannot be a Presthyterian, because he has not a Constitution
fit for Long Prayers, nor the Stool of Repentance. Independent Expositions, and
Lectures, would take up too much of his time; and the Quakers Silent Meetings
in a Barn, would unqualify him for showing his Oratory and Eloquence on the
Bench; and therefore he calls himself a Latitudinarian Whig, and that answers
all things. Every New Religion Scares him from a former, but none has power to
persuade him to it self. He finds Reason in all Opinions, but Truth in none,
and leads his Life accordingly. His Estate alone has Elected him into the
Highest Post in the Common Hall, for had he not been worth Thousands in Cash or
Ware, he never have rose above the Degree of a Beadle, by his Understanding or
Interest. However he is Ambitious of a Name, and therefore lays no stress upon
Honor and Conscience; but Wags his Tail upon every mean Cit, that Spits in his
Mouth by Flattery; and is never any thing, but what his Profit and his Company
make him. Among Churchmen, he is what they say of Chine of Beef, Pout,
Pheasant, Partridge, or whatever else will Relish with their curious Palates.
The King's Health in their Company goes down as Glibly as his Mistresses; which
at other times would go down with as much difficulty, as his Wive's, or a Cup
of Sour Sixes, If a Courtier makes him a Visit, the Velvet Chair, and a Flask
of Florence, shows how kindly he takes it, and to make him some Requital, there
shall be no discourse against the Ministry, or Mismanagements, at his Table for
Four and twenty hours afterward. He tells the Courtier how well the City and
their Wives are Governed, and forgets not to mention his own share in the
Settlement; but no sooner are his Gown and He removed into an Apartment where
the Whigs are stowed, but he lays aside his 'To'ther end o'th Town Face, and
slips on his Magistratical Phiz, and Salutes his Brethren in Mood and Figure.
If they repremand him for going sometimes to Church, he excuses it, as being a
Magistrate, and must Act Politickly: That he is in Conscience against the
Church, and goes thither only for his Convenience, to be a Spy upon that Party,
and asks God forgiveness for going to Prayers among them; and goes to the
Conventicle in the Afternoon, to make one part o'th day Scandalize the other.
Thus like a State Jack of all Trades, he appears Godly from the Teeth outward,
by putting the Cheat upon himself, and his Admirers. He sees two Parties
contesting for superiority, and therefore thrusts his Nose in the back-sides of
both the Pretenders; that whoever Wins the day, he may put in for a Friend to
the Prevailing Party. His Politics have also the perfections of the Whig: He
cannot take the Oaths to the Government, nor the Eucharist from a Church Man,
but as a Qualification to an Office of Profit, and so he would take it in Lambs
Wool, and at Constantinople would be Circumcised with a Reservation. He
discovers his Allegiance by repeating Misdemeanors, and in finding Faults
without any desire to mend them; but on all occasions, takes advantage to Cramp
and Canker all Men of a Steady Loyalty. Accordingly he divides his Life,
between Restless apprehensions, Doubts never to be resolved, Deliberations that
can never take effect, and starting Notions in Government, that no mortal Man
understands any further, than a Superinducing one Confusion upon another, and
encountering Lesser Evils with Greater: Which has given him the Character of a
Statesman Reversed, or a Christian with the wrong side Outward.

The Senceless, Upstart, Whig Country Gentleman.
IS an Animal begot betwixt Enthusiastic Dullness, and Sophisticated Reason,
and stole into the World when the Eye of Providence was a sleep, to Ridicule
the whole Creation, and outdo Africa with a Monster of a new Edition. His Name
in the Lapland Dialect is Wotsallon. He has the Natural Privilege of a
Visor-mask, and his own Face effectually describes him. His Strength is in his
Back, and his Weakness in his Brain, as if Nature had cut him out for a
Stallion to a Brothel-House. His Heels are better mounted than his Head, and
for the Figure sake might serve for Basis or Capitol. When he walks, he Grunts
like a Sow in Quest of Sun-Cake, Waddles like a Bear in state, and wants
nothing but a Rout of Bors and Bag-pipes to grace his solemn Entry to a
Conventicle, anglice, the Bear Garden. When he Eats, you would think all the
Cormorants in the Universe were united into one devouring Cerberus, to famish
the rest of Mankind, and when the Booby laughs you would think a Mandrake groaned,
or a Bed of Wormly Toads were croaking their Vespers. His Rickety Head is swollen
beyond a Symetrical Proportion, and was naturally adorned with Carrots of a
right Sandwich Hew, but now is covered with Puntack's cast white Wig to
disappoint the Hoggs, and keep his Fool's head from the Weather. His Face looks
as if some ignorant Carver had cut it out of a Dirty Turnip, Skinned it with the
Hexagongy of a Honeycomb, and embellished his Cheeks with the Blue from his
Eyes, to make the Figure more astonishing. His Lips are as green as a Leek, and
have the Virtues of it also, in preserving his Rotten Teeth from Gracing the
Shoulder-Belt of a Corn-Cutter; but if this Description be too brief to know
him by, you cannot miss the Rake every Noon hanging at a Lord's Arse in an
Eating-house; with a Soul full of Hypocrisy, a Heart full of Treachery, a Mouth
full of Commendation of Oliver's Usurpation, and Lies against the present
Court. A Belly full of Claret, a white Wig full of Powder, a Pocket full of
Papers against the Government, and a Head Brimfull of Emptiness.

Heraldry knowns nothing of his Ancestors on either side, for like Mushrooms
they grew up in a Night of Rebellion, by Plundering the Loyal Party, and
agreeably to his Stock, had this Miscellany of Whig and Publican his Education.
When Bulk and want of Brains, rendered him fit for Indentures, he was put
Apprentice to a Woodmonger, and when Seven Years of Eating and Drinking, and
now and then a little Ditch-side Whore, to enter him, were accomplished, he set
up at London, Master of a great Dog, a small Stack of Faggots, and a Lighter
of Coals about the bigness of a Hogs Troffe; but this Sickly show, not being
able to support his Extravances, according to the Laudable Custom of the City,
some Woman must be Cheated. To a Marriage Broken Brother he Complains for want
of a Wife, to exalt his Horns to an Equal Height with his Neighbors, who on
paying the Prime Cost for Procuration, and Mr. Scruples Fee for assisting the
Contrivance, a Plump Tarpolins Daughter, newly Rig'd, Washed, and Tallowed, is
found out, and Attacked: And though some Friends of the Girls opposed the Match,
as unwilling that any thing should Marry a Baboon, but what had been begotten
by a Monkey; yet the Devil's two Broker, the Holder Forth; and the Solicitor,
having Melted down the Mother with Evening Exercises, long Prayers, Fat Loins
of Veal, and Repeated Drams of the Bottle, and setting up the Fop as a
Stiff-Rumpt Whig, and a Zealous Conventicler, the Smithfield Bargain was struck
up with the Mother, and the young Lump of Wapping Zeal, and Breeding, finding
she had no other choice but the Collier, or a Shipless Saylor, she consented
the former should enter her Poop, and steer her, for Better for Worse, into the
fatal Port, of an empty Wood Wharf, where though replenished soon after, by
transmuting the Saylor's Mettle into a full stock of Wood and Coals; carrying a
greater Sail than the slender Smack would bear, the Vessel sprung a Leak in her
Bread Room, and the crazy Mast standing bent a while, at length Snapt asunder,
the Vessel Sunk in the Harbor, and the Quarter part Master and Owner, from the
hopes of a Livery Hood and Gown, which was the height of his Ambition, was
confined within the compass of a Leather Jacket, ecchoing about the streets
Great hard dry Faggots, five for Six pence, Faggots. This Employ not agreeing
with his Body, and being also above the reach of his Brain to manage; with his
Horse, and Cart, his Wife and other Lumber of the House, he retired to Fast and
Pray in the Country, for a Translation of his Sires into their Original Dust
and Ashes, that he from a Broken Trades Man, might have a Resurrection into
Gentleman.

The blind Baud Fortune, according to her usual Method of obliging Fools, with
the help of a Whig Doctor, and the Prayers of the Canting Tribe, sends his
Grand-Sire and Father to their places, and and removes the Whifling Whig out of
W -- Shire into Heart -- Shire, and Palms him upon that Country for a
Gentleman, without any other qualification than a large Stock of Whiggism,
Hypocrisy, and Confidence. Now he sets up for a man of figure, Whig, Beau and
Spark, and uses all the modern Arts to accomplish himself for something to be
talked on; and whereas in the days of his Retrogradation, he kept Sneaking
company, such as had some remains of Conscience about them; that were afraid of
being Damned, that went to Hear, Lay with their Own Wives, said Grace of an Ell
Long before two Eggs and a Sallad; and in short, were Errant Whig Christians,
without the least tincture of Beau, Bully or Bravo among them: He now pearches
up into Squire, and Worshipful, and Drinks, as Bloodily; Swears, as Damnably;
and Whores, as like a Gentleman, as is possible for a Woodmongers Apprentice to
attain to. He bids Adien to the Droanish Custom of Sober Whigs, in Kennelling
at Twelve, and Rising at Eleven; and now says the night was made for Beasts to
Rest in, and Sparks to be Pox'd and Revil in; and therefore never Nods in
London, but when there comes out a Proclamation against Sleeping, and then he
takes a Nap of Nine hours long to Affront the Government he lives by Sobriety
and Temperance he reckons among the number of the Seven Deadly Sins, and to
distinguish himself from the Lower Rate of Whigs, boasts how often he has been
Flux'd, and the great store of Buboes and Shankers he has had about him.
Sometimes he shows you his Face Broke against the Posts of a Tavern Door, his
Collar Bone dislocated, by being kicked down stairs in a Baudy-House, and
there is no question but one time or other, he will have his Brains beat out to
inform his Judgment, or be Run through the Guts by the La -- Shire Knight, for
Cracking and Lying of the favors he has received from his Virtuous Lady, and
then the World will be Rid of one of its greatest Encumbrances.

Having made this start into Gentleman, his next Affair is to keep up that
Character among the Party, by herding with all Factions against the Government,
Ecclesiastical and Civil, and sets up for a Drunken Saint, though the immodish
Coxcomb knows Religion is out of Fashion. The Surname of his Sect is unknown in
Alexander Ross's View of Religions; and though fools, make up the Gutts of all
Churches, yet his Life is so Scandalous he is not owned as a Member of any. His
Religion consists in Railing against all Governments but Oliver's, and cursing
the Whore of Babylon worse than the strect Crack that clapped him. He would be a
Prestbyterian, but for fear of the close stool of Repentance. An Independent,
but that he has neither Gifts nor Graces, and thinks himself not Fool nor
Madman enough yet to be a Quaker; though he has the Ill manners of 'em all, in
bespattering the Court, notwithstanding he Lives upon the Alms-Baket of the
Treasury.

The Stomach of an Ostridge is a Type of his Conscience, and his pretended
Generosity, is like the dissembled Compassion of a Crocodile. Whomsoever he
fawns on he Devours, and swallows Lands, Tenements and Stewardships, like a
Jugler Knives, without ever choking him. Two things he never kept in his life,
Fast-days, nor Promises, and his Words being but wind, he never scruples
breaking 'em Upwards in good Faith, nor Downwards in good manners. Honesty he
looks upon as a Starving Notion, next Door Neighbor to Beggary. Conscience,
like the Smallpox, haunted him when he was young; but since he came to years
of Maturity and Business, seeing it Interfere with his Interest, he gave it a
Wring by the Nose, and Kicked it down Stairs, that it might not Disturb his
company. To entitle him to the Office of a Publican (which his security e're
long will dearly suffer for) he makes a show of good Husbandry, which is indeed
but the effects of his Necessities; and therefore though he gives his Brother
Whigs, their Bellies full of Bacon when they come to see him, he makes them so
drunk before they go that they Spew it up again, which serves his Dogs for a
Meal, and so looses little by his Entertainments. He holds the Scale of Justice
as Blindly, as the Goddess that was born so; shows his Wisdom most in his
Silence, and does his Country best service in his Absence. His Severity is all
against Regretors and Fore-stallers, and cares not if they Raise the Devil, so
they don't Raise the Market. His Servants are in as many Shapes, and
Employments, as if their Master was a Magician; for the same person that Rigs
his Worship for the Bench, serves the Dogs in the Kinnel. To save the expense
of keeping a Clerk he writes his Warrants himself, from an ill President; but
when he has done cannot Read them, without the assistance of that Catholic
Utensil he calls his Secretary, his Valet, his Butcher, his Groom, his
Dogkeeper, his Every thing: And therefore hangs him behind his Coach, to be
serviceable upon all Public occasions; to wipe his Master's Shoes, or assist
his Woodmongers Worship in Rectifying Abuses and Mismanagements. Of all the
Senceless Animals that attend him, his two Black Mares have the Constantest,
though not the Sweetest Employment, who carry Dung to the field all the Week, and
to the Church, or Church Meeting House on Sundays.

Being thus accomplished for a Worshipful Shustice of the Peace, and the
the other thing too, Quorum, though he no more understands the meaning of it in
English, than if it was Arabic: To complete the Character of a Finished Fop,
he also sets up for a Wit, by swearing with a Bonne Grace, telling Baudy
stories, and convincing all the World, that he has no Sense, no Learning, no
Religion, no Good Nature; but boasts of being a Sott, and having the Pox five
times, that he may be admired for something. Old Fools and Fops that set up for
Wits and Rakes, are the Directors and Governors of his Life, and he despises
all Mankind, that are not arrived at his Pitch of Gallantry. He looks upon it as
an Unpardonable sin, to be without a Ribbon round his Wast, though a Halter would
better become his Neck, for honester men than he have been hanged. He calls all
Men Clowns that offer to Brush the Powder from their Coats, that han't a
Useless Sword, with a Dangling Ribbon down to their Shoes, and a juicy Dab of
Snet and Snush, at the end of his Snout, and a fine Silk Wastcoat and Breeches
to wipe it on, in the absence of an Indian Hankerchief. He is a great admirer
of all Women's Companies but his Wife's, though he smeils so Rank that he is
scarce able to be endured in Men's. He Chuckles at the sight of a White
Peticoat, like a Turky-Cock at a Red one; yet could never attain to any above
the degree of a Common Street Walker; for the Woman that would grant this Pole
Cat the favor of a Run, without giving him the Pox in Requital, would scarce
deny one to the Devil. He has a Hundred ways of getting Money, and a hundred
and fifty of spending it, besides Eating, Drinking, and Wenching. viz. in
Galloping from Town to Town, and from Conventicle to Conventicle, to buz Fears
and Jealousies among Citizens; Factions among Country Gentlemen, and Sedition
among the common People: Coaching it from Taverns to Eating-houses, and
thrusting himself into the company of Titulado's at the Price of Paying all the
Reckoning. In the Country he lives like a Hawking, Setting, Hunting Fool, that
rides many a Mile in the Dirt for a purchase like himself, neither worth the
time, nor trouble, that I have bestowed upon him; for striving to correct a
Blockhead by Satyr, which describes him to others, while he turns away his Eyes
from seeing his own Picture, is like railing to a Deaf-man, and therefore
'twould be a pleasure to men of Wit and Honor, and for Public Vengeance, if
this fool in a Frame, had some feeling, and were Sensible when he is corrected.
However, if this don't Reform him, and cause him to make Restitution, the next
Setting shall produce his Effigies, more to the Life than this is, and give you
his Name in words at length, and not in figures. In the mean time I will
describe his favorite Dunce, which he goes three or four miles to hear, in
contempt of the Worthy Minister of his own Parish.

The Church Whig, or the Ecclesiastical Bifarius.
IS the Offspring of Ignorance and Nonconformity, who being Dieted a while in
a Country School, upon Rules, Exceptions, and redious Repetitions of Amo's and
(...) till he had learned how Phaeton broke his Neck, how many Apples Tytirus
had for his Supper, and understood Homer's Commendations of Ach^lles's Toes,
and the Graecians Boots; knew a Hexameter from a Pentameter, a Sponde from a
Dactil, and could fit them without Sense to his Fingers-end; though his Parts
were contemptible, and the Purses of his Friends at too low an Ebb, to maintain
him like a Scholar: To the University he must go for a little Logic, and
Ethics, and is Predestined by his Relations to be a Cl^rgy-man, in hopes
that a Benefice where Henry the Eight had not been too busy with his Toll Dish,
but that yet there remained some Good-Land, that Afforded Milk and Honey, might
be the Portion of our Juvenile intended Levite. Now that success might answer
the desires of his Parents, and that the Babe of Grace might not Surfeit on
Human Learning, the Tutor employs him in Bed making, Chamber-Sweeping, and
Water-fetching, that the Sizars Brains might not be over heated with too much
Vain Philosophy. Having sucked in about Six or Seven mouthfuls of University
Air, exactly learnt to Respond to Quid est Logica, and Quot Sunt Vertutes
Morales; with Burgurdicius, Eustachius, and such Excellent Help Meets in
Divinity in his Coat Pocket; down he goes by the first Carrier on the Top of a
Pack, into the Country to Propogate the Gospel, and by that time he can say his
Predicaments, and his Creed, you find him in a Pulpit; for now he has the
Choice of Preaching or Starving: Though it had been Ten times better for the Lad
and the Church, that he had been made a Tooth Drawer, or a Porter. Some Poor
Starved Vicar, that never could keep a Curate in his Life, gives him a Title to
Ord^nation, and then a Neighboring Knight takes him into his Family, at the
Price of Ten Pounds a year, and a Sunday Pudding, to perform Holy Offices, and
spoil his Children by making him their Tutor. Being a Stranger to the House,
and a Decent Behavior, my Cousin Abigal out of Charity, and in hope of the
Benefit of her Clergy, instructs him in the knowledge of a Chaplains Duty, viz.
That he must never speak in the Parlour but at Grace and Prayer time, and be
sure with a Low Bow to Rise in time from the Table, take away his Plate, and
march off with his Hat under his Arm, and cleave a Logg into Billets, for the
Parlour Fire, whilst the Knight, my Lady, and her Children, eat up the
Chickens, Tarts, and Custards, and then calls in the Chiplin to Dismiss them.
This obligation upon the young Levite, gives him a liking to Mrs. Abigal, which
she Cherishes with the Remains of her Ladies Caudles, and the Pills of her
China Oranges, and lays the Foundation of his Ruin. To please his Mistress, and
gain the Vicarage that is Entailed upon her Office by the Custom of the Manner,
he is sometimes found Cracking Nutts, and Reading in his Study, and having
luckily discovered a Vacuum in his Upper Room, he fills it with Learned Jargon,
Materia Prima, Occult Qualities, and Attoms, which the Lady of the House
observing, she breaks out in his Commendation. Truly the Young Man is much
improved, since he came into our Family. The Ladies good Word, the Knight's
good Nature, and Mrs. Abigals's Apron Strings growing too short, preferrs him
at once to a Benefice, and a Belly-piece, where the All Wise Patron, and the
All Understanding adjoining Justice, being both Severe and Sour Whigs, the
Chipling to gain their Favors, and Reassume what he was bred to, sets up for a
Church Whig also, and leaves nothing unattempted that may show his Respects to
the Dissenting Party. Now he sets up for a Conforming Dissenter, and carries
the fair Outside of a Man, and is an errant Knave in his Heart: One that
indifferently divides his Body and his Soul betwixt Right and VVrong: The
Government has his Head and Purt'nances, and the Schism his Affections. He is
externally a Church of England-Man, but inwardly a Phanatique, and his own
Judgment Condemns his Practice, which he Dispenses with, to make Friends of the
Unrighteous Mammon. At first he bowed toward the Altar, and now if their
Worships are absent, to Goodman Webb, and Goodman Bland, and the best
Yeomanry of the Parish. He divides his good Wishes equally between the King and
his Patron, but prays for the former in the Desk, and the latter in the Pulpit.
He Huddles over the Prayers of the Church, as if he was Riding Post, and longed
to be at the end of his Journey; but is very Devout and Deliberate in his own
Extempore Belchings, as if want of Sense made 'em acceptable to God, as well as
to his Ignorant Auditors. He sets his Face by their Worships Glasses, casts his
Shapes in their Mould, and serves the VVhig Dons in all Offices. Prays and
Expounds in their Families, Writes their Leases, Bonds, and Warrants, and
gives them Glysters when they are Costive; which with Collecting his Tyth Pigs,
Calves, and Geese, and his Eggs and Easter Offerings, takes up so much of his
time, that he has scarce Leisure to steal an Old Parliament Sermon, and
therefore Stuffs his Memory with harsh Metaphors, Childish Similitudes, and
Misapplied Tales of Tubs, that serve him as well on all occasions. He has
however an Excellent Knack (as they call it) in Preaching of such Gibberish as
it is, and is always Provided. If a Text lies at Sculk all the Week, and will
not be found to be Rived in Pieces before Saturday Night, or Sunday Morning, he
then Climbs up to it by Six Steps, as Solomon ascended to the Ivory Throne, or
else goes down to it, as Moses from the Hill of Sinai, and wherever he finds
it Splits it into pieces, to make it look like something. If it be a Soft Text,
and does not Drop a sunder of it self, he Crumbles it into Morsels between his
Fingers, to feed the Brood of Chickens assembled. If like Meadow Hay the Text be
long, he Chops it for the tender Calves, and gives the Oarts to the Strong
Bulls of Bashan. If the Text be Free Timber, he divides it into as many parts,
as there are Words or Letters in the whole; but if it prove Knotty, he divides
it (Beloved) into One part, and then it looks like Rachel and Leah, or like
Abraham at his Tent Door; like the Dove that Noah sent out of the Ark to look
for fair Weather; like a Carpenters pair of Stradling Compasses, or an Orchard
of Pomgranets. He is mighty Provident in Husbanding the Words of the Text; and
from a Monasillable, like a Conjurer can Raise many Points of Doctrine and
Observation. If the Word And, sits in his Text, it is like Matthew at the Receipt
of Customs; or like Zoar, it is but a little Word, and observes from it, That
small things must not be disregarded. If he encounter the Word But, standing or
Traveling in his Text, it is like the Man going to Jericho, and it Preaches to
you Caution and Comfort, first Caution and shows that this But is such a Butte
that you cannot Hitt it, unless Free Grace direct your Arrow; and secondly for
your Comfort, it is a Butt of Excellent Wine, and then falls to Broaching it.
Sometimes he shows his Wit in Jingling with Words, and his Learning by false
Concord and Quantity, and then opens his Treasury of Tales Metaphors and
Similies, wherein the Almighty himself is in danger of being Blasphemed, if the
Metaphor-Monger had not the Art of bringing himself off, with a Limping, As it
were, As I may so say, and Salving all by hobling in, with Reverence be it
spoken. Then to humor the Factious he Groans, Leaps, Hurls and lays about him,
in Railing Bloodily against Pluralities, and wishes the Clergy as many Wives as
Benefices. Non Residence he Confutes by that plain Text of Scripture, Abraham
begat Isaac, which is as Convincing as Demonstration it self; for had Abraham
not Resided, but discontinued from Sarah his Wife, he could never have begot
Isaac, which sets 'em all a Groaning in the Middle-Isle, worse than at the
Burials of their Fathers, or Husbands, or at the News of Cherry's miscarrying
of a White-fac'd Calf: Which with a Sober Word or two against the Government,
and setting out his own Losses by the Tax upon Births and Burials, which kept
young Men from Gettiug Children, and old Men from Dying to save the King's
Duty, he concluded the Preachment, and the Masters of the Parish in
Commiferation of his suffering, charitably Order the half-Fac'd Brother, a
Recruit out of the Poors Rate; in a grateful Commemoration whereof, he resolves
at the first opportunity to burn the Cover of the Font to boil his Leeke
Porrage; to let the Common Prayer Book fall into the Dirt, to spare the Trouble
of Reading it; and to Tare out the Surplis into Necessaries for the Family, to
show his Zeal against Popery, and his Aversion to Ceremonies, and so much shall
serve for this Time and Text, next Lord's Day you shall have him again with a
New one.

A Slasher, or a Tirannical Ignorant Pedagogue.
IS an Essence that stands in need of a Double Definition, for he is nothing
related to the Man he would appear to be. He is a Tyrant in a Commonwealth of
Boys, and armed with a Rod and Ferula, is more insolent, and Arbitary, than a
Universal Monarch with his Sword and Scepter: And we need not wonder at
Dyonisius, the Tyrant, who being expulsed his Kingdom, and getting to be Master
of a School, should choose that Sovereignty for the more Voluptuous Dominion.
Beating of Children about their Books, has always been decryed by the wisest
Philosophers, when they understood it no further than the pleasure of Revenge;
but what would they have said of a Punishment, which serves a Viler Affection,
and may be numbted among those (...) and those (...) that are not to be named
among (...) without borrowing the Cleanly expression of the Incomparable
Hudibrass.

The Pedant on the School Boys Breeches,
Does claw and curry his own Itches.
A Man cannot speak without Shame of this Abominable Vice, nor expose this
Malady to Cure, without reproaching Mankind, and giving such Instances, as
would render the Malefactors the Hated Objects of all the World; the Master is
Idle, takes no Pains, and has no Patience, and the Child is Chastised for the
pleasure of gratifying a Base and Unnatural Appetite: And Catches at a fault in
a Boys Construing, to please himself in Inflicting the Punishment. The fault
once Sprung, the Bird is seized, the Flesh is made Bare, and how does the
Jer-Faulon Perch over it; and Commit a Sin, besides that of Cruelty, that
Nature abhors the thoughts of; and which Quintilian assigns as a Reason for the
Total Abolition of such a Barbarous and Inhuman Custom, in words which much
affected me: Jam si minor in dilegendis Custodum et Praeceptorum moribus fuit
Cura, pudet Discere in quae Probra nefandi hominis isto caedendi jure
abutantur, non morabar in part hominis hac, Nimium est quod intilligitur. I
will not English it, because it is the Sore I would fain have to be Remedied,
and for the sake of which I have made this Digression: That the Persons
concerned might Reform, before they are more Exposed, or a Law be promulged to
Restrain and Punish it.

His milder Character is a Silly Animal in black, with a Band as broad as a
Slabberring Bib, and serves for that purpose; A Steeple-Crown'd Hat, with broad
Brims, which shows he is flying into Deacon's Orders, and with good Friends may
be Preferred to be a Reader: Or he is a Fardle of Words (for he never had
meaning in his Life) bound up in Calves Skin, and Lettered on the back, Ludi
Illiterarij. His Soul is drowned in Flesh, and is the most dangerous Creature
in the World, for confirming of an Atheist: Who would Swear it was nothing but
the Temperature of his Body: His Thoughts never reach beyond his Eyes, and all
his Faculties, like Restive Jades, cannot be Spurred to the Pursuit of any
commendable Quality. His Tongue always runs before his Wit, in Mood and Figure,
and Lilies Lex in Sermon tenenda cannot stop it. Ignorance, and Gross Feding,
are his Founders; Railing Rabbis, and wide knee'd Breeches are his Nurses, and
his Life is but a borrowed blast of Wind, for between two Religions, as between
two Doors, he is alwas Whistling. He is averse to all kinds of Government, and
yet thinks it no less than Treason, to say the Nominative Case does not Govern
the Verb, or that the first Supine has no Active Signification; but after all,
should the Laws Ecclesiastical enjoin the wearing clean Shirts, he would be
Lowsy rather than Conform to a cleanly Command. His Memory is exercised in
setting his Phiz in a Form of good Literature, and he neither Coughs, nor
Spits, nor blows his Nose, but by a Rule in Grammar. His Learning was thrown
into him Glyster Wise, and therefore he speaks Sentences more Familiarly than
Sense; Writes true Latin, but false English; and is a Stranger in no part of
the World so much as in his own Country. He gives Rules for Husbandry from
Virgils Georgicks, for Breeding Cattle from his Bucolicks. Teaches Stratagems
in War, from Caesar's Commentaries, and Keckermans Logic furnishes him with an
Unanswerable Ergo. His motion on Foot is a measure, on Horseback a Gallop, for
his Legs are his own, but his Horse and Spurrs were borrowed. There went but a
Pair of Sheers between him and a Non Con Preacher; and both their Misfortunes
is not so much, in being a Couple of Starched Conceited Fools, as in taking so
much Pains to show it. The extent of his Ambition is Criticism, and Tully is
his Example. He Selects his Phrases by the Sound, and not by the Sense; and the
Eight parts of Speech are his Menial Servants, which he employs on all
occasions.

A Politic, Tricking, Overreaching, Trading Whig.
IS a true Copy of a Wicked Original, where Arrogance supplies the Place of
Birth, Inhumanity of Sincerity, and Cheating of Wit. His Cap and his Knee, his
Smiles and good Words, are all at a Minutes Warning, to be dealt about upon all
necessary occasions. All his Actions are Tipped with fair pretenses, yet are
directed to himself, and he never looks any further. He supplies his own
Necessities, by asking others what they want. No Man Speaks more, and to less
purpose; for his Words are like his wares, Twenty of One Sort, and he turns
them over alike, to all his Customers. Whatsoever he shows you, is the Newest
and best thing in all the Town, though it be the worst in his Shop or Warehouse.
His Conscience was a Commodity, that would have lain upon his Hands, and
therefore 'twas the first thing he Put off, and the want of it, serves him
better than the use on it. His Religion is but Skin deep, it may appear in his
Codled Countenance, but never comes near his Heart; it is Writ upon Changeable
Taffaty, and like folded Pictures, makes him look one way like a Saint, and
another way like the Devil. In his Shop he is a Tradesman, in the Coffee-house
a Statesman, and like an Earwig is always Creeping into peoples Ears, to breed
Maggots in their Heads, and Filth in their Mouths at the Election of Mayors and
Sheriffs, and City Officers. When he feels his craft is exposed, his Cunning
Detected, and his Cheating Tricks discovered and made punishable by Law, he
cries out his Diana Trade is endangered; and if the Holder forth is bribed to
whisper some Ugly Suggestion about the loss or Decay of Trade, which always
was, and always will be the Complaint of Shop and Conventicle, it is carried
about with Clamor and Tragical Declamation; the Noise of Persecution
Propogates like Thunder, spreads like Lightning, and every mouth is filled with
Dreadful Apprehensions, that the Government are blowing up the Thames, Raising
a Marian Persecution against Trade and Grace, and their Godliness. And that
their Religion and Seven-Pence in the Shilling, would be brought to the Stake
together, if care was not taken by them to prevent it; and then the Trading Mob
like Wild Asses, having snuff'd in these Prejudices, it is but natural they
should Bray, and be impatient, when they find their Credit Low, and Fancy Trade
a sinking, though there is no cause for this Complaint, only the People are Hair'd
and Jugled out of their Senses, by the Dictates of a Faction, and the Venom of
a Seditious Club of Common-Wealth's-men. He seems more Holy than others, to
gain the advantage of being more wicked. He avoids Taverns and Alehouses by
Daylight, only to Drink and Whore in Private. He knows there is Field room
enough to play the Knave out of the reach of the Statute, and to act the Part
of the white Devil in Hugger Mugger, and the Civil Magistrate be never the
Wiser; and therefore does his Cheating Jobs Discreetly, and Juggles and
Defrauds under the Visor of a Good Christian. He has too much Wit to play the
Fool in some Scandalous Cases, and Pleads Liberty of Conscience, for Biting his
very Brethren in another; and so is honest by Discretion, and a Knave by
Inclination. His seeming Sanctimony is made up of Negatives: If he does not
take the Meat and Drink from the Hungry and Thirsty, Use Strangers like Dogs,
nor strip Poor People Naked, he calls himself a Saint, and while he keeps his
Hands from Picking and Stealing, lets his Tongue loose to Lying and Slandering.
He Fawns like a Spaniel upon every New Customer, and a Puking Wambling
Conscience, is his Cloak to hide his Knavery. Oaths of Fidelity and Sacraments,
are hard things to Swallow; but rather than lose an Office of Profit, or a Post
to Plague the Government, he can digest them with as much ease as Lucatella's
Balsam, and be as upright a VVhig still, as any in the Linsey-wolsey Club of
busy Intermedlers; and so in Dissenting or Complying carries on the same Design
of Mischief, to the Public, and security to his own Mothers Child. He rises by
Degrees from one kind of Mischief to another, and makes one Solaecism in the
Ground work, produce a thousand in the Superstructure. He advances from Zeal to
Jealousy, from Jealousy to Practice, from Fearing Faults to finding them; from
Reforming Grievances, to the Dissolution of Laws, and from removing Evil
Ministers to the highest degree of Disaffection to Monarchy.

The Shifter, or Jacobite Whig.
HAving cast the Slough of Jacobite, with a design of doing further mischief,
he Herds with Republicans, and has Liberty and Property in his Mouth, whilst
Arbitrary Power and Slavery is Reigning in his Heart, and the whole design in
coming over, is to promote them. All his former Intrigues against the
Government being bassed, he lies like a Tiger or Wolf in the way, till he finds
an Opportunity of Seizing his Prey, and then he makes a Leap at it. He has
changed his Name, but not his Nature, and shows his Face at Court as a Convert,
that in the crowd he may Pass Unsuspected. He has worn his Estate to Rags in
the Service of his Old Master, and now endeavors to get a New One, to repair
his losses: Though there can be greater Indignity to Men of Merit, or a more
pernicious Solaecism in Politics, than to recommend this Counterfeit Convert
to Preferment, till he has given as convincing Testimonies of his Fidelity, as
he has formerly done of his Disaffection. He has changed his Color; but still
wearing all the Marks of Hyprocisy, you may read him in his Countenance; for as
the Government is Healthy or Sickly, you will find his Complexion and
Conversation just the contrary. He Clubs among the Whig Republicans, and keeps
up his Correspondence with his Old Acquaintance, and employs all his Interest
to help a Lame Dog over the Style, in the Service of that Party. He Compounds
with the State for a bare External Conformity, with the present Posture of
Affairs, and Compounds with the Jacobites to expiate the Delinquency of that
Cold and Formal Compliance, with Assurances that he is Theirs upon the first
occasion. His discourse is a New sort of Cant, betwixt Oracle and Riddle, and
never speaks any thing of Moment but under a Cover that will bear two meanings,
a Better and a Worse, and the one still serves as a Cloak to the other. Ask him
Who he is for? He answers, for the King and Government, meaning the Wrong King
all the while, and another sort of Governors. He see's his Party cannot carry
it by open Force, Battery or Assault, and therefore he is come in to Undermine
it, while the rest are employed as Spies upon the Government, and creep into
the Garrison to betray it if they can into the hands of the Enemy. He has failed
in his first Essay by force, and now is at it by Juggling and Fawning: There Is
not a Fang, or a Talon, now to be seen; the Wolves are all turned into Lambs,
and the Vultures into Pigeons. All our Enemies are either Dead upon the Spot,
or Come over to us; which, is Alas, but the last Shift of the Faction, a Dose
of Opium to lay us a sleep, for the cause is still alive, as errant a
Counterfeit as the World affords; and will rise again, unless more weight be
laid upon it, to keep it under. This kind of Trimming, is but the last effort
of a Faction, that is well nigh hunted down, which if they have time to Recover
it will be with a Vengeance. Their Conversations rise up in Judgment against
their Pretenses, and are Overt Acts to expound the Secret purposes and
Intensions of their Hearts against the Government, and that they have a mind to
Trick us out of our Legal Settlement. The Dishonor and Scandal of which
proceedings, will double our Calamities; for it is a much more supportable
Affliction, for a Government to be mastered by Force, than to be choused by
Credulity. The one is Fortune's fault, the other is our Own; and it is more
Shameful to be Outwitted than to be Overcome.

The Republican Whig Jacobite
IS an Individuum Vagum, an Uncle Robert, a Man of no Principle either of
Honor, or Conscience, any further than it squares with his own Advantage. He
is a common Enemy to all kind of Governments, and prefers Plotting against
whatever is Uppermost, above any other kind of Lechery. Under the Monarchy of
Charles the Secand, he was a professed Common-wealths-Man, and employed himself,
and his Pen, as desperately against that King and Court, as if he had been
weary of his Life, courted a Halter, and the Honor of Dying with his Shoes
on: Which he had certainly done, if there had not been an Understanding between
him and Secretary Jenkins; who ordered Mr. Legate, the Messenger, though his Name
was in all Warrants against the Whigs not to Seize him, for fear, I suppose of
Discovering him to be a Treacherous Jack of both Sides. In the Reign of James
the Second, he set up for a Monmothean, to scandalize the Action, and at the
Loss of honester men's lives, escaped from a Hog-sty with his own into Holland.
In the Prince's glorious expedition to Redeem our Religion and Liberties, his
Highness was pleased (as well he might) to deny this Boutfeau a Passage among
those that offered him their Service, and the Worthy Gentleman that
Over-perswaded the King he might pass in the Throng without any Reflection upon
that Honorable Enterprise, has repented it ever since, that he opened his
Mouth for so vile a Wretch. In this happy Reign, though obliged beyond his
Desert, he has played the Devil for the Devil's sake, and has put Hell to its
Shifts, to Invent Plots so fast as he could utter them. He had an Office under
the Government, and Acted for the Jacebites; begged money of the Independants to
Relieve their Poor, but gave what he could spare from Symond's Tap, to the Non
Jurant Parsons. Under the Visor of a Common-Wealth-Compounder, he made his
Court at St. Germans, which shows the Credit of their Cause was sinking, when
they laid hold on this Rotten Stick to keep it from Drowning. Lord Melford
found the Plot Mettle, and he the Fire and Furnace, to Forge, or Cast it into
Tools for the service of Popery and Slavery, and in every Consultation to
promote the Interest of that Party he always proposed the most Bloody Methods
to obtain their Ends. There has been no Plot against the King and Government
since his Majesty's Accesion to the Throne, in which he has not had a
considerable share, either in Acting in it, or Shamming it, when it came to be
Discovered. He represents our Allies and Confederates as Enemies, that make
advantage by our losses, and our professed Enemies as True-Friends to England.
When he had got Hundreds by his Office, he turned Tail upon the Government, and
herded with the Malcontents to make it Twice as much; and then tells the People
in his Printed Pamphlets, how strangely the King is Misled by evil Counselors,
and that there is scarce a man at Court fit to Advise him. Sometimes he appears
in Print, as one of his Majesty's Best Subjects, and in the Conclusion takes
way the King's Honor, for the preservation of his Life; Undermines the
Established Church for the security of our Roligion; and sets up Democratical
Principles for the Maintenance of the Monarchy. He has Modeled his Looks into
a Form, that is taking among the Seperating Precisians, and has his Eyes lifted
up to Heaven, while his Hands are in their Pockets. He never Remembers
Benefits, nor forgets Unkindneses, nor never is at a Loss for new Projects to
plague the World, and Ruin Mankind. Aquinas does not more abound with
Distinctions and Salvo's, than he with corrupted Texts to excite Men to
Rebellion; and expounds the preserving the King in his just Right, to be the
Assassinating his Royal Person, in which as he had his Share, it is pity he
missed the Punishment; for if he has not himself Brued all the Plots and
Conspiracies these Ten years; yet he has been the common Advocate of the whole
Rebellious Party, and has espoused their Crimes as well as their Interests; for
Writing for the Generality of Offenders, implies an Approbation of their
Treasons, and that he is influenced by the same Evil Spirit, and wants a Power,
not a Will, to commit the most Barbarous Murder. He scruples more the breaking
one Oath of Conspiracy, than Twenty of Allegiance. His life is governed by a
Phanatical License, that Emancipates him from the Servile and Pedantick
Obligation of Congruity in his Life and manners, and Stages him as one of the
Antipodes to mankind, made up of Crossness and Opposition. His Christian
Liberty is Thwarting Authority, and advancing an Antichristian Anarchy: In
placing the Sovereign Power in the People, and making as many Kings as there
are Men in England. He is the Spider, in the Emblem, he fetches Poison out of
every thing, and had rather go to Hell in a Rebellious Road of his own Finding,
than to Heaven in the way of Peace and Obedience. Like a Mole he works
underground, to throw up Fears and Jealousies, and when they have once taken
Air, if Lucifer himself sounded the Trumpet, it could not give a stronger Alarm
to Insurrections and Assassinations. He has commonly a Bible in his Hand, and
the Gospel in his Mouth, and yet it is legible by his Actions, that he quarters
his Coat with the Atheist in the Pslams, that says in his Heart there is no
God. He makes a Conscience of every thing and Nothing. What the Law requires,
he Pukes at like a Breeding Woman; but to promote his own Traitorous Designs,
the seven deadly Sins, pass whole through him without so much as Kecking. He is
by Complexion, Sower and Saturnine; but half a Dozen Bottles will wind him up
to the Pitch of Jest and Buffoonery; but either Drunk or Sober, merry or
melancholy, Grave or Frolicksome; he is still a Malcontented Whig; but whether
it is Hugh Peter's of our side, or the other, is not yet Determined; and therefore
Reader, cross thy self, and have nothing to do with him; for if all the
Wickedness of Mankind were lost, there is enough in him to Replenish the World
with Vices, and crow'd Hell with Obstinate, and Impenitent Criminals.

The Scurrilous and Seditious Whig Writer
IS generally speaking, either an Unimployed Needy Lawyer, a Proscribed Field
Conventicler, a Caledonian Medicaster, or a Renegado Popish Priest, new Licked
into a Socinian Tubster; and under some or all these Qualifications, commences
a Member Politic of an Incorporate Faction, a Formal Pedantick Fault-finder in
Government, and a Pamphleteer for Seditious Malcontended Clubbers. His Style is
either a Blustering Noise of Insignificant pompous Words, that threaten to kill
six Opponents with his Pen, and Six and twenty with his Inkhorn, or else a
Fardle of Obsolete Phrases, or Moth-eaten Adages, that were in use when Men
wore Bonnets, and wiped their Noses on their Sleeves, for want of
Handkerchiefs. The Scope of his Pamphlets (if they have any) is to possess the
People with Fears of Arbitrary Power, to reflect Scandal upon the Government,
to pelt the Court with Lean and Meager Reproaches, and the Ministry with such
Audacious Suggestions, as may give the Multitude a Loathing of the Men and the
Constitution. He is always provided (at the Charge of the Common Stock of busy
Intermedlers) to write for that Party, who are still affrai'd of Losing what
cannot be Taken from them, and upon those Fantastical apprehensions, care not
if the Government be Dissolved, to gratify their Scruples. He is full of
extraordinary Hints against Mismanagements, and Wounds Royal Authority through
the sides of pretended Evil Counselors. He is sometimes a Droll, and always a
Sceptick, and there is scarce any thing so certain or Sacred, that he does not
expose to Question or Contempt: Insomuch, that betwixt the Hypocrite and the
Atheist, the very Foundation of Religion and Morallity is shaken, the Two
Tables of the Decalogue dashed to pieces: The Laws of Government Subjected to
the Fancies of the Vulgar, and public Authority to the Private Passions of the
Fickle Multitude. He is so fond of being Public, that he will rather be a
Blasphemous or a Rediculous Incendiary, than not be taken Notice of as a
Whiggish Author. If there be a Libel in Town against the Government, some One,
or a Club of them All, are sure to be the Composers of it, and are Celebrated
among the Seditious, as Men of extraordinary Merit, merely for being
mischievious. Nothing comes amiss to make him Alarm the Mobile with approaching
dangers. What a Fury will he raise about Nothing, and counterfeit a Foolish
Melancholy upon improbable dangers, to excite the brutish passions of the
Rabble, upon every slight and frivolous suggestion. The Oration of the old
Dotard in Apuleius, would be less Rediculous than some of their doleful, and
tragical Harangues about a Standing Army. The old Fellow comes forth with
hideous Bellowings, and with all the Solemnities of Sorrow, and a discomposed
Mind, to declaim in the presence of the whole City, against a Little Boy; and
as soon as he could for Sighs and Groans, begins with weeping Tears, to let
them know that he had something to communicate that required all their
Attentions, as they tendered the safety of the Commonwealth; and so proceeds
to conjure them, by all things sacred and civil; by their Gods and their
Altars, not to let the Murderer escape unpunished; and having screwed up the
Peoples expectations even to impatience, he was earnestly desired to declare
the Crime, that so they might atone the Anger of the Gods, which otherwise
they might expect upon their City, if they should suffer such a horrid Villainy
to pass Unrevenged. At last (after he had moved all this indignation,) he
produces Three Bottles broken all to pieces by the Lad; Here, Here, (says he)
behold the Cruel Murderer. At which (you may suppose) all the Audience fell a
laughing then, as all Wise men do at our Pedantick Authors now, for
endeavoring, with so much Seriousness and dreadful Apprehensions, to raise a
furious Passion out of Nothing. To keep him within the Limits of his own
Sphere, was to confine a Wild Boar with sober words. There has been no peace
upon Earth since he was in it, and a Man might as well attempt the Conversion
of the Great Turk, as reconcile him to his Duty. He is the most Savage Creature
in the world, and no less incapable of Discipline than Rats and Swallows; and
smells so rankly of Confusion and Disorder, that no Towardly Christian can
approach him without an Antidote. He suriously combats every Trifle; raises a
Tempest from the least Drop of Water; either commends or dispraises to the last
degree of Rigor, and censures without Judgment or Authority: And there is no
way to persuade him from repeating his follies, and Mudling himself in Ink, but
to turn him to his old Trade of Lampoons, Ballads and Grubstreet Wonder-making,
or make him forswear the use of Pen, Ink and Paper.

For he will proceed, come on it what will,
There is no middle-Course in doing Ill,
A Whig Trimmer, or a Jack of all Sides
IS a Will with a Wisp. a Man of no Principle either of Honor or Conscience,
any further than it squares with his Safety and Profit. You may reckon him
among the common Enemies of the Government and Mankind. His Countenance is like
a Prognostication in an Almanac: When his Eyes sparkle with Joy, you must look
upon the Dancing of those Spirits, like the Play of Porpoises before a Tempest,
and when All is Well there, it is a fore-boding of Troubles, and Storms in the
Public: As a Cloud on his forehead (on the other side), is an Infallible sign
of Fair weather in the State; for that which makes the one fat, makes the other
Lean, and common Dissasters are not only his Discourse, but his Food and
Nourishment. and the reason of so much contariety is this: That Monarchy, and a
Popular Sovereignity, Law and License, Order and Confusion, can never stand
together. He talks aloud of Grievances, Abuses and Mismanagements, and makes
it his business to Enlarge upon them. He talks of Dangers, and fills Peoples
heads with frightful stories of them, and at the same Instant is so put to it
for Want of Proof that he is faint at least to magnify, if not to Create them,
and supply the Defect of matter, with Imposture and Invention. There Is not a
Whimsical Story passes the Town, that is capable of being improved into a
Scandal or Illusion, but it is presently Furbish'd up, for the Service of the
Malcontended: And when there wants matter of fact for a ground to work upon,
it is his care to supply it with Fancy or Suggestion. He has a new way of
Politic Masquerading, under a Coat that fits all Factions and Opinions, goes
round like a Mill-Horse in the same Track of Hearing, Telling and Dividing, and
under pretense of Triming, at last removes, and with his own Weight over-sets
the Wherry. The Gentleman that has endeavored to give him a fairer Character,
has forgot what he is, and represents him what he should be. He Inclines too
much to a Party to carry himself Uprightly, and approves the Sense of the Law,
no longer than it asserts his Interest; and thinks them no longer Jewels, than
they hang at his Ears, or Adorn his Fingers. Though Monarchy, when the
Administration falls into Wise and good Hands, is approved by all Judicious
Men, as the best form of Government, he is no longer in Love with it, than it
keeps him in humor with a Profitable Employment, and when that is taken away,
yet by Trimming when he held his Office, he has Secured his Interest in a
Party, and then sets up for a Jacobite, or a Republican; either for Another
King, or no King at All, as he sees the Beam turning to his own Advantage. He
is for a Liberty that is inconsistent with his Allegiance, and calls every
Government Arbitrary, where he cannot Act the Tyrant over all below him, and
Checkmate all above him. He is not so Displeased with any thing, as our own
Constitution, where Monarchy and Liberty are so happily reconciled, that they
Friendly Embrace each other. He is angry that Liberty of Conscience is
established by Law, because he has lost an opportunity of Quarrelling about it;
for he had rather want his Right, than not gratify his Spleen, and humor his
Perverseness. He is a Friend to Zeal, and an Enemy to Knowledge, and Cheats
himself by a false Ostentation of the Power of Godliness, without being in the
form of it. He thinks himself of the True Religion, because he has been of All
he could hear of, and having Pined himself to the Principles of Neutrality, had
rather undergo the Laodicean Fate, than enjoy the Reward of Fidelity and
Perseverance. The Noise of Fire at Midnight, does not so much Affright him, as
a Discourse of Accommodation and Comprehension, for to be all of a Piece would
spoil his Market, in being for, and against every thing, by way of Debtor and
Creditor. He always shifts for the Warm side o'th the Hedge, and rather than
run any Risque in his Body or Fortune, he will leave his Prince, his Country, his
Father or Friend in the Lurch, to save but the worth of a Cockle-shell. In your
Prosperity over a Bottle of Wine, and a Dish of your Meat, he will load you with
Caresses and Civilities; but if you come to have the Wind and Tide in your
Teeth, and the Vogue of the Town against you, he will be one of the first shall
desert you in stark Love and Kindness; till you have strugled your way through
the Difficulty, and then he is again your most Obedient Humble Servant,

If our Trimming Whig is a man of Authority, he will Ruin you with Trust and
Confidence; and draw out your last blood in pretenses to do your Business, when
he never in the least Intends it. Ask his favor for an Employment: He allows
you to be a very Honest man, and well qualified for any thing, one that has
faithfully served the King and Government, and he is glad, heartily Glad, that
he has an opportunity of serving you. He has three or four pretty things in's
Eye; there are two or three Vacancies at present, and you may assure your self
he is your friend to all Intents and Purposes. you may entirely depend upon any
Good Office he can do you, and that he will never leave you, till he has done
something, or other, that, is Considerable for you: And now betwixt the Credit
of the Pretense on the one side, and the Snare of the Trust and Confidence on
the other, you are entered upon the Road that leads to your Undoing. Now you
have a Waiter's Place, and having danced Attendance on him till you have hardly
Shoes to follow him longer, you have for answer, That he has done what he can;
but there was so many Buts and Exceptions in the way, he could not accomplish
his Wishes for you. But if you can find out any thing, you shall be sure of it.
This puts you upon a new charge of Enquiring, and when you bring him an account
of Three things Undisposed of, he falls into a Passion, and chides your
Negligence; for if you had but spoke of it a Quarter of an hour sooner, he had
done your business effectually; for one of them was just given away, and the
other Two are Promised, and you must have Patience, and hunt about for more
Discoveries, till he grow as Shy of you, as a sculking Citizen of a Sergeant.

Now as often as you come, he is Sick, Busy, Abroad, or not to be spoken with. If
you Way-lay and Surprise him, he is in great Have, cannot Stay; but when you
have found out something for your Turn, come to him, and you shall be sure, in
English, To go without it. And now put all his Proffessions, Protestations, and
Promises, into one Scale, and his Doublings, his Put-off's, Shams and Pretenses
into another, and you will find your very Soul upon the most painful sort of
Torture. Depend, says the Whiggish Trimmer. Assure your self, Upon my Honor, I
will serve you; when there is no more in it at last, than so much Air thrown into
the mouth of a Credulous fool, toward the satisfying of an Empty Stomach. One
while the Honor of the Government will not bear it. The Incompetency of the
Person; it is too Little, or too much; it is too soon or it is too late, it is out
of your Way, or unsuitable to your Humor; and, in a word, an honest man may as
well lay his finger upon an Indivisible Instant, as Nick the precise time of
doing his business, by the Mediation of a false Trimming-Whig, who does nothing
but Delude, and Bretray you; and his last Shift is, removing you out of his way
into the Country, and when he has found out something, he will send for you:
And that will be when the Devil's Blind, who is Eyes are not sore yet,

Having spent all your Money, Wearied out your Self, and Worn out your Clothes,
you procure a Friend to solicit for you, and at first sight the Whig Trimmer
tells him; Sir, your friend is a mighty Good Man, pray tell him I don't forget
him though he is absent. I have him here upon my Minutes, for the first business
that falls; but you would do well however, to mind me now and then on it; for I
have many things in my Head, you know, and now I cannot talk with you about it;
but if you could stay a little here about, or come again a matter of an hour or
two hence; or rather if it would stand with your convenience, let me see you
upon Monday next, precisely at Twelve, then I may Chance to tell you more. Your
friend replies I Will not fail your Honor at the very moment; but what hopes,
says he, shall I give my friend in the mean time. My Lord, I beg this freedom
from you; do you think 'twill do at Last? for a man had better Ten times be
hanged Once for All till he is Dead, than be starving in the Air the Lord knows
how long, under the Anxiety of a lingering Suspension; It Is some case to a Man
yet, to know the worst of a thing, and to be at a certainty, whether it be Off
or On. This Plain Dealing of your Friend, Ruffles and Discomposes the little
great man of Business; and he answers with some Emotion: I am extremely
pressed, you see: But I Will borrow half a Dozen words at any time from common
Business, for the service of an honest man, and a friend; but to be plain with
you, Sir, you are a little too Warm, and too Quick upon the Point. Beggars must
not be Carvers: Affairs of this Nature must be brought about by Patience and
Opportunity. It Is not for a man in his Circumstrnces, to talk of being off, or
on; as who should say; if I may not have it when I would, I will not have it at
all, It Is too Imposing and peremptory, let me tell you: Your best way is to let
matters and Humors work in their due season: Not but that all you have said to
me is as safe, as if the words were in your own mouth again. This smart
Commonplace Reprimand, puts your friend to'th' expense of two or three Low
Bows and Cringes, and an Apology to smooth him, saying, my Lord, I don't direct,
or expostulate, but my humble meaning, with Submission, is, that the frankness
of the Dispatch doubles the favor. To conclude, in all this Trimming Whigs
Promises, there is not one grain of Down right Integrity, but apparent marks of
a deliberated Fraud, to put men upon the torture of Vexatious, expensive,
endless and contemptuous Attendance, that the amused Multitude may reckon the
number of their Slaves by the number of these Dependencies; and the world will
never be better, till Generosity and sincere Honesty become more Fashionable.
Offer him a Civility he scorns, he says, to be Bribed; he is none of those that
sell Places, and at the same time expects you shall Fee his Servants, and makes
his own Secretary allow his Steward and Butler a Salary out of his Profits,
toward the Payment of their Wages, besides Cramming his hungry Footmen, who
are almost Famished for want of their promised Five Shillings a Week, to
procure them Belly-Timber.

A Whiggish false pretending Friend
IS an Insect that under the Disguise of Friendship, and Kindness, will do you
more mischief than the worst of your Enemies. If you are in Prosperity, he will
flatter and undermine you; if in Adversity, he will betray you, and creep out at
your Sleeve when you think you have him safe in your Bosom. He Is the mere
Spirit of Deceit and Hypocrisy, a general Disperser of nauseous Scandal; that
never speaks Well of any man behind his back, nor Ill of any man before his
Face, and cares not though the Subject be his Father, his Brother, or the best
Friend he has in the World, if he thinks it will not reach his Ear; for he has
an equal kindness for all he names his friends, and would go fifty mile on Foot
to see any of them hanged. His former Character was a mass of Treachery and
Lying, under a veil of seeming Sanctity; but now he is grown as great a
proficient at Swearing and Whoring, as the most debauched Bully at a Baudy
house; and can no more Rise without a Wench, than go to Bed without a Bottle.
He boasts much of his Company, and there is none so bad he will not keep, nor so
Good he will not pretend to. He swears he has been with my Lord such a One, and
had three Quarts of Champain to his share; that he had much ado to get away,
and is going to three other Lords about business of Importance. Dissimulation
is the Adjunct of his Quality. He always lies at Catch to ensnare you, and
there is no safer trusting him with a Secret than your Money, for no mortal ever
knew a Sour Whig True to any man. He is all for getting Money, for that he
knows will make the Pot Boil, though the Devil Piss in the fire. When he has
nothing else to talk on, Religion and his Green Pew with Red Inckle, is the
subject: And treats it with as much contempt, as if Eikon Basilike was the
Tubster. He has always a lying, sneering, ugly merry face when he is designing
Mischief, and that gives him a Name in the Party, for a very honest fellow; and
if these treacherous Moles that work under ground, were not as Blind as they
are Busy, an honest man could not be safe in a Cell, with all the Honesty in
the world about him. He is as Impudent as he is Troublesome, and like a Weezle
runs squeaking from house to house, that no man can cat his Bread at quiet for
him. In every thing he seeks his own Interest, and cares not if the whole
Kingdom were in a Flame, if he can but roast his Eggs by it. He thinks no gain
unsavory. All is Good that brings Profit. He serves God to get Money, and would
serve the Devil for better Wages. Biting, Sharping, and Shamming, is his whole
Employment, and it is so riveted in his Nature, that you may as well take him to
pieces, as hope to Mend him. His Treachery is habitual, he is past Shame and
Remedy, and he that throws away a Tester, and such a false Friend, loses but
Sixpence in the whole. And now having showed you the men, I shall (to keep
their Favor) Oblige them with a Female to keep them Company, under the Name
and Character of

A Precise Hypocritical Coquet.
WHo is one she knows not What if if you ask her, and consequently is neither
Flesh, nor Fish, nor good Red Herring; but what you please to make her. She
values her self for being neither in, nor out, of the fashion. She wears the
best of Silks and Linen, that ever Pinns were put in; but dresses so Odly, that
she spoils her Shape, and the make of her Face by screwing it into the Model of
Nonconformity. She reckons nothing so vicious as going to Church, and wearing
Lace is a greater Sin in her esteem, than Fornication, or Adultery. While she
is Uncoupled and in Company, she is as Demure as a Saint; but take her alone,
she is as gamesom as a little Cat in a Corner, and will Tee-Hee at a Smutty
Jest, and be as brisk and obliging as the Rankest Sinner. It Is true, she rails
at the Beau's, as Unregenerate Vermin, and a known Bully scares her as
wickedly at the first Assault, as a Mad Ox docs the Women in a Market; but if
he has the Wit to approach her Civily at first, after a little warm handling,
he soon raises a place to rest her hands upon; which her indulgent zealous
Father suspecting, he salves up her Reputation with the addition of another
Hundred Yellows, and Tacks her to a Needy but Hopeful Thriving Brother, which
new Dies her Honor and Chastity; and she is received into his Bed, as a pure
Virgin Sacrifice. Being now a spick and span new Wife, she looks as Demurely,
as if Almond Butter would not Melt in her mouth, though Suffolk Cheese will not
choke her. She is now so Innocent among her Neighbors, that she even Blushes
to see her Own Hand naked, and has sunk her voice to so low a Key, that she can
scarce hear her self; but er'e she had been married a Week, like a Larum-Clock,
the whole house Rang of her. A Spot upon her new Gown raised a Tempest, and her
Husband Rising in his own Defense before she was awake, made such a Thunder as
Deafned all the family. Her Devotion at the Conventicle is in turning up the
Eggs of her Eyes to the Tubsters, and turning down the Leaves of her Book,
without regard to the Quotation. When the Holder-forth shows how Artificially
he can grunt out the business of Persecution, she is full of sickly Qualms,
though if the Executioner be but Man, she says no Martyr shall suffer with
greater Resolution. She abounds with more Texts than a Concordance, and will
not flap her Maid over the Chaps, without a Scripture Authority; nor correct
her Husband's Coxcomb, but by a choice President out of some of the Dissenter's
Sayings. She never thinks a Sermon good, unless she ride five Mile to hear it,
because it covers an Assignation upon the way, which is much more Edifying than
the Lecture. She is much in love with the Quakers Silent Meetings, because it
gives her time to Recruit, and she makes amends for it at Dinner, and Prattles
more than any at the Table against Sense, Antichrist, and her Husband, till a
fat Gob of Mother Tripe and Mustard, puts her to Silence. When she has almost
Dined, she complains of a Tender Conscience, the weakness of her Stemach, and
her want of Appetite; and immediately a piece of Tart that, by accident was
bottomed with a Leaf of the Apocripha, made her puke, and had certainly brought
up all her Dinner, if a lusty Soke of Right Nans, had not qualified her
Antipathy against Bell and the Dragon. She i^ as full of Faith, as an Egg is
full of Meat, but has no room for Charity, and understands no Good Works but
those, which, when a Child, she wrought upon her Sampler, and spoils them too
by often showing them. She is a perfect Enemy to all Church Music but the
Chimes, which kindly call her to four Meals a day, and refreshes her Spirits
with the comfortable Melody of Wisdom, Hopkins, and Sternhold. She Rails at the
Women of the World as Damned, for wearing Fringes on their Petticonts; and
wears her own plain, that she may take them up with lesser trouble and
Inconvenience. High Heads and Laced Shoes puts her into horrible exclamations;
she calls them all Jezebels, Dalilahs, and Whores of Babylon that wear them;
and accounts it as a Mark of Grace, that she can Do as well without them. She
is no less Skilled in Policies of Government, and is an earnest Contender for
the Rights of Womankind, which she claims as her Due, and not as a Benevolence
from the good Man's Prerogative. She opposes the Monarchy of a Husband, with
the Undeterminable Privileges of a Wife, and maintains the Sovereignity of her
Sex, by keeping the Keys of the Cash at her Legislature Girdle, and supplying
her Husband's Necessities with a Bit and Knock, as she thinks convenient: And
as she gives him with One hand, will be sure to take Something from him with
the Other, that he may never grow to Big for her Management. Freedom of Speech
she claims as her Birthright, be it never so Arrogant and Supercillious. Doing
what she Lists, is her Liberty; a separate maintenance is her Property, and
claims them by her Original Contract, for Better for Worse, and as agreeable to
her Native Constitution in quality of a Wife, Dutiful and Dominering. The Man
that closes with her upon these Principles, of checking the Arbitrary Powers of
Husbands, though a mere Rake, has won the Fort of her feigned Virtue; she
surrenders upon Discretion, and will lie with him upon an Impulse of
Conscience, to reclaim him from the vulgar use of Whores, and Wicked Women. And
now having gotten her Heart, the Devil on it is, he cannot be Rid of the Rest of
her body, but like a Rattle at a Dogs Tail, let him go where he will, she will
follow him, till Impotency procures him a Release, or Incurable Claps bring him
to a Death Bed Repentance.

Precise She-sinners are by Nature Guilty,
For whether Young or Old Whores they will Jilt ye.
A Covetous Griping Usurer and Extortioner.
IS the degenerated Issue of a cruel Jailer, his Estate is in heavy Bonds, and
legal iron Shackles, which he never knocks off, but at the price of the
Debtor's ruin. He was like Hemp Seed, sown into the World in a shower of bitter
Curses, went Nine times to the Devil before he showed his Head above Ground,
and his Thriving empoverish'd all that grew near him. His God is his Gold, and
he the Idolatrous Priest, that Sacrifices his Soul to his Profit. He is a
Friend to none, for those he has most Interest in he Devours, and only dreads
the day of Judgment should come before he has taken the Forfeitures of his
Bonds and Morgages, though he has Ten in the Hundred besides Procuration, and
Continuance Money, at a Hundred in the Thousand. He puts his Money to the
Unnatural Act of Generation, and his Scrivener is the Supervisor Cock Baud to
it. He assumes the name of Protestant, because it is the Cheapest Religion, of
Dissenter for the sake of Contradiction, and forbears Whoring only for fear of
the Charge of keeping Bastards. A Capitation Tax removes him to a New Lodging,
and if he is found out, he swears himself off, and says will trust God with his
Soul, rather than the Collectors with his Money. His Study is how to cheat the
Prodigal, to cozen this Landed Neighbor, Defraud that Widow, and Beggar those
Orphans. Debts he owes none but shrewd turns, and those he will be sure to pay
without Suing. He loves the Common Law, but swears at the Sight of the
Chancery-Court, and a Subpaena would make him Hang himself, were it not to save
the charge of a Haltar. He is (in some sort) worse than the Devil, he never
Gives but sells his Days of Payments, Bloods you by Degrees, till the Spirits
of your Estates are insensibly exhausted, and then makes Dice of your Bones to
play at Size-Ace with his Scrivener. He seldom lends Money but in a Forenoon,
which secures him a Diner at the Tavern, where he will drink freely, because he
knows you must pay the Reckoning; but at all other times Preaches up
Temperance. He keeps a House would famish a Cricket, and his Servants do not
Live but starve with him. His Chimney is unacquainted with Fire, for fear of
Mischances, and if he is a Cold, he gets himself Heat by removing an old
Wood-Pile. He Allows his Servants no Candle, That they may break Glasses for
want of Light, which they must doubly pay for in their Wages. His good Name
always Dies before him, and to save the Expense of a Funeral for it, he suffers
it to Rot and stink above ground; and when he falls Sick himself, he sends two
or three Pawn-Brokers before him to the Devil for a Bribe, to use him more
kindly when he shall fall into his Clutches; or in hopes he will be so busy
about them, and a Rott of Stock-Jobbers, that he may be a while neglected.

A Wheedling Cheating Scrivener.
IS a Creature begot by a Pen, hatched in a Standish, nursed by a Sand-Box, and
the Wing of an old Goose will set up half a Score of 'em. In his threadbare
Baies Gown and Furred Cap, he looks like the By-blow of a Country Attorney,
from whom he differs as a Botcher from a Tailor, or the Yeoman of the Halter
from the Hangman. His Ears are the Characters of his Religion in Text-hand,
and like Rotten Fruit hang so loosely on his Head, that the next Sessions-Wind
will endanger the blowing them off on a Pilory. With Relation to the Public he
is a necessary Evil, for without him Men would become Honest Neighbors and
good Friends, and then the body Politic would dissolve, being no longer
compounded of Different Elements and Humors. Better Scholars there are many,
but few greater Writers, and those that curse the Invention of the Press for
others sakes, may more justly curse the use of the Pen for his. I should guess
his Trade was of great Antiquity, since I read Indentures of Covenants made
with Adam, but that we know Adam had no Money, and the Scivener would not do it
Gratis. Had Scriveners been in the Antedeluvian World, the Deluge might have
been spared, for Mankind would have destroyed one another, without any other
help than theirs; and therefore we must not look upon them as part of the
Creation, which was wholly good; But as a Surreptitious Race of Men, bred out
of the Corruption of several Ages, or like some Africa Monsters, are the
Amphibious Product of a Heterogeneous Copulation; or when Pawn Brokers,
Tally-Men, and Stock-Jobbers, met together in different Humors, Interests and
Contracts, this Jarring Conjunction begat Scriveners; who Viper like Devour
their Parents, and gnaw their lively-hoods out of the Bowels of those they hang
upon. Methinks they being so Resty that the severest Laws cannot restrain 'em
from doing Mischief, they should be banished all Well-governed Kingdoms; or at
least like Jews in Italy, wear a Red-Hot, or One Green Stocking for a mark of
Distinction, that endangered Passengers might avoid them; for where once they
get in, they spread like St. Anthony's Fire, and destroy like the Plague. Had
one of these kind of Scriveners been among the Israelites, there would have
needed no other pretense to have driven them out of Egypt, themselves had been
the greatest punishment, and Pharaoh would have fled, and not pursued them into
the bottom of the Sea. A Generation of Men more insatiate then Hell, and those
that pretend to fear or honor them, are but like Men making Court to their
Hangman for a more favorable Execution.

Sometimes he plays the Baud, and Prostitutes the same Title to all comers, and
if you Fee him soundly, will not stick at Morgaging the same Estate, to seven
several Lenders. Sometimes he Solders up a Cracked Title, and passes it away
for a pure Virgin. If it be weak, he will strengthen it by Forgery, and secure
but his Ears, his Man and He will out swear the Devil. If you would make a safe
Purchase, you must spend half the Value of it in Enquiries about the Title, and
when he has secured half of it to himself, he tells you it is Unquestionable.
Wheresoever he finds a Flaw, it may be stopped with Money from the Adverse Party;
and if both Grease him in the Fist, he will deal equally between Man and Man,
and make them alike Irrecoverably miserable, drawing the Conveyances on either
side so weak, and yet so strong, that neither Party shall have the Advantage;
but both endeavoring to Recover what each knows to be his Own, and he to be
Neithers, they at last consume their Estates like a Snow-Ball with handling it,
Spend double the Purchase Money to secure the Land, and at length the Usurers to
end the Strife, seizes on that which each of them have Morgaged, and neither of
them can Redeem, and then part the Stakes, and Limn and Canton out a brave
Estate like Alexanders Empire into Petty Lordships.

If he Trade in money, his Usurer and he answer one another like the Hunter and
his Dog, or like the Counter part and the Original Ipdenture, and walk up and
down, seeking whom they may Devour. First he does his utmost to make you Poor,
that you may be forced to address your self to him for a Supply, which is the
last Remedy, and indeed worse than the Disease. If you are necessitated to
Borrow, he marches among your Neighbors, smells after your Reputation,
Enquires into your Estate, and Ruins your Good name to gain you Credit. He is
vigilant in maintaing Old Customs, especially that of Ten in the Hundred, and
what you abate the Usurer you must pay to the Scrivener, or go without the Sum
desired.

If his Usurer and He start a young Heir, this Blood-Hound is laid upon the
Scent, pursues the Game, and never gives over the Chase till he has given him a
Mortal Gripe, and then like the Lion and Jackel they divide the Prey; the
Usurer gnaws off the the Flesh, and the Scrivener Picks the Bones. To strike
the greater Terror into the Landed Novice, he seats himself in all his
Formalities, his Furrrd Cap and Gown, his Pen in one Ear, (if both are not off
for Forgery,) in the midst of abundance of VVritings, which contain the Cases
of so many Ruined persons. A Sight worse than the Gallows, and shows the
Youngling what he must come to. Composing his countenance after the City cut,
seriously Grave, Dreadfully Rediculous, and most Majestical Simple; after a
tedious Harangue, like a Dog making a circle before he lies down, he sets forth
the great misfortune of many Young Gentleman, in falling into the hands of
Knavish Scriveners, where he reads him his own Doom in the third Person, whilst
he is showing him his Happiness in Lighting upon him, who is desirous of
nothing but his Goods. At last he falls upon what he has most mind to, his
Estate, and bids him deal truly and plainly with him, that he may do him right;
which the Youngster performs very Simply and honestly, and lays open his
Breast, that this Vulture with more ease may Prey upon his Liver. Having thus
gently wracked him into a Confession, the Scrivener draws up a Sentence
miscalled a Bond or Conveyance, and makes him sign and seal the Warrant of his
own Execution, and then by Law Condemns and Executes him.

This unmerciful Thief, like Death, spares no Body; he robbs the very Beggars,
and will pick a Courtier's Pocket though he knows it is the King's Money. He
stretches the Law and Justice upon the Wrack, and for an hours failure siezes
upon the Forfeiture. He prays for Nonperformance of the Condition, that he may
take the Advantage of the Penalty, and so far exceed the cruelty of that cursed
Jew, that he will not only have the Flesh, but the Blood also. When you have
incurred a Forfeiture, he tells you the strickness of the Law; and to be free
from the Usurer, you must compound with the Scrivener, and almost pay the
Penalty to be quit of trouble. All the Comfort you have left, is, that when he
has bound you never so fast, for Money he will Release you; teach you how to evade
the Articles he himself composed, and never refuses to prove himself a Knave,
when ever he can gild the Epithet.

Thus he plays fast and loose, breaths hot and cold, and the same Devil that
binds the Charms, unties 'em also. It Is a pretty sight to see them running
about the Exchange, smelling at the Merchants, just like a Dog fawning upon
some, and Snarling at others. He is one Misery after the very last, the Cause
of your Ruin, and the Effect too. When all other Miseries have destroyed you,
he follows as a Reserve, and after Execution will Quarter you; nay, such is
your Plague, that when all the World has shaken you off, Lice and Scriveners
will stick to you when you are Beggared. That you may go to Heaven the lighter,
he disburthens you of your Earth, your Estate, and then persuades you out of
Despair to Dye, having parted with all the World, and nothing left you to
forsake but your Body. For a good Fee he will oblige a Friend, and leave the
intended Heir so disputable, that the deceased Testator may as soon interpret
his own Mind, as the Lawyer; inserting such Equivocal Terms, as may be any
Man's Will more than his that sent for our Scrivener to make it. He begins a
Will very piously, and gives your Soul to God Almighty with abundance of
Complement, and of your worldly Goods he will not fail to give himself a good
share, and then turns you over to the Divine, before whom he has commonly the
Honor to be preferred: And there leaves you like a Christmas Box, expecting
no more from you till you are broke into pieces.

The Reverse, or the Charcter of a True Englishman, in Quality of a Statesman.
AS a Statesman he is well Learned and Descended, a Branch of a Reputable and
Loyal Family, and a true Patriot of his Country. One that loves and serves God
for Goodness sake, and Honors the King as God's Representative on Earth, a
Monarch that Governs England Uprightly, and preferrs the Glory of God, and the
Good of the People, above any accession to his own Glory. As a Counselor he
suggests nothing to the King that may look like Oppression, or by favoring any
Sinister Faction, would make his Majesty appear as the Head of a Party, rather
than the King and Father of All his People, who should neither know nor make
any Distincton of his Subjects, but by their Virtuous or Vicious Practices, and
Encourages or disapprove of them accordingly. He is as tender of the Kings
Prerogative, as of his own Life, Estate, or Honor: Is no less Zealous for the
Legal Liberty and Rights of the People, and carries so just and Equal a hand,
between Sovereignity and Subjection, as creates a Mutual Love, and an Entire
Affection, without Clashing, or Incroaching upon the Dignity of the Monarch, or
the Birthrights of Englishmen. He Studies for the Honor of his Country, to
make the King Great, and Rich, and his Subjects the Wealthiest and best Natured
People in the Worl'd; as the surest Defense against Foreign and Domestic
Enemies. Our States-man's Religion, is Read in the Ianocency of his Life, the
Exactness of his Morals, the Integrity and Truth of his Words, and the Justice
and Honesty of his Conversation. Bigottry, and Screwing up Forms of Worship
beyond the Bounds of Moderation, is his Utter Aversion; yet is he Zealous for
good Order, and Decency, and shows an Equal Love and kindness to all Good Men,
that Dissent out of Conscience, and not Humor from him. To Factions and Parties
in the State, he is a Professed Enemy, as knowing Unanimity and Concord, is the
Durable Cement of Societies. He Recommends no Man to the King for an
Employment, but upon the account of his Merits, and being Regularly qualified
for the discharge of his Office, without which, the nearest Alliance and Ties
of Nature cannot Bias him. He is a Stranger to the little Tricks, and
Artifices of selfish Courtiers, and will either oblige a Candidate Heartily, or
tell him Freely and Speedily he either will not, or cannot do it, without
keeping him in a Dilatory and Expensive Attendance to his Ruin. In brief he is
the King's Faithful Counselor; the honest Man's Friend, the Poor and Oppressed
Man's Advocate and Support; and the Shame and Scourge of the Double-minded and
Griping Courtier. He is well read in the Policy of Nations, and by his
Preventional Prudence, Countermines Plots and Conspiraces. He knows all the
Maxims in Governments, but the Laws of the Land are his Rule, and promotes none
but those that agree with them, and are Safe, and Honest. His chiefest Study is
the common Good, and is less concerned for his own Interest, than that of all
Mankind.

A Private Subject.
IS one that Quietly and Constantly moves in his own Sphere, without
Intermedling in Nice and Secret Matters of State, that are out of his Reach,
and Inconsistent wit his Duty. That Heartily obeys the King in all his
Commands, that do not Thwart the Laws of Nature, or his Country: That Honors,
Loves and Defends the King's Person, Crown and Dignity, and Cheerfully
contributes to the support of his Grandeur and Government: That makes his
Private concerns stoop to the Public Good, and sustains those Losses with
Patience, that he suffers for the common Interest. He is one that can
distinguish betwixt Slavish Fear, and Religious Obedience: Betwixt the Interest
and Cause of a whole Nation, and the Clamours and Discontents of a Litigious
and Incorrigible Faction. A Man that will be True to his King, without being
False to his God, or Treacherous to his Country, and to conclude, is One that
(like the Poets Dyal) always stands True, though the Sun of Reward or Favor
never Shines upon him.

A Clergyman.
IS a Holy-man in his Conversation, and gains Souls to God, as well by the
Integrity of his Life as the Purity of his Doctrine. He is Universally Learned,
See's with his own Eyes, and is able to Discern Truth from Error by
Understanding the Originals: While others are imposed upon for want of those
Lights, which a Generous Education and hard Study has Happily Blessed him with.
His Religion is the Ground of his Loyalty, and the Rule he prescribes to
others. His Companions are his Books, his Appartment his Study; and unless upon
the Discharge of his Office, in Relieving the Poor, visiting the Sich, or
Reconciling Differences among his Neighbors, he is seldom to be found out of
it. His Recreations are doing Good Works, and shows the steadfastness of his
Faith, by making the Holy Scriptures the Rule of his Life, and in Practicing
what he Preaches. He Reads before he Writes, Writes before he ascends the
Pulpit, and leaves nothing to a scandalous extempory Invention. He performs the
Offices of the Church with a decent Gravity, and by his own Example Awes his
Congregation into a praying Professing, or hearing Posture, and puts them in
mind of what they are doing. His Sermons are adapted to the Capacity of his
Auditors, and he makes it his Business to Instruct, and not to Amuse or Please
them. He knows sound Doctrine in decent Expressions, without Exercises of Wit is
the Business of a Preacher, and that his Learning is better seen in the
substance of his Matter, than in Elegant Harangues. He is a Stranger to all
manner of Affectation either in his Words or Gesture, and commands Attention
only by the seriousness of his Discourses, which are all ways confined to what
we ought to Believe or Practice, without Wandering into unnecessary Disputes, or
impertinent Digressions. If Providence raises him to be a Governor in the
Church, he is so much the more Humbler, the higher he is Exalted; for he sees
his Work and Account to be greater, and requires the Exercise of his greatest
care and Industry to discharge it Uprightly. His Authority in his Diocese does
not make him forget that the Inferior Clergy are his Brethren, and he treats
them accordingly: And the augmentation to his Estate, reminds him that he is
only a Trustee for the Poor, and must be given to Hospitality. If any under his
Jurisdiction offends, and by repeating his Crimes after a Fatherly Admonition,
he is constrained to punish his Contumacy, it is done with so much Meekness, as
shows him necessitated to it by the Rules of Justice, and not his own
Inclination to Severity; and therefore upon his sincere Reformation receives
him again into his Bosom. If he has only a Competency in a single Cure, without
any other additional Preferments. he lives peaceably among his Neighbors,
contentedly in his Family, discharges his Duty conscientiously, and Dies much
Lamented.

An Upright Lawyer.
IS a Man truly Learned in the Laws of the Land, and squares his Life by the
Rules of Equity and Justice: That cannot be Bribed to Act unjustly, or betray
his Clyent for filthy Lucre: That preferrs the Goodness of a Cause before the
Greatness of his Fee, and persuades his Clyent to desist, as soon as he
perceives his Cause is Unjust or Litigious. A Pauper in the Right, is more
Welcome to him than a Lord in the Wrong Box, and treats him as Humanly as the
Richest Clyent. He espouses his Cause, Dwells upon the point of Right, and no
Frowns, or the Interposition of a more Beneficial Cause, can make him give it
over, till the Law has done the Poor-man Right, and delivered him from
vexatious Delays, and the Tyranny of a Litigious and Purse-proud Adversary. He
is the poor Man's Patron, the Widow's Protector, the common Friend, and Father
of distressed Orphans, and the Honor of his Profession. He troubles not the
Court, nor wastes their time with impertinent Address; but insists only upon
what is material, and in that has the Ear of the Court, and the Satisfaction of
his own Conscience. He is zealous for the Prerogatives of the Crown, and with
equal Freedom and Courage Asserts the Liberty of the People, and in both the
Law is the Standard. In the Church he behaves himself agreably to his
Character, and the Integrity and Justice of his Life, Proclaims him Orthodox,
and sincere in his Religion. In short, he is a faithful Friend, a kind and
loving Neighbor; Hospitable to the Rich, Charitable to the Poor, and
Beneficial to all Men: Whose personal Merits, and the King's Favor, will e're
long promote him to the Honor of a Judge, to the Satisfaction of whole Nation.

A Learned Physician.
IS a true Friend, a careful Assistant of Nature, and from her Indigitations,
Collects a Method for his Practice. By a regular course in his University
Studies, he is able to converse with the Arabian, Grecian, and Latin
Physicians, his dilligent enquiry into the Nature and Operations of Plants and
Minerals, and his Anatomical Speculations into Human Bodies, has methodically
accomplished him for the Practice of Physic, and his Degree of Doctor, is a
Testimonial of his Sufficiency. He knows the value of Life, the Greatness of
his Trust, and his Care is equal to the Account, he must give to God for the
Death of every Patient. Physic has been too long accounted the Mother of no
less monstrous a Birth than that of Atheism, and the Adage is in every ones
mouth, Ubi tre^ Medici, duo Athui, where there are Three Physicians, there are
two Atheists; and because some Pops that wart a Name, are fond of that Ill one,
our Physician by a serious religious Life, and the Exercise of Virtue,
endeavors to wipe off that Scandal from the Profession, and proves from every
Leaf, Herb and Flower, and the stupendous Site of Man's compotion, that the
Knowledge of Physic, and Ignorance of the Existence of a Deity, is wholly
impossible, since beyond all other men they have undeniable Proofs of it.
Praesentemque refert quaelibet Herba Deum. and the deeper they search into the
wonders of Nature, the more will they be obliged to confess and say, This is
the Lords doing. He knows he has to do with Rational Creatures, and lives in an
Age not to be imposed upon by Authoritative prescriptions, or Opinionated
Nestrums, and therefore proposes the Satisfaction of men's Reasons by the
Rationality of his Method, before he attempts the Care of their Discases. He
does not always follow the common Tract, but varies his Prescriptions accoridng
to the different Constitutions of his Partients, and follows the Dictates of
Nature, in all her symptomatical discoveries of Despair or Amendments. He
despises the common Cheat, and dangerous Practice of administering Physic upon
the sight of a Urinal; but will See the Patient, though he is sure to have scarce
Thanks for his Visits, and is as careful of the Poor as the Rich, though at the
Expense of maintaining them with Food, while he is giving of them Physic. If
he is invited to a Consult, he delivers his Judgment freely, and will not
suffer his Reason to be blinded by a Nominal Authority; Solid Reason is his
Rule, and a well established Experience, both enlighttens his Judgment, and
satisfies his Conscience. Above all things he abhors tricking Men out of their
Lives; to try the Operation of a Chimerical Medicine, nor Flatters Mons hopes
against evident Symptoms of an imposibility of recovering; but gives every
Patient, early notice of his Dissolution, that before he leaves this World, he
may be prepared for a Better.

A true English Country Gentleman.
IS the Stack upon which our Nobility is grafted, the Tree from which Sciens
are gathered to be inocculated into the most Illustrious Families; there are
none of them but owe their Originals and Bearing to the Ancient Gentry of
England, and many of them are still more ancient Families, than those that have
acquired additional Titles. The Gentry of England are the Treasury of the
Nation, the Support of the Crown, the Safaty of the Kingdom, the Walls of the
Church, the Pillars of the State, the Honor of the Bench, the Credit of the
Bar, the Hero's of the Camp, the Learning of the Court, the Patriots of their
Country, and the Maintainers of Honor, Arts, and Arms. In his Country Mansion
House, he lives like a Petty Prince, and his own Deweans furnish his Table
plentifully, with Fewl, Flesh, and Fish, and his Orchard and Garden with
Flowers, Herbs and Delicious Fruits; of which few Men have more, no Man can
have better. He is not plagued with a Nursery of Beggars called Footmen; does
not keep an Hospital for Curres and Kites, nor a Seraglio of Where Is, which
Sluice the Blood and Brains out. He does not daily Muster a Regiment of Sharkes,
Fools, and Knaves, at his Table, which Surfeit on his Folly, and empty his
Celler with the Gluttons Prayer, God Bless the Founder; but keeps a constant
Table for his Friends and Family, and unexpected Visitors can never surprise
him. His kindness to his Friends, or Civility to Strangers, does never
Interrupt his Devotions, and those that Sit with him at his Table, must kneel
with him in his Chapel; his Recreations are generous and Manly, and he uses
them for his Divertisement and his Health, but his Study is his Business. His
Servants Thrive, his Tennants grow Rich, and the Poor in his Parish are
employed, and well provided for. He Administers Justice with an equal hand:
Honest Men Love him, and none but ill Men Fear him; he is careful in the
discharge of his Relative Duties, and is a stranger to the foolish and
Fashionable Vices of the Age, which consume the Bodies and Estates of all that
pursue them. He neither sells nor Mortgages his Old Land, to build a New House,
but resolves to leave them togethor as he found them: He delights in the
Country Air, and Innocent Diversion, Spends his Rovenue in Hospitality among
his Neighbors, and has no business in London unless his Country send him
thither as a Member of Parliament, and as soon as the Session is over, he
returns to enjoy himself and his Friends in the Country.

NINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 47. l. 1. for Pendantick, read Pedantick Page 47. l. 11. read to make him
look like himself. Page 62. l. 11. for Watsallen, read nots^W. Page 64. l. 15.
for Broken read Broking.


