A DISCOURSE ABOUT A Scrupulous Conscience, PREACHED At the Parish Church of
St. Mary Aldermanbury, London.

By Benjamin Calamy, D. D. One of His Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary.

Consider this, it is the Judgment of some, that thousands are gone to Hell, and
ten thousands upon their march thither, that in all probability had never come
there, if they had not been tempted from the Parish Churches, for the enjoyment
of Communion in a purer Church. Mr. Baxter's Ep. to separate Congr. The Second
Edition.

LONDON, Printed for Rowland Reynolds, next door to the Middle Exchange in the
Strand.

MDCLXXXIII.

TO Sr. George Jeffryes, Knight and Baronet, Chief Justice of CHESTER.
SIR,
THough I could not easily persuade my self to expose this following Sermon to
public view, yet after I was once resolved to venture it abroad, I was soon
determined to whom I ought to present it. To your Interest and Favor I chiefly
owe my being placed in this Parish, to your Countenance my greatest
Encouragement here, and if it may gain your Acceptance and Approbation, I shall
but little value the uncertain Judgment of others.

Upon how many this plain homely Discourse may have good effect, I cannot
ghess; how many it will anger and displease I am not at all concerned: and tho
I may be thought by some ill advised in publishing such a Sermon, yet every one
will commend and justify my Discretion in prefixing your Name before it: for
so great an awe have the Enemies of our Church and Government of your Loyalty
and Fidelity to both, of your undaunted Zeal and Activity for the Service of
both, that they will not dare loudly to condemn what you are pleased to
protect. They will be justly afraid of quarrelling with me, when they know I
have engaged you on my side.

I am very sensible, that in this Age we live some are so extraordinarily wise
and wary, as to censure and discourage all Men that speak roundly and act
vigorously for the King and Church, as being more forward and busy than is
needful: but I am also as sensible, that if some Men had not shown more Courage
and Honesty than those prudent Persons, both would have been by this time in
far greater danger, than at this present, Thanks be to God, they are.

For my own part, no one is more favorable to a truly tender Conscience than
my self, let it be as nice and scrupulous as it can well be, so it be about the
substantial matters of Piety toward God, Justice between Man and Man, due
Obedience to Superiors, and when it makes us more exactly careful of our
undoubted Duty in all Instances: But, when Men are scrupulous only on one side,
about things commanded by lawful Authority, and make no Scruple of
Disobedience, Schism, Faction, and Division; when Men set up their private
Humor, Fancy, or Opinion, in opposition to established Laws, when they become
peevish, pragmatical, and ungovernable; nay, when Men's Consciences prove so
generally tender and scrupulous, as to doubt of and suspect the Rights of the
Crown, (for that Conscience that is so tender against the Church is also
usually as tender against the King) such wayward skittish Consciences ought to
be well bridled and restrained, or else they will be not only intolerably
troublesome, but extremely mischievous both to Church and State.

That the Blessed Rewards of Virtue and Loyalty may plentifully descend upon
your Self, and all that belong to you, both in this Life and that which is to
come, is the earnest Prayer of

Honored Sir, Your most humble and most obliged Servant, Benjamin Calamy.

St. LUKE 11. 41. But rather give Alms of such things as you have; and behold,
all things are clean unto you.
THE occasion of these Words was this. Whilst our Blessed Savior was after his
wonted manner instructing the People, a certain Pharisee, either in some
measure pleased with his Discourse, or else that he might catch an advantage
against him, besought him to dine with him. Our Lord, who refused no fair
opportunity of doing good, would not disdain to go to the Houses, either of the
greatest Sinners, or his most deadly Enemies; would converse familiarly with
them, and eat at their Tables, that by such obliging condescension he might by
degrees win them to the love and embracing of Divine truth. He was the great
Physician of Souls, and went about continually visiting his Patients, all those
whose Minds stood in need of his help or cure. He consulted their Benefit more
than his own Safety or Reputation. He would keep company with Publicanes and
Sinners, in order to the reforming of them, tho he himself for doing so should
be thought one of them; and he frankly accepted the invitation of Pharisees, tho
he knew they lay in wait for him, and designed only to entrap him.

He went in therefore with the Pharisee into his House, and without any of
those previous Washings and Purifications, which the Jews religiously used
before eating, he sat down to meat. This the strict Pharisee thought a great
Profaneness and Wickedness in his Guest. He wondered that so great a Prophet
and Preacher of Righteousness as our Savior pretended to be, should so
scandalously violate the Traditions of the Elders, verse 38. And when the
Pharisee saw it, he marvelled that he had not first washed before Dinner: for
as St. Mark tells us upon a like occasion, Mark 7. 3. The Pharisees, and all
the Jews, except they wash their hands, eat not, holding the Tradition of the
Elders. And when they come from the Market, except they wash, they eat not. And
many other things there be which they have received to hold, as the washing of
Cups, and of Pots, and of brazen Vessels, and of Tables. Things not ordained by
God, nor any part of Moses's Laws, but the rules and prescriptions of their
Rabbis or Scribes; observed, at least by the strictest part of the Jews, out
of an Opinion that true purity of mind was to be obtained and preserved by such
frequent washings. For of such necessity did they think these outward.
Purgations to be, that it was a determined case amongst them, that if any one
in great distress had Water sufficient for washing, but not enough to wash and
drink too, he ought rather to perish by Thirst than neglect to wash himself;
and it was commonly said amongst them, that to eat with unwashen hands was a
greater Pollution, than to defile ones Body with an Harlot.

Now this our Savior with great zeal reproves in the Pharisees, in the Verses
before my Text, Now do ye Pharisees make clean the outside of the Cup and
Platter, but your inward part is full of ravening and Wickedness. Ye Fools, did
not he that made that which is without make that which is within also? That is
to say, that which God regards is the purity of your Minds, the cleansing your
Hearts from all evil affections and filthy lusts; and all your outward
washings, without this internal purity, are but as if a man should wash his
Vessels, the outside of them only, leaving the inside of them full of all
filthiness and nastiness. Thus do ye Pharisees wash your Bodies, whilst your
Souls and Spirits remain full of all Uncleanness, of Malice, and Wickedness. If
you would obey and please God, you must cleanse that which is within as well as
that which is without: then he adds the Words of my Text, But rather give Alms
of such things as you have; and behold, all things are clean unto you.

There are several Meanings given of these Words by Interpreters, with which I
shall not now trouble you, but only propound that which I shall choose to
insist upon. It is very ordinary in Scripture to express the whole of our Duty
or Religion by some one part or eminent Instance of it; as very frequently by
Charity, so here by one principal part of Charity, giving of Alms. So that the
Sense ought not to be restrained to this single duty of Almsgiving, to the
exclusion of the rest; but all other Duties, that are of the same weight and
necessity, are here understood, as well as that one which is mentioned. And
then the Sense is this, Mind chiefly the great, and moral, and substantial
parts of Gods Laws, study those Duties that are of eternal and indispensable
Obligation, be most zealous and sollicitous for the matters of Piety,
Righteousness, and Charity, and behold all things are clean unto you; that is,
ye need not then be so anxious or concerned about these little things, nor so
strictly tie up your selves to such Formalities and external Rites. If you be
but seriously diligent about your main and undoubted Duty, you will be more
indifferent about Meats and Drinks, nor will you lay so great a stress upon any
Singularities or Affectations in Religion. Be but exactly careful to avoid
every thing which God has forbid, to do every thing which he has expressly
commanded, and then trouble not your Consciences about eating with unwashen
hands. Thus, as Grotius upon these Words observes, they signify the same with
what St. Paul says, Titus 1. 15. Unto the pure all things are pure. They who
keep themselves unspotted from all sinful Pollutions, who strictly abstain from
unlawful Freedoms, may with a safe Conscience use any unlawful Liberty, and eat
any kind of meats, with washen or unwashen hands.

In short, the sense of the Words seems to be this; Mind your plain and
necessary Duty, and trouble not your selves with Scruples about little and
indifferent things. Whence I shall take occasion to discourse of what is
usually called a scrupulous Conscience: which I have chosen to do, not out of a
design to expose or upbraid the weakness of any, but rather charitably to
contribute what I can toward the healing and curing of it: and this I take for
granted, That we cannot do greater Service either to the Church of Christ or
Souls of Men, than by all prudent means to root out those needless scruples out
of their minds, which has been the occasion of such unchristian Separations
and dangerous Divisions amongst us, at first begun, and still maintained
generally upon the account of such things, as I verily believe a well
instructed Conscience need not be concerned or disturbed about.

I shall first show you what I understand by a scrupulous Conscience, then
observe some few things concerning it, and lastly, offer some plain Rules and
Means by which we may best get rid of it.

First, What is a scrupulous Conscience? Now Conscience, as it is a Rule of our
Actions, is nothing else, but a Man's Mind or Judgment concerning the moral
Goodness or Evil, Lawfulness or Unlawfulness of things; and as this Judgment is
either true or false, so is our Conscience either good and well grounded, or
erroneous, The Divine Law made known to us either by the Light of Nature, or
plain Scripture, or direct consequence from it, such as any honest man may
understand, is the rule of Conscience, or of that Judgment we make of the
Lawfulness or Unlawfulness of things. So that our Conscience is a safe Rule and
Guide of our Actions no farther than as it self is directed and warranted by
the Law of God.

1. A good and well grounded Conscience is, when we carefully abstain from
whatever God has forbidden, don't neglect doing any thing which he has
commanded, and as for other matters left indifferent and at Liberty, we do them
or forbear doing of them according as the Rules of obedience to Superiors,
Prudence, and Charity, do require. This is the Health and sound State of the
Mind.

2. An erroneous Conscience is, when we judge that to be evil or unnecessary
which God has expressly commanded, and is our Duty; or that to be good and
necessary which he has plainly forbid, and is really sinful. Now our
Consciences cannot alter the nature of things: that which is our Duty remains
so, and we sin by omitting it, notwithstanding we in our Consciences think it
unlawful to be done; and what is really Evil continues such, and is Sin in us,
however our Consciences tell us it is our duty to do it: and the fault is more
or less compassionable and pardonable, as the causes of the Error are more or
less voluntary and avoidable. This is a grievous Disease and deadly Sickness of
the Mind, when we thus grossly err in our Judgments, and act according to our
mistaken Opinion of things.

3. A scrupulous Conscience is conversant about things in their own Nature
indifferent, and it consists

Either in strictly tying up our selves to some things which God has no where
commanded; as the Pharisees made great Conscience of washing before they did
eat, and abundance of other unnecessary Rites and Usages they had of Men's own
inventing and devising, which they as religiously, nay more carefully observed
than the indisputable Commands of God himself:

Or in a conscientious abstaining from some things which are not forbid, nor
any ways unlawful. Touch not, taste not, handle not, doubting and fearing where
no fear is, thinking that they should as much offend God by eating some kind of
Meats, wearing some Garments, as they should do were they guilty of Murder and
Adultery. Which is the case of many amongst us, who by such Scrupulosity about
little matters seem more precise and austere than other good and honest
Christians are, or themselves need or ought to be.

For be it from me, by any thing I shall now say, to discourage the greatest
and tenderest care any Christian can take to keep himself from all Sin, from
all Occasions and Temptations to it, from the least appearance of Evil, of what
is really such: and to do any thing that is in it self sinful, out of
confidence that it is lawful, is far worse and a more grievous offense than to
abstain from many things which are truly lawful, out of an Opinion that they
are sinful. Notwithstanding this, I cannot but reckon it the chief Policy of
the Devil, the grand Enemy of all that is good, when he cannot persuade us that
there is nothing at all sinful or unlawful, then to make us suspect every thing
for such, or at least, that there is great danger of displeasing God by the
most indifferent and innocent Actions; by these means ensnaring and entangling
Men's Consciences, and rendering Religion a most troublesome burden to them.

A scrupulous Conscience therefore starts and boggles, where there is no real
Evil or Mischief; is afraid of omitting or doing what may be omitted or done
without Sin. Which I know not how better to illustrate than by those
unaccountable Antipathies or Prejudices that some men have against some sort of
Meats, or living Creatures, which have not the least harm or hurt in them, yet
are so offensive and dreadful to such Persons, that they fly from them as they
would from a Tiger or Bear, and avoid them as they would do the Plague or
Poison. Just thus do some Men run out of the Church at the sight of a Surplice,
as if they had been scared by the apparition of a Ghost.

I. proceed to the second thing I propounded, to observe to you some few
general things concerning this scrupulous Conscience; as,

1. That this is a very sickly, crazy temper of mind, a great indisposition, a
state of weakness and infirmity. It arises from Ignorance and want of right
understanding our Religion, from undue timerousness or unsetledness of mind,
from melancholy, or unreasonable prejudices and mistakes about the nature of
things. Such scrupulous Persons are like fearful Women, that wander in the
dark, who seeing nothing to affright them, yet fancy many things, which make
them tremble every step they take: or like those who see only by an uncertain
glimmering twilight, their Imagination once abused and prepossessed, transforms
every Object into a Monster or Giant.

Thus this Scrupulous is the same with what in other Words some call a tender
Conscience, so tender that every thing hurts and wounds it, like a tender Eye
which the least Dust or Smoke grievously offends, or a tender constitution of
Body, which the least Air or Wind mightily disorders and discomposes. Now this
is far from being any Virtue or Commendation in us, this is no desirable
Qualification, nor a matter of Ambition to be thought men of such tender
Consciences, no more than it is for a man's Reputation to be sickly and often
indisposed. A good Conscience is firm and steady, well settled and resolved, and
such needless Scruples about things lawful are at the best a sign of an
ungoverned Fancy, and a weak Judgment. As the niceness and squeamishness of a
man's Stomach that distasts wholesome Food is a simptom of an unsound and
unhealthy Body. This does not argue any extraordinary holiness or purity above
others, as the Pharisee conceited of himself, stand off, come not 'nigh me,
touch me not, for I am holier than thou, because he washed himself so often.
No, we are yet in a childish state, and whilst we are frighted with such
Bug-bears and Phantasms, we have not yet arrived to the Understanding or
Resolution of a Man.

2. This Scrupulosity about little matters may be, and is often a sign of
Hypocrisy. I take not upon my self to judge any Persons. Let every man look to
himself; but thus certainly it was with the Scribes and Pharisees of old; They
strained at every Gnat, stumbled at every Straw, would starve sooner than eat
their Meat with defiled hands, would not for the World wrong a man of a
Cummin-seed, or a spear of Mint, and by this wonderful exactness and strictness
in some instances, they easily gained the Reputation of the greatest Saints; so
that it is said to have been an ordinary Proverb among the Jews, That if but
two persons in the World, went to Heaven, one of them would be a Scribe the
other a Pharisee. Yet for all this, if we will believe our Savior's account of
them, they made nothing of swallowing Camels, living in the greatest and most
known Wickedness.

Alas! their Consciences would not give them leave to enter into the Governors
Hall to go amongst the Heathens, for fear of being polluted by them, yet at the
same time they stuck not at suborning false Witnesses against the best and most
innocent Person that ever lived. They blamed the Disciples for plucking the
ears of Corn on the Sabbath Day, as if they, poor tenderhearted men, were
offended and grieved to the Soul at such Profaneness, and yet they thought it
nothing to deny relief and succor to their own Parents when in Want or
Distress; they made no Bones of Rapine and Extortion, oppressing the Poor, or
devouring Widows Houses. By their curiosity about these external Observances,
they hoped to make amends for their gross Transgressions in other cases of far
greater weight and moment. Since they denied themselves many things which God
had allowed them, they hoped he would readily forgive them, tho in some other
things they took a greater Liberty than he had permitted them.

Had any of us been present when Mary, St. John 12. 3. took the Ointment of
Spikenard, very costly, and anointed the Feet of Jesus, and had heard Judas's
Rebuke, Why was not this Ointment sold for three hundred pence, and given to
the Poor? (He scrupled such a profuse expense, tho about our Savior himself.
He thought it might have been better employed, to more useful purposes.) Should
we not from this have strait concluded him the most charitable and
conscientious of all Christ's Disciples, and yet this overgreat care for the
Poor was only a pretense and covering for his theevish Intention.

They therefore who are so scrupulous about little indifferent matters, ought
to approve their Honesty and Sincerity by the most accurate Diligence in the
Practice of all other Duties of Religion, which are plainly and undoubtedly
such. They who pretend to such a tender Conscience above other Men must know,
that the World will watch them as to the fairness and justice of their
Dealings, the calmness of their Tempers, their behavior in their several
Relations, their Modesty, Humility, Charity, Peaceableness, and the like. If in
all these things they keep the same Tenor, use the same caution and
circumspection, and be uniformly conscientious, then it must be acknowledged,
that it is only Weakness or Ignorance that raises their Scruples, not any
vicious Principle; and the condition of those who are under the power of such
Scruples, is much to be commiserated.

But, when I see a Man scrupling praying by a Book or Form, and yet living
without any Sense of God or Fear of him, afraid of a Ceremony in God's Worship,
and not afraid of a plain damnable Sin, of Covetousness, rash censuring his
Brethren, of Hatred and Strife, Faction and Schism, and disobedience to
Superiors; when I see one that out of Conscience refuses to kneel at the
Sacrament, and yet dares totally neglect the Communion; who takes great care
not to give offense to his weak Brother, but can freely speak evil of
Dignities, and despises his lawful Governors; it is not then uncharitable to
say, That it is not dread of displeasing God, but some other bye end or
interest that acts and moves such a Person, and in pleading the Tenderness of
his Conscience he is no other than a downright Hypocrite.

On the other side, Let a Man be never so punctual and critical in his
Conformity to all the appointed Ceremonies and Usages in our Church, let him
constantly attend Gods solemn Worship, and behave himself most reverently and
decently at the Public Prayers, yet if this Man be profane and intemperate, a
Derider of true Piety and Godliness, if he lives loosly and at Random, all his
regular Devotions, all his bowing and kneeling to the Honor of our Savior,
all his niceness about his Worship to perform it in the most orderly manner,
all his Zeal for the Church shall avail him nothing. He is no better than the
Pharisee, washing the outside, whilst he is within full of all Wickedness and
Uncleanness. To be so concerned about little things, whilst we make no
Conscience of the greater, is the most evident sign that can be given of a
false Christian. And has it not often happened in the World, that such a mighty
Scrupulosity about our Duty has proved a very successful way of growing great
or raising an Estate, by giving Men so fair an opportunity of imposing upon the
credulous and unwary? So that I have known it advised as an useful caution to
those that would live in the World, always to stand upon your Guard and look to
your Pockets, when you deal with those who pretend to greater Tenderness and
Exactness than other undoubtedly sober and honest Christians generally do.

3. Where Persons are truly honest and mean well, there is nothing more
troublesome and vexatious than such unreasonable Scruples about things lawful.
This must needs be an intolerable disturbance to a Man's Mind, and breed great
Anxiety and Inquietude, when Persons are continually shivering and trembling
lest by every thing they do they incur the Divine Displeasure; and it certainly
disables a man from performing his necessary Duty. He is likely to make but a
slow Progress in his Journey, who instead of going on cheerfully in his way, is
frequently at a stand, doubting which Foot he should set forward, or what
particular Path he should choose. This robs men, in a great measure, of that
Peace and Satisfaction which they might otherwise find in Religion, whilst they
are daily perplexing themselves with untying Knots which themselves only have
fastened. Scruples about things indifferent, when once we attend to and
entertain them, like the Plague of Flies amongst the Egyptians, will be
constantly buzzing in our Ears, and tormenting us with their Impertinency; till
at length we come to distrust every thing, and there is nothing that belongs to
ordinary civility, no recreation we can use, no clothes we can wear, no
discourse we can hold with others, no conversation we can maintain, or business
which we transact in the World, but we shall raise some trifling Objections or
Scruples about it, which will make our Condition continually uneasy and
restless. For,

4. These Scruples are infinite and endless: for, being grounded upon some very
little and inconsiderable Reason, there is hardly any thing to be done but some
small Exceptions may be started against it, which may soon puzzle and confound
the more ignorant sort of Christians. Thus he that scruples a Minister's
officiating in a white Garment, may easily be brought to doubt of the fitness
of his doing it in black, and then he proceeds against any solemn distinct
Habit, and at last against the Office of Ministers it self, and tells you all
Gods People are holy, and that all Christians are a Royal Priesthood, and we
have no need of Teachers, for we are all taught of God. From scrupling the Sign
of the Cross after Baptism, Men have soon come to question Infant Baptism it
self: they have at first perchance disliked only some significant Ceremonies in
God's Worship, of Humane appointment, but thence they have gone on to deny all
outward bodily Reverence, and thought it not expedient to pull off their Hats
in Church, then not to do it before Magistrates, at last not at all: and thus
by giving place to such little Scruples, they become afraid of speaking,
looking, or doing any thing like other Men.

This is notorious amongst us. Those who have taken Offense at some things in
our Church and have thereupon separated from us, and associated themselves with
a purer Congregation, have soon disliked something amongst them also, and then
they would reform themselves farther, and after that refine themselves more
still, till at last they have sunk down either into Quakerism, Popery, or
Atheism. This does not only now and then happen in the World, but is the
probable effect of embracing and cherishing such Scruples, that men go on
scrupling one thing after another, till at length they doubt of every thing.

5. Lastly, This needless scrupling of lawful things has done unspeakable
Mischief to the Church of Christ, especially to the Reformed Church of England;
a Church reformed according to the most Primitive and Apostolical Pattern, by
the best and wisest Rules, in which even by the confession of the soberest and
most considerable of our Dissenters nothing is required, as a condition of
Communion, that is sinful; yet how is she rent and torn, mangled and divided,
how has she been assaulted, undermined, and in danger to be the second time
overthrown upon the account only of Habits and Gestures, and particular Forms,
Rites, and Modes of Discipline and Worship, with which some Men are not well
satisfied or pleased, which they judge might be better done and ordered another
way, or which they rather would have left at liberty, that every Man may do
therein according to his own Discretion or Opinion.

In the great and necessary Truths of Religion we all profess to be agreed. We
all worship the same God, believe in the same Lord and Savior, have the same
Baptism, the same Faith, the same Hope, the same common Interest, our
Sacraments, as to the main are rightly administered according to our Saviors
Institution, our Churches are acknowledged to be true Churches of Jesus Christ:
but there are some Constitutions, which respect chiefly outward Order and the
decent performance of Divine Worship, against which men have received strange
Prejudices, on the account of them have raised a mighty noise and clamor
against the Church, and have openly separated from its Communion, as if by
renouncing of Popery we had only exchanged one idolatrous Service for another.
About these skirts and borders, the dress and circumstances of Religion has
been all our quarrelling and contention; and these Differences have proceeded
to such an height, as to beget immortal Feuds and Animosities, to break and
crumble us into little Parties and Fractions, whereby mutual Edification his
hindered, our common Religion suffers Reproach, the Enemies of it are
strengthened and encouraged, public Peace endangered, and brotherly Love, the
Badge of Christ's Disciples, quite lost amongst us: and the continuance of
these miserable Distractions amongst us upon such frivolous Accounts, (if
compared with the Interests of Peace and Charity) is a matter of sad
consideration to all lively Members of Christ's Body, and forebodes great evils
impendent over our Church and State. I doubt not to say, that the Devil has
fought more successfully against Religion under the mark of a zealous Reformer,
than under any other disguise whatever.

The grand Enemy of mankind has by various ways and means all along contrived,
and endeavored to defeat the designs of Heaven for the good and happiness of
men: and as the divine Wisdom has in several ages of the World manifested it
self for the encouraging and promoting of true Righteousness and Holiness, so
has the Devil always been at work to oppose what he could find most proper for
the hindering the good effect of Gods Kindness toward us. When the fullness of
time came, by the appearance of the Son of God in the World, he was in a great
measure dethroned, his Kingdom overthrown, and the last and most effectual
means, were used for the recovery of men out of his snare and power. When
therefore he perceived that by all the grievous Persecutions he raised against
the Church, it spread only so much the faster, that at last the whole Heathen
Idolatry fell down before the Cross of Christ; when he was shamefully expelled
out of his Temples, and from his Altars, his Oracles silenced, and the Religion
of Jesus prevailed every where; He then betook himself to his old. Serpentine
Arts of dissimulation. Since he could no longer oppose Christ's Kingdom by open
war, he resolved to turn Christian, and to set up for Christ's Deputy, and
substitute here on Earth, to fight against Christians under Christ's Banner, and
by adulterating and corrupting the Christian Doctrine, to spoil it of all its
Efficacy, to introduce his old Heathen Rites and Idolatrous Ceremonies, as
unwritten traditions from Christ himself or his Apostles, and so under his Name
and pretended Authority to exercise all that cruelty, oppression, and fraud,
which is so pleasing to his own infernal nature, hoping to burn, destroy, root
out all true Christians from the face of the Earth, under color of propagating
the Catholic Faith, and enlarging Christ's Kingdom in the World.

When Christendom had long groaned under this miserable Tyranny, it pleased God
in many places of Europe, but especially here in England, to set on foot a
Reformation of Religion, which was happily and peaceably accomplished among us
by the favor and countenance of public Authority and the wise Counsel and
Advice of our Reverend Bishops and other Ministers. To nip this in the Bud the
Devil raised that sharp Persecution in Queen Mary's days, in which our first
Reformers gloriously sealed what they had done with their Blood: but this
proving ineffectual, that he might the better frustrate the ends of our
Reformation, himself would turn Reformer too; A great cry was soon raised
against our Church, as not sufficiently purged from Popery, our Bishops, our
Prayers, our Ceremonies were all Antichristian, and it was not long before all
Ministers, Tithes, Temples, and the Universities too, were condemned as such,
and God knows they had well nigh reformed away all Learning, true Religion, and
Worship of God, and under the specious Pretense of paring off all
Superfluities, had grievously shaken the Foundations of Christianity it self;
insomuch, that it came to pass, as some of those who now dissent from us did
then camplain, That Professors of Religion did openly oppose and deride almost
all that Service of God out of Conscience, which other men used to do out of
Profaneness. And what infinte mischief this rash and intemperate Zeal for
reforming abuses and corruptions has done to our Church and Nation, if the
experience of this last age will not sufficiently convince men, it is not to be
hoped that any Discourse should. We little consider whose Interest we thus
serve and promote: we do his work who is most delighted with Srife and
Confusion, and every one can tell who that is, and where he reigns. To be sure
by these uncharitable Separations we highly gratify the common Eenemy, whose
great Design and Policy it has all along been, by the Follies and invincible
Scruples of Protestant Dissenters to weaken, and by degrees pull down the
Church of England, and then we all become an become an easy Prey to Rome.

If any now tell me, that to prevent this great Mischief and Danger that
arises from our Divisions, it is not so necessary that the People should lay
down their Scruples, (which they cannot well do, since no one can at any time
think or believe as he will,) as it is that the Impositions themselves, the
matters scrupled at, should be removed and taken away, and then Peace and Unity
may be better secured. To this I only answer these two things.

1. I now consider things as they at present stand amongst us. We have a Church
settled and established by Law, in which nothing that is sinful is enjoined.
What the Duty of our Governors and Superiors is, how far they may or ought to
condescend to the Weakness or Scruples of others, I shall not take upon me to
determine; that is another Question which belongs not to us. But I consider now
only what private Members of such a Church are to do, and then I say, scrupling
the Use of some things prescribed by the Church, will not justify our leaving
it; nay, as I shall show afterward, it is our best and safest course to submit
and comply with such Orders notwithstanding our Scruples. But I add,

2. If this were a sufficient Reason why the Constitution of any Church should
be altered, because some things are scrupled in it, there never could be a
settled Church as long as the World stands: for, since there will be always a
difference in Men's Understandings and Tempers, some weak and injudicious,
others peevish and proud, there will consequently be many that shall scruple
and be offended at the best and most innocent Constitutions. And if the
Ceremonies now in use amongst us had not been retained at our first
Reformation, those very Persons, who are now so much dissatisfied with the
Imposition of them, would perhaps have been the first that should have then
complained of the want of them. Of which we have this notorious and undeniable
Evidence in the late times, when our Church was laid in the Dust, when none of
those Ceremonies or Forms which are now objected against were imposed or
commonly used, yet even then were men gathering Congregations out of
Congregations, purifying and reforming still further; Scruples increased, Sects
and Divisions upon them multiplied, and never such Distractions and Confusions
in Religion as in those days, and without the gift of Prophecy one may foretell
that, if what is principally found fault with in our Church was now abolished,
yet those that are given to Scruples would at least in time find cavilling
Objections against any Constitution that can be made. They are like Men given
to sue and go to Law. They never want some pretense to disturb themselves and
their Neighbors.

Men may talk of reconciling our Differences, and making up our Breaches to
their Lives end, and propound their several Projects, and frame their Models,
and conceive fine designs of Union and Accommodation, yet none of these will
have any effect or do any good, till men learn Humility and Modesty, and be
contented to be governed by others in things indifferent, till Self-conceit and
Pride be in some measure rooted out, and when this is effectually done, there
will then be found but little need of any alteration in the present
Constitution.

The foundation of our Peace and Agreement must be laid in the reforming our
selves and our own Tempers. The way to unite us lies not so much in amending
the present Establishment, Government, Liturgy, endeavoring to add to it, or
leave out of it, till all Parties amongst us are satisfied, (which indeed can
never be effected) as it does consist in our becoming more truly Christian in
our Lives and Tempers. They are our vicious Dispositions, more than our
different Apprehensions, that keep us at such a distance. Let the terms of
Communion with the Church be what they will, yet as long as Men retain the same
quarrelsom Mind, and industriously seek for Doubts and Scruples, and are glad
to find them, and prefer their own private Opinion and Judgment before the
Wisdom and Authority of all their Governors, whether Civil or Ecclesiastical,
it is plain our Divisions and Animosities will not, cannot cease.

But this leads me to the last thing I designed to discourse of; which was, to
propound to you the best ways and means by which men may get rid of and ease
their Minds of such Scruples; where I shall especially consider those that
relate to our communicating with our Parish-Churches. You must not expect that
I should descend to, and answer the particular Exceptions which hinder men from
constant Communion with us; but only in general I shall crave leave to advise
you some few things, which would mightily tend to the removing those Doubts and
Scruples that yet detain so many in a state of utter Separation from us, or at
least discourage their total and hearty joining with us. Which charitable
Design and Attempt, however unsuccessful I may be in it, yet cannot, I hope, be
unacceptable to any, whose Consciences are pestered with such Scruples, since I
endeavor only to deliver them from those Mistakes, which beside the disservice
they do to Religion and the Protestant Interest, do also expose them to trouble
and danger from the Public Laws and Civil Magistrate. Of many Rules that might
be given in this case, I shall insist only on these following.

1. We should take great care to beget and cherish in our Minds the most high,
and worthy, and honorable Thoughts of God Almighty. This is the Foundation of
all Religion; and as our Apprehensions of God are, such for the most part will
be his Worship and Service. Accordingly as we conceive of his Nature, so shall
we judge what things are most pleasing to him, as also what they are that are
most offensive and distastful to him.

Now consider, I beseech you, Can that Man have becoming and excellent Thoughts
of the Divine Nature, who imagines that God regards any particular Gestures,
Habits, and Postures so far, as that the acceptance of our Service and Worship
should depend upon such Circumstances of our religious Actions? When with all
Humility and true Devotion of Heart a sincere Christian prostrates himself at
the Throne of God's Grace, and with earnest Desire and Affections begs those
good things that are according to Gods Mind and Will, Can we believe that the
Father of our Spirits shall refuse and reject his Petition because it is
delivered in a certain prescribed form of Words? Shall his importunate renewed
Requests fail of Success because he still uses the same Expressions, and reads
his Prayers out of a Book? Is God pleased with variety of Words? or the
copiousness of our Invention, or the elegancy of our Phrase and Style? Is it
not the Heart and inward frame of Spirit that God principally respects in all
our Prayers? Or can we think so meanly of God, that he should shut his ears
against the united Prayers of his People, because offended at the color of the
Garment in which the Minister officiates?

Suppose two Persons, both with equal Preparation, with true Repentance and
Faith to approach the Lord's Table; one of them out of a deep sense of his
Unworthiness to receive so great Blessings, and out of a grateful
acknowledgment of the Benefits therein conferred upon him, takes the Sacrament
upon his Knees, in the humblest Posture; the other sitting or standing. Can you
think that the Sacrament is effectual or beneficial, or that God blesses it
only to him that sits, or that it would not have been of the same advantage to
him if he also had received it kneeling? To surmise any such thing, is surely
to dishonor God, as if he were a low poor humoursome Being, like a Father that
should disinherit his Child tho in all Respects most dutiful to him, and every
way deserving his greatest Kindness, only because he did not like his
Complexion, or the color of his Hair. The wiser and greater any Person is to
whom we address our selves, the less he will stand upon little Punctilio's.

Under the Jewish Law the minutest circumstances of Worship were exactly
described and determined by God himself, and it was not ordinarily lawful for
the People at all to vary from them. But it was necessary then that it should
be thus: because the Jewish Worship was typical of what was to come hereafter,
and those many nice Observances that were appointed were not commanded for
themselves, as if there were any excellency in them, but they were shadows of
things to come, which are all now done away by the Gospel, and the bringing in
of everlasting Righteousness, the only thing always pleasing to God and
agreeable to his Nature: It is a spiritual rational Service God now expects
from us, and delights in, and he must look upon God as a very fond and captious
Being, who can persuade himself that our Prayers and Thansgivings and other
Acts of Worship, tho we be most hearty and devout in them, yet shall be
rejected by him only because of some particular Habits or Gestures we used,
which were neither dishonorable to God, nor unsuitable to the nature of those
religious Performances.

Such mean Thoughts of God are the true ground of all Superstition, when we
think to court and please him by making great Conscience about little things;
and so it has been truly observed, that there is far more Superstition in
conscientious abstaining from that which God has no where forbid, than there
is in doing that which God has not commanded. A man may certainly do what God
has not commanded, and yet never think to flatter God by it, nor place any
Religion in it, but he may do it only out of obedience to his Superiors, for
outward Order and Decency, for which end our Ceremonies are appointed, and so
there is no Superstition in them. But now a man cannout out of Conscience
refuse to do what God has not forbid, and is by lawful Authority, required of
him, but he must think to please God by such abstaining: and in this conceit of
pleasing or humouring God by indifferent things, consists the true Spirit of
Superstition. Have great and honorable Thoughts of God, and behold, all these
things will be clean to you.

2. (Which is the particular Rule of my Text) Lay out your great care and zeal
about the necessary and substantial duties of Religion, and this will make you
less concerned about things of an inferior and indifferent Nature. As on the
one hand our fierce Disputes and Debates about little things and circumstances
are apt to eat out the Heart and Life of Religion, so on the other side,
minding those things most, in which the Power of Religion does consist, is the
best way to cure our Scrupulousness about little things. This was the Apostle's
Advice to the Romans, cap. 14. amongst whom eating or not eating some Meats,
observing or not observing some days, had occasioned as much trouble and
Scruple as forms of Prayer and Ceremonies do now amongst us, ver. 17. The
Kingdom of God is not Meat or Drink, but Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the
Holy Ghost. What needs all this Stir and Bustle? This censuring, disputing, and
dividing about Standing or Kneeling, these are not the great matters of our
Faith; they are not worth so much Noise and Contention. The great stress and
weight in our Religion is laid upon the Duties of a righteous and holy Life,
and a peaceable Spirit and Conversation, and then he adds, ver. 18. For he that
in these things serves Christ is acceptable to God and approved of Men.

Thus when you betake your selves to your Prayers, let it be your greatest care
to fix in your Minds a due sense of God's Infinite Majesty, of your own
Vileness and Unworthiness, of your manifold Wants* and Necessities, and the
greatness and goodness of the things you petition for, and his readiness to
grant them upon your humble Request; and the more you do this, the less
sollicitous you will be about the form or words of your Prayers. He that minds
those things most on which the efficacy of his Prayers for Christ's sake does
depend, will not stand in need of, nor require new Phrases every time to stir
his Attention or to raise his Affection. Thus let Men be very diligent and
conscientious in preparing themselves for the Holy Communion; let them come
thereunto with lively apprehensions of Christ's Love in dying for us, with
hearty Resolutions of Amendment, and true Charity toward all Men; the more
concerned they are about these necessary things, the less afraid will they be
of offending God by kneeling at the Administration, or coming up to receive it
in one part of the Church rather than another: for, they will find that they
are quite other things in which true Religion consists, in a new Nature, in a
divine temper of Mind, in the constant Practice of Holiness, Righteousness, and
Charity; which make a Man really better, and more like unto God.

He that places any Religion in not putting off his Hat, or sitting at the
Sacrament, or not standing up at the Creed or Gospel, as I before showed you,
has no worthy Thoughts of God; so neither has he any right Notion of
Christianity, which consists only in unfeigned Piety toward God, and sincere
Love to our Brother, not in any external Rites or Observances, which are in
their own Nature variable and mutable, and are different in several Churches.

3. It would greatly contribute to the removing these Scruples which hinder the
blessed Union of Christians amongst us, if men were but really willing to
receive satisfaction. This alone would go half way toward conquering them. But
when they are grown fond of and nourish their Doubts and Prejudices, and
converse only with those Men, read only those Books, and hear those Discourses
which are made of their side, which serve to heighten and strengthen their
Jealousies and Suspicions, when they avoid the means of Conviction as dangerous
Snares and Temptations, and look upon this tenderness or aptness to be
offended, as a sign of Grace and extraordinary Conscientiousness, there can be
but little hopes of recovering such Persons to a right apprehension of things.
Whereas would they come once to distrust their own Judgments, to suppose that
they may perhaps be all this while mistaken, would they calmly and patiently
hear, faithfully and impartially consider what is said or wrote against them,
as eagerly desire and seek for satisfaction as Men do for cure of any Disease
they are subject unto; would they, I say, thus diligently use all fit means and
helps for the removal of their Scruples, before they troubled the Church of
Christ with them, it would not prove so very difficult a Task to convince and
settle such teachable Minds.

If therefore any Man be possessed with Doubts or Scruples against any thing
practiced or required in our Church, let him first read some of those excellent
Books, that are written with all the fairness and evidence imaginable, on
purpose to explain and justify those things that are most usually excepted
against; let him consult with some of our Church before he leaves it. Let him
honestly repair to the Minister of his Parish, or some other whom he has in
greater estimation, and ingeniously open his Mind to him, declaring what it is
he most stumbles at, and hear what can be offered for the Resolution of his
Doubts. If consulting with one Person will not do it, let him advise with
others, and try this often, before he condemns us, and divides from us. Would
men do this seriously, with earnest desire of instruction, without doubt we
should have far fewer Separatists, and they who after this did still dissent
from us, would be far more excusable in it, than otherwise they are, and this
is no other than what men ordinarily do in their temporal affairs. When they
have any fear or suspicion about their worldly concerns, they presently repair
to those who are best skilled, and most able to resolve them, and in their
judgment and determination they commonly acquiesce and satisfy themselves.
Has any man a scruple about his Estate, whether it be firmly settled, or he
has a true legal Title to it? The way he takes for satisfaction is to advise
with Lawyers, the most eminent for Knowledge and Honesty in their profession.
If they agree in the same opinion, this is the greatest assurance he can have
that it is right and safe. Thus is it with one that doubts whether such a
custom or practice be for his health, the opinion of known and experienced
Physicians is the only proper means to determine him in such a case. The reason
is the same here. When any private Christian is troubled and perplexed with
fears and scruples that concern his Duty, or the Worship of God, he ought in
the first place to have recourse to the Public Guides and Ministers of
Religion, who are appointed by God, and are best fitted to direct and conduct
him; I say, to come to them, not only to dispute and argue with them, and
pertly to oppose them, but with all modesty to propound their doubts, meekly to
hearken to and receive Instruction, humbly begging of God to open their
Understandings that they may see and embrase the truth, taking great care that
no evil affection, love of a Party or carnal interest influence or bias their
Judgments.

Who do not by this desire men to pin their faith upon the Priests Sleeve, or
to put out their own eyes that they might be better guided and managed by them;
but only diligently to attend to their Reasons and Arguments, and to give some
due regard and deference to their Authority: for it is not so absurd, as may by
some be imagined, for the Common People to take upon trust from their lawful
Teachers, what they are not competent Judges of themselves.

But the difficulty here is, how shall a private Christian govern himself, when
the very Guides and Ministers of Religion determine differently concerning
these matters in question amongst us? Some warranting and allowing them, others
as much disapproving and condemning them: by what Rule shall he choose his
Guide? To which I briefly reply;

1. As for those who scruple at Conformity, and are tolerably to judge for
themselves, let not such rely barely upon the Authority either of the one or
the other. All we desire of them is, that they would equally hear both sides,
that they would think that the Ministers of the Church of England have some
Sense and Conscience too as well as other Men, and are able to say somewhat for
what they do themselves, or require of others; that laying aside all
Prejudices, Favor to or admiration of Men's Persons, they would weigh and
consider the Arguments that may be propounded to them, being diffident of their
own Apprehensions, and indifferent to either part of the Question; that they
would think it no shame to change their Mind when they see good reason for it.
Could we thus prevail with the People diligently to examine the Merits of the
cause, our Church would every day gain more Ground amongst all wise Men: for we
care not how much Knowledge and Understanding our People have, so they be but
humble and modest with it, nor do we desire Men to become our Proselytes any
further than we give them good Scripture and Reason for it.

2. But as for those who are not so capable of examining or judging for
themselves (as few of the common People who separate from us really are; they
not being able to give any tolerable account of their dissent from us, only in
general Words declaiming against Popery, Superstition, Antichristian and
Unscriptural Ceremonies, Humane Traditions, etc.) such had better trust to and
depend on those Ministers, of known Sufficiency for their Office, who are
regularly and by the Laws of the Land set over them, than any other Guides or
Teachers that they can choose for themselves. This to be sure is the safer
course, which in doubtful cases is always to be taken. I speak now of these
present Controversies about Forms and Ceremonies so hotly agitated amongst us,
which are above the Sphere of common People, out of their profession; not of
such things as concern the Salvation of all men, which are plain and evident to
the meanest Capacities. When therefore in such cases, about which we cannot
easily satisfy our selves, we follow the Advice of the publicly authorized
Guides and Preachers of Religion, if they chance to mislead us, we have
something to say or apologize for our selves. Our Error is more excusable and
pardonable, as being occasioned by those, to whose Judgment, by God's Command,
we did owe a great Respect and Submission. But when we choose Instructors and
Counselors to our selves according to our own fancy and liking, and they teach
us contrary to the Doctrine of our lawful Ministers, if then we prove to be in
the wrong, and are betrayed into Sin, we may thank our own Wantonness for it,
and are more severely accomptable for such Mistakes.

Thus let a man that is troubled with any threatening disease, apply himself
rather to the Licensed Phisicians or Chirurgions, of approved Skill and
Honesty; and if he chance to miscarry under them, yet he has this contentment,
that he used the best and wisest means for his Health and Recovery. But if he
leaves them all, and will hearken only to Quacks and Empiricks, tho they advise
him quite contrary to what the others prescribed, if under their hands he grows
worse and worse, he must then charge his own perverse Folly or idle Humor, as
the cause of his Ruin.

4. In order to the curing of our Scruples we should thoroughly understand and
consider, what is the true Notion of lawful, and how it differs from what is
necessary, and from what is sinful. That is necessary or our Duty which God
has expressly commanded, that is sinful which God has forbid; that is lawful
which God has not by any Law obliging us* either commanded or forbid: for,
Where there is no Law, says the Apostle, there is no Transgression, Romans 4.
15. There can be no Transgression, but either omitting what the Law commands,
or doing what the Law forbids. For instance, If any man can show where kneeling
at the Sacrament is forbid in Scripture, where sitting is required; where
praying by a form is forbid, and extemporary Prayers are enjoined, then indeed
the Dispute would soon be at an end: but if neither the one, nor the other can
be found, as most certainly they cannot, then kneeling at the Sacrament, and
reading Prayers out of a Book, must be reckoned amongst things lawful. And then
there is no need of scrupling them, because they may be done without Sin: nay,
where they are required by our Superiors, it is our duty to submit to them,
because it is our Duty to obey them in all lawful things.

This way of arguing is very plain and convincing, and cannot be evaded but by
giving another Notion of Lawful. And therefore it is commonly said, that
nothing is lawful, especially in the Worship of God, which God himself has not
prescribed and appointed, or that has been abused to evil Purposes. And on
these two Mistakes are chiefly grounded Men's Scruples about indifferent Rites
and Ceremonies in God's Worship.

1. That only is said to be lawful in God's Worship which he himself has
prescribed and appointed; so that this is thought exception sufficient against
the Forms and Usages of our Church, that though they are not forbid, yet they
are no where commanded in Scripture. Who has required these things at your
hands?

Now here I only ask, Where our Savior or his Apostles have forbid us doing
any thing in God's Worship, which is not by himself commanded, or where in the
New Testament we are told, that God will be angry with us for doing any thing
which he has no where forbid, either by general or particular Laws? For unless
this can be shown, there can be no color for this Pretense, and we are
sufficiently sure, that no such place can be produced out of the Bible. It is
acknowledged by all, that the Holy Scriptures, as to all that is necessary to
be believed or done in order to Salvation, as to all the essential and
substantial parts of Divine Worship, is a plain and perfect Rule; but it is as
certain that the outward circumstances of Time, Place, Habit, and Gesture, are
not determined in the New Testament, as they were by Moses's Law: and yet God
cannot be, at least visibly and publicly, worshipped without them. If
therefore these be not determined in Scripture, and it is unlawful to do any
thing in Gods Worship but what is so determined, it follows that God cannot be
worshipped at all, unless we could worship him in no Time, Place, Habit, or
Gesture: nor indeed can I learn how a Christian can, with a good Conscience,
perform any part of God's Worship, if this Principle be admitted for true, that
whatsoever is not commanded is forbid, since the external Circumstances of
religious Actions, without which they cannot be performed, are not prescribed
or determined in Scripture; and so he must commit a Sin every time he prays or
receives the Holy Sacrament.

Besides, this Reason would oblige us to separate from all the Churches that
ever were or are in the World, there being no constituted Church in which there
are not some Orders and Injunctions for the regulating the public Worship of
God no where commanded in Scripture. We could never, upon this Principle, have
held Communion with the Primitive Churches, which undoubtedly had their
instituted significant Ceremonies; nor is there any Church at this day, that
has not by its own Authority determined some of the circumstances of Divine
Service for the more decent and orderly performance thereof. Nay, those very
Persons that make this Exception, do themselves practice many things in the
Worship of God, without the least shadow of a Divine Command, to which they
oblige their Hearers and Communicants: for, conceived Prayers, sitting at the
Eucharist, sprinkling the Infant at Baptism, the Minister's officiating in a
black Cloak or Coat, are full out as unscriptural, humane, uncommanded as any
Gesture, Habit, or Form used in our Church.

2. That is said to be unlawful which has been abused to sinful Purposes, to
Idolatry or Superstition; so that nothing ought to be retained in our Worship,
tho it be not forbid by God, which was used in times of Popery. Hence the
ordinary Objection against our Parish Churches is, that they are not
sufficiently purged from Popery; that our first Reformers were indeed excellent
and worthy Persons for the Times they lived in; that what they did was very
commendable and a good Beginning, but they were forced to comply with the
necessities of the Age, which would not bear a complete Reformation. They left
a great deal of Popish Trash in the Church, hoping by degrees to reconcile the
Papists to it, or at least that they might not make the Breach too wide, and
too much prejudice or estrange them from it. But we now live under better
means, have greater Light and Knowledge, and so a further and more perfect
Amendment is now necessary. Thus the Order of Bishops is decried as Popish and
Antichristian, our Liturgy as taken out of the Mass Book, and our Ceremonies as
Relics of Idolatry.

But the truth of the case is this. We must consider, that those of the Church
of Rome do hold and maintain all the Essentials of Christianity, but then by
degrees, as they found opportunity, they have added a number of impious and
pernicious Doctrines to the Christian Faith, the Belief and Profession of which
they equally require of all that are in their Communion. Besides this, they
have introduced several idolatrous and superstitious Rites and Practices into
the Service of their Church, never heard of for the first four hundred Years,
by which they have miserably defaced and corrupted the Worship of God, and made
it necessary for all those that love their own Salvation, to separate from
them. Now our first Reformers here in England did not go about to invent a new
Species of Government, to devise new Rites and Ceremonies* and a new form of
Worship, such as should be least excepted against, and then obtrude it upon
this Nation, as was done at Geneva, and some other places; but they wisely
considered, that if they did but reject what the Romanists had added to the
Faith and Worship of Christians, lay aside their novel Inventions, Usurpations,
and unwritten Traditions, there would remain the pure, simple, Primitive
Christianity, such as it was before the Roman Church was thus degenerated: nor
have we any thing of Popery left amongst us, but what the Papists had left
amongst them of Primitive Religion and Worship.

As we must not receive the evil for the sake of the good, so neither must we
reject the good for the sake of the evil. In our Church we pray neither to
Saints nor Angels, nor the Virgin Mary, our Liturgy is in a known Tongue, we
deny the Laity no part of the Sacrament, nor the reading of the Scriptures, we
offer no Mass sacrifice, nor worship Images or the consecrated Bread. We have
not one Doctrine or Ceremony in use amongst us, that is purely Popish. But we
must be obliged to part with the most sacred, venerable and usefullest things
in our Religion, if this be a sufficient reason of our forbearing any thing,
because the Papists abuse it.

This therefore I conclude to be the best and plainest rule for the governing
of our Consciences, not wilfully to omit any thing that God has commanded, to
avoid to the utmost of our Power what God has forbid; and what ever else we
have no particular Divine Law about, to guide our selves by the general rules
of Scripture, the commands of our Superiors, and by the measures of Prudence,
Peace, and Charity. This one rule (and it cannot but seem a very reasonable
one) would soon put an end to our squabbles and janglings about Forms and
Ceremonies and other indifferent things.

5. In order to the bringing men to a compliance with the Laws of our Church,
we must desire them to consider that there never was nor ever will be any
public Constitution, that will be every way unexceptionable. The best policy,
whether Civil or Ecclesiastical, that can be established will have some flaws
and defects, which must be borne and tolerated. Some inconveniences will in
process of time arise, that never could be foreseen or provided against; and to
make alteration upon every emergent difficulty may be often of worse
consequence, than the evil we pretend to cure by it. Let the rules and modes of
Government, Discipline, public Worship, be most exact and blameless, yet there
will be faults in Governors and Ministers as long as they are but men. We must
not expect in this World a Church without Spot or Wrinkle, that consists only
of Saints, in which nothing can be found amiss; especially by those who lie at
the catch and wait for an advantage against it.

If men will scruple and reform, as long as any thing remains which they can
object against, they must even come at last, as a Reverend Person of our Church
has observed, to the state of that miserable Man who left all humane Society
that he might not be defiled with other Men's Sins, and at last cut out the
Contents of Chapters and Titles of Books out of the Bible, because they were
humane Inventions added to the pure Word of God. Men must be willing, if ever
they would promote Peace and Unity, to put candid Constructions and favorable
Interpretations upon things, to take them by the best handle, and not strain
things on purpose that they might cavil the more plausibly, and raise more
considerable Objections against them. We must not make personal, accidental
Faults, nor any thing a pretense for our leaving the Communion of our Church,
which arises only from the necessary condition and temper of all humane
Affairs, that nothing here is absolutely perfect.

6. And lastly, If you cannot by these, and other the like considerations, not
now to be mentioned, get rid of, and conquer your Scruples, then be advised to
lay them aside, to throw them out of your Minds as dangerous Temptations, and
act positively against them.

But here I easily imagine some ready presently to ask me, Do you persuade us
to conform to the Orders of the Church tho we are not satisfied in our Minds
concerning them? I answer, That I think this the best Advice that can be given
to such scrupulous Persons. It would be an endless infinite thing, and
Communion with any Church would be altogether unpracticable, if every private
Christian was obliged to suspend joining himself to it, till he was perfectly
satisfied about the reasonableness and expediency of all that was required, or
was in use in that Church: for indeed, private Persons are by no means proper
Judges of what is fit and convenient in the Administration of
Church Government, Discipline, or public Worship, no more than they are of
matters of State, or the Reasonableness of all Civil Laws. Common People
generally have neither Patience to consider, nor Judgment to weigh all
circumstances, nor Wisdom to choose that which is best; these things of a
Public Nature belong only to our Superiors and Governors, and if they
appoint what is unfit, indecent, or inconvenient, they only are accountable for
it. It is not the fault of those that join with such worship, or yield to such
Injunctions (not plainly sinful) for the sake of Peace and Order.

I know therefore no better Rule for the directing and quieting Men's
Consciences than this, that as to all such matters as relate to Public Order
and decent Administration of Gods Worship, they should without any
superstitious fearfulness comply with the Customs of the Church they live in,
never troubling themselves, nor curiously examining what is best and fittest,
as long as there is nothing enjoined or done, which (after due enquiry) appears
to us contrary to any Law of God. Thus St. Augustine directs us in that often
quoted place, where he tells us, He knew no better course for a serious prudent
Christian to take, in matters of Rites and Customs, than to follow the Churches
example where he is: for whatsoever is prescribed neither against Faith or
Manners, is a matter in its self indifferent, and to be observed according to
the Custom of those he lives among. This was agreeable to the Counsel St.
Ambrose, Bishop of Milan, gave him when he was sent by his Mother to enquire
his Judgment about the Saturday Fast, When I am at Rome, says the Bishop, I
fa^t on the Sabbath, but at Milan I do not. So thou likewise, when thou come
to any Church, observe its Custom, if thou would neither be an offense to
them, nor have them be so to thee. Which St. Augustine ever after looked upon as
an Oracle from Heaven.

I do not by this encourage Men to venture blindfold on Sin, or to neglect any
reasonable care of their Actions; but if People raise all the Difficulties and
Objections they can start, before they proceed to a Resolution about things
that have no manifest Impiety in them, nor are plainly nor by any easy
consequence, contrary to the revealed Will of God, this cannot but occasion
infinite Perplexity and Trouble to Men's Minds, and there are but few things
they shall be able to do with a safe and quiet Conscience. Should all those
that have some little Arguments against the Sign of the Cross, puzzle
themselves with the Objections usually urged against Infant Baptism, and defer
baptizing their Children till they were fully satisfied about it, I doubt not
but the baptizing of Infants would soon be as much scrupled at as the crossing
them now is. But there is no apparent Evil in it; it is the Practice of the
Church we live in, it is no where forbid in Scripture: this ordinarily is
sufficient warrant for what we do.

Before we separate from a Church, or refuse to comply with its Orders, we
ought to be fully satisfied and persuaded of the unlawfulness of what is
required, that it is forbid by God; because by leaving the Communion of any
Church, we pass Sentence upon and condemn it, which ought not to be done upon
light and doubtful Causes: but there is not the same necessity that we should
be thus fully satisfied about our Conformity to all things prescribed by the
Church. We may presume them to be innocent, unless they plainly appear to us
otherwise.

The Judicious and Learned Bishop Sanderson thus expresses it in his fourth
Sermon Ad Clerum, The Law takes every Man for a good Man and true, till his
Truth and Honesty be legally disproved: and as our Savior sometimes said, He
that is not against us is for us: so in these matters (he speaks of those
Ceremonies that for Orders sake, and to add the greater Solemnity to sacred
Actions, are appointed in the Church) we are to believe all things to be lawful
for us to do, which cannot be shown by good Evidence either of Scripture or
Reason to be unlawful.

If any one be afraid that this Principle once imbibed would introduce Popery,
make People greedily swallow, and without any Examination submit to every thing
their Superiors please to impose upon them, let him only consider (which we
all agree in) that there are many things in the Popish Worship and Religion
manifestly evil, and forbidden by the revealed Will of God, which renders our
Separation from them necessary, and so consequently justifiable: whereas the
things objected against in our Church are at worst only doubtful and
suspicious, or rather not so good and expedient as might be devised: and this
surely makes a wide difference in the case.

But does not St. Paul say, Romans 14. 19. I know and am persuaded by the Lord
Jesus, that there is nothing unclean of it self, but to him that esteems any
thing unclean it is unclean? Does not he expressly tell us, That whatsoever is
not of Faith is Sin? that is, Whatever we do without a full Persuasion of the
lawfulness of it, tho it be not so in it self, yet is a Sin in him that does it
against his Conscience. And does not the Apostle say, He that doubts is
damned if he eat, before he is convinced that it may be done? I desire here
therefore only to be rightly understood, and then these things are soon
reconciled.

1. When I speak of a Scrupulous Conscience I suppose the Person tolerably well
persuaded of the lawfulness of what is to be done, but yet he does not like or
approve of it, he has some little Reasons and Exceptions against it, it is not
the best and fittest, all things considered. This is properly a Scruple, and is
certainly the case of all those, who do sometimes (to save themselves from the
severity of the Laws) join in our Worship, and communicate with us; which we
presume they would never do did they judge it absolutely sinful and forbidden
by God. So that though it should be granted that a man cannot innocently do
that of which his Conscience doubts whether it be lawful or not, yet a Man
may, and in some cases is bound to do that which is not unlawful, though upon
some other Accounts he scruples the doing of it.

2. If the Question be about things wherein we are left wholly to our selves,
and at liberty, having no very weighty Reason for the doing of them, then it
may be the safest way to forbear all such things we scruple at. Of such cases
the Apostle speaks in the forementioned Places, of eating or not eating some
Meats; neither of them was required by any law. Eating was no instance of Duty,
or was it any ways forbid: where to do or not to do is perfectly at our own
choice; it is best for a Man to forbear doing that of which he has some
suspicion, tho he be not sure that it is sinful. As suppose a man have Scruples
in his Mind about playing at Cards and Dice, or going to see Stage Plays, or
putting out his Money to Usury, because there is no great Reason or Necessity
for any of these things, and to be sure they may be innocently forborne without
any Detriment to our selves or others; though we do not judge them absolutely
sinful, yet it is safest for him who cannot satisfy himielf concerning the
Goodness and Fitness of them, wholly to deny himself the use of them. But in
these two cases it is most for the quiet of our Consciences, to act against or
notwithstanding our Fears and Scruples, when either our Superiors, to whom we
owe Obedience, have interposed their Commands, or when by it we prevent some
great Evil or Mischief.

1. When our Superiors, other Civil or Ecclesiastical, whom by the Will of God
we are bound to obey in all lawful things, have interposed their Commands, our
Scruples will not excuse or justify our Disobedience. If indeed we judge what
is commanded to be absolutely unlawful, tho it be a false erroneous Judgment,
yet whilst we are under such persuasion we are by no means to do it upon any
Inducement whatever.

If I only doubt of the lawfulness of any particular Action, and it be an
instance wherein I am at liberty, I am still bound not to do it. For,
Whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin. I am certainly innocent when I forbear; I
may commit a Sin, if I do it, Wisdom would therefore, that the safer part be
chosen. But now if I am by the command of my Superiors obliged to it, my
choice is then determined, it then becomes my Duty, and it can never be safe or
advisable to neglect a plain Duty for an uncertain Offense. Thus most and best
Casuists do determine about a doubtful Conscience, particularly the forenamed
reverend Bishop, in the same Sermon, Whatsoever is commanded us by those whom
God has set over us, either in Church, Commonwealth, or Family (quod tamen non
sit certum displicere Deo, says St. Bernard) which is not evidently contrary
to the Law and Will of God, ought to be of us received and obeyed no otherwise
than as if God himself had commanded it, because God himself has commanded us
to obey the Higher Powers and to submit our selves to their Ordinances.

But now this is more plain concerning Fears and Scruples only about the
convenience and expediency of things, these ought all to be despised when they
come in Competition with the Duty of Obedience. Would men but think themselves
in Conscience bound to pay the same Duty and respect to the Judgment and
Authority of Magistrates and Governors, whether in Church or State, as they do
expect their Servants and Children should to themselves, they would soon see
the reasonableness of such submission. For all Government and Subjection would
be very precarious and arbitrary, if every one that did not approve of a Law or
was not fully satisfied about the reasonableness of it was thereby exempted
from all Obligations to obey it. This is to give the Supreme Authority to the
most humoursom or perverse sort of Christians: for according to this principle,
no public Laws and Constitutions can be valid and binding, unless every
scrupulous, tho a very ignorant Conscience, consent to them.

2. We are not to mind or stand upon our Scruples, when they probably occasion
a great evil, a general mischief. They are not fit to be put in the balance
with the Peace of the Church and Unity of Christians. Suppose for once that our
public way of Worship is not the best that can be divised, that many things
might be amended in our Liturgy, that we could invent a more agreeable
Establishment than this present is (which yet no man in the World can ever
tell, for we cannot know all the inconveniences of any Alteration, till it
comes to be tried) yet granting all this, it cannot be thought so intolerable
an Evil as contempt of Gods Solemn Worship, dividing into Sects and Parties,
living in Debate, Contention, and Separation from one another. If there be some
Rites and Customs amongst us not wisely chosen or determined, some Ceremonies
against which just Exceptions may be made, yet to forsake the Communion of such
a true Church of Jesus Christ, and set up a distinct Altar in opposition to it,
to combine and associate into separate Congregations, is (as it is somewhere
expressed) like knocking a man on the head because his Teeth are rotten, or his
Nails too long. How much more agreeable is it to the Christian Temper, to be
willing to sacrifice all such Doubts and Scruples to the Interests of public
Order and divine Charity; for better surely it is to serve God in a defective
imperfect manner, to bear with many Disorders and Faults, than to break the
Bond of Peace and brotherly Communion.

For this we have the example of our Blessed Lord and Savior, who lived and
died in Communion with a Church where there were far greater Corruptions both
as to Persons and Practices, than can be pretended to be in ours at this day;
yet though he was the great Reformer of mankind, he forsook not the Jewish
Church, but assembled with them in their Public Synagogues, which answer to
our Parish-Churches, preached in the Temple tho they had made it a Den of
Thieves, observed their Festivals, tho some of them of humane Institution, nay
commanded his Disciples to continue to hear the Scribes and Pharisees, tho they
were a most vile and wretched Generation of Men. Great were the Pollutions and
Misdemeanors in the Churches of Rome, Corinth, Galatia, yet no one Member of
them is ever commanded to come out or separate from those Churches to join in a
purer Congregation or to avoid mixed Communions, or for better Edification. For
men to be drunk at the Sacrament was certainly a worse Fault than to kneel at
it, or for a wicked Man to intrude himself; yet the Apostle does not advise any
to withdraw from that Church, but only every one to examine himself. We ought
to do all that we can do without sining, submit to an hundred things which are
against our Mind or we had rather let alone, for the sake of Peace and Unity,
so desirable in it self, so necessary for the Glory of God, the Honor of
Religion, for our common Interest and Safety, for the Preservation of what I
may, without Vanity, call the best Church in the World.

I cannot stand now to tell you, how earnestly this Duty of maintaining Unity
amongst Christians is pressed in the New Testament; how concerned our Blessed
Master was, that all his Disciples should agree together and live as Bretren;
how severely the Holy Apostles chid and rebuked those that caused Divisions and
Strife amongst Christians, reckoning Schism and Contention amongst the most
heinous and dangerous Sins. It should make both the Ears (one would think) of
some amongst us to tingle, but to hear what Sense the Primitive Christians had
of the sinfulness of separating from and breaking the Communion of Christians,
nay, what the old Non-conformists here in England have said of it, yet
remaining in Print, charging the People to be as tender of Church-Division as
they were of Drunkenness, Whoredom, or any other enormous Crime. And did Men
know and consider the evil of Schism, they would not be so ready upon every
slight occasion to split upon that Rock.

Let us therefore divert our Fears and Scruples upon greater Sins. It is far
more certain that causless Separation from the Communion of Christians is
sinful, than that kneeling at the Sacrament, or praying by a Book is such. Why
then have Men such invincible Scruples about one, and none at all about the
other? They run headlong into the Separate Assemblies, which surely are more
like to Schismatical Conventicles than any thing in our Church is to Idolatry.
Let Men be as scrupulous and fearful of offending against the Christian Laws of
Subjection, Peaceableness, and Charity, as they are of worshipping God after an
impure manner, and this alone will contribute much to the making up those
Breaches which threaten sudden Ruin to our Church and Nation. I only add here,
that in all that I have now said I am not conscious to my self, that I have
used any Argument or affirmed any thing, but what many of those very Ministers,
who now dissent from us, did teach, and maintain, and print too, against the
Independents and other Sectaries that divided from them when they preached in
the Parish-Churches. And if this was good Doctrine against those who separated
upon the account of Corruptions, for purer Ordinances in those days, I see not
why it is not as good against themselves, when upon the very same Pretenses and
no other they divide from us now.

The Lord grant that we may all come at last to be of one Mind, to live in
Peace and Unity, and then the God of Love and Peace shall be with us. FINIS.
Take heed of separating from the Public Assemblies of the Saints. I have
found by experience, that all our Church-calamities have sprung from this root.
He that separates from the Public Worship, is like a man tumbling down a Hill,
and never leaving till he comes to the bottom of it. I could relate many sad
stories of Persons professing godliness, who out of dislike to our
Church-meetings, began at first to separate from them, and after many changes
and alterations, are turned some of them Anabaptists, some Quakers, some
Ranters, some direct Atheists. But I forbear; you must hold Communion with all
those Churches with which Christ holds Communion. You must separate from the
sins of Christians, but not from the Ordinances of Christ. Take heed of
unchurching the Churches of Christ, lest you prove Schismatics instead of
being true-Christians.

See M. Edm. Calamy 's Godly Man's Ark, Epist. Dedic. to the Parish of
Aldermanbury, Direction 14th.


