HIS MAJESTY'S DECLARATION CONCERNING LEAVIES.

Charles R.

OUr express pleasure is, That this Our Declaration be Published in all
Churches and Chapels within the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales, by
the Parsons, Vicars or Curates of the same.

Reprinted at Oxford by His MAJESTY'S COMMAND.



By LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the University. 1642.

His MAJESTY'S Answer to a Printed Paper, entitled, A new Declaration of the
Lords and Commons in Parliament, of the 21. of June 1642. in Answer to his
Majesty's Letter dated the 14 of June, and sent to the Lord Major, Aldermen,
and Sheriffs of the City of LONDON.
IT seems by a new Declaration of the 21 of June, in Answer to Our Letter of
the 14 of the same month to the Lord Major of London, that the Lords and
Commons in Parliament have much more leisure then they pretend, or that those
Persons whom We have before described in Our former Answers and Declarations,
and of whom only We would be understood to speak, think such Declarations and
Votes to be such unresistable Engines of Battery against Us and the Law, that
no strength can oppose them: And therefore though they will take notice from
whence that Letter came, they will vouchsafe it no other mention, but of a
Paper (as if found by chance) inscribed, To Our trusty and welbeloved, etc. And
it is wonder, that since they have usurped the Supreme Power to themselves,
they have not taken upon them the Supreme Style too, and directed this very new
Declaration, To their trusty and welbeloved, their Subjects of the City of
London; For it is too great and palpable a scorn to persuade them to take up
Arms against Our Person, under color of being loving Subjects to Our Office,
and to Destroy Us, that they may Preserve the King.

They are offended that We should believe, That their end of persuading Our
Subjects to raise Horse, and to furnish Money upon pretense of a Guard for the
Parliament, is in truth to employ those Horse, Men and Money against Us: Let
the reasons of Our belief be never so strong, and their Actions never so
evident to compel all other men to believe so too, The Lords and Commons do
declare (think what you will, and see what you can) That the Design of those
Propositions for raising Men, Horse and Money, is to maintain the Protestant
Religion, The Kings Authority and Person in his Royal Dignity, The free course
of Justice, The Laws of the Land, The Peace of the Kingdom, and the Privileges
of Parliament against any Force which shall oppose them: And this all men are
bound to believe, though they see the Protestant Religion, and the Professors
thereof miserably reproached, and in danger of being destroyed by a vicious and
Malignant Party of Brownists, Anabaptists, and other Sectaries, (the principal
ringleaders of whom have too great a power, even with some Members in both Our
Houses of Parliament) Our Authority despised, and, as much as in them lies,
taken from Us, and reviled in Pulpits and Presses by persons immediately in
their Protection, and of their recommendation, and Our Person driven away by
Tumults and rude multitudes, against whom We can have no Justice; The course of
Justice interrupted and stopped by Orders and Injunctions never heard of till
this Parliament; The Laws of the Land trampled under foot and frustrated, and
new Laws attempted to be made and imposed upon Our Subjects without and against
Our consent; The Peace of the Kingdom shaken and frighted away by
discountenancing the Laws, absolving (as much as in them lies) the people from
the Rules of Government or Obedience, and even declaring a War against Us, and
the Laws of the Land; And lastly, The Privileges of Parliament so far
extended, as if to the bare sound of Privilege of Parliament, The Liberty and
Property of the Subject, the dignity and certainty of the Law were in such
subjection, that they may first make what Orders they please, and in what cases
they please; And whosoever disputes those Orders, and submits not to those
Votes, breaks their Privileges, and whosoever breaks their Privileges is an
Enemy to the Commonwealth, and worthy of such other Attributes (either of
favoring the Rebellion in Ireland, or advancing the War here) as are most
likely to render that person suspected or odious to the People: If in truth
this be evidently and demonstrably the case, such Declarations will no more
gain credit with, or longer mis-lead Our Subjects, then if they should tell
them, That We are personally with them in London, when all men see Us here at
York.

As they have Declared (the best Argument or Evidence you are to look for) that
all that they do is lawful, because they do it; so they proceed, by the same
power, to assure those, who are apt to be deceived by them, that the Force
already attending Us (they would certainly do otherwise if they did really
believe such Force to be about Us) and the Preparation We are making, do
evidently appear to be intended for some great and extraordinary Design, and
do justify their former Votes of Our intention of Leavying War against Our
Parliament: And they have at last given some Reason for that Vote and
Declaration; They find by our several Declarations that We intend force
against those who shall submit to the Ordinance of the Militia, and that We
intend to make an attempt upon Hull: In both which Cases they are pleased to
declare, That whatsoever violence shall be used either against those who
exercise this Militia, or against Hull, they cannot but take it as done against
the Parliament. We are beholding to them that they have explained to all Our
good Subjects the meaning of their Charge against Us; That by Our intention of
making War against Our Parliament no more is pretended to be meant, but Our
Resolution not to submit to the high injustice and indignity of the Ordinance,
and the business of Hull. We have never concealed Our intentions in either of
those particulars (We wish they would deal as clearly with Us) but have
always, and do now declare, That that pretended Ordinance is against the Law
of the Land, against the Liberty and Property of the Subject, destructive to
Sovereignty, and therefore not consistent with the very Constitution and
Essence of the Kingdom, and to the Right and Privilege of Parliament; That We
are bound by Our Oath (and all Our Subjects are bound by theirs of Alleagiance
and Supreamacie, and their own Protestation lately taken, to assist Us) to
oppose that Ordinance which is put already in execution against Us, not only
by Training and Arming Our Subjects; but by forceably removing the Magazines
from the places trusted by the Counties, to their Own houses, and guarding it
there with Armed men; whither it will be next removed and how used by such
persons We know not. That the keeping Us out of Hull by Sir John Hotham was an
Act of high Treason against Us, and the taking away Our Magazine and Munition
from Us was an Act of Violence upon Us (by what hands or by whose direction
soever it was done) and in both Cases, by the help of God and the Law, We will
have Justice or lose Our life in the requiring it, the which We do not value at
that rate as to preserve it with the infamy of suffering Our Self to be robbed
and spoiled of that dignity We were borne to. And if it be possible for Our
good Subjects to believe, that such a defense of Our Self, with the utmost
power and strength We can raise, is making a War against the Parliament, We do
not doubt (however it shall please God to dispose of Us in that Contention) but
the Justice of Our Cause will at the last prevail against those few Malignant
Spirits who for their own ends and Ambitious designs have so misled and
corrupted the understandings of Our People, and that both Our houses of
Parliament will in short time discern by their own observation and the
Information We shall speedily give them, how near this Flourishing Kingdom is
brought to ruin and confusion by these Persons.

And since neither Our Declaration, nor the Testimony of so many of Our Lords
now with Us can procure credit with these Men, but that they proceed to leavy
Horse, and to raise Money and Arms against Us; We are not to be blamed, if
(after so many gracious expostulations with them upon undeniable Principles of
Law and Reason, which they answer only by voting that which We say to be
neither Law nor Reason, and so proceed actually to leavie War upon Us to
justify that which cannot be otherwise defended) at last We make such
Provision, that as We have been driven from London, and kept from Hull, We may
not be surprised at York; but in a condition to resist and bring to justice
those Men, who would persuade Our People, that their Religion is in danger,
because We will not consent it shall be in their power to alter it by their
Votes; or their Liberty in danger, because We will allow no Judge of that
Liberty but the known Law of the Land: yet what ever Provision We shall be
compelled to make for Our Security, We will be ready to lay down as soon as
they shall have revoked the Orders by which they have made Leavies, and submit
those persons who have detained Our Towns, carried away Our Arms, and put the
Militia in execution contrary to Our Proclamation, to that Trial of their
Innocence the Law directs, and to which they were born. If this be not
summitted to, We shall with as good a Conscience (and We believe We shall not
want the affections of Our good Subjects to that end) proceed against those who
shall presume to exercise that pretended Ordinance for the Militia, and the
other who keep Our Town of Hull from Us, as We would resist persons who came to
take away Our life or Our Crown from Us. And therefore We shall again remember
and require Our City of London to obey Our former Commands, and not to be
misled by the Orations of those Men (who are made desperate by their Fortunes,
or their Fortunes by them) who tell them their Religion, Liberty, and
Property is to be preserved no other way but by their disloyalty to Us; That
they are now at the brink of the river, and may draw their Swords, when nothing
pursues them but their own evil consciences. Let them examine what excellent
fruits of Religion the lives of those Men have brought forth, and what great
Advancers they have been of the Public Liberty, and Property; How long they
have had those Opinions they would ruin them to defend, and how they came to
those Opinions; Let them consider whether their Estates come to them, and are
settled upon them by Orders of both Houses, or by that Law which We Defend; What
Security they can have to enjoy their Own, when they have helped to Rob Us; And
what an happy Conclusion that War is like to have, which is raised to
oppress their Sovereign; That the Wealth and Glory of their City is not like
to be destroyed any other way, but (and that way inevitably it must) by
Rebelling against Us; nor their Wives and Children to be exposed to violence
and villainy, but by those who make their Appetite and Will the Measure and
Guide to all their Actions. Let them not fancy to themselves Melancholic
apprehensions, which are capable of no satisfaction, but let them seriously
consider what security they can have, that they have not under Us or been
offered by Us; And whether the Doctrine these men teach, and would have them
defend, does not destroy the foundations upon which their security is built.

And We do lastly declare again, and publish to all the World; That We shall
proceed against all Persons whatsoever that shall assist those Leavies, by
furnishing of Horse, Money and Plate, as against the Disturbers of the Public
Peace, and the Authors of those Distractions which threaten the Ruin of Us and
this Kingdom. *

FINIS.

