SERMONS Preached upon Several Occasions.

Never before Printed.

BY BENJAMIN CALAMY, D. D. Late Vicar of St. Lawrence Jewry, and one of His
Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary.

LONDON, Printed by M. Flesher, for Henry Dickenson and Richard Green,
Booksellers in Cambridge, and are to be sold by Walter Davis in Amen-Corner.
1687.

To his Worthy Friends The INHABITANTS Of the PARISHES OF St. LAWRENCE JEWRY
AND St. MARY MAGD. MILK-STREET.
Gentlemen,
I Here present you with some Sermons of my dear Brother deceased, your late
(if I may be allowed to say it) worthy and faithful Pastor; in transcribing
them for the Press I have not presumed to make any alteration, or to correct so
much as the plain errata's of the original Copy, except only some few, and
those such as any Reader almost would have observed, and may well be supposed
to have been occasioned only through his haste in writing; and if after all
there happen to be any such still remaining in the print, I hope you will blame
neither him nor me, since I pretend not to publish any discourses designed or
fitted by him for the Press, but only those very Sermons which you your selves
heard, just as I found them in his notes.

If it be asked why these rather than others? I answer, these were the Sermons
which I found had been preached by him in the most public places; to which
however because they would not alone have made a just volume, I thought it
necessary to add two or three more; and I doubt not but you will find them all
plain and useful, and every way fitted to do good: And if it be asked why no
more? I think it will be time enough to answer that question, when I shall have
seen what acceptance these now published meet with in the world.

It was some time before I could persuade my self to comply with your desire in
publishing these Sermons, because I have sometimes heard my Brother express an
unwillingness that any thing of his should be printed after his death; but when
I had once resolved to print them, it took me no time to consider, it was not
left to my choice to whom I should present them, seeing you had an undoubted
title to them; and all the world would have blamed me, if I had not taken this
occasion of acknowledging with all thankfulness your extraordinary respect to
his person whilst alive, and to his memory after his decease; one particular
instance of which I must by no means omit, I mean your generous Present to his
Widow; a kindness which as I am confident he never expected, even from you,
from whom he might have expected any thing that was kind; so I dare say if he
could have foreseen it, would have pleased him more than any, nay, than all the
other kindnesses he ever received from you.

In the words therefore of Naomi concerning Boaz, Blessed be ye of the Lord,
who have not left off your kindness to the living and to the dead.

I am, Gentlemen, Your most obliged Servant, James Calamy.

The CONTENTS.
SERMON. I. Act. X. 38. -- Who went about doing good --, Page 1. SERMON. II. 1 Cor.
XI. 29. For he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks
damnation to himself, not discerning the Lord's Body, p. 37. SERMON. III. Prove.
I. 10. -- If sinners entice thee consent thou not, p. 67. SERMON. IV. Romans XII.
16. -- Be not wise in your own conceits, p. 101. SERMON. V. S. Matthew. XV. 19. For
out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, p. 135. SERMON. VI. 1 Cor. XIII. 4, 5, 6,
7. Charity suffers long, and is kind: charity envieth not: charity vaunteth
not it self, is not puffed up, does not behave it self unseemly, seeks not
her own, is not easily provoked, thinks no evil, rejoiceth not in iniquity,
but rejoiceth in the truth: bears all things, believes all things, hops
all things, endures all things, p. 177. SERMON. VII. Numb. XXIII. 10. -- Let me
die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his, p. 219. SERMON.
VIII. S. Matthew. V. 34. But I say unto you, swear not at all, p. 255. SERMON. IX.
S. Matthew. I. 21. -- And thou shall call his name Jesus; for he shall save his
people from their sins, p. 291. SERMON. X. S. Mark VI. 12. And they went out and
preached, that men should repent, p. 323. SERMON. XI. 1 Cor. XV. 35. But some man
will say, how are the dead raised up? And with what body do they come? p. 365.
SERMON. XII. Job. XXVII. 5, 6. God forbid that I should justify you: till I die*
I will not remove my integrity from me. My righteousness I hold fast, and will
not let it go; my heart shall not reproach me so long as I live, p. 423. SERMON.
XIII. 2 Timothy I. 10. -- And has brought life and immortality to light through
the Gospel, p. 459.
IMPRIMATUR,

Nov. 29. 1686. Ex Aedibus Lamb-hithanis. Jo. Battely. Rmo Prl ac Dno, Dno
Wilhelmo Archiep. antuariensi a Sacris domesticis.

A SERMON Preached at WHITE HALL. The First Sermon.
ACTS X. 38. -- Who went about doing good --.


WHICH words give us a short account of our blessed Savior's life here on
earth; it was spent in doing good: They also teach us after what manner we his
disciples ought to live in this World, namely that we should omit no fair
opportunity of doing good according to our several abilities and capacities. I
shall speak to them

I. As referring to our Lord and Saviviour, and describing his manner of life
to us.

II. I shall consider them as prescribing to us our duty in imitation of his
most glorious example who went about doing good.

(I.) As referring to our Lord and Savior, and describing his manner of life
to us. Now these words, he went about doing good, especially signify these
three things:

1. That this was the chief business and employment of his life, to do good.

2. That where he did not readily find, he went about to seek objects of pity
and compassion.

3. This he constantly persevered in, notwithstanding the foul ingratitude and
malicious opposition his good works met with in the World.

1. This was the chief business and employment of his life to do good. To
propound to you the several instances of it, were to give you an history and
account of his whole life, the four Gospels being nothing else but the
authentic records of those good works Jesus of Nazareth did, containing his
excellent instructions, his free reproofs, the wise methods he used for the
bettering and reforming men's minds, together with those various kindnesses he
showed to their bodies and outward estates with a generosity and charity not to
be paralleled by any thing but the divine goodness it self. I shall not
therefore descend to particulars, but only take notice, 1. That doing good was
his ordinary daily employment. 2. That to the same end tended all his
extraordinary miraculous works: and 3. That this was also the sum and substance
of his Religion. From all which it will easily appear, that he made doing good
the chief business of his whole life.

(1.) Doing good was his ordinary dai-employment. He did not only by the by,
and on great occasions exercise his charity and compassion, but it was as it
were his only profession, his meat and drink, his business and recreation too;
so that he denied himself the conveniences of this life that he might attend
this work. How was he thronged after and pressed upon by the miserable and
unfortunate, the diseased and possessed in all places wherever he came, and
can you tell of any one person whom he ever sent from his presence
dissatisfied? It was but saying Lord have mercy upon me, and the poor humble
beggar's wants (of what kind soever) were strait supplied.

And by these acts of love and kindness he did engage men to hearken to his
wise counsels, and obey his gracious commands, for he had a farther design in
all this compassion which he showed toward men's bodies and outward estates,
viz. to heal their bodies and their minds both together; to instill and
insinuate good instruction, and to promote men's eternal welfare, by
contributing so much to their ease and happiness in this present life.

All this good he did with the greatest readiness and joy; it was his greatest
pleasure to spread his healing wings over every place, continually to dispense
his benign influences and favors, and to make every one, who had the happiness
to converse with him, sensible of his good will to Mankind. Nor from this would
he ever rest, not so much as on the Sabbath Day, though he was accounted a
Transgressour for it. He consulted the good of other men above his own
reputation, and would cure the sick on that day even before those who thought
it a great piece of profaneness and wickedness so to do. He wanted objects
sooner than will to show kindness; and nothing grieved him so much as that men
by their own malice and perverseness should obstruct and defeat his gracious
designs toward them, and obstinately refuse to be made happy by him.

(2.) This was not only his ordinary daily employment, but for this end did he
always exercise his extraordinary divine power, to do benefits. All his
Miracles were mercies to men, so that his wonderful works proved him to be
sent from God, not more by that infinite power that was seen in them, than by
that surpassing goodness they demonstrated to the World.

He never employed his omnipotence out of levity or ostentation, but only as
the necessities and wants of Men required it. His miraculous works were not
such as the Jews sometimes demanded and expected from him, such only as would
strike their senses and fancy with admiration and astonishment, as the making
prodigious and amazing shows and representations in the Heavens, or in the Air;
but they were all expressions of a most immense benignity and charity to
Mankind, such as healing the sick of all manner of diseases, making the lame to
walk, and the blind to see, and the deaf to hear, cleansing the lepers, feeding
the hungry, raising the dead, and casting evil spirits out of those that were
miserably possessed with them, and cruelly tormented by them.

In such good offices, so useful and profitable to Men, did he all along exert
and manifest that divine power which God had anointed him with, thus
demonstrating himself to be the most divine person that ever appeared in our
flesh, not only by doing the strangest and most miraculous works, but
especially by doing the most good in the World.

(3.) To do good was the sum and substance of his Religion. He affected not
any precise singularities, or unusual severities of life. Of all the time he
was here on earth, he spent but forty days in the Wilderness in close solitude
and retirement; the rest of his time he conversed freely and openly, that
thereby he might have opportunity of obliging and benefiting all sorts of Men.
He neglected not indeed any duty of piety toward God, but then his love to God
shone forth most resplendently in his incessant care of, and charity to his
Creatures. He knew he could not please or glorify his Father better, than by
bearing much fruit, or, which is all one, doing much good in the World.

His Religion was active and operative: it consisted not in notions or
formalities, or external abstinences and strictnesses, by which the several
Sects amongst the Jews were distinguished one from another; but the principal
thing he was most remarkable for in his way of living was a most sincere
readiness to do all manner of good to all that came to him. He pretended not
to any seraphick enthusiastical raptures, or inimitable unaccountable
transports of devotion, or wonderful mortification; others might pray oftener
and longer, fast more than He or his Disciples did, (as we know was objected
against him by St. John's disciples;) but no Saint, no Prophet, no Man ever
before him so served God in his generation, or was either able or willing to
show such considerable kindnesses to the World as our blessed Lord and Savior
did.

And in this chiefly did his holiness and godliness appear above the rate and
pitch of other men's, in that he was so infinitely merciful and charitable: He
made not such a pompous outward show of Religion as some of the Pharisees did,
but his actions truly bespoke him what he was, a person infinitely full of
goodness, that could not be at ease without continual venting it self; nor yet
by all the wants, infirmities, necessities, either of men's minds or bodies
could ever be exhausted.

Thus he made doing good the chief business and employment of his whole life,
which is the first thing signified by these words.

2. That he went about doing good implies farther, that where he did not easily
meet with, he industriously sought out objects of pity and compassion. His
goodness did often prevent men's desires, always surpass them, doing for them
beyond all their requests or hopes. He came to seek and save that which was
lost.

He descended from the bosom of his Father, and eclipsed the glory of his
Divine Majesty with a veil of flesh, and lived amongst us, that he might redeem
us from the greatest evils and miseries, even whilst we were enemies to him,
and desired no more than we deserved his love and favor. And whilst he was
here upon earth, he was not only easy of access, he did not only courteously
receive all that addressed themselves to him, he not only freely invited and
encouraged all men to repair to him for succor and relief; but also did not
disdain himself to travel up and down the Country on purpose to give
opportunity to all that stood in need of him, to partake of his healing virtue
and power. Those whom his Disciples checked for their rude and troublesome
importunity, he lovingly entertained, and never dismissed without a blessing.

This mightily enhanced the value of every kindness he bestowed, the frankness
of his doing it doubled the benefit. We spoil a good turn when it is extorted
from us. It loses all its grace and acceptableness when it is done grudgingly,
and as of necessity.

Nay our Savior denied not to converse familiarly with Publicans and the
greatest Sinners; he endeared himself to them by signal condescensions, though
this also proved matter of reproach and infamy to him: as if he countenanced
those vices he attempted to cure, or it were any disgrace to a Physician to
visit his patients. He refused not the civil offer of a Pharisee, though his
sworn enemy, and would go to the houses, and eat at the table of those who
sought his ruin: and whatever ill design they might have in inviting him, yet
he always improved the occasion for the doing them some considerable good.

3. And Lastly. He constantly persevered in this notwithstanding the foul
ingratitude and malicious opposition his good works met with in the World.
Never did any one meet with greater discouragements, or more unworthy returns
than the Son of God, when all his acts of beneficence, all the good offices he
had done amongst them were so far from obliging, that they rather tended to
exasperate and provoke that untoward generation; and the more kindness he
expressed toward them, the greater have they made to betray and destroy him.
This great Patron and Benefactour, this generous friend and lover of Mankind,
was mortally hated and cruelly persecuted, as if he had been a public enemy,
and had done or designed some notorious mischief. They continually laid traps
to ensnare him, loaded him with malicious slanders, greedily watched for an
advantage to animate the multitude against him, took up stones to throw at him,
as a reward of his gracious attemt to make them wise and happy; put bad
constructions, and made sinister interpretations of all the good he did, as if
he designed to caress the people, and by such arts to gratify his ambition, and
make himself popular. So that this great and gallant person was looked upon as
a dangerous man, and the more good he did, the more he was feared and
suspected: yet all this and a thousand times worse usage could not dissuade him
from persisting in doing good to them. He was ready to repay all these injuries
with courtesies, even his bitterest enemies were partakers of his kindness, and
he still continued to entreat them to accept of life from him, and with tears
of true compassion bewailed their infidelity and wilful folly. Nay at last
when they laid violent hands upon him, and put him to the shameful death of
the Cross, yet then did he pray to his Father to forgive them; and which is
still most wonderful, and is the very perfection of charity, he willingly laid
down his life for them who so cruelly and treacherously took it from him. Thus
our Lord went about doing good; Let us who are his disciples and followers go
now and do likewise: which brings me to the second thing I was to consider in
these words, viz.

II. Our duty in imitation of his most glorious example, who went about doing
good.

But we, you will say, are not in a capacity, we have not ability or opportunity
of doing good in that ample manner, in that measure and degree our Lord did. We
cannot by any means, (however willing to it or diligent in it) come up to the
perfection of this noble and heroical example. Were such miraculous powers
communicated to us as were to our Savior, so that by a word speaking we could
heal all manner of sickness, and restore sight to the blind, and feet to the
lame; could we instruct the ignorant, reprove the prop^ane, admonish the erring
with so much ease, advantage and authority as our blessed Lord did, we should
then perhaps be very free and liberal in imparting those great favors and
blessings Heaven had so signally bestowed upon us, for the good and benefit of
others; but alas! as things now stand with us, we have neither power, nor
skill, nor means to do good at all after that illustrious manner our Savior
did.

To which all I shall at present reply is, that though we cannot after that
stupendous manner be beneficial to mankind as our Savior was, yet there are
very many things which we are able to do for the good of others, which our
blessed Savior could not do by reason of his poverty and low estate in this
World, without the expense of a miracle.

Few of us but as to our outward circumstances in this life are in a far more
plentiful condition than the Son of God himself was, whilst here on earth: and
it is in our power by ordinary ways to relieve and succor, oblige and benefit
many, so as our Lord could not do, without employing his divine power to
furnish himself with means for it.

Be pleased therefore to take notice that it is not doing good just in the same
instances, or after that same wonderful manner, that this example obliges us
unto, but only to a like willingness and readiness to do good upon all fit
occasions, as far as our power and activity reaches; it obliges us all in our
several stations, according to those opportunities God has afforded us, and
those abilities he has endued us with, and those conditions of life his
providence has placed us in, to endeavor, as much as in us lies, the welfare
and prosperity, ease and happiness of all men; so that others may bless the
divine goodness for us, the state of their bodies or minds being bettered by
our imparting to them what God has more abundantly bestowed upon us.

Contrary to which is a narrow, selfish, stingy spirit, when we are concerned
for none but our selves, and regard not how it fares with other men, so it be
but well with us; when we follow our own humor, and with great pleasure enjoy
the accommodations of our own state; when we think our own happiness the
greater because we have it alone to our selves, and no other partakes of it:
which of all other things is the most directly opposite to that benign and
compassionate temper, which our Savior came into the World by his doctrine and
example to implant in men.

I shall not undertake to set before you the several instances of doing good to
others, since they are so various and infinite, and our duty varies according
to our circumstances and opportunities, which are very different; and every one
may easily find them out by considering what good he would have other Men do
for him. What he should reasonably expect or would take kindly from those he
converseth with, or is any ways related unto, all that he is in like cases to
be willing to do for another; so that this doing good is a work of large
comprehensive extent and universal influence; it reaches to the souls and
bodies of men, and takes in all those ways and means whereby we may promote the
temporal, spiritual or eternal advantage of others. And to so happy and noble
an employment one would think there should be no need of persuasion. However I
humbly beg your patience whilst I put you in mind of some of those arguments
and considerations which seem most proper and effectual to engage men to the
imitation of this blessed example, to do all the good they can in the World.

1. This of all other employments is most agreeable to our natures. By doing
good we gratify and comply with the best and noblest of our natural
inclinations and appetites. The very same sense which informs us of our own
wants, and does powerfully move and instigate us to provide for their relief,
does also resent the distresses of another, and vehemently provoke and urge us
to yield him all necessary succor. This is true in all men, but most apparent
in the best natures, that at beholding the miseries and calamities of other
men, they find such yernings of their bowels, and such sensible commotions and
passions raised in their own breasts, as they can by no means satisfy, but by
reaching forth their helping-hand: and to deny our assistance according as our
ability permits us, is a violence to our very natural instincts and
propensions, as well as contrary to our religious obligations: Our very flesh
which in many other instances tempts us to sin, yet in this case prompts us to
our duty.

This is a gracious provision God Almighty has made in favor of the
necessitous and calamitous; that since his providence, for great reasons, is
pleased to permit such inequalities in men's fortunes and outward conditions,
the state of some in this life being so extremely wretched and deplorable, if
compared with others; lest the sick and blind, and naked and poor should seem
to be forgotten, or wholly disregarded by their Maker; he has therefore
implanted in men a quick and tender sense of pity and compassion, which should
always solicit and plead their cause, stand their friend, and not only dispose
us, but even force us for our own quiet and satisfaction, though with some
inconvenience to our selves, to relieve and succor the afflicted and
miserable, according to our several capacities and opportunities. And this
sympathy does as truly belong to humane nature, as love, desire, hope, fear, or
any other affection of our minds; and it is as easy a matter to divest our
selves of any other passion as of this of pity; and he who, like the Priest and
Levite in our Savior's Parable of the wounded man, is void of all compassion,
is degenerated not so much into the likeness of a brute beast, as of the
hardest rock or marble. Thus to do good is according to the very make and
frame of our beings and natures.

2. Hence it follows that it must be the most pleasant and delightful
employment we can choose for our selves. Whatever is according to our nature,
must for that reason be pleasant: for all actual pleasure consists in the
gratification and satisfaction of our natural inclinations and appetites. Since
therefore the very constitution and temper of our nature sway and prompt us to
the exercise of charity and beneficence, the satisfying such inclinations by
doing good must be as truly grateful to us, as any other thing or action
whatever that ministers to our pleasure; and it cannot be more delightful to
receive kindnesses than it is to bestow them. A seasonable unexpected relief
does not affect him that stands in great need of it with more sensible
contentment, than the opportunity of doing it does rejoice a good man's heart.
Nay it may be doubted on which hand lies the greatest obligation; whether he
who receives is more obliged to the giver for the good turn he has done him,
or the giver be more obliged to the receiver for the occasion of exercising his
goodness. When we receive great kindnesses it puts us to the blush: we are
ashamed to be so highly obliged; but the joy of doing them is pure and unmixed:
and this our Savior has told us, Acts 20.35. It is more blessed to give than
to receive; and some good men have ventured to call it the greatest sensuality,
a piece of Epicurism, and have magnified the exceeding indulgence of God, who
has annexed future rewards to that which is so amply its own recompense.

These two advantages this pleasure of doing good has above all other
pleasures whatever.

(1.) That this satisfaction does not only just accompany the act of doing
good, but it is permanent and lasting, endures as long as our lives. The very
remembrance of such charitable deeds by which we have been really helpful and
serviceable to others, our after-reflexion upon the good we have done in the
world does wonderfully refresh our souls with a mighty joy and peace, quite
contrary to all other worldly and corporeal pleasures. There are indeed some
vices which promise a great deal of pleasure in the commission of them, but
then at best it is but short-lived and transient, a sudden flash presently
extinguished. It perishes in the very enjoyment, like the crackling of thorns
under a pot, as the Wiseman elegantly expresses it; it presently expires in a
short blaze and noise, but has very little heat or warmth in it. All outward
bodily pleasures are of a very fugitive volatile nature, there is no fixing
them; and if we endeavor to make up this defect by a frequent repetition and
constant succession of them, they then soon become nauseous; men are cloyed and
tired with them. Nor is this yet all; these sensual pleasures do not only
suddenly pass away, but also leave a sting behind them, they wound our
consciences, the thoughts of them are uneasy to us; guilt and a bitter
repentance are the attendants of such indulging our selves, sadness and
melancholy comes in the place of all such exorbitant mirth and jollity. These
are the constant abatements of all outward unlawful pleasures. Whereas that
which springs from a mind satisfied and well pleased with its own actions, does
for ever affect our hearts with a delicious relish; continually ministers
comfort and delight to us; is a never-failing fountain of joy, such as is solid
and substantial; fills our minds with good hopes and cheerful thoughts; and is
the only certain ground of true peace and contentment.

(2.) This pleasure and joy that attends doing good does herein exceed all
fleshly delights, that it is then at the highest when we stand in most need of
it: In a time of affliction, old age, or at the approach of death, the
remembrance of our good deeds will strangely cheer and support our spirits
under all the calamities and troubles we may meet with in this state. By doing
good we lay up a treasure of comfort, a stock of joy against an evil day, which
no outward thing can rob us of. But now it is not thus with bodily pleasures;
they cannot help us in a time of need, they then become miserably flat and
insipid; the sinner cannot any longer taste or relish them: nothing remains but
a guilty sense, which in such time of distress is more fierce and raging,
especially at the hour of death.

Yet even then, when all our former inordinate pleasures shall prove matter of
anguish and torment to us, when all the flowers of worldly glory shall be
withered, when all earthly beauty which now does so tempt and bewitch us, shall
be darkened and eclipsed, when this world and the fashion of it is vanished and
gone, when the pangs of death are just taking hold of us, and we are ready to
step into another world, what a seasonable and comfortable refreshment then
will it be to look back upon a well-spent life? to consider with our selves how
faithfully we have improved those talents God has entrusted us with; how well
we have husbanded our time, estates, parts, reputation, learning, authority,
for the glory of God and the good of other men. The time will surely shortly
come wherein you shall vastly more rejoice in that little you have laid out or
expended for the benefit of others, than in all that which by so long toil and
drudgery in the world you shall have saved and purchased. They are not your
great possessions, lands or estates, nor your dignities and titles of honor,
nor your eminent places and trusts, nor any external advantages you have
purchased or acquired, that at such a time will yield you any true peace or
comfortable hope. What use you have made of them, and what good you have done
with them, is that which your conscience will then enquire after, and
accordingly pronounce its sentence.

3. To do good is the most divine and God-like thing. By it we do most
especially become like unto God, who is good, and who does good; and not only
like him, but we resemble him in that which is his very nature and essence, and
which he esteems his greatest glory: for such is his goodness, which does as it
were deify all his other attributes and perfections.

There is no quality or disposition whatever by which we can so near approach
the divine Majesty, as this of beneficence, and delight in doing good. As for
knowledge and power the evil Spirits partake of them in a greater degree than
the best men, but a man has nothing of God so much as to do good. By
contributing to the contentment of other men, and rendering them as happy as
lies in our power, we do God's work, are in his place and room, perform his
office in the world; we make up the seeming defects of his providence, and one
man thereby becomes as it were a God to another. Hence this employment must
needs be the highest accomplishment and perfection of our beings. It is the
only argument of a brave and great soul to extend his care and thoughts for
the good of all men; and not to do so is a certain indication of a little
narrow spirit, contracted within it self and its own paltry concernments.

4. This is the very end of all the blessings and several advantages God has
vouchsafed to Men in this life, that by them they might become capable of doing
good in the World; this is the proper use they are to be put to, for which they
were designed by the author and donour of them; and if they are not employed
to such purposes, we are false to our trust, and the stewardship committed to
us, and shall be one day severely accountable to God for it. For the Almighty
and Sovereign Lord and disposer of all things both in Heaven and Earth has
assigned to every man his particular place and station in this World, has
given him his part to act on this great theater, has furnished him with powers
and abilities of mind and body fitted for several uses, in the due and regular
improvement and management of which, every one may in some measure be helpful
and serviceable to others. This our Savior illustrates by his excellent
parable of the Talents, St. Matthew. 25.

There is no man but God has put many excellent things into his possession, to
be used, improved and managed by him for the common good and interest: for men
are made for society and mutual fellowship. We are not born for our selves
alone, but every other man has some right and interest in us, and as no man
can live happily in this World without the help and assistance of others, so
neither is any man exempted or privileged from being in his place some way
beneficial to others,

It is with men in this World, as it is with the parts of the body natural. It
is St. Paul's comparison, 1 Cor. 12. the body consists of diverse members, which
neither have the same dignity and honor, nor the same use and office, but
every part has its proper use and function, whereby it becomes serviceable to
the whole body, and if any one part fails or is ill affected, the whole suffers
for it, and the meanest part is necessary for the good of the whole; so that
the eye cannot say to the hand, I have no need of thee, nor again the head to
the feet, I have no no need of you. Thus has God distributed several gifts
amongst the sons of men, or they by God's blessing upon their industry acquire
particular art, skill and experience, some in one thing, some in another, none
in all; so that it is impossible, but that every man must want something for
the convenience of his life, for which he must be obliged to others; upon which
account it is most highly reasonable that he also himself should some way
oblige and serve others.

But besides this there are many special favors and advantages which some men
enjoy above others, which also are designed for the common good and benefit. It
is plain that there is a very great inequality amongst men both as to the
internal endowments of their minds and their external conditions in this life.
Many more talents are committed to some persons than to others; but yet we
greatly mistake when we think them given us merely for our own sakes, to serve
our own turns, and for the satisfaction of our own private appetites and
desires, without any respect to other men. No, at the best they are but
deposited with us in trust, the more we enjoy of them the greater charge we
have upon our hands, and the more plentiful returns God does justly expect
from us; for unto whomsoever much is given, says our Savior, of him shall be
much required.

This ought especially to be considered by all those who by reason of the
eminency of their qualities and dignities, and by their superiority above
others, have vast authority over them, whose sphere is large and influence
great, who have many dependents who court their favor and whose interest it is
to observe and please them: what infinite good may such do in the world,
especially by their example?

5. Doing good is the main and most substantial part of Christian Religion, the
most acceptable sacrifice we can offer, or service we can perform to God; and
therefore do we so often find in Scripture all Religion summed up as it were in
this one thing, it being the best expression of our duty toward God, and
either formally containing or naturally producing all our duty toward our
neighbor, whence this is said to be the fulfilling of the whole law. It is not
enough that we give to every man what is due to him. His Religion is but very
little and of a narrow compass, who is only just, nay he that is rigidly so in
all cases has no Religion at all: that I have wronged no man will be a poor
plea or apology at the last day, for it is not for rapine or injury, for
pillaging or cousening their neighbors, that men at the last day are formally
impeached and finally condemned, but I was an hungry and ye gave me no meat, I
was a stranger and ye took me not in; you neglected to do that good which you
had power and opportunity to do.

Some men are so taken up with their courses of piety and devotion, that they
have no time to do much good; if they be but temperate and just, and come
frequently to Church, and constantly perform the duties of God's worship, this
they hope will carry them to Heaven though they are notoriously covetous and
uncharitable, and hardly ever do any good office for their neighbors or
brethren. Some again there are who pretend to be of a more spiritual and
refined Religion, spend their time in contemplation, and talk much of communion
with God, but look upon this way of serving God by doing good as a lower
attainment, an inferior dispensation suitable to children and novices in
Religion, and think that they are excused from these mean duties; and yet read
over the life of the best man that ever lived, the founder of our Faith and
Religion, and you cannot but confess what I have already shown you, that the
great thing he was most exemplary and illustrious for, was his unwearied
readiness to help and oblige all men, he went about doing good: and it is a
scandal raised on our Church, that we do not hold the necessity of good works
in order to salvation, but trust wholly to faith; for we hold and teach them to
be as necessary as Papists themselves can or do, but then we say they are
accepted by God only for the sake of Jesus Christ.

6. And Lastly. Nothing has greater rewards annexed to it than doing good and
that both in this life and that which is to come. I have time now but just to
mention to you some few of those benefits and advantages, that do either
naturally flow from it, or by God's gracious promise are annexed to it.

To do good with what we enjoy is the most certain way to procure God's
blessing upon all we have; it does entitle us to his more especial care and
protection. Trust in the Lord, says David, and be doing good, so shall thou
dwell in the Land, and verily thou shall be fed. The divine goodness cannot but
be mightily pleased to see men so far as they are able imitating it self, and
following the example of God's benignity.

For every good office we do to other men we have some thing to plead with God
Almighty to engage him to bestow upon us what we want or desire; not by way of
merit or desert, but God himself graciously becoming our debtour, takes what is
done to others in such cases as done to himself, and by promise obliges himself
to full retaliation.

By this means we provide against an evil day that which will mightily support
us under all the troubles and afflictions that may happen to us in this life;
our good works will attend us and stand by us at the hour of death, as I have
already hinted to you, nay farther our good works will appear and plead for us
before God's tribunal, and will procure for us for the sake of Jesus Christ, at
the hands of our merciful God, a glorious recompense at the resurrection of
the just; for at the last and final reckoning, when all men's actions shall be
scanned and judged, the great King shall pass his sentence according to the
good men have done or neglected to do in this life.

Nay every way so great is the reward of doing good, that even wicked men, who
yet have been of bountiful tempers and have had generous spirits, shall fare
the better in the other world for those good acts of mercy and charity they
have done here; and in this sense it is said (with which I end all) that
Charity does cover a multitude of sins, and to cover sins in the Scripture
phrase is to forgive them.

Now of this saying there are several senses given, which I cannot stand now to
recite, but the words are true in these two senses.

(1.) If he that is thus truly charitable, and has done a great deal of good
in his generation be also endued with the other virtues and qualifications
required in a Christian, then though he may have a great many infirmities and
miscarriages to answer for, yet these failings shall be overlooked and buried
in his good deeds, and then they mean the same with that of the Psalmist, with
the merciful God will show himself merciful, he will show him all favor
possible.

(2.) Or else secondly, if you understand these words, Charity shall cover a
multitude of sins, as spoken of a person, who though vicious in all other
respects yet out of principles of common humanity or natural goodness of
temper, or greatness of Spirit, is very apt and inclined to do generous and
great things for the good of the world; (which is a case that may sometimes
happen,) they mean this, that though Charity alone will not be sufficient to
make such an one happy in the other world, because he is otherwise incapable of
it, yet it shall be considered so far as to lessen his punishment. He shall be
in a less intolerable condition, (though that be sad enough) than the cruel and
uncharitable, or than they who have delighted in doing mischief.

A SERMON Preached at WHITE HALL. The Second Sermon.
1 COR. XI. 29. For he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks
damnation to himself, not discerning the Lord's Body.


THE Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, which we are now to receive, is
undoubtedly the most solemn and venerable part of Christian worship, a most
excellent instrument of Religion, an institution of our Savior's of mighty use
and advantage to us, if we duly partake thereof; and yet there is hardly any
part of Religion so little or so ill understood by the generality of Christians
amongst us, as this duty: which sufficiently appears from that great number of
those who constantly join with the Church in all other public offices of
divine worship, and yet wholly neglect the receiving of this Sacrament; or at
least communicate so seldom, as if they looked upon themselves at liberty to
do it, or not do it, as they thought best. I speak not now of the profane
contemners of God and Religion, who despise this as they do all the other
duties of God's worship; but of those who pretend to the fear of God, and care
of their souls, and yet live at ease in the gross omission of this duty.

Now amongst the many pleas or excuses with which men satisfy themselves in the
neglect or disuse of this holy Communion, that which most generally prevails,
and perhaps with some honest and well-meaning persons, is the consideration of
the words of my Text, He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and
drinks damnation to himself. So dreadful is the threatening and punishment
here denounced against those who receive this Sacrament unworthily, that men
are apt to think it much the safer and wifer course, never to venture on a
duty, the wrong performance of which is attended with so great mischief.
Damnation is so terrible a word, and to be guilty of the body and blood of
Christ (as it is said v. 27. Whosoever shall eat this bread and drink this cup
of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord) is
so heinous a crime, that it may seem the most prudent course for a man to keep
himself at the greatest distance from all possibility of falling into it.
Better never receive at all, than expose ones self to so great hazard by
receiving.

I hope therefore it will not be thought altogether unprofitable to entertain
you at this time with a discourse on these words, wherein I shall endeavor to
give you the full meaning of them, with the true and just inferences and
consequences that may be drawn from them. In order to which I shall show you

I. What is meant here by damnation.

II. What by eating and drinking unworthily.

III. How far this Text may reasonably scare and fright people from this
Sacrament.

IV. What is the true consequence from what is here affirmed by the Apostle. He
that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself.

I. What is meant here by eating and drinking damnation to a man's self. The
original word which is here translated damnation truly signifies no more than
judgment or punishment in general, of what kind soever it be, temporal or
eternal. So that there is no necessity of translating it here by the word
damnation, nay there are two plain reasons why it ought to be understood only
of temporal evils and chastisements.

1. Because the judgments that were inflicted on the Corinthians for their
profanation of this holy Sacrament were only temporal; verse 30th. For this
cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep.

2. Because the reason assigned of these judgments is, that they might not be
condemned in the other world, v. 32. But when we are judged (where the same
Greek word is used which in my Text is translated damnation) we are chastened
of the Lord, that we might not be condemned with the world. That is, God
inflicted these evils on the Corinthians, that being reformed by these stripes
in this life, they might escape that vengeance which was reserved for the
impenitent in another life; and therefore it could not be damnation, that is,
eternal damnation that was either threatened or inflicted upon them for their
unworthy receiving.

The sum of what the Apostle means seems to be this; that By profaning this
holy Sacrament they would pluck down some remarkable judgment upon their heads.
Of this, says he, you have notorious instances amongst your selves in those
various and mortal diseases that have been so rise in your City; and this God
does to warn you, that you may be awakened to avoid greater and worse judgments
that are future and eternal. Now this punishment was extraordinary and peculiar
to that time; for there is no such thing found amongst us at this day, namely,
that God does suddenly smite all unworthy Communicants with some grievous
disease or sudden death. Nor indeed are men afraid of any such thing, though it
is very plain that this is the true meaning of the words of my Text, that by
such profaneness they would bring down some remarkable temporal judgment upon
themselves.

But I shall not insist any longer upon this, but take the word damnation as we
commonly understand it, and in that sense, to eat and drink damnation to a
man's self, does imply, that by our unworthy participation of the Sacrament, we
are so far from receiving any benefit or advantage by it, that we do incur
God's heaviest displeasure, and render our selves liable to eternal misery; and
so proceed

II. To enquire who those are that do run this great danger, they who eat and
drink unworthily. Now this phrase of eating unworthily being only found here
in this Chapter, for the understanding of it we are to consider what the faults
were with which the Apostle charge the Corinthians, and we shall find them to
be some very heinous disorders that had crept in amongst them, occasioned by
their Love Feasts, at the end of which the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper was
usually celebrated; which disorders therefore were peculiar to those times, and
are not now to be found amongst us, as, v. 18. First of all, when ye come
together in the Church, I hear that there be divisions among you, they bandied
into separate parties; and v. 21. In eating every one takes before another his
own supper; that is, Whereas there was a custom when they came together to
commemorate Christ's death, to furnish a common table, where no man was to
pretend any propriety to what he himself brought, but was to eat in common with
the rest, this charitable custom these Corinthians wholly perverted: for he
that brought a great deal, fell to that as if it were at his own house, and at
his own table, and so fed to the full; whereas another that was able to bring
but a little, remained hungry. With such irreverence and disorder did they
behave themselves at the Lord's Table, as if they had been met at a common
feast: this the Apostle calls not discerning the Lord's body; that is, they
made no difference between that heavenly food and common bread; they ate the
Sacrament as if it were their ordinary meat. What (says he v. 22.) have ye not
houses to eat and drink in? ye may even as well stay at home and do this;
there is nothing of Religion in this, nor is this to celebrate the Sacrament
according to Christ's institution, whereby we ought to represent his death for
the world, and to commemorate his love, and to devote our selves to him in new
and better obedience, and not to make it a merry meeting only to fill our own
bellies.

But this was not all; for they were also riotous and intemperate in these
Love Feasts. They played the gluttons, and were drunk even when they received
the holy Sacrament. Now this was so notorious and foul a profanation of the
holy Mystery, to make it an instrument of debauchery, that we cannot at all
wonder that God should so severely threaten and punish such an high affront and
violation of his sacred ordinance. No judgment could be too great or sharp to
vindicate our Savior's most excellent institution from such impious contempt.
But now this is by no means to be extended to every little failure or omission
in this duty, or in our preparation for it, as if that did render us such
unworthy receivers as these Corinthians were, or straight consign us over to
the same punishment.

Those scandalous irregularities and excuses are here called eating and
drinking unworthily, which were heard of only in the first ages of the Church,
when the Sacrament was always joined with these Love Feasts, which were
therefore in process of time wholly abrogated; and to prevent that intemperance
and abuse they had introduced, it generally prevailed to receive this Sacrament
fasting. But whatever faults may be found now amongst our Communicants, yet
they cannot be charged with these mentioned in this Chapter. The worst of men,
if they do communicate at all, do it with greater reverence and more suitable
deportment than these Corinthians did. So that neither the fault here reproved,
nor the punishment denounced, has place now amongst us. What reason then is
there, why this text of Scripture should fright any people from the Sacrament,
whenas there is neither the same fault committed, nor the same punishment
inflicted?

Though this be the just meaning of the words, yet because this plea of
unworthiness to receive is often insisted upon to excuse our neglect of this
Sacrament, I shall farther and more largely consider it by proceeding to the
third thing I propounded to discourse of.

III. How far this danger of receiving unworthily may reasonably scare and
fright people from coming to this Sacrament. And here I shall offer these few
things to the thoughts of all such as are seriously disposed.

1. In a strict sense we are none of us all worthy of so great a favor and
such an high privilege as to be admitted to this Sacrament, or of such
excellent benefits as are conferred upon us in it. After all our care, after
all our preparation to make our selves fit, yet still we must acknowledge our
selves unworthy but to pick up the crumbs that fall from our master's table,
much more to sit and feast at it. If we are not to receive this Sacrament till
we can account our selves really worthy, the best of men, the more holy and
humble they are, the more averse would they be from this duty.

2. This unworthiness is no bar or hindrance to our receiving this Sacrament.
We are not worthy of the least mercy either spiritual or temporal which we
enjoy; must we therefore starve our selves or go naked, because we deserve not
our food or raiment? We are not worthy so much as to cast up our eyes toward
heaven the habitation of God's holiness; but what then, Shall we never make our
humble addresses to the throne of God's grace, because we are not worthy to
ask, or to have our petitions heard and granted by him? Shall we refuse any
favors the kindness of Heaven offers to us, because they are beyond our
merits, or more than we could challenge or expect?

It is not said here in the Text, he that is unworthy to eat and drink of this
Sacrament, if he does it, eats and drinks damnation to himself; if it were,
then indeed we might all be justly afraid of coming to this royal feast, but he
that eats and drinks unworthily: now there is a great deal of difference
between these two things, between a man's being unworthy to receive this
Sacrament, and his receiving it unworthily, which I shall thus illustrate.

He, for example, who has grossly wronged, maliciously slandered, or without
any provocation of mine treated me very ill, is, as ye will all grant, utterly
unworthy of any kindness or favor from me. But now if, notwithstanding this
unworthiness, I do him some considerable kindness, and offer him some favor,
his unworthiness is no let or hindrance to his receiving it; and if he accepts
it with a due sense and a grateful mind, and by it is moved to lay aside all
his former enmity and animosity, and heartily repents him of his former
ill will against me, and studies how to requite this courtesy, it is then
plain that though he were unworthy of the favor, yet he has now received it
worthily, that is, after a due manner, as he ought to have done, and that it
has had its right effect upon him.

So we are all unworthy to partake of this holy banquet, but being invited and
admitted we may behave our selves as becomes us in such a presence, at such a
solemnity. And if by it we thankfully commemorate the death of our Lord, and
renounce all our sins and former evil ways, and there give up our selves to be
governed by him, and vow better obedience, and are affected with a true sense
of his love, then, though unworthy of so great a favor, yet we have worthily,
that is after a right manner (as to God's acceptance) received this blessed
Sacrament. But if now unworthy of so great honor and favor, we also receive
it unworthily after a profane disorderly manner, not at an minding the end,
use or design of it, without any repentance for sins past, or resolutions of
amendment for the future, and without any grateful affection of love toward
our Savior dying for us, we do by this means indeed highly provoke God
Almighty, and justly incur his most grievous displeasure.

3. Those who are unworthy and are truly sensible of their own unworthiness,
are the very persons for whom this Sacrament was appointed, and for whose
benefit it was instituted. Were we not all sinners we had no need of such means
of grace as Sacraments are, nor of such instruments of Religion. Christ came
not to call the righteous but sinners to repentance. They that are whole need
not the physician but they that are sick. Now it is an idle thing for a man to
be afraid to receive an aims because he is miserably poor, or to be loath to
take physic because he is dangerously sick. If we are truly sensible of our
unworthiness, and, as we ought to be, duly affected with it, this is a great
argument and motive to engage us not any longer to delay the use of these
means, but to hasten to the Sacrament, there to receive supplies and
assistances suitable and proportioned to our wants and necessities: the more
unworthy we find our selves, the more we stand in need of this holy Sacrament,
whereby our good resolutions may be strengthened and confirmed, and divine
power and grace communicated to us, to enable us by degrees to subdue all our
lusts and passions, and to resist all temptations, and so by often receiving
this Sacrament we shall every time become less unworthy to partake of it.

There has been a great dispute in the world whether the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper be a converting ordinance or no, as prayer and hearing of the
word of God read or preached are allowed to be; and many there are that have
been brought to believe, that it is a duty incumbent on, or rather a privilege
belonging to none but great and exemplary Saints, to strong and well-grounded
Christians; that this Sacrament is not food proper for babes and novices, for
those who often fail in their duty, who are still only wrestling with their
lusts, but have not yet got the mastery or victory over them; that we ought
first to be fully assured of our salvation before we come to this holy table,
that this ordinance serves only to strengthen and confirm our faith and
repentance and all other Christian graces and virtues, but not to beget any of
them in us.

Now here thus much must be granted, that this Sacrament does belong only to
those that are within the pale of the visible Church, only to baptized
Christians that do publicly own their faith and Christian profession; that it
is no means of converting Jews or Infidels; and that even Christians by
notorious evil lives, whereby they become scandalous to their brethren and
incur the censures of the Church, may justly forfeit all their right and title
to this Sacrament; and farther, that it is a bold profanation of our Savior's
institution for any wicked person, resolved to continue such, to presume to
bless God for that mercy and love of a Redeemer which he does not in the least
value. Thus far we are on all hands agreed, but not now to engage in any matter
of controversy, I shall only say that I can see no reason why to one that is
really sensible of his sins and miscarriages contrary to his baptismal vow and
profession, and makes some kind of resolution to forsake them; why, I say,
this Sacrament as well as prayer or any other duties of Religion may not be
reckoned as a means of begetting true repentance in him, of turning him from
sin to righteousness, from the power of Satan to God; and for this I shall
offer only this one plain argument which is obvious to every man, that if the
death of Christ it self, his bitter passion, his whole gracious undertaking for
us, was amongst other reasons designed by God also to convince us of the evil
and danger of sin, to bring us out of love with it, and to engage us to a new
and better life, surely then the consideration of the same things represented
to us in the Sacrament, the commemoration of his death and passion there made,
may also serve for the same great ends and purposes.

If Christ died that we should die unto sin, certainly then the memory of his
death may justly be accounted a proper means of killing sin in us; nay what in
the nature of the thing can be imagined a more likely instrument to turn us
from a life of sin to the practice of holiness, than the frequent consideration
of what our blessed Lord has done and suffered for us? and if so, it cannot be
necessary that this change should be completely wrought in us, before we ever
solemnly commemorate his bloody passion, for that were to suppose it necessary
that the end should be obtained before we use the means.

It is not therefore absolutely necessary that we should be fully assured that
we are in a state of grace, and in God's favor, and have repented enough and
truly forsaken all our sins before we venture on this Sacrament; it is
sufficient that we heartily and sincerely resolve against them, that we
approach the Lord's table with honest and devout minds, that we be really
willing and desirous to use all means to become better, and if thus disposed we
come to the Sacrament, I doubt not but we shall find it a most effectual means
for the enabling us to leave our sins, and to lead a better life. It is not our
unworthiness, but our resolving to continue in that state, that makes us
unqualified for this Sacrament.

4. If therefore by your unworthiness you mean that you live in sin and are
resolved to do so, and therefore dare not come to the Sacrament for fear you
should farther provoke God almighty, I will suppose that in this you act
prudently and warily, but then I would advise you for the same reason and on
the same account to leave off all other duties of Religion as well as this; if
you would act upon the same grounds, you ought to reckon it the safest way
never to pray to God any more, nor ever again to appear in any religious
assemblies, nor to join in any part of God's solemn worship; for God has often
declared that he does far more abominate all such formal, whining, cringing
hypocrites, and will more severely punish them than the open and bold
contemners of his authority and laws. The prayer of the wicked man is an
abomination to the Lord. He hates the addresses of those who call him father
and master, and in words acknowledge him, but yet continually do the things
that are displeasing in his sight. His soul loathes and nauseates all the
services of impure worshippers: You do but mock God, basely fawn upon and
impudently flatter him, when you present your selves before him as his people
and servants, and yet secretly hate him and wish him out of the world; nay for
the same reason for which you forbear the Sacrament even lay aside your whole
Christian profession, openly renounce your Baptism, deny your Savior, disown
his Religion, for that is the safest course whilst you resolve to continue in
sin and disobedience; for God's wrath shall be in the first place revealed
against wicked Christians, and better will it be in the last day for Tire and
Sidon, for Sodom and Gomorra, than for those who were called by Christ's name,
and yet did not depart from iniquity.

If this pretense be true, that you go out of the Church when the Sacrament is
to be administered, lest you should farther provoke God by unworthy receiving
it, by the same reason keep from the Church altogether, lest you as highly
provoke God by being present at those prayers you do not heartily join in, nor
ever intend to live according to. Or rather (to speak yet more fully, what is
the true consequence of this) you now know your selves unworthy, and are
resolved yet, at least for some time to continue such; alas! what need such as
you be afraid of this Text? In this case it ought to seem indifferent to you
whether you receive or not; Damnation here threatened cannot be supposed
reasonably to scare him from the Sacrament, who runs the constant hazard of it
by living in known sin. This can be no such terrible word to an habitual and
resolved sinner. He that can swear and talk profanely, and live intemperately
and loosely, and without any fear or regret commit mortal sin, in vain pretends
fear of damnation for not doing that which is indeed his duty; for it is a most
odd and ridiculous thing to be afraid of doing what our Savior has commanded
us, whilst we are not in the least afraid every day of doing what he has
forbidden us. How strange is this for men out of a dread of damnation to
neglect their duty, and yet at the same time not to be afraid to live carnal
and sensual lives? Never therefore let any amongst you, so long as you continue
in your sins, plead, that you are afraid you should offend your Savior if
unworthily you eat his body and drink his blood, and therefore dare not
communicate; for your daily practice confutes this pretense, whilst you
notoriously break his Laws, and violate his Authority and scandalize his
Religion.

You pretend fear of damnation; no such matter, this is not the true reason of
your abstaining from this Sacrament. You are rather afraid the Sacrament will
engage you to leave those sins you have no mind as yet to part with, that it
will put you upon the practice of those duties which are inconsistent with your
profit, pleasure, or secular interest. You are not afraid of displeasing God,
but of being too strictly tied and bound to please him. You are afraid lest
that solemnity should raise some scruples in your minds which you have no
leisure to consider of. You would not be troubled with such a serious business;
you suspect you shall not be able to sin so securely and quietly after it, as
now you do.

Let not such therefore as neglect this duty, invent any such pitiful excuses,
but confess plainly that they love sin and the world too much, that they prize
them above the benefits purchased by Jesus Christ, that they resolve to go on
in their wickedness for some longer time, and that therefore they do not come
to this Sacrament. They are loath to engage themselves so solemnly to do that,
which they find in themselves no heart or will to perform. This indeed is the
secret thought of many men, though indeed it is a very foolish one: for they
are very much mistaken who think themselves at greater liberty to do evil
whilst they abstain from this Sacrament, for Christians are engaged by
receiving this Sacrament to no other obedience than they were before by their
Baptism: it does not so much oblige us to new duties, as enable us to make good
those obligations which our profession of Christianity has already laid upon
us.

5. And Lastly. If the receiving of this Sacrament were an indifferent rite or
ceremony, that might be done or omitted at pleasure, then indeed the great
danger there is in receiving it unworthily might in a great measure justify our
omission of it. But what if the danger be as great and the hazard equal of not
receiving it at all, as of receiving it unworthily? where then is our prudence
or safety, when to avoid one danger, we run into another every whit as great?
when for fear of displeasing God, we disobey a plain command, and for fear of
damnation commit a damnable sin? for I can call it no less, to live in the
neglect and contempt of this holy institution.

It is not very easy to determine which is the greatest affront to God, or
does most highly provoke him, never to perform our duty, or to perform it after
a wrong manner; never to pray at all, or to be present at prayers, but not to
mind or regard what we are about; never to receive this Sacrament, or to
receive it often, but make no difference between what we and drink there, and
what eat we do at our own houses. But however, he that receives this Sacrament,
although it be after an undue manner, seems to me to show somewhat more respect
to God and his commands, than he who wholly neglects it. And besides, there is
hardly any wicked man that dares come to the Sacrament without some good
thoughts and resolutions, or who is not for a little time before and after the
receiving of it more careful of himself and his actions; and though this does
not last long, but he soon returns to his former wickedness, yet however this
is something better than continuing in sin and wickedness without any
intermission or cessation. Moreover, such an one uses the best means of
becoming better, which by God's grace at some time may prove effectual; whereas
he that casts off all these duties is in a more desperate and irreclaimable
state.

In short, were there neither sin nor danger in omitting this Sacrament, and
yet so great hazard in the receiving it unworthily, prudence and interest might
engage us to choose the safest side, and not to meddle with it at all; but if we
expose our selves as certainly to God's anger and displeasure by wholly
neglecting this duty, as by performing it unduly, then these words of the
Apostle can be no pretense or excuse for our abstaining from this Communion.
For would not this be an odd way of arguing? because intemperate eating and
drinking is very prejudicial to our health, and often breeds mortal diseases,
therefore it is better never to eat or drink at all? would it not be madness,
lest we should kill our selves by a surfeit, to resolve to starve our selves by
obstinate fasting?

And this shall bring me to the fourth and last thing I propounded to discourse
of; which was

IV. To show what is the only true and just consequence which can be drawn
from what is here affirmed by the Apostle, He that eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself, which is this: that
forasmuch as our Savior has plainly commanded all his Followers and
Disciples, to do this in remembrance of him; and yet on the other side, there
is so great danger in doing it unworthily, that we should neither omit the duty
(for that would be a plain transgression of our Savior's command) nor yet be
careless in the performance of it.

And this is the inference which the Apostle himself makes, not that the
Corinthians, whom he blames so much for their unworthy receiving this
Sacrament, should therefore forbear coming to it any more at all, but for the
future they should examine themselves, and partake of it with greater reverence
and devotion than they had used to do. Let the danger of receiving unworthily
be never so great, the consideration of this ought only to make us so much the
more careful to receive it after a right and acceptable manner, and to put us
upon greater watchfulness over our selves when we meddle with such sacred
things. This is the use we ought to make of these words of the Apostle, not
rashly or precipitantly without due preparation or consideration to rush upon
this holy Sacrament, but seriously to mind the end and design of it, and so
duly to affect our spirits with the things represented to us by it, that they
may make lively and lasting impressions upon us, and we may bring forth the
fruit of all in a holy and unblamable conversation in the world.

To end all, I would not have any thing I have now said upon this subject to
you, so interpreted or understood, as in the least to take away from the
reverence you have of this institution, or to lessen that awe and dread you
have of receiving it unworthily. Only I would not have men afraid of, or
scruple doing their duty. There is preparation and good disposition of mind
required for prayer and the right performance of other religious duties, as
well as this of the Sacrament.

We ought therefore to be afraid of these three things.

1. Of neglecting to receive this Sacrament, for that is to live in
disobedience to a plain command of our Savior.

2. Of receiving it unworthily without reverence or attention to the meaning of
it, without hearty repentance and sincere resolution of amendment, for that is
to affront and profane our Savior's most excellent institution.

3. Of turning to your evil courses after receiving it: for then your having
taken this Sacrament will be a great aggravation both of your sin and
condemnation.

A SERMON Preached before the Late KING AT NEW MARKET. The Third Sermon.
PROVE. I. 10. -- If Sinners entice thee consent thou not.


IN Scripture we often find that the evil Spirits are represented as Tempters,
going to and fro in the earth, and walking up and down in it, seeking whom they
may devour; and to that end as furnished with all manner of wiles and devices,
by which they may ensnare and deceive Mankind. They would not be unhappy alone,
and therefore bend all their study and cunning to involve Men in the same ruin
they have plunged themselves into.

Yet these are not our only Enemies, whom we are to watch against or resist.
There are many in our own shape, who though their Feet are not cloven, yet
drive on the same design, and are the Devil's Agents, and use their wit and
parts to set up his Kingdom in the World, by enticing Men to, and pleading for
Sin and Irreligion. And this they do just for the same ill-natured reason;
namely, to make others as bad as themselves, that they may be also as
miserable; that this may a little comfort them against the gnawing fears of
future punishments, that if they should chance to befall them, as is threatened,
yet they have made sure of company enough.

And this may afford us one Consideration of no little force to secure us
against the solicitations of Sinners, that though they may pretend to great
love and kindness, and tell us of the excellency and bravery of being wicked,
and undertake to answer all the scruples and coyness of our Consciences; yet
the bottom of all is only to engage us in the perils and dangerous adventures
they have run themselves into: They cannot endure to think that if the great
Doctrines of Religion should at last prove true, any should be likely to fare
better in the other state than themselves; they hope either by their number to
bear down God Almighty to pity and pardon, or at least that when they are so
many, they shall help one another more cheerfully to suffer the worst that can
happen to them.

But now would we count it reasonable for a Man to persuade us to be sick with
him? or because he has undone himself and is lost and ruined, that we should
therefore bring our selves into the same circumstances and condition? In our
temporal affairs we are not thus easy and flexible, nor can Men in their wits
by any means be prevailed upon to hazard their lives and fortunes for the
gratifying the vain humor of any desperate person, who has forfeited his own;
and why then should we be so foolishly soft as to part with all that can be
called truly good, and venture our everlasting concernments and immortal Souls
only to bear those company who are resolved to be damned? Wherefore of old in
all places where civility and good manners have obtained, such as have taken up
that vile trade of debauching others, and enticing them to sin, have been
always branded with marks of infamy, and accounted and dealt with, as the very
pests and public enemies of mankind.

But I suppose there is not much need of convincing you, that it is your
interest to follow this advice of the wise man. Every one will readily grant
that it is good and wholesome counsel, not to consent to the enticings of evil
and wicked men; the only difficulty is in the practicing of it, especially in
a time when sin is not only grown into fashion, but into very great reputation.

It would be well if the sad complaints of the hideous degeneracy and
profaneness of this present age were as unjust as they are frequent; it is the
humor of too many to admire and commend all the persons that lived, and every
thing that was done before they were born, whilst they please themselves in
nothing more than in continually lamenting and bemoaning the sins and
misfortunes of their own days. And whatever times such had lived in, it is like
they would have picked out matter of discontent, having no better way of showing
their own wisdom or goodness than by finding fault with others. But however
thus much is certain, that since the World is always so thronged and thickly
beset with wicked men (and we have no reason to doubt but that we at this time
have our share of them amongst us) since the best of us all are so apt to be
misled, surprised or betrayed into sin, we have great need, if we would
preserve our innocence, to fortify our minds with all such considerations as
may help us to withstand the restless allurements and subtle enticing of
those, who not only themselves do things that are evil, but rejoice in making
others do the same.

I shall at this time discourse only of these two ways by which those that
entice men to vicious practices ordinarily prevail with them, viz. either by
their example, or else by arguing for and excusing of sin, and shall endeavor
to make out how unreasonable it is to be moved by either of them.

I. Consent not when you are enticed to sin by bad examples. He that is tempted
only by his own wicked self, and drawn away with his own lusts, doubts
oftentimes and is afraid, and sometimes repents and forbears; but when his own
inward propensions and inclinations are seconded and backed with bad examples,
especially if they are numerous and given by men of authority, interest and
name in the World; when by them he is encouraged and urged to that which of
himself he had no little mind to; then does Vice become strong and triumphant,
the temptation is then at the full height, and it is hard for a Man to stand it
out. When thus there is a confederacy and combination of sinners, when
wickedness joins, as it were, hand to hand, and draws it self into leagues,
when the road is smoothed and the passage made broad and plain by the
tramplings of others before us, then we are in great danger either of being
hurried on in the Crowd or else of being by degrees inveigled to venture our
selves with those to whom we cannot but think we do owe a great regard. Vice
then becomes popular and creditable, and he that startles at the commission of
any Sin when he is alone, shall make no stop or scruple when he has the
invitation and approbation of so many; for he sins now by consent and sympathy,
and has the opinion of others to vouch him; when Conscience accuses, or
virtuous men reprove him, he has his authorities ready to produce for his
wickedness, and can quote others to justify his debaucheries.

Sin is infectious, and when it once gets head, and men dare be openly
profane, it spreads like a contagious disease; and though for some time we
should keep our selves untainted, yet by degrees we shall be apt to lose that
averseness and abhorrence we had of it; it will not seem so strange and dismal
a thing to us, it will become more familiar, and then we shall proceed to wish
our selves free that we might also do the same; to long and hancker after a
greater liberty, to think our selves too hard tied up, and then the next step
is running with others into the like excess of riot. The sense and apprehension
we have of any danger cannot but be much abated when we see the greatest part
of men continually to outbrave, and daringly to defy it, and it is hard to
retain a just value for goodness when it is despised and contemned by those who
are famed for their wit and prudence in other things.

But though by experience we find that examples do thus strongly influence men,
yet that they should do so, reason there is none: for what can argue greater
stupidity and unmanliness than at a venture to take every thing for better for
worse, and to go on only for company sake, and leave all matters, though we
are never so deeply concerned in them, to be judged of only by others? What
does reason or understanding advantage him who lives wholly by precedent, and
is always what others please to make him?

But alas! it is very tedious and troublesome for a man to examine his own
ways, and ask himself a reason of every step he takes. It would cost too much
time and pains to be wary and thoughtfull, and consider always what ought to be
spoken or done next; this is a dull and methodical way of living: but to be
always poised, to be indifferent to every thing, to wait the next tide, and to
follow the next hint, this is gay, and free, and easy. But be it as easy as
it will, it is nevertheless no other than the life of Beasts who herd together,
and follow one another, and love to be in the same track.

But more particularly; men are led by examples, and tempted to do as the most
do, chiefly on one of these accounts, either that they may not be thought
singular, or which is worse rude and uncivil, or else that they may avoid
scoffs and reproaches.

1. To avoid the imputation of singularity: and this indeed must necessarily be
laid to the charge of good and virtuous men, so long as the greatest part of
the World is wicked and sensual: But then it is to be considered that it is
such a singularity as is most honorable, and redounds the more to our credit,
by how much the fewer are of our side. It Is true, to affect singularity in any
indifferent or trivial matter is unbecoming and ridiculous; but Men were never
afraid of being singular in any excellency: and though Religion and innocence
may not always meet with that esteem, which is due to them, yet it is strange
that any one should ever think them scandalous.

If this cast any disparagement upon piety and virtue, that there are but few
in the World that heartily regard them, it does equally on all things that are
extraordinary and really praiseworthy. Are men ashamed of being counted
singular in any knowledge or wisdom, in any skill or trade? and why should it
be otherwise in the instance of true goodness, the highest perfection our
natures are capable of? are not great honors and estates as liable to this
exception, since there are but few that can deserve the one or acquire the
other? and yet men rather vaunt and glory in such things as these, which
distinguish them from the vulgar rout, and usually reckon those the most
desirable accomplishments which few are masters of; why then should this
prejudice men against Religion, that the greatest part of the World are fools,
and are contented to be miserable?

2. We must follow, say they, the examples of others, and do as the most do,
or else we shall be counted rude and uncivil; we shall be thought ill-manner'd
and to want fashionable breeding. And this alone has so far prevailed in the
World, that I doubt not but there are many who make themselves seem to be worse
than really they are, and boast of sins which they never durst commit, only
that they may not be without this mark and character of Gentility; who
hypocritically dissemble wickedness, that they may gain the name and reputation
of Gentlemen, and may not be thought precise or godly.

But surely it is a sign of a mean, low and base spirit, and does not suit with
that braveness and gallantry of mind, which is or ought to be in all Gentlemen,
to suffer themselves thus to be usurped upon, and so tamely to submit to mere
wicked customs; and instead of all those good qualities and dispositions and
virtuous actions to which their Forefathers owed their good names and great
titles, to value themselves or others upon the account of such vices, as in
former times were found only in Clowns and Beggars.

This indeed is the proof of a very wicked and degenerate age, and a notorious
sign that irreligion appears with a very bold face, when it is accounted a
piece of bad manners and becoming only those of a mean rank to own a reverence
for that Sovereign Majesty who made us all, and a due respect to those Laws,
which not so much his power and dominion over us, as our own interest and
self-love do oblige us to observe; when we shall be called rude unless, besides
the hopes of eternal happiness, we foolishly hazard the loss of our health,
peace, and every thing else that is truly valuable for a momentany satisfaction
merely out of compliance with our company; when to be able to walk, stand, or
speak sense, shall be thought an indecent thing, an uncivil trick put upon
those whom we either chanced or were forced to converse with; to name no more,
when it shall be esteemed less dishonorable to be a murderer than to forgive
some petty injury, or put up any small affront. We should therefore in this
case say as David did when he danced before the Ark of the Lord, and was
derided for it, If this be vile, I will yet be more vile than thus. If meekness
and patience, chastity and temperance, the fear of God and true Religion be
uncivil and ungentile, we will yet be more uncivil and ungentile; and I should
as soon be persuaded that it was rude and clownish not to pledge one who drank
to me in rank poison, as that it is any sign of want of good breeding and
gentile accomplishments, to be wiser and more sober than the rest of the World.

3. Lastly, Men are tempted to comply with bad examples and follow the
multitude, that they may avoid scoffs and reproaches, and not expose themselves
to the laughter and drollery of those who think every thing wit that is
impudent or profane. But this surely is so little and inconsiderable that it
deserves not to be named with the least of those inconveniences which attend a
wicked life; for what hurt can it be to us to have those speak ill of us, whose
very commendation and good word would be our greatest scandal and reproach? and
shall we to escape their irreligious scoffs and foolish jests, justly merit the
reproof of all wise men, and make our selves liable to the censure of those
whose opinion and judgment alone ought to be regarded?

Were we but once thoroughly convinced of the truth and excellency of that
Religion we are baptized into, how happy it would make us in this life, and
what great things it assures us of in the future, no flouts nor railleries
would any more be able to shake our purposes of good living, than they are to
persuade a rich man out of his estate and large possessions.

But farther, the best way to preserve our reputation, even amongst wicked men,
is to be true to those principles which we have first espoused; for let men say
what they will, they have a secret respect and veneration for all those whose
goodness is exemplary and conspicuous (which appears sufficiently by their
envying and snarling at them) and they inwardly scorn none more than those whom
they know to be guilty of those vices which yet they themselves tempted them
to, and he that will be drunk himself will yet be sure to laugh at another whom
he sees in that condition.

But let us suppose the worst, what is it that they can say of us? only that
we are nice, and squeamish, and curious; that we have not yet learned to live
at random, nor perfectly subdued our Consciences; that we weigh and consider
our actions, and use our reasons and understandings, and believe we were born
into the World for some higher ends than pleasing our senses, and gratifying
our appetites; that we are not indifferent to health and sickness, peace and
disquiet, life and death; that we think there is somewhat in the World besides
what we daily see; that we provide for a State which we may very soon enter
upon, and trouble our selves with thoughts of what will become of us after we
are dead, and the like: but if this be all, we ought to pray to God that we may
constantly live under such ignominy and die under the disgrace.

To what I have already said on this subject, I shall only add, that if bad
examples even against our reason and interest do so far prevail with Men to
their utter undoing, what mighty power and influence would good examples have,
enforced with all the arguments for and advantages of Religion? what an age of
virtue, and quiet, and happiness should we enjoy, if Men of dignity and renown,
of parts and understanding, of birth and fortune, would freely and
conspicuously offer themselves to the World for patterns of life and
conversation? thus they might entice others to be good, and soon retrieve the
honor of our Religion, and bring it again into credit and repute. Were such
Men's lives as good and holy as their profession is, sinners would soon be put
out of Countenance, and be ashamed to appear in the World, their party would be
made inconsiderable, and they would have but little power to draw others over
to their side: for there is not a more winning and taking sight in the World,
than the life of a Christian led exactly according to the prescripts of his
Religion. And were there not in all ages some such persons of authority and
fame, whose zeal for Religion inspires them with so much courage, as that they
are neither ashamed nor afraid of being honest and innocent, whatever the mad
World may say or think of them for it (I say, were it not for such) we should
soon lose not only the power but even the form of Godliness too. And God only
knows how many daily make shipwreck of their Consciences, only because they
have not spirit enough to endure to be out of the mode and fashion.

II. But I hasten to the second thing propounded, which was to show how
unreasonable it is to be enticed to sin, by such as argue for it, and would
endeavor to excuse it, for there are many that are not altogether thus easy
and complaisant, as to follow merely for company, nor so lazy as to take up
every thing on trust, but they are men of prudence and discretion, who desire
first to be satisfied whether what they are enticed to be prudent and safe;
they like a wicked life well enough, could they be but furnished with some
small reasons and arguments for it, by which they might justify their choice
and stop the mouths of their Consciences. I shall just mention these four ways
whereby sinners ordinarily entice such as these to join with them, either 1. by
representing the pleasures; or 2. by propounding the temporal advantages which
attend sin; or else 3. by speaking slightly of the evil of it; or lastly, by
persuading them that there is no danger in it.

1. Men entice others to sin by propounding to them the pleasures that are to
be found in a loose and wicked life. They tell them that the laws of Religion
are fitted only for the dull and Phlegmatic, unactive and Hypocondriack, who
grudge at others enjoying those delights which themselves are not capable of;
that Nature designed we should freely use whatever she has provided for our
entertainment here, and was not so unkind as perpetually to torment us with the
sight and presence of such things as we are not permitted to taste nor touch;
that heaven indeed is the Lord's and he dwells there, and does what pleases
him best, but that the earth by his grant and permission is ours, and who shall
interrupt or disturb us? that God has left this lower World to us to take our
pastime therein, and that that man makes the best use of it, who improves it
most to serve his own pleasures; that to live honestly, scrupulously and
virtuously is to be buried whilst we are alive; and that to order all our
actions according to stinted rules and precepts, belongs only to slaves and
those who are of a servile disposition; but what greater pleasure, say they,
than to be ungovernable and uncontrollable, to satisfy every appetite with its
proper object, to deny our selves nothing that our lusts or passions crave, in
every thing to gratify our own humor and fancy, and to trouble our heads with
nothing, unless it be to find out new delights and surprising extravagancies?

But what are all these now other than the vain conceits of mad Men, who during
their phrenzy do many times think themselves the wisest, greatest and richest
Men in the World, and take as much delight in such idle dreams as others do in
real enjoyments? but this pleasure lasts no longer than till they recover the
use of their understandings, and therefore in this case we are not to give
credit to what wicked Men say, nor judge of the pleasure and content of their
lives by what outwardly appears. Even in laughter the heart is sorrowful,
says Solomon; and it is very possible for one who seems to spend all his days
in mirth and jollity yet really to be in a very uneasy condition all the
while; which appears from this, that such as are sensual and licentious find it
best to keep themselves in a continual hurry and heat, and as soon as they are
tired with one sin, presently to betake themselves to some other, for fear they
should unhappily light upon a Bible or a sober thought: for this reason it is
that they hate nothing so much as to be alone, and be forced to converse with
themselves, and that if they chance to fall into any affliction or calamity
they are the most dejected and disconsolate persons in the World; all these are
certain signs that they are haunted with dreadful and ghastly apprehensions
and jealousies, which will ever and anon be crouding in, and sometimes even
when they are taking their fill of pleasures.

But on the other side, Religion denies us no pleasures which are manly and
suitable to our natures, and forbids us only such excesses as in themselves
are both tedious and nauseous; and lays the foundation of that solid peace
and joy, which no external thing whatever is able to shake or discompose.

In short, if to be carried away with every vanity and whimsie, to be swayed by
every unreasonable humor and lust, to be a slave to every Man's frolic and
beck; to try the utmost strength of our bodies, to run a course of all
diseases, to undergo all reproach and infamy, to spend our estates and time in
pursuit of short life, rotten bones, and wretched poverty; if this be pleasure,
then for certain there is enough of it to be found in a dissolute and vicious
life.

2. With such as are not altogether so foolhardy, and but a little better
husbands of their health and estates, this kind of Philosophy will not take at
all, but if you would get them into a good opinion of wickedness, it must be by
propounding to them some temporal advantage. Virtue or vice is very indifferent
to such, but what they can save or get most by, is always the best. Profit and
gain do strangely mollify sin, and take away much from the odiousness and
ugliness of it; it shall be the most just and equitable thing in the World, if
it can help us to raise a new family or recover one that is decayed; if it may
serve to maintain our selves or relations, if by it we may oblige and obtain
the favor of any great men, who will be so condescending as to admit us into a
society with them, though it be only in their vices: for men are in the worst
instances ready to please and humor those they hope to get something from, or
upon whom they depend.

But to this I shall reply nothing, but only ask our Savior's question, What
shall it profit a man to gain the whole world and lose his own soul, or what
shall a man give in exchange for his soul? If we sell our integrity and hopes
of future happiness only to get a little of this world, we make a foolish
bargain. And I hope I need say no more in this place, since those only who are
made of the basest and coursest metal, and are of poor and degenerous spirits,
are capable of being ensnared by this temptation.

3. Another way men have of enticing others to sin is by assuring them, that
there is no such great evil in it as is commonly believed; That when once we
have conquered our fear of sinning, we have seen the worst of it; that the evil
of sin lies most in a little scandal, that is cast upon it by some doting
Philosophers, or melancholy Enthusiasts, or some covetous Usurers, who will not
be at the expense of it, or by those who receive tithes to declaim against it;
that the nature of good and evil has been always matter of dispute, and there
is hardly any vice but what has been not only approved but rewarded by some
whole Nation or other; that at the best Religion is only the politic
contrivance of some wise Governors who knew how to manage and make advantage
of the simplicity and credulity of ignorant people: but that all things are in
their own natures indifferent.

Now is it not strange that men should ever be persuaded, that it is as good to
kill as to obey ones Parents? that we deserve as much commendation when we
repay kindnesses with ill will and injuries, as when we relieve those that are
in necessity? that cruelty, treachery and malice are as amiable in themselves,
and as innocent dispositions, as mercifulness, fidelity and good nature? and
why may we not as well believe that wisdom is to be found only in Bedlam, and
that all that has been ever spoken or done by men, hitherto counted in their
wits, has been indeed only the effect of madness and distempered brains?
though some politic men, for notable ends, have cunningly made common people
for this great while to imagine quite otherwise. But I forbear.

4. And Lastly; That which prevails most powerfully is to persuade men that
there is no great danger in sin. Some sins may indeed prove inconvenient, but
the pleasure recompenseth that; some may be of ill report, but the profit will
pay off that score; and if sin should chance to have any evil in it, what is
that to us when we are dead? the only fear is of an after-reckoning. And
therefore do they who would fain sin without control, especially labor that
they may free themselves and others from all suspicions of a future state;
raking up every trifling objection that has been of old used by any of the
Atheistical Philosophers, and has been a thousand times answered; and
inventing new ones as far as their wit serves them. But if after all there
still remain any doubts concerning another life, then they plead how little we
know or understand of it, or how absurd it is to think that a man shall be for
ever punished for what he did by mistake or surprise, or strength of passion or
height of blood, or good nature or civility, or to save his life, or to
maintain his reputation, family, or the like.

But will nothing convince men of the certainty of future punishments but their
feeling of them? or do they think that God has as little regard for those Laws
which he has made, and by which he will govern and judge the world, as wicked
men themselves have? but should we grant all that can be asked in this case,
and suppose it very doubtful whether our souls are immortal, (and surely no
man will pretend to prove it impossible that they should be so) nay should we
suppose it great odds that there is not a future state; yet that man does
nevertheless most notoriously betray his want of prudence and discretion, who
will not contradict his own brutish inclinations, and deny himself some short
pleasures, and choose that course of life which our reason no less than our
Religion does recommend to us, rather than run the least hazard (though it were
of an hundred to one) of being for ever miserable. And thus much concerning
being enticed to wicked practices.

And now I might discourse at large of another sort of enticing, which is to
erroneous and pernicious doctrines, and of such as go about to inveigle and
corrupt our judgments, and debauch our understandings by seducing us to the
belief of opinions no less wicked than false; But I shall at present only
crave leave briefly to show

1. What danger men are in of being seduced by such temptations.

2. What is our best armor and security against them.

1. What danger we are in of being enticed from that profession and belief
which is publicly taught and owned amongst us: which danger arises partly from
the earnestness, importunity, or the arts that subtle men use to bring us off;
but most especially from the doctrines themselves which they would learn us,
and instill into us, which are such as are most pleasing and grateful to one
who delights in his sins; such as cannot but be most acceptable to him, as
giving him hopes of heaven, though he deny himself very little for it; such as
lay the grounds and foundations of sinning cheerfully without any fear or
remorse; and therefore as long as the greatest part of the world love vice and
ease, will succeed and be greedily entertained.

It is no hard matter to persuade men to believe, what they beforehand wish
were true; and there needs no great store of proof or arguments to recommend
those opinions to the sensual and profane, which give them leave to fulfill
their lusts without any regret of conscience or dread of punishment. Is it not
a comfortable doctrine, and will it not be readily embraced by every resolved
sinner, that after a long wicked life, at the last gasp a bare sorrow for sin
out of fear of hell, with the Priest's absolution, shall at least free him from
eternal pains, and take away the guilt of his sins, so that he need not be
afraid of any thing besides a sudden death, which happens but seldom? When he
is at any time disturbed with the sense of his dangerous condition, when the
forced remembrance of his sins does gall and fret his mind, and fill him with
fears and melancholy thoughts, what a relief must it needs be to him, to be
assured that it is but going to a Priest, and confessing his sins, and
undergoing some small penances, and he is safe? for then he may go on in his
full carriere with the greatest security imaginable, then he may sin with
judgment, and commit all manner of wickedness with discretion.

He who has no mind to part with his lusts is easily persuaded that they are
invincible; nor is it very difficult to make him, who is loath to take any pains
or be at any trouble for keeping of Christ's commands, to believe that they are
impossible to be kept, and that our Savior fulfilled even his own law in our
stead, and that we have nothing to do but to believe that he has done all and
be thankful.

In a word, where the obscurity of Scripture, or the difficulty of the matter,
or the weakness of our understandings have caused one to mistake; multitudes
have been drawn aside to the most pernicious errors by their lusts and secular
interests, and carnal designs, and love to gain, sloth or sensuality, and by
this chiefly are the several dissenting parties amongst us maintained, and do
increase their numbers, to wit, by levelling the doctrine of Christianity to
men's corrupt inclinations and passions, whilst we of the Church of England dare
not be so false either to our own trust or the souls of men, as to give them
hopes of everlasting bliss on any other condition but that of living godlily,
righteously and soberly in this present world; from all which follows,

2. That our security against such temptations does not consist in much reading
and great learning, in our skill in controversies, or cunning in managing a
dispute, or ability of discerning between good argument and sophistry, so much
as in an honest mind and humble heart, an unfeigned desire of knowing, and
sincere endeavor of doing the will of God. Him who is thus minded, God by his
infinite goodness is engaged not to suffer to fall into any error of
mischievous effect; and as for other mistakes wherein a good life is not
concerned, God is ready to overlook and pardon what is the result only of the
imperfection of our present state, besides which, honesty of mind, or love to
virtue, is in it self and its own nature our best preservative against being
infected with any bad opinions.

I am far from taking upon me to judge or condemn those that were born and bred
up, and have lived well under any forms of Religion different from what is
established amongst us (for it is very possible for men to hold opinions very
wicked, and yet not perceiving nor acknowledging the just consequences of them
to live very good lives) yet this is true, that one that designs nothing so
much as pleasing God and saving his soul, and is willing to take any pains for
it, and has no by-ends to serve, will not desire to be excused from the
mortification of his lusts, subduing his appetites, crucifying his flesh, and
from the severities of an holy life, by substituting in the room of them
pilgrimages, vain oblations, bodily austerities, or such formal devotions as
very bad men may perform and be very bad still. Those principles which most
advance the honor of God by laying the strictest obligations on men to all
manner of goodness he will hearken to and readily believe; but if they serve
the ends of avarice or ambition, if they are apt to make men dissolute or
licentious, lazy or presumptuous; this alone to such an one will be reason
sufficient utterly to reject them, let them be propounded to him with never so
much advantage or subtilty.

I shall conclude all with this, that did I know any constituted Church in the
world, that did teach a Religion more holy and useful, that delivered
doctrines in themselves more reasonable, or in their consequences tending more
directly to the peace of Societies and the good of every particular person, to
the promoting of piety and true morality, and the discountenancing of sin and
vice; that did give more forcible arguments for the one and against the other;
that did lay greater stress upon a pure mind and a blameless life, and less
upon voluntary strictnesses and indifferent rites and ceremonies than we do, I
would very soon be of that Church, and even entice all I could to it: but till
such an one can be found, nay so long as it is manifest that all the zealous
opposers of the Church of England do hold opinions either destructive of or in
their plain tendencies weakening the force of all the precepts, promises and
threatenings contained in the Gospel, and such as if they do not encourage men
to, yet at least furnish them with pleas and excuses for their wickedness; I am
sure it is our interest no less than our duty, if we sincerely love God and our
souls, and have any real desire of our own or others welfare, faithfully to
adhere to that Church we have the happiness to be members of, and vigorously to
maintain and defend it.

A SERMON Preached at WHITE HALL. The Fourth Sermon.
ROMANS XII. 16. -- Be not wise in your own conceits.


THERE is hardly any vice that men do so readily condemn in others, and yet so
easily overlook and excuse in themselves, as this of self-conceit, or a fond
opinion of their own great wisdom and understanding. None of us can endure
that another should assume to himself continually to prescribe to us, or usurp
so far upon us, as to be always imposing on us his own private customs, humors
or manners, as if we had no wit or judgment of our own whereby to govern and
order our own affairs; and yet it is to be feared, most of us, who call this
intolerable pride in another, are so deeply in love with our selves and our own
ways, that we cannot forbear to censure and despise, to charge with folly and
ignorance, all that do not believe and practice just as we our selves do: Every
one thus in his own vain imagination presuming himself wise and good enough to
set a pattern and give law to all round about him.

It is the observation of the great French Philosopher, That the most equal
distribution God has made of any thing in this world is of judgment and
understanding, because every man is content with his own, and thinks he has
enough: and though as to the outward gifts of nature or fortune he be willing
to yield to others, yet he doubts not but he himself is as far removed from a
fool, has as large a share of reason and discretion, is as able to manage
himself and his own business as any other whatever. Whence it is that all men
are apt so confidently to lean unto, and rely upon their own understandings, so
peremptorily to trust to and follow their own judgments, so resolutely and
inflexibly to adhere to their first choices and determinations, scorning and
taking it in great snuff and dudgeon, to be taught, advised, checked or
controlled by any.

Now this is to be wise in our own conceits, against which the Apostle here in
my Text cautions us; when any man has a vast and undue opinion of his own
powers and faculties, and thinks of himself above what is meet, when he will
hearken to none other, nor believe any one but just himself; when he knows all
things, does all things, is all things to himself, and within himself alone,
not needing (at least in his own big thoughts) any ones help, counsel or
assistence; In short, when he rates and values himself above his true worth,
and despises others, and judges meanly of his Betters, then a man may be said
to be wise in his own conceit. Which self-conceit undoubtedly lies at the
bottom, and is the original cause of all Atheism and skeptical disputes against
Providence and Religion, of all undutifull carriage toward governors and
superiors, and of all those uncharitable separations and unchristian divisions
that are so rife amongst us, and do so sadly threaten the ruin both of our
Church and State.

Whereas on the other side, the great foundation of all true Religion and civil
order, the only effectual means of procuring and advancing peace, real wisdom
and truth amongst men, is an humble and lowly esteem of our selves, a modest
diffidence of our own apprehensions, an hearty and serious acknowledgment of
our own defects, and a willingness to be instructed, directed, ruled and
governed by others who are better and wiser than our selves.

I shall at this time propound to you some plain instances, wherein this sort
of pride or self-conceit does show it self, particularly in matters of
Religion, together with the folly and mischiefs of it.

I. This self-conceit shows it self in being confident and positive about
things which we do not understand, and in intermedling with affairs which do
not belong to us.

II. In being obstinate and pertinacious in some singular fancies and opinions,
though upon never so slight grounds at first believed and entertained.

III. In affecting to impose our own humors and conceits upon others, and in
despising and condemning all that are not in every thing just of our own mind
and persuasion.

I. This self-conceit appears in being confident and positive about things
which we do not understand, and in intermedling with affairs which do not
belong to us. When we reject every thing as false which we cannot presently
comprehend, and damn every thing, of which we cannot easily give a satisfactory
account; when we speak evil of those things which we know not, as St. Jude says
of some in his days; when nothing shall escape us which we do not straight
arraign and bring to the bar, nor any thing pass with us for wise, good or
decent, but what is exactly fitted to our own palate, and suited to our raw and
unwary notions of things: when we measure and judge of the nature of God, the
counsels of heaven, the methods of Providence, the constitutions of our
governors, the doctrines of our approved teachers, the reasonableness of
public laws, the designs and undertakings of other men, truth and falsehood,
good and evil only according to the agreement or disagreement of things with
our private fancies, childish prejudices and rash judgments. But more
particularly.

1. Hence it is that men are apt to quarrel with God and Religion, and
endeavor either to dispute or rally them out of the world. Into this one
principle, I think, may be resolved the most considerable, (if any such there
be) nay almost all the objections that ever were framed against the existence
of a God, and the truth and certainty of Religion, viz. that there are many
things commonly taught and believed, which some pert young sinners cannot by
any means understand, and therefore all of it must presently be false.

They cannot possibly frame a notion of a spirit or immaterial substance. Every
thing they think of is clothed with corporeal accidents; they cannot conceive
an infinite Being, nor solve all the difficulties about eternity, omnipresence,
omniscience, and the like; and therefore the whole Idea of an invisible power,
as one of the most conceited men in our Nation says, is feigned only by the
mind, or imagined from tales publicly allowed of. The Resurrection seems a
very unlikely and improbable story. How can these things be? It is past their
finding out why God did not send Christ sooner into the world, if there be no
salvation to be had without him. It seems to them very absurd and unworthy
that the Son of God should appear here in so mean a condition, and dye so
shameful a death. They understand not the reason of some of God's Laws, and
think they themselves could make better. They conclude the parts of this
visible world might have been much more conveniently ordered and contrived than
now they appear to be, if all were managed and conducted by an infinite power
and wisdom: and thus rather than in any case doubt or suspect their own want
of understanding, they turn Atheists or Scepticks, and renounce the most
certain and plainest truths. God shall not be at all, unless he please to be
and do just as his creatures would have him. These now are the persons that
conceit themselves the only men of parts and deep reach, who will not be born
down by a popular faith, who search and dive into the very bottom of things,
and have alone happily smelt out that grand cheat and juggle with which the
rest of mankind has been so long abused.

I know not one objection or doubt against the being of a Deity and Providence
but what is thus raised only by pride, and an arrogant opinion of our own
understanding, as if nothing could be either true or reasonable, but what is
perfectly within our own ken and cognizance. If such conceited and haughty
persons cannot apprehend the usefulness of any part of the creation; if any
thing happens in the world that seems to them confused and disordered, if their
wisedoms cannot discern the end, benefit and design of every thing that falls
out, presently they either charge God with folly and ill contrivance, or banish
him out of the world, and impute all to blind fortune or inexorable destiny.
Whereas indeed it is only their own ignorance they ought to accuse, and others
may perchance comprehend what they cavil at; nay they themselves may possibly
arrive to the complete knowledge of that hereafter, which now seems so
mysterious to them.

Let us but suppose God infinitely wiser than we poor mortals are or can be,
and that he may do and order many things for good and great reasons, which yet
we who can see but a little way, and consider but of a few things at once, are
not able as yet to grasp or find out: Let us, I say, but suppose our
understandings in this state imperfect and limited, and capable of far greater
improvement in another, and all these scruples of the Atheist presently vanish
into nothing. Thus you may observe with my Lord Bacon that no great proficients
in Philosophy who have really improved their minds and reasons, have ever been
Atheists; but such only as have had a little smattering of it, and being puffed
up with a small pittance of knowledge, became presently ready to conclude they
understood all things; and being wise in their own conceits, did therefore huff
against every thing they were not able to render a reason of. And if you
consult the experience of these days you will find those only to swagger and
hector against Religion who have a lofty opinion of their own learning and
parts, begot and maintained by a slight and superficial skill in Philosophy, by
a little dabling in the Mathematics and Mechanics, and a small share of wit
and drollery, enough to render themselves the scorn and compassion of all truly
wise and good men; but who art thou, O vain man, that thus exaltest thy self
against God, and set up thy puisne wit and understanding in competition
with his eternal reason?

It Is strange that when men find themselves at a loss, and utterly to seek
about the nature of things visible and sensible, about the ordinary appearances
of this world; when it is easy for a man but of little parts to raise such a
mist about the plainest truths, and invent such difficulties and objections as
shall puzzle the sagest Philosophers handsomely to solve and unriddle; when men
do and must believe several things, the causes of which they can only guess
at, nor can ever be certain they are in the right; when a Loadstone's drawing
of iron, the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, the striking fire out of a Flint,
shall find men's wits employment enough, nor shall they ever be able perfectly
to satisfy themselves or others about them; when they are forced in such things
as they see daily before their eyes to confess their ignorance, and the
uncertainty of all their reasonings: that yet, I say, when they come to
discourse of such things as are plainly above their reach and capacity, being
invisible and infinite, they will believe nothing but what they can fully
comprehend, and count all that absurd which they cannot satisfactorily explain.
This is the first particular instance of that sort of self-conceit which
consists in meddling with things we do not understand, nor do belong to us.

2. Then also we meddle with things we do not understand, and which do not
belong to us, when we take upon our selves to give peremptory accounts of God's
providential dealings with the sons of men, when without control we pass our
rash verdicts upon God's Actions, and sit in judgment upon the various
occurrences of this world, accusing and arraigning God of arbitrary tyrannical
government, if every thing happen not according to our minds, as we had
beforehand wished or projected; if those we love much thrive not so well, or if
our enemies prosper more, and grow greater in this world than we would have
them; when we offer to prescribe to Providence, and teach God how he should
rule the world, and dispose of his favors. When we dare clamor and mutiny at
God's proceedings, imagining that he has not done well, or that we our selves
could have done better; that if the Government of mankind were but committed to
our care, (as the Chariot of the Sun is said once to have been to Phaethon) we
could order and determine things more wisely and equally, and to better
advantage.

This is a most notorious piece of arrogance thus saucily to affix senses and
meanings on God's providence where he has given us no rule to judge by; and to
interpret them according as our own interest, prejudice, passion, or some other
vice does sway us; to bring arguments for any way or sect from temporal
successes, or to condemn any who differ from us by reason of some calamities or
unfortunate accidents that may have befallen them. This shows us mightily
conceited of our selves and our own judgments, when we think God so fond of our
private and singular sentiments as that all his Providence must needs serve
only to vindicate and countenance our side, and disparage those that are
contrary to us. This is busily to pry into God's secrets, and it is the
greatest affront we can put upon him, thus unwarrantably to pronounce
concerning his Actions, as if we were of his Cabinet-council, and had
particular revelations of all the designs he carries on in the world. This is
to exercise our selves in great matters, and such as are too high for us: for
what man is he that can know the counsel of God? or who can think what the will
of the Lord is? for the thoughts of mortal men are miserable, and our devices
are but uncertain. And hardly do we guess aright at things that are upon earth,
and with labor do we find the things that are before us; but the things that
are in heaven who has searched out? and God's counsel who has known?

3. Another instance of this sort of self-conceit may be in private and
illiterate persons pretending to expound the most difficult and obscure places
of Scripture, and to unfold and determine the most nice and curious questions
in Theology. There is enough in holy Scripture plain and easy to employ the
thoughts and lives of private Christians, and yet it is too true that these
parts of it, though they alone contain our necessary duty, are quite
overlooked, at least not near so much studied or regarded, as those that are
most mysterious and dark: and thus even amongst common people you will find not
a few that are more positive and dogmatical in their interpretations of
Prophecies, mystical Speeches, and the Book of Revelations, than any sober
Divine that has made the Bible his study for many years. Whether this arises
from the increase or decay of knowledge amongst us, I shall not stand now to
enquire, but so it is, that many a zealous Mechanic amongst us sets up for a
judge of Orthodoxy; and having learnt a great deal of Scripture by rote and a
few terms of art, shall dictate as magisterially concerning the difficultest
points in Divinity, as if he had sat all his life long in the infallible
Chair. And indeed I am apt to think this is peculiar to us in England, at least
that we are more notorious for it than those who live in other Countries, and
that not only now in our days, but that we have been so in former times: for I
find it amongst the observations made by an Italian in Queen Elizabeth's days,
of glorious memory, that the common people of England were wiser, or at least
thought themselves so, than the wisest of other Nations: for that here the very
women and shopkeepers were able to judge of predestination, free will,
perseverance, and to demonstrate the divine right of a Layelder, and were
better able to raise and answer perplexed cases of conscience, than the most
learned Colleges in other parts of Europe; and he concludes with this serious
remark, that those persons who were most busy in disputations and
controversies, and finding out the mistakes of their governors and teachers
had always the least of humility, mortification or the power of godliness. Of
all the several kinds of fops that are, there is none more impertinent,
troublesome and justly ridiculous, than a gifted brother full of his visions
and illuminations, who can split an hair, and smell out an heresy I know not
how far off, who thinking that he knows all things knows nothing yet as he
ought to know. It is good advice therefore of the wise son of Sirach, Be not
curious in unnecessary matters, for more things are showed unto thee than men
understand.

4. This sort of self-conceit which consists in meddling with things we do not
understand, or do not belong to us, appears in nothing more than in opposing
our own prudence and discretion to the constitutions of our governors, and the
determinations of our superiors in matters relating to public peace and
order; and a great many such there are who are never satisfied unless every
thing be decreed and appointed just as they themselves think best and most fit.
Hence they spend most of their time and discourse in canvassing and descanting
upon the actions of their superiors, of which they are yet most incompetent
judges; in taxing and inveighing against their proceeding, though never so far
out of their sphere and capacity; in finding fault with their conduct and
picking quarrels with their orders and commands. What an happy world would
there soon be, thinks such a grave politician, if all things were settled
according to that model, which he has framed in his own conceit? how well
would the State be secured, how quietly would the Church be governed, how
decently would Divine Service be performed, how would all interests and parties
be pleased, how soon would all fears and jealousies vanish if he had but the
management of affairs, or his counsel might be heard? how soon would there be a
through reformation of all that is amiss, would the King but please to think him
worthy of such a place of power and authority? In short, let things be well or
ill administered, still, if his hand be not in it, he finds matter of dislike
and complaint; or if it do chance that he has nothing at all to object, yet he
will give you a grave shrug or nodd, and shake his empty head, as if all were
not well, and he knew some great matter which he durst not utter. Alas! what an
unhappy thing is it that such a prodigious wise man should be so little taken
notice of or regarded? Thus every one almost conceited of his own politics
invades the office of a Counselor of State, and acts a Prince or Bishop,
and positively determines what laws are fit to be repealed, what new ones to
be made; what ceremonies in God's worship ought to be retained, what to be
abrogated: and thus we confound and disturb that order and subordination which
God has placed in the world, and render the Magistrate's office altogether
useless, and as it were dethrone and depose those whom God has set over us. It
is the office of our governors to take care of the public peace and safety,
and to make such laws as shall seem to them most conducing thereto, which we
are bound to submit to, whether we judge them expedient or not; for if no laws
or constitutions of our governors were to take place but only such as every
one should approve of, the authority of the Magistrate would signify nothing,
but every man would be his own lord and master, which would necessarily
introduce the greatest disorder and confusion.

5. And lastly. Hence it is men are so busy and pragmatical in intermedling
and interposing in the concerns and private affairs of their neighbors, or any
others they have the least knowledge of, putting their sickle into every man's
corn, peeping into every man's house, listening at every ones window, to
furnish themselves with matter for censure and observation, and by thus
thrusting themselves into every man's business, they usurp undue authority,
they assume without just title superiority and jurisdiction over others,
infringe their liberty, and implicitly charge them with weakness and incapacity
to dispatch their own affairs without their direction. The conceited man will
not allow to others their share of discretion, but monopolizes and engrosses
all wisdom to himself, and if any thing happens well with others, it was he to
be sure that gave the first hint and advice; but if things go otherwise than
well, why, the fool would not be governed, he may even thank himself for it, he
would not hearken to good counsel. Such an one is in at all things, is of all
trades and professions, understands all arts and sciences, is fit to regulate
all disorders, make up all differences, carry on all intricate designs, able to
conquer all difficulties and remove mountains; he is ready to undertake any
thing, though never so much above his observation and experience; to him all
ought to repair for satisfaction and direction; he speaks nothing but oracles,
and to his decisions all ought to submit, and perfectly to acquiesce in his
judgment. But this shall suffice for this first sort of self-conceit, which
consists in meddling with things we do not understand, or do not belong to us.

II. This conceit of our own wisdom is shown in being obstinate and
pertinacious in some singular fancies and opinions, though upon never such
slight grounds at first believed and entertained. There is none so apt to run
into gross mistakes and absurdities, nor yet so hard to be made sensible of
them, as one that overvalues his own parts and wisdom; for he has not
patience enough to consider and examine any thing justly and thoroughly, he
counts it a disparagement in any case to suspend and enquire, he understands
all things at first sight, and by instinct; and thus if he judges rightly, he
has good fortune, but if not, if he be in error, it is impossible ever to
convince or reclaim him; for he is impatient of all opposition, disdains all
counsel, cannot brook the least contradiction, nor endure to be gainsayed; he
scorns all instruction or rebuke, is galled to the quick, and takes it for an
insufferable affront if you yield not to him in every thing he says. It is as
safe to give a man of honor the lie, as to dispute what such a dictatour
affirms, you must receive all his grave and wise aphorisms with a deep silence
and profound reverence, or else you lose his favor and friendship for ever.
The proud man will teach all, learn of none, will not suffer any one besides
himself to have or use any understanding in his company, or to be able to do
or say any thing well; what hopes then of doing him any good, who swelled with
an overweening esteem of his own abilities, never so much as once dreams that
it is possible he may be deceived? It is the saying of Solomon, Prove. 26.12.
See thou a man wise in his own conceit, there is more hope of a fool than of
him.

I persuade you not to deny or doubt of any truth which indeed you know, nor to
be uncertain and wavering in your belief of any thing which by good argument
and reason is made plain and evident unto you, but only that you would not be
too passionately confident of what you do believe, and that you would not be
stiff and dogmatical about such things as good and wise men have in all ages
differed about. All I advise is, that we should all of us thoroughly consider
our own ignorance, and the scantiness of our faculties, and how easy it is for
us to mistake, and be very ready to distrust our selves, and our own
apprehensions; that we should bear a due regard and deference to the judgments
of other men, and quietly hear and carefully attend to what is said against any
thing we do believe, as well as to those who are of our own mind; that we
should be willing to be taught (and untaught too what for a long time we have
held as certain) by those who are better and have more understanding than our
selves, especially by those whom God has set over us, for that very end: that
we should weigh things without partiality or passion, and enquire out truth
with the same indifference a Traveller does his road, being concerned only to
find out the right way; and that we should be ready at any time to change our
opinion where we see good reason for it, and account it no shame to go over to
the better side; for it is a fairer and nobler victory to vanquish an old
inveterate prejudice or mistake, than in wrangling dispute to silence the most
subtle adversary. And in disputable things, which are capable of opposition
and reason on both sides, for a man to confess his doubt, is a great testimony
of a good judgment, and an excellent disposition, and a preparative to sound
wisdom; whereas to talk confidently and positively about such things, has
been always given as the sign of a fool and illiterate person, of a fiery and
clamorous bigot, of an ill-manner'd and conceited zealot.

What I have said of opinions may easily be applied to vices, where the case is
the same, for it is this self-conceit which hardens a man in all his sins, and
makes him deaf to all good instructions, whilst he thinks so well of himself,
that even his very defects he accounts beauties, and can excuse, if not
commend, his own deformities.

III. Lastly, This conceit of our own wisdom appears in affecting to impose
our own humors and apprehensions upon others, and in despising and condemning
all that are not in every thing just of our mind and persuasion.

I have heard not a few complain of the impositions that our Laws
Ecclesiastical do lay upon their tender consciences; but yet give me leave to
say I never met with any man that made this complaint, but who, notwithstanding
his dislike of the present constitution (and there never was nor ever will be
one that all men shall like) I soon found would be well pleased if his own way
were settled instead of it, and laws made to oblige all others to the practice
and observance of what he in his own wisdom thinks best and fittest. And
though he does not approve of what the Magistrate has appointed or commanded,
yet he would have the Magistrate and every one else approve of that, and that
only which he in his own conceit fancies and commends.

And thus every one almost sets up for himself, and would have a Church of his
own framing, a Liturgy of his own inventing, and a Government of his own
devising: and it is impossible for us to be satisfied as long as we will submit
to no Tribunal, nor ever be pleased unless every one be forced to believe and
practice just as we our selves would have them.

That all men should be of the same mind, and agree in the same conceptions and
apprehensions of things is impossible, and no more to be expected in this life,
than that all men's faces and complexions should be alike. As long as there are
some places of Scripture hard to be understood, several things pertaining to
Religion which are not fundamental, and therefore not plainly determined, but
remain doubtful; as long as men have different educations, tempers,
constitutions of body, inclinations of mind, and several interests to serve, as
long as there are different degrees of knowledge and understanding in men; in a
word, as long as ignorance and confidence continue in the world, so long there
will be disputes and controversies about matters of Religion, even amongst
those who yet agree in the same faith and profession. Nor has our Christianity
provided any infallible way or means of silencing or putting an end to such
differences about less matters and speculative points.

We have indeed plainly propounded to us whatever is necessary for us to know
or practice in order to salvation; and for the understanding of this, nothing
else is requisite but an honest mind and sincere desire of learning. As for
other things which are not of so great moment, and are more obscure, it is
sufficient that in all cases we be modest and humble, teachable and governable,
that we preserve peace, order and charity, and I doubt not but God will pardon
the errors of those who are upright and well-minded. What horrible presumption
therefore is it in us to judge, despise, condemn our brethren, for those
mistakes (if they be so) which God will overlook and pass by? What devilish
pride is this (I cannot speak too earnestly in the case) to endeavor like the
old Tyrant, to stretch or cramp up every man to the proportion of my bed? to
presume that God will judge and count with men just by the rate and measure of
my understanding, and damn every one that has either more or less wit than I
have, for either of these may be the occasion of his differing from me. It is
the greatest oppression and usurpation imaginable to assault or try to overcome
the reason of another by any thing else but reason: and this is the
uncharitable spirit that so eminently discovers it self in the Roman Church,
which pretending to infallibility and an unerring authority over Christians,
condemns and persecutes all who will not submit to her determinations, and
believe as she does. And with the same spirit many, that hate Popery enough,
are too much leavened; I mean those who appropriate the glorious names, of the
godly, people of God, orthodox Christians, only to their own paltry Sect or
Conventicle, and reprobate all that have not arrived to the same skill in their
Dutch Divinity with themselves.

Many divisions and subdivisions there are now amongst us, and God only knows
when they will be at an end; but if you would know from whence they arise, it
is easy to tell you in the words of Solomon, only of pride comes contention;
or of St. James, Whence come wars and fightings among you? come they not hence,
even from your lusts?

Self-conceit and self-love, whatever is pretended, is the great and principal
root of all our religious quarrels and debates, whilst men too highly value
their own private judgments in things doubtful and indifferent, think meanly
of the determinations of their superiors, and care not though they sacrifice
peace and charity to the promoting of any trifling opinion they happen to be
fond of.

I find it quoted as one of the Reverend Hooker's ordinary sayings, that the
Scriptures were not writ to beget disputations and pride, and scruples and
opposition to government, but charity, humility, moderation, obedience to
authority, and peace to mankind; of which virtues (as he always added) no man
ever repented himself at his deathbed. And if ever unity and Christian
concord, and peace, and brotherly love be again recovered, and prevail again
amongst us, it must be by these means and principles.

It is a vain thing to think to bring all men to one mind, but yet one would
hope it not impossible to persuade Christians to a mean opinion of themselves,
that in lowliness of mind each should esteem others before himself, to a
dutiful subjection to their betters in things under their charge and ordering,
and to a mutual forbearance and charity where they cannot presently agree, and
this would do every whit as well as if we were all of one mind.

Several expedients have been propounded for the uniting us, and reconciling
our differences; some are for toleration, others for comprehension, others for
the strict execution of penal laws, but alas! neither these nor any other are
likely to have any effect upon us till we learn humility and modesty, till
pride and self-conceit, and all imperious affectation of imposing our own
singularities upon others be rooted out of the world, till we learn to submit
to our betters, and in indifferent things not to oppose our private opinions to
the public determinations of the Church. This one virtue of humility would go
farther toward the putting an end to all our terms of distinction and
unchristian Separations, than all the Writings or Disputings, all the Laws and
Proclamations about the Church have hitherto done. Whatever is the cause of the
error, pride is always the cause of the quarrel that makes the breach and
forms the party.

Let but all amongst us agree together in common to mortify our pride and
arrogance, and conceited esteem of our selves, and base contempt of others, and
the simple truth will prevail in the world, or at least there will be no more
of these unchristian Separations and Schisms, but peace and unity will be
established and secured amongst us.

To sum up all I have said. Be not wise in your own conceits. Affect not things
above your skill and reach. Meddle not with what is beyond your capacity, or
out of your sphere; small abilities and great confidence ordinarily make the
most inconsiderable and ridiculous creature in nature.

Think it no diminution in some things to confess your ignorance, in all
weighty business to ask for counsel and advice: trust not too much to your own
judgments and discretions.

Think that your Governors and Teachers may be wiser, and know better what is
for the public good, and what is fit and decent than you can possibly do. Give
other men leave to understand as well as you, and make not your selves the
standard of wisdom, nor take upon your selves to bear down all mankind, or to
command in all companies, nor expect that every one should yield to your
humors, and deny their own inclinations that they may gratify yours.

Do not pertinaciously pursue any thing wherein you are singular, examine all
things, even those things you may have long believed to be true, with
diffidence of your selves, and suspicion of your own judgments: hear calmly,
debate soberly and rationally, and allow other men their turn to speak, and
attend to what is said against you with as eager a desire of learning, as you
do to what is discoursed on your own behalf.

Think how often formerly you have been deceived, and been forced to retract
your error; and that when you grow older, and get greater experience, you may
chance also again in many things to change your mind. Be not apt to think
meanly of, or severely censure, or superciliously disdain those that differ
from you. Woe unto them, says the Prophet, that are wise in their own eyes,
and prudent in their own sight. There is nothing more odious and distasteful to
God or men, than the imperious domineering and insulting spirit and temper of
the self-conceited; nor yet any greater sport and diversion to his company than
his grave looks, his formal stiff carriage, his starched set discourse, his
lofty pretenses, his cunning conjectures, his Vtopian projects, his sly and
crafty commendations of himself, his wise remarks upon all things and persons;
and thus the fool empty of all true worth, and full of himself, struts and
swells and admires himself, but is laughed at by every body else.

What on the other side is more graceful and amiable, more lovely and
charming, than humility and modesty, a mean estimation of our selves, and a
willingness to yield and condescend to others? It renders us no less acceptable
to men than to God; it has a singular obligingness and agreeableness in it
self, though we have nothing else to give us advantage.

To conclude all: when we had rather obey than rule, follow than lead; when we
disdain not to learn of the meanest, despise no body besides our selves, do not
think it reasonable to magnify our selves above other men, but set a just value
upon those abilities they are endewed with, in honor preferring others before
our selves: When every one thus minds and contents himself with his own
business and the offices of his particular calling, contains himself in that
rank God Almighty has placed him in, studies to act his own part well and to
the life, and is most busy in mending himself; Then, and not till then, will
the times mend, and we may expect God's blessing upon us. But when every common
Soldier thinks he can order things better than his Captain, and leaves his own
station to direct his Officer, and every Captain neglects his own Company to
teach and instruct the Commander, what can follow but mutiny and disorder, if
not utter confusion? Be not wise in your own conceits.

The Fifth Sermon.
S. MATTHEW. XV. 19. For out of the heart proceed evil thoughts --.


AS it is God alone that knows the thoughts of man, so his commands alone
directly reach to them, and no little part of Religion consists in the due
government of them; whence it is commonly laid down as a rule of interpreting
any of God's laws, that though only the outward action be expressly commanded
or forbidden, yet it must be extended to the inward thoughts, affections and
dispositions of our minds; and he that appears very innocent and unblameable as
to his words and actions, may yet really in the sight of God, and a true
account of things, stand guilty of the greatest wickedness by reason only of
his impure, malicious, or otherwise evil thoughts.

Thoughts indeed are free from the dominion or power of men, we may conceal or
disguise them from all the world, we may deceive the most cunning and subtle,
by speaking and acting contrary to our minds; by pretending what we never mean,
by promising what we never intend; and if we betray not our selves no man can
find us out, and we ought to judge one of another only by what is visible and
notorious: but yet our thoughts are absolutely subject to God's authority, are
under his jurisdiction who is omniscient, who knows them afar off; who sees
not as man sees, nor judges as man judges; for the righteous God tries the
hearts and reins, discerns the most hidden workings and inward motions of our
souls, is conscious to all the wanderings of our fancies and imaginations, is
acquainted with all our private designs and contrivances, and knows our
secret ends and intentions, so that in respect of the divine laws and judgment,
our very thoughts are as capable of being really good or really evil as our
actions.

Now thoughts here I understand in the largest sense, as comprehending all the
internal acts of the mind of man, viz. not only simple conceits,
apprehensions, fancies, bare pondring or musing of any thing in our minds, but
also all the reasonings, consultations, purposes, resolutions, designs,
contrivances, desires and cares of our minds as opposed to our external words
and actions. Whatever is transacted wholly within our selves, of which none are
conscious but God and our own souls, I understand here by thoughts.

But then by evil thoughts I do not mean the bare thinking of any thing that is
evil, or the apprehending or considering what is sinful; for this of it self
does no more pollute or defile our souls, than seeing a loathsome ugly sight
does hurt the eye.

The Prophet indeed tells us that God is of purer eyes than to behold evil, and
that he cannot look on iniquity, that is, not with the least degree of
complacence or approbation; he cannot endure it, nor will he always bear it;
but yet for all this, God sees all the sins that are committed in the world;
for he beholds mischief and spite to requite it with his hand, as David tells
us Psalm. 20.14. and it is necessary when he forbids it, punishes it, or
pardons it, that sin must then be the object of the divine understanding in all
those acts that are conversant about it. The eyes of the Lord are in every
place beholding the evil and the good.

Thus our blessed Savior, though he was free from all sin, yet when he was
tempted by the Devil, no doubt had in his mind the apprehension of that evil he
was instigated to by that wicked spirit; it was all at that instant represented
to his thoughts; but since his will did not in the least comply with or incline
toward it, since the motion was rejected with infinite abhorrence and dislike,
he contracted not the least guilt thereby.

A bad man may often think of what is good, may entertain his mind with
speculations about God, his immortal soul, a future life, the benefits
purchased for us by Jesus Christ; may employ himself much in the study and
meditation of the Scriptures, divine and spiritual things, only to exercise
his wit, to satisfy his curiosity or inquisitive humor, to furnish himself
for talk or dispute, to appear learned, or the like; nay he may take great
pleasure in thinking of such objects, and in using his reason, judgment,
invention or fancy about them, as other men are delighted in the study of any
other sciences or in any acquired knowledge. Yet all these thoughts about good
things are not, in a moral reckoning, good thoughts, nor is the man at all
morally the better for them, if his will do not join with nor is governed by
them. If he be not pleased with, if he does not entertain such thoughts upon
some other accounts, there is no more Religion or virtue in fixing his mind
upon God, than there is in thinking of the Sun, or Moon, or Stars, or any
proposition in the Mathematics, or any other innocent thing or notion; for
thus an atheist may consider much God's nature, and attributes, and providence,
only to pick a quarrel with him, or find out something to object against them.

And on the other side the best men may, and sometimes must, think of those
things that are sinful, how else should they ever repent of them, beg God's
pardon for, or resolve against them? there is no reading in the holy Scriptures
or any other histories, wherein the evil actions and speeches of wicked men are
recorded, there is no living or conversing in the world, where so much evil is
every day committed, without thinking of that which is sinful; but then in
good men the thought of any such thing is always with grief and detestation,
they think of it as of a thing that is most hateful and pernicious to them; as
men think of a plague or mischance, shivering at the very naming of it, and
praying to God to preserve them from it. Thus our thoughts are not to be called
or counted evil only from the object of them.

Nor yet farther by evil thoughts do I understand any sudden thoughts, starting
up in our minds before we are aware, which will not I believe be imputed to us
as sins, though if consented to, they are undoubtedly evil; for nothing will be
reckoned to us as a sin, or punished as such, but what is some way or other
voluntary, and might have been helped or avoided. Now such first motions of sin
(as we commonly call them) which come upon us, nobis non scientibus nec
volentibus, without our knowledge and against our wills, are only the exercise
of our virtues when presently checked and contradicted; but when consented to
and delighted in, they then bring forth sin, and sin when it is finished brings
forth death.

But to be more particular, I shall first of all show you when our thoughts may
be counted voluntary, and we are truly and justly answerable for them.
Secondly, propound to you some of the several kinds of evil thoughts. Thirdly,
lay down some practical rules for the due government of our thoughts.

I. I shall show when we are justly answerable for our thoughts, or when they
may be reckoned voluntary; and here I shall only give these three instances.

1. When evil thoughts are plainly occasioned by any thing that was voluntary
in us, then they are to be accounted voluntary and sinful. What our thoughts
shall be depends very much upon the choice of the outward objects that we
converse most with in the world, and they will be oftenest on those things
which we delight most in, and accustom our selves most unto. So far forth
therefore as our company, discourse, employments, entertainments, books,
recreations, wine, nay I may add diet too do contribute to the stirring up in
our minds, wanton and lustful, covetous or ambitious, angry or revengefull
thoughts, so far are such thoughts voluntary in us, and though they may come
upon us, and arise in our minds without any actual consent or command of our
wills, yet we are justly answerable for them, as having by some wilful act of
our own disposed our selves for such thoughts.

By sensuality, and looseness, and intemperance, and indulging themselves in
bodily pleasures, men may so debase their minds, that hardly any thoughts shall
offer themselves, but what are beastly and lewd, or at best trifling and
useless. Empty, light, vain, foolish, extravagant thoughts, are the natural
product of idleness, sloth, pride and luxury. So that, though what we shall
think of be not at all times in our power, yet it is in our power in a very
great measure to abstain from those things which are apt to incite evil
thoughts, and minister fuel to them; from all incentives or provocations to
inordinate or filthy imaginations. And as far as we our selves give occasion to
the raising up of evil thoughts in our minds, so far are they voluntary and
imputable to us.

2. When evil thoughts proceed from gross supine negligence and carelessness,
then are we accountable for them: when we keep no guard at all over our minds
and fancies, but give them free liberty wildly to rove and ramble; and let what
will come into our thoughts; if they then prove vile and wicked, it is very
much our own fault, and we must answer for them, because we then willingly
prostitute our minds to every lust and vanity. And when we set the doors wide
open without any watch or guard, we must blame our selves if dishonest men
enter in sometimes as well as good friends.

Indeed, notwithstanding all our care to secure our selves, thieves may
perchance break in upon us, or creep in unawares; whilst we sleep or intermit
our watch, (for we cannot be always upon the guard) the enemy may sow some
tares, inject and dart in some evil thoughts. Though we keep never so strict an
eye over our selves, and endeavor to the utmost to keep our souls pure and
chaste, yet sometimes by surprise, through casual non-attendance and
inadvertency, or the cunning and activity of our spiritual enemies, a base
wicked thought may suddenly possess our minds, nay and abide in us for some
time before we take notice of it; but then the mind is mostly passive in this;
it is ravished rather than voluntarily commits lewdness: this is our weakness
and infirmity only, which God is always ready to pity and pardon.

Our souls are active and busy, they cease to be and exist, when they do not
think of something or other. Now if we do not take care to furnish our minds
continually with good and useful matter for our thoughts, they will soon find
out something else to exercise themselves upon; and when we let them run
loosely and at random, and think at all adventures as it happens, we then tempt
the Devil to choose a subject for us, we expose our selves to the wildness and
extravagance of our own vain imaginations; and when we keep no watch, no wonder
though we be overrun with swarms of vagrant thoughts. When therefore our evil
thoughts arise from gross neglect and carelessness, they then may be accounted
voluntary, and charged on us as sins.

3. Though evil thoughts may be involuntary at the first starting of them,
being occasioned by what we could not avoid hearing or seeing, or coming upon
us unawares, or proceeding from the temper and habit of our bodies, or the
accidental impulses and motions of the animal spirits in our brains, which are
the most immediate instruments the soul uses in her operations; though thus the
first rise of evil thoughts may be involuntary, yet if we with pleasure
entertain and cherish them, if our fancies are tickled by them, if they are
delightful and grateful to us, this implies the consent of our wills, and
they then become greatly sinful in us.

Though we did not at first willingly conjure up these evil spirits, yet if we
like their company, and bid them welcome, and provide lodging for them, that
they may continue with us, this comes wellnigh to the same as if we had at
first invited them in. Nay when such enemies have invaded our minds, if we do
not presently raise all the forces we can against them, put a sudden check and
stop to them, labor with all our power to quell and root them out; we are
reasonably presumed to be of their party, and to join with them. My meaning is
plainly this, that though evil thoughts at first enter without our leave and
consent, yet if afterward we knowingly indulge them, nay if we do not straight
upon our reflection upon them reject them with utter hatred and indignation, and
by all means strive to divert our thoughts to more innocent objects, we then
stand truly guilty of the evil and malice of them: which some have used to
express thus; that though we cannot hinder the birds from flying over our
heads, ye we may prevent their making of nests in our hair.

The sum of all I have said is this: That evil thoughts are no farther sinful
in us, than they are voluntary, or than they may be helped and avoided:
whenever therefore we give manifest occasion to them by allowing our selves in
such practices as are apt to incite evil thoughts, or when we do not
beforehand duly watch against them; or when, if they do at any time arise in
our minds, we fail to stifle and crush them as soon, and as far as we are able,
then they are reckoned to us as sins, and are to be repented of as well as
actual transgressions.

II. Having thus briefly shown you when we are in fault and to be blamed if our
thoughts be evil, I proceed now secondly to give some account of the nature and
kinds of evil thoughts. And here you must not expect that I should give you a
particular enumeration of the several sorts of them, for that would be an
impossible thing; Who can tell how often he offends? who can declare all the
several thoughts that come into a man's mind but in one day or one hour, which
yet he would blush to have made known to those he converses with? Our thoughts
are very quick and sudden, nimble and volatile, can wander in a moment to the
utmost ends of the earth, can leap straight from one pole to the other, are as
various as the several objects of our senses, and the infinitely different ways
whereby they may be disposed, united or blended together. And if we should be
at a loss for external objects to think of, the mind can easily frame objects
to it self, and a thousand frenzies and extravagances, and mad whimsies and
giddy conceits are the monstrous issues of men's brains. I shall therefore only
give some few instances of thoughts undoubtedly evil and sinful. Such are

1. Which I shall insist most upon, the representing and acting over sins in
our minds and thoughts: when we erect a stage in our fancies, and on it with
strange complacence imagine those satisfactions and filthinesses which yet we
dare not, which we have not opportunity to bring into outward act. This is by
some called speculative wickedness, the dreams of men awake. When we gratify
our covetous impure desires and lusts with the pictures and feigned
representation of those enjoyments and pleasures and sensual contentments we
have a mind to. Now such kind of thoughts may be considered with respect to the
time present, past or to come.

(1.) If we consider these lewd imaginations as to the present time, there is
no sin or wickedness so vile and heinous but a man may become truly guilty of
it in the sight of God only by imagining it done in his mind, and taking
pleasure in such a thought. Thus the revengefull person who perhaps has hardly
heart and courage so much as to handle his sword, or to look his enemy in the
face, yet in his thoughts can fight him and subdue him, imagine him under his
power, lying at his mercy, and exercise all manner of spite and cruelty toward
him, put him to extreme pain and misery, fancy him undone and ruined, and then
rejoice in his own mind, that he is thus even with him; and by this means may
become guilty of the sins of murder and revenge, though he has not done his
enemy the least mischief all this while.

Thus again, modesty, shame, fear of discredit, or some other temporal
consideration may prevail with a man so far, as that he shall never attempt a
woman's chastity; but yet if in his thoughts he fancies her present with him,
and embraces that image of her which is painted in his mind with a fantastic
love; if the devil of lust be stirred up in him, and he enjoys the cloud, the
creature of his own brain, this is the adultery of the heart, our mind then
becomes a stews, and is polluted and defiled; and though the actual sin be a
sign of greater impudence and more untamed lust, yet this argues the same kind
of wickedness and uncleanness. And this was the Doctrine of the Philosophers of
old: fecit quisque, quantum voluit: every one may well be supposed to have done
that which he wanted not will or mind to, but only opportunity of doing. So
Seneca, latro est etiam antequam manus inquinet. He is a thief that covets,
though he never rifles another man's goods, if in his imagination only, he
possesses them; nay a man may thus contract the guilt of greater and more sins,
than ever he can possibly act. It is but a very little in reality that the most
griping ravenous oppressor can grasp to himself, or defraud other men of, but
in his thoughts he may swallow Empires, and plunder whole Towns and Cities.
Thus a man, even whilst in this place, may stal another, though in Turkey, he
may ravish every beautiful woman he sees, rob every man he meets with, and in
the twinkling of an eye (like Caligula) murder whole Societies and Kingdoms.

For this I take for an undoubted truth, that they who allow themselves in evil
thoughts and imaginations, who give way to their ambitious, covetous, or
lustful fancies, are not restrained by the fear of God from the actual
commission of those sins they love to think of; it is some other bye
consideration, some temporal respect that hinders them, not the sense of their
duty and Religion: and this I believe every one that faithfully examines his
own mind will yield, that if he could as freely, and as safely and secretly
commit any sin, as he can think of it with pleasure and delight, he should not
stick, as often as he had any inclination or temptation thereto, to do all
those things he thinks of with so much joy. Could the angry revengefull person,
whose mind boils and ferments with inward spleen and rage, by a wish or
thought, with as little danger, and as secure from all knowledge of other men,
or the least suspicion of being found out, kill or wound or mischief his enemy,
as he can desire it in his mind, do you believe he would spare any of his
adversaries? could the greedy wretch as secretly get the possession of his
neighbor's goods, as he can covet them, could he actually cheat and overreach,
and it were no more possible for him to be discovered, than it is for men to
know his thoughts, I doubt not but every such person would soon actually invade
and usurp all those things he now swallows in his imagination or greedy
appetite only. But farther;

(2.) As to what is past, there is reciting and repeating over those sins in
our thoughts and fancies, which we had long before committed, and perhaps, as
to the external acts, quite forsaken. When we revive our stolen unlawful
pleasures in our memories, and run over in our minds all the passages and
circumstances of our sins long since committed, with a new and fresh delight;
this is much the same as if we lived continually in them. As men often think of
their dead friends, and represent to themselves their features, their
conversations, and divert themselves with the remembrance of that pleasure they
once enjoyed in their good discourse and company, though they have lain many
years rotting in their graves: or as good men with mighty satisfaction reflect
upon the actions of a well-spent life, recalling to their minds with great joy
and transport, what at any time they have well done, after the same manner do
wicked men as it were raise again by the witchcraft of their filthy
imaginations, their past sins, renew their acquaintance with them, and
approbation of them. When weak and impotent, disabled by poverty, age, want of
convenience or opportunity for the repeated commission of them, they possess
the sins of their youth, and place them ever before them, chewing upon the cud,
recounting over to themselves their merry bouts, their mad pranks, their wanton
dalliances, their lewd excesses, their wicked company, with the same
contentment almost as they first acted or enjoyed them: and thus their souls
sin still as much as ever, although yet as to the outward act they may be
through age, poverty, want of ability or opportunity, chaste, temperate and
sober. This is certain, we cannot be truly said to have forsaken or repented of
those sins, the remembrance of which is grateful to us. To think of our evil
ways with grief and shame, and to abhor them, is our duty; but to relish them
in our thoughts is still to approve of them, it is a sure sign that we have not
really disowned or renounced the sin in our judgments, though we may have loft
it for some accidental reason, and that we are still very good friends with it,
if we can allow our selves to think of it with pleasure and delight.

(3.) If we consider evil thoughts with respect to the time to come; the
speculative wickedness of men's fancies and imaginations shows it self in the
wild and extravagant suppositions they make to themselves, feigning themselves
to be what they would fain be, and then imagining in their minds what in such
circumstances they would do, how they would manage and demean themselves. God
only knows how much time men fool away in such childish conceits, of becoming,
God knows when, great and rich and honorable; and how bravely they would then
live, how they would please every appetite and humor, fulfill every desire,
have their will in all things, and enjoy perfect ease and content. Now this is
the work of a mean idle fancy, when we thus frame to our selves imaginary
models of happiness, creating fools paradises to our selves, building castles
in the air, and then vainly struting up and down, and sporting our selves in
them. What preferments and advancements, what success and prosperous fortune do
some men, especially young men that know but little in the world, promise to
themselves? what jolly thoughts do such false Romantic hopes often fill them
with, how do they make their spirits leap and caper within them, as if the
messenger were just now at the door to bring them tidings of it? how do their
thoughts go out to meet that pleasure and happiness they so much desire? how do
they please themselves with the fancies of those mountains of gold, with those
strange chimerical Idea's of bliss which yet they are never like to be
possessed of? like those Good-fellows the Prophet Isaiah speaks of, Isa. 56.12.
Come ye, say they, I will fetch wine, and we will fill our selves with strong
drink, and to morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant: they feed
and live upon the promises of their own hearts and thoughts beforehand, and as
one has well expressed this vanity, they take up beforehand in their thoughts
upon trust the pleasures they hope to enjoy, as spend-thrifts do their rents,
or heirs their revenues before they come of full age to enjoy them.

Very few men are satisfied with their present allotments, or like their
present fortune, and therefore they set their imaginations on work to mend it;
and please and gratify themselves with these silly impostures of their teeming
fancies. Well, says the impatient youth, when my Parents are once dead and gone
to heaven, and my time of being subject to Masters, Tutours and Guardians shall
be once happily expired, and I shall be free from the restraint of the grave
and wise, how brisk and frolicksome shall I then be? how merry will the days
be, how short the nights, when I shall sin without fear of an angry look, or a
severe check, please only my self, give no account to any? Thus his heart and
mind is debauched long before his body is entered: and so the admirer of honor
and worldly dignity cuts out for himself that place at Court, or that office
which he affects most, and then settles himself in all the magnificence and
pomp imaginable, fansying himself highly raised and exalted above other men;
all his neighbors and former acquaintance crowding to attend and wait on his
pleasure, and all their sheaves bowing down to his sheaf, as Joseph dreamt, and
the sun, moon and stars making their humble obeisance to him. These are the
first sort of evil thoughts, lewd or wicked, or trifling and useless
imaginations. I shall but just mention some other, as

2. Unworthy, Atheistical, profane, desperate thoughts of God Almighty, saying
in our hearts there is no God, either secretly denying there is any, or too
often wishing there were none: questioning his power and goodness, distrusting
his truth or faithfulness: How should God know? or is there knowledge in the
most high? can he judge through the dark cloud? bidding him depart from us, for
we desire not the knowledge of his ways. What is the Almighty, that we should
serve him? and what profit should we have, if we pray to him? what can he do
for us to recompense the trouble of his service? what advantage will it be to
me, if I be cleansed from my sin? Here is a deal of do and bustle made about
Conscience and Religion, I will even venture my self as I see a thousand others
do; I shall escape as well as the rest of my company or acquaintance, and the
like. God only knows how many of us suffer such vile thoughts as these to
lodge in our breasts.

3. I might instance in our thinking and musing upon things innocent and
harmless enough in themselves, which yet become evil because of the seasons of
them, that is, because we should then be thinking of better things; for it is
certainly lawful to think of our friends, relations, temporal concerns, but
then it must be in due time and place: they must not justle out all other
thoughts; nay we must wholly banish them our minds when we come into God's more
especial presence; at our prayers, or at receiving of the Sacrament, such
thoughts are by no means to be admitted. I speak not now of the sudden
excursions of our thoughts, even when the mind is about the most serious
employments, nor of the greater unruliness of our thoughts, upon some
particular accidents or occasions. I mean only our gross heedlesness in
suffering them to wander to the ends of the earth, whilst in pretense and show
we are engaged in worshipping that God, who is a spirit, and will be worshipped
in spirit and truth. What man that now hears me would be content that all the
several things not only that have suddenly come into his mind, but which he
has voluntarily for a considerable time dwelt upon and entertained his mind
with during this short exercise, should be here openly exposed to the whole
Congregation? How many of us have been telling our money, or counting over our
bags, or selling or buying in our shops, or at our games and sports, or
ordering our household affairs, or conversing with distant friends? into how
many Countries have some of us traveled? how many persons have we visited? how
many several affairs have we dispatched, to say no worse, since we first this
day began Divine Service?

4 I might farther mention envious, malicious, fretting thoughts, when our
spirits are disquieted and vexed at the prosperity and happiness of other men,
who get the start of us, and are preferred before us, because they have a
greater trade, or are better loved and more respected than our selves. Or

5. Troublesome anxious thoughts of future events, multiplying to our selves
endless fears and solicitudes, distracting our minds with useless unnecessary
cares for the things of this life, perplexing our selves about things that do
not at all concern us, nor belong to us. How many who want nothing they can
reasonably desire, render their lives strangely wretched and miserable, only
by discontented and melancholy thoughts, and ill-boding apprehensions? their
souls continually shaking with the pannick dread of improbable crosses and
misfortunes, creating to themselves great pain and confusion by tragical and
idle jealousies of evils to come, and by vexing at what they cannot help or
avoid? or,

6. I might insist on haughty, proud, admiring thoughts of our selves. How much
time do many men spend in studying and considering their own worth and
excellencies? how do they please themselves with viewing their own endowments
and accomplishments, and imagine all others to have the same opinion of them
they have of themselves, that every one is speaking of their praise, and that
all that pass by them take notice of them, and ask who they are.

I might instance in carking and projecting thoughts, plotting and contriving
for years and ages to come, as if our houses were to continue for ever, and our
dwelling places to all generations.

I might instance in thoughts of presumption and security; bidding our souls
take their ease, and satisfy themselves with those good things we have laid up
for many years.

I have not time now to speak of vain, unprofitable, insignificant thoughts,
when, as we ordinarily say, we think of nothing, that is, not any thing we can
give an account of; when our thoughts have no dependence nor coherence one upon
the other, which I may call the nonsense of our thoughts, they being like the
conceits of madmen, or like little boys in a School, who, as long as the Master
is with them, all regularly keep in their several places, every one minding his
proper work, but as soon as his back is turned, are all straight out of their
places in disorder and confusion: such are our thoughts when we forget to watch
over them, or command them: but this is an endless subject.

III. The only thing remaining is to name to you some plain practical rules
for the right government of our thoughts.

1. The first Rule shall be grounded upon the words of my Text, Out of the
heart proceed evil thoughts. If they proceed from our hearts, then we must look
especially after them. In the words therefore of Solomon, Prove. 4.23. Keep thy
heart with all diligence, for out of it are the issues of life. Thus the
Prophet Jeremiah 4.14. Wash thy heart from wickedness, how long shall vain
thoughts lodge within thee? and here our Savior, out of the heart proceed evil
thoughts. Now by heart in the Scripture phrase is most ordinarily meant the
affections, such as love, hope, fear, joy, desire, and the like: so that the
plain sense of this place is, that such as men's affections are, such as the
objects are, upon which they are placed, and toward which they are most
carried out, such will their thoughts be: we shall certainly think most of
those things that we love most, that we fear most, that we desire most. Do we
not find it thus in all other instances? and were our affections but duly set
upon divine and heavenly objects, we should as constantly and as pleasantly
think of them, as the worldly or ambitious man does of his honors and riches.
Were our hearts but once thoroughly affected with a sense of God and goodness,
and the things of the other world, we should hardly find any room in our
thoughts for meaner and inferior objects; such divine and spiritual matters
would fill our souls, and wholly employ and take up our minds. If we once
really loved God above any present enjoyment or temporal contentment, it would
be impossible that things sensible should exclude the thoughts of him out of
our minds, or that we could pass any considerable time without some converse
with him, and addresses to him. Have we a business of such infinite moment
depending upon those few hours that yet remain of our lives (how few God only
knows) and have we time and leisure to spend whole days and weeks in
unprofitable useless fancies and dreams, in the mean time forgetting the danger
we are in, and the only necessary work we have to do?

Here then must the foundation be laid, in setting our affections upon things
above, in frequent considering the importance, the necessity, the absolute
necessity of our duty in order to our happiness, till by degrees we come to a
love and liking of goodness and Religion, and then holy, pious and devout
thoughts will be easy, free and almost natural to us; it is I grant it, a vain
thing to persuade you to look after your thoughts whilst your minds are
estranged from God; but a renewed mind, a new heart, as the Scripture calls it,
would produce new and otherghess thoughts. As the fountain is, such will the
streams be; where the treasure is, there will the heart be also: An evil tree
cannot bring forth good fruit, nor can we gather figs from thorns, or grapes
from thistles; evil thoughts, lusts, foolish imaginations, are the natural
genuine spawn of a wild dishonest mind. When I was a child, says St. Paul, I
thought as a child, I spoke as a child, but when I became a man I put away
childish things. As it is impossible for a wise man, after that he is arrived
to years of understanding, and his mind is furnished with the knowledge of the
best and worthiest things, to please himself with those silly fancies and
childish imaginations, which were the entertainment and diversion of his
younger, rawer years; so it is no less impossible for any one who is deeply
touched with the things of God, and has a due sense of those things which are
more excellent, to endure such silly worldly extravagant thoughts as possessed
his soul, and pleased him in the days of his ignorance and folly. How do I love
thy law, says David, it is my meditation day and night. This is the first
rule, look after your heart and affections.

2. And more particularly; Consider what care and art wicked men use to prevent
good thoughts, and let us use the same diligence and endeavors to hinder evil
and wicked thoughts and motions. There is no man, especially that lives in any
place where Religion is professed, and in any tolerable credit, that can go on
in a course of sin without some regret and remorse; sometimes his conscience
will find a time to speak to him; the natural notions of a God and a future
state will ever and anon be stirring, and are apt to disturb the repose and
jollity of the most secure and hardened sinner. Now to one resolvedly wicked,
such thoughts of a judge, a future account, and everlasting punishments, cannot
but be very uneasy and unwelcome; and therefore does he strive all that he can
to stifle such chilling thoughts in their very first rise, to silence or drown
the whispers of his conscience, he would fain even run away from himself, he
chooses any diversion, entertainment or company, rather than attend to the
dictates of his own mind and reason, is afraid of nothing so much as being
alone and unemployed, lest such ghastly and frighting apprehensions should
crowd in upon him; he keeps himself therefore always in a hurry and heat, and
by many other artifices endeavors to shut all such cool and sober thoughts out
of his mind, till by often quenching the motions of God's good spirit, and
resisting the light and voice of his own conscience, he by degrees loses all
sense of good and evil, all good principles are laid asleep within him, and he
arrives at his wisht-for happy state of sinning without disturbance or
interruption.

Now if we would but use equal diligence and watchfulness to prevent or expel
evil thoughts, we should find just the same effect, that in time our minds
would become in a great measure free from their solicitations and importunity;
would we but presently reject them with the greatest disdain and indignation,
use all manner of means to fix our minds on more innocent and useful subjects,
avoid all occasions, or provocations, or incentives to evil thoughts, as
carefully as wicked men do reading a good book or keeping of good company, we
certainly should find in a short time our minds no longer pestered or troubled
with them, we should begin to lose all savor and relish of those sins we
formerly delighted in; by their being for some considerable time kept out of
our minds, there would arise a strangeness between them and us, and they would
become as uneasy to us as now they are pleasant and grateful.

3. Would you prevent evil thoughts? above all things avoid idleness; the
spirits of men are busy and restless, something they must be doing, and what a
number of monstrous, giddy, frothy, improbable conceits do daily fill our
brains, merely for want of better employment? no better way therefore to
prevent evil thoughts, than never to be at leisure for them, I went by the
field of the slothful, says Solomon, and lo it was all grown over with
thorns and nettles, and therefore indeed those are most of all concerned in
this discourse about thoughts, whom providence has placed in such a station,
as that they are under no necessity of minding any particular calling for the
gaining of a livelihood; for whom God has provided a subsistence without their
own laboring and working for it; such as these are in manifest danger of
consuming a great part of their time in idle and unprofitable, if not lewd and
wicked imaginations; having little else to do, the Devil or their own vain
fancies will find work for them; and when consideration and argument alone are
not able to drive out these wicked inward companions, yet business will; and
therefore I know nothing more advisable, than that we should be always stored
with fit materials, and subjects to exercise our thoughts upon, such as are
worthy of a reasonable creature, that is endued with an immortal soul, that is
to live for ever. Those who are most busy, yet have some little spaces and
intervals of time in which they are not employed. Some men's business is such as
though it employs their hands, and requires bodily labor, yet does not much
take up their thoughts, nor need their minds be very intent upon it; now all
such should constantly have in their minds a treasure of innocent or useful
subjects to think upon, that so they may never be at a loss how to employ their
minds; for many of our evil thoughts are owing to this, that when our time
hangs upon our hands, we are to seek what to think of. Let us therefore every
one resolve thus with our selves, the first opportunity of leisure I have, the
first vacant hour, I will set my self to consider of such or such a good
subject, and have this always in readiness to confront and oppose to any wicked
or evil thoughts that may sue for entrance or admission; for if we do thus,
temptations will always find our minds full and prepossessed; and it is an hard
case if neither the visible nor invisible world, neither God's works, nor
providence, nor word can supply us with matter enough for our thoughts, unless
we feign extravagant conceits, or repeat our old sins in our minds, or tickle
our selves with wild suppositions of things that never were, nor are ever like
to be.

4. Another rule I would give is this, that we should live under the due awe of
God's continual presence with us, and bear this always in our minds, that the
pure and holy God, the judge of the world, before whose impartial tribunal we
must all shortly stand, is conscious to every secret thought and imagination
that passes through our minds, and that he knows them altogether, that God is
in us all, Ephesians. 4.6. One God and father of all, who is above all, and through
all, and in you all; that he is present in the most inward corners and recesses
of our hearts and knows every one of those things that come into our minds. Now
who of us is there but must confess, that if his thoughts were all known and
open to other men, if his parents, his friends, his neighbors, or enemies
could have certain cognizance of them, he should be infinitely more careful
about them than he is, should not allow himself that liberty and freedom which
he now takes; should be as watchful that his thoughts should appear to other
men orderly, rational and virtuous as he is now that his words and actions may
be such? and while we profess to believe that the transcendent Majesty of
Heaven and earth is acquainted with all our private conceits, is privy to all
our wishes, desires and purposes, observes and takes notice of all the motions
of our minds, and that at the last day he will bring every secret thing into
judgment; are we not ashamed of showing in his sight such folly, of committing
such wickedness in his presence? should we blush and be confounded to have but
a mortal man certainly know all the childish, vain, wanton, lustful thoughts
that possess our minds, and is it nothing to us that the great God of Heaven
and earth beholds and sees them all? Consider this then, O vain man, who
please thy self in thy own foolish conceits, with thinking how finely thou
do cheat the world, by a mask of Religion and godliness! consider, I say,
that there is not an evil thought that ever thou take any pleasure and
delight in, not an evil device or imagination of thy heart, but what is
perfectly naked and open to that God with whom we have to do. That he is with
thee in the silent and dark night, when no other eye sees thee, when thou
think thy self safe from all discovery, and that thou may then securely
indulge thy own wicked appetites and corrupt inclinations; for the light and
darkness are both alike unto God, he compasses thy path and thy bed, he is
acquainted with all thy ways. And the frequent consideration of these things
would certainly produce a mighty awe in us, and a suitable care not willingly
to entertain or cherish any such thoughts as we should be ashamed to have known
to all the world, nor ever to suffer any other thoughts to take place or remain
in our minds, than such as we should not blush to have written in our foreheads.

5. For the right government of your thoughts, let me recommend to you above
all things serious devotion, especially humble and hearty prayer to God
Almighty. Man is compounded of two natures, a rational and spiritual, and a
bodily; by our bodies we are joined to the visible corporeal world, by our
souls we are allied to the immaterial invisible world: now as by our outward
senses the intercourse and correspondence is maintained between us and the
corporeal world, so by our devotions chiefly our acquaintance is begot and kept
up with the spiritual world; when we lay aside all thoughts of this lower
world, and the concerns of this life, and apply our selves to the Father of
spirits, and make our humble addresses to him, we then more especially converse
with him as far as this state will admit of; and the more frequently and
constantly we do this, the more we shall abstract our minds from these
inferior objects which are so apt to entangle our hearts, and take up all our
thoughts, and shall make the things of the other world become more familiar to
us; for when we betake our selves seriously to our prayers, we do then bid
adieu to all that is visible and sublunary, and for that time endeavor to
employ our minds wholly on what relates to another life; and therefore
consequently the oftener we do this, and the more hearty and serious we are in
it, the more our minds will be used and accustomed to divine thoughts and pious
meditations, and weaned from present sensible objects. Every devout exercise
conscientiously performed will season our spirits, and leave a good tincture
upon them, and dispose us for worthy and excellent thoughts, it is like keeping
of good company, a man is by degrees molded and fashioned into some likeness
unto them, and on the other side, the intermission, neglect or formal and
perfunctory performance of our devotion, will soon breed in us a forgetfulness
of God and heavenly things, as omitting to speak of an absent or dead friend,
or neglecting to call him to our mind, by degrees wears him quite out of our
thoughts and memory; so that you see a due sense of God upon our minds, and of
those things that belong to our greatest interests, is by nothing so well
maintained as by our constant devotion; this is like seeing our friends often,
or conversing with them every day, it preserves acquaintance with them, it
cherishes our love and kindness toward them. I end all with that excellent
Collect of our Church.

Almighty God, unto whom all hearts be open, all desires known, and from whom
no secrets are hid: cleanse the thoughts of our hearts by the inspiration of
thy holy spirit, that we may perfectly love thee, and worthily magnify thy
holy name, through Christ our Lord. Amen.

A SERMON Preached at the Anniversary Meeting OF THE GENTLEMEN Educated at St.
Paul's SCHOOL. The Sixth Sermon.
1 COR. XIII. 4, 5, 6, 7. Charity suffers long, and is kind; charity envieth
not: charity vaunteth not it self, is not puffed up, etc.


THE chief and most laudable design of this and other the like Anniversary
Meetings being to promote love, kindness and friendship amongst men, from the
consideration of some particular relations, by which (over and above what does
belong to us in common with all men and Christians) we are more nearly united
and linked one to the other. I thought I could not entertain you with any thing
more proper to this Solemnity, than a discourse upon these words, wherein I
intend

I. To describe unto you wherein this amicable friendly temper and mutual love,
which we are to further amongst our selves this day, does consist. And

II. To recommend it especially to your care and practice, who have had the
advantage of a liberal and ingenuous education.

I. To show you wherein true and undissembled love does consist, which I shall
do only by paraphrasing or commenting as briefly as I can upon this most
excellent description of Charity given us by St. Paul.

1. Charity suffers long, is not hasty to return any evil or injury we may
have received from others; it makes a man patient, forgetful of wrongs, and
slow to demand satisfaction. He that is possessed with this excellent grace of
charity will defer righting himself when injured, and seem for a great while as
if he did not at all observe or take notice of those affronts and tre^^asses,
which the furious and wrathful would be sure straight to revenge. He does not
lie at catch, and presently take all advantages against his neighbor, and
trouble him for every little offense, and require strict reparation for every
petty damage he may unjustly sustain: he does not take all forfeitures that the
rigor of the law would give him, or stand with his debtours for a day, or
straight break off friendship for the first unkindness; but he will for a long
time bear with the failures and miscarriages of other men, as all of us do
easily overlook and readily forgive the mistakes or misdemeanors of those whom
we entirely love; with great patience he waits their amendment, and silently
tarries till of their own accord they make him satisfaction, and is always
willing to hearken to any fair terms of accommodation, and to accept of the
least submission and acknowledgment.

Contrary to all this is the temper of those whom the Apostle calls fierce, and
Solomon, hasty of spirit: who when once offended breath forth nothing but utter
ruin and slaughter, and are for the present destruction of all who stand in
their way. Thus David in that great fit of impatience, 1 Samuel 25. when
displeased at Nabal's surly answer, resolved straight to murder him and all
his household; and so the Servant in the Parable of our Savior, St. Matthew 18.
who, though his Lord had forgiven him a vast debt of ten thousand talents, yet
after this, when he met with one of his Fellow Servants who owed him but an
hundred pence, laid violent hands on him, took him by the throat, would not
tarry one hour for his money, notwithstanding the poor man humbly besought him
to have patience with him but for awhile, and promised him he would honestly
pay him all.

But a truly charitable man suffers long, and forgiveth much, and deals
with others as he has experienced, and yet hopes God will deal with him; he
gives them time to recollect and bethink themselves, does not soon despair of
their growing better, but tries all the arts and methods of patience and
kindness, and is unwilling to be brought to extremities, or to do any thing
that may seem harsh or rigid; and in a word, had rather suffer an hundred than
do one evil.

2. Charity is kind, (...), gentle and courteous, easy to be treated with, is
gracious and benign, and as far as may be, useful to all. Christian charity
does sweeten men's minds and spirits, smooths the ruggedness and unevenness of
their natures, makes them tractable, affable, and, as far as is consistent with
their innocence, complaisant.

Contrary to which is that roughness and sourness of disposition and manners
which is distasteful to, and grates upon every one that falls in its way; as it
was said of Nabal beforementioned, that he was such a son of Belial, that a
man could not speak unto him: Such were the Pharisees of old, grave, formal and
morose, troublesome and uneasy to all who conversed with them, sullen and
froward. And too many such there are in the world, who pretend to great and
high seize in Religion, and yet are of such techy and fiery dispositions,
that there is no living quietly by them; nothing can please them, a man is
afraid of having any thing to do with them, they are of such waspish,
quarrelsome and churlish natures.

Whereas he in whom Christian charity dwells endeavors to oblige every one,
and carries himself fairly toward all, so as to gain every man's good word and
opinion; he is calm and mild, and friendly in his deportment, receives every
one that addresseth himself to him with civility and respect; his demeanor is
full of compliance and condescension, his carriage and behavior free, candid
and ingenuous; and indeed there is no greater pleasure in the world than what
is to be found in the conversation of those in whom the true Christian temper
and spirit rules and prevails.

No one complains of such an one; he is not grievous or offensive to any, and
if he cannot do you all that courtesy you desire, yet he so civily denies
you, that you are almost as much pleased as if he had granted your request.
Charity is kind.

3. Charity envieth not; the charitable man grudgeth not at another's good,
does not mutter and repine because his neighbor thrives better, has a greater
trade, is of better repute, has got a larger estate, or has arrived to
greater dignity and preferment than himself. Charity rather rejoices and
pleases it self in other men's doing well; it adds to a charitable man's
contentment to see other men satisfied, and does really minister unto, and
increase his own happiness to see the happiness of his neighbors and
acquaintance. He finds almost as much delight and complacence in their good
fortune and success as they themselves do, thus making the happiness of every
man to become really and truly his own; it makes him better to see other men
in health, and refreshes his spirits to see others cheerful and pleased. No
real benefit or advantage happens to any round about him, but he comes in for
his share, and largely partakes of it, and the pleasure of it becomes as truly
his, as it is the persons who is possessed of it.

Nay, as it has been observed by some, here love has the advantage. I enjoy
greater pleasure in my neighbor's good success and prosperity than he himself
can possibly do: for all the content and joy that his prosperity ministers to
him, I have pure and unmixt, without bearing part in those cares and troubles
with which it is usually attended.

Love makes us not apt to take disgust and pet, though God should bestow the
good things of this life more liberally upon some others than our selves,
whereas the envious man would not have God do any good turn for any person
without his leave and approbation. He would alone engross and monopolize all
the blessings of heaven and benefits of the earth, or at least, if he could
have his will, none should partake of them but some private friends of his, and
those he has a good opinion of. He would have God mind no one else in the
world, nor hear any other prayers besides his own; nay he reckons himself ill
dealt with, and mutinies against heaven if any thing goes beside him, or any
one enjoys something he is without. There is many a man in the world who thinks
himself beyond all expression miserable, for no other reason but only because
another man is happy; the good things his neighbor enjoys eat up his flesh,
dry up his marrow, and prey upon his spirits, make his eyes hollow, his cheeks
lean, his face pale, and his bones rotten. Hence it has been observed that
envious men are the only persons to whom without form of justice or breach of
charity we may do harm; since to do them hurt or mischief we need only do
good to their neighbors. Love envieth not.

4. Charity vaunteth not it self, (...). I shall not dispute the rigid meaning
of the original word, but follow our translation of it; vaunteth not it self,
is not insolent and domineering, and arrogantly imposing upon others, as if we
only were wise and worthy to be regarded; but it is modest and governable,
willing to yield, and comply, and submit to the judgment of others. This
vaunting, foolish and giddy elation of the mind is the cause of manifold
quarrels and disturbances in the world, when men malapertly take upon
themselves to prescribe to others, and fondly expect that their singular humor
only should be observed, that their private will and fancy should stand for a
rule and law to all others, and that all men should accommodate themselves to
their idle conceits, fond prejudices, unreasonable customs or impertinent
opinions.

Charity vaunteth not it self, and as it follows, is not puffed up, which is of
near signification, and therefore may be joined with the former. Haughtiness
and imperiousness of mind, proceeding from a too great love and opinion of our
selves, does especially show it self in despising all others. Proud persons are
so full of themselves, so wrapped up in the vain contemplation of their own
perfections, that they slight and despise all the world; they look upon it as a
disparagement to learn from any, they cannot bear the least contradiction or
opposition, they take upon themselves to judge and condemn all others, and will
allow none to pretend to wisdom or understanding besides themselves. Any the
least disrespect or oversight, any failure of due observance and submission
straight begets a quarrel; for they think themselves wronged, affronted, and
unjustly dealt with, if every one does not value them just at the same rate
they do themselves.

But now love makes us humble and lowly minded, teaches us to value those
accomplishments, to set a due price and estimate upon those abilities others
are endued with, and not to magnify our selves, or to think of our selves more
highly than we ought to think: and therefore in Scripture, where the virtue of
charity is commanded, humility is very often joined with it; Put on therefore
bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind. Be ye kindly affectioned one
toward another in brotherly love, in honor preferring one another, esteeming
others better than your selves.

What we have a real kindness for is apt to appear to us in all circumstances
better than indeed it is, and were our minds once thoroughly possessed with
charity toward others, we could not easily entertain any despicable and
contemptible thoughts of them, but upon all occasions should bear a due regard
and deference to them; and if this one effect of charity did but get ground in
the world, if men were humble and modest, diffident and distrustful of
themselves, willing to learn, and receive instructions from others more learned
and wiser than themselves, we might hope soon to see an end of those
unchristian feuds and schisms which our Church is so miserably infested with.
But so long as men lean so much to their own understandings, and are swelled
with such lofty conceits of their own abilities that they think they need no
instruction; so long as they are so fond of their own private and singular
opinions, as that they not only resolve inflexibly to adhere to them
themselves, but seek to impose them upon others, and fall out with all who are
not of their mind and way, nay take upon them to pronounce every one damned who
is not as fond of their childish conceits as themselves are; what can we expect
but strife and envying, contention, confusion and every evil work? Charity
vaunteth not it self, is not puffed up.

5. Charity does not behave it self unseemly; (...) does never use others
rudely in words or gestares, especially not reproachfully; and thus it is fitly
joined with what went before; contumelious behavior being the natural effect
of pride and arrogance. We care not how we demean our selves toward those whom
we despise and set at naught, we can hardly vouchsafe such a good look or a
civil word: but now love gives no abusive language, never casts dirt in the
face of any; it never endeavors to dishonor or disparage any ones person,
but is respectfull to all however they differ from us; it can confute the
errors of those whom we oppose without any opprobrious or disgraceful
reflections, and answer their arguments, and show that they are in the wrong
without reviling their persons, or calling them names. And it were well if this
were regarded more than it is in our religious debates and controversies; if we
would learn to differ from one another in our judgments and matters of opinion
without virulent railing, and taunting speeches, and unhandsome bespattering
and exposing our adversaries, which one thing, if it were conscientiously
observed, would go a great way toward the maintaining peace amongst us,
notwithstanding our different sentiments and apprehensions. The ill language
which we give one another oftentimes does set us at a greater distance, and
more estrange our minds from one another, than all our different conceptions
and judgments. Railing against those who dissent from us never yet made, nor is
it likely ever to gain, any one convert or proselyte: men are naturally
inclined to suspect that to be a bad cause which needs such base and unmanly
artifices to uphold it; and it is a shrewd sign that we want substantial
reasons and arguments against any thing, when once we begin to scold and cry
out with him in Lucian (...), thou cursed damned villain, it is not so or so;
but now love is not rude or clamorous, but patiently and calmly hears both
sides, and soberly and cooly debates the matter, and reasons meekly about
things; it considers more what it is that is spoken than who it is that
speaks, it gives no needless provocation, it behaveth not it self unseently.

6. Charity seeks not her own, A selfish, stingy and narrow spirit, when we
care for none but our selves, and regard not how it fares with other men, so we
do but live in ease and plenty our selves, is of all other things most contrary
to that charity which our Savior both by his doctrine and example has taught
and so earnestly recommended to us; love is not mercenary or self-seeking, it
inclines us to do good to others, though we thereby receive not the least
advantage to our selves, besides the pleasure of doing it; if our hearts be
full of true charity, it will never suffer us to be in quiet till we give it
some vent, and will make us impatiently seek for opportunities of exercising
it; it will spend it self in laying out for others, so far is love from
projecting gain or profit to it self by that kindness it does to others, that
it is beneficent to the evil and unthankful, to the indigent and those who are
unable to make any requital; it teaches us to lend not hoping to receive
again, nay to do good to those who return evil for it, so far is it from any
base or selfish designs. 1 Cor. 10.24. Let no man seek his own but every man
another's wealth; Christian charity obliges us to pursue the benefit and
edification of others, though it be with some loss to our selves, and teaches
us willingly to suffer some detriment, rather than omit a fair occasion of
doing a public good. We are not to please our selves, but rather to please our
neighbor for his good, Romans 15.1, 2. for this is the mind which was in Christ
Jesus, who denied himself, nay laid down his life for the good of mankind.

Christians are or ought to be so closely linked together by this bond of
charity that every one should be as solicitous and concerned for the good of
other men as he is for his own. I am sure the love of the primitive Christians
was so remarkable, and raised such an admiration even amongst their very
enemies and persecutours, that it was a proverbial speech amongst the Gentiles,
see how the Christians love one another, what care do they take one of another?
had they been all brethren according to the flesh, they could not more heartily
have contrived nor more industriously advanced one another interest and
welfare than they did: Was any one amongst them cast into prison, all the
Christians of that place presently flocked to him to visit and relieve him? was
any one visited with sickness, all the best and greatest personages did
straight condescend to minister unto him in his weak estate? were any poor and
in want, their straits and necessities were no sooner known than they were
relieved? But what is now become of this brave and generous spirit? when
instead of doing good unto, we devour and bite one another? charity seeks not
her own.

7. Charity is not easily provoked, (...), which differs from what we had
before, it suffers long, in this that the former especially respects revenge,
but this the passion of anger, and though we may sometimes upon just occasions
be displeased and offended, yet charity will teach us always to observe these
two rules.

(I.) This excellent grace of charity will give us so much power and command
over our selves, as that we shall not be suddenly inflamed upon every slight
inadvertency, mistake or misfortune of our brother; we shall not be easily
angered upon every little and trivial occason. A charitable man is not nice and
delicate, apt to pick quarrels, to take fire and fall out into rage and passion
upon every cross accident or miscarriage; he is easy in his converse and
deportment; and it is no difficult matter for a man to live with him without
ever offending him. But alas! how weak and impotent are most of us in this
case? how does every little forgetfulness or negligence of a servant, inferior
or neighbor, the breaking of a glass, the loss of a trifle, discompose and
ruffle our minds, and raise such storms and tumults in our breasts as require a
great deal of time and trouble to lay and appease? we have but little kindness
for those whom we cannot at all bear with; not only charity but even common
humanity requires this at our hands, that we should mutually pass by and
overlook such little indiscretions, oversights, mistakes and inadvertencies,
which we are all more or less subject unto, and cannot live without.

(II.) When we have great and just cause of anger and offense given us, yet
charity suffers us not to fall into immoderate passion, or to be transported
by blind rage and fury beyond the bounds of reason and religion: it will secure
us from all paroxysms of anger, for so the Greek word properly signifies: it
will restrain that unruly and ungovernable passion within its due bounds and
measures, and keep it in some temper and moderation, and not suffer it to
betray us into any unreasonable and rash actions, which end in shame and a
bitter repentance. Our anger, how just soever, should never make us hurt or
injure the person offending. It should never break out into fury, which is the
short madness of a man; we should never be so far exasperated, as to suffer our
passion to hurry us into any indecency or excess.

It is certainly as lawful on some occasions to be angry, as it is to rejoice,
grieve, pity, or exercise any other affection of our minds: there is no passion
implanted by God in man, but what was designed by our wise Maker for some good
end, and whilst in the exercise thereof it is directed to that end, and kept
within its due bounds and limits, subject unto and regulated by reason, the
principal and imperial faculty of our souls, so far it is certainly harmless,
nay useful.

In truth, all the passions in themselves simply considered are neither good
nor evil. Love, hate, hope, fear, joy, sorrow, and the rest, as they are parts
of our nature, are things indifferent; but when they are fitly circumstantiated
and ordered, they then become morally good, and are highly beneficial to us,
and serve many excellent purposes: but when they are misplaced or extravagant,
when they command us, and are our masters, they then become morally evil, and
the most troublesome things in the world both to our selves and others. We must
take great care therefore to curb and bridle this passion of anger, to keep it
under government, and not suffer it to dethrone our reason, or to hinder the
free use of it, or to make us act any thing precipitantly, unadvisedly or
foolishly. And this I think may be given as a certain rule whereby we may judge
when our anger becomes sinful and vicious, and does transgress the limits of
charity; namely, when it is raised to such an height, as that we have no
perfect command over our selves, and cannot freely use or exercise our reasons
and understandings; when we drive on headlong, and the beast rides the man;
when we do we know not what, and repent of it after it is done; when our
passion is got into the chair, and carries all before it; when our blood boils,
and our spirits are in a great fermentation, and we are so blinded with fury
and rage that we know no difference between friend or foe, right or wrong, but
are hurried on by the torrent of an impetuous passion to the commission of the
greatest outrages, to the most disorderly and unseemly actions: this is surely
contrary to charity which is not easily provoked.

8. Charity thinks no evil: is apt and ready to put the best and sairest
interpretations upon all the actions of other men. Whatever vices other men are
guilty of, love, if possible, will find out excuses and plead their pardon. It
will be so far from aggravating those injuries which our neighbors may at any
time have offered us, that it will set it self to find out some charitable
construction or other, and be ingenious in devising apologies for them. It will
put us in mind of the good offices they may sometimes have done us, reckon up
the several kindnesses we may have formerly received from them, and make use of
that as an argument to prevail with us more easily to pass by the wrong we now
suffer. Love will be sure to allege something or other in their favor,
sometimes their age, sometimes their ignorance, sometimes the sickness of their
body, sometimes that of their mind: perhaps it was done by mistake, perhaps
unawares, against the mind and will of him who did it. Whatever mischief or
damage we have received, yet perhaps it was never intended or designed, and it
was done rather by chance, than out of any ill will: at least he was
misinformed, he was in a great and violent passion, and much out of humor when
he did it, and perhaps now is heartily sorry for what he has done, and is just
coming to ask us forgiveness.

Love is not jealous or suspicious, does not endeavor to blast men's good
actions and reputations by imagining and surmising some secret evil or bad
design in them, but makes a favorable construction, and a fair and candid
interpretation of every thing, and always judges the best.

I know nothing more opposite to charity than that detracting, censorious
humor which prevails so much in the world: when men rashly censure and condemn
their neighbors without any just or probable grounds, and by vain surmises and
ill-favored constructions lessen the good they do, and aggravate the evil; as
thus, Such an one is a very liberal and charitable man, and it must be
acknowledged that he does a great deal of good in the place where he lives; but
I wish he be not vainglorious in all this. I am much afraid he does it only
to be seen of men. Another is indeed very serious and devout in the Church, but
I doubt whether he be as honest at home. I can find no fault with such a
neighbor, he is wholly blameless as to his outward conversation, a good moral
man, but I do not question but he has some private haunts, he is only a
little more cunning and close than the rest of his neighbors. Thus do many
men, who it may be are conscious to themselves that they have no true solid
worth on which to bottom a reputation, seek to raise it on the ruin of other
men's. Such as are bad themselves are apt to think all others so too, and to
suspect that every one is an hypocrite and dissembler, who pretends to more
honesty or religion than themselves. They cannot imagine that others, whatever
outward show they may make, can really abstain from those pleasures and
gratifications which they are so strongly inclined unto, and in which they find
so much savor and relish. But love takes every thing by the best handle, and
never judges nor suspecteth any man to be worse than his visible actions do
declare him. Love thinks no evil.

9. Charity rejoices not in iniquity, but in the truth. A charitable man is so
far from rejoicing when others do amiss, that he is passionately affected with
sorrow for it. He is moved to as much pity and compassion, and feels as
sensible a grief for the sins and follies of those amongst whom he dwells, as
he does for any temporal afflictions or bodily calamities that do at any time
befall them. He longs for the salvation of all men, and nothing can trouble
him more than to see men needlessly and foolishly destroying and undoing
themselves, when by the Religion they profess they enjoy so many and such fair
opportunities of making themselves for ever happy. But he rejoices in the
truth. Nothing pleases him so much as to see goodness and truth prevail and
enlarge their dominions, and become prosperous and triumphant in the world. He
joineth with the heavenly host at the conversion of every sinner in their hymns
of praises and allelujahs, and heartily blesses the divine goodness for those
graces and excellent dispositions and qualities he finds others endued with.

How far then are they from charity to whom it is meat and drink to hear a bad
story of their neighbor? who watch for men's halting, make sport with their
sins, and take great pleasure and delight in publishing the guilt and shame of
others: who gad from house to house, and run into all companies on no other
errand but to proclaim and divulge such failings and imperfections as they know
their neighbors are guilty of; who curiously pry into men's actions on purpose
to spy out some faults, and then severely comment and criticize upon them; and
wherever they come, make them the subject of their impertinent and unsavory
prattle. But the Apostle farther adds,

10. Charity bears all things. The words in the original are (...), which are
here badly rendered. It should be, as almost all Interpreters do agree, covers
and concealeth all things. Charity chooses rather to hide and cast a veil over
the sins and faults of others, than to trumpet and proclaim them. A charitable
man is not wanting in his duty to warn and rebuke those whom he knows guilty of
any notorious sins, but then he does it secretly and in private: before others
he chooses rather to take notice of what is good and commendable in men, than of
what is faulty: he never speaks ill of any man behind his back, but rather if
possible finds something or other to commend him for. There is hardly any man
so wicked, so much enslaved to baseness and villainy, but he has some good
quality or other, and this charity will be sure to lay hold on, and improve to
his advantage: not that we are bound to commend any one falsely, or may not
speak the truth of a person, when it is for his own or other men's advantage
that it should be discovered; but charity obliges us to give a favorable
character of others, and to represent them, as much as may be, to advantage;
and to take all opportunities to commend them, rather than needlessly to vilify
and disparage them, and speak all the evil we know of them.

There are many who are always complaining of the looseness and profaneness of
the age, of the sins and debaucheries of the times they live in, and under this
pretense they grievously slander, backbite and calumniate their neighbors, and
take all occasions to rip up and lay open their faults, and with great study
and artifice publish their disgraces; and this they do with great demureness
and turned-up eyes, as if they were mightily concerned for the honor of God
and Religion, and were heartily troubled and grieved to hear or report such
shameful and scandalous things, and thus when they have vented a most cursed
malicious lie, with the woman in the Proverbs, they wipe their mouths and say
they have done no wickedness, and would have you impute it wholly to their
zeal, and not to their malice. This I cannot better represent unto you than by
translating the words of an ancient Father, who thus describes some in his days.

[There are, says he, who shall endeavor to shadow and disguise the malice
and ill will they have conceived against any sort of persons or company of men
with the false color of zeal for the glory of God, and sorrow for the
wickedness of the times; and then looking very sadly and premising a deep sigh,
with a dejected countenance and doleful voice, they vent their lies and
slanders; and therefore, says he, they do all this, that they may the more
easily persuade those who hear them of the truth of what they relate; that the
story may be the sooner believed, and more readily swallowed, as seeming to be
uttered with an unwilling mind, and rather with the affection of one that
condoles, than any fetch of malice: I am grievously sorry for it, says one,
for I love the man well, he is one of excellent parts, and has many things
very laudable in him, but -- and then he aggravates this particular sin
(whether truly or falsely imputed to him it matters not) to the highest degree:
Another tells you, I knew so much of him before, but it should never have gone
farther for me, but now seeing the matter is out (though perhaps he was the
first broacher of it) he shakes his head and lifts up his eyes and tells you it
is indeed too true; he speaks it with grief of heart, and then tells it in
every company he comes in, but adds it is great pity, he otherwise excells in
many things, but in this he cannot be excused.] Thus far my Author.

There is, says Solomon, Prove. 12.18. that speaks like the piercings of a
sword, and Prove. 18.8. the words of a talebearer are as wounds, and they go
down into the innermost parts of the belly: Curse the whisperer and double
tongued, for such have destroyed many that were at peace, says the son of
Syrach: This if any thing is point blank contrary to charity, for love covers
all sins, Prove. 10.12. Charity hides all things.

11. Yet farther, Charity believes all things, hops all things. It makes us
to believe all the good of others we have the least probable ground for, and to
hope that which we have no reason to believe. We very easily believe those
things to be, which we beforehand wish were true, and therefore charity being
a wishing well to all men, must needs incline us to believe well also of them:
this daily experience tells us, that where we love, there we are very unapt to
discern faults, though never so plain and obvious to the impartial and
disinterested; witness the strange blindness men generally have toward their
own, though never so gross and foolish. The judgment of charity is very large
and comprehensive, it takes in all, and believes well of every one who
continues within the pale of the Christian Church, does never presume to judge
men's hearts, or pry into their secret intentions.

Nay, where there is some reason to doubt of a man's truth and sincerity, yet
charity hops the best. It despairs of no man's repentance and salvation, but
entertains some hopes that even the worst of men, the most refractory and
disobedient will at length amend and grow wiser. Whoever sins, charity hopes it
is out of weakness, or surprise, or inadvertency, and not out of wilfulness or
habitual custom: whoever mistakes charity hopes the error proceeds from
ignorance only, or unavoidable prejudice, or unhappy education, and not from a
bad and wicked mind, or from any worldly sensual interest. And in this
particular is the charity of our Church much to be commended, who contents her
self with propounding an undoubted safe way to Heaven without passing any
reprobating sentences and anathema's on all other Churches and societies of
professors, and excluding them from all hope of mercy or possibility of
salvation. And indeed it concerns us all to take great care rightly to
discharge this office of charity, since according as we judge others, so shall
we our selves be judged; it is our interest as well as our duty to be very mild
and merciful in our censures of others, and to judge of them with favor and
allowance, since with what measure we measure unto others, it shall be measured
unto us again.

12. Lastly, charity endures all things; never will be wearied or tired out;
is not fickle and wavering; thinks nothing too much to do, nothing too great
to undertake, nothing too hard to undergo for the good of others. Love sticks
not at any thing, nay makes any duty or labor easy and pleasant; as Jacob
after his disappointment grudged not to serve the other seven years for the
sake of Rachel. Love is strong as death, many waters cannot quench it, nor the
floods drown it; nothing can allay the heat of its endeavors, or stop its
progress; it easily surmounts all difficulties, and triumphs over all
opposition: though we meet with great ingratitude, contradiction and unworthy
returns from those whom we have obliged, yet love is not apt to repent of the
good it has done, but still perseveres, endeavoring to overcome evil with
good, unkindnesses with courtesies. Love does not invent excuses or seeek
delays when a fair occasion of exercising it self is offered; it makes us
willing for some time to leave our own business, though of near concernment to
us, to expose our selves to heat and cold, to wearisome and painful journies,
to deny our selves our own ease, and pleasure, and profit in some measure,
rather than to forfeit an opportunity of showing a great kindness. Charity
endures all things.

This now is that affection of love which we ought to bear one toward another:
this is that kind, benign and gracious temper which manifests us to be the
children of God, and to partake of his nature, and to be like unto him who is
good and does good, which shows us to be the followers of our Savior in deed
and in truth, who went about doing good, and which alone can fit us for that
Kingdom wherein true love, undisturbed peace and universal charity dwells and
reigns for evermore.

To convince you of the necessity of this frame and temper of spirit, let me
only put you in mind of what St. Paul says in the beginning of this Chap.
that though a man should be able to speak with the tongues of men and angels,
had the gift of all languages, and could discourse with the greatest eloquence
and efficacy, yet without this charity he would be but as sounding brass, or a
tinkling cymbal. Though a man had the gift of prophecy, and could foretell
things to come, were inspired from above, and were able to convert others to
the Faith, and propagate the Christian Religion in the world; though he could
understand all mysteries, expound all Scripture, and give an account of the
most difficult and sublime truths, and had all knowledge and all faith, nay the
highest degree of that faith by which miracles are wrought, so that he could
remove mountains, yet without this affection of sincere love he would be
nothing worth; nay though a man should part with his whole estate, and bestow
all his goods to feed the poor, though he should exercise the highest acts of
bounty and liberality; nay, lastly, though he should give his body to be burned
for his religion, and die a martyr for the faith of Jesus Christ, yet if he
has not charity, if he cannot patiently bear and pardon injuries and affronts,
if he delights not to do good, and rejoices not in the happiness of other
men, if he be envious, and malicious and implacable, of a narrow contracted
spirit, it profits him nothing.

II. I only beg your patience whilst in a very few words I recommend this more
excellent way, as St. Paul calls it, this spirit of love to you especially who
have enjoyed the advantages of a liberal and ingenuous education. And if ever I
could hope to prevail and persuade, I should certainly expect no little success
in such an assembly as this, consisting of persons well taught and bred, whose
natures have been refined and polished, and minds improved and cultivated, and
newmoulded and fashioned by the care and skill of those excellent persons to
whose charge we were committed.

I think it ought not over-slightly to be taken notice of, that in such an age
as this, there are yet so many persons of fashion and quality who are not
ashamed to own their education, and therefore may be reasonably thought yet
sensible of the benefits that may have accrued to them from it. I say, in such
an age as this, wherein the first thing almost that Gentlemen affect, after
they have once got free from under the discipline of others, is presently to
forget all they have learned, and to erase out of their minds all the sober
counsels and useful rules they had before received, huffing at all instruction
as a piece of pedantry, fit only for children in coats, or fools, and freely
revenging themselves on their Schoolmasters and Tutours, for attempting to make
them wise and good against their wills.

But notwithstanding this, I must say, that by our thus meeting together we do
but little credit either to our selves or the School where we were brought up,
or the persons under whose feet we sat, unless we also clearly discover to the
world in our temper and conversation something excellent and singular that may
distinguish us from the rude untutoured vulgar, the ignorant and illiterate
rout.

Were that only good breeding which is now most fashionable, and does in
ordinary account pass amongst us for such, I should very freely acknowledge it
a blessing not much to be valued or regarded. To move ones leg and body
gracefully and in time, to bow and cringe in mood and figure; to wear clothes
most exactly made according to the newest mode; to be able to speak of the
French Court, and to repeat the witty part of a Play, and to talk finely of
love and honor, and make smart reparties; and to give every one good words
without meaning any thing at all by them; to know how to embroider a discourse
with many oaths and a little Atheism; to be able to drink high, and hector
loudly; to abuse a Parson, and to dare to kill a man; these and such others not
worth naming are too often now adays reputed the only gentile accomplishments
of a well-bred person?

But these are not the things we learnt at St. Paul's School, nor is this the
education which we now assemble in God's House to bless his name for. Those are
truly well bred, not only whose understandings and discerning faculties are
improved and enlarged, but especially whose natural rudeness and stubbornness
is broken, and wild and unruly passions tamed; whose affections and desires are
made governable and orderly; who are become manageable and flexible, calm and
tractable, willing to endure restraints and to live according to the best
rules. By good education we are, as it were, made over again, the roughness of
our natural tempers is filed off, and all their defects supplied; and by
prudent discipline, good example and wise counsel our manners are so formed,
that by the benefit of an happy education we come almost as much to excel
other men, as they do the brute beasts that have no understanding.

How much therefore we are obliged to our School, we can no better way show
than by our civil and comely demeanor, by our compliant and inoffensive
conversation, by our courteous and affable, sweet and benign disposition, by
our kind, useful and sociable behavior in the world.

If we consult the sober judgments of all men, we shall soon find that there is
nothing renders a man more respected, his company more pleasant and delightful
and desirable, nothing procures greater credit and reputation, and sooner
obtains the good word of every one, than a free, ingenuous, candid and
condescending temper, that studies to oblige, and rejoices to do good; That
there is nothing more noble and generous than an universal love and good will
to all men; nothing more amiable than mildness, peaceableness and gentleness of
spirit; nothing more graceful and gentile than kindness and benignity; nothing
more honorable and manly than being useful and beneficial to all round about
us.

And these are indeed qualities and perfections hardly attainable (as a wise
man expresses it) by those who hold the plough, and glory in the goad; who
drive oxen, and are occupied in their labors; and whose talk is of their
bullocks; who give their mind to make furrows, and are diligent to give the
kine fodder. These are above the reach of the smith who sits by the Anvil,
and considers the iron-work; the vapor of the fire wastes his flesh, and he
fights with the heat of the furnace: the noise of the hammer and the anvil is
ever in his ears, and his eyes look still upon the pattern of the thing be
makes. Vulgar and undisciplined minds are not capable of such noble
principles, and worthy inclinations.

If we indulge our furious and intemperate appetites, and blind and impotent
passions; if we are apt to pick quarrels, and delight in feuds and broils, if
we allow our selves to rail and give ill language; if we are rude and saucy in
our behavior toward others, or practice any of the mean arts and methods of
detraction: we basely unman and degrade our selves, and offer an affront to
that liberal education which has been bestowed upon us, and equal our selves
to the vulgar rout: for where are such qualities as these to be found but
amongst clowns and beggars, amongst the savage and unbred? Such accomplishments
as these befit only hostlers and porters: they are most highly distasteful to
all company, and productive of aversation and disrespect. In a word, if you
would excel others in point of true worth and excellency, endeavor to get
your souls possessed with this divine grace of charity, which is the only
thing that does truly ennoble a man, that does exalt and dignify his nature,
and raise him above the rest of his fellow creatures.

A SERMON Preached at WHITE HALL. The Seventh Sermon.
NUMB. XXIII. 10. -- Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end
be like his.


I Shall not now trouble you with enquiring into the strict meaning of these
words, as uttered by the Prophet Balaam; but I shall consider them only as
they are commonly understood, viz. as containing in them the secret wish and
desire of most wicked and ungodly men; who, though they are loath to be at the
pains of living the life, yet would fain die the death of the righteous, and
would gladly that their latter end should be like his. As well as men love
their sins, yet they would not willingly be damned for them. They cannot endure
to think seriously of passing out of this World in an impenitent state. For it
is what but a very few can arrive unto, wholly to shake off, or wear out all
sense of good and evil, of reward and punishment. The fears of another World
will ever and anon be stirring and erowding themselves in, and will fret and
gall the Sinner sorely, and make his thoughts troublesome to him. An uneasy
bed, a broken sleep, a sudden affliction, an handwriting on the wall, will
sometimes force us, whether we will or no, to smite upon our breasts, and
reflect sadly upon our past dishonorable misdeeds and the satal issue of them;
and very often our own conscience will fly in our face, notwithstanding all our
arts to divert it, or our charms to lull it asleep; nor could a wicked man ever
be at quiet in his mind, but that he is resolved by God's grace, when time
shall serve, to do something or other, he does not well know what or when,
whereby he may obtain pardon for all the follies and miscarriages of his life
past.

I am very confident I now represent to you the secret mind of most wicked
Christians who at any time think seriously, viz. that that which makes them so
hardy and stupidly neglectfull of their immortal concerns, and so jocund and
pleasant whilst they live in plain known sins, is this, that they promise
themselves, and depend on God's goodness for time and opportunity of making
amends in a lingering sickness, or in a declining age. They are now young and
healthful, strong and lusty, their pulse beats evenly, their blood moves
briskly, their spirits are active and subtle, and they feel no symptoms of any
approaching sickness. Hereafter therefore they think it will be time enough to
look after another life, when they shall be nigh leaving this, when their
bodies shall begin to decline, and their strength to decay, and death shall
make its approaches.

Thus there are as it were two ways propounded to Heaven; one, (and that is
counted a very dull, tedious and difficult passage,) by the constant doing of
good, by living righteously and godlily and soberly in this present world. The
other, (which is a shorter cut, and a much broader way;) by repenting at our
death of a wicked life: and it is not at all hard to guess which way the
greatest part of men will choose.

And would this do, it were indeed a very fine and subtle management of
things: for thus we might swallow the bait, and never be hurt by the hook: we
might have both the pleasure of being wicked, and the hopes of being saved. We
might spare our selves all the trouble of Religion, and yet not miss of the
reward of it. We might spend all our days as we list, gratify every vain humor
and appetite, enjoy this world as much as we can, deny our selves nothing that
our lusts and passions crave, live all our life long without God in the world,
and yet at last die in the Lord.

The great enemy of mankind has not in all his magazine a more deadly engine
for the destruction of souls. Nor is there any thing I know of, that does so
notoriously frustrate and defeat the whole design of our Savior's coming into
the world, and render our Christianity so useless to us, as this one
presumption, that the whole of Religion, or all that is necessary to salvation,
may be performed upon a sick or deathbed. For if it may be done as well at the
last, in good truth what need we trouble our selves about it sooner? what need
we disquiet our selves in vain about the exercises of virtue and piety, or
forego the sweet pleasures of this life, or constantly maintain a painful and
ungrateful conflict with the inclinations and inordinate cravings of our
flesh, or renounce our secular interests, or undertake a sharp and troublesome
service, whenas it is but at any time lamenting over our sins, and trusting to
the performances of Jesus Christ, and we shall be as secure of Paradise, as if
we had all our days kept a conscience void of offense both toward God, and
toward all men? and in so doing shall run no other hazard but that of dying
suddenly, which does not happen to one man in five hundred.

Eternal bliss and happiness is a thing of so very great and weighty
consideration, of such vast moment to us, that to put off the thoughts thereof,
or provision for it, but one day (after that we are become capable of thinking
and acting like men) is certainly a very great and unaccountable indiscretion;
but for a man to give all his days to himself, and to his own pleasure and
humor, and to reserve for God, for whose service he was born, but one, and
that the worst and the last, This is surely madness beyond all measure.

The extreme folly and danger of such practices I shall now endeavor to
evince, by showing briefly these three things.

I. How little all that amounts to which can be done by a wicked man in order
to the obtaining the pardon of his sins on a sick or deathbed.

II. How far short all this comes of what the holy Scriptures require as the
indispensable conditions of salvation.

III. What small hopes or encouragement God has any where given men to believe
that he will at all abate or remit of those conditions he has propounded in
the Gospel, or accept of any thing less than a good life.

I. How little all that amounts to which can be done by a wicked man on his
sick or deathbed. Now some at this time can do more, some less, according as
God affords them space and ability; but ordinarily the whole of a deathbed
repentance is no more than a few good words and wishes, a superficial
confession of sin and wickedness in general, some broken prayers and pious
expressions to the Minister, (who then shall be sure to be sent for in all
haste, however despised by the sinner all his lifetime before) and perhaps
receiving the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, (which he never thought of, nor
ever would trouble himself about whilst he was well and in health,) together
with a legacy of his ill-gotten goods to charitable uses; and this in common
esteem is making a good Christian end; and such an ones condition, whatever his
life has been, is thought fair and hopeful.

But I am willing in the handling of this subject to allow to the dying
penitent all the advantages imaginable, and to consider his repentance in the
best circumstances, and therefore I shall not instance in such as are violently
snatched and suddenly hurried out of the world in the midst of their
wickedness, and have hardly time so much as to beg mercy at God's hands; nor
yet in those who are taken with such diseases as render them incapable of any
wise or rational thoughts, though this is a case that often happens in the
world; for there is many a man who intends when he comes to die to repent, that
is, to call to mind all his wicked ways, and to be extremely sorrowful for
them, and at last it proves that his sickness is of that sort as utterly to
take away all his memory and understanding: and when he is to look back, and
seriously to consider how he has lived, alas! he remembers not one thing good
or bad that he ever said or did. He has pitched upon and fixed a time wherein
to fit himself for another world, and for his long home; and when that time is
come, his distemper proves such, that he knows nothing of his going, or that he
is now upon his journey. And as he lived like a fool all his life long, so now
when he designed to die very piously and wisely, perhaps he dies raving mad.
But I shall omit these and the like considerations, (though indeed all those
who are so daring and intolerably venturesome as absolutely to resolve to
continue in all ungodliness till they come to die, ought reasonably to expect
that God should in his justice cut them off without allowing them either the
opportunity or means of repentance:) and instead thereof shall rather put the
case of one who dies leisurely and by degrees, who retains his memory and
understanding to the last, and is able in some measure to reckon up and recount
all his former wickednesses; and I shall consider what such an one can do
toward the securing his everlasting salvation.

1. He may be most passionately sorrowful for what he has done amiss, so that
the remembrance of his evil ways may become very bitter and grievous to him,
but yet it is hard to think for all this that his mind should on a sudden be
really altered; for I speak now of such as have all along pleased and delighted
themselves in sin and vanity, who have fortified themselves with all the
arguments for vice and irreligion, who have cherished the most contemptible
thoughts of, and hated nothing so much as piety and virtue; now is it likely
that of a sudden such men's judgments and opinions concerning the worth, value
and goodness of things should be so wonderfully changed, that they should be
able so immediately to lay aside all their former prejudices against the rules
of goodness and righteousness, and to be reconciled in a moment to what they
have so long declared open enmity against? that just a little before they die
they should become as absolutely of another mind, and as clearly of another
persuasion as if they were in truth other men? It argues greater command over
our selves than we should now find, should we try the same thing, for a man to
think, believe judge and act quite contrary to what he has thought, believed
and done for forty, or fifty, or sixty years: so that in truth this grief and
sorrow that now possesses the dying penitent, is no other than that of every
common malefactor who when he is ready to receive that punishment which he
has deserved, is then very angry and displeased with himself for what he has
done, and yet were he set free, would not stick, the next fair opportunity, to
commit the same crime again that he is now condemned for; he is sorry not that
he sinned, but that he cannot escape suffering for it; it troubles him not so
much that he has been so evil, as that he fears God will prove just and true
to his word; it wounds him to the heart to think that he can now sin no longer,
that all the pleasure of it is past, and that nothing now remains but a sad
reckoning and account; but yet he could still applaud himself in the
remembrance of his former extravagancies, were he sure that God would forget
them; so that it is no thanks to wicked men though they are mightily confounded
at the sense of their guilt when they come to die, and see hell gaping before
them just ready to devour them; those fears and horrors that they at such
times feel, are very often but some flashes of those flames that are just ready
to catch hold of them; and if such a sorrow be repentance, they shall then
sadly repent to all eternity.

2. If the dying penitent proceeds still farther, most earnestly and
affectionately to beg God's pardon for the sake of Christ Jesus, pleading his
merits and satisfaction; what do they but mock God, (to use the words of a
great Scholar and Courtier) who think it enough to ask him forgiveness with the
remainder and last drawing of a malicious breath? for what do they otherwise,
that die this kind of well dying, but say unto God, we beseech thee, O Lord,
that all the falsehood, forswearing and treacheries of our life past may be
pleasing to thee, and acceptable in thy sight, that thou will for our sakes
(who have had no leisure to do any thing for thine) change thy nature, and
forget to be a just God, that thou would love injuries and oppressions, call
ambition wisdom, and charity foolishness; certainly, (as he concludes) they
who depend upon such prayers have either found out a new God or made one. Nay,

3. Should he back his prayers with restitution of all that he has gotten
unjustly, and with charity to the poor, and forgiveness of all the injuries he
has received from other men; these indeed had been excellent beginnings of a
new life, had they been done in time, but what virtue or praise can there be in
restoring that which we cannot possibly detain any longer? in giving away that
which we must necessarily part with? and as for pardoning injuries received,
alas! what is all this when we speak of wicked and unreasonable men, who in
their life time take present pay, immediate revenge? such people talk of
forgiving injuries, whenas there is not one injury done to them that they have
not a great while ago fully returned, there is nothing behind hand or due to
them, in that kind; they have had the spite and all the pleasure of revenge
already, and now after that they would freely forgive and die in charity.

4. Lastly, The utmost and greatest thing that the sick or dying sinner can do
is to make strong, and as to his present meaning, most sincere resolutions
against his former evil courses, and for walking in all virtue and godliness,
should God continue his life; and this is that which men usually trust unto in
this extremity, they hope God will accept of the will for the deed, and that
such unfeigned resolutions shall pass for repentance.

Now here I would desire you seriously to consider, that there is nothing in
the world more easy than to resolve well, especially when we are under any
fear or fright, that there is not any thing, however difficult or ungrateful,
or even impossible, that men will not readily promise to perform if thereby
they may but deliver themselves from a pressing and imminent danger; for our
minds being then wholly prepossest with the great sense of the danger we are
in, we weigh not at all the difficulties or inconveniences of what at such a
time we undertake or engage our selves to do; but yet how hard do we by daily
experience find it to keep close and constant to those religious resolutions
which we make even in the time of our health and vigor, and that upon the most
serious deliberation? And how many have we known in the world, who when they
lay on their sick beds, and were under the fears and apprehensions of death
have by the most solemn vows, and those no doubt as to the present sense of
their minds, sincere, obliged themselves to walk in better ways, and professed
that they desired to live for no other end but only to testify the reality of
their intentions by their future obedience; who yet, as soon as ever they have
been restored to health, have presently returned like the dog to the vomit, or
the sow to the wallowing in the mire? Then is the time of making good and
lasting resolutions of living well, when we can examine indifferently, and
determine impartially, when our judgments are good, and our passions are quiet;
but all the purposes of sick men are most commonly like the vows of a mariner
in a great tempest, which vanish away and are forgotten upon the clearing of
the Sky and altering of the weather; their mind changes with their blood, and
varies with their pulse, and all their good purposes are purged away with the
dregs of their distemper. And thus it is easy to observe that the ungodly
man's resolutions are just according to the degrees of danger that he is in; so
long as there are brisk hopes of recovery, his intentions of amendment are weak
and slender, but as death comes nigher and nigher, his resolutions increase and
get strength, and when at last he sees it is very unlikely he should live any
longer, then he resolves soundly and stoutly to live better; the plain meaning
of which is this, he promises and vows to do that which according to his own
fears and opinion is impossible to be done; and can we think that God will
accept of a purpose, (let it be never so sincere) of living well, which is
founded upon no other consideration or motive but only this, that I verily
believe my life is now all done? a resolution that is so far from being likely
to hold, that it is most reasonable it should not; for if I once am likely to
live longer, the reasons why I thus resolved do then cease, and I may upon as
good grounds, and with as great security as ever go on in my former sins.

But farther, the dying man resolves to leave all his sins, but, alas, they are
not so easily parted with! he has entertained and cherished them for a long
time, and they are not now so quickly to be rooted out; for it takes even good
men many months and years, a great part of their time spent in most hearty and
frequent begging the divine assistance, and in calling together all the
arguments imaginable, and using their utmost strength of mind to conquer and
subdue but some one unreasonable passion or desire; and wicked men in their
life time complain enough of the difficulty of this; what more common with them
than to say that it is impossible to resist the allurements of good company, or
the charms of beauty, or the temptations of gain and honor? nay, do they not
often try to excuse themselves in many sins, by pleading that they are so used
to them that they cannot possibly leave them? as for instance, that they swear
before ever they think of it, that they cannot keep down their passion when
provoked, that they have tried to break off some lewd customs, and have
prevailed for a while, but that then they have returned upon them with greater
violence, and yet now when they come to die how easy is all this? a good
resolution and a few prayers shall do all this great work in a trice, and an
hour or a day shall vanquish all sin in general, and at once, so as that the
man shall become fitted to stand before God.

When therefore men make such resolutions of amendment, they resolve they know
not what, for it is a work of great time and patience, it requires long
consideration, assiduous watchfulness and unwearied diligence, to extirpate
those inveterate habits which by a long wicked life we have contracted, and to
mortify those lusts that have been so long used to tyrannize and domineer over
us; this must be done by degrees and successively, by first conquering one
vice, then another; there is very little trust or heed therefore to be given to
such hasty resolves, violently extorted from us by a great and present fear;
and after all let them be never so honest and strong, yet still there is a
great difference between doing a thing, and only resolving in our minds to do
it, and why should that be thought sufficient to save us at the last gasp,
which all grant is not sufficient to put us into a state of salvation whilst we
continue well and in health? But wishes and purposes made in the time of our
life and strength do not alone make a bad man good, why then should they alone
be sufficient on our deathbed? in a word, a man that professes himself a
scholar, but who has spent all his days in idleness, and made no improvement
of his mind or reason, and only at last resolves to study hard, should God
spare his life, may as well and properly be said to have died a learned man, as
one who being by profession Christ's disciple has lived wickedly and
unworthily all his days, and only at last just before he dies resolves to
amend his life, can ever on that account be thought to have passed out of this
world a good Christian. Which leads me to the second thing.

II. To consider how far short all this comes of what the holy Scriptures
require as the indispensable conditions of salvation; for should all this that
I have now rehearsed, and whatever else can be added to it which a wicked man
may do upon his deathbed, should it all amount to repentance, yet where in
the mean time is obedience to all the laws of the Gospel?

As for those indeed who in the sincerity of their heart have done God's will,
their repentance shall be accepted for what they have fallen short in, or those
few things they have miscarried and transgressed in, and which the best of us
all have need to lament over; but I cannot think that a short repentance at
last was ever intended to answer for an universal disobedience and a whole life
of wickedness; for repentance from dead works and resolutions of a godly life,
are required as a preparative for Christianity, and are therefore accounted
necessary in adult persons even before their Baptism; but then by our Christian
profession, which we take upon us in Baptism, we are obliged to more, viz. to a
new life and all manner of purity and righteousness; and therefore to hope to
be happy in another world without living well here is against our own very
bargain, and that agreement and covenant which we made with God in our baptism,
wherein we expressly promised to walk in God's holy Commandments all our days:
and therefore this keeping God's commands must be as necessary for the
obtaining the reward, as sorrow for, or forsaking of our sins.

This I shall illustrate briefly thus. The ways of virtue and righteousness,
and of sin and wickedness, are not like two roads that lie nigh or parallel one
to the other, so that with ease, and in a little time, a man may step out of
one into the other; but they are perfectly opposite, and directly contrary to
each other. Suppose that a man for a great reward be obliged in one day,
between Sunrising and Sunsetting, to travel so many miles Northward, and
moreover by a solemn oath (as all Christians are to the practice of
Christianity) engaged to the performance of it; but that the man freely
presuming he has time enough to do this in, does not set out at the first
rising of the Sun, but loiters and trifles away all his time; nay, not only
so, but that for his pleasure, or some little convenience, he travels the quite
contrary way, and goes Southward; and finding that road very smooth, broad, and
full of company and diversion, is by any little temptations drilled on still
farther in it, wholly forgetting his bargain; till on a sudden the Sun is just
ready to set, night comes on a-pace, and then the wretch begins to consider how
much he is out of his way, and finds himself weary and tired, and unfit for
travel, and curses his own folly, and promises if he were to begin again, he
would go directly to the place commanded, but by that time he has thus
resolved, the Sun is set, shall this man now obtain the promised reward? Alas!
before he can challenge that, he must first return back all the way he has
gone, even to the point from whence he first set out, and also after that will
have his whole days journey still to go, and all that task to do which he at
first engaged himself to perform; so a wicked man upon his deathbed is not
only to unravel all his former works, to break off all his lewd customs, to
mortify all his foolish passions and unruly lusts, to forsake all his deadly
sins, and to repent of his past ill-spent life, but he is then to live a new
life, he is then to accustom himself to the practice of goodness, and to make
it habitual to him; his mind is then to be furnished with all Christian virtues
and graces, he has his whole race still to run, and his salvation still to
work out; and is the least part of this possible to be done on a languishing
bed of sickness?

Had we made Religion the business of our whole lives, and in every thing
exercised our selves to keep a conscience unblameable; yet at such a time, when
we come to die, we should find work and duty enough to employ us to the utmost:
To manage our selves well and decently and as becomes Christians in such a
condition, patiently to bear our affliction, cheerfully to submit to God's
will, to beg pardon of our manifold failings and miscarriages, readily to leave
this world, and all that is dear to us in it, at his call: these and many other
are the exercises of a Christian on the bed of sickness. And how few are there
in those agonies that are able to bear up with any tolerable manhood or
courage? and therefore we do not ordinarily account him a wise man that will
leave so much as his worldly affairs then to be settled. How then, besides
taking care of all these things at a time, when our very natural powers and
faculties are disabled, when our bodies are full of pain, and our minds full of
distractions and perplexities, shall we be able also to do all that work, for
which our whole life is little enough, and for which alone we were born into
this world? and this the Devil subtly foresees, that if he can but prevail
with men to put off the care of Religion till a sick bed, he shall find
othergess employment for them then. He will not fail to be present at such an
opportunity; and as before in their lifetime he told them it was too soon, so
now he will himself suggest to them that it is too late to repent and turn to
God.

Ye therefore that are apt to defer your repentance till a deathbed,
condescend sometimes to visit your sick neighbors and friends: look on their
condition when they lie on their dying bed; and by it judge whether that be a
fit time to do so great a work in; see how troubled and disturbed their
thoughts are, how uneasy and distempered their minds are as well as their
bodies, how fast their reason and understanding decays, how their memories are
lost, and their senses fail them, and they cannot in the least help themselves.
Is this a time, say then, to prepare for eternity, to vanquish all sin, and to
obtain all grace? is this the fittest opportunity we can choose, to make our
peace with God in, to sue out our pardon, and to perform all those duties of
piety, mercy, justice and charity that we were before wanting in; or rather are
not they then happy, who at such a time have nothing else to do but to die?
would you but take the opinion of those who are themselves in this condition,
and be moved by their judgments, they will all give their suffrages for what I
have been now proving. Do not they when surprised by death offer all their
goods and substance that they have so long and vainly labored and toiled for,
for some longer time, for a little truce and respite? what are they not willing
to give, on condition that God would spare them yet a little while before they
go hence, and be no more seen? Did you ever hear of any dying penitent that did
not a thousand times wish he had begun sooner? and how earnestly do such warn
every one by their example to take heed of trusting to a deathbed repentance?
If therefore he that has served the lusts of the flesh, and done his own will
during a long malicious life can, for any thing a dying person can do, be in
any sense said to have lived soberly, righteously and godly, then may he be
sure of salvation: if we walk according to this rule, then shall peace be upon
us, but how can a man sow to the flesh, and reap to the spirit? serve the Devil
all his life long, and be crowned by God at his death? but

III. The last thing to be considered was, what hopes or encouragement God has
given us to believe that he will remit or abate of those conditions of a good
life which are propounded to us in the Gospel. And indeed there is very little
to be found either of promise or example in Scripture to be a sufficient ground
of belief that he will ordinarily accept of a deathbed repentance; for are not
the conditions of salvation the same to persons sick and dying, as they are to
men alive and in health? Are they not both under the same covenant, and is not
the same actual obedience required of all under equal penalties? or can we
think that any man shall fare better, and come off upon easier terms; or that
God will deal more mildly and gently with him, and accept of less from him
only because he has been so hardy and bold as to continue in sin, and to put
off his duty toward God even to the very last minute of his life?

But however there are two instances commonly mentioned in favor of a
deathbed repentance. The first is that of the laborers, in our Savior's
Parable, that came into the vineyard at the eleventh hour, and yet received
equal wages with those that came in at the first, and had born the heat of the
day. But it is here to be observed,

1. That these laborers who came in so late, yet came in as soon as ever they
were called and invited; for they gave this reason why they had stood so long
there idle, because no man has hired us, Had they been often solicited by the
Master, or his Servants, and offered work, and all the day refused, and only
then at last, just in the close of the evening, been willing to have taken upon
themselves the service when it was over, this had been something like the case
I have been now speaking of, of Christians all their lives long rejecting
Christ's yoke, but just when they are summoned to give an account, willing to
submit their necks to it. But this Parable rather represents the case of an
Heathen man that never heard of Christ or his Religion till a little before his
death; whose coming into the Church so late shall not therefore hinder his
receiving a full reward. But this is by no means the condition of those who
have made a covenant with Christ in baptism, and after they have most
notoriously failed of what they promised, do then only return to their service
when the night is come, in which no man can work. He that came in at the
eleventh hour was under no engagement to work any sooner, he had nowhere
promised it, nor had the Master commanded it, and therefore he was without
fault.

2. He that came in at the eleventh hour did yet work one hour, that was indeed
but a short time, yet however sufficient to render his case very different from
that man's, who comes in but at the twelfth; which is the case of the deathbed
penitent.

The other instance often named in favor of a deathbed repentance, is that of
one of the Thieves on the Cross, a passage in the Gospel, remembered better, and
studied more by wicked men, than any other story whatever, though the whole of
it was so very miraculous and extraordinary, that the like never can be
expected again, unless our blessed Lord should once more descend from Heaven,
and suffer here amongst us, and one of us should happen to die in company with
him; and then indeed from such a wonderful repentance and faith as his was, we
might hope for the like success and acceptance. But this example affords but
little comfort to those who have for many years professed the Religion of
Jesus, and yet deferred the practice of it till the day of their death.

But, you will say then, is there no hopes? is there no remedy? what must a
wicked man do in such a condition, when he happens to be thus surprised by
death? I am far from taking upon me to limit and confine the mercies of God
Almighty, they are over all his works, and are as infinite as himself, such
persons therefore as have spent their days in luxury and profaneness, and
contempt of all religion, but at last humbly beg pardon, and heartily promise
and resolve amendment, we must leave to his goodness, and pity, and gracious
compassion, who though he ties us up to rules, yet is not himself bound by
them, and who may do more for us than he has any where promised, and
therefore persons in such circumstances ought to be encouraged and quios^^ed to
do all that they can, and at last to submit themselves to God's good pleasure,
and all that we can tell such men is, that the greater and more remarkable
their repentance is, the more hopes of their forgiveness; that sometimes there
have appeared now and then some illustrious instances of the power of God's
grace and spirit, men who have been as famous for their signal repentance as
they were before for their profaneness and debauchery, and that where God gives
such extraordinary grace in this life, it is to be hoped he will show
extraordinary favor in the other; so that if such men may be saved, it is
nevertheless by way of prerogative, not by the ordinary rule of judgment; it is
we know not how.

But yet lest men should from hence presume to defer their repentance, thus
much must, I think, and ought to be said on the other side, that God has no
where expressly declared that he will accept of all our sorrows, and
submissions, and tears, and promises, and resolutions made on a deathbed; that
all these do not amount to what is the plain condition of the covenant of
grace, that though what God may do is not for us to define, yet he has
plainly enough told us what we are to do, and that it is the greatest madness
in the world to run so great an hazard as that we cannot be saved without a
dispensation from the ordinary rule; had a wise man an hundred souls he would
not venture one of them on such uncertainties, and thus the ancient fathers
have determined this question, Do I say (says St. Augustine) such an one shall
be damned? I dare not. Do I say he shall be saved? I cannot. What say I then?
will you free your self from all uncertainty in this matter? Repent now whilst
you are in health; forsake your sins whilst you are able to commit them, and
then you are sure of pardon. There is indeed another Church in the world that
can teach men how to be saved on a deathbed even without repentance, which
has found out ways to make it not only possible, but very easy, for any
ungodly wretch to secure himself from Hell at length when he comes to die by
less than half an hours work; but we have not so learned Christ, nor dare we be
so false to our trust, or to the souls of men, as to give them certain
assurance of everlasting life, on any other terms than a constant, habitual
obedience to the laws of the Gospel. The only certain way to die well is to
live well.

Nor shall I go about to determine how much of our life must be spent in the
practice of righteousness and goodness before we can be said to have lived
well; since this varies according to the circumstances of men which are
infinite: this is as if a man should ask how long it will be before a fool can
become wise, or an unlearned man a scholar, which differs according to the
capacity of the man, his industry and opportunity, and God's blessing; but
only thus much, I think, may safely be said, that so much time of our life is
necessary to be spent in the practice of goodness, as that we may from the
temper of our minds and the course of our actions be truly denominated, holy,
humble, pure, meek, patient, just, temperate, lovers of God and men; for the
Gospel promises not eternal life and glory to any but to persons so and so
qualified, and it is undoubted that a few pious wishes, prayers and purposes,
or a good will made at our death will not suffice to denominate us such. God
does not just watch how men die, but he will judge every man according to his
works, and the deeds he has done in the flesh; and those dispositions we have
nourished, loved and delighted in all our life will follow and attend us to
another world; and an evil nature, however loath we are to it, or sorry for it,
will sink us down into the deepest Hell.

To conclude all, the use we are to make of all I have now said, is not to
judge or censure others whose lives we may have been acquainted with, and whose
condition according to this doctrine may seem sad and deplorable, such we are
to pity and pray for, and exercise our charity upon, and leave to God's mercy;
but that we should all now resolve not to defer the doing of the least thing
that we could wish done in order to the salvation of our souls, to a sick or
deathbed, but that to day, even whilst it is called to day, we depart from
iniquity, and not be always beginning to live; we ought not to lose so much
time as it would take to deliberate about this matter, for there is no room for
consultation here; he would be next to mad that should seriously advise whether
he should be for ever happy or for ever miserable.

Let us all endeavor therefore so to live now as we shall wish we had done
when we come to lie upon our deathbeds, or as we shall then resolve to live,
in case God should continue our life to us, let us pursue those things now,
which we shall be able to think of and reflect upon with pleasure when we come
to die, and presently forsake all those things the remembrance of which at that
time will be bitter to us; let us now whilst we are well and in health cherish
the same thoughts and apprehensions of things, that we shall have when we are
sick and dying; let us now despise this world as much, and think as ill of sin,
and as seriously of God and eternity as we shall then do, for this is the great
commendation of the righteous man that every one desires to die his death, that
at last all men are of his mind and persuasion, and would choose his condition;
Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his.

I end all with those words of the wise Son of Sirach. Learn before thou speak,
and use physic or ever thou be sick; before judgment examine thy self, and in
the day of visitation thou shall find mercy. Humble thy self before thou be
sick, and in the time of sins show repentance. Let nothing hinder thee to pay
thy vows in due time, and defer not until death to be justified. Make no
tarrying to turn to the Lord, and put it not off from day to day; for suddenly
shall the wrath of the Lord come forth, and in thy security thou shall be
destroyed, and perish in the day of vengeance.

A SERMON Preached at WHITE HALL. The Eighth Sermon.
St. MATTHEW. V. 34. But I say unto you, Swear not at all.


FOR our more clearly understanding the sense and extent of this prohibition of
our blessed Savior's, Swear not at all, these two things must be observed.

I. That it was a common practice amongst the Jews to swear by some of God's
creatures, which custom prevailed amongst them from a pretended reverence of
God's holy name: whenever they would affirm any thing with more than ordinary
vehemence and earnestness, or beget an assurance of what they said in another,
they thought it not fit or decent presently to invoke the sovereign God of
Heaven and earth, and on every slight and trivial occasion to run to the great
maker and father of all things; but in smaller matters and in ordinary talk
they would swear by their Parents, by the Heavens, by the Earth, by Jerusalem,
the Altar, Temple, their Head, or the like; nor did they count such forms of
swearing equally obliging with those oaths wherein the name of God was solemnly
and expressly called upon: to this our Savior in probability refers in the
verse foregoing my Text, Ye have heard that it has been said by them of old
time, thou shall not forswear thy self, but shall perform unto the Lord thine
oaths; they thought such only incurred the guilt and penalty of perjury who
stood not to those promises they had confirmed by explicit calling the Lord
himself to witness, but that there was but little evil or danger either in the
common use of swearing by creatures, or in breaking such oaths.

Now our Savior here absolutely forbids not only swearing by the sacred name
of God, but also by any of his creatures, Swear not at all, no not so much as
by the Heavens, by the Earth, or by Jerusalem; and the reason he gives is
because in all such forms of swearing by creatures, though God is not expressly
named, yet he himself is really referred to, and tacitly invoked, who is the
supreme Lord and maker of all, when you swear by the Heavens you call upon him
whose throne is there placed, when by the earth you appeal to him whose
footstool it is, when by Jerusalem you implicitly and by just interpretation
swear by him that is the great King thereof. This our Savior as plainly
delivers on another occasion, Matthew. 23.20. Whosoever shall swear by the altar,
swears by it and all things thereon; and whose shall swear by the Temple,
swears by it and by him that dwells therein; and he that shall swear by
Heaven, swears by the throne of God and by him that sits thereon. So that
in this case, the truth is, if in such kind of oaths, when men swear by the
Heavens, the Earth or the like, they mean only the material sensible Heavens
and Earth, besides the irreligion of vain swearing, they are guilty of plain
idolatry, in giving to the creatures that worship that is due only to God; as
(supposing those inanimate beings able to hear them and judge their thoughts,
and witness to the sincerity of their purposes, or to punish them for their
falseness and hypocrisy) but if they do not believe any such thing of those
creatures they swear by, then must such oaths, if they have any sense at all,
refer to God, and his name must be understood to be invoked, even though he be
not expressly mentioned: So that this prohibition of our Savior may be
accounted to extend to all such forms of speech amongst us, as are used as
oaths (and so understood) to beget credit to what we say, though God be not
named; in short, all manner of oaths whether by the Majesty of God, or any of
his creatures, or any words, signs or gestures, which by common custom and
interpretation are accounted swearing, may be understood to be hereby
forbidden, as well as direct express swearing; for a man may swear without ever
saying a word, if by received usage such a gesture does signify our calling
God to witness; and so the forms and outward modes of swearing are different in
several Nations, though the reason and sense of them be the same in all places,
whatever words or signs are used. If therefore such phrases as these, faith,
troth, and many others which I might name, are in ordinary esteem and practice
thought to contain something more than an affirmation, and are used and
understood amongst us as oaths, they are here forbidden to Christians under
this rule of swearing not at all, though such words in themselves have not the
force of oaths, nor is God immediately appealed to by them.

II. It is farther here to be observed, that though all manner of swearing
whether by the name of God or any of his creatures be thus prohibited, Swear
not at all, yet this must be understood only of arbitrary voluntary swearing
in ordinary talk and discourse, when there is no great reason, no justifiable
occasion for it. It is to be acknowledged that some of the ancient Fathers from
these words did conclude it utterly unlawful for a Christian at any time to
swear; some of their sayings to this purpose are quoted by Grotius in his
comment upon these words; but then it is to be considered,

1. That there were but some few of them of this opinion, and that against the
current doctrine of the greatest part of the primitive Christians; and,

2. Against the known allowed practice amongst them; for we all along find
there were many Christians in the armies of the heathen Emperors, and they
could not have served under them without taking the military oath, which they
did not use to scruple, so they were not put to swear by any of their Genii, or
Heathen Deities, or Fortune, or the like.

3. Their great argument against taking of oaths was drawn from the invincible
faith and truth of Christians, who upon no consideration whatever could either
be forced or won to affirm what they knew to be false, or promise what they
never intended to perform; and this they were so remarkable for, that they
thought it a diminution or scandalous affront offered to them to be put to
their oaths; they always had such a regard to their words, and it was so sacred
a thing at all times to speak truth, that they would not be so much distrusted
or disparaged as to have the security of an oath required of them; the constant
tenor of their lives they thought did bear a greater testimony to what the
Christians affirmed, and render it more credible than the oaths of any other
men could what they witnessed.

But now because in latter days some Sectaries both here and elsewhere have
from these words, Swear not at all, pleaded against the lawfulness of taking of
any oaths though thereto required by the Magistrate, though it be an oath of
Allegiance to their Prince, or when they give testimony in a public cause: I
shall briefly and plainly make out to you that this prohibition of our
Savior's must admit of some exceptions, and must be restrained only to vain
and rash oaths in our ordinary discourse, which I shall do by desiring you to
consider,

(1.) That in other general prohibitions it is acknowledged by all that we must
make the same or like exceptions. Thus though our Savior has said a little
before these words in this Sermon on the Mount, v. 21. Thou shall not kill, and
whosoever shall kill shall be in danger of the judgment, yet we all grant that
this must be confined to private persons, that this forbids not the
Magistrate's inflicting capital punishments; and then that as to private
persons, it is meant only of killing innocent men; but that still it is
lawful for us in the preservation of our own lives to kill those who unjustly
assault us, these cases must be reserved: so here, Swear not at all, that is,
not of your own motion, without any necessary or sufficient cause; but this
does not infringe the right which Magistrates have to impose oaths on their
subjects, and to require the utmost and greatest security for their fidelity
and obedience; this does not forbid swearing when it is requisite for the
determining of important controversies or distribution of justice, when it is
for the public good, that our testimony should be credited and made more valid
by the solemnity of an oath. And that such exceptions as these must be allowed
from this general rule will appear,

2. If we consider the positive command that is opposed to this prohibition,
Swear not at all, but let your communication be yea, yea; nay, nay; for
whatsoever is more than these, comes of evil. Let your communication, i. e.
your speech, your ordinary familiar discourse, be yea, yea; nay, nay: which was
a proverbial way of expressing an honest man whom you may believe and trust.
Justorum etiam est etiam, and non eorum est non: His aye was aye, and his no
was no. His promises and performances did exactly and constantly agree: without
any more ado you may give credit to, and rely upon whatever he says. Whatever
is more than these, comes of evil; i. e. whatsoever is more than bare
affirming or denying any thing, (that is still in our communication, in our
ordinary talk and discourse) is from evil; from men's so commonly breaking of
promises, and speaking of falsities; from whence that lewd custom of adding
oaths proceeds, because they cannot be believed without them. Now therefore
since our Savior is here directing us how to govern our common discourse and
conversation together, the prohibition also in the beginning must be restrained
to the same matter, and so the full sense of the words seems to me to be this.
In your communication, familiari sermon, in your common talk use no swearing,
not so much as by any creature; but let it suffice barely to affirm or deny,
and be always so true to your words, that nothing farther need be desired or
expected from you: all other confirmation in such ordinary affairs is practiced
only by such as are used to lie and dissemble, and intend to impose upon
others.

(3.) That our Savior did not here forbid all swearing, whatever cause there
might be for it, as a thing in it self unlawful, we are fully satisfied from
the example of St. Paul, who certainly understood his Master's mind in this
particular. Now it is a very unreasonable thing to imagine, that he should so
often swear, and that by the name of God too, that such his oaths should be
recorded in the Scriptures, and that there should not be the least intimation
of his sinning in so doing, if all swearing was utterly prohibited by his Lord
and Master. I shall propound two or three eminent instances to show, that in
serious and great matters of mighty concernment he made no scruple of adding
the confirmation of an oath; Gal. 1.20. Now the things which I write unto you,
behold, before God I lie not. He bears witness to the truth of his writings by
an express oath; Romans 1.9. For God is my witness whom I serve, that without
ceasing I make mention of you always in my prayers. It was of great moment that
in the beginning of his Epistle he should persuade those, to whom he did
address himself, of his good will toward them. How well therefore he did wish
them, he calls God to witness, which is the formal essence of an oath. Thus
again, to name no more, 2 Cor. 11.31. The God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, which is blessed for evermore, knows that I lie not: which is a plain
appeal to God's testimony. So that when the glory of God and the public good
was engaged, he thought it not unlawful to invoke God's holy name, and to call
his Majesty for a witness of his truth, or the avenger of his falsehood. Thus
our blessed Savior himself when he stood before the High Priest of the Jews,
did not refuse to answer upon oath; Matthew. 26.63. The High Priest said unto
him, I adjure thee by the living God that thou tell us whether thou be the
Christ, the Son of God, which amongst the Jews was the form of giving an oath;
to which our Savior answered, Thou have said; that is, upon my oath it is as
thou say. Nay, to make all sure, that there is no evil in swearing when it is
done gravely and seriously, and upon an important occasion that requires it; we
find that God himself has been pleased to give us his oath. Though it were
impossible for him to lie, yet that we might have strong consolation and full
assurance, to show the heirs of the promise the immutability of his counsel, he
confirmed it by an oath; and when he could not swear by a greater, he swore by
himself; Heb. 6.13. And therefore it must be very absurd to deny amongst
Christians the lawfulness of doing that, though upon never so great reason,
which St. Paul so often did, nay which God Almighty, who is truth it self, did
yet vouchsafe out of condescension to our weakness, to do more than once. Not
now to mention Baptism and the Lord's Supper, both of which have in them the
nature of oaths, and are therefore called Sacraments.

(4.) We are to consider that swearing rightly circumstanced is so far from
being a thing in it self evil, and so universally forbidden; that it is indeed
a most eminent part of religious worship and divine adoration, by which we do
most signally own and recognize God Almighty to be the great Sovereign Lord and
Governor of the world, the highest and supremest Power, to which the last and
final appeal is in all cases to be made. By it we acknowledge the immensity of
his presence, his exact knowledge and continual care of humane affairs, and all
things that happen here below; his all-seeing eye, that he searches into the
depth of our hearts, and is conscious to our most inward thoughts and secret
meanings. We do by it avow him as the grand Patron of truth and innocence, as
the severe punisher and avenger of deceit and perfidiousness. And therefore
does God often in holy Scripture appropriate this to himself; Him only shall
thou serve, and to him shall thou cleave, and shall swear by his name. And if
this be done with that consideration and solemnity which does become such a
special part of devotion; upon an occasion that does deserve, and that will in
some measure excuse our engaging the divine Majesty as a witness in it; I say,
if it be performed with due awe and reverence, with hearty intention for a
considerable good, we do, thus calling upon God when we swear by him, honor
and glorify his great and holy name, as well as by prayer or praises, or any
other act of religious worship whatever.

(5.) Add to this the necessity of taking oaths in order to civil government,
public administration of justice, and the maintaining of good order and peace
in Societies. And therefore the Apostle tells us, Heb. 6.16. That an oath for
confirmation to men is the end of all strife; and that not by particular
customs and laws prevailing in some places only, but from the appointment of
God, the reasonableness and fitness of the thing it self, and the constant
practice of all the world in all ages; for as far and wide as the sense of a
Deity has spread it self, has also the religion of an oath, and the final
determination of matters in difference, by calling to witness the Lord and
Maker of all things; this being the utmost assurance, and the surest pledge any
can give of their faith and sincerity. For nothing can be imagined sufficient
or effectual to engage men to speak truth, or to be faithful and constant to
their promises, if an oath does not. He must surely renounce all sense and fear
of God, all conscience of duty or regard to the Almighty's love and favor, who
can with open face call him to testify to a lie, or challenge him to punish him
if he speaks not true, when yet at that very time he knows he does not. This is
the greatest security men can give of their honesty, and that they mean as they
say. And it being necessary for the government of the world in so many cases
(not proper now to be named) that truth should be found out, and the greatest
certainty of it be given that can possibly, and that men should by the
strictest ties be obliged to some duties; it thence also becomes necessary that
oaths should sometimes be required, especially when men cannot by other means
well assure the sincerity of their intentions, or secure the fidelity of their
resolutions.

I confess amongst Christians in the first ages I believe oaths were not so
commonly required in such little matters, as now sometimes they are, but the
reason was because truth and honesty then prevailed far more amongst them, and
lying was then more scandalous than, I fear, perjury is now: but perfidiousness
and dissembling, and equivocating and fraud increasing, have made the use of
oaths more ordinary than otherwise would have been necessary. For if Christians
did generally observe the laws of their Religion in all other instances, men
would fly to this greatest security only in extreme and highest cases, and not
find it needful to require it in common and more trivial matters.

(6.) Lastly, I only observe farther, that what seems thus to be the doctrine
of our Savior concerning swearing, was delivered by the Philosophers of old
amongst the Heathens as agreeable to the light of nature and right reason: that
is to say, they advised their Scholars to forbear all oaths as much as possibly
they could: never to swear but when it was necessary, to reverence an oath (as
Pythagoras expressed it in his golden Verses) not easily or lightly or want
only to take God's name into their mouths. I forbear to trouble you with the
Authors, or the Sentences themselves: and I propound this only to show that
the wise men of this world did agree with our blessed Savior in this rule
which he has prescribed to us concerning swearing; and I have been the larger
in it that you might see what little reason any Enthusiasts amongst us have to
stand out so stubbornly against the wholesome laws of our Country, and the
proceedings of the Courts of Judicature; who, though it were to save the King's
life, will not give their testimony upon oath, because our Savior has said,
Swear not at all.

The sum of all is; Our Savior absolutely forbids swearing in our
communication or ordinary discourse together, and about the unlawfulness of
this there is no dispute; and strange it is that against such express words of
our blessed Lord and Master, men should so openly allow themselves in such a
vile practice, and yet have the face to call themselves his disciples and
followers. This evil of voluntary rash swearing has prevailed amongst us even
almost beyond all hope of cure and remedy. That great Orator St. Chrysostom
made no less than twenty Homilies or Sermons against this foolish vice, and yet
found it too hard for all his reason or Rhetoric, till at length he attempted
to force his Auditors to leave off that sin, if for no better reason, yet that
he might choose another subject. They are ordinarily men only of debauched
minds and consciences that freely indulge themselves in it; and if any such now
hear me, I cannot expect by those few words I have now to deliver, to dissuade
them from it. I had rather endeavor to offer something to your consideration
who are not yet infected by it, to persuade you to watch severely against it,
and resolve never to comply with such an impious senseless custom.

1. Consider what an horrid affront it is to the divine Majesty. All sin
reflects dishonourably upon God, but other sins do this by consequence only:
this directly flies in his face, and immediately impugneth his justice and
power. Other sins are acts of disobedience, but it is high contempt of God, thus
to toss about his excellent and glorious name in our unhallowed mouths, and to
prostitute it to so vile an use as only to fill up the vacuities of our idle
prattle. That great and terrible name of God which all the Angels and host of
Heaven with the profoundest submission continually adore; which rends the
mountains, and opens the bowels of the deepest rocks, which makes hell tremble,
and is the strength and hope of all the ends of the earth, our only refuge in
the day of trouble, the very thought whereof should fill all sober persons with
a reverential awe and horror, how do men most impudently and rashly almost
every minute pollute and tear without fear or sense, or observing what they
say, as if God Almighty, the Maker and Judge of us all, were the meanest and
most despicable Being in the universe? What unaccountable boldness and
intolerable sauciness is this, to dare to invoke the dreadful Majesty of
heaven and earth to witness to every impertinent saying, silly story, vain
fancy, almost every five words we utter? thus at our pleasure to summon our
Omnipotent Creator, as if he were at our beck, and a slave to our humor? thus
to play and dally with him who is a consuming fire, and can in the twinkling of
an eye make us all as miserable as we have been sinful? How shall we ever be
able in the day of our fears to address our selves to the throne of his grace,
whom every time we speak, we thus madly defy? with what shame and regret and
confusion must we needs appear before his Judgment seat, whose honorable name
we have thus foully profaned and used so ignominiously? Can they ever think to
plead that blood of our dearest Lord, and those wounds made by the spear and
nails in his most precious body for the pardon and expiation of their most
grievous sins, who thus daily have made a mock of them? Can they ever with the
least hope of success pray God, when they come to die, to deliver them from
that damnation that they have a thousand times before wished to themselves?

And yet this sin which argues such slight and abuse of the divine Majesty such
rudeness toward him, and draws so many dire consequences after it, is now
adays (pardon me if I say it) one of the fashionable accomplishments of too
many of those that should be precedents of civility or good manners to others;
but this is so sad a consideration that I cannot endure to dwell longer upon it.

I proceed to other mischiefs of this vice though none need be named after
this; for those whom the awe of God and sense of his power and infinite
greatness will not keep and restrain from such desperate profanations of his
holy name, it is not to be imagined that any less arguments should.

2. This practice of common swearing must of necessity frequently involve men
in the heinous sin of perjury. He that swears at every turn in his ordinary
discourse, how often does he call God to witness even to what he knows is
false, and as often forget to do what before God he has engaged himself to
perform? or if he be afraid of this crying sin of perjury, and be put in mind
of what by his needless oath he had obliged himself unto, how many
inconveniences will his rashness continually expose him unto? You all know how
Herod was loath for his honors sake before all his Court to violate his hasty
oath, and how that cost the head of the greatest Prophet that ever was. By
customary using of God's sacred name men come to vent it when they think not of
it, without any forethought or consideration, and by it swear to things
impossible or romantic, to their own fictions and dreams which they neither
believe themselves, nor yet intend to deceive others into a belief of; and
oftentimes transported by anger or rage they swear to things they repent of
when they are calm and sober, and are then quite of another mind; so that false
swearing is the certain never-failing effect of much swearing; nay indeed it is
only chance or luck in such as every time in the hurry of their discourse call
upon God's name that they do not, not only vainly swear, but also impiously
forswear themselves; for whilst they thus back almost every affirmation with an
oath, how idle, uncertain or doubtful soever the matter be, without making any
difference, or at all weighing what they say, or being satisfied concerning the
truth of it, or knowing their own minds about it, they cannot be freed from the
guilt of the sin of perjury, though what they say should happen not to be
false, or they should be as good as their word, it being by fortune only that
it does prove so. And he that swears to a thing that chances to be true, (if he
knew it not certainly, or did not consider it whether it were so or no, but
unadvisedly sealed it with an oath, though it be as he did swear) yet must be
presumed guilty of this crime of perjury in the sight of God, and then I leave
it to your selves to judge how often by this vile custom of swearing men do
forswear themselves.

3. From hence it follows that this sin of vain and rash swearing in our
ordinary discourse is of very bad influence to the public state; nothing is so
pernicious to the government, nay nothing is so destructive of our liberties
and properties, of which we are so fond, and for which we are so zealous, as
this wicked practice of swearing upon all occasions; as it makes oaths become
cheap and vile, so it derogates from their sacredness and authority, for what
reason can there be to believe, that he who makes no conscience of those many
oaths that he daily belches forth upon the slightest provocations, should be of
another opinion, and look on himself as more strictly tied up by them when he
swears allegiance to his Prince, or gives his testimony in a Court of
Judicature? why should he be more afraid or concerned for calling God to
witness in a cause wherein his neighbor's estate, good name or life is
engaged, than he is in his private conversation of invoking the Majesty of
Heaven an hundred times in a day? The fear of the penalty which the laws have
appointed for perjury may indeed move him in such cases wherein there is danger
of his being discovered, and there is likewise a little more solemnity in such
public swearing before a Magistrate; but yet what is that to one who has cast
off all sense and fear of God, and every hour dares openly reproach and despise
him? So that the public laws ought to provide against this piece of debauchery
as the bane of all society; and we cannot answer it in prudence, to have any
intercourse, to hold any correspondence or transactions with, or in any case to
trust or rely on his word who fears not an oath; for,

4. This practice of swearing in our ordinary discourse does highly detract
from the credit of the person that uses it, it renders justly suspicious every
word he says and confirms with an unnecessary oath; for if the thing be true
and certain, and the person of unblemished faith, what need can there be of an
oath to vouch it; but if he swears to it, he declares himself not to be worthy
of belief, that his word ought in no case to be taken, since in the most
indifferent matters he chooses still to warrant it with an oath, and by thus
doing most deservedly forfeits all credit and repute among considering persons.

A truly honest man is so well assured of his own veracity that he counts it
wholly needless and useless to offer an oath as a pledge or pawn of the truth
of what he affirms; but if upon every word I am apt to swear to it, this is an
undoubted sign that either I intend to deceive in that particular, or else that
I am so used to lie that I cannot expect to be believed without an oath.

5. This is a vice most distastefull and ungrateful to all the rest of
mankind, most strangely offensive to those we converse with. The talk of him
that swears much, says a wise man, makes the hair to stand upright, and
their brawls make one stop his ears. If men harden themselves against other
arguments taken from the wickedness and irreligion of this practice, yet this
methinks ought to prevail something with those that pretend to honor and
gentile carriage, viz. that this is the most uncivil and the rudest thing that
can be offered to other men; it rankly favors of ill manners and want of
breeding for them to be continually defying of that Being which all other men
adore, and spitting out their venom against that God whom the rest of mankind
profess to love and honor above all things. Should one of our hectoring
swearers come into a company, the greatest part of which he knew highly valued
and prized an absent friend, never mentioned him but with all the kindness and
respect imaginable, called him their patron, professed mighty obligations to
him and believed him one of the best of men; would it pass for a thing
tolerably becoming or decent for him every word, when no occasion was offered,
to fall abespattering and vilifying this person, so dear to the company, and to
speak of him with the greatest contempt and despite? now such is God to the
greatest part of the world, they own all that they have or are to be from him
alone, that he is their great benefactour and Savior, that they are infinitely
engaged to him, that they desire his love and favor above all this world: how
is it sufferable then, in men of fashion and repute especially, (as is the
common practice of too many) when they meet with persons that are more than
others concerned for the honor of God, to be ever and anon with their profane
talk pelting this holy being, polluting his name with their filthy speech,
outbraving his Majesty, choosing to do that which they know grates most harshly
upon other men, and which they hate above any thing in the world?

6. That which mightily aggravates this madness and folly is, that it is such a
sin as we have no temptation to commit, nothing to move or sway us toward it,
it gratifies no natural inclination, it produces no pleasure, no gain or
worldly profit accrues to us by it; it affords us not so much as any short
temporal recompense for the venture we run, and the dangerous hazards we expose
our selves unto; other sorts of sin have something to excuse them, our natures
and bodily tempers may strongly incline, us to some other sins: The covetous
man has his full bags and great estate to plead in his behalf; and as for the
voluptuous Epicure, his appetites and lusts are tickled with the variety of
sensual delights; and the ambitious man has the contentment he takes in his
honors and advancements to answer for the loss of the peace of his mind and a
good conscience; the drunkard pleads the goodness of his wine and company, the
unclean person talks of the resistless charms of beauty; but the swearer
sells his soul for nothing; so that of all wicked men he is the most silly
and unreasonable, and makes the worst and maddest bargain for himself. Nay,
other ways of sinning may be almost called wisdom, if compared to this; For
other sinners either project something future, and are delighted with the hopes
and expectations of it, or enjoy something present that pleases them and
satisfies some craving inordinate desire: but this is pure sinning for sinnings
sake, only in compliance with an ugly imperious custom too much in vogue and
fashion.

7. There is no kind of sin whatever that does so highly provoke God Almighty
to inflict some remarkable exemplary judgment on a Person or Nation, even in
this life, as this practice of vain swearing by his Name. This almost
necessitates him to thunder from Heaven after some extraordinary manner, to
vindicate his power and justice and authority, all which are so notoriously
abused, blasphemed and challenged by such hideous oaths and dire imprecations.
He is even forced by such horrid defiances and outrageous darings of him to
show his strength and might to the children of men, by sending some grievous
plagues and sore calamities amongst them, by which they may perceive he will
not always bear such bold prophanations of his truth and honor and majesty;
but will at length return those curses upon men which they have so often wished
to themselves: that he will at last punish and avenge himself of those who have
so openly and frequently provoked him to it by their dreadful appeals to him.

The whole Nation of the Jews; that forlorn and forsaken people, the scorn of
all the earth, are to this day a standing monument of God's implacable anger
and wrath upon a like occasion, when they so solemnly cursed themselves, and
prayed that the blood of the holy Jesus might be upon their heads, and the
heads of their children. God is jealous and tender of his name, and will not
always suffer it to be scorned and reproached. Because of swearing, says the
Prophet, the land mourns. God is engaged in honor to right himself, and
maintain his name from such foul contempt, lest men should begin to think
either that he is not at all, or that he is deaf to all their loud calls and
impudent invocations.

8. Lastly, I only add this one peculiar consideration to you who now hear me,
assembled in this place for the worship of that great God, for the honor of
whose name I am pleading: that this custom of vain swearing is the great
scandal to our Church of England, and those that adhere to it in its present
establishment. This was of old, and is still the great objection against those
of the Church Way, as they ordinarily call us, that so many amongst us allow
themselves in this sinful practice; nay not only use it, but look on it as
their credit so to do. You see the fruit, say they, of your Common Prayers, of
your read devotions, of your decent and orderly worship which you so much plead
for. You may judge of the goodness and efficacy of that way, by those oaths and
curses that abound so much in those of your profession. And really, what can we
answer to this charge? can we absolutely deny it? Must we not rather confess,
amongst friends at least, that it is in some measure true, that the Separatists
and Dissenters do more generally restrain themselves from this lewd practice,
and do not so ordinarily allow themselves in this vice, as too many amongst us
do? Now it is not a sufficient answer to this to recriminate and tell them of
as great sins that they are guilty of; that they can lie, cheat and dissemble,
are factious and ungovernable, though they will not swear, which is sometimes
replied in this case: for this, though never so true, is not sufficient to wipe
off this disgrace and reflection from our Church: but the true answer to this
is, that thus it always was in the world, and ever will be, that where there
are different opinions and parties in Religion, and one is favored by the
public Laws, and countenanced by the Government, all those who are of no
Religion will be sure to be of that side which is uppermost, which the King and
Court is of, which is freest from danger. So that all the profane, wicked,
dissolute livers will be of our Church, as long as the doctrine of it is the
established owned Religion of the Nation; but if ever the tide should turn, and
another Party get the upper hand, they should have the company of those men
also, unless some worldly interest did interfere and hinder them. Such men of
such loose principles and seared consciences matter not what Religion they
profess, or whether any at all. But do these receive any encouragement or
countenance amongst us? do we boast of their godliness? do we account these to
live answerably to their profession? do not we complain of them as well as our
Adversaries? and would to God all such as hate to be reformed, would even leave
our Church. 'Twould be an happy day if all such ungodly wicked wretches, who
will not be won over by the excellent means and arguments of our Religion,
would also forsake that profession which in practice they disown, nay, blemish
and discredit; that they would be of any Party, run over to our enemies, rather
than continue to dishonor the best settled and purest Church in the world. Ye
now who, by your presence at these her solemn devotions, seem concerned for the
glory, preservation and security of our Church, it is much in your power to
wipe off such blots and aspersions, to answer such reflections, and to stop the
mouths of all opposers, by a due care and government of all your words and
actions: and by the innocence and unblameableness of your lives, your unfeigned
piety and reverence toward God, your invincible truth and faithfulness, and
other remarkable virtues to recommend our Church even to those who are without:
especially be persuaded to join all your endeavors against this vice by
keeping a strict guard against it, in your selves by keeping from all
appearance of it; by not suffering it in your inferiors, or those that have
any dependence upon you; by mildly and seasonably warning and reproving those
of your neighbors and acquaintance that are guilty of this folly. In a word,
let us all observe such exact truth in all our chat and discourse, be so
constant to our promises, that at any time our word may pass without any
farther engagement, that we may never think it necessary to assure our credit
or faith by an oath.

Amongst the Romans the Priest of Jupiter was in no case permitted to swear,
because it was not handsome that he who was so nearly related to their great
God, and charged with such divine matters as the care of Religion, should be
distrusted about small things. And we know amongst our selves solemn formal
oaths are not in many cases required from persons of honor; their word upon
their honor has equal credit with the express oath of inferior persons. Now
such would our blessed Savior have all his disciples to be, so true and
faithful, that there should be no need of oaths to confirm their speeches, but
that the holiness and strictness of their lives should give such undoubted
testimony to, and command so firm a belief of all they say, as that no farther
asseveration should be able to vouch it more. I conclude all with those sayings
of the wise Son of Sirach, Ecclus. 23.9, 10, 11, 12, 13.

Accustom not thy mouth to swearing, neither use thy self to the naming of the
Holy one.

For as a servant that is continually beaten shall not be without a blue mark,
so he that swears and names God continually shall not be faultless.

A man that uses much swearing shall be filled with iniquity, and the plague
shall never depart from his house. If he shall offend, his sin shall be upon
him; and if he acknowledge not his sin, he makes a double offense. And if he
swear in vain, he shall not be innocent, but his house shall be full of
calamities.

There is a word that is clothed about with death, God grant that it be not
found in the heritage of Jacob: for all such things shall be far from the
godly, and they shall not wallow in their sins.

Use not thy mouth to intemperate swearing, for therein is the word of sin.

But I say unto you, swear not at all.

A SERMON Preached at WHITE HALL. The Ninth Sermon.
St. MATTHEW. I. 21. -- And thou shall call his name Jesus; for he shall save his
people from their sins.


THAT the appearance of the ever blessed Son of God in our mortal nature was
upon some very great and most important design, not otherwise at all, or at
least, not so happily by any other means to be accomplished, every one must
needs grant at first hearing. It could not be any indifferent trivial errand or
business that a person of such infinite honor and dignity was employed about,
which brought down God himself from the regions or glory and light inaccessible
to dwell in an earthly tabernacle, and to veil the splendor of his Majesty
with a body of flesh. This was such a surprising condescension of him that had
lived from all eternity in the bosom of his Almighty Father, this signified
such wonderful love and regard to that humane nature he assumed, that all men
cannot but reasonably promise themselves the greatest advantages imaginable
from such a gracious undertaking. That our forlorn nature should be thus highly
honored and exalted, as to be after such an unspeakable manner united to the
divine, does evidently assure us of God's good will toward sinful men, that
he yet entertained thoughts of mercy toward us, and was loath that the folly of
his creatures should prove their irrecoverable ruin.

Had God sent a message to us by the meanest servant in his heavenly Court, it
had been a favor too great for us to have expected, and for which we could
never have been enough thankful. Had he commanded an host of illustrious
Angels to have flown all over the earth, and loudly to have proclaimed God's
willingness to have been reconciled to men, should we not all with mighty joy
and wonder have regarded and adored such stupendous grace and goodness, crying
out, Lord, what is man, that thou art thus mindful of him? or the son of man,
that thou thus visitest him?

But that God himself should descend from his heavenly habitation to be clothed
with our rags; that he who thought it no robbery to be equal with God, should
take on him the form of a servant, and be found in the fashion and likeness of
sinful flesh, this astonishes not only men, but Angels themselves: for he
took not on himself the nature of Angels, nor appeared for their rescue and
deliverance, who had left their first mansions of glory; but was pleased so far
to humble himself, as to undertake the cause and patronage of us vile worms,
sinful dust and ashes, even whilst we were enemies, traitors and rebels to
his divine Majesty, and utterly unworthy of the least gracious look from him,
though we had never so earnestly besought it: in our behalf it was that he did
mediate and intercede, he stepped in between guilty wretched us and God's
justice; perfected our redemption, procured our liberty, and purchased eternal
life and happiness for all men on the easy and pleasant conditions of the
Gospel. And thou shall call his name Jesus; for he shall save his people from
their sins.

In my discourse on these words I shall only

I. Show you how, or by what means the Son of God became our Jesus, or did save
men from their sins.

II. Draw some plain inferences from it.

I. How, or by what means the Son of God became our Jesus, or did save men from
their sins.

Now in order to the salvation of sinners, the great end of our Savior's
Incarnation, these two things were necessary to be done; one of which
principally respects God, the other sinners themselves.

1. In order to the salvation of sinners it was necessary to obtain and
purchase the pardon of their sins, and reconciliation with God.

2. It was farther necessary that sinners themselves should be reformed, and
turned from their sins to the love and practice of true righteousness and
goodness; that so they might be in some measure qualified and disposed for
God's grace and mercy.

1. In order to the salvation of sinners it was necessary to obtain and
purchase the pardon of their sins, and reconciliation with God. It is true
indeed, that God Almighty by the unlimited goodness and compassionateness of
his own nature is infinitely inclined to all acts of favor and pity; and he
might without wrong to any one (if he had seen it fit) absolutely have pardoned
the sins of mankind, without any other consideration than their repentance: but
out of his infinite wisdom he rather chose to dispense his pardoning grace
after such a manner as should not at all seem to reflect upon his exact
justice, immaculate holiness, and unchangeable truth, and might not give the
least encouragement to sinners to presume farther upon his mercy and goodness;
as it would have done for God lightly and easily to have passed by such
notorious offenses, and without any satisfaction to have receded from all his
threatenings. He would not therefore propound terms of reconciliation with
mankind without some public reparation of the divine Honor and Authority, and
open manifestation of his just displeasure against sin and disobedience.

(1.) In order to our reconciliation with God, it was necessary that some
public reparation should be made of the divine Honor and Authority. The sins
of the world were an unspeakable affront to the divine Majesty, and an open
scorn put upon his most excellent Laws and Government. Now our merciful
Creator inclined to forgive the sons of men that great debt which they were
never able themselves to discharge, yet would so contrive it, that his clemency
should no ways obscure or impair the glory of his Sovereign dignity, justice
and holiness. It was most highly congruous, that whilst he pardoned the
offenders, yet his Government should be acknowledged, the righteousness of his
Laws vindicated, his Honor and Authority secured.

All which was most effectually done by our blessed Savior, the Son of God's
negotiating our peace in our nature, putting himself into the place of sinners,
and answering all demands for us. By this the infinite holiness of God's pure
nature was declared to all the world, in that he would have no intercourse
with, nor ever receive into his favor such vile unworthy wretches as we were,
but only in and through so holy, so perfect a Mediator. By this it appeared
that God at first upon good reasons established his laws, and pronounced his
threatenings, since he would not without such a glorious compensation go back
from them. We have now the greatest cause given us to tremble at his severe
justice, to adore his sovereign power and dominion, even whilst we admire and
feel his love and kindness to us; since no other consideration could prevail
with God to remit our offenses, but the powerful interposition of his only
begotten Son, and his suffering in our nature those pains and torments which
were due to our sins.

(2.) By this appearance of the Son of God was God's hatred and grievous
displeasure against sin most abundantly manifested, in that he would not hear
of, nor offer any pardon or mercy without such a valuable satisfaction. Here
God poured forth his utmost vengeance against sin, when he delivered up to such
a cruel and cursed death that Person that was most dear to him, and least
deserved any such treatment from him, before he would forgive it. Can we now
possibly think that there is but little evil in, or that God is not much
offended with that which could no other ways be expiated but by such precious
blood? Can any man imagine that it is a cheap thing to sin, when God himself in
our flesh was bruised and buffeted, crowned with thorns, and nailed to the
cross for it? That surely was no trifle or indifferent matter that caused the
Son of God to bleed and die. That sore was deadly that could be cured by no
other balsame but his blood. If any thing could show the fierceness of God's
wrath against sin, surely it must be the gaping wounds and bleeding side of our
Savor. Look on this his wonderful humiliation; see the pits that were dug
in his hands and feet, and the furrows that were made on his back, and then
tell me what an accursed thing must that be that made God so displeased, and
fastened our blessed Lord to the Gibbet. So that by our Savior's incarnation,
obedient life and patient death, the divine honor was more illustriously
repaired, his authority more clearly vindicated, his justice and severity
against sin more openly declared, disobedience more highly disgraced and
condemned, than if all the Sons of Adam had perished eternally in their
rebellion. But this being once done by the Son of God's appearing in our
behalf, this great propitiatory Sacrifice being offered for the sins of the
world, God now thought it fit and consistent with the glory of all his
Attributes, and the ends of government, to tender life and peace to sinners
upon the most equal and reasonable conditions of the Covenant of Grace.

This is the admirable temperament and expedient found out by the wisdom of
God, by which God glorifies his mercy in the pardon of sin without any
violation of his justice or truth, though he had denounced death against it.
Thus this blessed Jesus opened to us the gates of Paradise, removed the flaming
Cherubims, took away the partition wall between God and men, and put us all
into a fair capacity of being for ever happy. To him alone do we and all men
owe, that God will now deal with mankind upon such favorable conditions, by a
new law suited and accommodated to our circumstances and infirmities in this
lapsed state; that God upon the account of Christ's gracious undertaking for us
is ready and forward to be reconciled with us, to forgive all that is past, and
to make us as blessed as our natures are capable of: and of this benefit all
that hear of the Gospel do equally partake. For we are not to imagine that our
Savior came into the world upon so little and narrow a design, as only to
rescue and redeem peremptorily and absolutely a few particular favorites
without any conditions, but he has put all men, those especially to whom his
Gospel is preached, in a ready and easy way of obtaining pardon and salvation.
And thus our redemption, justification and salvation, as to the valuable
meritorious causes, depend only on our Savior. In all this work we have not
the least hand, we have no place nor part. It was not any thing in us, or that
can be done by us, that moved God to contrive, or our Savior to accomplish our
redemption, but only the pity he had of us in our forlorn miserable condition.

Here also is the only comfort and security of guilty minds depressed with
shame and fear for their sins: that We have an advocate with the Father, Jesus
Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins. That we are not
to stand the brunt of God's anger or displeasure our selves, since his own Son
has voluntarily offered himself to screen mankind from the divine wrath and
vengeance. And if we do but thoroughly consider how great and sublime a person
he was, we cannot in the least doubt the prevalency and success of his
appearing for us. We ought not to despair of obtaining any thing from God, fit
for him to grant, when we present our selves before him with such a Mediator
and Intercessour, in whom he is infinitely well-pleased, and who is able to
save to the utmost all that come unto God by him. Thus this Jesus has saved us
from our sins in the first sense; that is, obtained and purchased the pardon of
them, and made God placable to us.

But this is not all.

2. In order to the salvation of sinners, it is farther necessary that men
should be freed from the power of sin, and from their evil natures, and become
really good and holy. It is not enough that God should be made willing to
forgive our sins, unless we also are made willing to forsake them. Christ came
not to save us from the evil consequences of our sins whilst we loved them, and
delighted our selves in them. He did not purchase for us an indulgence or
license to sin without punishment. That indeed had been an employment unworthy
of the Son of God, nay an impossible task to have reconciled God to unhallowed
and impure minds. The reformation of the world, the reparation of our natures,
the purifying our minds, the implanting the divine nature in men, were as much
the design of his incarnation, as the vindication of the divine justice, to
which all the world was obnoxious; and (pardon me if I say it) he is more our
Savior by freeing us from the dominion of sin, than from the penalty. Our
blessed Lord had not been so kind and gracious to us, had he obtained Heaven
for us (could such a thing possibly have been) whilst we continued impenitent,
and utterly unlike to God.

Now there are these two things absolutely necessary for the recovery of
mankind, and making us really happy, repentance for sins past, and sincere
obedience for the future; and to effect both these, no means so likely as this
appearance of the Son of God in our nature.

(1.) As for repentance for sins past, what in the world can be imagined more
effectual for the working in men an ingenuous shame and sorrow for what they
have done amiss, than these tender offers of God's pardon and acceptance upon
our submission and returning to a better mind? We have now all possible
assurance given us that mercy is to be had for the most grievous offenders.
Nothing can exclude or exempt us from this act of grace, but only our own
wilful and obstinate refusal of life and happiness.

All men are in the condition of the prodigal Son in the Parable of our
Savior, Luke 15. They have gone astray from their Father's house after their
own inventions; promising themselves indeed great pleasures and full
satisfactions in a licentious riotous course of life; but soon wearied with
such painful drudgeries, and many woeful disappointments, at last they begin
to recollect themselves, to remember that plenty they had enjoyed of all good
things in their Father's house, how easily and happily they lived whilst they
continued under his mild and gracious government, and to think of returning
thither again; but the sense of their horrid guilt and unworthiness flying in
their faces, fills them with dismal fears and anxious despair, so that they
cannot hope for any kind reception or entertainment after such an ungrateful
rebellion.

Now let us suppose this Parable thus continued; that the Father, who was so
highly provoked, had nevertheless sent his other Son, who had never offended
him, into a far Country, exposed to many difficulties and hazards, to seek and
find out his lost Brother, to beseech him to be reconciled, to promise him that
he should be dealt with as if he had never displeased him. Would not such
condescension and unparalled goodness have melted and dissolved the poor
Prodigal's heart? what joy would soon have overspread his face? with what
gladness would he have hearkened to such an overture? what haste would he have
made home? Could he after this have doubted of his Father's love and kindness
to him?

This therefore is the greatest encouragement that can be given to our
repentance, that God has now by his Son declared himself exorable and
placable, more willing to forgive, than we can be to ask it of him; and can we
desire pardon and peace upon more equal and easy terms? Can any thing be
conceived more reasonable, than that before our sins be forgiven, we should
humbly acknowledge our faults, and with full purpose of heart resolve to do so
no more? and if such love and kindness of Heaven toward us will not beget some
relenting and remorse in us, if such powerful arguments will not prevail with
us to grow wise and considerate, it is impossible that any should.

(2.) As for sincere obedience for the future, without which we can never be
accepted by God, nor be made happy; this also our Savior has most
sufficiently engaged us to; by his doctrine clearly revealing God's mind and
will to us, setting before us his own most excellent example, promising us all
needful help and assistence, and propounding eternal rewards and punishments
as the motives of our obedience.

1. He has clearly revealed to us God's nature, and his whole mind and will
concerning our salvation. He came into the world a Preacher of righteousness,
plainly to instruct mankind in all their duty toward God, themselves, and one
another. He freed men from the intolerable yoke of many burdensome and costly
ceremonies, and brought in a rational service, an everlasting righteousness,
consisting in purity, humility and charity; all his commands being such as are
most becoming God to require, and most reasonable for us to perform. They are
most agreeable to our best understandings, perfective of our natures, fitted to
our necessities and capacities, the best provision that can be made for the
peace of our minds, quiet of our lives, and mutual happiness even in this
world: they are easy and benign, humane and merciful institutions, and all
his laws such as we should choose to govern our selves by, were we but true to
our selves, and faithful to our own interest. He has not denied us the use or
enjoyment of any thing but what is really evil and hurtful to us; he has
considered our infirmities and manifold temptations, makes allowances for our
wanderings and daily failings, and accepts of sincerity instead of absolute
perfection; so that the advantages and excellency of his laws are as great an
argument to oblige us to the observance of them, as the divine authority by
which they were enacted.

2. Our Savior propounded himself an example of all that he required of us,
the better to direct us in our duty, and to encourage us to the performance of
it; since nothing is expected from us, but what the Son of God himself was
pleased to submit unto. He conversed therefore publicly in the world, in most
instances that occur in humane life; giving us a pattern of an innocent and
useful conversation, thereby to recommend his Religion to us, and to oblige us
to tread in his steps, and to follow him as the leader and great Captain of our
salvation.

3. He has promised, and does continually afford the mighty assistences of his
holy Spirit to all those who humbly beg it of him, to strengthen them in every
good work, and to join with, and second their faithful endeavors. He will
never fail an honest mind, nay he does first strive with men, prevent and
surprise them by his good motions and suggestions. He does not slight any weak
attempts, but cherishes the very first beginnings of virtue and goodness. He
does not forsake us at our first refusal, but still stands at the door
knocking, waiting our amendment. He is always ready at hand to help and succor
us under all temptations or discouragements that we may meet with in our
Christian course. He has appointed many excellent means of grace, and even to
this day has continued his Ministers and Ambassadors in the world to beseech
men in his name to be reconciled to God.

4. He has engaged us to the doing of God's will by most glorious rewards,
even everlasting pleasures and immortal happiness, such as eye has not seen,
nor ear heard, nor could it ever enter into the heart of man to conceive; and
still farther, that no means might be omitted likely to work upon reasonable
creatures, he has denounced most severe threatenings against all those who
refuse to comply with his gracious offers, even eternal flames, remediless
torments and miseries, and that they shall be doomed for ever to the company,
and partake of the fate of Devils and infernal Fiends. Thus our blessed Lord
has propounded the most proper object of fear to keep men from sin, and also
presented the most desirable object of hope to encourage men to be good.

And to give us the greatest assurance of all this that we can possibly desire,
he has confirmed and established his doctrine, not only by those undoubted
miracles which he wrought, and sufferings he underwent in attestation to its
truth and divinity, but also by his own resurrection from the dead, and visible
ascension into Heaven; where in our nature he has taken possession of that
eternal joy which he purchased for us, and lives for ever at God's right hand
to intercede for us, to protect and rule his Church, to distribute his gifts
and graces, to subdue all our enemies, and at last to instate all his true
disciples in the same glory and eternal life he is now possessed of; and so to
become their complete Savior.

All this is a very imperfect description of but a little part of what our
Savior has really done toward the reformation and amendment of sinners: for
indeed there is nothing that could have been done toward the salvation of men
which this Jesus has not done for us: And I believe all the world may be
challenged to name any one help, motive or encouragement to the love and
service of God, that is suited to the nature of God, of Man, and of Religion,
which is not afforded to us by this appearance of the Son of God in our nature
to mediate for us. By the Gospel it is therefore that Christ saves sinners,
which is therefore called, Romans 1.16. the power of God unto salvation to every
one that believes, to the Jew first, and then to the Greek; it being most
admirably contrived to the end it was designed for, the opening of men's eyes,
and turning them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God.

And this the holy Scriptures often declare to us, that for this purpose was
the Son of God manifested, that he might destroy the works of the Devil; might
redeem us from our vain conversation, renew our minds, and form them over
again, and purify to himself a peculiar people zealous of good works. And all
that our Savior did and suffered for us toward the procuring of our pardon
and peace will signify nothing to us, will not be in the least available for
our benefit, unless he first save us from our sins, by washing and cleansing
our natures, and subduing all our lusts and inordinate passions, and making us
conformable to his own image in true holiness and righteousness. 'Twill be no
advantage to us that he was born into this world, unless he be formed in our
minds, and we become new creatures, such as he requires us to be. Now in all
this our Savior deals with men according to their natures, as rational
governable creatures, moves them by hopes and fears, draws them with the cords
of a man, and will have heaven and happiness be the reward of their own
virtuous choice and free obedience.

The short of all is this. In the Gospel of Jesus Christ (which as at this time
he came down from Heaven to reveal to men) God Almighty, out of his infinite
compassion to his degenerate creatures, has prescribed such methods, appointed
such means, given such examples, encouragements, assistences, that nothing can
be thought fit and likely to promote the salvation of all men, but what his
goodness and wisdom have therein most abundantly supplied us with, unless we
would have him offer violence to the liberty of our will, and force us to be
virtuous and happy whether we will or no, which would be to alter our natures,
and make us another sort of creatures; but such care is taken, such provision
is made for our happiness, that we have nothing left us but only the power of
being miserable, if it be our resolved mind (notwithstanding all possible
obligations to the contrary) to be so.

If men will stop their ears against the voice of the Charmer, though he charm
never so wisely, if they will choose, court and embrace sin and ruin; if the
strongest arguments will not prevail, if the most forcible engagements will not
persuade; if neither the most glorious promises, nor the severest threatenings,
nor interest, nor self-love, nor any of those considerations by which men are
swayed in other affairs, will at all move them in matters of greatest moment,
they must perish, and that most deservedly and inrecoverably. If after all this
sinners will die, and be damned even as it were in spite of Heaven, maugre all
that God or Christ has done for them, they must even thank themselves for it,
and are only to charge it upon their own wilful and incurable folly and base
contempt of such infinite love and kindness. Thus I have briefly shown you how,
or by what means, the Son of God truly became our Jesus or Savior by saving
his people from their sins.

II. It only remains that in a few words I draw some conclusions from what I
have said.

1. Hence we may learn, that the honor of the Son of God, as Savior of the
world, is best secured and exalted by an actual obedience to his laws; that we
ought not to shift off all duty and work from our selves upon him alone,
leaving it wholly to him to save us if he pleases, without any care or trouble
of ours, nor trust to, and rely altogether upon his righteousness and
obedience, without any of our own; since, as I have shown you, he must save us
from the power of our sins, before ever he will save us from the penal
consequences of them. So that the efficacy of Christ's undertaking for us, and
the necessity of our own personal righteousness do very well consist together,
and each has its proper work in obtaining the pardon of our sins, and the
favor of God. Our Savior's incarnation and perfect obedience even unto death,
is the sole meritorious cause of our acceptance with God, and of our salvation.
He alone purchased those great benefits for us, made atonement, paid our
ransom, and procured this covenant of grace from God, wherein eternal life is
promised to penitent sinners. But then these great advantages are not
immediately and absolutely conferred upon us, but under certain qualifications
and conditions of repentance, faith, and sincere obedience; for the performance
of which the holy Spirit is never wanting to sincere endeavors. We do
therefore vilely affront and disgrace our blessed Lord, when we boldly expect
to be saved by him whilst we continue in our sins. Nay we ought to think our
selves as much beholden to him for his doctrine, and the assistences of his
grace, and the glorious promises of the Gospel, by which we are made truly holy
and righteous, as for his sufferings and death, by which he satisfied God's
justice, and purchased the pardon of our sins.

2. I shall hence make that inference of the Apostle, Heb. 2.3. How then shall
we escape, if we neglect so great salvation? Has God so abundantly provided
for our happiness, has his only begotten Son done and suffered so much for
it, and shall we be so sottish and stupid as foolishly to despise it, when it
has been so signally the unwearied care of Heaven to procure it for us? It is
only our own advantage that is designed, God projects no private profit, nor
does any accrue to him from the salvation of all mankind. Shall we our selves
therefore madly defeat all these designs of grace and goodness toward us by
our invincible resolution to ruin and undo our selves? Did the only begotten
Son of God as at this time descend from the regions of bliss and happiness, was
he born into this miserable world, and did he humble himself to take our flesh,
that by that means he might exalt mankind, and make us capable of dwelling in
the highest Heavens, and all this out of mere pity and compassion of our
desperate condition; and shall we think the denying our selves a lust, or the
satisfaction of a forbidden appetite, or a short-lived pleasure too much for
the obtaining the same glory? Did he live here a poor, mean and contemptible
life, and at last die a shameful death to merit eternal life for us; and for
the obtaining the same, shall we grudge to live a sober, temperate and honest
life?

Oh how will this consideration one day aggravate our torment! What vexation
and anxiety will it one day create in our minds, with what horror and despair
will it fill our guilty souls? Had God predestined us from all eternity to
everlasting misery, so that it had been impossible for us to have avoided our
sad fate; had he never provided a Mediator and Redeemer for us, it would have
been a great ease in another world to consider that we could no ways have
escaped this doom. But when we shall reflect upon the infinite love and
kindness of God, and how desirous he was that all men should be saved; when we
shall consider the wonderful pity and compassion of our Savior in being born
and dying for us, and procuring for us such easy terms of salvation, and so
often by his Spirit moving and exciting us to our duty, and the care of our
souls; when we shall think of those many obligations he has laid upon us, and
the wise methods he has used for our recovery and amendment; and how that
nothing was wanting on God's part, but that we might now have been praising,
blessing and adoring his goodness and wisdom amongst the glorified Spirits in
the happy regions of undisturbed peace and joy; and yet that we through our own
most shameful neglect (though often warned to the contrary) are now forced in
vain to seek but for a drop of water to cool the tip of our tongues. How will
this heighten our future pains, and prove the very essence of Hell?

Better shall it be in the last day for Tire and Sidon, for Sodom and Gomorrah,
places overrun with lust and barbarity; for the Nations that sit in darkness,
and never heard of these glad tidings of a Savior, than for you to whom this
salvation is come; but you cast it behind your backs. The fiercest vengeance,
the severest punishments are reserved for wicked Christians, and what can we
imagine shall be the just portion of those whom neither the condescension and
kindness, nor wounds and sufferings of the Son of God could persuade; nor yet
the excellency, easiness and profitableness of his commands invite, nor the
promises of unexpressible rewards allure, nor the threatenings of eternal
punishment engage to live and be happy?

In vain therefore do such come hither to celebrate the memory of Christ's
birth. They of all men who despise this great salvation, purchased by the Son
of God, have no great cause to rejoice this day; nay, happy had it been for
them (who still persist in their sins, notwithstanding all that Christ has
done to save them from them) if this holy Jesus had never been born.

3. Lastly, Let us all improve this present opportunity to return our most
humble praises and thanksgivings for so great and unvaluable a blessing, and to
join our voices, as well as we are able, with those bright Seraphims and that
heavenly Host that attended and celebrated Christ's nativity; (when the Heavens
proclaimed his birth with their loud shouts of joy) saying, Glory be to God in
the highest, on earth peace, good will toward men.

Blessed be God, for ever blessed be his holy name, who has found out a way
for our deliverance, and has raised up for us a mighty salvation; that we
being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, might serve him without fear,
in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our life. Praise
therefore the Lord, O our souls, and all that is within us praise his holy
name; and forget not all his benefits, who forgiveth all our iniquities, and
heals all our diseases; who has redeemed our life from destruction, and has
crowned us with loving kindness and tender mercies.

What shall we now return, what do we not owe to him who came down from his
imperial Throne, and infinitely debasing himself, and eclipsing the brightness
of his glorious Majesty, became a servant, nay a curse, for our sakes, to
advance our estate, and to raise us to a participation of his divine nature,
and his eternal glory and bliss?

To him therefore let us now all offer up our selves, our souls and bodies and
spirits, and that not only to be saved by him, but to be ruled and governed by
him; and this he will take as a better expression of our gratitude, than if we
spent never so many days in verbal praises and acknowledgments of his love and
bounty.

Let us all open our hearts and breasts to receive and entertain this great
friend of mankind, this glorious lover of our souls, and suffer him to take
full possession of them, and there to place his throne, and to reign within us
without any rival or competitour; and let us humbly beg of him, that he would
be pleased to finish that work in us which he came into the world about; that
by his blood he would cleanse and wash us from all filthiness both of flesh and
spirit; that he would save us from our sins here, and then we need not fear his
saving us from everlasting destruction hereafter.

Which God of his infinite mercy grant to us all for the alone sake of our
blessed Lord and Redeemer, to whom with the Father, etc.

A SERMON Preached on ASH WEDNESDAY. The Tenth Sermon.
St. MARK VI. 12. And they went out and preached, that men should repent.


THOUGH repentance be a duty never out of season, nay is indeed the work and
business of our whole lives, all of us being obliged every day to amend, yet
there are some particular times, wherein we are more especially called upon, to
review our actions, to humble our souls in God's presence, to bewail our
manifold transgressions, and to devote our selves afresh to his service; such
are times of affliction, either personal or public, when extraordinary
judgments are abroad in the earth, or are impendent over us; or when we our
selves are visited with any sickness or grievous calamity: so also before we
receive the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, we are then more strictly to
examine our selves, and renew our vows and resolutions of living better. And to
name no more, the Church in all ages has thought fit to set apart some solemn
times to call upon men more earnestly to repent, and to seek God's face before
it be too late; such were the fasting-days before the feast of the resurrection
or Easter; and accordingly our Church, as you have heard in the exhortation
this day read to you, does at this time especially move us to earnest and true
repentance; that we should return unto our Lord God with all contrition and
meekness of heart, bewailing and lamenting our sinful lives, acknowledging and
confessing our offenses, and seeking to bring forth worthy fruits of penance.
And such as now seriously set themselves to repent of all the sins they have
committed, using such abstinence as is necessary for the subduing the flesh to
the spirit, do certainly keep Lent far better than they who for so long time
only scrupulously abstain from all flesh, and call filling themselves with the
choicest fish, sweetmeats and wine, fasting.

I shall at this time suppose you sufficiently instructed in the nature of
repentance, (it being one of the first principles of the doctrine of Christ, as
the Apostle to the Hebrews calls it, Heb. 6.1.) and also that you will readily
acknowledge the indispensible necessity of it, in order to the obtaining the
pardon of your sins, and eternal life: and that which I now design, is only to
set before you some, if not the main hindrances and impediments that keep men
from repentance, and to endeavor to remove them; and I shall discourse in
order of these three of the many that might be mentioned.

I. Want of consideration.

II. The unsuccesfulness of some former attempts; when men have resolved and
begun to reform, but have soon found all their good purposes and endeavors
blasted and defeated, this discourageth them from making any farther trials.

III. The hopes of long life, and some better opportunity of repenting
hereafter.

One of these is commonly the ground and cause of those men's remaining in an
impenitent state, who yet are convinced of the absolute necessity of repentance
in order to their peace and happiness.

I. Want of consideration. For could men but once be persuaded seriously and in
good earnest, as becomes reasonable creatures, to consider their ways and
actions, patiently to attend to the dictates of their own minds, and soberly to
weigh the reasons and consequences of things, their is no doubt to be made, but
Religion would every day gain more proselytes, virtue and righteousness would
prosper and flourish more in the world, and men would soon become ashamed and
afraid of nothing so much as vice and wickedness. Of such infinite moment are
the matters of Religion, so mighty and strong are the arguments which it
propounds to us, so clear and convincing are the evidences it gives us of its
truth and certainty; so agreeable to our minds are all its principles, so
amiable and excellent its precepts, so pleasant and advantageous is the
practice of them, that there seems nothing farther required to make all men
in love with it, but only that they would open their eyes to behold its
beauty, that they would not stop their ears against all its most alluring
charms.

Let men but once thoroughly ponder the folly and mischief of sin, with the
benefits and rewards of piety and an holy life; let them but compare their
several interests together, and look sometimes beyond things present unto that
state wherein they are to live for ever, and use their understandings about
these matters as they do about other affairs, and it is impossible they should
enjoy any tolerable peace or ease without a careful and strict provision for
another world. Vice owes its quiet possession of men's minds only to their
stupidity and inadvertency, to their carelessness and inconsideration: it reigns
undisturbedly only in ignorant, secure, unthinking spirits, but straight
loses all its force and power when once men begin to look about them, and
bethink themselves what they are doing, and whither they are going. Could we
but once gain thus much of wicked men, to make a stand, and pause a little, and
to cease but a while from the violent pursuit of their pleasures, and fairly
reflect upon their lives, and see what is the fruit of all their past follies,
and consider the end and issue of these things; could we, I say, but obtain
thus much, we might spare most of our pains spent in persuading them to repent,
their own thoughts would never suffer them to be in quiet till they had done
it. Let us but once begin to deliberate and examine, and we are sure on which
side the advantage will lie: sin and wickedness can never stand a trial, let
our own reasons be but judges; it hates nothing so much as to be brought to the
light. A vicious man, however he may brave it in the world, yet can never
justify or approve himself to his own free thoughts; and however he may plead
for sin before others, yet he can never answer the objections his own
conscience would bring against it, would he but once dare impartially to
consider them.

But the misery of wicked men is, that they industriously banish all such
troublesome guests out of their minds, instead of debating with themselves, the
reasonableness and fitness of any of their actions, they will not endure so
much as to hold any parley or discourse with themselves; they endeavor either
by a constant succession of sensual delights to charm and lull asleep, or else
by a counter-noise of revellings and riotous excesses to drown the softer
whispers of their consciences; or else the hurry and tumult of this world,
multiplicity of business and secular affairs, temporal projects and designs,
and bodily concerns, do so wholly engross and prepossess their thoughts, that
they are not at leisure for any such serious reflections. They choose to divert
themselves by any folly or vanity, by which they may stiflle and choke all such
good motions; they hate nothing so much as being alone, or at a distance from
their dear companions in sin, for fear lest some affrighting apprehensions
should steal or force their way in; till at last they come to inherit the
portion of fools; that is, for ever lament and curse their own incogitance and
indiscretion.

Now till wicked men enter into such deep and earnest consideration of
themselves and their own estates, it is as impossible that the means of grace,
the calls of the Gospel, or the motions of God's Spirit, should have any force
or efficacy upon them, as that a man's body should be nourished by meat that he
does not digest, or that a medicine put into a man's pocket should preserve his
health. The most invincible arguments cannot gain assent till they first obtain
attention; and it is all one to be wholly ignorant of, or not to consider the
danger we are in; and therefore the ordinary way by which God brings such men
to repentance, is first by some sudden affliction or affrighting providence to
awaken and rouse them up to a serious consideration of their evil ways, and
desperate condition, which by degrees may improve into an hearty contrition,
and thorough reformation.

And oh that I could now prevail with any one that has hitherto lived in ease,
in a course of disobedience to God's laws, to go home and diligently consider
with himself, and count up what he has got by all his most beloved sins, what
a dreadful and manifest danger he runs, how sad and dismal his reckoning one
day must needs be; how inexcusable he is in his folly, how short the pleasures
of sin are, and how sore the punishments, and that it is yet, through God's
grace, possible for him to escape them; and these and such like thoughts for a
while cherished, would surely beget relentings, or at least resolutions of
repentance and amendment: and if we would do thus frequently, if we would
daily set our selves to this work, we should be more and more confirmed in such
good purposes.

It is much to be hoped, that none of us here present, who show so much respect
to Religion, as to join in the solemn worship of God, are so far hardened in
sin, but that we have some lucid intervals, some sober moods, wherein we give
our consciences leave to speak to, and admonish us; an uneasy bed, a broken
sleep, will ever and anon bring these things to your remembrance; oh do not
straight fly from them, nor thrust them out of your minds; nay be not contented
only to give them a fair hearing, but never leave thinking of them, and
revolving them over in your minds, till they have transformed you into new
creatures.

For if you will not consider these things now, let me tell you, the time will
surely shortly come, when you shall consider them whether you will or no; when
your sins shall set themselves in order before you, and it shall not be in your
power to forget them, or to divert your thoughts from those things which you
are now so loath to think upon. Here indeed in this life the thoughts of God and
a future state often present and offer themselves to us, they often spring up
in our minds, and when expelled, recur again; but men find out several ways and
artifices whereby to hinder their fixing or abiding upon their spirits, or at
all influencing their lives; but the time will come, when we shall be forced to
bring our evil ways to remembrance, and yet then consideration will do us no
good, nor serve to any other purpose, but only to aggravate our misery, and
double our torment. This is the first most general hindrance of repentance,
want of consideration.

II. Another hindrance of repentance is the unsuccesfulness of some former
attempts; for when men have resolved, and perhaps begun to reform, but have
soon found all their good purposes and endeavors blasted and defeated, they
are apt to be thereby discouraged from making any farther trials. They have
long had it in the purpose of their hearts to leave their sins, nay sometimes
they have prevailed against them for some time, and withstood some fair
temptations, but yet at last nature did, they know not how, return, and they
have been persuaded to renew their old acquaintance with those sins which they
had once forsaken: and in their conflicts with sin they have been so often
foiled, that they now despair of ever getting the day; should they once again
resolve to enter upon a new course of life, they fear they should only add to
the number of their offenses, the breach of this vow, as they have already of
many others which they formerly made.

This is the condition of many men in the world, and a very dangerous one it
is; they have not yet sinned themselves past all sense or feeling, but have
some regrets and frequent remorses, and when their spirits are at any time
disturbed with the sense of their guilt, they then bethink themselves seriously
of returning to a better mind, resolve upon a new life, and that presently too,
and perform some duties in order to it, and are for a little time more careful
and watchful over themselves, and their ways; but they are soon disheartened,
their goodness is but like a morning cloud, and as the early dew it passes
away, they are soon again easily frighted or tempted from their duty; upon any
little discouragement that they meet with, they repent themselves of their good
choice, and forget their virtuous resolutions, and, which is worst of all, this
they often do; they often resolve to begin, and as often neglect to perform
what they promised; and thus they continue running an endless wearisome circle,
of sinning, and then resolving against it, and then upon the next inviting
opportunity sinning again; till at last, when they have found so many trials
and essays prove fruitless and unsuccesfull, and their good purposes so often
overpowered, they even fit down contented slaves to their vices and lusts.

But notwithstanding all this, what I have now represented to you, ought not in
the least to discourage your endeavors of amendment, but should rather engage
you to greater deliberation, circumspection and caution in your proceeding in
it. That your good purposes have so often proved ineffectual, is not a reason
for not resolving again, but only for not doing it rashly, inconsiderately,
and by halves. The fault is certainly your own, that you have so frequently
failed and come short; it was not from any defect on God's part, in not
affording you sufficient grace, but you were some way plainly wanting and
unfaithful to your selves. And the miscarriage of former trials only
admonishes you to begin again with greater care, courage and sincerity.

I shall therefore briefly mention to you the chief conditions or
qualifications of such a resolution as is like to hold out against all
temptations and opposition, by which we may also see how it comes to pass that
men's good purposes do so often prove abortive.

1. If we would resolve effectually, we must take care to found our good
purposes upon such reasons and arguments as are universal, and oblige us to a
thorough change, and hold indifferently for all places, circumstances and
conditions. Our pious resolutions must not be made upon any contingent
particular reasons, which may soon chance to cease, and when they do, we shall
be in manifest danger of returning back to our old courses. For instance,
Suppose any one to be surprised in any base and unworthy action, and to have
endured the shame and punishment of it, and upon these accounts to resolve with
himself, that he will never be guilty of the same again; but afterward it
happens that this man meets with such a temptation to that sin, as that he may
be confident of committing it with privacy and safety; judge you, whether, if
he be not furnished with other arguments, he will not certainly fall into the
snare, and break all his former vows to the contrary: and this is the case of
all those who resolve for the practice of Religion, for some particular
convenience, or to avoid some present evil, such as loss of credit, trade or
gain, to preserve their health, to oblige their relations, to please their
superiors, or the like for these at the best are but slight and mean arguments
for Religion, and they commonly hold against some sins only; and circumstances
may easily be so changed, that they may become no reasons or arguments at all.

Thus one man resolves to live well, because he finds he shall not live long;
but a good air, temperate diet, and wholesome physic alter the state of his
body and mind both together: and so the intemperate person, when he has filled
and stretched his vessels with wine to their utmost capacity, and is grown
weary and sick, and feels those qualmes and disturbances that usually attend
such excesses, resolves then, that he will hereafter contain himself within the
bounds of sobriety; till within a little while he recovers his former debauch,
and is well again, and then his appetite returns, and his company invites, and
he forgets both the trouble that his sin created, and the promises that he made
against it.

But now he that would resolve for repentance and amendment successfully, must
do it upon such grounds as these; namely, the evil and baseness of sin it
self, and the excellency of virtue and goodness, out of the sense of his
subjection to his Maker, and the worth and value of his own immortal soul; out
of gratitude to God and our blessed Savior, who has done and suffered so much
for us, out of a full belief of God's continual presence with us, and
inspection over us, and the strict account he will one day call us to; out of
fear of the vexations of a disturbed conscience, and those eternal miseries
that await all impenitent sinners, and out of hopes of that glory and
happiness, which shall be the reward of welldoing: for these reasons will at
all times serve to stablish and confirm our virtuous resolutions, they will
always hold good, as long as men are in their wits, they are sufficient to
answer every temptation, and oblige equally against all sin, in all places, and
upon all occasions.

2. Let our resolutions be made upon the maturest, and most deliberate
consideration of all things that can occur to our thoughts: An hasty sudden vow
is soon forgot, and this is one great reason why men's good purposes so often
fail; namely, that when they are serious and devout, or scared, they then in
the general, and in gross resolve for the future to live well and religiously,
when yet, alas! they know not what is meant by it; and so when they come to be
tried in any particular part of Religion, this they never thought of before,
nor did they ever intend to oblige themselves to it.

Before therefore thou engagest thy self, consider well all circumstances, and
the several instances of Religion; what thou must part with, what companies
thou must forsake, what friendship and acquaintance thou must renounce, what
pleasures and profits thou must deny thy self, what strict duty and service
will be required of thee; and then most seriously examine thy self, can I march
through all these inconveniences, and overcome all the difficulties and
temptations that may or can befall me in this new enterprise? consult thy
judgment, affections and inclinations, and make thy determination upon every
particular, and be always as jealous and suspicious of thy self as possibly
thou can, always remembering that vast difference that there is between things
as they are only represented to us by our fancies, and when they become
actually and sensibly present to us: This I must do, that I must avoid; I must
never gratify this lust, no not once more, whatever opportunity, provocation or
desire I may have to it; I must hold to this practice not only this day, not
only at some certain times and seasons, but constantly throughout the whole
course of my life, shall I not soon grow weary of such strictness? All my
worldly affairs, all my fleshly pleasures must give place to this resolution;
and can my heart fully, without any reserve, consent to such an universal
alteration? How many will this change offend? how many flouts and jeers must I
expose my self to by this repentance? how shall I answer such an old
acquaintance when he invites me to an intemperate cup? can I now wholly abstain
from what I have so long allowed my self in?

Thus consider all things well and thoroughly in thy mind before thou do
resolve, that it may be the deliberate act of the whole man, that thy
understanding may perfectly approve of it, being fully convinced of its
reasonableness; that thy will may wholly consent to it, that all thy affections
may yield up themselves and submit to it, so that nothing that can befall thee
afterward may be able to stagger thee because it was not foreseen, or make
thee doubt of the wisdom of thy choice.

3. Renew these thy good purposes often, every day, yea many times every day,
at least whilst they are fresh, and thou art just beginning thy repentance;
frequently propound the same things to thy thoughts and judgment, that thou
may see it is not any particular heat or fancy that forms thy resolution.

For this is another ordinary cause why some men's good resolutions do not hold
but, namely, because they are the accidental effect of some passionate
commotion within them, of some fright or disturbance, rather than their
deliberate judgment; they depend upon some present heat, good mood or pang of
devotion, which lasts not long upon them, and so consequently their resolutions
have but little force and efficacy. There are some men of that facile temper,
that they are wrought upon by every object they converse with, whom any
affectionate discourse, or serious Sermon, or any notable accident, shall put
into a fit of religion, which yet usually lasts no longer, than till somewhat
else comes in their way, and blots out those impressions, and these men are
good or bad as it happens; for it is not likely that men of such volatile loose
tempers should make any lasting resolutions, either in matters of Religion, or
even in any other instances whatever.

Ask your self therefore the next day, whether you are still of the same mind;
after some intermission put the cause again to examination, after that thy mind
has been diverted by other matters, and thy thoughts employed in other
affairs, so that the warmth of thy first imagination is now over, try then
whether thou approvest of the same things: Does not thy heart begin to stumble,
and draw back, and shrink from the undertaking? do thou not begin to think of
some instance of thy duty wherein thou desire to be excused, or some sin
which thou would fain have excepted? do thou not hanker after a greater
liberty in some things? if not, I know no better sign in the world of a good
resolution, and such as is like to hold out than this, when we keep the same
mind in our different tempers, and several states of life. And think not all
this care too much, or too troublesome, since it is necessary only for
awhile, till we are well settled and confirmed in this change, or new life. Try
thy self when thou art sound and in health, as well as when under a fit of the
stone or gout; when thou art merry and brisk, as well as when thou art sad and
melancholy; and if thou still find'st reason to persist in the same resolution,
thou may do well, the more to fix thy self, to back it with a solemn vow and
protestation to Almighty God, that by his grace thou will keep firm and
steadfast to it to the end of thy life. And it has been farther advised, that
we should commit this to writing, keep it safe by us as our act and deed, by
which we have devoted and given up our selves to God, and often read it over,
and examine our faithfulness to it, as that which shall one day be produced
against us to our everlasting confusion, if we do not discharge and satisfy it.
Let us also take the first occasion to renew and confirm these vows and
resolutions at the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, there again bind thy self to
perform all that thou have promised; there by that sacred body and blood thou
commemoratest, oblige thy self never to start wilfully from God's service,
whatever difficulties thou may encounter with, what temptations soever thou
may have to forsake it; and surely this, if any thing, is sufficient to make
us constant as long as any sense of God or Christ remains in our minds.

4. Make known this thy good resolution to the world, be not ashamed to own
this change to other persons, as fit occasions may be offered: let them know
that thy mind is now altered, that thou art not the same person thou were
before, that they are much mistaken if they expect the same discourse, the same
compliances, the same practices from thee as before; that thou art now resolved
to serve thy Lord and Master even unto death, and never for the world to do
any thing that does displease him; that by the help of God, thou have fully
determined, never to be any more false to thy Christian Profession, and that
thou do glory in this thy unfeigned resolution.

This will hinder others from tempting thee, and make them see it is in vain
any more to assault or trouble thee; nay, and it will be a mighty confirmation
and security to thee, for then thou will have this great argument to continue
true to this promise and engagement, lest by breaking it, thou should most
justly become a sport and mock to those to whom thou have made it known, and
they should say of thee, as our Savior says of the foolish builder, behold
this man began to build, but was not able to finish.

5. Having fixed so good a purpose of mind, fail not to apply your self to the
diligent conscientious use of all those means of grace which God has
prescribed and appointed, for the vanquishing of sin, and for the obtaining
virtue and goodness: Many men suppose they have done enough, when they have
once brought their minds to a resolution, though they then never think more of
it; they think there is piety and security sufficient in resolving for the end,
though they never consider nor concern themselves about the means; they look
upon a good resolution as a kind of holy charm, and if they do but intend to
mend their lives, they reckon their lives will mend alone, without any farther
pain or trouble.

But such had best try first what money they can get by only resolving to be
rich, without taking any pains for it; or let them see whether learning will
come of it self, without any reading or study, to a man that only resolves to
be learned.

Nothing has done more mischief in the world, has made Christians more lazy
and secure, or given greater occasion to that prevailing Religion without
virtue amongst us, than this one principle, that we are converted (as it is
usually called) by those operations of God's Spirit, wherein we are wholly
passive; so that it is in vain to strive, contend and labor for the making our
selves holy, as we must do for the attaining of any other perfections and
accomplishments, since the habits of all goodness are supernaturally infused
into us: But this is all but fancy and idle talk, for the Spirit of God works
not now a days, but according to the methods of reason and discourse, assisting
us whilst we sincerely use such moral means as Religion teaches, or reason
prescribes, and that with as much diligence, vigor and constancy, as if we had
no assistence at all, but were wholly left to our selves; so that the way to
recover our selves to a Christian temper of mind after a vicious course of
life, is in truth the very same by which a man recovers his health after a long
disease, viz. by God's blessing upon the diligent use of fit means; and any
other way is no more now to be expected than prophecy or miracles.

The reformation of an habitual sinner is a work of time and patience; evil
customs must be mastered and subdued by degrees; and we must be forced to
destine particular times, and to use particular proper means for the gaining of
the several graces required in a Christians we must first encounter one vice or
lust, then another; and after we have done our best, yet perhaps a temptation
may surprise us unawares, and we may fall again into the mire even after we
have washed our selves in some measure, and so create our selves new work and
greater trouble: we must expect sometimes to come off by the worst, before we
obtain the final conquest; and our lusts, after they have been routed, may
perchance rally, and make head again.

We must not therefore be presently discouraged, or faint and grow weary in
these our conflicts with sin and vice; for if we can but bear undauntedly the
first shock, and stand out the first assaults, the force of our enemies will
sensibly decline, we shall every day gain ground, the work will grow much
easier upon our hands; and the means of grace, if we are but constant and
unwearied in the use of them, will never fail of success.

6. Lastly, Let us always second our good resolutions with devout prayers for
the aids of God's holy Spirit to strengthen us in this our undertaking; to
animate us with patience and courage, to fight for us, and with us, against all
the enemies of our souls; that he would furnish us with an inward power in our
minds, whereby our evil inclinations may be changed, and that by the strength
of his grace we may be freed from those ill impressions that formerly subdued
us.

For by this means God is not only made an assistent, but a witness and a
party, and our resolutions come near to the nature of a vow; by this we daily
oblige our selves afresh to God, and renew our resolutions, this adds the
greatest strength and solemnity to them; and though they were at first begun
upon too slight considerations, or too suddenly or weakly made, yet when once
we seriously make God concerned in them, they will then become firm and strong:
And indeed he that finds in himself no mind to pray to God for his assistence,
his resolutions, be they what they will, are certainly vain; his neglect to
implore God's aid, is a sure sign that he has no mind to keep them.

Often therefore prostrate your selves at his footstool, beseech him not to
despise the day of small things, not to quench the smoking flax, nor to break
the bruised reed, that he would be pleased to bless and prosper these
beginnings and first attempts toward a new life; profess your dependence upon
his help and assistence, and beg of him most earnestly never to leave you, nor
forsake you.

And if thus resolved, thus trusting upon God's grace, thus diligent in the use
of all due means, we yet fail of overcoming our sins and lusts; I shall then
readily confess, that there is but little heed to be given to the promises of
the Gospel, that our misery is unavoidable, and that God has not provided a
sufficient remedy for sinners: but therefore it is only that we so often fall
short, and find temptations too hard for all our good purposes, because we
resolve but by halves, and unadvisedly, we resolve we know not what, we do it
rashly or sillily, or humoursomely, upon no reasons, or none that will hold.
This is the second hindrance of men's repentance, the unsuccesfulness of former
resolutions, which ought to be laid only at our own door, and charged upon our
selves as our own fault.

III. Another great hindrance of men's repentance is the hope of long life, and
better opportunity of repenting hereafter. And indeed of all the Devil's
artifices to keep men off from amending their lives, this is that which
prevails most, and with most men, they content themselves with a repentance in
reversion, and continually postpone this one thing necessary; After this or
that business is dispatched, this or that lust satisfied, this or that turn
served, when their bodies are as infirm as their souls, then they will take
care of both together. If you look abroad into the world, you will find this is
that by which chiefly wicked men maintain the quiet and peace of their minds;
for they cannot endure to think of passing out of this life, and appearing
before God in an impenitent state; but their full purpose is to do something,
some time or other, they cannot well tell what nor when, by which they hope to
make some amends for all their former follies and miscarriages.

This therefore is our most difficult task, not so much to persuade men of the
necessity of repentance, as to prevail with them unalterably to fix a time when
this change shall begin, and the care of Religion take place: we find it most
hard to convince them that it is necessary now at this very present to set
about it: we are thought a little too hot and hasty, when we press wicked men
to leave their sins to day; even whilst it is called to day, as long as they
have so much time before them to do it in. This is the most fatal cheat men
put upon themselves, so that I doubt not to say, that the infernal regions of
darkness and despair are not crowded by any sort of persons so much as by those
who fully designed and intended to have repented before they died.

It were easy now at large to show the infinite unreasonableness and danger of
such delay; but I shall content my self with propounding to you these two
considerations.

1. That if we be unwilling to repent now, it is not likely that we shall be
more willing at any other time.

2. That if we think our selves not able to do it now, we shall be less able
hereafter.

(1.) If we be unwilling to repent and amend now, it is not likely that we
shall be more willing or inclined to it at any other time: for the same reason
that makes any man defer it now, will be as forcible and prevalent at another
time. Since the man has found no great inconvenience from the sins of the last
week or month, he sees not why he may not as well venture on them for another,
and after that he says he will certainly become a new man; but when that time
comes, yet still God continues his patience, and is not weary of bearing with
him, so that he will think he may still venture to put it off once more, and then
he will not fail to perform his good intentions of amending his life.

And this is most probably the consequence of such vain purposes of leaving our
sins hereafter; for the only objection we have against doing it now, is
because this time is present, and we are loath as yet to put our selves to so
much trouble and pain as this work does require; and therefore when to morrow
is as this day, and comes to be present too, we shall for the same reason for
which we defer it till then, put it off still to another day, and so it will be
always a day or more to that day when we shall begin to repent.

So that this ought rather to be called a full purpose of committing sin to
day, than a resolution of leaving it to morrow: he that resolves to be
virtuous, but not till some time hereafter, resolves against being virtuous in
the mean time; and as virtue at such a distance is easily resolved on, so it is
as easy a matter always to keep it at that distance: the next week, says the
sinner, I will begin to be sober and temperate, serious and devout; but the
true sense of what he says, is this, I am fully bent to spend this present week
in riot and excess, in sensuality and profaneness, or whatever vice it is that
I indulge my self in; and if we do thus often, if it be our common course to
put off our repentance thus from time to time, this is a most shrewd sign, that
indeed we never intend to repent at all: This is only a pitiful device and
excuse to shift off the duty wholly; and so we should interpret it in any man
who should deal with us after the same manner in our worldly affairs.

It is with wicked men in this case, as it is with a bankrupt, when his
Creditours are loud and clamorous, speak big and threaten high, he gives them
many good words and fair promises, appoints them to come another day, entreats
their patience but a little longer, and then he will satisfy them all; when yet
the man really intends not to pay one farthing, nor ever thinks of compassing
the money against the time: Thus do men endeavor to pacify and quiet their
consciences, by telling them they will hear them another time; but this is
only to delude and cheat their consciences with good words, and specious
pretenses, making them believe, they will certainly do, what yet they cannot
endure to think of, and what they would fain wholly excuse themselves from; but
yet this is not all, for

(2.) We shall be less able to repent, and more indisposed for the work at
another time than we are now. That which makes men so loath to be brought to
reflect upon their lives past, is (as I before observed) the uneasiness and
trouble they think they shall find in such a work; so a great Trader, that has
good reason to think he is run much behind-hand in the world, of all things
hates to look into his Books, cannot endure to hear of stating his accounts,
and yet the longer he defers this, his accounts will become more intricate,
he will still run more in debt, his condition will every day grow worse and
worse, till at last it is past all recovery: and thus it is with wicked men,
they would fain defer their repentance as long as ever they can, they would not
yet be interrupted with such grave and serious thoughts; but the mischief is,
the longer they defer it, the more they have still to repent of; and not only
so, but they become more unable and unfit for such a work; they are still more
backward and averse, as having been longer used and accustomed to their sins,
and as having contracted greater familiarity with, and kindness for them; and
by such delay their ill habits grow more confirmed, their lusts and passions
become stronger and more potent, and even their very natural powers and
faculties are by degrees weakened and disabled.

And for this reason, the sooner we begin a religious course of life, the more
easy it will prove to us, not only because in the time of youth we are most
capable of any impressions, our natures being then most soft and tender, but
also because if we begin betimes, there is so much the less change to be made
in our lives and tempers, our repentance then is like a man's returning into
the right road as soon as ever he was out of his way, he has but a few paces
to go back.

You therefore who have not yet lost all your natural modesty, who yet blush at
your vices, whose hearts are not yet hardened in sin, would you but presently
without any delay, apply your selves to the service of God, and practice of
Religion, what abundance of care and trouble might you save your selves? how
many sad days and sorrowful nights might you prevent? it is in your power now
upon easy terms to become good and virtuous, and the sooner you begin, the
less sorrow, the less self-denial, the less pains will suffice.

Now therefore, even this very day let us set about it, and he that has done
wickedly, let him not dare to do the same so much as once more; let us resolve
never to have any parley with our lusts, but to make some considerable progress
in our repentance, before ever we give sleep to our eyes, or slumber to our
eyelids; let not any worldly business, or the cares of this life, or even our
necessary employments, much less sinful and vain pleasures, stifle or choke
any good thoughts or resolutions, that, during this exercise, may be raised in
our minds: we have trifled too long already about a matter of such infinite
moment, it is perfect madness to dally any longer, when our souls, which are
ten thousand times more worth than our lives, are at stake: If we begin this
very moment, God knows, we begin late enough, and who knows but to morrow may
be too late? had we been wise we should have begun sooner.

A long and eternal adieu therefore (let us every one say) to all the unlawful
bewitching pleasures of this world, I will no longer be fooled or imposed upon
by them, nor one day more live in such a state, as I shall be afraid to die in:
from this hour I change my service, I now lay my self down at the feet of my
blessed Master; without any farther disputing the case, I will immediately
begin my journey to my father's house; I will as soon defer eating, drinking or
sleeping, as delay to secure my everlasting salvation, to become sound and
healthful, to be at ease and in peace, to be safe and happy.

And for our encouragement to this, I shall only, for the conclusion of all,
add, that however great and heinous our sins have been, yet we cannot be more
ready to ask, than God is to grant us our pardon; we cannot be more forward to
return, than he is to receive us into his embraces. And because we know our
selves obnoxious to his severe justice, and that he is a God of truth and
faithfulness, as well as of mercy and compassion, and that he hates sin with a
perfect hatred; therefore that we might not have the least suspicion remaining
in us of his unwillingness to forgive such high provocations and offenses as we
may have been guilty of, he has been pleased to send his only begotten Son
into the world, to lay down his life a ransom for us, to stand between us and
God's justice, and by his dismal sufferings and cursed death to expiate our
offenses: so that we have not only the infinite goodness of the divine nature
to trust to, but the virtue and efficacy of that sacrifice which the Son of God
made of himself, to plead for our forgiveness, upon our repentance and
amendment.

Nor was our blessed Savior only our propitiation to die for us, and procure
our atonement, but he is still our Advocate, continually interceding with his
Father, in the behalf of all true penitents, and suing out their pardon for
them in the Court of Heaven: If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, who deprecates anger, mitigates wrath; and
not only barely intercedes for us, but with authority demands the release of
his captives, redeemed by his blood, by virtue of God's promise and covenant.

And in order to the sufficient promulgation of this his gracious willingness
to forgive us upon our repentance, God has provided and appointed an order of
men, to last as long as the world does, to propound to men this blessed
overture, and in God's name to beseech men to be reconciled to him.

Nay God condescends to prevent the worst of men, by manifold blessings and
favors daily obliging them, by his grace and spirit and several providence
toward them, moving, affecting and awakening the most grievous offenders to a
timely consideration of their ways. Though highly provoked, he yet begins first
with us, so desirous is he of our welfare.

He has not only outwardly proclaimed pardon to all that will submit, and
sent his own Son on this message of peace, but inwardly, by his spirit and
grace, he solicites men to comply with it, even where it is resisted and
despised; he forsakes not men at their first denial, he gives them time to
bethink and recollect themselves; he does not lie at the catch, nor take
present advantage against us, but with infinite patience waits to be gracious
to us, hoping at last we shall be of a better mind: he does not soon despair of
men's conversion and reformation, he yet extends his grace toward those who
abuse it, and offers his pardon to those who slight it; nothing is more highly
pleasing and acceptable to him, than for a sinner to return from the evil of
his ways; nay, which is more yet, he is not only, upon our repentance, ready
to overlook all that is past, but he has promised to reward our future
obedience with eternal life, so that we shall not only upon our repentance be
freed from those dismal punishments which we had rendered our selves liable to,
but likewise receive from God such a glorious recompense, as is beyond all our
conception or imagination. Now if such love and kindness of Heaven toward us
will not beget some relentings and remorse in us, if such powerful arguments
will not prevail with us to grow wise and considerate, it is impossible any
should.

Let us all therefore smite upon our breasts, and say, O Lord, we are highly
sensible of our folly, of our unworthiness and foul ingratitude; for we have
sinned against thee, and done evil in thy sight, and are no more worthy to be
called thy children: but we have heard that the great King of the World is a
most merciful King, that he delights not in the death of sinners, but had
rather they should repent and live: we cannot longer withstand or oppose such
unspeakable goodness, we are overcome by such wonderful kindness and
condescension, we resign up our selves wholly to the conduct of his good
spirit, and will never withdraw or alienate our selves from him any more; we
will now become God's true and loyal subjects, and continue such as long as we
breathe, nor shall any thing in the world be able to shake or corrupt our faith
and allegiance to him.

What punishment can be too sore, what state black and dismal enough for those
who contemn all these offers and kindnesses of Heaven? who will not by any
means be won, to look after, and have mercy upon themselves, to consult their
own interest and welfare? what pity can they expect, who obstinately choose to
be miserable, in despite of all the goodness of God, and grace of the Gospel?

The Lord grant, that we may all in this our day, know and mind the things that
belong to our everlasting peace, before they are hid from our eyes.

The Eleventh Sermon.
1 COR. XV. 35. But some man will say, how are the dead raised up? And with
what body do they come?


THE Apostle having in the beginning of this Chapter most firmly established
the truth and reality of our Savior's resurrection from the dead, proceeds to
infer from thence the certainty of our own resurrection, v. 12, 13. Now if
Christ be preached that he rose from the dead, how say some among you that
there is no resurrection of the dead? But if there be no resurrection of the
dead, then is not Christ risen. It cannot now any longer seem an impossible or
incredible thing to you that God should raise the dead, since you have so plain
and undoubted an example of it in the person of our blessed Lord, who having
been truly dead and buried, is now alive, and has appeared unto many with the
visible marks of his crucifixion still remaining in his body. And to show of
what general concernment his resurrection was, the graves were opened, as St.
Matthew tells us, and many bodies of Saints which slept, arose, and came out of
the graves after his resurrection, and appeared unto many; the same power which
raised Jesus from the dead, is able also to quicken our mortal bodies.

Now in my Text the Apostle brings in some skeptical person objecting against
this doctrine of the resurrection of the dead, But some man will say, how are
the dead raised up? and with what body do they come? Two questions that every
one almost is ready to start, especially those who love to cavil at Religion;
and it has not a little puzzled such as have undertaken to give a rational
account of our faith to give a full and satisfactory answer to them. How can
these things be? How is it possible that those bodies should be raised again,
and joined to the souls which formerly inhabited them, which many thousand
years ago were either buried in the Earth, or swallowed up in the Sea, or
devoured by fire; which have been dissolved into the smallest atoms, and those
scattered over the face of the earth, and dispersed as far asunder as the
Heaven is wide; nay which have undergone ten thousand several changes and
transmutations, have fructified the earth, become the nourishment of other
animals, and those the food again of other men, and so have been adopted into
several other bodies? How is it possible that all those little particles which
made up, suppose, the body of Abraham, should at the end of the world be again
ranged and marshalled together, and unmixt from the dust of other bodies, be
all disposed, into the same order, figure and posture they were before, so as
to make the very self-same flesh and blood which his soul at his dissolution
forsook? This seems a Camel too big for any considering person to swallow: he
must be of a very easy faith who can digest such impossibilities. Ezekiel
indeed, when the hand of the Lord was upon him, and he was carried out in the
spirit of the Lord, thought he was set down in the midst of a valley full of
dry bones; and that afterward he heard a noise, and behold a shaking, and the
bones came together, bone to his bone, the sinews and the flesh came up upon
them, and the skin covered them above; and the breath came into them, and they
lived and stood upon their feet. This may pass well enough in a Prophetical
Vision, and did handsomely represent the wonderful restoration of the Jewish
People; But that all this and much more should in truth come to pass, that our
bones after they are resolved into dust, should really become living men; that
all the little atoms whereof our bodies consisted, howsoever scattered, or
wheresoever lodged, should immediately at a general summons rally and meet
again, and every one challenge and possess its own proper place, till at last
the whole ruined fabric be perfectly rebuilt, and that of the very self-same
stuff and materials whereof it consisted before its fall; that this, I say,
should ever really be effected, is such an incredible thing, that it seems to
be above the power of reason so much as to frame a conception of it. And
therefore we may observe that the Gentiles did most especially boggle at this
Article of our Christian faith, as we read in the 17th of the Acts: when St.
Paul preached unto the Athenians concerning the resurrection of the dead, the
Philosophers mocked at him, and entertained his doctrine with nothing but
scoffs and flouts; and indeed it was one of the last things that the Heathens
received into their belief; and it is to this day the chiefest objection
against Christianity. How are the dead raised up? and with what body do they
come? In my discourse of these words I shall do these three things.

I. I shall show that the resurrection of the dead, even in the strictest
sense, as it is commonly understood and explained of the very self-same body
that died and was buried, contains nothing in it impossible or incredible.

II. Since it is certain that the body which we shall rise with, though it may
be as to substance the same with our terrestrial body, yet will be so much
altered and changed in its modes and qualities, that it will be quite another
kind of body from what it was before; I shall give you a short account of the
difference the Scripture makes between a glorified body and this mortal flesh.
And

III. Lastly, I shall draw some practical inferences from the whole.

I. I shall show that the resurrection of the dead, even in the strictest
sense, as it is commonly understood and explained of the very self-same body
that died and was buried, contains nothing in it impossible or incredible.

Whether this strict sense of the Article be the true or not, I think I need
not determine; it is sufficient for me to show, that if this be the true sense
of it, yet the Atheist or Sceptick has nothing considerable to object against
it, but what is capable of a fair and easy answer. However give me leave just
to lay before you some of the principal reasons and Scriptures upon which it is
built and established. And

1. I think it must be acknowledged that this has been all along the most
common received opinion amongst Christians, that at the last day we shall rise
again with the very same flesh with which we are clothed in this state, and
which we put off at our death: and that our heavenly bodies will not only
consist of the same substance and matter with our earthly, but will be of the
same consistency and modification, perfect flesh and blood, though in some
properties altered and changed. Most of the ancient Fathers of the Church
(excepting some few that were of a more inquisitive temper and philosophical
genius than the rest, as Origin and some others) did believe and teach, that at
the general resurrection men should he restored to the very same bodies which
they dwelt in here, and which at last were laid in the grave: that their bodies
should be then as truly the same with those they died in, as the bodies of
those whom our Savior raised when he was upon earth were the same with those
they had before; that no other body should be raised but that which slept, and
that as our Savior Christ arose with his former flesh and bones and members,
so we also after the resurrection should have the same members we now use, the
same flesh and blood and bones.

And that this was the common belief and expectation of all Christians in the
primitive times, that they should appear again at the general resurrection with
the very same bodies they lived in here on earth, will appear from that spite
and malice which the Heathens sometimes showed to the dead bodies of
Christians, reducing them to ashes, and then scattering them into the air, or
throwing them into rivers, that thereby they might defeat and deprive them of
all hopes of a resurrection: of this Eusebius gives us an eminent instance out
of the Epistle of the Churches of Vienna, and Lions in France, to those in Asia
and Phrygia, under the Persecution of Antoninus Verus; which gives an account,
how that the Heathens, after many vain and fruitless attempts to suppress the
Christian Religion, by inflicting the cruelest torments on the Professors of
it, which they bravely endured, looking for a joyful resurrection; at last
thought of a way to deprive them, as they fondly imagined, of that great hope
which ministered so much joy and courage to them under the severest trials;
which was by reducing the wrackt and mangled bodies of the several Martyrs into
the minutest Atoms, and then scattering them in the great River Rhodanus. Let
us now, say they, see whether they can rise again, and whether their God can
help them, and deliver them out of our hands. Now this is a sufficient
intimation to us, that it was then the known common opinion of Christians, that
the very same body and flesh which suffered and was martyred here on earth,
should be raised again at the last day. And indeed those amongst the Ancient
Christians who have undertaken to defend or explain this Article of the
resurrection of the dead, do it mostly by such principles, arguments and
illustrations, as do suppose the very same body and flesh and members to be
raised again, which the soul animated here in this life.

2. This has not only been the common received opinion of Christians, but
also the most plain and easy notion of a resurrection seems to require it;
namely, that the very same body which died should be raised again. Nothing dies
but the body, nothing is corrupted but the body; the soul goes upward, and
returns to God, and therefore nothing else can be properly said to be raised
again, but only that very body which died and was corrupted. If God give to
our souls at the last day a new body, this cannot literally be called the
resurrection of our bodies, because here is no reproduction of the same thing
that was before, which seems to be plainly implied in the word resurrection.
Indeed the word is sometimes used otherwise, as when a House or Temple that
has been consumed by fire, is rebuilt on the same ground where it formerly
stood, this is often, though improperly and figuratively called the
resurrection of it, and after the same manner do the Latins use the word
resurgere; but yet the most proper and literal signification of the word
resurrection, is, that the same flesh which was separated from the soul at the
day of death should be again vitally united to it.

3. There are many places of Scripture which in their strict and literal
meaning do seem plainly to favor this sense of the Article, that the very same
flesh shall be raised again; what more plain and express, says St. Hierome,
than that of Job? Job 19.26, 27. Though after my skin worms destroy this body,
yet in my flesh shall I see God, whom I shall see for my self, and my eyes
shall behold, and not another. But however plain these words may seem to be,
yet I cannot think that the primary and original meaning of them does at all
relate to the resurrection, nor were they ever so understood and interpreted by
the Jews, as Grotius tells us; not but that they might be prophetical of it,
and so by way of accommodation may be fitly applied to it; but the first and
most easy sense of the words seems to be this: After my skin is consumed, let
that which remains of me likewise by piecemeals be destroyed, yet I am
confident that, before I die, with these very eyes I shall see my Redeemer, and
be restored by him to my former happy state. So that the words are a plain
prophecy of his own deliverance, and an high expression of his confident hope
in God, that in time he would vindicate his innocence, and bring him out of all
his troubles. But if this place will not hold, there are others in the New
Testament of the same importance.

St. Paul in the 53d verse of this Chapter, speaking of our body, and the
glorious change it shall undergo at the resurrection, tells us, that this
corruptible shall put on incorruption, and this mortal shall put on
immortality; now by this corruptible and this mortal can only be meant that
body which we now carry about with us, and shall one day lay down in the dust.
Thus also the same Apostle tells us, Romans 8.11. He that raised up Christ from
the dead, shall also quicken our mortal bodies. Now that which shall be
quickened and raised to life again, can be nothing else but that very body of
flesh which is mortal, and died: though there is some question to be made,
whether the quickening our mortal bodies by the spirit of Christ dwelling in us,
should not rather be understood in a metaphorical or moral sense, of the first
resurrection from the death of sin to the life of righteousness, than of the
general resurrection at the consummation of all things.

But farther, the mention and description the Scripture makes of the places
from whence the dead shall rise, does seem plainly to intimate, that the same
bodies which were dead, shall revive again. Thus we read in Daniel, Chapter 12. v.
2. That those that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to
everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting death. Where we may yet
farther observe, that the Metaphor of sleeping and awaking, by which our death
and resurrection is here expressed, does seem to imply, that when we rise
again, our bodies will be as much the same with those we lived in, as they are
when we awake, the same with those we had before we laid our selves down to
sleep. Thus again it is said in St. John's Gospel, Chap. 5. verses 28, and 29.
The hour is coming, in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his
voice, and shall come forth; they that have done good, unto the resurrection of
life; and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation. And in
the Revelations, Chap. 20. verse 13. And the sea gave up the dead which were in
it, and death and hell, that is, the grave, delivered up the dead that were in
them, and they were judged every man according to their works. Now if the same
flesh shall not be raised again, what need is there of ransacking the graves at
the end of the word? the Sea can give up no other bodies but the same which it
received in; nor can the Grave deliver up any, but only those that were laid
therein: if it were not necessary that we should rise with the very same
bodies, the graves need not be opened, but our flesh might be permitted to rest
there for ever. To this may be added, that St. Paul tells us in the 3d Chapter
of the Epistle to the Philippians, verse 21. that our Savior shall change our
vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body. Now this vile
body can be no other than this flesh and blood which we are now clothed with,
restored to life again.

4. If we consider the several instances and examples either of those who did
immediately ascend up into Heaven, or of those who after death were restored to
life again, they all seem plainly to confirm this opinion, that at the last day
we shall rise again with the very same flesh and blood which we had here. Enoch
and Elias of old were translated into Heaven in their terrestrial bodies; and
therefore may be supposed now to live there with the same flesh and parts they
had when they were here upon earth. And those three that were raised from the
dead in the Old Testament, and those that were recalled to life by our Savior,
or accompanied him at his resurrection, all appeared again in the very same
bodies they had before their dissolution: and these were examples and types of
the general resurrection, and therefore our resurrection must resemble theirs,
and we also must appear at the last day with the same bodies we lived in here.
Even our blessed Savior himself, who was the first fruits of them that slept,
did raise his own body, according to that prediction of his. Destroy this
Temple, and in three days I will build it up again. Nay he appeared to his
Disciples with the very prints of the nails in his hands and feet, and with all
the other marks of his crucifixion; Behold my hands and my feet, says he, that
it is I my self; Handle me, and see, for a spirit has not flesh and bones, as
ye see me have: from whence it seems to follow, that we in our resurrection
shall be conformable to our Savior, and resume the very same bodies that were
laid in the Sepulcher.

5. And Lastly, It is farther urged by some of the Ancients for a proof of the
resurrection of the same body, that the exact justice and righteousness of God
does require it; that God's justice, I mean that which consists in the equal
dispensation of rewards and punishments, will seem to be much obscured, at
least will not be so illustriously manifested and displayed to the world,
unless the same body of flesh be raised again; that so that which was here the
constant partner with the soul in all her actions, whether good or evil, may
also hereafter share with her in her rewards or punishments. It seems but equal
that we should be punished in the same body in which we sinned; and that that
very flesh in which we pleased God should be exalted and glorified at the last
day, and receive a just recompense of reward for all the trouble and hardship
it underwent in this life.

Thus I have given you a brief account of this strictest sense of the Article
of the Resurrection, namely, that the very selfsame lesh and blood which make
up our bodies here on earth, shall be raised again at the last day; and after
it has been changed and glorified by the power and spirit of Christ (I speak
only of the bodies of good men) shall ascend up into Heaven, and there live
and dwell for ever in the presence of God. I come now to show that there is
nothing in all this impossible or incredible: which I shall do by proving these
three things.

1. That it is possible for God to observe and distinguish and preserve unmixt
from all other bodies the particular dust and atoms into which the several
bodies of men are dissolved, and to recollect and unite them together how far
soever dispersed asunder.

2. That God can form that dust so recollected together, of which the body did
formerly consist, into the same body it was before. And

3. That when he has made this body, he can enliven it, and make it the same
living man, by uniting it to the same soul and spirit that used formerly to
inhabit there. It cannot be denied, but that these three things do express the
whole of the resurrection of our flesh in the strictest sense, and none of
these are impossible.

1. God can observe and distinguish and preserve unmixt from all other bodies
the particular dust and atoms into which the several bodies of men are
dissolved, and recollect and unite them together, how far soever dispersed
asunder. God is infinite in wisdom, power and knowledge, he knows the number
of the stars, and calls them all by their names; he measures the waters in
the hollow of his hand, and metes out the heavens with a span, and comprehends
the dust of the earth in a measure; he numbers the hairs of our head, and not
so much as a sparrow falls to the ground without his knowledge: he can tell the
number of the sands of the Seashore, as the Heathens used to express the
immensity of his knowledge; and is it at all incredible that such an infinite
understanding should distinctly know the several particles of dust into which
the bodies of men are mouldred, and plainly discern to whom they belong, and
observe the various changes they undergo in their passage through several
bodies? Why should it be thought strange, that he who at first formed us, whose
eyes did see our substance yet being imperfect, and in whose book all our
members were written; from whom our substance was not hid, when we were made in
secret, and curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the earth, should know
every part of our bodies, and every atome whereof they are composed? The
curious artist knows every pin and part of the Watch or Machine which he
frames, and if the little Engine should fall in pieces, and all the parts of it
lie in the greatest disorder and confusion, yet he can soon rally them
together, and as easily distinguish one from another, as if every one had its
particular mark; he knows the use of every part, can readily assign to each its
proper place, and exactly dispose them into the same figure and order they were
in before: and can we think that the Almighty Architect of the world, whose
workmanship we are, does not know whereof we are made, or is not acquainted
with the several parts and materials of which this earthly tabernacle of ours
is framed and composed? The several corporeal beings that now constitute this
Universe, at the first creation of the world lay all confused in a vast heap of
rude and indigested Chaos; till by the voice of the Omnipotent they were
separated one from the other, and framed into those distinct bodies, whereof
this beautiful and orderly world does consist: and why may not the same power
at the consummation of all things, out of the ruins and rubbish of the world,
collect the several relics of our corrupted bodies, reduce them each to their
proper places, and restore them to their primitive shapes and figures, and
frame them into the same individual bodies they were parts of before? All the
atoms and particles into which men's bodies are at last dissolved, however they
may seem to us to lie carelessly scattered over the face of the earth, yet are
safely lodged by God's wise disposal in several receptacles and repositories
till the day of restitution of all things; in aquis, in ignibus, in alitibus,
in bestiis, says Tertullian, they are preserved in the waters, in birds and
beasts, till the sound of the last trumpet shall summon them, and recall them
all to their former habitations.

But the chiefest and most usual objection against what I am now pleading for
is this, That it may sometimes happen that several men's bodies may consist of
the very self-same matter: for the bodies of men are oftentimes devoured by
beasts and fishes, and other animals, and the flesh of these is afterward
eaten by other men, and becomes part of their nourishment, till at last the
same particles of matter come to belong to several bodies; and it is impossible
that at the resurrection they should be united to them all. Or to express it
shorter, it is reported of some whole Nations, that they devour the bodies of
other men, and feed upon humane flesh; so that these must necessarily borrow
great part of their bodies of other men: and if that which was part of one
man's body, comes afterward to be part of another man's, how can both rise at
the last day with the very self-same bodies they had here? But to this it may
be easily replied, that but a very small and inconsiderable part of that which
is eaten, and descends into the stomach, turns into nourishment; the far
greater part goes away by excretions and perspirations. So that it is not at
all impossible but that God Almighty, who watches over all things by his
providence, and governs them by his power, may so order the matter, that what
is really part of one man's body, though eaten by another, yet shall never come
to be part of his nourishment; or else, if it does nourish him, and
consequently becomes part of his body, that it shall wear off again, and
sometime before his death be divided and separated from it, that so it may
remain in a condition to be restored to him who first laid it down in the dust.
And the like may be said of Men-eaters, if any such there be, that God by his
wise providence may take care, either that they shall not be at all nourished
by other men's flesh which they so inhumanely devour, or if they be nourished by
it, and some particles of matter, which formerly belonged to other men, be
adopted into their bodies, yet that they shall yield them up again before they
die, that they may be in a capacity of being restored at the last day to their
right owners.

But perhaps it may seem to some unworthy of God, and beneath his divine
Majesty, to attend to such little things, and to concern himself about such
mean and trivial matters; or inconsistent with his ease and happiness, to
trouble himself with such a perplexed and intricate business, as curiously to
mark and observe all the particles of dust into which the several bodies of men
are dissolved, and exactly to distinguish one from another, and to preserve
them entire and unmixt, and at last to restore them all to their old bodies.
But such persons should have a care, lest under pretense of pleading for God's
honor and glory, they really lessen him, and derogate from all his other
perfections. It is the great excellency and perfection of the divine providence
that it extends it self to all, even to the least things, and that nothing is
exempted from its care and influence. And to fancy that to govern the world is
a burden to God, is surely to entertain mean and unworthy conceptions of him,
and to judge of him by the same rules and measures we do of our selves. It is
very unreasonable, because we are of such weak and frail natures, as that a
little business and employment presently tires us, to think the same of God
Almighty, as if it were any trouble to him, or at all interrupted his infinite
pleasure and happiness to take care of the world, and order and manage the
several affairs of it.

2. Of this dust, thus preserved and collected together, God can easily re-make
and rebuild the very same bodies which were dissolved. And that this is
possible must be acknowledged by all that believe the history of the creation
of the world, that God formed the first man Adam of the dust of the ground: if
the body of man be dust after death, it is no other than what it was
originally; and the same power that at first made it of dust, may as easily
re-make it when it is reduced into the same dust again.

Nay this is no more wonderful than the formation of an humane body in the
womb, which is a thing that we have daily experience of, which without doubt is
as great a miracle, and as strange an instance of the divine power, as the
resurrection of it can possibly be: and were it not so common and usual a
thing, we should as hardly be brought to believe it possible, that such a
beautiful fabric as the body of a man is, with nerves and bones and flesh and
veins and blood, and the several other parts whereof it consists, should be
raised out of those principles of which we see it is made, as now we are, that
hereafter it should be rebuilt, when it is crumbled into dust. Had we only
heard or read of the wonderful formation of the body of man, we should have
been as ready to ask, how are men made? and with what bodies are they born? as
now we are, when we hear of the resurrection, How are the dead raised up? and
with what bodies do they come?

3. When God has raised again the same body out of the dust into which it was
dissolved, he can enliven it, and make it the same living man, by uniting it to
the same soul and spirit which used formerly to inhabit there. And this we
cannot with the least show of reason pretend impossible to be done, because we
must grant that it has been already often done. We have several undoubted
examples of it in those whom the Prophets of old, and our blessed Savior and
his Apostles raised from the dead. Nay our Savior himself, after he was dead
and buried, rose again, and appeared alive unto his Disciples and others, and
was sufficiently known and owned by those who had accompanied him, and
conversed with him for many years together, and that not presently, but after
long doubting and hesitation, upon undeniable conviction and proof, that he was
the very same person they had seen expiring upon the Cross.

Thus I have endeavored to show you that in the strictest notion of the
resurrection there is nothing that is absurd or impossible, or above the power
of such an infinite being as God is. The only thing I know of that can with
any pretense of reason be objected against what I have discoursed upon this
head, is this, that this way of arguing from God's omnipotency is very
fallacious, and has been often much abused: for under this pretense that
nothing is impossible to an infinits power, all the Rabbinical and Mahumetan
Fables, or, which are as incredible, all the Popish Legends may be obtruded on
us for Anthentick Histories; since there is nothing contained in them that is
absolutely above or beyond God's power to effect, if he pleases to exert it.
Whence some of the Fathers have observed, that the Omnipotency of God was the
great sanctuary of Heretics, to which they always betook themselves when they
were baffled by reason. And indeed so much is certainly true, that God's
Omnipotency alone is no good argument to prove the truth of any thing; for
without doubt there are an infinite number of things which are possible to be
done or made, which yet God in his infinite wisdom never thought fit to
exercise his power about, nor perhaps ever will: and therefore we ought not to
conclude, because God can raise us again with the very same bodies we have
here; that therefore he will do so. But supposing that God has expressly
revealed and declared that he will do it, from the consideration of his
infinite power, we are bound (however impossible it may seem to us, so long as
it does not plainly imply a contradiction) not to doubt of the truth of it, but
firmly to believe, that he that has promised, can also perform. We must first
therefore be assured that it is the will of God to raise again the same flesh
which was laid in the grave, and then we may safely have recourse to the
Omnipotency of God to confirm and establish our faith of it.

I conclude this head therefore with that question of St. Paul's, Acts 26.8.
Why should it be thought a thing incredible with you that God should raise the
dead? The change from death to life is not so great as that from nothing into
being; and if we believe that God Almighty by the word of his power at first
made the heavens and the earth of no pre-existent matter, what reason have we
to doubt, but that the same God by that mighty power whereby he is able to
subdue all things to himself, can also raise to life again those who were
formerly alive, and have not yet wholly ceased to be. And though we cannot
answer all the difficulties and objections which the wit of men (whose interest
it is that their souls should die with their bodies, and both perish together)
has found out to puzzle this doctrine with: though we cannot fully satisfy our
minds and reasons about the manner how it shall be done, or the nature of those
bodies we shall rise with, yet this ought not in the least to shake or weaken
our belief of this most important Article of our Christian faith. Is it not
sufficient that an Almighty Being, with whom nothing is impossible, has
solemnly promised and past his word, that he will re-animate and re-enliven our
mortal bodies, and after death raise us to life again? Let those who presume to
mock at this glorious hope and expectation of all good men, and are continually
exposing this doctrine, and raising objections against it, first try their
skill upon the ordinary and daily appearances of nature, which they have every
day before their eyes; let them rationally solve and explain every thing that
happens in this world, of which themselves are witnesses, before they think to
move us from the belief of the resurrection by raising some dust and
difficulties about it, when Omnipotency it self stands engaged for the
performance of it. Can they tell me how their own bodies were framed and
fashioned, and curiously wrought? Can they give me a plain and satisfactory
account by what orderly steps and degrets this glorious and stately structure,
consisting of so many several parts and members, which discovers so much
delicate workmanship and rare contrivance, was at first erected? How was the
first drop of blood made, and how came the heart and veins and arteries to
receive and contain it? of what, and by what means were the nerves and fibers
made; what fixed those little strings in their due places and situations, and
fitted and adapted them for those several uses for which they serve? what
distinguished and separated the brain from the other parts of the body, and
placed it in the head, and filled it with animal spirits to move and animate
the whole body? How came the body to be fenced with bones and sinews, to be
clothed with skin and flesh, distinguished into various muscles? let them but
answer me these and all the other questions I could put to them about the
formation of their own body, and then I will willingly undertake to solve all
the objections and difficulties that they can raise concerning the resurrection
of it. But if they cannot give any account of the formation of that body they
now live in, but are forced to have recourse to the infinite power and wisdom
of the first cause, the great and sovereign orderer and disposer of all things;
let them know that the same power is able also to quicken and enliven it again
after it is rotted and returned unto dust: we must believe very few things, if
this be a sufficient reason for our doubting of any thing, that there are some
things belonging to it which we cannot perfectly comprehend, or give a rational
account of. In this state our conceptions and reasonings about the things that
belong to the future and invisible world are very childish and vain; and we do
but guess and talk at random, whenever we venture beyond what God has revealed
to us. Let us not therefore perplex and puzzle our selves with those
difficulties which have been raised concerning this doctrine of the
resurrection; for it is no absurdity to suppose that an infinite power may
effect such things as seem wholly impossible to such finite beings as we are;
but rather let us hold fast to what is plainly revealed concerning it, namely,
that all those who love and fear God shall be raised again after death the fame
men they were before, and live for ever with God in unspeakable happiness both
of body and soul.

Thus I have endeavored to show the possbility of a resurrection in the
strictest sense; I now proceed to the second thing I propounded, which was

II. (Since it is certain that the body we shall rise with, though it may be as
to substance the same with our terrestrial body, yet will be so altered and
changed in its modes and qualities, that it will be quite another kind of body
from what it was before.) To give you a short account of the difference the
Scripture makes between a glorified body and this mortal flesh.

But before I do this, I shall premise this one thing; that all our
conceptions of the future state are yet very dark and imperfect. We are
sufficiently assured that we shall all after death be alive again, the very
same men and persons we were here; and that those that have done good shall
receive glory and honor and eternal life. But the nature of that joy and
happiness which is provided for us in the other world is not so plainly
revealed; this we know, that it vastly surpasses all our imaginations, and that
we are not able in this imperfect state to fancy or conceive the greatness of
it; we have not words big enough fully to express it; or if it were described
to us, our understandings are too short and narrow to comprehend it. And
therefore the Scriptures, from which alone we have all we know of a future
state, describe it either first negatively, by propounding to us the several
evils and inconveniences we shall then be totally freed from; or else secondly
by comparing the glory that shall then be revealed with those things which men
do most value and admire here: whence it is called an inheritance, a kingdom, a
throne, a crown, a scepter, a rich treasure, a river of pleasures, a splendid
robe, and an exceeding and eternal weight of glory. All which do not signify to
us the strict nature of that happiness which is promised us in another world,
which does not consist in any outward sensible joys or pleasures: But these
being the best and greatest things which this world can bless us with, which
men do ordinarily most admire and value, and covet the possession of, are made
use of to set out to us the transcendent blessedness of another life, though
indeed it is quite of another kind, and infinitely greater than the greatest
worldly happiness. These are only little comparisons to help our weak
apprehensions and childish fancies; but we shall never truly and fully know the
glories of the other world, till we come to enjoy them. It does not yet appear
what we shall be: from the description which the Scripture gives of the other
world, as from a Map of an unknown Country; we may frame in our minds a rude
confused idea and conception of it; and from thence, as Moses from the top of
Mount Pisgah, may take some little imperfect prospect of the land of promise;
but we shall never have a complete notion of it, till we our selves are entered
into it. However, so much of our future happiness is revealed to us, as may be
sufficient to raise our thoughts and affections above the empty shadows and
fading beauties, and flattering glories of this lower world: to make us
sensible how mean and trifling our present joys and fatisfactions are, and to
excite and engage our best and most hearty endeavors toward the attainment of
it, whatever difficulties and discouragements we may meet with in this life;
though all that can be said, or we can possibly know of it, comes infinitely
short of what one day we shall feel and perceive, and be really possessed of.

Having premised this, I come to consider what change shall be wrought in our
bodies at the resurrection, which is no small part of our future happiness: now
this change, according to the account the Scriptures give of it, will consist
chiefly in these four things. 1. That our bodies shall be raised immortal and
incorruptible; 2. that they shall be raised in glory; 3. that they shall be
raised in power; 4. that they shall be raised spiritual bodies. All which
properties of our glorified bodies are mentioned by St. Paul in this Chapter,
verses 42, 43, 44. So also is the resurrection of the dead. It is sown in
corruption, it is raised in incorruption; It is sown in dishonor, it is raised
in glory; It is sown in weakness, it is raised in power. It is sown a natural
body, it is raised a spiritual body. And the explication of these words will
give us the difference between the glorified body which we shall have in
Heaven, and that mortal flesh and vile earth which we are now burdened with.

1. The bodies which we shall have at the resurrection will be immortal and
incorruptible; verse 53. For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and
this mortal must put on immortality. Now these words immortal and incorruptible
do not only signify that we shall die no more, for in that sense the bodies of
the damned are also raised immortal and incorruptible, since they must live for
ever, though it be in intolerable pain and misery: but they denote farther a
perfect freedom from all those bodily evils which sin has brought into the
world, and from whatever is penal, afflictive, or uneasy to us; that our
bodies shall not be subject to pain or diseases, or those other inconveniences
to which they are now daily obnoxious. This is called in Scripture the
redemption of our bodies, the freeing them from all those evils and maladies
which they are here subject unto. Were we at the general resurrection to
receive the same bodies again, subject to those frailties and miseries which in
this state we are forced to wrestle with, I much doubt whether a wise
considering person, were it left to his choice, would willingly take it again;
whether he would not choose to let it lie still rotting in the grave, rather
than consent to be again fettered down and bound fast to all eternity to such a
cumbersome clod of earth: such a resurrection as this would indeed be what
Plotinus calls it, (...), a resurrection to another sleep: it would look more
like a condemnation to death again, than a resurrection to life.

The best thing that we can say of this earthly house and tabernacle of clay,
the tomb and sepulcher of our souls, is, that it is a ruinous building, and it
will not be long before it be dissolved and tumble into dust: that it is not
our home, or resting place, but that we look for another house, not made with
hands eternal in the heavens; that we shall not always be confined to this
doleful prison, but that in a little time we shall be delivered from the
bondage of corruption, and being disengaged and set free from this burden of
flesh, shall be admitted into the glorious liberty of the children of God.
Alas! what frail and brittle things are these bodies of ours? How soon are they
disordered and discomposed? To what a troop of diseases, pains, and other
infirmities are they continually liable? And how does the least distemper or
weakness disturb and annoy our minds, interrupt our ease and rest, and make
life it self a burden to us? of how many several parts and members do our
bodies consist? and if any one of these be disordered, the whole man suffers
with it: If but one of those slender veins or tender membranes, or little
nerves and fibers, whereof our flesh is made up, be either contracted or
extended beyond its due proportion, or obstructed, or corroded by any sharp
humor, or broken; what torment and anguish does it create? How does it pierce
our souls with grief and pain? Nay when our bodies are at their best, what
pains do we take, to what drudgeries are we forced to submit, to serve their
necessities, to provide for their sustenance, and supply their wants; to repair
their decays, to preserve them in health, and to keep them tenantable, in some
tolerable plight and fitness for the soul's use? We pass away our days with
labor and sorrow in mean and servile employments, and are continually busying
our selves about such trifling matters, as are beneath a rational and immortal
spirit to stoop to, or be solicitous about; And all this only to supply our
selves with food and raiment, and other conveniences for this mortal life, and
to make provision for this vile contemptible flesh, that it may want nothing
that it craves or desires. And what time we can spare from our labor, is taken
up in resting and refreshing our tired and jaded bodies, and giving them such
recruits as are necessary to fit them for work again, and restore them to their
former strength and vigor. How are we forced every night to enter into the
confines of death, even to cease to be, at least to pass away so many hours
without any useful or rational thoughts, only to keep these carcasses in
repair, and make them fit to undergo the drudgeries of the enfuing day? In a
word, so long as these frail, weak and dying bodies, subject to so many evils
and inconvemences both from within and without, are so closely linkt and united
to our souls, that not so much as any one part of them can suffer, but our
souls must be affected with it; it is impossible that we should enjoy much ease
or rest, or happiness in this life, when it is in the power of so many thousand
contingencies to rob us of it. But our hope and comfort is, that the time will
shortly come, when we shall be delivered from this burden of flesh: When God
shall wipe away all tears from our eyes, and there shall be no more death,
neither sorrow, nor crying; neither shall there be any more pain, for the
former things are passed away: When we shall hunger no more, neither thirst any
more; neither shall the sun light on us, nor any heat; for the lamb which is in
the midst of the throne shall feed us, and shall lead us into living fountains
of waters. Oh when shall we arrive to those happy regions, where no complaints
were ever heard, where we shall all enjoy a constant and uninterrupted health
and vigor both of body and mind, and never more be exposed to pinching frosts
or scorching heats, or any of those inconveniences which incommode this present
pilgrimage? When we have once passed from death to life, we shall be perfectly
eased of all that troublesome care of our bodies, which now takes up so much of
our time and thoughts: we shall be set free from all those tiresome labors and
servile drudgeries which here we are forced to undergo for the maintenance and
support of our lives; and shall enjoy a perfect health, without being vexed
with any nauseous medicines, or tedious courses of physic for the preservation
of it. Those robes of light and glory which we shall be clothed with at the
resurrection of the just, will not stand in need of those careful provisions,
or crave those satisfactions which it is so grievous to us here either to
procure or be without. But they, as our Savior tells us, St. Luke 20. verse
35, 36. which shall be accounted worthy to obtain that world, and the
resurrection from the dead, neither marry, nor are given in marriage, neither
can they die any more; for they are (...), equal to Angels: they shall live
such a life as the holy Angels do. Whence Tertullian calls the body we shall
have at the resurrection carnem Angelificatam, Angelified flesh, which shall
neither be subject to those weaknesses and decays, nor want that daily
sustenance and continual recruit which these mortal bodies cannot subsist
without. Meats for the belly, and the belly for meats, but God shall destroy
both it and them. This is that perfect and complete happiness which all good
men shall enjoy in the other world; which, according to an Heathen Poet, may be
thus briefly summed up. Men's sana in corpore sano, a mind free from all trouble
and guilt in a body free from all pains and diseases. Thus our mortal bodies
shall be raised immortal; they shall not only by the power of God be always
preserved from death, for so the bodies we have now, if God pleases, may become
immortal; but the nature of them shall be so wholly changed and altered, that
they shall not retain the same seeds or principles of mortality and corruption;
so that they who are once clothed with them, as our Savior tells us, cannot
die any more.

2. Our bodies shall be raised in glory. Then shall the righteous shine forth
as the sun in the kingdom of their Father, Matt. 13.43. Our heavenly bodies in
brightness and glory shall contend with the splendor of the Sun it self: A
resemblance of this we have in the luster of Moses's face, which, after he had
conversed with God in the Mount, did shine so gloriously, that the children of
Israel were afraid to come near him, and therefore when he spoke to them, he
was forced to cast a veil over his face to cloud and eclipse the glory of it:
And that extraordinary and miraculous majesty of St. Stephen's countenance
seems to be a presage of that future glory which our heavenly bodies shall be
clothed with: Acts 6.15. And all that sat in the Council looking steadfastly
on him, saw his face as it had been the face of an Angel. That is, they saw a
great light and splendor about him; and if the bodies of Saints do sometimes
appear so glorious here on earth, how will they shine and glitter in the other
world, when they shall be made like unto Christ's own glorious body? for so St.
Paul tells us, that Christ will fashion our vile bodies like unto his glorious
body. Now how glorious and splendid the body of Christ is, we may ghess by the
visions of the two great Apostles, St. Peter and St. Paul.

The former of them, when he saw the transfiguration of our Savior, when his
face did shine as the sun, and his raiment became shining, and white as snow,
was at the sight of it so transported and overcharged with joy and admiration,
that he was in a manner besides himself, for he knew not what he said. When our
Savior discovered but a little of that glory which he now possesses, and will
in due time communicate to his followers, yet that little of it made the place
seem a paradise: and the Disciples were so taken with the sight of it, that
they thought they could wish for nothing better than always to live in such
pure light, and enjoy so beautiful a sight. It is good for us to be here; let
us make three tabernacles: here let us fix and abide for ever. And if they
thought this so great a happiness, only to be where such heavenly bodies were
present, and to behold them with their eyes, how much greater happiness must
they enjoy, who are admitted to dwell in such glorious mansions, and are
themselves clothed with so much brightness and splendor?

The other appearance of our blessed Savior after his ascension into Heaven to
St. Paul as he was traveling to Damascus, was so glorious, that it put out his
eyes; his senses were not able to bear a light so refulgent: such glorious
creatures will our Lord make us all, if we continue his faithful servants and
followers; and we shall be so wonderfully changed, by the word of his power,
from what we are in this vile state, that the bodies we now have will not be
able so much as to bear the sight and presence of those bodies which shall be
given us at the resurrection.

Now this excellency of our heavenly bodies the Schoolmen fancy will arise in
a great measure from the happiness of our souls. The unspeakable joy and
happiness which our souls shall then enjoy, will break through our bodies, and
be conspicuous, and shine forth in the brightness of our countenances, and
illustrate them with beauty and splendor; as the joy of the soul, even in this
life, has some influence upon the body, and makes an imperfect impression upon
the countenance, by rendering it more serene and cheerful than otherwise it
would be: as Solomon tells us, Eccles. 8.1. That a man's wisdom makes his
face to shine. Virtue and goodness purifies and exalts a man's natural temper,
and makes his very looks more clear and brisk.

3. Our bodies shall be raised in power. This is that which the Schools call
the agility of our heavenly bodies, the nimbleness of their motion, by which
they shall be rendered most obedient and able instruments of the soul. In this
state our bodies are no better than clogs and fetters which confine and
restrain the freedom of the soul, and hinder it is all her operations; The
corruptible body, as it is in the wisdom of Solomon, presses down the soul,
and the earthly tabernacle weighs down the mind that museth upon many things.
Our dull, sluggish and unactive bodies are often unable, oftener unready and
backward to execute the orders, and obey the commands of our souls; so that
they are rather hindrances to the soul, than any-ways useful or serviceable to
her. But in the other life, as the Prophet Isaiah tells us, Isaiah 40.31. They
that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength, they shall mount up with
wings as Eagles; they shall run, and not be weary; and they shall walk, and not
faint: or as another expresses it; They shall shine, and run too and fro like
sparks amongst the stubble; the speed of their motion shall be like that of
devouring fire in an heap of dry stubble, and the height of it shall surpass
the towering flight of the Eagle: for they shall meet the Lord in the air, when
he comes to judgment, and afterward mount up with him into the third and
highest Heavens. This earthly body is continually grovelling on the ground, slow
and heavy in all its motions, listless, and soon tired with action; and the
soul that dwells in it is forced, as it were, to drag and hale it along; but
our heavenly bodies shall be as free, as active and nimble as our very thoughts
are.

4. And Lastly, Our bodies shall be raised spiritual bodies; not of a spiritual
substance, for then the words would imply a contradiction; it being impossible
that the same thing should be both a spiritual and a bodily substance. But
spiritual is here opposed, not to corporeal, but to natural or animal; and by
it is expressed, (as it is ordinarily interpreted) the subtilty and tenuity and
purity of our heavenly bodies. But I would rather explain it thus. In this
state our spirits are forced to serve our bodies, and to attend their leisure,
and do mightily depend upon them in most of their operations; but on the
contrary, in the other world our bodies shall wholly serve our spirits, and
minister unto them, and depend upon them. So that by a natural body, I
understand a body fitted for this lower and sensible world, for this earthly
state; by a spiritual body, such an one as is suited and accommodated to a
spiritual state, to an invisible world, to such a life as the Saints and Angels
lead in Heaven. And indeed this is the principal difference between this mortal
body, and our glorified body. This flesh, which now we are so apt to dote upon,
is one of the greatest and most dangerous enemies we have, and therefore is
defied and renounced by all Christians in their baptism, as well as the world
and the Devil. It continually tempts and solicits us to evil; every sense is a
snare to us, and all its lusts and appetites are inordinate and insatiable; it
is impatient of Christ's yoke, and refuses discipline; it is ungovernable, and
often rebelleth against reason; and the law in our members warreth against the
law of our minds, and brings us into captivity to the law of sin which is in
our members, and when the spirit is willing, the flesh is weak; so that the
best men are forced to keep it under, and use it hardly, lest it should betray
them into folly and misery. We are now in a state of warfare, and must always
be upon our guard and watch, continually arming and defending our selves
against the assaults of the flesh, and all its violent and impetuous motions.
How does it hinder us in all our religious devotions? How soon does it jade our
minds when employed in any divine or spiritual meditations; or how easily by
its bewitching and enchanting pleasure does it divert them from such noble
exercises? So that St. Paul breaks forth into this sad and mournful complaint;
Romans 7.24. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this
death? Who shall? Death shall. That shall give us a full and final deliverance.
When once we have obtained the resurrection unto life, we shall not any more
feel those lustings of the flesh against the spirit, which are here so
troublesome and uneasy to us; our flesh shall then cease to vex our souls with
its evil inclinations, immoderate desires, and unreasonable passions; But being
its self spiritualized, purified, exalted and freed from this earthly grosness,
and all manner of pollution, shall become a most fit and proper instrument of
the soul in all her divine and heavenly employments. It shall not be weary of
singing praises unto God Almighty through infinite Ages. It shall want no
respite or refreshment, but its meat and drink shall be to do the will of God.

In these things chiefly consists the difference between those bodies which we
shall have at the resurrection, and this mortal flesh; which we can but very
imperfectly either conceive or express: but yet from what has been discoursed
on this subject, it does sufficiently appear that a glorified body is
infinitely more excellent and desirable than that vile and contemptible flesh
which we now carry about with us. The only thing remaining is,

III. And Lastly, to draw some practical inferences from all I have said on
this subject. I shall but just mention these five, and leave the improvement of
them to your own private meditations.

1. From what I have said, we may learn the best way of fitting and preparing
our selves to live in those heavenly and spiritual bodies which shall be
bestowed upon us at the resurrection; which is by cleansing and purifying our
souls still more and more from all fleshly filthiness, and weaning our selves
by degrees from this earthly body, and all sensual pleasures and delights. We
should begin in this life to loosen and untie the knot between our souls and
this mortal flesh, to refine our affections, and raise them from things below,
to things above; to take off our hearts, and leisurely to disengage them from
things present and sensible, and to use and accustom our selves to think of,
and converse with things spiritual and invisible: that so our souls, when they
are separated from this earthly body, may be prepared and disposed to actuate
and inform a pure and spiritual one, as having before hand tasted and relished
spiritual delights and pleasures, and been in some degree acquainted with those
objects which shall then be presented to us. A soul wholly immersed and buried
in this earthly body is not at all fit and qualified for those celestial and
glorious mansions which God has provided for us: an earthly sensual mind is so
much wedded to bodily pleasures, as that it cannot enjoy its self without them,
and is incapable of tasting or relishing any other, though really greater, and
infinitely to be preferred before them. Nay such persons as mind only the
concerns of the body, and are wholly led by its motions and inclinations; as
do, (...), as it were embody their souls, would esteem it a great unhappiness
to be clothed with a spiritual and heavenly body: it would be like clothing a
beggar in princely apparel. Such glorious bodies would be uneasy to them; they
would not know how to behave themselves in them; they would even be glad to
retire, and put on their rags again. But now by denying the solicitations of
our flesh, and contradicting its lusts and appetites, and weaning our selves
from bodily pleasures, and subduing and mortifying our carnal lusts, we fit and
dispose our selves for another state: and when our souls are thus
spiritualized, they will soon grow weary of this flesh, and long for their
departure; they will be always ready to take wing, and fly away into the other
world, where at last they will meet with a body suited to their rational and
spiritual appetites.

2. From hence we may give some account of the different degrees of glory in
the other state. For though all good men shall have glorious bodies, yet the
glory of them all shall not be equal; they shall all shine as stars, and yet
one star differs from another star in glory; there is one glory of the sun,
and another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars; so also is the
resurrection of the dead. Some will have bodies more bright and resplendent
than others: Those who have done some extraordinary service to their Lord, who
have suffered bravely and courageously for his name; or those who by the
constant exercise of severity and mortification have arrived to an higher
pitch, and attained to a greater measure of purity and holiness than others,
shall shine as stars of the first magnitude: Dan. 12.3. And they that be wise,
shall shine as the brightness of the firmament; and they that turn many to
righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever. It is certain that the purest
and most spiritual bodies shall be given to those who are most fitted for them,
to the most heavenly and spiritual souls: so that this is no little
encouragement to us to make the greatest proficiency we can possibly in the
ways of virtue and piety, since the more we wean our selves from these present
things and sensible objects, the more glorious and heavenly will our bodies be
at the resurrection.

3. Let this consideration engage us patiently to bear those afflictions,
sicknesses and bodily pains which we are exercised with in this life. The time
of our redemption draws nigh; let us but hold out awhile longer, and all
tears shall be wiped from our eyes, and we shall never sigh nor sorrow any
more. And how soon shall we forget all the misery and uneasiness we endured in
this earthly tabernacle, when once we are clothed with that house which is
from above? we are now but in our journey toward the heavenly Canaan, are
pilgrims and strangers here, and therefore must expect to struggle with many
straits and difficulties, but it will not be long before we shall come to our
journeys end, and that will make amends for all: we shall then be in a quiet
and safe harbor out of the reach of those storms and dangers wherewith we are
here encompassed: we shall then be at home, at our Father's house, no more
exposed to those inconveniences which, so long as we abide in this tabernacle
of clay, we are subject unto. And let us not forfeit all this happiness only
for want of a little more patience and constancy; but let us hold out to the
end, and we shall at last receive abundant recompense for all the trouble and
uneasiness of our passage, and be enstated in perfect endless rest and peace.

4. Let this especially arm and fortify us against the fear of death; for death
is now conquered and disarmed, and can do us no hurt. It separates us indeed
from this body for a while, but it is only that we may receive it again far
more pure and glorious. It takes away our old rags, and bestows upon us royal
robes: either therefore let us lay aside the profession of this hope of the
resurrection unto life, or else let us with more courage expect our own
dissolution, and with greater patience bear that of our friends and relations.
Woe is us who are forced still to sojourn in Mesech, and to dwell in the tents
of Kedar: for how can it be well with us so long as we are chained to these
earthly carcasses? As God therefore said once to Jacob, fear not to go down
into Egypt, for I will go down with thee, and I will surely bring thee up
again; so may I say to you, fear not to go down into the house of rottenness,
fear not to lay down your heads in the dust, for God will certainly bring you
out again, and that after a much more glorious manner. Let death pull down this
house of clay, since God has undertaken to rear it up again infinitely more
splendid and useful.

5. And Lastly, Let us all take care to live so here, that we may be accounted
worthy to obtain the other world, and the resurrection from the dead. Let us
rise, in a moral sense, from the death of sin to the life of righteousness, and
then the second death shall have no power over us. A renewed and purified mind
and soul shall never fail of an heavenly and glorious body in the other world,
but a sensual and worldly mind, as it has no affection for, so can it find no
place in those pure regions of light and happiness. Since therefore we have
this comfortable hope of a glorious resurrection unto life eternal, let us
purify our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit; let us hold fast our
profession, and steadfastly adhere to our duty, whatever we may lose or suffer
by it here, as knowing we shall reap, if we faint not. And this is Saint Paul's
exhortation with which he concludes his discourse of the resurrection,
Therefore my beloved brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in
the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labor is not in vain in
the Lord.

A SERMON Preached before the House of COMMONS. The Twelfth Sermon.
JOB XXVII. 5, 6. God forbid that I should justify you: till I die, I will not
remove my integrity from me.

My righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go; my heart shall not
reproach me so long as I live.


THESE words may be considered as the resolution of a truly honest man, whose
virtue and goodness depends not upon any outward accidents or fortuitous
circumstances; who in all things keeps an exact conscience, and in all times,
places and conditions acts by the same unalterable rule of righteousness, and
steadily pursues what is good and honest, whatever he may lose or suffer by it.
Would you know, says Seneca, whom I call a good and perfect man, I mean such
an one, quem malum facere nulla vis nulla necessitas potest. Whom no outward
force, no exigence or turn of affairs, neither prospect of advantage, nor fear
of inconvenience can ever prevail with to do an evil or base action; who can
never be swayed by any particular sinister interest to do that which his own
mind inwardly disapproves and condemns.

A truly honest man considers not what will take best, or please most, whether
it will prove for his credit or profit, whether he shall gain or lose friends
by it, whether it will hinder or further his advancement in the world; but in
all cases inviolably keeps to what is fit, just and reasonable, and behaves
himself as becomes a good honest man, being wholly unconcerned for the success
and event of what his conscience tells him he ought to do: he is resolved to
please God, and to do his duty, and to maintain the peace of his own mind, let
the world go as it will.

But on the other side, the crafty wise politicians of this world live by no
certain law; profess, believe, practice this Religion, or that, or none at all,
as may best suit with the present state of things and juncture of affairs, or
with those particular private designs which they carry on in the world, and in
all their actions are governed by the giddy and uncertain measures of interest
and worldly policy; and though sometimes, if it happens to be for their
interest so to do, they may seem to speak and act as fairly as any men
whatever; yet to serve a turn, to promote their temporal safety and advantage,
or some other bye and selfish design, they shall not refuse to commit the
basest and foulest crimes.

Now that which I would persuade you to from these words is this, that in all
your actions you would govern your selves by the fixed and immutable principles
of conscience and honesty, and always steadfastly adhere to your plain duty,
though never so highly tempted to swerve from it. -- Till I die I will not
remove my integrity from me. My righteousness I hold fast and will not let it
go, my heart shall not reproach me so long as I live. I shall handle these
words,

I. More particularly as they relate to Job, by whom they were spoken.

II. More generally, as they may be applied to men in all states and conditions.

I. As to the particular instance of Job, we all know he is propounded to us in
holy Scripture as the most eminent example of an invincible resolution and
unshaken constancy in maintaining his innocence and integrity in two very
different fortunes, the one highly prosperous and flourishing, the other no
less strangely adverse and calamitous; both which one after another by God's
wise providence did befall him, for the more illustrious trial and
manifestation of his sincere and disinterested loyalty to God and Religion; and
it is no easy matter to determine in which of these two states he met with the
greater temptations, whether he found it the more difficult task to keep a good
conscience in that splendid and plentiful condition he was once in, or to hold
fast his righteousness in that deplorable poverty and want of all things, which
he was at last reduced unto. For without doubt riches and honors and high
places, and an uninterrupted prosperity are as great snares, and as dangerous
temptations, and often prove as fatal, nay, I may say, are generally more apt
to draw men aside from the love of goodness and the care of their souls, than
the severest afflictions, or the most surprising calamities and outward
crosses. So that Job perhaps was as much to be admired, and as hard to be
imitated in his virtue and piety, when he was the greatest man in the East, as
in his submission, meekness and patience, when he became the miserablest
spectacle that eyes ever beheld.

1. Job in his most prosperous state held fast his righteousness, and would not
let it go. Though he enjoyed all the pleasures, riches and worldly
satisfactions that the most ambitious or covetous mind could crave, yet he was
so strictly religious and temperate, that when he was deprived and stripped of
all, and left as bare and as naked as he was when he first came into the world,
his mind could not reproach nor condemn him for any unworthy or unhandsome
carriage, for any one notorious failure in his duty that should provoke God to
deal so harshly with him. His three Friends indeed unadvisedly fell into that
fault which is so common amongst us even to this day, of judging and censuring
men by their outward conditions, and by what befalls them in this life; they
could not imagine that such unheard of calamities could betide an innocent
person; when therefore they saw so great a Lord and Prince in so forlorn a
plight, him whom but a little before all men called blessed, and accounted the
darling and favorite of Heaven, sitting among the ashes, and scraping his
painful boils with a piece of a broken pot, they presently began to suspect
his piety and integrity, and to call upon him to confess those grievous sins
which had plucked down such terrible vengeance upon his head, fondly presuming
that he must needs be a greater sinner than others, because he was more
miserable and unfortunate. Which uncharitable censure forced from this
excellent person those rhetorical and pathetical vindications of himself and
all his actions in the days of his prosperity, which you may find scattered up
and down in this Book, especially in the 31st Chapter.

Though his Friends were so unkind as to reproach and condemn him as guilty of
some notorious crimes, whereby he had justly deserved all those evils which God
had been pleased to lay upon him; yet his own conscience, a more impartial
judge, acquitted him, and spoke peace to him. He was not afraid or ashamed to
have all his life past impartially and thoroughly examined, and whatever he had
done exposed to public view, and to the knowledge of all the world. Nay he
durst appeal to God himself, the searcher of hearts, and call the righteous and
impartial judge of the earth to bear witness to his uprightness and sincerity.
He challenged even his very enemies, those who had the least kindness for him,
to draw up a bill against him, and to try if they could find any thing whereof
to accuse him. He was so just, so humble, so moderate, so charitable, when he
was in power and prosperity, that none either envied his greatness, or rejoiced
at his fall. With such prudence and sobriety, with such integrity and temper
did he manage a great and magnificent fortune, that in the lowest ebb of it,
when he was reduced to the meanest condition a man can possibly sink into (and
such a change is most apt to open the mouths, not only of our own consciences,
but of all that know us, against us;) I say, in this his worst estate, neither
his own mind, nor his friends, nor his enemies (if so good a man had any) could
find matter of complaint or reproach against him. And this was such a
remarkable instance of pure and resolute virtue, that God Almighty seemed to
rejoice and triumph that he had now found a man who could preserve himself
innocent and upright even amidst all the flattering temptations that attend
riches and power and worldly greatness. Have thou considered (said the Lord
unto Satan, chap. 1. verse 8. as it were in a boasting manner) my servant Job,
that there is none like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright man, one
that fears God, and escheweth evil? but

2. Behold the scene of a sudden quite changed, and extreme poverty, loss and
pain dwelling there, where plenty and honor and riches formerly made their
abode. The great enemy of mankind was at length satisfied that this renowned
servant of God was not to be enticed by any of his baits; that he had a soul
too great to fall in love with the fading beauties and perishing glories of
this world; and therefore when he saw he would not be moved from his duty by
fair means, he uses force and violence, and sets himself openly to assault that
virtue, which would not be caught in any of his snares, nor yield to any of his
gilded temptations. And to this end in one day he spirits away all his wealth
and servants, slays all his children by the fall of an house, and exercises
such cruelty upon his body, that there was nothing about him whole and entire
and free from sores, but only the skin of his teeth; he arms his own wife and
his best friends against him; his brethren went far from him; his acquaintance
were estranged from him, his kinsmen failed him, and his familiars forgot him:
the young children despised him, those that dwelt in his house counted him for
a stranger, and those whom he loved most were turned against him. But when he
was thus abandoned and forsaken of all, he yet held fast his righteousness, and
would not remove his integrity from him; he still preserved a good conscience,
which neither the Sabaeans, nor the Chaldaeans, nor the Devil himself could rob
him of. Notwithstanding all these violent attaques of Satan, he bravely stood
his ground, and the greatness of his sufferings served only to make his
courage and constancy still more glorious and illustrious. Under all these
afflictions he entertained not an unworthy thought, never uttered one hard word
concerning God, but humbly kissed the hand that struck him, and received evil
things from him with the same grateful resentment he used to receive good
things; and was as thankful for these sad misfortunes and dire calamities, as
other men are for the greatest favors and blessings. And whatever betided him
in this world, yet he would never fall out with God, or do any thing that
might displease him, or wound his own mind and conscience. Thus this heavenly
Champion came off with success and victory, and the trial of his faith and
patience was found unto praise and honor and glory.

Now the words thus understood, relating in particular to Job, as exercised
with these various conflicts and temptations, afford us these two plain, but
useful, rules.

1. That we should so manage our selves in times of prosperity, and so use and
improve our worldly advantages of health, riches, honor, authority, and the
like, that whenever we come to be deprived of them, our hearts may have nothing
to reproach us for.

2. That we should never, either to prevent, or to redeem our selves from any
outward evil and calamity, do any thing which our own minds and consciences do
disapprove and condemn.

1. We should so manage our selves in times of prosperity, and so use and
improve all worldly advantages of health, riches, honor, authority, and the
like, that whenever we come to be deprived of them, our hearts may have nothing
to reproach us for.

It is certain, that so long as the world goes on our side, and we live in ease
and plenty, and enjoy whatever our hearts can wish for, we have not so quick
and lively a sense of good and evil, nor do we ordinarily suffer our
consciences to speak so freely and plainly to us, as when we are under some
affliction or distress. Whilst we enjoy an uninterrupted prosperity, the noise
and tumult of the world, the hurry and multiplicity of business and secular
affairs, the variety of sensual pleasures and delights, the mirth and jollity
of company, and the several temporal projects and designs we have in hand do
generally so wholly engross and prepossess our thoughts, as that they drown the
softer whispers of our minds and reasons, and allow no time or opportunity to
our consciences to do their office. But when once we meet with a sudden check
and stop, and are brought into straits and difficulties, when we are crossed
and disappointed, and all our fine hopes and expectations are blasted and
defeated, especially when death and judgment draws nigh, then does conscience
take the advantage against us, and fly in our faces, and set our sins in order
before us, and fill our minds with galling regrets, and misgiving fears, and
disquieting and uncomfortable reflections upon our past follies, and we soon
begin to have quite other notions and apprehensions of things than we had
formerly in the days of sunshine and security. Thus Joseph's brethren, after
they had sold him into Egypt, and thereby had afflicted their Father's soul
even unto death, for a long time seemed pleased and satisfied with themselves
that they had done no worse to their innocent brother, that they had not slain
him; but afterward when they found themselves captives in a strange Land, they
laid their hands upon their breasts and thought more impartially on what they
had done, and said one to another, we are verily guilty concerning our brother,
in that we saw the anguish of his soul when he besought us, and we would not
hear, therefore is this distress come upon us.

When we come to languish upon a bed of sickness, our minds will then take the
liberty to reproach us for those many days of health and strength, which now
without any sense or remorse we fondly trifle and squander away. Should our
riches take to themselves wings and fly away (and we all know how slippery and
uncertain all these earthly enjoyments are) it would then wound us sore to
think how much we stretched our consciences to get some part of them, and how
prodigally we misspent other part of them, how much we loved them and trusted
in them, and what an ill use we made of them. If ever we our selves should come
to stand in need of the help, assistence and charity of others, how irksome and
uneasy will it be to us, to remember how little our bowels were moved at the
misfortunes of our poor neighbors, and what little compassion we showed to the
miserable and necessitous, and how loath we were in our flourishing condition to
do any one a good turn, if it put us but to the least expense or trouble?

However great and prosperous your present condition may be, yet often consider
it may shortly be otherwise with you, daily interpose the thoughts of a change:
should I lose this honor, esteem, authority and dignity I am now possessed of,
how many untoward scars and blemishes will stick upon me? should I be reduced
to a mean, low estate, shall I not then blush to be put in mind of that pride,
vainglory, haughtiness, oppression and domineering I was guilty of, when I was
in place and power? and will not the forced remembrance of such our base and
unworthy behavior be more grievous and afflictive to us, than any outward loss
or pain? our consciences which now we stifle and smother, will at such a time
be even with us, and our own wickedness shall reprove us, and our iniquity
shall correct us, as the Prophet expresses it.

Learn therefore so to demean your selves in prosperity, as that your hearts
may acquit you, and have nothing to chide and rebuke you for, when you come
into adversity; and so to husband and improve those present advantages and
opportunities you have in your hands, that when they are withdrawn from you you
may be able with great comfort and satisfaction to reflect upon the good you
have done with them, the sense of which will mightily blunt the edge, and
mitigate the sharpness of those evils that do at any time befall you; this was
Job's great comfort and support under all his dismal sufferings, when he was
fallen from the highest pinnacle of wealth and honor almost as low as hell,
that he had held fast his integrity, and that his mind could not reproach him.

2. We should never, either to prevent or to redeem our selves from any outward
evil or calamity, do any thing which our own minds and consciences do
disapprove and condemn. Though Job had lost all other things that men usually
call good, yet his righteousness he held fast, and would not let it go: and
indeed the peace of our own minds is more to be valued than any temporal
blessing whatever, and there is no pain or loss so intolerable as that inward
fear, regret and shame which sin and guilt create: so that whatever external
advantage we acquire in the world by wounding our consciences, we are certainly
great losers by it; no real good can ever be obtained by doing ill, a guilty
conscience being the sorest evil that a man can possibly be afflicted with.

Herein especially do inward troubles exceed all outward afflictions whatever
that can happen to our bodies or estates; namely, that under all temporal
calamities, how desperate and remediless soever they be, yet we have something
to buoy up and support our spirits, to keep us in heart, and ennable us to bear
them, the joys of a good conscience, the sense or hopes of God's love and
favor, the inward satisfaction of our own minds and thoughts, these things
will wonderfully carry us through all those difficulties and adversities which
we shall meet with in the world, and are able to uphold and cheer our hearts
under the greatest pressures and hardships; but when a man's mind it self is
disturbed and disquieted, where shall he seek for, where can he find any ease
or remedy?

This seems to be the meaning of the Wiseman, in the 18th of the Proverbs, the
14th Verse, the spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity, but a wounded
spirit who can bear? It is a saying much like that of our Saviors, if the salt
has lost its favor wherewith shall it be salted? if that by which we season
all other things it self want it, by what shall it be seasoned? so here the
spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity, i. e. a mind and spirit that is at
peace within it self, that is conscious of its own innocence and integrity will
enable a man to bear with great patience and contentment those chastisements
which God may see good to exercise him with in this life; but a wounded spirit
who can bear? i. e. if that spirit or mind which should help us to bear all
those evils that betide us, be it self wounded and disquieted, what is there
then left in a man to sustain it? when our only remedy is become our disease,
when that which alone can support us in all our troubles and distresses is
become it self our greatest torment, how shall we be able to bear it?

What dangers soever therefore we are exposed unto, let us be sure to preserve
a good conscience, nay let us rather suffer the greatest evils, than do the
least. If we always continue faithful and constant to the dictates of reason
and religion, our minds will be in peace, and the conscience of our having
pleased God and done our duty, and secured our greatest interest will hugely
ease and alleviate our afflictions, and sustain us under the most pressing
evils we can suffer in this life, whereas on the other side, the greatest
confluence of the good things of this world will not be able to free us from
the disturbance and anxiety of an evil conscience, or to quiet and settle our
minds when harassed and tortured with the sense of guilt: And this shall lead
me to the second thing I propounded, which was,

II. To consider these words more generally, as they may be applied to men in
all states and conditions, and then they propound to us this rule, which we
should always live by; namely, that we should upon no consideration whatever
do any thing that our minds or consciences reprove us for. And this is the
just character of an honest man, and of one fit to be trusted, that he will
never either out of fear or favor consent to do any thing that his mind tells
him is unfit, unworthy, or unbecoming, or that he cannot answer or justify to
himself; but in all cases will do what is right and honest, however it may be
thought of and relished by other men; and resolutely adhere to his plain duty,
though perhaps it may hinder his preferment and advancement, his trade and
gain, and expose him to many inconveniences in this world. I wish you would all
with Job in my Text take up this brave resolution, My righteousness I will hold
fast, and will not let it go; my heart shall not reproach me so long as I live.
For your encouragement I shall only crave leave to represent unto you these
two things.

1. That this is the plainest, easiest, and most certain rule that we can
propound to our selves.

2. That it is the wisest and safest rule, the best policy, all things
considered.

1. That this is the plainest, easiest, and most certain rule that we can
propound to our selves. Let times be never so difficult or dangerous, and
affairs never so intricate and involved, yet an honest man is hardly ever at a
loss what to do; The integrity of the upright shall guide him, and the
righteousness of the perfect shall direct his way.

The path of justice and honesty is straight, right on, neither to the right
hand, nor to the left; there are no labyrinths or winding Meanders in it, so
that there is no great wit or cunning required to find it out. To any one whose
mind is free from prejudice and evil affections, who is not governed by blind
passion or interest, or any bye corrupt designs, the way he should walk in is
plain and obvious, like the highway. So it is called by the Prophet Isaiah: An
highway shall be there, and it shall be called the way of holiness, and
wayfaring men, though fools, shall not err therein.

As for those indeed that will not keep the direct road, but thinking to pass
some nearer way, travel in untrodden paths, through desert woods or solitary
fields, over hedge and ditch, as we say, it is no wonder if they are sometimes
out of their way, and go backward and forward, and are often at a stand, not
knowing how to guide their steps, and what path to choose, till at last they are
utterly lost and bewildred; and such are all the wise men of this world, who
make haste to be rich, and are resolved by right or wrong to be great and
powerful, and mind nothing but their own interest and worldly advantage; who
forsake the plain and beaten ^enin of virtue and piety, and betake themselves
to the crooked ways of unrighteousness; they are infinitely various and
uncertain, sometimes they go straight forward, and then quite back again;
sometimes they are of one party, sometimes of another; to day of this Religion,
to morrow of that, reeling to and fro like a drunken man; so that whatever they
profess themselves to be this week, yet neither themselves, nor any one else
can guess what mind they will be of the next, seeing their opinions and
judgments and practices depend upon such causes as are as variable as the wind
or weather: they are always ready to turn as the tide and stream does, and are
resolved to please those that are uppermost, like the Roman that told Augustus
Caesar, in his Civil-wars, when asked by him what side he would take, that he
would be praeda victoris, of that party which prevailed.

But alas! what an absurd and unequal life do such men lead? How do their
minds, their words, their actions clash and interfere one with the other? How
often are they forced to contradict themselves, and to call themselves fools or
knaves for doing those things, which afterward, when another interest is to be
served, they are fain to disown, nay to do the quite contrary? Into what mazes
and perplexities does this wandering, fickle and desultory temper betray men?
what pitiful shifts are they put to to patch up such disagreeing practices,
and to reconcile such different designs? since they are forced servilely to
comply with so many several humors, to act so many different parts, and so
often to follow other counsels, and take new measures; with what great artifice
and subtilty must they continually manage themselves, with what wariness must
they direct their feet, lest by any misadventure they should expose their own
mean and sordid designs?

Now such persons as are thus fickle and inconstant to themselves, and are
guided by no fixed and steady principles, but only by their own present
interest, which depends upon the uncertain state of worldly affairs, and a
thousand other little contingencies, must needs be often at a loss which way to
steer themselves, and can never be certain they are in the right. They are
always to seek, and are utterly unresolved what to say or do, till they can
smell out how matters are likely to go, and see the final event and issue of
things: such men are like the Samaritanes, who, as Josephus tells us, when the
Jews were in any affliction or danger, disclaimed all acquaintance with them,
and relation to them, and knew them not; but at another time, when the Jews
prospered, and were great and potent, then they boasted of their alliance, and
would needs be near akin to them, of the race of Ephraim and Manasses the Sons
of Joseph.

But on the other side, he that aims at nothing more than to please God and his
own conscience, and to do the duty of the place he is in fairly and justly, in
all times knows what to do, and is still the same man, and meddles not with
those that are given to change; his own honesty is his tutour and directour,
his counselor and guide. He knows that the nature of goodness and virtue is
always the same, and cannot be altered by any change of the times or state of
affairs, and therefore under all external changes and occurrences whatever, he
keeps the same smooth and even course of righteousness, peaceableness,
sobriety, loyalty and charity; whether the world smiles or frowns upon him, he
still holds to his principles, does the same things, and goes on in the same
road; and nothing, neither honor nor dishonor, neither good report nor evil
report can divert him from it.

2. This is not only the plainest, but the wisest and safest rule, the best
policy, all things considered. For if we resolutely maintain our innocence and
integrity,

1. We shall ordinarily escape best in this life; but however

2. We shall be sure to come off well at last, and to be plentifully rewarded
for our faithfulness and uprightness in the other world.

1. We shall ordinarily escape best in this life. There is nothing that does
more contribute to our safety and security even in the worst and most dangerous
times, than a firm and constant adherence to our duty. For,

(1.) By this we engage God Almighty to be our friend, and do most effectually
recommend our selves to his care and good providence; so long as we commit our
ways unto God in well-doing, and no hazards or dangers on the one side, nor any
worldly advantages or conveniences on the other can prevail with us in any one
instance to disobey him, we may be assured that he will never forsake us, but
that he will either deliver us from those evils we fear, or else support us
under them, and by the assistences of his blessed spirit enable us to bear them
with patience and cheerfulness. A good man in all his dangers and distresses
has a sure friend, who will always stand by him; an Almighty Savior and
Deliverer, on whom he may securely rely for salvation and protection; he is not
afraid of evil tidings, his heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord: He has
nothing to aghast him, or fill him with pale fears, and dreadful terrors and
jealousies; he has no secret guilt that haunts him and stares him in the face,
and severely threatens him; and therefore amidst all worldly distractions and
confusions, he is not dismayed; his innocence does inspirit him with boldness
and courage, he is not afraid to trust God with his life and honor, and
estate, or any thing else that is dear to him; and can with an humble
confidence and assurance, as it were, challenge the favor of Heaven, saying
with good Hezekiah, Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked
before thee in truth and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good
in thy sight: though the earth should be removed, and the mountains carried
into the midst of the Sea; though the waters thereof should roar and be
troubled, and the mountains shake and tremble with the swelling thereof; nay,
though the world should crack and break in pieces about his ears, yet
intrepidum ferient ruinae, he would still be unmoved and unshaken. Knowing that
his father, his friend, his patron and benefactour, whom he has always served
in the honesty and simplicity of his heart, is Pilot of the Ship, in all the
storms and tempests of this lower world he can put his trust in God, and with
an unshaken confidence commit himself, and all he has, to him, who is engaged
to protect and defend the innocent, who encourage and support themselves in him
alone. The Lord is his strength, his fortress, his refuge in the day of
affliction, and under the shadow of his wings, as in an impregnable castle, he
can securely hide and shelter himself, till these calamities be overpast.

But now on the other side the worldly projectour, who will not trust himself
or his concerns with Almighty wisdom and power, but endeavors to secure
himself, and to raise his fortunes, and make himself great and considerable in
the world by ways of his own devising, such as God does not allow, nay does
strictly forbid; who, as it were, renounces God Almighty's care and protection,
and places all his hope and confidence in his own craft and sagacity, has
nothing to support and bear up his spirit under any misfortunes. In a time of
public danger and calamity he is the most disconsolate forsaken wretch in the
world: his guilt arms every thing against him, and makes him afraid even of his
own shadow, (like that wicked Emperor Caligula, who every time it thundered ran
under his bed, as if he had been aimed at in every crack;) at such a time he is
at his wits end, and knows not where to turn himself, and his hope is as a
spider's web, nay as the giving up of the ghost.

(2.) An honest and upright man is most likely to find the best treatment from
other men, even from the most wicked and ungodly. Who is he that will harm you,
says St. Peter, if ye be followers of that which is good? 1 Pet. 3.13. a good
man is armed with innocence and harmlesness, which will guard and defend him
from the injuries of wicked and lawless men: his unaffected piety, and
unbyassed honesty, and undissembled charity, the excellency of his temper and
disposition, and the unblameableness of his life and conversation will speak in
his behalf, and plead his cause, and procure him so much love and esteem in the
world, that there will be but few that can find the heart to do him any
mischief; as the harmless innocence and simplicity of little children do secure
and protect them from all harm and violence, and engage every one almost in
their defense. Whence this observation has been made, and is justified by
experience, that one who is unstable and wavering is loved by no man, because
he is not fit to be trusted; but a man who is constant to worthy and generous
principles commands the like constancy of esteem and veneration from all men,
and is commonly safe and secure in all times, his very enemies reverencing such
invincible virtue and honesty. He that desires and designs nothing but what is
fair and reasonable, may promise himself the good will of all round about him:
whereas he that is deeply engaged in worldly intrigues, and is resolved, per
fas and nefas, to enrich himself, and is always climing higher, trampling upon
all that stand in his way, must necessarily be engaged in many quarrels, and
make many enemies, and draw on himself the envy and ill will of the proud and
ambitious, and live in perpetual emulation and contention; for as he striveth
to exceed and overtop others, so others endeavor as much to get before him;
and though for awhile he gets the better, yet his enemies are at work to
undermine him, and blow him up, and he must expect that in a little time some
sudden change of affairs, some unlucky hit or other will tumble him down, and
put an end to all his fine designs and projects.

(3.) Whatever misfortunes and disappointments an honest upright man may meet
with in the world, yet he incurs no real disgrace, he shall not be ashamed in
an evil day: no man can reproach him, or justly insult over his fall. Whereas
when the designs of ambitious and covetous oppressors are frustrated and
defeated, when the crafty Politicians of this world are ensnared in their own
devices, the city rejoiceth, it is matter of sport and triumph to their
neighbors, and every one acknowledges the justice of it. But I hasten.

(4.) An upright man, how miserable and forlorn soever his outward condition
be, yet is pleased and satisfied with himself; his mind is at quiet, and though
the weather abroad be never so blustering and tempestuous, yet there is a calm
within, and he is then most sensible of the joy and contentment which flows
from innocence and a rightly ordered conversation, when there is the most
trouble and confusion without him. When all the plagues of God are poured upon
Egypt, a good man is a Goshen to himself, has light in darkness, and under the
most cloudy appearance of the Heavens, finds nothing but clearness and serenity
in his own breast; and a good conscience can make a man rich and great and
happy even in the midst of the greatest worldly miseries and distractions.

Whereas when wicked men are in any danger or distress, they have a secret
enemy in their own bosoms, and their guilty consciences will fly in their
faces, and fill them with amazing fears and terrors, and wrack and torture
their souls with unexpressible grief and anguish. And oh! how sad and
disconsolate must their condition needs be, when the arrows of the Almighty
stick fast in them, and the poison thereof drinks up their spirits, and the
terrors of God set themselves in array against them; when there is nothing but
dismaying dangers and distractions abroad, and all outward hopes fail them, and
at the same time their own minds write bitter things against them? this will
double every evil that befalls them, the sense of guilt being the very sting
and venom of all outward troubles and distresses. But

2. He that exactly observes the rules and dictates of his own conscience will
be sure to come off well at last, in the final account and judgment; then God
will confirm and ratify the sentence of his conscience, and publicly own and
approve of what he has done, and clear and vindicate his innocence, and reward
his fidelity and constancy before all the world.

At that day, when all our great undertakers and contrivers of mischief, all
the cunning practisers of guile and hypocrisy shall lie down in shame, when
their secret arts and base tricks, whereby they imposed on the world, shall be
detected and proclaimed, as it were, upon the housetop, and all their unworthy
projects and designs shall be laid open and naked, being stripped of those
specious pretenses they here disguised them with; when the hidden things of
darkness shall be brought to light, and the counsels of all men's hearts shall
be made manifest as the noonday; at that day, I say, the upright and righteous
man shall stand in great boldness, and shall lift up his head with joy and
confidence; and then it will appear that he was the best politician, and the
only person that either understood or regarded his true interest.

To conclude all. Our consciences are either our best friends, or our greatest
enemies; they are either a continual feast, or a very hell to us. A conscience
well resolved and settled, is the greatest comfort of our lives, the best
antidote against all kind of temptations, the most precious treasure that we
can lay up against an evil day, and our surest and strongest hold to secure us
from all dangers, which can never be taken unless through our own folly and
negligence.

But an evil clamorous conscience that is continually twitting and reproaching
us, is a perpetual wrack and torment; it wastes our spirits, and preys upon our
hearts, and eats out the sweetness of all our worldly enjoyments, and fills us
with horrid fears and ghastly apprehensions; this is that knawing worm that
never dies, the necessary fruit of sin and guilt, and the necessary cause of
everlasting anguish and vexation.

A SERMON Preached at WHITE HALL. The Thirteenth Sermon.
2 TIMOTHY I. 10. -- And has brought life and immortality to light through the
Gospel.


LIFE and immortality by a figure often used in the holy Scriptures is the same
with immortal life, which our Savior has brought to light, that is, has
given us undoubted assurance of, by the revelation of the Gospel.

For though all men by the light of nature have some apprehensions of a future
state, yet their reasonings about it, when left to themselves are miserably
vain and uncertain, and often very wild and extravagant. The best discourses of
the Heathens about the other life were weak and obscure, and the wisest
Philosophers spoke but doubtfully and conjecturally about it; nor even in the
books of Moses, or writings of the Prophets, are there contained any plain
express promises of eternal life; all the knowledge men had of it before was
but like the faint glimmerings of twilight, till the sun of righteousness
appeared; till God was pleased to send one from that invisible world, even his
own most dear Son to dwell here and converse amongst men, to make a full
discovery to us of this unknown country, and to conduct us in the only true
way to this everlasting happiness; an happiness so great that we have not words
big enough to express it, nor faculties large enough to comprehend it: but yet
so much of it is clearly revealed to us in the Gospel as is most abundantly
sufficient to raise our thoughts and incite our sincerest endeavors for the
obtaining of it.

By which plain revelation of this state of immortality,

First, Is most illustriously manifested to us the transcendent goodness and
indulgence of our most merciful Creator, in that he will be pleased to reward
such imperfect services, such mean performances as the best of ours are with
glory so immense, as that eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor can it enter
into the heart of man to conceive the greatness of it. There is nothing in us,
nor any thing done by us that bears the least proportion to such an ample
recompense. Our best actions stand in need of a pardon, so far are they from
deserving to be crowned. All possible duty and obedience we certainly owe to
him, to whom we owe our beings, and should God almighty have exacted it from us
only on the account of his sovereign authority over us as we are his creatures
we had been indispensably obliged to all subjection to him; but that he should
over and above promise to reward our faithfulness to him with eternal life,
this is a most wonderful instance of his infinite grace and goodness.

Secondly, By this revelation of immortal life is farther demonstrated the
exceeding great love of our ever blessed Savior, who by his death and perfect
obedience not only purchased pardon for all our past rebellions and
transgressions, not only redeemed us from hell and destruction to which we had
all rendered our selves most justly liable, (which alone had been an unspeakable
favor) but also merited an everlasting kingdom of glory for us, if with true
repentance we return to our duty. And this if any thing shows the infinite
value and efficacy of our Savior's appearing on our behalf, that by his most
powerful mediation he obtained not only freedom from punishment, but also
unexpressibly glorious rewards for us vile and wretched sinners upon easy and
most reasonable conditions.

Thirdly, This especially recommends our Christianity to us, which contains
such glad tidings, which propounds such mighty arguments to engage us to our
duty, such as no other religion ever did or could. For since hope and fear are
the great hinges of all government, and the most prevailing passions of humane
nature, what better thing can be propounded to our hope than to be as happy
both in body and soul as we can be, and that for ever? what more dreadful
thing to our fear than everlasting misery? and this indeed is the utmost that
can be said or offered to men in order to the reclaiming them from their sins,
and recovering them to a conscientious observance of God's laws, that God has
appointed a day wherein he will call all men to an account for the deeds they
have done in this body, and reward the sincere, faithful Christian with
immortal glory, and punish the disobedient and impenitent with everlasting
vengeance, and if men can harden themselves against these most powerful
considerations, if they are not at all concerned or solicitous about their
eternal happiness or misery, what other motives are likely to prevail with
them, or able to make any impression upon them? For is there any thing of
greater weight and moment that can be propounded to the reasons and
understandings of men than what shall become of them in a state which they are
very shortly to enter upon, and which shall never have an end?

I humbly therefore beg your patience whilst with all the plainness and
seriousness I can, I apply my self to these three sorts of persons.

I. To those who would seem to doubt of this fundamental doctrine of a future
life.

II. To those who profess to believe it, but not fully and heartily.

III. To those who do really and constantly believe it.

I. I begin with those who would seem to doubt of this fundamental doctrine of
a future life. And though far better things are to be hoped concerning all here
present, who show so much respect to religion, as to bear a part in God's
solemn worship, yet since nothing is more complained of than the prevailing
atheism of this age; and since, if we judge of men's faith by their lives, we
cannot but suspect many of those who pass among us for orthodox believers to be
really no other than mere infidels in these matters: I shall not wholly pass
these sort of persons by: not that I design at large to show you the
unreasonableness of atheism, or to set before you the undeniable evidences we
have of another world; but I shall put the whole cause upon this short issue.

Let us for once be so kind to the skeptical disputers against religion as to
suppose what they are never able to prove, that it is a very doubtful thing
whether there will be another life after this; that it is possible that all
these stories of a judgment to come, heaven and hell, are mere fables, the
inventions of crafty politicians and designing Priests; and that all good and
virtuous men have been miserably deceived and fed with fond hopes and fancies,
and have unnecessarily troubled themselves about the matters of religion: (and
surely you will all acknowledge this to be a very large concession) yet
granting all this, nothing is more plain than that if we would act prudently,
and consult our own safety we ought to believe and live as if all these
doctrines of religion were most certainly true; for every wise man will run as
little hazard as he can, especially in such things as are of highest
concernment to him, and wherein a mistake would be fatal and undoing. Here
therefore be pleased to consider,

(I.) What little hazard he runs, or what little loss he ordinarily undergoes
who believes and acts according to these principles, should they all at last
prove false.

(II.) What extreme and desperate hazard he runs, who does not believe, nor
live according to them, should they all at last prove true.

(1.) What little hazard he runs, or what little loss he ordinarily undergoes
who believes and acts according to these principles should they all at last
prove false. All that this man loses or ventures is only some present
gratifications, and enjoyments which he denies himself; he crosses indeed the
irregular inclinations of his nature, and forbears those excesses that are
truly hurtful to him, and lives according to the dignity of his species, and
is possessed with cares and fears about another world, (and these even the
atheist himself cannot wholly free his mind from) and ties up himself to
several rules and strict duties, which contribute not a little to his
convenient living here, and perhaps is exposed to some hardships, reproaches
and sufferings for righteousness sake; and this is the worst of his case: but
on the other side, he is blessed at present with a contented life, with peace
of conscience, and the joyful expectation of an eternal reward hereafter; so
that if he be in the right, he is then made for ever; if not, if he be
mistaken, his condition however will be no worse than other mortals; he will
have lost indeed all the pains and trouble he was at about religion, but if his
soul survive not his body, he will never be sensible of it; this disappointment
will never vex nor grieve him in that land where all things are forgotten. So
that a virtuous and righteous man may ordinarily pass his days here more easily
and comfortably than any wicked person, and please himself all his life long
with the hopes or dreams of future glories; which fancy alone (were it no
other) will make him abundant recompense for all the self-denial it puts him
upon. But if these things at last prove true, he is then blessed above all
expression; if they prove false and vain hopes, and there be no other life
after this, yet will it be as well with him as with the Atheist in that
supposed state of eternal silence and insensibility. He runs no hazard, he
loses nothing except some forbidden pleasures, which in most cases it is best
for him, even as to this life, to be without. He is safe if these doctrines be
not true, and unspeakably happy for ever if they be true.

(2.) Consider the extreme and desperate hazard that man runs who does not
believe nor act according to these principles, should they at last prove true;
for he stakes and pawns all that can be called good and desirable; he ventures
being for ever undone and miserable, if he should chance to be mistaken in his
opinion, and it should at last prove that there is another life after this. And
therefore nothing would sooner convince such men of their deadly folly, than if
they would but sometimes ask themselves when they are calm and sober a few such
questions as these: What though I have almost persuaded my self that religion
is nothing but a melancholy dream, or a politic cheat, or a common error; yet
what if at last it should be true? How dismal, and of what affrighting
consequence is a mistake in such a matter as this? what amazing, surprising
thoughts, fears and despairs will it fill me with, if after all I should find
my self to be alive when my friends had closed my eyes, and should presently be
hurried away into the company of those spirits, which I had before derided and
droll'd upon, and into the presence of that God whose existence I had boldly
denied? What horror and confusion must it create, when my infidelity shall be
confuted by such a woeful experiment, and I shall find my self suddenly entered
into that endless state which I would not here believe any thing of?

Were the arguments on both sides equal, yet the hazards are infinitely
unequal, since the one runs the chance of being for ever happy, the other runs
the chance of being eternally miserable. Which one consideration justifies the
discretion of a religious man in renouncing and despising the glories and
pleasures of this world, though it were very uncertain whether there were
another life after this. How much greater madness then must they needs be
guilty of, who reject this doctrine of another life, against all the
probabilities, reasons, nay, demonstrations of the truth of it? when they have
as great evidence of the truth of it as its nature will admit of; when God from
Heaven has most plainly revealed it to them; when this revelation is confirmed
by all the signs and testimonies they can reasonably expect and demand; nay,
when he has implanted in their souls such a lively apprehension of it, as that
they must offer the greatest force and violence to their own minds before they
can bring themselves to disbelieve it? nay, I believe, let the most resolved
sinner labor and struggle never so hard with himself to subdue and extirpate
this natural persuasion of another life, yet after all his pains he will not be
able wholly to root out all thoughts and fears of it. This shall suffice for
the first sort of persons, those who doubt of, or deny this great fundamental
of Religion. I proceed now,

II. To those who profess to believe this immortal life, but yet do it not
really and heartily. And this I fear is the case of the generality of
Christians amongst us. For it may well be enquired, what is the reason that
this promise of eternal life, (than which there cannot be a greater) has yet
so little power upon men's minds, does so little move their affections? what
makes their endeavors after it so faint and languid? Are any of those good
things which men here court and seek after so desirable and considerable as the
glories and joys of Heaven? or are there any evils in this world that can vie
terrors with Hell? this cannot be pretended since all the good or evil things
of this world can only make us happy or miserable for a short time, for this
life at most, which is not to be named with living for ever either in
unspeakable happiness or misery. Whence is it then that Christians are so
strangely cold and indifferent about these most weighty things of another life,
as if they were of no concernment to them? After all our search we must resolve
it into one of these two causes.

Either that men, whatever they profess, do not heartily believe this Doctrine,
or else that they do not duly consider it.

(1.) Most men, whatever they profess or pretend, though they dare not renounce
or deny it, yet are not heartily and thoroughly persuaded of the certainty of
this future state. Their understandings were never rationally convinced of the
truth of it, and so the belief of it is not firmly rooted and settled in their
minds.

Would but God Almighty be graciously pleased to indulge to us a sight of those
future glories and miseries which he has revealed in the Gospel, this we
imagine would certainly prevail for the conviction and reformation of all men.
Would he give us, though but a short and transient view of that blessed place
where himself dwells, that we might but for a few moments behold the joys and
triumphs of those happy souls that are admitted into his beatifick presence; or
would he but open the gates of Hell, and once suffer us to look into those
dismal receptacles of impure spirits, that so we might be eye and ear witnesses
of their grievous torments and horrid despair, such a sight as this we doubt
not would presently change us all, and make us whatever God requires us to be.

But God's ways are not as our ways, nor his thoughts as our thoughts. He
governs men in a method suited to their reasonable natures, and has given us
such assurances of another life, as are abundantly sufficient to satisfy and
convince the understandings of men, but yet may be resisted by those who have
no mind, or are resolved not to believe it. For there could have been no trial
of men, no discrimination made between the wise and considering, and the
foolish and wicked, if the rewards of Religion had been present, or exposed to
our senses. God will not force a faith upon us, as the sight of these things
would do, but will have it to be a matter of choice, and an instance of virtue
in us. No praise is due to them who believe only what they see. Such cannot be
said to believe God, but their own eyes: but rather blessed are they, says our
Savior, who have not seen, and yet have believed. God has denied us the sight
of these things to prove us, and try whether we dare trust his promises and
threatenings. Our belief therefore of this invisible world, if we would have it
effectual for the amendment of our hearts and lives, must be so strong and
powerful as to serve instead of ocular and sensible demonstration. (Whence the
Apostle calls it, Heb. 1.11. the evidence of things not seen,) that so the
things unseen which God has revealed to us, may have the same effect upon us,
(not as to degree, but the same real effect) as if the other world were always
visible to us.

Now our belief of any thing must necessarily be stronger or weaker according
as the evidence is upon which it is believed; and that not only as the
evidence is in it self, but as it is perceived by us. For however evident a
thing may be in it self, yet if it does not appear so to us, our belief of it
must be very uncertain and wavering, because it is groundless. Since then the
truths or principles of Religion, which relate to another life, are not things
to be seen or felt, we can be assured of them only by undeniable arguments and
testimonies; about which we must use our reasons, and our discerning and
judging faculties before we can understand the force of them, or be really
convinced by them. Not that there is any great difficulty in apprehending these
arguments; but yet there is required such attention of mind and serious
thoughts about them, and a frequent revolving over the proofs and evidences of
a future state with such diligence and careful examination of them, as all men
ordinarily use about other matters, wherein they are greatly concerned to find
out the truth.

But now is any thing more plain, than that the generality of Christians, who
profess these Doctrines of Religion, are so far from being rationally by the
force of arguments convinced of the truth of them, that very few amongst them
ever so much as set themselves to enquire into the reasons of their belief?
They owe their faith solely to education, prepossession, instruction and
example of others, take it up without any consideration of the grounds and
reasons of it: and is it then at all wonderful that this faith should have but
very little force or power on men's minds, which is thus received without any
rational conviction of their understandings, which is thus weakly founded and
supported? Any little blast will overthrow that house which is thus built upon
the sands.

I deny not but that a belief thus taken up upon trust, and confirmed by a long
and customary profession of it, may be so strong, and a man may be so resolved
in it, as that he will never stir from it. But then, I say, this is not the
faith which our Savior requires, or which God will accept of in those who are
capable of a better; and a Mohammedan, born and bred at Constantinople, has as
good reason for his belief of the Alcoran, as such a one has for the belief of
Christianity. Such a faith is only an obstinacy in adhering to those things
which we were first taught, whether true or false, and is common to men in all
Religions.

Our understanding is the imperial and governing faculty of our souls. It is
that which does engage our wills and affections, and so consequently by them
move and excite us to action. When therefore our understanding does assent to
any truth upon clear and satisfactory evidence, being overpowred by the force
of reason and argument, it must needs propound it with greater strength and
authority to the lower faculties, and so must have more powerful influence
upon all our affections and actions. Otherwise how can we expect but that any
little reason should be too hard for, and baffle that faith, which is grounded
on no reason at all? or how can we think that those things which we believe,
but without any sufficient convincing motive or evidence, should outweigh those
things which we are more certain of, which we daily see, feel and experience,
such as are the present sensible pleasures, and the visible good and evil
things of this life? This therefore is one great reason of the inefficacy of
men's faith, that their belief of these great truths was never well rooted and
fixed in their understandings.

(2.) If our understandings are so fully convinced of these truths, that we
cannot any longer doubt of them, and yet this belief is not effectual for our
reformation, the reason then must be only because we do not really consider
them. The understanding has not such an absolute power over the will, as
necessarily to determine it always to that which it judges best and fittest;
but after our understandings have yielded, our wills may stubbornly hold out
against the siege and batteries of the clearest evidence, and strongest
reasons, if the truths propounded be contrary to our fleshly lusts, and worldly
interests.

For the will of man is a kind of middle faculty between the understanding and
the bodily inclinations; and as it is moved by our understanding to follow and
obey its dictates, so also it is most importunately solicited by our lower
fleshly appetites and lusts, craving their several satisfactions and
gratifications, and by outward objects that continually thrust themselves upon
us agreeable to those desires and propensities. Hence arises a great conflict
between those truths of Religion which are propounded by our understandings on
the one side, and our inferior sensitive faculties on the other. Our lusts
being checked and crossed by the hopes and fears of another life, make the
shrewdest objections against the principles of Religion, and do with all their
force and power oppose the entertainment of them in our minds, and on the
success of this contest does especially depend the efficacy of our faith.

Thus it was with very many amongst the Jews, whilst our blessed Savior was
alive here upon earth. They could not resist those undoubted testimonies which
he gave of his being the Son of God; but yet the love of this world, or fear of
sufferings had so much greater power over their wills, as that they could never
prevail with themselves to become his Disciples. St. John 12.42, 43. Among the
chief rulers many believed on him, but because of the Pharisees they did not
confess him, lest they should be put out of the Synagogue. For they loved the
praise of men more than the praise of God.

It is not enough therefore that these truths of Religion have subdued our
understanding by the evidence of reason, but they must also conquer our will,
and draw out its affections after them, before ever they can have any lasting
effect upon our lives. For the affections of the will are the most immediate
principles of all our actions, and therefore till our belief has powerfully
wrought upon these affections of love, desire, hope, fear, it can have little
or no influence upon our outward actions.

Now the way and means to obtain this consent of our wills and affections to
these truths thus propounded by our understandings, is often and most seriously
to consider the immense greatness of the happiness offered to us; the extremity
of the misery threatened; how vastly it concerns us what our portion shall be in
that eternal state; how unspeakably sad and unpitied our condition will be, if
we foolishly neglect providing for it; how infinitely the glory of Heaven does
surpass all the joys and pleasures of this life. These things, and the like, in
a lively manner represented unto, and fixed in our minds, will by degrees so
captivate our wills and affections, as that we cannot but love and choose this
future happiness as our greatest good; fear and fly from this eternal misery as
the greatest evil that can possibly betide us.

Of such infinite moment are the concerns of eternity, that if we do but
patiently attend to them, and exercise our thoughts freely about them; if we
will not suffer our lust to bribe and bias our judgments or to stifle and
choke these principles of Religion; they will at last awaken our consciences,
and prevail above all present temptations. And when our faith, by the frequent
and serious consideration of the mighty importance of these matters, and of
their consequence to us, has made such a complete conquest over our minds and
wills, then our actions will of themselves naturally follow. For men will live
and act agreably to what they love, desire, hope for, or fear most.

So effectually has our Christianity provided for the happiness of all men,
that nothing can make us miserable, but either not believing, or not
considering the great arguments of Religion.

The different behavior of men as to the promises of our Savior concerning
another life, I shall beg leave to illustrate by this plain similitude.

Suppose a person of great credit and authority should now appear amongst us,
and should propound to us, that if we would follow him, entirely resigning up
our selves to be governed by him, he would safely conduct us all to a certain
Country or Island, where we should possess all that our hearts could wish,
should be all Kings and Princes, and flow in all manner of wealth, and enjoy an
uninterrupted health; in a word, want nothing that men can fancy could
contribute any way to their complete satisfaction and contentment: and farther,
that he should give all the security that any reasonable man could expect or
demand that this was no vain promise or illusion. Now some amongst us will give
no heed at all to what this man offers, nor be convinced by any reasons or
arguments he can give them; but being either prejudiced against his person, or
disliking the conditions, straight reject him for a Deceiver and Impostour.
These are the Atheists and unbelievers.

Others are indeed convinced that all this is likely to be true, they cannot
see any sufficient cause to doubt of it; but yet they enjoy such conveniences,
and are so taken with their present circumstances here, as that they will not
quit them for these hopes. These are the fond lovers of this world.

Others are willing to go to this place, but they think it time enough yet.
They would tarry and live here where they are, as long as they can; and when
they can stay no longer here, then they would be glad to be wafted to this
fortunate Island. These are they that defer their repentance till a deathbed.

Others acknowledge that there is such a place, where a man may live as happily
as this person describes, but they suspect that he does not show the right way
to it. They would find out a nearer and shorter cut to this Country. These are
Heretics and Schismatics.

Others are resolved to venture with him, and begin the journey; but meeting
with some difficulties and dangers in the passage, they are soon discouraged
and frighted, and return home. These are they who receive the word of God
gladly, but when tribulation and persecution arise, by and by they are offended.

Lastly, a few amongst us wholly relying upon this Person's promises, and
preferring them before all present possessions and enjoyments, forsake all
their concerns and relations here, and absolutely give up themselves to his
guidance. And when in the passage they meet with any dangers or hardships,
cross winds or storms; though this may make them stagger a little, and fill
them with doubts and fears; yet they are resolved still to go on, and venture
all upon it. These, and these only, are the true believers.

There are many degrees of faith, but the least degree of saving faith is, when
the consideration of another world is become our most prevailing interest, and
is the main principle that gives law and rule to all our conversation. Let none
then think to be saved by such a faith as the very Devils in Hell have, and yet
remain Devils still. They believe these great truths of Christianity as really
and as much as thou do, who only assentest to them in thy understanding, and
confessest them with thy mouth, but deniest and contradictest them in thy life
and practice.

To pretend to believe this great doctrine of another life which shall never
end, and not to govern our selves by this persuasion, is the most unaccountable
and prodigious folly that a reasonable creature can be guilty of; according to
that famous saying of a great man in this case, That the strangest monster in
nature was a speculative Atheist, one that denies the being of a God and a
future state, excepting one, and that was the practical Atheist who professed
to believe both, but lived as if he was certain there were neither.

Nor indeed is the difference between them great. The one, the Atheist, winks
hard, and so rushes blindfold upon eternal ruin. The other, the wicked
believer, runs madly upon it with both his eyes wide open. How inexcusable must
they be at the last day; what plea can they offer for themselves, who
obstinately refused that happiness, which yet they acknowledged to be
infinitely beyond all that this world could bless its most darling favorites
with? who wilfully precipitated themselves into those evils and miseries which
they had a plain foresight of.

I conclude this head with that answer which a defender of Atheistical
Principles is said once to have given to a companion of his, who freely
indulged himself in the same vicious course of life the Atheist did; but yet
took upon him to wonder how one that denied the being of a God, and of a future
life, could quiet his mind in such a desperate estate. Nay rather, says the
Atheist, it is much more strange how you can quiet your mind, or sleep
contentedly in such a vicious course of life as I see you lead, whilst you
believe such things as you say you do. And so indeed one would think that it
was impossible for such a man to live in peace, without laying aside either his
faith or his sins. Now the Atheist chooses to lay aside his faith, that he may
sin more quietly; the true Christian lays aside his sins, that they may not
defeat his hopes: and which of these two acts more wisely, if we will not see
in this our day, the final event and issue of things will certainly convince us
to our everlasting regret and confusion. Thus much for those who do profess to
believe another life, but do it not really and heartily.

III. All that remains is to apply my self in a few words to those who do
heartily and constantly believe this great truth of another life after this;
who not only assent to this doctrine with their understandings, but have made
this future happiness their ultimate choice and desire. And to them I need not
say much; for this faith alone will always teach them what to do, without the
help of an instructour. It will even force them to do well, without a guide or
monitour.

This will fortify our minds against all the temptations we may meet with from
this world, or any of its bewitching enjoyments. So that that man who has his
eternal state always in his eye, is set above the power of this world's frowns
or smiles. He can neither be tempted by the sufferings of this life, nor yet
enticed by any of its alluring charms. Can he, whose thoughts are fixed upon
thrones and kingdoms, and immortal glory, be diverted by the gay baubles, or
glittering toys which this world presents him with? It offers him infinitely
too little. When the soul once by faith is mounted beyond the stars into that
place where God and his Savior dwells, how mean and contemptible, how vile and
sordid do all things here below appear? when this whole earth seems but a
point, how next to nothing is that small pittance of it which any one man can
possess or enjoy? Faith looks beyond this present scene of things; beholds this
world dissolved, and all the glory and pomp of it vanishing; and this curtain
being drawn, there appears to his view a new world, wherein are joys and
pleasures and honors substantial and eternal; the prospect and forethought of
which, rectifies his judgment about these inferior things, and begets very
slight and undervaluing thoughts of all things on this side Heaven.

This faith will inspire us with strength and activity, and carry us out even
beyond our selves; will animate us with such courage and resolution, as that we
shall despise all dangers and difficulties, and think eternal happiness a good
bargain, whatever pains or trouble it may cost us to purchase it. Such great
hopes set before us, will animate us with an undaunted bravery and courage, and
enable us to work wonders.

This conquers the love of life it self, which is most deeply implanted in our
natures; for what will not a man give or part with for the saving of his life?
Yet they who have been endued with this faith, have not counted their lives
dear to them, so that they might finish their course with joy.

I have not time now to set before you the trophies and victories which this
faith has achieved; you may find many of them recorded in the famous 11th
chapter to the Hebrews, where the Apostle for the encouragement of all true
believers, propounds to us the brave examples of the holy Patriarchs and
Prophets of old, who through faith subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, out
of weakness were made strong, were tortured not accepting deliverance that they
might obtain a better resurrection, had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings,
yea moreover of bonds and imprisonments: they were stoned, they were sawn
asunder, were slain with the sword, wandered about in sheepskins and
goat skins, afflicted, destitute and tormented. These and many more like these
were the exploits of the Saints under the old Testament, who had not so clear a
revelation of this eternal state, as we now have under the Gospel. But far
greater yet, and more stupendous are the triumphs of faith in the holy lives
and patient deaths of the blessed Apostles, and primitive Martyrs and
Confessors, who with invincible constancy endured pains and torments to flesh
and blood insupportable, only assisted and upheld by the grace of God, and a
lively faith in this promise of his son Jesus. They clapped their hands, and
sang praises in the midst of scorching slames, they took joyfully the spoiling
of their goods, and gave God thanks that they were counted worthy to suffer for
his name: and without doubt God's grace and the same lively faith would produce
in us the very same effects, and enable us to do and to suffer the same things
with the same joy and resolution.

But farther, This faith by degrees moulds and transforms the mind into a
likeness to these heavenly objects, it advances and raises our spirits, so that
they become truly great and noble, and makes us, as St. Peter tells us,
partakers of a divine nature.

It fills the soul with constant peace and satisfaction, so that in all
conditions of life, a good man can feast himself with unseen joys and delights,
which the worldly man neither knows, nor can relish. This makes him content
with any small allowance of this worlds goods and glad if by any hard shift he
can rub through this world till he comes to his Kingdom.

He is but very little concerned about these seemingly grand affairs of this
life, which so much take up and busy other men's thoughts and time. He
converseth most with invisible objects, and with them finds that solid and
lasting comfort, which all outward things can neither give nor take away.

He has something to uphold and cheer his spirit under all worldly calamities
and distractions; and when he is wearied with the impertinencies of this life,
or is not pleased with things here below; he can retire himself into the other
world, and there entertain his mind with those ravishing joys that never cloy
nor satiate.

Nay, this faith arms a man against the fear of death; it strips that King of
terrors of all his grim looks; for he considers it only as God's messenger to
knock off his fetters, to free him from this fleshly prison, and to conduct him
to that blessed place, where he shall be more happy than he can wish or desire
to be, and that for ever.

All this and much more than I can now speak, will this faith do, where it is
sincere and hearty. It will serve us instead of sight; it will afford us a
fore-tast of this immortal happiness; it will give us present entrance into
heaven in part, and at last a full and complete fruition of it.

Oh then let it be most plainly seen by our words, by our works, by all we do,
wherever we are, what our faith and hope is. Let it appear to all men that we
walk by faith, not by sight or sense. Sense is a mean, low, narrow principle,
confined to this present time, and this lower earth; it can reach no higher
than these outward visible things, nor can it look farther than things present.
But the just shall live by faith; they steer their course and govern their
lives, not by what they see, but by what they believe and hope for, looking
beyond things temporal for those things that are eternal.

Let us not be ashamed of this our design and aim-before all men, that whatever
others think or say of us for it, we are resolved to be happy, not only for a
few days or years, but for ever; that we will so use this world as those that
must shortly leave it; that we will so improve and husband our time, as
remembering that it will soon be no more, but be swallowed up in eternity: and
did the stupid world know and believe what you do, they would no longer wonder
at your being so much moved in a case of such unspeakable and everlasting
consequence.

Blessed be God who has set such mighty hopes before us, who has given us
such glorious promises, who has made such a plain and clear revelation of this
eternal life by Jesus Christ, and has by him taught us the true way of
obtaining it; who himself became to us an example of that holy life he
prescribed to us, and after he had suffered for our transgressions in our
nature, entered into the highest heavens to prepare mansions of glory for all
the faithful followers of him. To whom therefore with the Father and Holy
Ghost, one eternal God, be ascribed by us and all men, all praise, thanksgiving
and obedience for evermore. Amen.

THE END.

