A SERMON Preached at St Lawrence-Jury, London, upon the 9th of September,
BEING THE Day of Thanksgiving FOR THE DELIVERANCE OF THE King and Kingdom From
the late Treasonable CONSPIRACY.

By BENJAMIN CALAMY, D. D. Vicar of St. Lawrence-Jury, and one of His Majesty's
Chaplains in Ordinary.

LONDON, Printed by R. E. for W. Kettilby, at the Bishops-Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1683.

TO THE INHABITANTS OF The Parishes of St. Lawrence Jury, and St. Mary Magd.
Milkstreet, London.
Gentlemen,
THE Kindness with which you at first received me, and have all along expressed
toward me since my being placed amongst you, has been so great and obliging,
that I ought not in Reason to deny you any thing, though never so much against my
own Inclinations, that you are pleased to request of me: Yet yive me leave to
say, that upon my own deliberate perusal of the following Discourse, I cannot
find any thing in it at all answerable to your Earnestness for its being
Printed.

It was the Occasion, the Subject, and the Temper, which, the Consideration of
the Wonderful Deliverance of our Most Gracious King, and these Kingdoms, did on
that Solemn Day of Thanksgiving put you into, that made this plain Sermon
pleasing to you in the hearing of it, all which Advantages it will want in the
Reading.

But however, I had rather fail in any thing, than let slip so fair an
Opportunity of showing my self duly sensible of your Great Respects to me; For
which I am, and always will be thankful; And I know no better way of being so
to purpose, than by endeavoring to do amongst you all the good I possibly can.

Which I am assured I cannot more effectually do, than, after your immediate
Duty to God, by encouraging and promoting an Hearty Obedience to the King and
Church, and a sincere Love and Friendship amongst your selves. To effect which
shall be the constant study and labor of,

Gentlemen, Your most faithful Friend and Servant, BENJ. CALAMY.

Ecclesiastes X. 20. Curse not the King, no not in thy thought; and curse not
the rich in thy bedchamber; for a bird of the air shall carry the voice, and
that which has wings shall tell the matter.
THE original word, which is here translated Curse, is variously rendered by
Interpreters; but the easiest sense seems to be this, That we are here forbid,
though never so secretly and closely, speaking any evil of, or designing any evil
against our Sovereign, upon any pretense or occasion whatever. Curse not the
King, no not in thy thought; we must not so much as wish any Mischief or Harm
to him; and curse not the rich, etc. By the rich Grotius understands virum
summatem, a Person in Chief Dignity and Power, whom God has set in Authority
over us; and so these latter words are either only a repetition of the former,
to give the greater force and emphasis to them, or else by the rich may be
meant subordinate Magistrates and Ministers of State, sent and deputed by the
King, who is Supreme, to whom all internal Reverence and Honor ought to be
paid, as well as outward Subjection and Obedience; (to express the sense in
words ordinarily used amongst us) we must not Compass, Imagine, Desire, or
Contrive any thing that tends to the Damage and Prejudice either of our
Sovereign Lord the King, or of any that are Commissionated or Authorized by
him. Curse them not in thy Bedchamber; that is, though we seek the darkest
Retirements, the most private Corners, however cautious we are that there be no
Witnesses present, who may bear testimony against us, so that we think our
selves secure from all possibility of Discovery, yet a bird of the air shall
carry the voice, and that which has wings shall tell the matter. Which words
signify, that God by his Wonderful Providence, some way or other, by Means we
never thought of shall bring about, that all these evil Speeches, and
clandestine Designs against his Vicegerent shall be revealed, to the utter
Confusion of all those that are engaged in them.

Thus these words do not only contain a Prohibition of any secret Plots and
Conspiracies against our Governors, but propound also a weighty Argument to
discourage men from any such wicked Undertakings: Because, let them be carried
on never so cunningly and closely, yet they shall be as suddenly and surely
discovered, as if the Birds of the air had listened to all their Whispers, had
overheard all their Discourse in their secret Cabals, and immediately flown
away with the news, and given in Evidence against them.

An expression like to this we may find in the Prophet Habakkuk 2. 11. where it
is said that the stone should cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the
timber should answer it. What is whispered in a corner, what is hatched in
darkness, yet by unlikely Means, by unthought of Accidents, which by the
greatest subtlety and caution could not be provided against, shall be disclosed
and brought to light; the Divine Providence being peculiarly concerned for the
Defense and Protection of Sovereign Kings and Princes, and in an especial
manner watching over them, as the choicest Object of its Care.

Now that it is thus, that God Almighty is more particularly engaged for the
safety of Kings and Supreme Governors, so as wonderfully to appear for their
Deliverance from the treacherous Conspiracies of Ungodly Men, we have both good
Reason upon which to believe it, and the Experience of all Ages does abundantly
confirm it.

We have good Reason upon which to believe it, and that upon these two plain
accounts.

I. Because Sovereign Kings and Princes are God's Deputies and Vicegerents, set
up by himself, and they derive their Power and Authority from him alone. God
Almighty, the Maker of us all, is the only Absolute Lord and Uncontrolable
Sovereign of Men and Angels. Part of his own Power and Authority which he has
over his Creatures, he has delegated and committed to Kings and Princes, who
are the most principal Instruments and Ministers of his Providence in the
World. Hence are they called Gods, and Children of the Most High, Psalm. 82. 6.
God has invested them with some part of his own Majesty, stamped his own
Character upon them, and appointed them in his place to perform and administer
even some part of his own Divine Office, if I may so speak, amongst men: Thus
constituting them Earthly Gods, as to their Persons sacred, and as to their
Actions accountable to none, but that supereminent Divine Authority that gave
them Commission.

This is not any new-coined Divinity, invented in favor of Arbitrary Power by
Court Parasites, and needy Flatterers, who seek Preferment; (as the Enemies of
our flourishing Monarchy have sometimes represented it;) but it is expressly
delivered in the Holy Scriptures, was professedly owned and taught by the
Primitive Christians, and has been the constant Doctrine of the Reformed
Church of England: Nay, it is agreeable to the general sense of Mankind, and
might be made out by rational Evidence, if we had no other Confirmation of it.

That Supreme Governors have their Power and Authority from God alone, is
expressly delivered in Scripture; and that not only of the Kings of Israel, who
were evidently established by God's Appointment, but in general we are told,
Prove. 8. 15, 16. By me Kings reign, and Princes decree justice. By me Princes
rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges of the earth. Thus Cyrus an Heathen
Emperor is called God's Anointed, Isa. 45. 1. Thus says the Lord to his
anointed, to Cyrus; and in the last Verse of the preceding Chapter he is
called God's Shepherd: (Princes being often, by reason of the resemblance
between the Pastoral Office and Government, called Shepherds) I have made the
earth, says God by the Prophet Jeremiah 27. 5, 6. and have given it to whom it
seemed meet unto me, and now have I given all these lands into the hand of
Nebuchadnezzar the King of Babylon my Servant. Thus Daniel declares that the
most high rules in the Kingdom of men, and gives it to whomsoever he will.
And he tells Nebuchadnezzar, cap. 2. 37. that it was the God of Heaven that had
given him a Kingdom, power, and strength, and glory. In the New Testament
nothing can be plainer, than the beginning of the thirteenth Chapter to the
Romans, where St. Paul tells us, that there is no power but of God: that the
powers that be are ordained of God. Whence in the next Verse he styles
Magistracy or Government the Ordinance of God; and in the Fourth Verse the
Ruler is called the Minister of God (not of the People) to execute his
vengeance upon them that do evil.

I shall not now trouble you with any Quotations out of the Primitive Fathers,
who so often acknowledged even their Heathen Emperors to have been constituted
by God, and to have held their Empire from him alone, and to have only him
above them.

It is plain that this was always the Doctrine of our Church of England, as
appears from the Book of Homilies, wherein we are taught, That the High Powers
are set in Authority by God, that they are God's Lieutenants, God's Presidents,
God's Officers, God's Commissioners, God's Judges ordained of God himself; nay,
it has been directly asserted in our Church, That the most high and sacred
Order of Kings is of Divine Right, being the Ordinance of God himself, founded
in the prime Law of Nature, and clearly established by express Texts both of
the Old and New Testament.

Nor is it our Religion alone that teaches us this, but the same was of old
owned both by the Heathen Poets and Philosophers, that Kings were from God, and
to his Supreme Authority ordering, and appointing it, was to be referred the
Original of all Sovereignty and Rule amongst men.

Nor indeed can it be well conceived, or reasonably imagined, from whence Kings
and Sovereign Powers should have Right to Govern and Command, but from God
alone. Since he is the undoubted Lord of the whole Earth, and alone has full
power and right to Govern it, I cannot see but that whoever shall go about to
confer any power of Government, or take upon himself any such Authority over
others, were it not by God's appointment and institution, he would thereby put
himself upon disposing of God's right, without his leave or ordering. So that
Government and Superiority of one or more over others, is all Tyranny and
Usurpation upon God's right, or else it must be granted to be Ordained by God
himself. And it being so necessary for the Happiness and Welfare of Mankind,
that it is impossible Peace and Order should be maintained, Justice
administered, or that we should live in tolerable safety, every man enjoying his
own, without Government, it would seem an unworthy disparagement and reflection
upon the Divine Wisdom and Goodness, to have left the World without any such
provision for the quiet and security of it.

Thus whatever the Form of Government may be, which is different in several
places, whether it be in a single person, or many, or in the Body of the
People, or their Representatives, whatever hand the people may have in some
places, according to the particular Customs of their Countries, in Choosing or
Designing the person or persons, that shall be invested with this Supreme
Authority, yet the Power and Authority it self is derived only from God, and is
neither received of the People in trust, nor is the Sovereign Power answerable
to them for the Administration of it. Which is sometimes illustrated thus, Though
the Wife may choose what person she pleases to make her Husband, yet the
Husbands Authority over the Wife is not owing to her, nor does she confer it
upon him, but it is of Divine Appointment.

The King (as it has been said of old) in regard of the Nature of his Body is
of the same Mould with every man, but in respect of the eminency of his Dignity
he is like unto God, who is Lord over all, whose Image he bears, and by whom
he holds that Power which he has over Men.

Now this being so clear and undoubted, that Kings and Princes represent the
Person of God, and bear his Image, since they are Earthly, Visible, Corporeal
Gods; (for so you find it, Exodus 22. 28. a place parallel to the words of my
Text, Thou shall not Revile the Gods, nor Curse the Ruler of thy People.) Since
they are the Vicegerents of the Almighty Sovereign, Authorized and
Commissionated by him, his Deputies and Lieutenants here in the world, we may
easily hence conclude, that his Providence cannot but be more particularly
concerned for those, whom he calls to such an High Office, whom he places in
such Dignity and Eminence. He cannot but have a more special regard unto, and a
more than ordinary Care over them, because of their peculiar relation to him as
his Representatives.

As it is here amongst us in Humane Governments, the Supreme Sovereign is
highly concerned to uphold and support all his inferior Magistrates in their
several Places and Offices, to protect them in the discharge of their Duty, to
keep up their Honor and Reputation, and to provide that all due respect be
paid to them: He resents all injuries and affronts offered to them, as done to
himself; He looks upon all those, who set and oppose themselves against them,
as Enemies to his Imperial Crown and Dignity, and that himself is struck and
aimed at by any Violence done to his Officers or Ministers. So it is in the
Case we now discourse of. Supreme Governors have the same relation to God, as
subordinate Magistrates have to their Sovereign Princes; they are employed and
entrusted hy him, and accordingly he expects subjection to them as to himself,
that we should honor and serve them according to that High Divine Character
they bear. He therefore always in a more remarkable manner stands by them, and
watches over them, as the chiefest of his Servants, and nearest to himself. He
takes what is done against them, as done against himself. Whosoever resists
the Power, resists the Ordinance of God, says St. Paul. To oppose and shake
off their Government, to Plot and Conspire against their Life, is to Rebel
against God; and when we will not suffer our Lawful Sovereign, whom the Divine
Majesty has appointed, to Rule over us, we do by just consequence and fair
interpretation endeavor what we can to dethrone God himself, and prove
Traitors not only against our Natural Lord and King, but against the Heavenly
Monarch himself, by whose Commission he Reigns.

II. Another reason to persuade us of the truth of this, that God's Providence
is more peculiarly engaged for the safety and protection of Sovereign Kings and
Princes, may be taken from this Consideration; viz. how much the Public does
depend upon, and is concerned in their welfare and prosperity. Thus the People,
2 Samuel 18. 3. told King David, when they would not suffer him to expose his own
Person to hazard in the Battle against Absalom, Thou art, say they, worth ten
thousand of us. Hence was he called the light of Israel. Thou shall go no more
out with us to Battle, said Abishai, 2 Samuel 21. 17. that thou quench not the
light of Israel. Nay, that wicked King Zedekiah, of whom it is expressly said, 2
Kings 24. 19. that he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, yet is
styled by the Prophet Jeremy, Lam. 4. 20. the Breath of our Nostrils. The Fates
of whole Kingdoms depend upon them. All that live under their Government are
interested in them, and partake with them, and a Villainous Attempt succeeding
against our Sovereign, may stab an whole Nation to the Heart, and fill all
places with Blood and Confusion.

Now God Almighty extends his Providence to the meanest and minutest things.
He cloatheth the grass of the Field, he provideth for the Raven his food, a
Sparrow does not fall to the ground without his knowledge, by him are all the
hairs of our Head numbered; and can we think that this same Providence is not
more particularly employed in matters of such vast moment, which are of such
Universal Consequence, as the Life and Safety of Kings and Princes?

God exercises a more special Providence over their Sacred Persons, on whom
under himself the whole Community does depend. For the sake of the People,
whose Happiness is so closely wrapped up in the prosperity of their Prince, does
God Almighty guard him from secret Treachery, defend him from open Assaults,
and by various means deliver him from imminent Dangers. Especially good and
gracious Kings, who are Fathers of their Country, and Nursing Fathers of the
Church, who maintain the true Religion, encourage Virtue, protect Right and
Innocence, and resemble the Divine Majesty, not only in Power and Authority,
but also in his Attributes of Justice, Mercy and Goodness, they are more
tenderly regarded by God. He hides them under the shadow of his Wings, he
keeps them as the apple of his Eye, he gives his Angels stricter Charge over
them, that no evil may approach them. Such Princes being public Blessings to
the Kingdoms or Nations over which they preside; in their safety must consist
the greatest part of the Common Welfare. And thus if we consider either
Governors themselves, or the People committed to them, we shall see sufficient
reason to believe, that Sovereign Kings and Princes are the peculiar Care and
Charge of Divine Providence.

Nor have we reason only to believe this, but the experience of all Ages does
most abundantly confirm it. For surely there is not any one thing, wherein
God's Providence has more remarkably appeared, and interposed it self at all
times, than in Discovering the secret Plots, and Defeating the traitorous
Designs of wicked Men against the Government they lived under, which has been
often done by such ways and means, as have most evidently demonstrated the
Finger of God in it, and must be ascribed to him, who only does wonderful
things.

Nor have we perhaps (besides what Divine Revelation affords us) a greater
Argument to prove this World to be Governed, and all things in it directed by
the vigilant Eye and powerful Hand of Almighty God, than the sudden and
seasonable Discovery of such Damnable Enterprises, contrived with the utmost
caution and secrecy, carried on with great subtlety and cunning, and just ripe
for Execution; yet in an instant blasted, in a trice broken all to pieces,
either by a surprising dread and fear seizing the Conspirators themselves, or
an unlucky word overheard, or an unaccountable suspicion of some ill Designs;
which though founded upon no reason, or a very trifling one, yet has proved
true; or God has smote upon the Conscience of some one of them, and for the
ease of his own tortured mind he is forced to a Discovery; or a jealousy that
they are betrayed by others, has made some of them give the first notice of it
themselves; or a Letter miscarried, or some fright, mistake, oversight,
something happening otherwise than was expected, has brought the hidden works of
darkness to light, by which the King and his People have been just snatched out
of the Jaws of Ruin.

True indeed it is, that there are some Exceptions against this. Sometimes it
has happened that such Desperate Undertakings have been prosperous, and God's
Providence has suffered even a Good and Excellent Prince to fall a Sacrifice
by the Merciless Hands of a Bloody Assassin, or being overpowered by his own
Rebellious Subjects, to be more pompously Murdered under the pretense of
Justice; of which we have had a sad, and never to be forgotten Instance, in our
own Nation. But then this has been permitted, when the sins of a Nation have
been extreme, and called aloud for Punishment; when God has been long and
highly provoked to give up a People to Destruction, who have filled up the
measure of their Iniquities, then has he sometimes suffered such inhumane
Barbarities to take place. But ordinarily it is otherwise, and by some secret
invisible means God does either infatuate the Counsels, and confound the
Devices, or else by some fortunate accident seasonably discover the horrid
Conspiracies of his own and the Kings Enemies. A Bird of the air shall carry
the voice, and that which has wings shall tell the matter.

Of the truth of all that I have now said, concerning God's wonderful Care and
Providence over Sovereign Kings and Princes, we cannot reasonably desire, we
cannot easily meet with a more Illustrious Instance, than his Majesty that now
is, whom God long preserve. A Prince, for whose safety and protection Heaven
has all along so signally interested it self, and so miraculously defended
him, in spite of all the restless attempts of his and ours, either open or
secret Adversaries, that I cannot but wonder, if no other Argument could
prevail with these Sons of Belial to desist from such Hellish Enterprises; yet
that they should not at last be tired with Plotting against him to no purpose;
that they should not despair of doing him any hurt, for whose Defense and
Deliverance God Almighty has so frequently and publicly appeared. This
betrays the Folly, as well as the Wickedness, of all those who are engaged in
such Caballings and Plottings, that they vye Power with God himself, and
resolve to destroy him, whom by such a series of miraculous Providence God
has shown himself resolved to save and protect.

Alas! they are not only the Guards whom they must seize upon and master. In
vain are all their Meetings and Consultations about the feasibleness of such a
Design; unless they can find out a way to escape God's knowledge, or could be
too hard for the Almighty, who has undertaken to guard and secure our King,
and will see that no Weapon formed against him shall prosper.

Was it not by God's wonderful Providence that he was preserved from the Fury
and Rage of those, who embrued their Savage hands in his Fathers Sacred Blood?
Was it not the same good Providence that continually compassed him, as with a
Shield, when his own Subjects in Arms against him sought his Death and
Destruction? Was it not the same Providence that for a long time hid and
concealed him from the most diligent search of Blood-thirsty Rebels, (though so
many Conscious, yet none tempted by great Rewards and more powerful Fears to
betray him) and at last, after a miraculous manner, provided an escape for him,
and through innumerable dangers, conveyed hime safe to a strange Land? Was it
not the same God who defended and supported him during a long and most unjust
Banishment, and at length by his own right Hand, and outstretched Arm, brought
him safe again to his People, and gloriously restored him to his three
Kingdoms? Has he not since been graciously pleased in time to discover all the
evil Designs of Wicked men against his Person and Government, or has prevented
those which were never discovered? Has he not saved him from the Popish Plot?
And are we not this present day met together to bless God for his deliverance
from a Fanatic one? And after all, have we not vast Reason from such large
Experience of God's infinite kindness toward our most Gracious Sovereign, and
in him to us his People, yet to hope that he will still preserve him, and
continue his Life amongst us, to be every day a greater Blessing to these
Kingdoms.

Give me leave therefore in this Case to apply the Words of the Psalmist in the
beginning of the Second Psalm, Why do the Papists rage, and the Fanatics
imagine a vain thing? What madness is this, that thus possesses them to unite
and associate together? The heads of the several Parties and Factions set
themselves, and take Counsel together against the Lord, and against his
anointed King, saying, Let us break their Bands asunder, and cast away their
cords from us. Let us not be tied up any longer by that slavish Principle of
Obedience to Authority for Conscience sake, but rather like free born People
throw off the Yoke which the King and his Ministers would impose upon us. He
that sits in the Heavens shall laugh, the Lord shall have them in derision.
The Almighty Sovereign, by whose Commission and Authority our King Reigns,
shall despise all these foolish Attempts, and will expose these presumptuous
Rebels to the Scorn and Contempt of every man. Then shall he speak unto them in
his wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure. Even then when they think they
have effected their Design, and made all sure, God shall suddenly disappoint
and confound them, so that all men shall observe the tokens of the Divine
Vengeance against them. Yet have I set my King upon my Holy Hill of Sion. See
how madly they have Plotted against themselves: For our King and his Government
is not only yet preserved, but we hope Strengthened and Established by their
impious Conspiracy against it.

But more particularly, we are now assembled to make due acknowledgments of
God's wonderful Providence and Mercy, in Discovering and Defeating the late
Treasonable Conspiracy against his Sacred Majesty's Person and Government. In
speaking of which, I shall first of all briefly set before you the Horridness
of the Conspiracy it self; then the Greatness of the Deliverance we now bless
God for; and lastly, add some few plain Advices suitable to this occasion.

I. The Horridness of this late Conspiracy will sufficiently appear, if we
consider only these three things.

1. The Actors or Persons engaged in it.

2. The Motives from which they acted.

3. The Mischiefs that would inevitably have followed, had not God's Providence
made timely Discovery of it; and under these heads I shall only hint at some
few things.

1. As to the Persons that were engaged in this Plot, they may be considered
under several Circumstances, which do all highly aggravate their Crime and
Guilt: As that they were Protestants; nay, the most Zealous Protestants, who
would hardly allow any others to be such besides themselves. Hence on all
occasions they would appear most vigorous and active for the Prosecution and
Suppression of Papists, and counted all that were not so fierce and violent as
themselves, to be Popishly affected, and ready upon any turn of the times to
leave their Religion. All this Zeal against the Papists, they professed to
proceed from a just Hatred of their Disloyal Principles, which were
inconsistent with the Civil-Government, and dangerous to the Monarchy, and the
Kings Person; as if they had a mind to save the Government from the Papists,
only that themselves might have the Honor of Subverting it. They liked the
thing well enough, it was a glorious work, but only they did not approve of the
Instruments. And if these must be called Protestants, who can join in such
Villainous Designs, I shall only say, that then I know some Protestants, who are
every jot as bad, and as little to be trusted as any Papists.

We indeed of the Church of England, for this one thing, were not a little
beholden to these Conspirators, viz. That they were so careful to distinguish
themselves from us, and were for a finer and purer Communion than that
Established by Law. A Protestant is a word at large, and may signify any
thing, and comprehends all that are not Papists, whatever they are for. But the
Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England, we all know what it is; it is
Stated and Defined, and we are sure that it condemns all Disloyal, Seditious
Practices, on any pretense whatever: And therefore they who were engaged in
this Wicked Conspiracy, however some of them might sometimes be seen in our
Churches, yet they were forced to find fault with our Establishment, to decry
our Bishops and Ministers, and weaken their Authority, to endeavor by all
means to prejudice the People against our Church, and to lessen its Interest,
which they knew stood in the way of their Designs.

And have not these Men now bravely provided for the Credit and Honor of the
Protestant Religion? Had these great haters of Popery gone to School to the
Jesuits, could they possibly have been taught a more compendious way to serve
and promote Popery, than that very way which they took to keep it out?

But besides this Consideration of their Religion, we shall find the persons
concerned in this late Treason, under as great Obligations to have lived
quietly under the present Government, as could possibly be laid upon Men. Some
of them were actually in the late Rebellion, and had hitherto enjoyed the
benefit of his Majesty's Gracious Act of Indemnity, owing their Lives and
Fortunes to his Majesty's unparalled Clemency: Of whom it may be truly said,
what St. Peter says of some in his days, 2 Epist. 2. 22. It is happened unto
them according to the true proverb, The dog is turned to his own vomit again;
and the sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire. So hard a matter is
it to cure one bewitched with the Principles of Rebellion, that after above
twenty years he shall return to his old trade as bare-facedly, as if we had
never heard of his former pranks.

Many of them were Persons, who, besides his Majesty's pardon, had partaken
largely of his Royal Grace and Favor, been advanced by him to great Honor and
Dignity, been entrusted in places of great Power and Eminency; and after they
had raised their Families, and gotten great Estates by his Majesty's Bounty,
then lifted up their Heels against him; to whom the King may well say, what our
Blessed Lord did to the Jews, St. John 10. 32. when they took up Stones to cast
at him; for which of those many good works I have done for you, do you now
design and contrive this mischief against me?

Others there were that were engaged out of Discontent, because they had not
all they had a mind unto, because they were not employed in the public,
proportionably according to the opinion they had conceived of their own worth
and usefulness to the King and Nation, or because they did not now appear in so
high a Station as they had done formerly.

Add to this his Majesty's wonderful Lenity and Indulgence toward all sorts of
Dissenters, the fresh memory of our late Troubles and Confusions, and the
direful Consequences of them, the easiness of our present Government under his
most Gracious Majesty, who adheres so close to his Laws, and has given us all
possible assurance that he will always do so, that great Plenty and Peace we
have for so long time enjoyed, excepting only the disturbance which our own
intestine Divisions and Commotions have raised, the little prospect any could
have of bettering his Condition by such a Revolution as was designed, and we
must conclude that never any men had less reason or provocation to enter into a
Conspiracy against the Government, than those Persons who were actually engaged
in this late Treason.

2. Consider the Motives from which they acted, where I do not mean the true
and real ones, which did indeed sway with them, and were different according to
their several Ranks and Qualities, (some of which I have already mentioned) but
the pretended ones which they made show of, to gain a Party, and to fasten the
People to them; and it would not be very difficult to guess what these were,
had we never heard of them. To be sure the Good and Interest of the People,
Care of their Liberties and Properties, and the Defense of the true Religion
against Popery.

Fear of Popery, and Arbitrary Government, and evil Counselors, once in the
memory of very many here present, made this Nation run mad, and set us all
together by the Ears, cost an infinite Treasure, the Lives of many thousand
Englishmen, and which was more to be valued of that Excellent Martyr King
Charles the First. And what was the Conclusion of all, but instead of Liberty,
enslaving the Nation to a Military Power; instead of Property, Plunder,
Sacrilege, and Sequestration, and the setting up freakish Enthusiasm instead
of True Rational Religion?

And may it not yet without offense be said, that Men were just playing the
same Game over again? The same Fears and Jealousies were started, and
industriously propagated amongst the People; the Government, by a number of
impudent Libels, that every where swarmed and were exposed to every ones view,
publicly traduced and defamed; all ill Reports of the Kings Ministers, of the
Clergy, and all Loyal persons studiously spread amongst the People, and handed
from one to another; every miscarriage heightened and aggravated, all Faults and
Misfortunes laid at the Kings door; every thing that was done or ordered
mis-construed and mis-interpreted; the Church of England represented as daily
approaching nigher to that of Rome; and Men's minds were so generally possessed
with such sad Prognostics, of strange and dismal Evils just coming upon us,
that even some honest Persons were almost frighted out of their Wits and
Allegiance, and could not suspect any harm in them, who talked so speciously of
Reformation of Abuses, and securing of Religion, and defending the Kings
Person: all which, as now plainly appears, was designed only to prepare the
People for the contrived Insurrection and Rebellion.

Now of all Rebels they are certainly the worst, that are such out of
Conscience; and no such desperate Villains as those, who think to please God by
Murders and Massacres. Other wicked men may be often checked, are sometimes
restrained by their Consciences, and dread of a future Judgment: but what Evil
shall they ever boggle at, who commit such gross Wickedness out of compliance
with their Consciences, out of Obedience to God, and expect to be rewarded for
it in another World? And is it possible by any thing we can do to bring greater
dishonor to, or more effectually to prejudice Rulers and Governors against
Religion, than by pretending it to patronize and countenance Faction and
Rebellion? If this were the true Genius of Religion, to make men Unpeaceable,
Turbulent, Seditious, and Mutinous, it would then become the great Interest of
Princes to guard themselves against it, as the very Pest of Humane Society, and
dangerous to the Civil-Government; but thanks be to God, this is not the temper
of our Christianity. Our Saviors Religion begets in Men the most Gentle and
Meek, Patient and Governable Spirits, and is so far from being inconsistent
with Loyalty to our Prince, that it is the greatest tie and obligation to it in
the World; and there is no one can throw off his Allegiance toward his Earthly
Sovereign, but at the same time he renounces all Duty and Conscience toward
God. That Religion therefore, of which Loyalty is not a very considerable part,
is not of our Saviors, but of our own making; and when it disposes Men to
such Outrages and public Mischiefs, it is worse than no Religion at all.

3. Consider what had followed, had God permitted this Horrid Conspiracy to
have taken effect. What certainly had followed God only knows; but we cannot
think any other thing, but miserable Confusion, and the Destruction of us all.
For what a Bloody Tragedy must presently have begun, as soon as the surprising
news of the Murder of the King and his only Brother, had arrived to this Great
and populous City: When the Streets should have been presently stained with the
Blood of our Magistrates, and Ministers, and Loyal Citizens, and all those who
were not likely to have proved for their turn.

Where this would have ended, the Conspirators themselves could not possibly
have divined, nor would it have been in their Power, who set the multitude on
work, to have put a stop to them, saying, Thus far ye shall go, and no further.
Those Murders, and Massacres, and Rapines, and Devastations might have
followed, which even the Plotters themselves never intended, but knew not how
to prevent, having raised a Devil that was past their Power and Skill to lay;
and there is nothing in the World so Cruel, so Outrageous, so Barbarous, as an
Armed incensed Rabble, which is like the Sea breaking in, the force of which is
not to be resisted. Nay, this might have ended in the destruction of the very
Heads of the Plot themselves, who could not promise themselves Security. But
this brings me to the Second thing I propounded to speak of, viz.

II. The greatness of the Deliverance we are now to bless God for. To his
Gracious Providence seasonably discovering this Traitorous Conspiracy, we do
owe the Preservation of his Majesty's Life, which is dearer to us than our own,
together with the Life of his Royal Brother, and the continuance of this
present Government, which has so long made the People of England the happiest
and most envied People in the World. To the same Mercy many of us owe our own
Lives; for who knows in such a day who had passed for Papists, or whom they
would have accounted ill affected Persons? By this means all true and desirable
Liberty is continued to us, whilst we dwell safely, every man under his own
Vine and Fig Tree: the public Laws, which best maintain our Property, have
still their due force, and which to be sure ought not to be forgotten,
especially in this place, our pure Religion and Church is yet continued to us.
Our Orthodox Ministers are not driven into Corners, nor our excellent Prayers
and Liturgy thrust out of the Church, to make room for Extemporary Effusions,
nor every one left at Liberty to serve God when, and where, and how he
pleases. What grateful Acknowledgments do so great a Mercy and Deliverance
require from us all; and by our thankfulness this day for these great and
invaluable Blessings, who knows but we may prevail with God, and oblige him
still to preserve them to us, and to succeeding Generations?

3. I shall only in the last Place add some few Advices proper for this
occasion, and shall mention these four.

1. Let us from this Conspiracy, by observing the rise and progress of it, the
Methods by which it was carried on, and the Persons that were engaged in it,
make this Rule to our selves, Always to suspect those, who clamor for
Reformation of public Abuses, and Defense of the true Religion, and yet are
scandalously Wicked and Flagitious in their Lives and Manners. It cannot but be
observed almost by every Man, that many of the Heads of this late Conspiracy,
were Persons infamous throughout the whole Nation, for their Immoralities and
Debaucheries, notorious Whoremasters, Adulterers, Drunkards, Murderers,
Swearers, and what not? Now what a fulsome thing is it, and to be abhorred of
all honest Men, to hear such Persons as these set up for the great Patriots of
their Country, and the Assertors of the Peoples Rights, and Conservators of
their Liberties, and Religion? Are Men of such Atheistical Principles, and
Prostituted Consciences, fit to be trusted either with Religion, or our
Liberties? Or can we desire any greater Argument, that they are moved by some
other Design, which they mask under such plausible pretenses? The Case of
securing the Protestant Religion with such Men is a mere Story, to sham and
delude the Ignorant and Unwary. Such matter not what Religion prevails, so they
can but gain their Secular, Ambitious, Covetous, or Revengeful ends. Now this
is so palpable a Cheat, so thin a Disguise, that methinks the meanest Person
may easily see through it.

2. Let us all have a great care of entertaining any ill Opinions or Conceits
of our Governors. For this is the first foundation of all Sedition or
Rebellion. We must not nourish or give way to any discontents, nor readily give
ear to any Factious reports that tend to the disgrace of the Government, or the
disparagement of the Public Ministers, or that detract from their Reputation
and Esteem, who are set in high place of Power and Authority. Though it were
really so, that we were oppressed or treated harshly by them, yet we are not to
give vent to our Passion, in indecent railing or inveighing against them,
called in Scripture Blaspheming or speaking evil of Dignities, Is it fit, says
Elihu to Job, to say to a King, thou art wicked, and to Princes, ye are ungodly.

It is to be feared we in this City have much to answer for our immoderate
Taxing and lavish Censuring the actions of our Governors, and aspersing our
Superiors with Scandalous Imputations; for I doubt not but men may be in this
Plot, and have a great hand in this Conspiracy, though they never met at any of
the Consults, nor had any particular part to act in it, nor knew any thing of
killing the King, or of the Insurrection intended, but yet by doing and saying
of those things which manifestly tend to the weakening and disenabling the
Government, and prejudicing the People against it, they may by this means have
been highly instrumental in carrying on this wicked Design, for our Deliverance
from which we now bless Almighty God.

There may be, I say, not a few amongst us, that might never be particularly
acquainted with this design, yet hoped much that there was one going on, and
that some body at some time or other would dare to appear for the liberty of
the Subject and Conscience, and whenever they did, they might be sure of their
good wishes and prayers: who would have been more than tolerably content, if
all that was designed had taken Effect. These are the men that are watching
for, and picking up all the stories that may disturb and disquiet the Nation,
that have so much pity for these Conspirators, that they have hardly any for
the King; who though they dare not publicly say it, yet sliely suspect the truth
of this Plot, would fain iamagine a trick in it, and that it is all an
invention of the Court to take away honest men's lives; who could heartily wish
that Vienna had been much nigher, and were very sorry to hear that the Turk was
likely to go home again, without making some greater fright, some jumble and
alteration in our Affairs. These men are very far gone, and in next disposition
toward Rebellion.

Men do not become Traitors and Rebels in an instant, but first they begin with
murmuring and complaining, then unmannerly talking of their Superiors, at
length plain accusing their Proceedings, till by such undutiful Practices they
become Conscious to themselves, that they have offended the Government at so
great a rate, as that they cannot be safe under it, and then in their own
defense they think of destroying it.

3. Let us all be warned to have a great care ofreading Factious Seditious
Libels, or of imbibing Antimonarchical Principles, many of which have strangely
prevailed these last years amongst us, as that the Supreme Power is always in
the People, in the Kingonly in Trust; And that the People may resume that Power
whenever they Please, and call their King to an account for his Execution of
it; that here in England the Sovereignty is not by Law completely and
absolutely in the King; That he is but one of the three Estates of the Kingdom:
And especially one very ill Antichristian Principle, which has done an
infinite deal of Mischief amongst us, and perhaps has brought more into this
Plot than any one thing else, I mean, that it is lawful in some Cases by Force
and Violence to resist the Supreme Authority, especially in defense of the True
Religion, particularly if the King, or those Commissionated by him, use illegal
Force to bring in another Religion, or to Persecute the Professors of the True
Religion. All such Principles as these, and many more might be named, are
directly fitted and calculated for such a Conspiracy, and Association as this
lately discovered amongst us. Let us all have a care therefore of the books,
wherein such poisonous Doctrines are taught, or of the Company of those who
profess to believe them, lest before we are aware they insinuate themselves
into us, and so betray us into infinite mischiefs.

4. And lastly, What a fit opportunity is this for all those that are Honest
and Sincere amongst the Dissenters, to lay aside their Prejudices and little
Sngularities, and Affectations, and as one man to unite with the Church? And
this would be the greatest means to preserve the Civil State in peace; for as
long as there remain these Divisions in Religion, these several Sects and
Parties amongst us, we shall always be in danger of Plots and Conspiracies
against the Government. These Parties will be always matter for Ambitious,
Discontented Persons to work upon, and to sow the Seeds of Sedition and
Rebellion amongst them. All the Malcontents in the Kingdom fly to these
Dissenters, and to the Separate Meetings for refuge, and there herd and shelter
themselves.

This therefore is the time for those amongst them, who heartily love the King
and their Country (as many of them profess to do) publicly to disclaim and
declare their utter Detestation of all such Principles and Practices, which
have given occasion and encouragement to these late Horrid Conspiracies against
the Kings Person and Government; with Sorrow to acknowledge how much they have
been abused and deceived by the plausible pretenses of Wicked Men; to become
ashamed and weary of Schism and Fanaticism, since by this late Discovery they
cannot but plainly see whither it tends, how troublesome and dangerous it is to
the Public Peace, what a Bloody Devilish Spirit it possesses men with all;
lastly, as an Evidence of their sincerity in all this, to return into the Bosom
of the Church.

This indeed would be a most happy Fruit of this Conspiracy, if all men would
now be persuaded, how much it is their Interest and Security to unite in the
Public and Legal Establishment, which under God can be the only probable way
of preserving the Peace, Happiness, and Religion of our Nation.

The Lord grant that we may all in this our day mind the things that belong to
our Peace, before they are hid from our Eyes.

FINIS.

