A Prospect take of those who next Heavens hand, Routed Rome's Powers, and
saved the drooping Land. Whilst promised Blessings crowd About the Throne, And
all with Joy the happy Change do own.



A Faithful ACCOUNT, OF THE Present State OF AFFAIRS, IN England, Scotland, and
Ireland: OR, The Remarkable Transactions and Proceedings that have happened in
these Kingdoms, since the Discovery of the Horrid Popish Plot, Anno 1678. to
this present Year, 1689/90. Plainly showing the State of Affairs, from time to
time, in Peace and War; but more particularly what has happened under the
Government and Reign of their present Majesty's, King William and Queen Mary,
and of our wonderful Deliverance from Popery and Slavery, etc. By E. C.

LICENSED, and Entered according to Order

London, Printed for Tho. Bever at the Hand and Star next the Middle
Temple-Gate, near Temple Bar, 1690.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
READER,
I Have undertaken this Historical Account, that the hand of Providence may be
the more fully seen, in our many signal and great Deliverances; it being a
Collection of such Transactions, as from time to time have publicly happened,
whereby it appears, how all along the Projects and Devices of the Enemies of
our Religion have been frustrated, even when they supposed themselves the
surest: As likewise, the various turns of Affairs, laid down in such Order, as
will not only refresh them in the the Memories of such as have been Conversant,
and knowing in Matters of this kind, but instruct those that are Ignorant of
them, and be a means to convey them to Posterity. I need not much Appologize in
a Work of this Nature, but only declare what is done, is faithfully laid down,
as it has in the several Periods; occurred, viz. In part of the Reign of King
Charles the Second, the Reign of King James the Second; but more largely, since
the beginning of our present great and wonderful Deliverance, from Popery and
Arbitrary Power; by their present most sacred Majesty's, King William, and
Queen Mary; and so refering you to what is contained in the following Pages, I
Remain,

Reader, Your very Humble Servant, E. C.

A Faithful Account of the Remarkable Transactions and Proceedings, that have
happened in the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland.
When the Nations seemed to be in a Calm, as having Peace abroad, and Plenty
at home; and every one promised him ^elf a large Portion of Felicity, Trading
being in its height; all on a sudden, Men's Minds were strangely amused and
disturbed, upon the Discovery of a Horrid Plot, designed against the Life of
King Charles the Second: As likewise, all his Protestant Subjects, by way of
Massacre, to the utter Subversion of the Protestant Religion. True it is, for
some time it was held, as it were in Suspense; but a Testimony most apparent,
confirming what had been Discovered by Dr. Oats, and Dr. Tongue, viz. The
Murdering Sir Edmond-Bury Godfrey; whose Body was found, with the Neck broke,
and a Sword thrust through it, at a place called Primrose-Hill, a Mile or Two
out of Town. On the 12 th. of October, 1678. after he had been Three Days
missing; the King upon notice, was extremely troubled, and upon further
Enquiry, it appearing; that he, as a Justice of Peace, for the County of
Middlesex, had taken Dr. Oats's Depositions, etc. concerning the Plot he
Discovered; it was conjectured, he had been Murdered by some Villains, to
stifle that Affair; and the Coroner's Inquest having found him to be Murdered;
on the 20 th. of that Month, the King Published a Proclamation for the
Apprehending the Murderers, with the offer of a Reward of 500. l. to any that
should make the Discovery; and that if any of the Murderers should discover
the rest, whereby they, or any of them should be Apprehended, he should not
only have his Offense pardoned, but receive the said Reward; and a few Days
after, there being private Intimation, that some Persons who could discover the
manner of the Circumstances, and yet were withheld, through fear of the
Revenge, the Murderers, or their Friends might take, the King renewed his
Promise, that they should not only immediately receive the Reward, but that he
would take such Effectual Courses, for the security of such Discoverers, as
they should in Reason propose; and the same Month* a Proclamation was Published
for a General Fast, on the 13 th. of the following November; and the King
acquainted, (upon the Informations that he had received) the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, and Commons in Parliament, of the Design against his Life and
Government, which was followed by a Proclamation, commanding all Persons, being
Popish Recusants, and so reputed, to depart from the Cities of London, and
Westminster, and other Places, within Ten Miles of the same; and the King
further Declared in Council, that whosoever should make a Discovery of any
Officer or Soldier of his Horse or Foot Guards, who having formerly taken the
Oaths of* Allegiance and Supremacy, and the Tests, enjoined by Act of
Parliament, for the preventing Dangers which may happen from Popish Recusants,
and had since, or for the future, should be preverted to the Romish Religion,
or hear Mass; the Discoverer upon Intimation given to the Duke of Monmouth,
Lord General of His Majesty's Forces, should have the Reward of 20. l. for
every Officer or Soldier; and diverse accused and suspected Persons, as well of
the Nobility, as others, were taken up and committed.

On the 9 th. of November, the King being seated in his Throne, in the House of
Lords, at Westminster, and the Commons attending, he made the following Speech.

My Lords and Gentlemen.
I am so very sensible of the Great and Extraordinary Care, you have already
taken (and still continue to show) for the Preservation of my Person in these
Times of Danger, that I could not satisfy my self without coming hither, on
purpose, to give you all my most hearty thanks for it.

Nor do I think it enough, to give you my thanks only, but I hold my self
obliged, to let you see withal, that I do as much st^dy your Preservation to,
as I can possibly; and that I am ready to join with you, in all the ways and
means that may Establish a firm security of the Protestant Religion, as your
own Hearts can wish: and this, not only during my time, of which I am sure you
have no fear; but in all future Ages, even to the end of the World: And
therefore, I am come to assure you, that whatsoever Reasonable Bills you shall
present, to be passed into Laws, to make you safe in the Reign of any
Successor, (so as they tend not to Impeach the Right of Succession, nor the
Descent of the Crown in the True Line, and so as they restrain not my Power,
nor the just rights of any Protestant Successor) shall find from me a ready
concurrence. And I desire you withal, to think of some more effectual means for
the Conviction of Popish Recusants, and to expedite your Councils as fast as
you can, that the World may see our Unanimity; and that I may have the
opportunity of showing you how ready I am to do any thing that may give Comfort
and Satisfaction, to such Dutiful and Loyal Subjects.

Hereupon a Proclamation was Issued out for the Confinement of Popish
Recusants, more distant from London, within five Miles of their Dwellings; and
another Proclamation for Apprehending diverse Persons by Name, accused of the
Conspiracy; Likewise an Order of Council for the apprehending Jesuits and
Popish Priests, with the Reward of Twenty l. a Head.

One William Staley, a Goldsmith's Son in Covent Garden, and a noted Papist,
was Tried on the 21 of November at the King's Bench Bar, before the Lord Chief
Justice Scroggs, and other Judges of that Bench, upon an Indictment of High
Treason, for saying, He would Kill the King; etc. and being Convicted, was
Sentenced to be Draw'd Hanged and Quartered, which was accordingly Executed,
and his Quarters being given to his Friends, a great many Papists crowded to
his Funeral, which was Solemnized with much pomp, as accounting him the
Proto-Martyr of their Cause: The King was so much Incensed at this proceeding,
that an Order was sent to have the Body taken up, and the Head and Quarters
afixed upon the Gates of the City of London, which was accordingly performed.
And now the Conspiracy being more narrowly searched into, and manifested by the
Papers seized with Edward Coleman Esquire he was Tried at the Kings Bench Bar,
before the Lord Chief Justice Scroggs, on the 27 th. of November, upon an
Indictment of High Treason, in Conspiring the Death of the King, subverting the
Government, and Extirpating the Protestant Religion; upon which he was found
Guilty by a Jury of Gentlemen of Quality, of the County of Middlesex, and the
next day received Sentence as in case of High Treason, and was Executed at
Tyburn, and a reward and protection was offered to such as would come in within
a limited time, and make a further Discovery; and to prevent any danger that
might from hence arise in any of the other Kingdoms, Expresses were dispatched,
and such Persons as were accused, or had been suspected, were Seized, and all
due care taken, especially in Ireland, where by reason of the number of Papists
Inhabiting that Kingdom, the danger seemed to threaten; and an Order was
published, That no Person upon great penalties should resort to the Queens
Chapple, or the Houses of Ambassadors, unless her Servants, or Servants of such
Ambassadors as had Chapples; and strict Inquiry was made upon this occasion,
Officers being appointed to have an Eye upon such as came in and out, and some
who could give no good account of themselves, were carried before the
Magistrates, and Committed; and a Proclamation was Issued out for dis-arming
and securing Popish Recusants throughout the Kingdom, which was punctually
observed in most parts.

On the 17 th. of November, Letters having been scattered in the Streets of
Dublin in Ireland, Intimating a Conspiracy against the Life of the Duke of
Ormond, Lord Lieutenant of that Kingdom, to be put in Execution by one Michael
Jepson; he was thereupon Seized, and confessed the Design; and that he was
preverted and incited amongst other Inducements to this intended Murder; for
that Alexander Jepson, his Father, had been hanged at Dublin, for the Plot
contrived 1663. and hereupon Brin and Plunket, two Secular Priests, were
Seized, the former being the party that set him on to perpretrate this
wickedness; and Papers from other Priests, encouraging the like, were found
upon a strict Inquiry. And now the Parliament of England having made a
considerable progress into the Plot, and the design growing more and more
apparent, by the Testimonies of other Witnesses that came in, they were on the
30 th. of December, Prorogued 'till the 4 th. of February following; upon which
the Papists relying for a greater boldness in returning to the Cities of London
and Westminster, another Proclamation was Issued out, commanding them to
depart, as likewise the Magistrates and Officers to make diligent search for
such as should lurk about Town, etc. And a Proclamation, commanding the
immediate return of the Children of Noblemen, Gentlemen, and others, that were
the Kings Subjects, being in Foreign Seminaries, and forbidding relief to be
sent to them, according to the Statute made in the 20 th. Year of Elizabeth, or
undergo the Penalty of that Statute, which is to be adjudged a Traitor, and
suffer Forfeit and ^oss, as in case of High Treason. And another Proclamation
for apprehending several Jesuits by Name, viz. John Gaven Vavasor, alias
Gifford, Edward Levison; as also Broadstreet, a Popish Priest, and Francis
Evers, alias Ireland, forbidding all Persons to Harbor, Conceal, or Shelter
them, on pain of being proceeded against for High Treason; offering for the
lattor 100 l. and for the rest 50 l. a Man; and William Ireland and John Grove,
the first a Jesuit* being Tried and Convicted at the Old Baily, as Guilty of
the Conspiracy, were Sentenced as in case of High Treason, and afterward
Executed at Tyburn.

In the Month of February several of the Justices of the Peace being doubtful
in putting the Laws in Execution, as to what related in some particulars
against Popish Recusants, and proposing several Queries to His Majesty, He
referred them to His Judges; who after Consultation, made this return of their
Opinions, viz.

I. That Foreigners, being Popish Recusants, and excercising ordinary Trades,
but not Merchants, are not excused from taking the Oaths, or finding Securities.

II. That Foreigners, though certified by Ambassadors to be their Servants,
except they are their menial Servants are not excused.

III. That Foreigners, though settled Housekeepers, being no Travelers, or
Foreign Ministers Servants, are not excused.

IV. That the Kings Native Subjects are not excused from taking the Oaths, by
being menial Servants to Foreign Masters.

V. That we find no Law that excuses a Female Covert, being a Papist from
taking the Oaths, though her Husband be a Protestant.

VI. That a Popish Recusant having taken the Oaths, is not bound to find new
Surities unless upon a new tender of the Oaths he shall refuse to take the
same. And this was Signed Will. Scroggs, Fra. North, W. Montague, W. Wild, T.
Littleton, Hugh Windham, Robert Atkins, V. Bertie, Fra. Bramston, Tho. Jones,
W. Dolbin.


And the King having approved the Opinion of his Judges, ordered, the Justices
of the Peace, in their respective precincts, to take notice accordingly in the
execution of their dutys, and conform thereunto, and ordered the Custos
Rotulorum of each County to give them Information, and a further charge given
them to put the Laws in Execution where any neglect had been.

The Murder of Sir Edmond Bury Godfrey being by this time fully discovered to
have been acted in Somerset House Yard, whither he had been way-layed, and
trained in under pretense of parting a Fray, and there being Strangled by the
sudden twisting a Napkin round his Neck, and afterward breaking his Neck; and
that he had been carried to Primrose-bill, where he was found with his Sword
run through him, under color, to make it suspected he murdered himself.
Lawrence Hill, Henry Bury, and Robert Green, were on the 10th. of February,
tried for the Murder at the King's Bench Bar, where they were found Guilty,
upon the Evidence of Captain William Bedlow, and the positive Oath of Miles
Prance, who swore himself to be immediately concerned in the Murder, though
since, the popish Priests have prevailed upon him to recant, as will appear
hereafter; and one Samuel Atkins was likewise Indicted as an Accessory to the
Murder, but acquitted; and according to Sentence, Green, Bury and Hill, were
Executed at Tyburn, where they denied the Fact. And this month Sir Joseph
Williamson, giving place, the Earl of Sunderland was appointed Principal
Secretary of State. And now the time being come, for the Judges to go the
Lenten Circuit, they had a strict Charge to recommend to the Justices of Peace
and other Magistrates, the putting the Laws in execution, against popish
Recusants; and to see it done themselves, as much as in them lay. And upon the
Kings Command, the Duke and Duchess of York departed for Holland; and there
went Ashore at Masland-sluyce, and so to the Hague, and were received at the
Court.

On the 28th. of March another Proclamation was issued out for a public Fast,
to implore the further Protection of Almighty God, in preserving us from our
Enemies, and commanded to be strictly kept, and it was accordingly observed
with more than ordinary Devotion and Solemnity: And thus passed over the
memorable Transactions of the latter part of the year, 1678.

In April 1679. The Knights Citizens and Burge^ses in Parliament assembled,
having in the Name of themselves, and all the Commons of England, impeached
William Earl of Powis, William Viscount Stafford, William Lord Petre, Henry
Lord Arundel of Wardour: and John Lord Bellasis, Prisoners in the Tower, upon
diverse Articles of High Treason; and other high Crimes and Offenses, at the Bar
of the House of Lords, etc. The said Prisoners were on the Ninth of April
(except the Lord Bellasis, by reason of his illness of the Gout) brought to the
Bar of the Lords-House, where kneeling, and afterward standing, the Articles
of their Impeachment were Read; upon which they made several Petitions to the
House, that they might have Copies of their Charge, and time to Answer thereto:
that they might be allowed Council; and that their Witnesses might be summoned,
and have Liberty to come and Return: And that that they might have the use of
such Records as they should have occasion for, which were granted them; but
with limitation that their Council should only assist them in matters of Law.
And the Lord Bellasis was allowed, though absent, a Copy of his Charge. After
this, those that were present, were remanded to the Tower, and being brought
again the 16th. they delivered their Answers to the Articles of Charge; and
were reconducted to the Tower; and on the 20th. of April the King dissolved his
Privy Council and called another, putting forth a Declaration to show his
reasons for so doing; appointing his new Council to consist of Thirty Persons,
Fifteen whereof were to be certain, and the rest to be Elective at his
pleasure; Ten out of the Nobility, and Five Commoners, besides a Lord
President, a Secretary of Scotland; and such of the Princes of the Blood as
should be at Court: the King acquainting his Parliament, that next his great
Council, he would be advised by that Council; and on the 30th. of April, being
seated on the Throne, and the Commons attending, he made a Speech to both
Houses, recommending to them three particulars, viz. The Prosecution of the
Plot, the Disbanding of the Army, and the setting out a Fleet. And after that
the Lord Chancellor opened to them the Kings Mind, concerning the securing the
Religion and Liberty in future Reigns. And another Proclamation was published
for Banishing Papists ten miles from London. As also another for the Discovery
and Apprehending several Persons, suspected to have contrived and acted in
fellonous Burning Houses, in and about the City of London; as Morice Gifford a
popish Priest, Roger Clinton, Derby Molrain, alias Fowler, and several others
of the Romish Religion.

On the 13th. of May, a Villainous and Barbarous Murder was committed upon the
Person of the Archbishop of St. Andrews, Primate of Scotland, by several
desperate Ruffians on Horseback, who Seizing him in his Coach, on the Road,
dragged him out, and not giving him, as he earnestly requested, so much time as
to say his Prayers, beat out his Brains, for which several of them were
afterward deservedly Hanged, being ridged Sectaries. And now the Parliament of
England, considering the Kings urgent Occasions, granted him a supply of Two
Hundred and Six thousand Four Hundred and Sixty Two Pounds, Seventeen Shillings
and Three pence, for paying off and disbanding the Forces, raised since the
29th. of September, 1677. And accordingly Commissioners were appointed to
disband those Forces. And the same Month he gave the Royal Assent to a Bill,
for the better securing the Liberty of the Subject, and for Prevention of
Imprisonment beyond the Seas: As likewise, a Bill for the Engrossing the
Records of Fines burnt in the Fire, that a little before had consumed the
greatest part of the Temple.

The latter end of this Month, a great number of discontented People, armed in
Scotland, proclaiming the Covenant, and putting out a Declaration of
Grievances, burning publicly several Acts of Parliament, which they seemed to
be disgusted at, and many Hostilities ensued, their number daily increasing;
but the Duke of Monmouth passing into that Kingdom with an Army, utterly
defeated and scattered them in the Fight of Bothwell Bridge; and several of the
Ringleaders were taken and Executed.

On the 13 th. of June, Thomas White, alias Whitebread Provincial of the
Jesuits in England, William Harcourt, pretended Rector of London, John Fenwick,
Procurator for the Jesuits in England, John Gaven, and Anthony Turner, all
Jesuits and Priests, were Tried at the Old-Bayly, where they were found Guilty
of High Treason, in Conspiring the Death of the King, etc. And the next Day
Richard Langhorn, a Councellor at Law, was Tried, and found Guilty upon the
like Account, and they were all Executed soon after at Tyburn.

In the beginning of July, a dreadful Fire happened at East Deerham, and burnt
down the greatest part of the Town, destroying Six or Seven People, and almost
all the Substance of the Inhabitants.

On the 12 th. the King Published a Proclamation for dissolving the Parliament,
declaring his Purpose was to meet his People in frequent Parliaments, giving
Directions thereupon to the Lord Chancellor, to Issue out Writs for the
Calling of another Parliament, to Sit at Westminster, the 7 th. of October
following.

On the 18 th. Sir George Wakeman, the Queen's Physician, William Marshal,
William Rumley, and James Corker, were tried at the Old-Bayly; upon Indictments
of High Treason, in Conspiring the Death of the King, etc. But contrary to the
Expectation of many; and perhaps their own were found not Guilty: For as soon
as they were at Liberty, they went to visit other Countries. John Evans, and
William Lloyd, Two Popish Priests, were condemned at the Assizes, holden at
Cardriff. About the latter end of August, the King fell sick at Windsor, and
had diverse dangerous Fits, of a Tertian Ague, and continued for many days
indisposed; insomuch, that People began to be in doubt of his Recovery: The
News of which being speedily conveyed to the Duke his Brother, in Flanders; he
hasted over, and on the 2 d. of September (contrary to the Expectation of many)
arrived at Windsor, and told the King, 'that hearing of his Indisposition, he
thought he could do no less then come to wait upon him, and see how he did;
adding, he was ready as soon as his Majesty pleased to return into Flanders, or
any other part of the World he should Command him to go to.'

It having amongst other things been discovered, that Four Ruffians were hired
to kill the King at Windsor; He put forth his Proclamation for Apprehending
them, but they made their escape, till the storm was over: and now the Duke of
Monmouth, upon some Matters suggested, falling into the King's Displeasure, had
many of his Great Offices, and Places of Trust taken from him, and Ordered to
leave the Court: Whereupon, he passed the Seas for Holland; but finding in his
Progress into other Parts, that it was not safe for him, considering the
Attempts that might be made upon his Person, of which he had warning, through
the many Affronts he had given him; he returned soon after, without being sent
for: And Writs being issued out for the Calling a Parliament, to Sit at
Westminster. On the 7 th. of October, a Proclamation was Ordered to be issued
out, to Prorogue the Sitting to the 30 th. of the said Month: And the Duke and
Duchess of York had Leave to go to Scotland, whither, upon her Arrival from
Holland, they departed in few Days; and a Commission was Ordered for the
Prorogation of the Parliament till tthe 26 th. of January; and the Earl of
Shaftsbury was removed from being President of the Council, and the Earl of
Radnor was appointed President; and Sir William Jones getting leave of the King
to quit his Place of Attorney General, Sir Creswel Levins was appointed to that
Station.

Sir Robert Clayton having been chosen Lord Mayor, for the City of London; he
on the 29 th. of October, was sworn at Westminster before the Barons of the
Exchequer, and returning, went to Guild Hall, with the accustomed Splendour and
Magnificence, where the Judges, and a great many of the Nobility accompanied
him at a Sumptuous Entertainment: And this Month the King Ordered a
Proclamation to be issued out, for the more effectual and speedy Discovery, and
Prosecution of the Popish Plot; for now the Papists growing more confident,
began to ply their Instruments for shaming their Plot upon the Protestants; and
some dangerous Papers were found in the bottom of Mrs. Celliers Meal Tub, for
which she was committed Prisoner to Newgate; especially, upon Thomas
Dangerfield's making his Discovery, as likewise one Mrs. Rugaut, and John
Gadbury was committed to the Gate House; the Earl of Castlemain to the Tower,
and other Persons accused, were taken into the Custody of the King's
Messengers; one great Matter was that Dangerfield had been hired or induced to
Plant several Treasonable and Dangerous Papers, in Colonel Roderick Mansel's
Chamber, importing a designed Insurrection of diverse Protestants, with a List
of some designed for Officers, etc. And the Countess of Powis being likewise
accused by Dangerfield, was committed to the Tower; and diverse Persons being
examined before the Council, acknowledged several Circumstantial Matters, that
strengthened Dangerfield's Evidence; whereupon, he had his Pardon, as likewise
had one Sergeant, a secular Priest, whom the King on this Occasion had sent for
out of Holland: And another Proclamation was put forth for the more Effectual
Discovery of Jesuits; and of the Estates belonging to them, or to any Popish
College, Seminary, or other Popish and Superstitious Foundation: And the King
about this time granted a General Pardon to those concerned in the Late
Insurrection in Scotland, except some of the Ringleaders, and particularly the
Murderers of the Archbishop of St. Andrews, in case they Signed a Bond, upon
Condition never to rise up in Arms against Him, or His Authority, the which
Five taken at Bothwell-Bridge were so obstinately Foolish, as to refuse, and to
justify their Proceedings; Likewise, to declare the Murder of the Archbishop
no Sin; whereupon, after Trial they were Sentenced by the Lords Justicers, to
be Hanged in Chains at the place where the Murder was committed, which was put
in Execution; and on the 24 th. of November, the Duke and Duchess of York
arrived at Edenburg, and were received by most of the Nobility, residing in
those Parts; and he soon after Received into the Privy Council of that Kingdom.

On the 12 th. of December a Proclamation was Issued out for the prorogation of
the Parliament of England, to the 11 th. of the ensuing November; and the King
appointed a Committee of the Lords of His Privy Council, to consider the most
effectual means for putting the Laws in Execution against Papists, and the
suppression of Popery, and other matters tending to that Affair; and that the
Justices of Peace should be permitted to Search Somerset House, at any time in
the Queens absence, as also St. James's, for Priests and Papists: And in
January David Joseph Kemish, William Russel, alias Nap, Henry Starkey, William
Marshal, James Corker, Lionel Anderson, alias Munson, Charles Parris, alias
Parrey, and Alexander Lundsden, were Arraigned at the Old Baily for High
Treason, upon the Statute of the 27 th. of Elizabeth, who being born Subjects
of the King of England, and having taken orders of Priesthood by the authority
derived from the Sea of Rome, had come and remained in England, contrary to the
Statute; and all but Keemish, whose Sickness rendered him incapable of it, were
Tried, and six Convicted of High Treason, and afterward by Judgment attainted
according to the Statute; but a special Verdict was found for Lundsden, he
being a Scotch man, and a Question arising whether he was within the purvey of
the Statute or no; but however being Convicted only as Priests, none of them
suffered, but after a long Imprisonment in Newgate got their Liberty.

On the 9 th. of February, amongst other Matters Gadbury pleaded his Pardon at
the Kings Bench Bar, Westminster, and Sir Thomas Gascoin, a Roman Catholic,
having been accused by one Baldron and Mobray; he was Tried upon an Information
of High Treason, but was acquitted. Sir Lionel Ienkins, upon Mr. Secretary
Coventry's request to leave that Station, was appointed Secretary of State.

On the 24 th. of February the Duke and Duchess of York arrived from Scotland,
and were received by the King with much Joy and Satisfaction: And the King
having released a Judgment, obtained upon a Quo Warranto against the City of
London, concerning the duty of Water-ballage, and caused a Nolle prosequi to be
entered; the Lord Mayor, Court of Aldermen, Recorder, and Committee of Common
Council, went in a Body to pay their dutiful acknowledgment to the King; and
afterward many of them did the like to his Royal Highness the Duke.

About this time James Baker, alias Hesketh, and John Naylor, were Tried at the
Old Baily, for being Priests; yet only the former was found Guilty. And now
some Heats arising amongst great Ones, to prevent the danger, the King
published a Proclamation, wherein he declared, that he would not Pardon any
Person that should Kill another in a Duel. And thus ended the noted Affairs of
this Year.

In May, 1680. A prodigious Storm of Hail fell, the Stones being of a vast
weight, and 8 or 9 Inches in Circumference, did great damage to Houses, Cattle,
Fowl, Herbs, Corn, etc. And soon after Mrs. Celier getting herself Tried before
the Lord Chief Justice Scroggs, was acquitted by the said Judges, disapproving
of Dangerfield, as a good Evidence: But not content with this narrow escape,
she undertook to publish a Book for shamming the Popish Plot, and particularly
Prance's Evidence as to the Murder of Sir Edmond Bury Godfrey; for which She
was Tried at the Old Baily, Fined, and Pilloryed. And the Parliament sitting
according to prorogation, and the popish Lords in the Tower having been obliged
to give in sufficient Answers, they proceeded to Try William Viscount Stafford,
who had the whole House of Peers for his Judges, a place being erected in
Westminster Hall for that purpose; where after a Trial which held 4 or 5 days,
he was by the majority of Voices cast, and attainted of high Treason, for which
he lost his Head on Tower Hill: And soon after his Death, a prodigious beam of
Light streamed in the Nightime from the West, and soon after the Star from
whence it darted appeared above the Horizon, and grew nightly higher till it
had compassed East and West, and was admired by many, who made different
Judgments as their Minds lead them. And the Parliament after a considerable
Sitting was prorogued to a further time, but before the time of their appointed
Meeting, they were dissolved, and a Parliament called to meet at Oxford on the
21 th. of March; though the Earl of Essex, and diverse Lords petitioned the King
to have it sit at Westminster; however they did not prevail, for the Parliament
accordingly met at Oxford; where the King in his Speech amongst other things,
put them in mind of the r^lief of Tangier, then pressed by the M^^rs: But they
had not sat many days, before they were Dissolved, and the King came in great
haste for London.

One Edward Fitz-Harris, having been discovered by Mr. Everard, and Sir William
Waller, to have contrived a treasonable and dangerous Pamphlet, since called
Treason in Grain; and having other projects against the Government, he had been
Impeached by the Commons, but in fine, was Tried before the Lord Chief Justice
Pemberton, and being found guilty of High Treason, was Executed at Tyburn with
one Oliver Plunket, condemned at the Kings Bench Bar, for attempting to betray
Ireland to the French: Plunket was a Romish Bishop, and termed the titular
Primate of Ireland; and the Wife and Maid of Fitz-Harris accused some persons
of Honor, but it came to nothing; but upon Information of several Irish
Evidence, and others, soon after the Earl of Shaftsbury was committed to the
Tower, as were several other persons, having continued there a considerable
time, a Bill of High Treason was drawn up against him; as likewise Bills
against Stephen College, and others, and preferred to the Grand Jury of the
City of London, and the Evidence heard in open Court at the Old Baily; but
after a long Examination, the Bills were found Ignoramus; but College was soon
after carried, by Water, to Oxford, and there being Tried, for treasonable
words. spoke in that City, during the siting of the Parliament there, was found
Guilty and Executed; and the following Michaelmass Term, the Earl of Shaftsbury
and diverse others, were set at Liberty.

A Parliament being called in Scotland, the King sent his Brother to preside as
his High Commissioner; and there amonst other things, they passed an Act for
asserting the right of Succession to the Crown, making it Treason for any to
question or object it: and the Earl of Argyle, for only making some Queries,
etc. was committed to the Castle, and in danger of his Life; but he escaped
thence, by changing Habit with a Ladies Page that came to visit him; and fled
into Holland, where he remained till his unfortunate invading Scotland, Anno
1685, of which more hereafter.

The Duke being returned for England, upon the concluding of the Parliament,
and leaving his Duchess in Scotland, whilst he was on his way again by Sea, in
the Gloucester Frigate, attended with several Yatchs, to fetch her home; the
Frigate, under full Sail, stood in upon the Lemmon and Orrey, two dangerous
Sands, off the Humber Mouth, where she beat along the Sands till she foundered;
and falling off the Sands fell into deep Water, where she was swallowed up, and
about One hundred Persons lost, besides the Dukes Plate, and a great deal of
Treasure. Amongst the Drowned, was the Lord Obrian; the Duke however, with as
many as his Barge (which was hoisted Overboard) could hold, got safe to the
Yatchts and landed in Scotland; and the Pilot being suspected of Treatchery,
suffered a long Imprisonment in the Marshaseas on this occasion; and soon after
this Disaster, the Duke and Duchess returned for England.

Sir John Moore, after the Mayorality of Sir Patience Ward, being Elected Lord
Mayor of London, and received with the usual Splendour, at the time of Election
of Sheriffs, great Heats and Contests arise among the Citizens, about the
Electing two Persons, to serve as Sheriffs for the year ensuing; and it was
deferred from time to time; however in the end, Sir Peter Rich and Sir Dudly
North were sworn; Mr. Box, who had been declared Elected declining it and
paying his Fine, and Si^ William Pritehard was chosen Lord Mayor and upon the
occasion of these Contendings, several Citizens, as Sir Thomas Player and
others, had Informations in the Crown Exhibited against them as Rioters; and
haviug a Verdict found against them before the Lord Chief Justice Saunders at
Guild Hall, were the following Term Fined at the King's Bench Bar, very
considerably. And this year died the Illustrious Prince Rupert; a Prince whose
great Services, have all along, been very considerable to these Kingdoms. And a
thing not known before, two Ambassadors arrived, one from the Emperor of Fess
and Morocco, and the other from the King of Bantam, with rich Presents; and
were splendidly Entertained, and much admired by the crouding People, for their
strange Habits. The first came to treat of Peace and free Traffic. Tangier, an
English Garrison, standing in his Masters Countries; and the other to crave
Succor for the King his Master, against his Son, who had risen in Rebellion
against him, and soon after outed him of his Kingdom, by the help of the Dutch,
and our East India Company of their Trade in that part of the Country. As for
the Emperor of Morocco, he kept not the Truce or Treaty his Ambassador had
made; whereupon the King finding one Town very chargeable to keep against a
populous Country, and that it turned to no great advantage, by reason the Mould
could not be finished, as had been proposed, he sent the Lord Dartmoueh to
fetch off the Garrison, the Inhabitants, and their Effects, and then fired the
Town, and blew up the Works, which had cost a Million of Money.

And now the Court being disgusted at the proceedings of the City of London, a
Quo Warranto was brought against their Famous and Ancient Charter; and the
Controversy admitted of many long Arguments and Debates, at the Kings Bench
Bar, between the Kings Council, and the Council for the City; but it being
overruled in the end, it was declared by the Judges, that the Liberties and
Franchises should be Seized into the King's hands; however Judgment was not
entered up, but the King appointed the Lord Mayor, Sheriffs, etc. to Act by
Commission, reserving to himself the Nomination of the Chief Magistrates, and
the Common Council was laid aside; and so it continued 'till the Charter was
restored, Anno 1688. of which hereafter; for the City finding it in vain to
contend, when the Opinions of the Judges were against them, found themselves
constrained to acquiesce in what was done, as did afterward most of the
Corporations of England; likewise the Companies, or Bodies Corporate of London,
etc. whose Charters and Franchises were either Seized or Surrendered.

About this time the Nation was allarmed by the appearing of Keeling, West, and
others; who Deposed there was a Design against the Life of the King, etc.
whereupon the Earl of Eslex, the Lord Russel, Captain VValcot, William Hone,
John Rouse, were Imprisoned, and Proclamation published for the apprehending
the Duke of Monmouth, and others that fled; many of which upon their not
rendering themselves, were attainted by Out-lawry; but the Duke a considerable
time after came in, and was received into Favor; the proceedings upon
Out-lawry having been stopped by the Kings special Command; but the Duke out of
Discontent, soon after went for Holland, and from thence (after his Fathers
Death) Invaded England, of which hereafter. However, this Business proved very
Bloody, for the Earl of Essex was found with his Throat cut in the Tower:
Rouse, Hene, and VVal^ot, were Executed at Tyburn, the Lord Russel was Beheaded
in Lincoln-Inn-Field, Colonel Sidney on Tower Hill; and Sir Thomas Armstrong,
being surprised and brought from Holland, and James Holloway from Nevis, were
executed upon their Out-lawrys, by a rule of Court made for their Execution;
all of them making very penitent ends; and upon this score diverse were Executed
afterward, as will appear in the Reign of K. James. The Earl of Shaftsbury, a
little before this matter broke out, Dyed in Holland, whither he was retired,
and his Body was brought over, and Buried in England.

This Storm being a little over, the happy Marriage was Consummated between the
Lady Anne, and his Royal Highness Prince George, Brother to the King of
Denmark; the Ceremony being performed by the Bishop of London, in the presence
of the King, Queen, Duke, Duchess, and most of the great Persons of the Court,
and followed with great demonstrations of Joy and Satisfaction throughout the
Kingdom; and a great Muster of the Land Forces was soon after held on
Putney-Heath, where the King and most of the Court went to take a view of them.
And such a Frost happened, that the like had never been known in England
before; all the Rivers were Frozen over, and the Harbors and Havens were
stopped up; so that Carts and Coaches might move on the Waters, but neither
Boats nor Shipping could stir for the space of six Weeks, People keeping Fairs
upon the River of Thames, with all manner of Disports, as likewise upon other
great Waters, and diverse Foul and Cattle were starved to Death; many of the
Elder sort of People despairing to outlive so sharp a Season; but the Wind
turning it Thawed of a sudden, without much harm.

The King having appointed Sir William Goslin and Sir Peter Vandeput, by
Commission under the Great Seal, to be Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, on the
28 th. of September, 1684. they were Sworn at Guild Hall, before the Lord Mayor
an^ Court of Aldermen, and on the 30 th. at Westminster in the Exchequer
Chamber, taking upon them the charge of Sher^ffs (...) the ensuing Year.

On the 2 d. of October the City of Oxford had a New Charter sent; and
thereupon according to what was nominated therein, Mr. Walker was sworn Mayor,
and Mr. Baker Town Clerk; the latter making a large Speech upon the occasion;
and afterward great Feasting ensued to Treat and Welcome the Earl of Abindon,
who brought the Charter: And about this time many other Charters were sent down
to diverse Cities, Corporations, etc. in lieu of those that had been
surrendered, or were taken away by proceedings in the Courts of Westmincter;
and a new Engine was Invented by sundry Undertakers to make Seawater fresh,
which was tried and approved by many persons of Quality of diverse Nations, and
experienced Sea-Commanders, as well as Foreign Ministers of State; and His
Grace the Duke of Grafton being appointed Recorder of Bury St. Edmonds by the
new Charter; he was received there with many demonstrations of Joy, and sworn
the 20 th. of October. And Justice Windham Dying in this Month, Mr. Baron
Street was removed to the Common Pleas, and in his stead Sir Robert Wright was
Constituted; and Sir James Smith being Commissionated by the King to be Lord
Mayor for the ensuing Year, was Sworn before the Barons of the Exchequer on the
29 th. and the Entertainment was performed with the usual Solemnities.

Great Storms about this time happened at Sea and Land, which did considerable
damage, breaking many Ships in pieces, and over-setting some Houses: And Dr.
Turner being removed to the Bishopric of Ely, Dr. Sprat, Dean of Westminster
was Consecrated Bishop of Rochester, at the Chapple at Lambeth, by the Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, a^^isted by several other Bishops: and two Addresses
were presented to the King, the one from the Lieutenant and Governor General
of the Collony and Dominion of Virginia, together with the Council of the same;
and the other fromt the Burgesses and General Assembly of the said Dominion, in
the Name of themselves and the Commons, to congratulate his happy continuance
in the Throne, and the sensibility they had of their own Tranquillity under his
Reign, etc.

On the 6 th. of November the Trial commenced at Guild Hall, between Sir
William Pritchard, formerly Lord Mayor of London, and Mr. Papillion, etc.
before the Lord Chief Justice Jefferies; where the Jury gave Sir William, 10000
l. Damages; and on the 18 th. of November, Mr. Rosewel was Trayed, and sound
Guil^y of High Treason, for Speaking words in a Meeting House at Rederiff; and
on the 20 th, Elias Best received Judgment for speaking certain words, and was
Fined 1000 l. Ordered to stand Twice in the Pillory, and to find Sureties for
good Behavior during Life; and a Rule was made for all Clerks of the Peace,
and common Clerks of several Cities, Towns and Buroughs, for Extracting the
Names of such as had been Defaulters in refusing to go to Church, into the
Exchequer. On the 24 th. of November, Dr. Mew was Translated from the Sea of
Bath and Wells, to that of Winchester, vacant by the Death of Dr. Morley.

In this Month several desperate Persons in the Kingdom of Scotland, affixed in
the Night time, a Paper on diverse Crosses in the Towns and Villages, and doors
of Churches, declaring War against the King, under the Name of Charles Stuart,
and their Resolution to kill and destroy all that Served and Adhered unto him,
and in Pursuance thereunto, about 36 Footmen, and 16 Horse coming in the Night
time to a Country Inn called Swiney Abbey, Seized on Two of the Kings
Horse-Guards in their Beds, and cuting them in pieces, carried away a great
deal of their Flesh as in Triumph.

On the 2 d. of December, the Artillery Company kept their Anual Feast at
Merchant Taylors-Hall, where their Royal Highnesses the Duke of York as their
Captain General; and the Prince of Denmark were present with many of the
Nobility, and other Persons of Quallity, and were Splendidly Entertained: And
the Duke of Albemarle being made Recorder of Colchester, was received there on
the 20 th. with great Splendour; and the Earl of Bath was Constituted Governor
of Plymouth, to whom the Inhabitants of several Corporations delivered up their
Surrenders and Charters, desiring him to lay them at His Majesty's Feet, which
he performed with a Petition on their behalf; the King accepted them with
demonstrations of his Favor, saying, he very well remembered the Duty and
Loyalty of that Country viz. Cornwall, and was very well pleased with this
fresh demonstration of it by them, and for the better securing the Roads, a
Proclamation was put forth for the Apprehending Highway-men, with the Reward of
10 l. upon Conviction. And in Scotland, on the 23 d. of December, Robert Baily
was Tried, and found Guilty of endeavoring to stir up Rebellion in the
Kingdom, and in the Afternoon was Executed as in Case of High Treason, and his
Head and Quarters set up in diverse places; and now many of the Cities and
Corporations of England having delivered up their Charters, had the same or new
ones Restored, as Leeds, Carlisle, Lincoln, etc. and an Order of the Courts of
King's Bench, and Common Pleas, was Published that all Clerks and Attorneys
should Enter themselves in one of the Inns of Court, or Inns of Chancery, or
dwell as near as possible leaving word with the Buttler of the places of their
Aboads, upon pain of being put out of the Roles of Clerks and Attorneys.

On the 13 th. of January, the King sent to the Lord Mayor of the City of
London, a Silver-Box Sealed up with his own Seal, in which, was Enclosed the
Receipts of the several Cements used by the Pattentees of making Sea water
fresh, as also the Receipt of the Metalline Composition, and Ingredients
certified under the Hand of the Honorable Mr. Robert Boil, to be kept so
Sealed up by the present, and Succeeding Lord Mayors, least a Secret of so
great Importance to the Public, might come to be lost if lodged only in the
knowledge of a few Persons herein Concerned.

On the 25 th. of January, Dr. Thomas Kenn was Consecrated Bishop of Bath and
Wells, by the Lord Arch Bishop of Canterbury and other Assistant Bishops, the
next day did Homage to the King, but now to the Grief of all Loyal English Men,
the Life of this Great Monarch, who had Tried the Smiles and Frowns of Fortune,
and seen her in all her shapes, grew to a Period, for on the Second of
February, he was taken as he was rising, with a violent fit of the Appoplexy,
and it was given out by some that he was Dead, which caused the Council on the
Fourth, to publish the following Notice, viz.

At the Council Chamber, White Hall, the 4 th. of February, 1684. at Five in
the Afternoon, The Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, have
thought fit, for the preventing false Reports, to make known, that His Majesty,
upon Monday Morning last, was seized with a most violent Fit, that gave great
Cause to fear the Issue of it; but after some hours, an Amendment appeared,
which by the blessing of God being improved, by the Application of seasonable
and proper Remedies, is now so advanced, that the Physicians have this Day, as
well as Yesterday, given this account to the Council, viz. That they conceived
his Majesty to be in a Condition of Safety, and that he will in a few Days be
freed from his Distemper; but they were deceived in their Account, for on the
Sixth of February he Dyed, having been pestered and tormented at his Death, by
the impertinency of Father Hudleston, and other Popish Priests, who now growing
bold, as perceiving this Monarch past Recovery, had the Impudence to bring
their Trumpery about him; and after his Decease, to give out, that he Dyed a
Roman Catholic; and Wrote several Pamphlets and Libels, to justify their
Assertions.

Upon the Death of this Prince, his Brother was immediately Proclaimed King, by
the Style of James the Second, etc. at White-Hall-Gate, Temple Bar, and before
the Royal Exchange, with the usual Solemnity; having caused all the Lords, and
Others, of the Deceased King's Privyvy-Council, that were present, to be Sworn
of His Privy Council; and an Order was Published, for all that were in Places
of Trust, to continue them, till further notice; there being a Clause in the
Order, viz. Reserving in his own Judgment hereafter, the Reformation and
Redress of any abuse in Misgovernment, upon due Knowledge and Examination
thereof: Notwithstanding which, the Popelings (who knew this was their time to
play their Cards) soon undermined a great many Worthy Persons, and got them out
of their Employments; but the Church of England, being at present looked upon,
as the main Pillar of the Throne; the King spared not to give that Church,
especial promises of his Favor, etc. in the following Speech made at his first
Sitting in Council.

My Lords,
Before I enter upon any other Business, I think sit to say something to you;
since it has pleased Almighty God, to place me in this Station; and I am now
to Succeed so Good and Gracious a King, as well as so Kind a Brother; I think
fit to Declare to you, That I will endeavor to follow his Example; and most
especially, in that of his great Clemency, and Tenderness to his People: I have
been reputed to be a Man for Arbitrary Power; but that is not the only Story
that has been made of me: And I shall make it my endeavor to preserve this
Government, in Churcb and State, as it is now by Law Established. I know the
Principles of the Church of England are for Monarchy, and the Members of it
have showed themselves Good and Loyal Subjects: Therefore, I shall allways take
Care to defend and support it: I know too that the Laws of England are
sufficient to make the King as great a Monarch, as I can wish; and as I shall
never depart from the Just Rights and Prerogative of the Crown, so I shall
never invade any Man's Property. I have often ventured my Life in Defense of
this Nation, and I shall still go as far as any Man in preserving it in all its
Just Rights and Liberties.

Upon this fair promising Speech, the Lords of the Council became Humble
Suitors to the King, that it might be Printted and Published, for the
Satisfaction of the People, which was accordingly done: and although some
People as yet doubted of K. James's being a Roman Catholic; he now put them
out of doubt, by going publicly to the Chapel; so that these Protestant
Lords, that waited on him thither, would not enter with him, but attended his
coming out, etc.

On the 9 th. of February, a Proclamation was Exhibited, for continuing the
Collection of Customs, and Subsidies of Tonage and Poundage; and Orders were
taken for the Funeral Solemnity of the Deceased King; and every one that
appeared, or attended at Court, were commanded by an Order of the Earl Marshal
to be in the deepest Mourning, except Long Cloaks, and that as well the Lords,
as Privy Councello^, and Officers of his Late Majesty's, as of the present
Household, should cover their Coaches and Chairs, and cloth their Livery
Servants with Black Cloth; and that none presumed to use any Varnish, or
Bullion Nails to be seen on their Chairs, or Coaches, except his Majesty, the
Queen Consort, Queen Dowager, and their Royal Highnesses; and the Proclamation
Ceremony was upon notice performed in all the chief Cities, Towns and Places,
of the Three Kingdoms, etc. and a great many Addresses of Condolence and
Congratulation were presented, from the Societies, and Inns of Court, and from
diverse parts of the Kingdom, before the Funeral of Charles the Second was
performed, to particularize which, would be too tedious to the Reader, and
swell this Book at too large a Price; nor was Scotland behind in these
Proceedings, for the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and others of the Council,
proceeded in their Formalities, to the Market Cross, and made the Solemn
Publication, and returned a suitable Answer, to the Letter, the King had sent
them, to give notice of what had happened: an other was sent in the Name of the
Archbishops, and Bishops of that Kingdom, of Congratulation and Condolence.

Ireland appeared not behind Hand, for his Grace the Duke of Ormond, Lord
Lieutenant of that Kingdom, having received the News on the 10 th. of February
in the Evening: The next Day, the Ceremony of Proclaiming was performed, and a
Proclamation was issued forth, on the 16 tb. directing the payment of the Duty,
arising by Excise; and the Right Honorable Lawrence Earl of Rochester, Lord
President of the Council, was appointed Lord High-Treasurer of England; the
King Declaring, the Lord Marquess of Hallifax, Lord President of the Council in
his stead: Likewise, the Earl of Clarendon, Lord Privy Seal, and the D. of
Beaufort, Lord President of Wales, who were sworn accordingly: The Lord
Godolphin was appointed Chamberlain to the Queen, and Henry Bulkly Esquire Master
of his Household; Sir Stephen Fox, eldest Clark of the Green Cloth, Sir William
Boreman second Clark, Sir Winston Churchil Eldest Clark-Comptroller, and Sir
Richard Mason Youngest Clark^Comptroller; being in the same Places, during the
Reign of King Charles the Second. And for some time an industrious Party
labored to accost the Court with Addresses, being the prime subject of public
Papers: and the great Business of the Lord Chief Justice Jefferys, at this
time, was against Higlers and Carryers, for carrying Letters; some of which
were tried and fined at the King's Bench Bar Westminster. Many Foreign
Ambassadors arrived with Complements of Condolance and Congratulation; and the
Solemnity of the Coronation being appointed on the 23d. of April, being St.
Georges day, a Proclamation was issued forth, bearing date the sixth of March,
in order to the Preparation on that occasion; and the King resolving to call a
Parliament, to sit at Westminster on the 19th of May; great Preparations were
made, upon the Writs being issued out, in order to Elect Members, for the
Shires, Cities, Boroughs, etc: And an Order bearing date the 20th. of March was
Published, for the Apprehending of Highway-men and Robers; any Person so doing,
before that Order should be recalled, upon Conviction, to have Ten Pounds as a
Reward. And a great many Officers were changed in the Kingdom of Ireland,
whereupon sundry Addresses ensued.

On the 14 th. of April, 1685. the Ambassadors of the States General of the
United Provinces, made their Public Entery, and had a House made Ready for
their Reception, in St. James's Square; and had their first Public Audience,
on the 20 th. being Conducted to it by the Lord North, and Sir Charles
Cotterel, Master of the Ceremonies: And the 23 d. of April being come, the
Proceeding of the Coronation Set in Order, passed from Westminster Hall, to
the Abbey, and there was performed, with the usual Ceremonies, very Splendid and
Magnificent; which ended, it returned to the aforesaid Hall, where a Royal
Entertainment was prepared; and the King's Champion, came in on Horseback, and
made his Challenge, etc. and most of the Towns throughout England, were that
Night filled with Bone-Fiers: And on the same Day, the Parliament of Scotland
met at Edenburg, and passed on the 28 th. Two Acts, one for settl^ng the
Protestant Religion, and the other for settling the Excise of Inland and
Foreign Commodities, upon the King, and his Lawful Heirs and Successors for
ever. On the 30 th. of April, Sir Roger Le' Estrange, Author of the Observat^r,
was Knighted in the King's Bedchamber; and on the 6 th. of May, his Grace the
Duke of Norfolk, was Elected Knight Companion of the Noble Order of the Garter,
and invested with the George and Garter, having first been Knighted by the
Sovereign.

The Enemies of Dr. Oats, having by this time prevailed against him, he was
tried on the 8 th. and 9 th. of May, upon Two Informations of Willful Perjury,
at the King's Bench Bar, Sir George Jefferys being Lord Chief Justice; and after
a long Hearing, a Verdict passed against him, upon either Indictment, and his
Sentence proved very severe, and was put in Execution with all manner of
Rigor; yet he lived contrary to the Expectation of Many to weather that Storm,
and see the short Triumph of his Enemies.

On the 28 th. of May, a Proclamation was Published in Scotland, for the
stirring up the several Counties and Shires, for the Defense of that Kingdom.

On the 19 th. of May, the Parliament met at Westminster, pursuant to the Writs
of Summons; and the Commons being by the Black Rod sent for up to the House of
Lords, the Lord Keeper declared to them, That it was his Majesty's Pleasure to
defer Speaking to them, till both Houses had taken the Oaths, appointed to be
taken by Act of Parliament, and then he would Declare his Mind to them,
concerning the Cause of Calling them: And further, That the Gentlemen of the
House of Commons should go apart, and proceed immediately, to the Choice of a
Speaker; and accordingly, they chose Sir John Trevor, who was approved by the
King: And on the 22 d. of May, the King made a Speech to both Houses, promising
to maintain the Government in Church and State, in all its Rights and
Privileges; demanding a Settlement of the Revenue, for Life, and further
supplies, and^. proceeded, to let them know, he had received News, that the
Earl of Argyle was Landed in the West Highlands of Scotland, with the Men he
brought with him out of Holland; and that he had put out Two Declarations, one
in his own Name, and the other in the Names of those he brought over with him,
etc. Upon this, the Commons going to their House, Voted, the Revenue should be
settled, and that a Bill should be brought in for that purpose: And the Lords
and Commons declared their Resolutions, to stand by, and assist him. And the
Scots began likewise to stir, to prevent the Danger that threatened that
Kingdom, from a geathering Army, passing diverse Acts, and putting forth sundry
Proclamations, and raising Forces, especially, in the Highlands; for the Earls
Declation spread abroad, many believed, they contained somewhat of Reason; and
thereupon, went unto him so, that in a short time, from about 300. he brought
over with him, he became about 3000. strong; fortefying some Places, and
keeping the Islands.

On the 30 th. of May, Thomas Dangerfield was tried at the King's Bench-Bar,
for Writing, and Publishing a Book, called his Narative, and a Verdict passed
against him; and in the Afternoon at a Nisiprius, held at Guild Hall. Mr.
Richard Baxter was Tried and Convicted, for Writing Notes upon the New
Testament; and the same Day, the Act for settling the Revenues on the King for
Life, as it was in King Charles's Time, passed the Royal Assent.

On the 1 st. of June, about Five in the Morning Her Royal Highness the
Princess Ann of Denmark, was Delivered of a Daughter, which in the Afternoon
was Christened by the Lord Bishop of London, by the Name of Mary.

The Earl of Argyle, being by this time on the firm Land, sent out his Summons
from Campletown, in these Words, viz.

Being by the Blessing of God, came safe to this Place, with a Resolution,
according to a Declaration, emitted for the Defense of the Protestant Religion,
and our Lives and Liberties, against Popery and Arbitrary Government, and all
the Fensible Men of Illa, being come this Length; and this Country being this
Day together, at a General Rendesvous; these are to require all Heritors,
Tenants, and Others; and all the Fensible Men, within the division of Cowal,
between Sixty and Sixteen, with all their Useful Arms, and Two Week: Loan, to
come to Tarbet, against Tuseday, the 26th. Instant, at Twelve of the Clock,
without fail, or sooner if possible.

And in Order to this, he sent to Cowal, and dispersed diverse Letters, and a
great many Persons came in; but the Highlanders for the most part, declared for
the King: However, the Earl on the 26 th. of June, Marched from Campletown in
Kintaire, with Two Troops of Horse, and 700. Foot, to Tarbet; and there met
200. of the Illa Men, and 200. more were expected, and mustered on the 28 th.
and the Three Ships belonging to him, the greatest carrying 30^ Guns; and other
small Vessels afterward taken up, came likewise into the Port; and from thence,
he passed to diverse other places, Sailing round the Islands, and taking in such
Men, as would join him; and amongst other Letters, we find the following, dated
at Campletown, May, 22. 1685* and directed to the Lord of Lupe.

Loving Friends,
It has pleased God to bring me safe to this Place, where several of both
Nations do appear with me, for the Defense of the Protestant Religion, our
Lives and Liberties, against Popery and Arbitrary Government, whereof the
particulars are emitted in Two Declarations, by those Noblemen: Gentlemen, and
Others, and by me for my self. Your Father and I lived in great Friendship, and
I am glad to serve you, his Son, in Defense of the Protestant Religion, and I
will be ready to do it in your particular, when there is Occasion. I beseech
you, let not any out of Fear, or bad Principles, persuade you to neglect your
Duty, to God and your Country, at this time; or to believe that the D. York is
not a Papist or that being one, he can be a Righteous King: Then know, that all
England is in Arms, in Three several Places; and the Duke of Monmouth appears
at the same time, upon the same Grounds that we do; and few Places in Scotland,
but will join; and the South and West, want but till they hear I am Landed, for
so they resolved, before I left Holland. Now I beseech you, make no delay, to
separate from those that abuse you, and are carrying on a Popish Design; but
come with all the Men of your Command, to assist the Cause of Religion, where
you shall be most welcome to your Loving Friend to serve you.

Argyle.
P. S. Let this serve Young Loigie Skipuag, and Charles Mc. Echan.




By this time, the Charlotte Yatch was arrived in the Clyde, and several Men of
War were dispatched from England, as the Falcon Mairmaid, etc. and several
Warrants were issued out for Persons in England, that had retired from their
Houses, and public notice given in the Gazette, for the apprehending them.

On the 13 th. of June, an Express came to the King, at White Hall, by the
Mayor of Lyme; that on the 11 th. there appeared Three Ships, off that place;
and about 7 in the Evening, the Duke of Monmouth Landed, with about 150. Men,
and possessed himself of that Town, sending some of his Men into the
Neighboring Counties, to incite the People to Rise: whereupon, a Proclamation
was put forth, for Apprehending him, his Adherents, Adbettors, Accomplices, and
Advisers; And the King sent noti^e of the Dukes Landing, to both Houses of
Parliament, then Sitting at Westminster; who severally Addressed him, and
promised him in their Addresses, to stand by him with their Lives and Fortunes,
entreating him to have more than ordinary Care of his Royal Person, to secure
it from any Attempt, etc. And on the 15 th. of June, a Proclamation was
Published, to Suppress the Duke's Declaration; Entitled, The Declaration of
James Duke of Monmouth, and the Noblemen, Gentlemen, and others, now in Arms;
for the Defense and Vindication of the Protestant Religion, and of the Laws,
Rights and Privileges, of England, from the I^vasion made upon them, etc. and
immediately after, viz. the 16 th. the following Promise of Reward was
published by the King, viz. Whereas, an Humble Address has been made unto us,
by our Commons Assembled in Parliament: that we by our Proclamation, would be
pleased to promise a Reward of 5000. pounds, to such Person or Persons, who
shall bring in the Person of James Duke of Monmouth, alive or dead; and whereas
the said Duke of Monmouth, stands attainted of High Treason, by Act of
Parliament: We do hereby, by the Advice of our Privy Council, Publish and
Declare our Royal Promise: And our Will and Pleasure is, that whoever shall
bring in the Body of the said James Duke of Monmouth, either dead or alive,
shall receive, and have the reward of 5000. l. to be forthwith paid by our
High-Treasurer of England, for such his or the^ Service.

During these proceedings at Westminster, the Duke left Lime, with about 60
Horse and a 120 Foot; a party of which came to Bridport, and surprised diverse
Volunteer Gentlemen in an Inn, between whom there happened a smart Skirmish, in
which Mr. Wadham Strangways and Mr. Coaker were killed; but some Forces coming
in, the Dukes Party was beaten off, and obliged to retreat with some loss,
about 7 being killed, and 23 taken Prisoners: and soon after there happened a
small Skirmish, between a detached Party of the Kings, and some of the Dukes
Men near Taunton, where Lieutenant Monaux, who commanded the former, was
mortally wounded by a Shot in the Head, of which he dyed; and diverse others
were killed and wounded on both sides; so that more of the Dukes Party coming
in, the Kings Forces were obliged to retire. Whilst these things were
transacted in England, the Forces, on both sides, increased in Scotland, and a
hot Skirmish happened, between a Party of 300 Men, under the Command of the
Marquess of Athol for the King, and about 400 Foot and 80 Horse of the Earl of
Argyles; in which several were killed, and the latter, in the end retired, and
marched back to Elengreg, a Castle fortified by the Earl, but upon the Kings
Ships of War coming before the Castle, they marched off and abandoned it; so
that upon fi^ing the first Gun, two Men put off with a White Flag, to give
notice of what had happened, whereupon the Commanders on Board sent their Men
on Shore, and took possession of the Castle, Ammunition, and what they found
there, which was very considerable. On the 17th of June the Earls Men passed
the River Clyde in the night time, and the Earl of Dumbarton, Commander in
Chief for the King, passed the River Leuin, and marched from Glasgow very early
the next morning, and overtook them in the Parish of Killerne; the Kings Horse
and Dragoons kept up with the Earls men till the Foot arrived; but they being
Posted in a strong ground, and it being late in the evening, they stood in
battle all night, but before day the Earls men had passed the Clyde, swiming
over their Horse, and passing over their Foot in Boats; whereupon the Kings
Forces marched to Glasgow, where after they had rested two hours the Earl of
Dumbarton, with the Horse and Dragoons marched after them leaving the Foot to
follow with all convenient speed.

Upon this Retreat, part of Argyle's Forces took Guides to conduct them to
Galloway; but mistaking the way, were led into a Bog, and thereupon obliged to
disperse into small Parties, as did the King's Forces to pursue them, which
caused great Consternation and Disorder; and the Earl of Argyle returning
toward the Clyde, was set upon by Two of Greynocks Servants, but stoutly
defended himself, till he received a Wound in his Head; upon which, not longer
trusting his Horse, he alighted, and betook himself to the Water, into which, a
Country Fellow entered after him, upon whom the Earl Fired, but his Pistol
missed, and he was beaten down, when in his Fall, He cried out, Unfortunate
Argyle; and thereupon was made Prisoner, and carried to a commanded Party,; and
a Party of 40. Horse, commanded by the Lord Ross, with as many Dragoons,
commanded by Captain Cleland, fell upon a Patty of the Stoutest, that yet
remained in a Body, commanded by Sir John Cochran, who had taken the way to the
Sea; They had fortefied themselves in a small Enclosure, in which they had
posted themselves, covered Breast-high: Notwithstanding which, the Lord Ross,
Charged them; but the Ground being too strong for the Horse, and the Captain of
the Dragoons being killed in the coming up, the Lord Ross slightly wounded, Sir
Adam Blair shot in the Neck, and Sir William VVallock in the Side; before the
Dragoons had time to come up on Foot, the Earls Men had got into a Wood,
behind the Enclosure, which the King's Forces beset: and Five of the Earl of
Arran's Men, took Richard Rumbald the Maltster, who ^^ghting desperately,
killed one of them upon the Place, and was himself wounded: Colonel Ayloff was
likewise taken, and 200. more sent to Glasgow, Prisoners; Aylofff during his
Imprisonment, in a desperate Mood, ripped up his Belly with a Penknife, but
the Wound proved not Mortal.

Notwithstanding this Defeat given in Scotland, the Duke of Monmouth held out
in England his Forces being very much increased, which created for a time no
small fear at Court: all the Militia of the Country were raised; and diverse
eminent Persons, secured in most Parts of England, especially in London, where
all the Halls were filled with Citizens, on whom Guards were set; and it was
but branding (...) Man with the Epethite of a disaffected Person, and a File of
Musketeers were sent to take him up; the Roads were every where stopped, and
no Letters were sent, but such as were unsealed and sent open.

On the 20 th. of June, Capt. Trevanion Commander of the Suadadoes a Man of
War, coming into the Cob at Lime, found there a Pink and a Dogger left by the
Duke, which he seized and 40 Barrels of Powder, there was likewise found in the
Town, Back, Breast and Head-peices for between 4 or 5000 Men; he Released
likewise those that had been made Prisoners for not taking Arms under the Duke.

On the 25 th. of June, a hot Skirmish happened between a Party of a 100 Horse
Commanded by Colonel Oglethorp for the King, and a Party of the Dukes Men, in
which, about 80 of the latter were killed, and the Earl of Newbury was Wounded
in the Belly, this happened near Canisham-Bridge between Bristol and Bath; and
the next day in the Evening all the Kings Forces Joined near Bath, upon which,
the Dukes Men drew up on the other side the Town, and Marched away, yet the
Com^^ns got together at Froom Assembled from diverse parts. Headed by a
Constable, and set up the Dukes Declaration in the Marketplace, upon Notice of
which, the Earl of Pembroke Lord Liutenant of the County of Wilts, Marched
theither with 160 Horse, and mounted behind some of them 36 Musketeers, when
coming to the end of the Town he heard great Shooting and beating of Drums, and
had notice that between 2 or 3000 of the Common People, were gathered together
from Warminster, and West^ury, some with Muskets, some with Pis^o^s, some with
Pikes, and some with Pitch-sorks and Scythes; however he Attaged the Town at
the head of his Musqueriers, followed by the Horse; the Plebe^ns ^^emed at
first very Resolute upon de^^nce, one of them Firing at the Earl, and commanded
the rest to do the like when he was advanced to a certain place he named, yet
they were no sooner Charged, but they threw down their Arms and fled for the
most part out at the other end of the Town, whereupon the Declaration was taken
down, and the Constable after he had Renounced what he had done, and Subscribed
an Abhorrance, was made Prisoner, and diverse others were taken.

On the 27 th. of June, the Earl of Feversham Leiutenant General of the Kings
Forces, designing to fall upon the Rear of the Dukes Men, as they were Marching
to Philipsuorton, a Detatchment of 500 Foot Commanded by the Duke of Grafton,
and of Dragoons and Horse Granadiers, leaving the rest of the Forces to follow
with the Cannon; near Philipsnorton Lane, they heard some Shooting, whereupon
20 of the Horse Guards with a company of Foot Grenadiers entered the Lane, the
Duke of Grafton being with them, but there found the Hedges lined with Horse
and Foot, who Fired upon them very smartly, and many were killed and wounded;
however they made good the Retreat, though Opposed by the Duke of Monmouth's
Horse, after which, the Cannon played from each side for several hours without
any considerable Execution, but a great deal of Rain falling, both Parties drew
off; and three Scotch Regiments sent from Holland, were recalled on their way
to Scotland and sent to the West. And on the 26 th. of June, Richard Rumbeld
was Tried in Scotland, and being Sentenced for High Treason, was drawn upon a
Hurdle to the Cross, and there Hanged and Quartered, whose Quarters were
afterward sent to London, and set upon the principal Gates of the City.

On the 29 th. of June, Thomas Danger^ield^ was brought to the Court of
King's Bench, and received Judgment, viz. to stand in the Pillory before
Westminster-Hall-gate, and the Royal Exchange, to be Whipped from Ald-gate to
New gate, and from New gate to Tyburn, and coming back from the latter, he was
run into the Eye with a Cane, by one Francis belonging to Gray's Inn, of which
Wound he dyed in Newgate, and for which, Mr Francis was Tried, found Guilty of
Murder, and Sentenced in the Old-Baly, and afterward Executed at Tyburn,
notwithstanding the Intercession of some great ones at Court to save his Life;
and Mr. Baxter the same Term was Fined 500 Marks, and ordered to find Sureties
for his good Behavior for seven years, yet after a considerable Imprisonment
in the Press Yard^, he was Released without paying the Fine.

On the last day of June, the Earl of Argyle was carried to the Mer^ut-Cross of
Edenburg, where he was Beheaded on a Scaffold Erected for that purpose, his
Head was ordered to be set upon the Tol-booth, and his Body was carried to the
Chaple of St. Magdalins in the Cow gate; he was Executed in pursuance of his
former Sentence, so that there was no new Process against him; he made no
Speech upon the Sca^fold, but delivered a Paper to the Dean of Edenburg, to be
given to the Lord Chancellor, declaring he had neither directly, nor
indirectly left any Speech of Paper upon this occasion; many other Persons of
lesser Note Suffered in Scotland, who had Imbarqued in his Cause. And now the
Parliament of England having settled the King's Revenue, and Increased it by
larger Imposts on Tobacco and other Commodities, and several Acts passed: The
King on the ^d. of July, came to the House, and giving his Royal Assent to some
Acts that were prepaired: The Lord Keeper Signified it was the Kings Pleasure,
that they should Adjourn to the 4 th. of August ensuing, with Intimation that
it was not His Majesty's Intention that there should then be a Meeting, but
that the Sessions should be continued by Adjornment till toward Winter, by
such Members as should be about the Town, unless his Service should require
their Sitting sooner, which they should know by His Proclamation, and
accordingly both Houses severally Adjourned to the time mentioned.

On the 1 st. of July, the Earl of Feversham Marched from Sommerton to Weston,
within three miles of Bridg-water; he Quartered his Horse and Dragoons in the
Village, and Encamped his Foot in an advantageous Post near it, fronting
toward Sedgmore, having a Ditch before them, and in the Evening he had notice
that the Dukes Army was drawing out of Bridge water, which made him keep his
Troops in a Readiness, and sent out f^equent Parties to observe the Dukes Men;
however they so ordered their March that they found an uninterrupted passage
into the Mocr; and toward the morning formed their Foot in Battle, to the
Number of between 5 and 6000 Headed by the Duke of Monmouth, but upon their
approach, the Earl of Feversham put the Kings Forces (being about 2000 Foot,
and 700 Horse Granadeers and Dragoons) into a Posture to receive them, the
Dukes Men begun with a great Volley of Shot and shouts, which were returned in
the same manner; in the mean time, the Dukes Horse were coming into the Field
to second his Foot, but were hindered by a Party of the Kings Horse Commanded
by Coll. Oglethorp, who Engaged them till the Lord of Oxford's Regiment, and a
Detachment of the Guards came in to form the Line; the Dukes Horse was
Commanded by the Lord Gray of Wark, but being the most part unmanaged, they
would not stand the Fire, but after a hot Charge they fell into disorder; their
number was between 1000 and 1200 during this Action, the Foot stood firm on
both sides and Exchanged great Volleys, but the Ditch that run along the Moor,
hindered them from closing; however, the Cannon played violently, and the Horse
coming up, after the Dukes Horse had quitted the Field, they broke into his
Foot, and made them fall into disorder, which turned afterward to open flight,
and great slaughter ensued, so that 2000 are said to be killed on the Dukes
part, and 300 on the Kings, and a great many Prisoners were taken and Treated
with great Rigor, a number of them being Immediately Hanged up by Marshal-Law,
or by the Order of some Commanders.

The Duke escaped the Battle, but was some days after Taken in an Enclosed
ground, where he had hid himself in hopes of a favorable oppertunity to pass
the Seas.

During these Transactions, William Dis^ie Councellor at Law, was Tried by a
special Commission of Oyer and Terminer for the County of Surrey, upon an
Indictment of High Treason, for Publishing and Printing the Duke of Monmouth's
Declaration, and being found Guilty, was Drawn Hanged and Quartered, and his
Head set upon the Bridge gate.

The King upon this Success put out a Proclamation for a Sollemn and Public
Thanksgiving throughout the Kingdom; and the Popish Priests, who began to
appear more Barefaced than ever, Magnified the Victory in their Sermons and
Discourses, Attributing it solely to the Virgin Mary; nay, some of them were so
vain, as to afirm that she was seen flying over the Armies with a drawn Sword
during the Fight, but we believe they might mistake her for a Meteor that
appeared that Evening, with a very swist motion, and spreading light passing
quite through the City of London.

The Duke of Monmouth, the Lord Gray, and a German Officer, being brought to
White Hall on the 13 th. of July, they were sent by Water to the Tower; and
although great Intercession was made for the Duke by the Queen Dowager and
others, he was on the 15 th. brought upon a Scaffold on Tower Hill, and after
having made a large Speech, and Discoursed with the Bishops that waited on him,
showing much Penitence, and declaring he dyed in the Communion of the Church of
England, he laid down his Head, and whether through the the Inability of the
Executioner, or a fear that seized him, the Execution was Barbarous, for He
received five strokes before his Head was severed from his shoulders, his Body
and Head were delivered to his Servants, who carried them away in a Mourning
Hearse, in order to its private Interment, and thus fell this great Man who had
been so long the Darling of the Multitude, and upon whose Inconstant Breath he
to much bore himself, till it brought him to Ruin, as for the Lord Gray, he was
afterward Pardoned, and the Brandenburger dismised, but others fared not so
well, for a Bloody Scene ensued, which was Acted with too much Heat and
Cruelty, and several Proclamations were set forth, commanding diverse Persons
that Absconded to surrender themselves, and soon after, the Earl of Stamford,
the Lord Delamere, and the Lord Brandon, were Committed to the Tower, the first
of which was discharged, the second Pardoned, and the last Acquitted by his
Peers.

Our Ships being on the Coast of Sally to Curb those Pirates, Maned out their
Boats and boldly passed their Bar, Burning their Ships in the Port within
Pistol shot of the Town, and notwithstanding the Continual Fire that was made,
only one Man was mortaly wounded and five lightly hurt.

On the 12 th. of July, Henry Duke of Norfolk, Earl Marshal of England, Henry
Earl of Peterborrough, Groom of the stole to the King, and Lawrence Earl of
Rochester Lord High-Treasurer of England, were Installed Knights of the Garter,
at the Royal Chaple of St. George within the Castle of Windsor; and on the 30
th. the Earl of Feversham was Installed; and the White Staff of Lord
Chamberlain of the King's Household, was given to the Earl of Aylesbury.

On the 4 th. of August, pursuant to the Adjornment, the Parliament met at
Westminster, and the Lord Treasurer whom the King appointed to perform the part
of Lord Keeper in his Absence, having declared to the House of Lords, that they
should further Adjourn to the 9 th. of November, and the like being Signified
to the Commons by the Earl of Midleto^, both Houses Adjourned accordingly^ And
the French King, and Duke of Orleance sent to Congratulate the King upon his
Victory, the first by the Marescha de Humiers, and the last by the Count de
Tonnerre; and on the 8 th. of August, the City of York had their Charter
restored, which was received with great Joy; and a Declaration bearing date the
25 th. was put forth to Regulate the Soldiers, and prevent any disorders they
might commit, the King resolving to keep up his Army, and the Lord Chief
Justice Jefferys and others, being sent into the West with Commission to Try
those that were in Prison, for taking part with the Duke of Monmouth: Made a
miserable Havoc of those People, Condemning great Numbers, and causing them to
be Hanged in all the principal Towns, and their Quarters to be set up in such
abundance, that the stench Infected the Air, and brought a kind of a Contageon;
few of those that went from London, except such as turned Evidences against
others Escaped, many as well Women as Men, were publicly Whipped, and others
had their Estates seized, and a great many were thrust on Shipboard, and Sold
to the Transmarine Plantations, so that there was nothing but Weeping and
Lamentation to be heard, yet, it nothing moved the Inexorable Judge to
Compassion, for a Proclamation coming forth, forbiding any to Harbor or
Relieve any of them that had been with the Duke, they were forced to wander up
and down in Woods, their nearest Relations not daring to Relieve them, so that
several were Starved to Death, or Perished for Want of Necessaries; such as
could get shiping went for Holland, and other places of Refuge; and on the 3 d.
of September, Alice Lisle, a very Ancient Lady, was Executed upon a public
Scaffold at Winchester, by having her Head Severed from her Body, pursuant to
a Sentence for no other Crime than giving Entertainment in her House to one
John Hix, who had been with the Duke, which brought such a Terror upon others,
that a Father delivered up his own Son, and those that had concealed any, was
forced to dismiss them, and Orders were every where given to search for
Suspected Persons, so that the Popish Priests by making Interest for Pardons,
got extraordinary sums of money, nor did the Lord Chief Justice less Enrich
himself, as since it has appeared by taking 15000 l. of one Person for a
Pardon, and no doubt, a great deal of many others; and the Lord Keeper North
Dying on the 5 th. of September, the Great Seal was keept for the Lord Chief
Justice till the Bloody Harvest was finished; and this month Dyed that Great
and Eminent Statesman, Sr. Leoline Jenkins, and was Buried with much Formality
and Ceremony in Jesus College Chaple at Oxford, to which he had been a
considerable Benefactor.

The Lord Chief Justice being by this time sufficiently Gluted with Blood,
returning to White Hall, about the latter end of September, having before been
made Barron of VVem, had now the Broad Seal delivered to him, with the Title of
Lord Chancellor: Sr. Edward Herbert Chief Justice of Chester, was made Lord
Chief Justice of the King's Bench; and Sr. Edward Lutwich Succeeded him in his
place of Chief Justice of Chester; and Sr. Robert Wright was removed from the
Exchequer to the King's Bench; and many other Alterations were made.

On the 19 th. of October, Henry Cornish, Esquire was brought to his Trial at the
Old Baily, upon an Indictment of High Treason, and was found Guilty upon very
slender Evidence: There was likewise Tried one William Ring, for Harboring and
Concealing Joseph Kelloway and Henry Lawrence, who had been with the Duke of
Monmouth in the West; as likewise John Ferneley, for Harboring and Concealing
James Burton, a Person Outlawed for high Treason; and Elizabeth Gaunt, for
Succouring and Assisting the said Burton with Money, and helping him to a
Passage, in order to his escape beyond the Seas, and were all Three found
Guilty, and received Sentence of Death, as in case of High Treason: And on the
23 d. of October, Mr. Cornish was taken out of Newgate, and Drawn in a Sledg to
Kings-Street-end, by Guild Hall, and there Executed on a Gibbet erected for
that purpose, his Head set upon Guild Hall, and his Quarters upon the Gates,
though since taken down, and his Attainder reversed in Parliament; Elizabeth
Gaunt was conveyed to Tyburn, and there Burnt to Ashes; the other two got their
Pardons, and a Soldier for running from his Colors was Hanged on Tower Hill.

On the 27 th. of October Richard Nelthrop, and John Ayloff were carried from
Newgate, to the Kings Bench Bar, and there received Sentence, upon their being
Outlawed for High Treason, and a rule was made for their Execution on the 30
th. when accordingly they were executed, the first before Grays Inn Gate, and
the last before the Temple Gate, and Quartered as in Case of High Treason.

On the 29 th. of October Sir Robert Jefferys, Lord Mayor of London, was Sworn
for the Year ensuing before the Barons of the Exchequer, and the City received
him with the usual Pomp, etc. and about the latter end of this Month a great
Scuffle happened at Wiggan, in the County Palatine of Lancaster, between the
Townsmen and 4 Companys of Soldiers belonging to Sir William Clifton's
Regiment, in which many People were hurt; however the inquiry as to the
Agressors being submitted to a Court Marshal, the Soldiers were excused, and
only obliged to remit out of their Pay so much Money as their Quarters came to,
it being alleged, That the Crowds of People pressed upon* their Artillery and
Carriages, and their endeavoring to keep them off began the Fray.

On the 6 th. of November an Order of Council was Published against making
Bone-fires, or Fireworks, at, or upon any Festival Days or Times whatsoever,
without particular leave first had from the King or Council Board, or signified
to them by the Lord Mayor of London, or by the Justices of Peace of the
Respective Limmits, upon Pain of Displeasure, and being Prosecuted with the
utmost Severity of the Law; and some were taken up and Imprisoned on this
occasion, but upon submission and acknowledgment most of them Released. And on
the 20 th. of November, the King by the Lord Chancellor Prorogued the
Parliament to the 19 th. of February.

On the 4 th. of December, Robert Earl of Sunderland Principal Secretary of
State, was declared Lord President of the Council and took his place. And
diverse new Charters about this time were Granted to sundry Corporations.

On the 10 th. of December, One Charles Bateman a Surgeon, was Tried upon an
Indictment of High Treason, for Conspiring the Death of King Charles the
Second, and to raise Rebellion within the Kingdom, etc. of which, the Jury
found him Guilty, and he the next day received Sentance of Death, as in Case of
Treason, and upon the 18 th. was Executed at Tyburn, where he made a very Pious
End; and his Head and Quarters afterward set up in diverse places. And the King
Appointed the Lord Viscount Tiveot, Coll. Robert Phillips, and John Evelyn, do
in the Absence of his Excellence the Earl of Clarendon, who was made Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland, and on his way theither, being Attended to the utmost
Limits of this Kingdom, with a Numerous and Gallant Train, and received at
Dublin with all the Demonstrations of Joy usual on that Occasion; and the Earl
of Huntingdon was appointed Lord Chief Justice, and Justice in Air of all the
King's Forests, Chaces, Parks and Warrens on the South side of Trent. And on
the 29 th. the Bishop of Durham was Sworn Dean of the Chaple Royal; and the
Bishop of Rochester Clerk of the Closet to the King.

On the 30 th. of December, John Hambden Esquire was Arraigned at the Old Bailey,
upon an Indictment of High Treason, but was afterward Pardoned. And a
Proclamation was published for the further Prorogation of the Parliament viz.
to the 10 th. of May, 1689. On the 8 th. of February, Thomas Saxton was brought
to his Trial at the Kings Bench-Bar, upon an Indictment of Perjury in wilfully
Forswearing himself at the Trial of Henry Lord Delamere, and the Jury found him
Guilty without going from the Bar, and afterward received Sentence to stand in
the Pillory before VVestminsterx-Hall gate, Temple Bar and the Royal Exchange,
and to be Whiped from Newgate to Tyburn, and to pay 500 Marks as a Fine* and
he did stand in the Pillory, and was Whiped.

Phlibert Vernatti, who had been Attainted by Outlawry, for Murdering Sr.
Edmunbury Godfry, appeared likewise at the King's Bench, and being admitted to
Reverse the Outlawry by Writ of Error, took^ a kind of a pretended Trial, as
knowing^ doubtless no Witness would appear, for that Miles Prance and others
being called, and not coming into Court* the Jury was necessiated to A^quit
him; and the Parliament Meeting on the 10 th. of February, was Prorogued by
Commission to the 10 th. of May.

On the 13 th. of February, Sr. Thomas Jenner, was Appointed one of the Baro^^
of the Exchequer, in the place of Sr. William Gregory, and Sr. Henry
Bedingfield was Appointed a Justice of the Common Pleas, in the stead of Sr.
Creswel Levens, and Sr. John Holt was Constituted Recorder of London.

On the 10 th. of March, 1685. The King-Signed a Proclamation of General
Pardon; yet full of Exceptions in Sundry matters and cases Excluding from the
benefit of it, a great number by Name, especially the most considerable Persons
that had Escaped the Battle of Sedgmore, or were concerned in the business of
the West; however diverse Addresses followed it, and sundry clusters were
granted or restored, and thus ended the most Remarkable Transactions of the
year, 1685.

The year 1686. began with Storms, in which, a great many Ships were cast away,
and the shoars in many places were strewn with Wrecks etc. And on the 21 st.
of April Sr. Thomas Jones, Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, William
Montague Esquire Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer, Sr. Job Charleton, one of the
Justices of the Common Pleas, and Sir Edward Nevil, one of the Barons of the
Exchequer, had their Quietus, and others appointed in in the stead, however Sir
Job Charleton was made Chief Justice of Checter; and a Call of Sergeants was
made by Writ, and they took their Oaths accordingly at the Chancery-Bar the
first day of Easter Term, and performed the Ceremonies usual on that occasion;
Presenting Rings with this Motto viz. Deus Rex Lex: And an Order about this
time was Published by the King and Council, strictly Commanding any one to
Betrary or Seduce any Person to the Foreign Plantations in America etc.
without their Consent, and being lawfully bound before a Majestrate, or such as
should be thereunto Appointed; which for a time, together, with some Examples
made of Kidnappers detered* those Lewd People from putting so great a
Wickedness* in Practice.

The Earl of Murray, being Appointed the Kings High-Commissioner in Scotland,
the Parliament of that Kingdom according to Adjournment, met the 29 th. of
April, where the High Commissioner let them know the Kings Esteem of their
Loyalty, and what was further to be done and Expected, etc. And now the French
Protestants coming over in great Numbers, a Book was Published of the Cruelties
acted by the French King and his Ministers toward his Subjects of the Reformed
Religion, at which the French Ambassador Residing at the English Court, found
himself much Agrieved, pretending it Reflected upon his Master, whereupon an
O^der was put out to Supress it, and to Discover the Translator and Printer,
that they might be Prosecuted, and that a Printed Copy in French, and another
in English should be Burnt by the Hands of Common Hangman, which was
accordingly done before the Royal Exchange.

On the 10 th. of May, the Parliament meeting at Westminster, and some Debates
Arising about Papists, and other unqualified Persons who had got into Offices
of great Trust without taking the Oaths, Test, or Sacrament according as the
Law Required under a Penalty of 5000 l. They were further Prorogued to the 22
d. of November, and a Proclamation was published, forbiding all Persons from
using the Trade of a Peddler, or Petty Chapman, unless such as should be
Licensed or Authorized, and Offices were appointed for that purpose, but the
Countries as well as a great number of poor people finding the In-convenience
of it, it soon fell and came to nothing.

On Wednesday, May the 13 th. Her Royal Highness the Princess Ann of Denmark,
was Delivered of a Daughter at Windsor, which was Christened by the Lord Bishop
of Duersem, being Named Ann Sophia.

On the 14 th. of May, Miles Prance, commonly called the Brass Siver-smith, a
person who had been Instrumental in the Discovery of the Death of Sir Ed^mund
Bury G^dfry, was brought to the Kings-Bench-Bar, and an Information there
Exhibited against him for Wilful and Malicious Perjury, as to the Evidence he
gave at the Trial of Green, Bury, and Hill, who were Executed at Tyburn for the
aforesaid Murder, where upon the Information being Read; after some preamble,
he Pleaded Guilty, and declared his Sorrow for what he had done, Aledging he
had falsely Sworn against those persons, though, but a very few believed, but
that fear of Punishment, and hopes of Reward, made him go back^ and deny what
not only in Courts, but other places he had so frequently Avered; and being
brought up the last day of the Term, he was Fined 100 l. and ordered to Appear
before the Courts of Westminster, with a Paper on his Head Declaring his
Offense; and that he should stand in the Pillory before Westminster Hall, the
Royal Exchange, and at Charing Cross, and moreover be Whiped fron Newgate to
Tyburn, yet the Fine and Whiping were afterward Remitted.

On the 21 th. of June Mr. Samuel Johnson was Tried at the Kings-Bench^Bar,
upon an Information of High-Misdemeanour for Writing and Publishing a Paper,
Advising the Protestant Soldiers and Seamen not to join with the Papist to ruin
the Protestant Religion; for which a Verdict was given against him, and he
received a very severe Sentence, which was executed with great Rigor; for
about this time the Council of the Priests began openly to prevail, and they
gloried to exert the Influence they had over some Magistrates to Rigor and
Cruelty, against such especially as had opposed their Practices, and proceeded
to set up and build Chapples, and places for publicly Celebrating Mass, and
diverse were troubled for opposing them, though the Law was expressly against
their proceedings.

A great Robbery having in the Kentish Road been committed on the Holland Mail,
and as much Dust Gold taken out, as came to about 3000 l. Richard Alborough,
Oliver Haly, John Conde, who were concerned in the Robbery, were brought to the
Kings Bench Bar, where the first confessed the Fact, and the two others were
found Guilty, and received Sentence as in case of Felony and Robbery, etc.

The Charter of New England about this time was proceeded against, and Judgment
obtained upon Scire Faci^s, whereupon followed many Alterations in that
Collony, Sir Edmond Andrews being appointed Governor; and diverse that had
formerly held places were dismissed.

On the 22 th. of August, the King Named Dr. Cartwrite, Dean of Rippon, to be
Bishop of Chester, and Dr. Samuel Parker, Archdeacon of Canterbury, to be
Bishop of Oxford; those Sees being Vacant by the Death of Dr. John Pearson, and
Dr. John Fell: And the King began his Progress into the West, where he
Conferred the Honor of Knighthood on diverse Persons, and labored to settle
the Minds of the People, which were disturbed by the bold attempts of the
Popish Clergy, and the continuing many in Office that were no ways Favorers of
the Protestant Religion; and Visited Marleborough, Badminster, Bristol,
Bridgwater, VVillton, Southampton, Portsmouth, etc. and was very splendidly
entertained.

On the 8 th. of October the Earl of Tyrconnel was Sworn of the King's Privy
Council, and took his Place at the Council Board, at White Hall accordingly:
and the Parliament was Prorogued to the 15 day of February by Proclamation; and
the 14 th of October, the King's Birthday, by an express Command was kept with
great strictness in London, Westminster, etc. and on the 17 th. Dr. John
Lloyd, Bishop of St. David's, Dr. Samuel Parker, Bishop of Oxford, and Dr.
Thomas Cartwrite, Bishop of Chester, were Consecrated at Lambeth, etc.

On the 29 th. of October Sir John Peak was sworn Lord Mayor of the City of
London, before the Barons of the Exchequer at Westminster, and the City
received him with the usual splendor and magnificence, and on the 22 th. of
November, the Parliament meeting, was further Prorogued, as specified by
Proclamation, to the 15 th. of February: And in the beginning of January the
King appointed the Lord John Bellasis, Sidney Lord God^lphin, Henry Lord Dover,
Sir John Earnly, and Sir Stephen Fox, Commissioners for executing the Office of
Lord High Treasurers of England; and the Parliament by Proclamation was further
Prorogued to the 28 th. day of April, 1687.

On the 2 d. of February the Lady Anne Sophia, youngest Daughter to their R.
Highnesses the Prince and Princess of Denmark dyed, after about a Fort-nights
Illness; and on the 4 th. privately^Inter^ed in the Vault of the Royal Families
in K. ^Henry the VII. Chapple; and unhappily to second this misfortune, the
Lady Mary, Daughter to their Royal Highnesses, dyed the 8 th. of February in
the Evening, after an Illness of 3 Weeks, and was privately Interred as the
former on the ^0 th. And about this time the Right Honorable the Earl of
Clarendon being re-called, the Earl of Tyrconnel (to the little satisfaction of
the Prote^^ants) was appointed Lord Deputy of the Kingdom of Ireland, where
after he had been some time detained by contrary Winds he arrived, and was
received at Dub^^n (by those of his Sticklers) with Acc^^ma^^^^s of Joy; and
from that time the I^^sh Papists began to date their hopes of subjectin^ the
Protestants, and bragged, that their Religion should not long co^^inue: And
indeed, this Earl did all he could to surpress it, by placing and dis^^^ing
Office^s and Ministers in S^^^^ns Military and Civil, by ^n ^ncontro^lable
Power, refusing to show any War^^^^, or g^ve the least reason for his so (...)*
and all (...) a ^^ddain a Proclamation was sent to the Co^^c^l of Scotland,
(...) sed in (...) Letter, for Liberty of cons^^ce, as ^^ll for Roman
Ca^^^licks, as other (...), only Field-Convenci^^^^, and (...) Meetings* and
such like (...), and to suspend all Laws, etc. (...) ^^c^sants and Conventicie^
(...) that should peacefully meet, dis^ anulling (...) Tests, and other
Matters, (...) were rende^d unqualified or incapable of holding Places and
Trusts in the Government; and appointing a new Oath to acknowledge his Right
and Power, and not to take up, or bear Arms against him, but to oppose such as
should attempt it; to which a suitable Letter was returned, Signed by the chief
Ministers of State of that Kingdom, promising Obedience. And now many Roman
Catholics being Commissioned for the Peace throughout England, and Dispensed
with from taking the Oaths, and Tests of Qualification. The Protestant Justices
of the County of Middlesex, desired the same Dispensation might be allowed
them. To which the King replied; He took it kindly their putting Confidence in
him, and he would take care of them.

The New Lord Deputy of Ireland, finding his violent Proceedings much
disatisfied the greater part of the People, and occasioned Reflections on them,
the better to palliate the Matter, Is^ued out Three Proclamations, One to
assure the People of his good Intentions toward them, commanding the
Magistrates to apprehend, and bring to Justice, the spreaders of Reports,
tending otherways: Another, for preserving the Forces in good Order and
Discipline: And a Third, for suppressing Tories and Robbers.

On the 18 th. of March, the King being in Council at White Hall, Declared his
Intention further to Prorogue the Parliament, to the 22 d. of November, 1687.
And that he intended a General Toleration of Liberty of Conscience, to his
Subjects; and for that end, he designed to Publish his Declaration, for a
general Liberty of Conscience, to all Persons, of what Persuasion soever, etc.
The Attorney, and Solicitor General, were forbidden to suffer Process, to
Issue out in the King's Name, against any Dissenter whatsoever; and a
Proclamation was Issued out for a fu^ther P^orogation of the Parliament; and
with these Proceedings, concluded the Year, 1686.

On the 4 th. of April, 1687. A Declaration for Liberty of Conscience was
Signed by the King at White Hall, promising amongst other things, to Protect
and Maintain the Archbishops, Bishops, and Clergy, and all others of the
Church of England, in the Free Exercise of their Religion, as by Law
Established, etc. and that the Penal Laws, and all Tests, should be laid aside;
and no longer useful, for distinguishment of Opinion, or keeping Persons of any
Persuasion out of Places of Trust; directing how, and in what manner they
should meet in their several Assemblies, and upon what notice, etc. Upon this,
both Papists and Dissenters, began to spread sundry Scandalous and Malicious
Libels, against the Conduct of the Church Established; and doubted not, but
this great Engine, would make her totter; but it proved otherwise, and this
dividing, made way for a surer Establishment: However, diverse flattering
Addresses followed from sundry Persuasions, promoted for the most part, by
Underhand Insinuation; for the Priests were every where busy in making their
Advantage, and several Alterations were made in the Judges, and Ministers of
State; many of the Judges having given their Opinions for the Dispencing Power;
and it having been carried for Sir Edward Hales, in the King's Bench Court,
upon an Action brought against him by his Coachman, for Five Hundred Pounds,
according to the Statutes, for taking upon him a Place of Trust, without being
Qualified by the Oaths, etc. On the 22 d. of April, the King removed the Lo^d
Chief Justice Herbert, to the Common Pleas; and the Lord Chief Justice Wright,
to the King's Bench; and Sir Francis Withens, one of the Justices of the
King's Bench, had his Quietus: And now the D. of Buckingham dying, his Garter
was given to the Earl of Sunderland, and he was made a Knight Companion of the
Order; and Sir Richard Allebone, a Roman Catholic, who had been (...) and a
Sergeant at Law, by the King's Writ, was sworn on the 28 th. of April, one of
the Justices of the King's Bench, before the Lord Chancellor. And the
Parliament meeting at Westminster, were by Commission Prorogued to the 22 d.
of November.

The Army being all this while on Foot, and several Campaigns held at
Hounslow-Heath, where Two Cn^ppels were erected; one for the Roman Catholics,
and another for the Protestants: The ^^ege of Buda was appointed to be Acted,
but it being like to come to earnest, about Priority; and some Bullets being
shot, (...) was given over; and some of the Judges having given their Opinion,
that it was Death by the Law of the Land, for a Soldier ^ntering into Pay, and
Deserting his Colo^rs without Leave, though in time of Peace; diverse were tried
and executed: and now ^ddresses, came crouding from all (...)* of Thanks for
Liberty of Conscience, etc. The public Papers being Weekly fi^led with them,
etc. And the Priests proceeded to Build Chaples in St. John's, Limes-Street,
Bucklers Bury, Lincolns-s^n-Fields; and in most places giving out what
Advantages they had gained, and how near they were to the Consummating their
Wishes; but (...) Man Proposes, God Disposes; nor were the Quakers (a thing
unusual in those People) behind-hand in their Complements and Addresses, which
induced many to believe, that some Jesuits in Disguise were gotten amongst them.

About this time arrived a Ship, very Richly ^aden with Gold and Silver from
the West Indies, Commanded by Captain William Phillips, who afterward was
Knighted for this Exploit; and this Treasure, with several pieces of Canon*
were the Wreck of a Spanish Galleon, about 40. Years since; and recovered by
Diving in 14 and 15 Fathom Water, in a strong Sea, running between diverse Rocks
and Islands; the Treasure amounted to about 200000 l. and was partnered amongst
those that had fitted him out, of whom, the Duke of Albermarle was principal;
but others going to attempt the like, returned without Success; and Sir John
Narborough dyed in the Enterprise.

And now contrary to Expectation, the King Published a Proclamation, for the
Dissolution of the Parliament, given at Hamp^on Court, on the Second of July,
1687. and upon an Embassy sent to Rome, the Pope sent hither in Quality of his
Nuncio, Ferdinand d' Adda, Archbishop of Amasia, etc. who on the 3 d. of July,
had his public Audience at Windsor, and was received with a profound
solemnity, and had a place prepared for his Reception.

An other Robery having been committed on the Holland Male, and rough Diamonds
taken thence, to the value of 6750. l. a Reward of 500. Guineas, and a Pardon
was offered to any that should discover and restore them.

About the middle of July, Commissioners were appointed to Sit in diverse
Counties, on sundry Days, for the Sale of the Estates of such as had been in
the West with the D. of Monm. and public notice was given, of the Days and
Places of their Sitting, at Eight in the Morning, at the Respective Places,
etc. and on the 23 d. arrived an Express from Rome, of the Death of the
Duchess of Modena, the Queen's Mother; whereupon, the Court went into Mourning.

And now the Queen to divert her Melancholy for the Death of her Mother, went
to the Bath, where in August the King made his Progress, and visited diverse
places in his way, and giving necessary Orders, whilst Addresses were crowded
upon him by the Dissenters, who began to murmr at, and reproach the Church of
England Men, for not doing the like. The King going more Westerly, the Earl of
Tyrconnel came to wait upon him, giving out, it was only to pay Him his Duty,
for the Favors bestowed upon him. This Progress was the longest that had been,
and was attended with many splendid Entertainments and Complements; the Queen
in the mean while continued at the Bath, expecting his retur^^ During these
proceedings, a kind of Creatures called Regulators, had been abroad, and new
molded the Corporations, placing and dis-placing at pleasure, laboring with
the People, to give them their word, that if any of them were chosen Members of
Parliament they should be for taking away the Penal Laws and Test, etc. Or Vote
for the election of such as should do it; however the wiser sort seeing further
into the matter, answered but very coldly, and only some that were Hot headed
Addressed upon this occasion, promising to do it whenever the King should be
pleased to call a Parliament. Father Petre a crafty Jesuit, was already got
into the Council, and carried a main stroak^ at Count, unhappy for the King;
for his violent proceedings began to break the Measures that were taken, the
Suspending the Lord Bishop of London, for not Suspending Dr. Sharp, Dean of
Norwich, for arguing against Popery, in a Sermon at St. Giles's in the Fields,
the erecting a new Ecclesiastical Court, and the Imposing Obadiah Walker, a
known Papist, and other Papists, Fellows of Magdelen College, and turning out
such Fellows as would not acknowledge Samuel Parker, Bishop of Oxford,
President; and the Ministers in diverse places being threatened for detecting the
Errors of the Romish Church in their Sermons, and commanded not to meddle
therein, began to open the Eyes of most, and make them see there was something
extraordinary intended. Several new Creations of Honor were made, and many of
the Protestant Lords sent on Embassies, and other Affairs beyond the Seas; the
Duke of Albemarle was made Governor of Jam^^a, where some time after he Dyed.
Sir Robert Holmes was ordered away with a Squadron of Ships to surpress the
Pirates in the West India's, with a power to destroy all such as would not
submit, or come in, within in time limited; and Father Petre was appointed one
of the Overseers of the Building of St. Paul's, by whose advice the Foundations
were Enlarged, and the Work car^ied on with more than ordinary pressing, as
hoping (no doubt) it should call St. Peter's Church at Rome Cousen. Father
Ellis, Father Leyb^^n, and other Popish Bishops took the power of Licensing
into their Hands* and not only Licensed all manner of Papers that reflected
upon the Church and Clergy of England, but in couraged every little Scoundrel
that brought and promoted them, allowing Pensions to Mercenary Scriblers for
that purpose; so that it might easily be guessed which way things were going.
At first, indeed the Popish Clergy were bold to offer open Disputes with our
Divines, but finding themselves baffled, and the Arguments they brought
Confuted, they (upon second Thought) concluded it disadvantagious, and not only
Shunned it, but as much as in them lay, Locked up the Press, and prevented the
coming out of any Vindications against their Callumnies; however, many stole
into the World, and especially that notable piece, called, A Letter to a
Dissenter; showing their imminent Danger, which was fell upon with great Fury,
and diverse insignificant Answers put out, which rather increased than hindered
the Peoples good Opinion of the unknown Author.

On the 29 th. of October Sir John Shorter having been appointed by the King to
take upon him the Office of Lord Mayor of London, was Sworn at Westminster,
before the Barons of the Exchequer; and the King, attended by the Pope's
Nuncio, the French Ambassador, and other Foreign Ministers and Noblemen, Dined
with the Lord Mayor at Guild Hall, where the Entertainment was very sumptuous.

On the 10 th. of December the Commissioners that had been appointed for
Ecclesiastical Causes, and for Visiting all Cathedrals, Collegiate Churches,
and Colleges, etc. met, and going upon the Matter of St. Mary Magdelen
College in Oxford; they Declared, Decreed, and Pronounced, That Dr. Hough, Dr.
Charles Aldeworth, Dr. Henry Fairfax, Dr. Alexander Pudsey, Dr. John Smith, Dr.
Thomas Baily, Dr. Thomas Stafford, Mr. Robert Almont, Mr. Mainwarning Hammond,
Mr. John Rogers, Mr. Richard Strickland, Mr. Henry Dobson, Mr. James Baily, Mr.
John Davis, Mr. Francis Bagshaw, Mr. James Fayzer Mr. Joseph Harwar, Mr. Thomas
Bateman, Mr. George Hunt, Mr. William Cradock, Mr. John Gillam, Mr. George
F^l^ham, Mr. Charles Penestone, Mr. Robert Hyde, Mr. Edward Yerbury, Mr. H^nry
Holding, and Mr. Stephen VVilks, should be Incapable of Receiving, or being
Admitted to any Ecclesiastical Dignity, Benifice or Promotion; and such of them
that were not as then in Holy Orders, were adjudged incapable of receiving or
being admitted into the same; and all Archbishops, Bishops, and other
Ecclesiastical Officers, were required to take Notice of the Sentence and
Decree, and yield Obedience to it: However, these worthy Gentlemen, though
turned out to make way for the Creatures of the Popish Bishops, were kindly
received wherever they came, and not a little applauded for their Resolution,
rather to relinquish then give a president of Innovation upon that Foundation.
And in this Month (as a Forerunner of the Miseries Ireland has since suffered)
an extraordinary Innundation happened at Dublin, Rings-End, Cork, and other
places, occasioned by violent Rains, the Water not only breaking down the
Bridges; but rising even to the first and second Stories, so that Boats for
some days Rowed in the Streets. A great deal of Goods and Cattle were
destroyed, and some Persons perished in the Rapidity of the Torrent.

On the 16 th. of December a Proclamation was Published for Prizing of Wines,
allowing for Canary Wines, by Retail, no more than Nine Pence the Pint, and so
proportionably, Land-Carriage being considered, in any distant place from
London: And it being given out, that the Queen was with Child, for which it is
reported, a great Offering had been made at the Shrine of the Lady of Loretto;
a Proclamation was put forth, appointing a public Thanksgiving and Prayer
throughout the Kingdom, that is, in the Cities of London and Westminster, on
the 15 th. of January, and ten Mlies thereabout, and on the 29 th. throughout
the Kingdom; and Prayers were formed and published to that end, and read in the
Churches upon the Days mentioned. This made the Papists greatly rejoice, and
not stick to declare before hand it was a Son; and many Flattering Poems were
Written and published on that occasion, and the Priests spread it loudly in
their Sermons, Attributing it as a Miracle to the Virgin Mary, or as a return
of the Offering, etc. And the privy Council of Scotland made an Act likewise
for a public and solemn Thanksgiving throughout that Kingdom, to the same end,
bearing Date the 17 th. of January, 1687.

And now to smooth with the Dissenters, Commissioners were Appointed to Inquire
what Moneys or Goods had been Received or Seized by any Persons Ecclesiastical
or Civil, within the Cities of London or Westminster, or the Counties of
Middlesex, Essex, or Surry, from the 29 th. of September, 1677. For matters
Relating to Religion, directing them to places where they should be heard and
Redressed; and this way of Proceeding, made a great noise throughout the
Kingdom for a while, but in the end it fell a sleep, and came to little or
nothing. On the 2 d. of March, a Proclamation was Exhibited, for-biding the
Subjects of England, etc. to go into any Foreign Service without leave by Sea
or Land, as they would Answer it at their utmost Peril; and upon some
Complaints that the Soldiers in Pay were Disorderly in their Quarters; a
General Court Marshal consisting of General Officers, and Officers of the Army
were Appointed to meet at the Horse Guard every Friday morning to hear and
Redress Grievances of that kind, and commanded not to spare any for Respect or
Favor, that should be found Culpable.

Upon Notice that the King Intended ^o Recall his Forces in the Service of the
States of Holland, they Circumvented it by Disbanding them, and Listing them a
new, such as would be Listed into their own Service; before our Ambassador
Received his Orders, to Require their being sent Home; or at least had made
them known to the States General, so that the King finding himself
Disappointed, published a Proclamation bearing date the first of March,
Commanding the Return of all his Subjects who had taken Arms, or were ^n the
Service of the States General of the United Neitherlands, either by Land or
Sea, upon pain of being proceeded against, if Refusing; and the English Ships
had a strict Charge to give such free Passage, as would Return, whereupon a
great many Officers, though but few of the Soldiers, came over. And now the
Mass-Houses growing numerous, the Rabble began to Stomach ^^t, who are
frequently the first on such occasions, and broke the Windows, whereupon the
Trained-Bands had Orders to be in Arms to prevent it, Especially on Sundays;
and several Youths were taken, and Committed to Prison, but upon making
Friends, most of them got off without Punishment; and now many who had been
very forward upon the first Publishing Liberty of Conscience, appearing more
Wavering; the King Renewed it by a Second Declaration, wherein he more Amply
Declared his Pleasure as to the manner and management of that Affair, and this
was dated the 27 th. day of April 1688. but some Ill willers to the Church of
England Clergy, finding they were not greatly Concerned at these Proceedings,
Resolved to try them further, and thereupon so dealt, that the King caused the
following Order to be Published, viz.

At the Court of White Hall, the Fourth of May, 1688. By the Kings Most
Excellent Majesty, and the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
IT is this day Ordered by his Majesty in Council; that his Majesty's Late
Gracious Declaration, bearing date the 27 th. of April last, be Read at the
usual time of Divine Service, upon the 20 th. and 27 th. of this Month, in all
Churches and Chapples, within the Cities of London, and Westminster; and Ten
Miles thereabout: And upon the 3 d. and 10 th. of June next, in all other
Churches and Chapples throughout the Kingdom: And ^t is hereby further Ordered,
that the Right Reverend the Bishops, Cause the said Declara^ion to be sent and
distributed throughout their Respective Diocesses, to be Read Accordingly.

Very few complied with this, for many of the Bishops refused to meddle, or
^end any Declaration or Order of this kind; whereupon the Popish party, and
others began to Rant at a high Rate, and Charged them with Disobedience and
Disloyalty, putting out many Scandalous Pamphlets on that occasion; yet, at the
same time Rejoiced to see this non Compliance, as thinking thereby to gain an
advantage by the Kings being Exasperated; but that which they, thought would
have most availed them, broke all their measures; for the Lord Archbishop of
Can^erbury, the Lords Bishop of Chichester, Bath and Wells, Bristol, Ely,
Peterborough, and St. Asaph, thought it neccisary in their ^lames, and on the
behalf of others, humbly to Petition the King to Remit the Order for the
Declaration to be Read in Churches in the time of Divine Service; but those of
that Reverend Body, that delivered it, had not only a slighting Answer, but the
before Named Worthy Men were Summoned to Appear before the King in Council at
White Hall, where the Lord Chancellor Jesseries, and diverse Popish Lords Sat
to Examine them, and after they had given their Reasons, why they could not
comply, they were contrary to the Expection of a vast number of People, who
waited to hear the Issue, sent to the Tower by Water; and whilst they remained
there, News was spread abroad that the Queen was Delivered of a Son at St.
James's, between 9 and 10 in the Morning, when about Noon the Council met and
ordered, there should be a general Thanks Giving observed in the Cities of
London and Westminster; and Parts Adjacient on the 14 th. of June, and in 14
days after, in all other Parts of the Kingdom, and that notice should be given
of this Birth to the Lord Mayor of London, that Bone-fires and public
Rejoycings might be made, which was performed, and the Tower Guns Discharged,
to Signify it at a greater distance; and Dr. VValgrave, the Queens Physician
was Knighted in the Kings Bedchamber, for the Skill and Diligence he had
used; and on the 10 th. of June, the Marchioness of Powis, was Sworn by the
Lord Chamberlain of the Household, Lady Governess of their Majesty's Children,
and the Lady Strickland under Governess; and a Proclamation was published for a
Public Thanksgiving, and a Form of Prayer and Thanksgiving, ordered to be
drawn up, and dispersed to the diverse Churches and Chapples of England, Wales,
etc.

On the 15 th. of June, the Lord Archbishop, and the other Bishops that were
Committed to the Tower, were brought by Habeas Corpus to the King's Bench; where
the Attorney General had Exhibited an Information against them, for Contriving,
Making and Publishing (as they termed it) a Seditious Libel against His Majesty
and the Government; to which, they severaly Pleaded not Guilty; and had that
day fortnight Appointed for their Trial, and upon entering into Recognizance,
for their further Appearance; they were Dismissed the Court, and the same day
in the Evening, their Royal Highnesses the Prince and Princess of Denmark, came
from the Bath.

The 17 th. day of June, Appointed for the Thanksgiving being come, within the
City of London, etc. the Conduits were ordered to run with Wine, which
accordingly they did, and the Streets in the Evening every where shined with
Fires, the Bells Ringing etc. and most of the Cities ^ Towns in England,
followed the Exampl^ of London, as well upon the first News ^ upon the
Thanksgiving day.

On the 26. of June, (...) was a new (...) of Serjeant^ at Law, out of several
In^^ Court, wh^ were Swo^^ in the Chance^^ Court, performing the usual
Ceremo^^^ and ga^^ ^ings with this Motto, viz. R^ Princ^p^ and Christian^
Libertas; and the Lord Mayor and his Brethren the Alde^ mon^^e^t to 8. Ja^^s's,
and Presented the (...) by (...) Chamber ^ain with Gol^ to be Distributed by
the Marchioness (...) his Govern^ss as Custom directed; (...) ordered by an
Order of Council, (...) be (...) for in all public Prayers for tho (...)
^amily, (...) to the King an^ (...) ^^ssion of Common prayer, (...) commanded
to be Printe^ (...) the Alteration.

(...) now the Bishops coming upon their Trials, at the Kings-Bench-Court i^
Westminster, after a long and full hearing on all sides, with many Arguments o^
Council against Dispensing Power, and the Lawfulness of such a way of
Petitioning they were Acquitted, and gained to them selves as Worthy
Confessors, a lasting Memory in the minds of good Men however, it so far
displeased some at Court, that Sir Richard Holloway, and Sir John Powel, two of
the Justices of this Bench, were Removed, for they had delivered their Opinions
in favor of the Bishops, and indeed, only Sir Richard Allebors a devoted
Papist, pressed it strongly against them; so that upon notice of their
deliverance; the Shouts of the People Echoed in all places; in some places the
Bells were rung, and Bone fires made, etc.

This gave a sensible blow to the designs of the Popish Clergy, so that some of
them confessed it had broke all the measures they had been taking for many
years, and indeed it so opened the Eyes of the People, that their Projects
became visible, and they were often Afronted in the Streets, and in their
Mass-Houses; and about this time, the Brother of Edward Petre, the leading
Jesuit, and now Clerk of the Kings Closet, holding forth at the Chapple in
Lime-street, took occasion to Cavel with the Bible, declaring it false, and no
rule of Faith, and having one in his hand tore out several Leaves at the same
time and threw them amongst the People whereupon one that stood by gave him the
Eye in his Pulpit, and there being sideings on both parts, it came to a
Scuffle, in which, some were hurt, and it had gone very far, had not it been
timely appeased; and from that very day, the Priest's might date their no
Success in England, for all that were not Papist's, declared against their
Practices, and talked loud against the Intreagues of Court; however, curious
Machins of Fireworks were prepared on the Thames, to Celebrate the Infants
Birthday, and performed before the King, Queen and the whole Court, with great
variety on the 17 th. of July; and the Ambassadors, Envoys and Consuls Abroad,
spared no Cost in the Courts of Foreign Princes on the like occasion; So that
to appearance of what is Related, it Cost the King above 200000 l. but the Joy
was some time dashed, by the Infants falling ill at Richmond; where upon a
Country Nurse, said to be the Wife of a Tile-maker, was provided for him, to
give him Suck, he being before designed to be brought up by hand; And Envoys
were sent from most of the Neighboring Princes, to Congratulate this Birth;
but the most Memorable proceeding was at Rome, where Sir John Lydcot the Kings
Agent, caused amongst other things, a piece of Painting to be drawn,
Representing the Infant, in the Apparel of a Knight of the Garter, supported
by two Angels, surrounded with Laurels descending from Heaven, and other Angels
holding the Crowns of the Three Kingdoms, and his Sword, with several Trophies;
over him was a Plum of Feathers with the Device, and below, the Sun rising at a
distance, Expressing his Birth, with the Representation of a Sea Battle,
wherein the English Admiral was Triumphing over his Enemies. This Piece was
hung over the Palace gate, in Rome, all hung with Dammask richly Laced and
Fringed with Gold, the King and Queens Picturs being on each side the piece,
and the Popes, after the Roman manner: But all this Joy was soon after dashed
by surprising News from beyond the Seas, as will appear in proper place, etc.

On the 24 th. of August, the King declared in Council, that he Intended
pursuant to a Declaration he had put forth to call a Parliament to meet on the
27 th. of November, and directed the Lord Chancellor to Issue out Writs on the
18 th. of September; and the Addressers continued to make large Promises in
diverse of their Addresses, what they would do toward Choosing such Mem^ers as
should answer his Expectation etc. But however, the great Preparation in
Holland; to make Decent; in England being by this time known at Court, a
Proclamation contrary to the thoughts of most, was put forth, bearing date the
21 st. of September, declaring amongst other things. Inv^olably to preserve the
Church of England, by such a Confirmation of the several Acts of Uniformity,
that they should never be Altered any other way the^ by Repealing the several
Clauses which ^^flicted Penalties upon per^^ not promoted, or to be promoted
upon any Ecclesiastical Benifice or Promotion within the meaning of the said
Acts, for using and exercising their Religion Contrary to the Tenor and Purport
of the said Acts of Uniformity, and for the further securing, not only the
Church of England, but the Protestant Religion in General; he was willing that
the Roman Catholics should remain Incapable to be Members of the House of
Commons etc. this sudden Alteration made many Ama^ed, till the true cause was
known, and then the Wonder ceased; for now as (...) Papists as others were
dismissed of the^^ Places; the King Authorizing and Impowring the Lord
^ieutena^^^ of the socral Counties, to Grant Deputations to such Gentlemen as
had been lately (...) from being Deputy Li^^tenants, and directions were given
to the Lord Chancellor to put into the Commission of the Peace, such Gentlemen
as were said aside, and should be Recommended by the Lord Lieutenants.

On the 30 th. of September diverse of the Bishops were sent for to White Hall,
and received into Favor; and the King let them know, that he would signify
his pleasure for taking off the Suspension of the Lord Bishop of London, which
was done accordingly; and a Proclamation was Published, giving notice of the
sudden Invasion expected from Hol^and; and the Writs that had been Issued out
for Election of Members to sit in Parliament, were by this Proclamation
re-called, and discharged: and all People Commanded to be in a readness for
Defense, and charged on pain of High Treas^^ no^ to be Corresponding, Aiding
(...) or Countenancing any of the In^aders, (...) And hereupon the Duk^^ of
(...) ^erwick were Elected Knight^ (...) of the Order, and (...) the ^arter and
George, having (...) first Knighted by the Sovereign; and (...) ^ew Commissions
were given out to raise Men in diverse Counties, wh^lst some ^oble Men came in
to offer their Service. And now the Church of England came again into the
Thoughts of the Court; the King being pleased to declare in Council on the 5
th. of October, That in pursuance to his Intention and Resolution to Protect
the Church of England, and that all Suspicions and Jealousies to the contrary
might be removed, He thought fit to dissolve the Commission for Causes
Ecclesiastical, etc. And accordingly gave Directions to the Lord Chancellor,
that it might be forthwith done. And his Grace the Duke of Newcastle was
appointed Lord Lieutenant of the Three Ridings of the County of York.

On the 6 th. the City of London had rerestored to her, all her Ancient
Franchises and Privileges, as fully as she enjoyed them before the Judgment
upon the Quo Warranto, and the Lord Chancellor Jefferys brought an Instrument
of Restitution and Confirmation under the great Seal of England; and Sir John
Eyles, who by appointment succeeded Sir John Shorter (he Dying before the
expiration of his Mayoralty) had his Quietus, Sir John Chapman being by this
Instrument appointed Lord Mayor, until the Feast of Simon and Jude, and was
Sworn in the Guild Hall, with the usual Solemnity; and the Aldermen that were
in being at the time of the said Judgment, were restored to their places, and
the Vacancies left, to be supplied by Election, according to the Ancient
Custom. And from this Message no doubt, the Chancellor took a presage of his
falling Greatness, for instead of being received with Shouts and Acclamations,
he was affronted in his return by several Inferior Persons, and took it very
patiently, contrary to his wonted fiery Humor; yet the Lord Mayor, Aldermen
and Sheriffs, Addressed the King upon this occasion, as likewise did the
Lieutenancy of the City. And the Lords of the Privy Council of Scotland, sent a
Letter signed by many of them, to let the King know into what a Postu^^ they
had put that Kingdom for Defense.

On the 10th. of October the King was pleased to signify, That having received
several Complaints, of great Abuses and Irregularities committed in the late
Regulations of Corporations, He thought fit to Authorize and Require the Lords
Lieutenants of the several Counties, to inform themselves of all such Abuses
and Irregularities within their Lieutenancies, and to make forthwith Report
thereof to himself, together with what they conceived fit to be done for
redressing the same; and that then be would give such further Orders as should
be requisite: And hereupon some few Addresses followed; and the Lord Bishop of
Winchester was empowered as Visitor of St. Mary Magdelens College in Oxford,
to settle the Society regularly and statutably; whereupon the Popish Tribe was
turned out, and those worthy Persons who had been causelessly dismissed,
restored to their fellowships, etc. and had power to choose themselves a
President.

On the 13 th. of October Sir John Chapman was Elected Lord Mayor for the
en^suing Year, and Sir Humphry Edwin, and Mr. John Fleet, afterward Knighted
by the King, were Elected Sheriffs, and Si^ Peter Rich Chamberlain. And a
Proclamation, bearing Date the (...) was pu^lished for restoring Corporatione
to the^ ancient Charters. Liberties, R^ghts and Franchises, and to displace
many of those who bore Offices, or ha^ pl^ces of Truff unduly obtained, by the
taking away such Charters, or put in by the Regulators, and leave for (...) a^
had been wrongfully (...) though late, this (...) he had been ab^^ed and
Imposed on, by such as sought their own advantage and revenge, before his ^rue
Interest, and the welfare of the Kingdoms.

And now the Infant having before been privately Christened, was Solemnly named
at the Chapple of St. James's, amidst the Ceremonies and Rites of Baptism, as
used in the Church of Rome, viz. James, Francis, Edward, the Pope by his Nuncio
standing for Godfather, and the Queen Dowager as God-mother; and diverse new
Lord Lientenants were appointed in the Countys, etc. And a Proclamation,
bearing date the 20 th. of October, was published for driving all Cattle of
Draught, Oxen, etc. 20 Miles from the Shore; and that the Coasts should be
diligently Guarded, which was given in charge to those that were in power in
the respective Counties, as well Civil as Mi^itary. And although a considerable
Army was on Foot, under the Command of the Earl of Feversham, as also a Fleet
at Sea, under the Command of the Earl of Dart^outh; yet such par^^ck ^ear had
seized the Priests, and such Ministers of State as wore (...) of evil
Practices, that they were pr^par^^ to be on the Wing, and made it a great part
of the^^ Business to gaze upon the Weather-Cocks, and observe which way the
Wind stood, and to that end a Vane was placed on the highest part of the
Banqueting House, where it yet remains: and Sutlers were Encouraged more than
ordinary to follow the Army with Provisions and other Necessaries. And now the
Legality of the Birth of the Infant being much discoursed of abroad, an
Extraordinary Council was called on the 22 th. of October, where by the King's
desire and appointment, the Queen Dowager, and diverse of the Peers, as well
Spiritual as Temporal, that were about the Town, as also the Lord Mayor and
Aldermen of London, and the Judges, with several of the Kings Council at Law,
the Ladies, Lords, and others that were present at the time the Queen was held
to be in Labor, did likewise appear, and Declare upon Oath what they knew
concerning or relating to the Bi^th, etc. which was afterward published at
large, and soon after Theirs and other De^ositions were by the Kings Order
Enrolled in Chancery: and about this time the Ea^l of Sunderland was removed
from being principal Secrecary of State, and the Lord Viscount Preston
appointed to take that Office upon him: and the Wind for the most part
continued at S. W. and by S. so that though all things were in a readiness, and
the Dutch Fleet laboring to get to Sea, it was for a time obstructed, which
made the Priests Insinuate into the more foolish sort of Biggots, that the
Virgin Mary had commanded the Wind not to shift its Quarter till Lady Day at
soonest. And various Reports flying abroad, every one freely speaking as they
thought, or stood affected, a Proclamation was published to prevent the
spreading of false News, but the Rumors rather increased, then lessened.

On the 29 th. of October, Sir John Chapman was sworn Lord Mayor of the City of
London, before the Barons of the Exchequer; but the Solemnity was not great at
his return, by reason of the Consternation the People were in; also, to prevent
Tumults that might have happened, notwithstanding, the Judges, and several of
the Lords of the Privy Council, dined with him at Grocers Hall.

In the beginning of November, the Wind suddenly coming about, the Dutch Fleet
weighed Anchor, and got to Sea, consisting of 635. Men of War, Flyboats, Pinks,
and Fireships, on Board which, was his Royal Highness the Prince of Orange,
since King of England, etc. with diverse great Commanders, as well English
Noblemen, as others, and (...) Horse and Foot^ and on the 3 d. of November,
about 10^ of the Clock in the Morning it appeared about half Seas over, between
Dover and Callais, steering a Chan^^l Course Westward, the Wind a very fresh
Gale at East North East and was between Six and Seven Hours passing by Dover^
(...) Fleet lying still (the Seame^ not being willing to sight on this
Occasion) Yet a Fly-Boat, and some Straggling Victuallers, were brought into the
River, by Scoutships, and such as were cruizing for Discovery; and on the Fifth
of November, the Day of our former Deliverance from the Powder Plot, about 300^
Sail of the Dutch Fleet came into Torbay, and diverse into Brixham Key, where
they Landed some Soldiers, whilst the rest were s^nt on Shore in Boats,
without any Opposition: The Country People, who in other cases being timorous
and frighted from their Habitations, here, on the contrary, came flocking to
the Shore, and brought such Provisions as they hastily could get, to comfort
and refresh the Soldiers. The Army being Landed, Marched toward Exeter,
increasing as it went; and that City upon its approach, opened the Gates, and
many of the Townsmen Listed themselves, only the Bishop left his Palace, and
came (...) London, where the King appointed him to the Archiepis^^pal See of
York, In which his Grace has been since confirmed? and now the Armies be
ginning to move, the King (...) out an Order for the punctual Payment of
Quarters and good Behavior, etc. and a Proclamation to supp^^^ Declaration
omitted by the Prince; and the Train^^ A^^s^ery was ordered to be in a
Readiness to m^rch to Salisbury but the Court was extremely startled, upon News
that the Lord Cornbury was gone over, with a considerable Number of Horse and
Dragoons, and that the Noblemen and Gentlemen went in daily; and even the whole
Army* or the greater part of it showed an open unwillingness to Fight, against
those that came to deliver us from Popery, etc.

Upon these Proceedings, Exetar ^air, and other Fairs in the West, were (...)
and on the 17 th. of November, in the Afternoon, the King went to Windsor; and
from thence continued his ^ourne^ toward Salisbury, (...) a General B^nde
(...) of (...) dering the Privy Council to meet in his Absence, for the dispa^^
of Aff^irs, as Occasion should require; and the (...) Forces, held to be 3 or
4000. that were (...) over a little before by the Earl of Tyrconnel, marched
into the West.

Whilst these things were doing, the Lord Delamere mustered a great many Forces
upon Boddon Downs, and Declared for the Prince. The King arriving at Salisbury,
was Lodged in the Bishop's Palace, and while he continued there, a Skirmish
happened between an advanced Party of Foot, who had gone too far from the main
Body, or else were going to the Prince's Army, and Colonel Sarsefield, who
commanded a Party of the King's Horse, Dragoons, and Granadiers, in which, the
former being very unequal in number, were worsted, some being after a resolute
defense killed, others taken Prisoners, and the rest escaped; on the Kings part
Four were killed, and Two wounded, one mortally; this happened near Wincanton,
where the Foot upon the pursuit made after them, had posted themselves in a
strong ground, and had had the better, had not a Countreyman discovered a
place, where the Horse might enter.

The King finding great Numbers, as well Soldiers in his own Pay, as others, to
go daily over, Published a Proclamation of General Pardon to such as would
return within the space of 40. Days; as also, Pardon and Protection to all such
Foreigners, as should do the like; but it little or nothing availed, for we do
not hear of any that returned. With these Discouragements, the King came
hastily from Salisbury, having first given Order for his Army to retreat, which
was done with great Precipitation, even contrary to Expectation, considering
for several Campaigns, it had attracted the wonder of many, on Hounslow Heath.

The King thus returning, and hearing that several strong Places had declared
against him, thought it convenient (in order to quiet the People) to Call a
Parliament: and Ordered the Lord Chancellor to Issue out Writs, for summoning
a Parliament to meet at Westminster, the 15 th. of January ensuing; and made
Colonel Edward Griffin a Baron of this Kingdom, by the Name and Title of Lord
Griffin of Braybrook, in the County of Northampton, after which, he caused his
Proclamation to be Published for Calling a Parliament.

On the 9 th. of December, his Grace the Lord Archbishop of York did Homage to
the King, the Ceremonies of his Translation to that See, having been performed
the Day before at Lambeth-House, by the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury,
assisted by the Bishops of St. Asaph, Ely, Rochester, and P^terborough.

Whilst these things happened, H^ll, ^ork, Plymouth, and some other Places,
were secured for the Prince's Interest, by diverse Noble ^on and Gentlemen, and
the whole Kingdom inclined to his Side, and his Army which was greatly
increased, advanced a pace toward London, when some of the advanced Parties,
finding an Opposition in the Town of Reading, by some Scotch and Irish Troops
of Horse and Dragoons posted there; they after a hot Ski^mish, ^orced their
(...), and clearing ^he Town, drove them to ^^yford-Bridge, where the main
Guard had taken its Station; and those fearing a greater Party (...), thought
fit to retire, and leave the passage free, though not above Nine or Ten were
killed in the skirmish. This News flying swiftly to White Hall, alarmed the
(...), and put all into hurry and confusion^ The (...), whose Councils (as it
is (...) believed) had brought the (...), packed up their (...) themselves;
(...) (who in the height of his (...) professed, nothing grie^^d him more than
that he had not stayed ^n the Reign of K, Charles the Second, and ^ered with
his (...)) had by this ^hanged his Mind, and (...) no Stomach to be placed as a
Martyr in the Roman ^alender, for having gotten a huge Mass of Money, he timely
^^bbed off with it, and never staid till he had Earthed himself beyond the
Seas: The Queen and the Infant ^ant were likewise sent privately away for
France, where they arrived, and were received by Order of the French King; and
King James not thinking himself safe in White Hall, on the (...) of December,
about Three in the Morning, privately left (...) Palace, and wen^ by Water
^^lenderly ^ttended) to kent, and ^o Overland, to ^^e Shore, in Expectation of
Shipping him^^lf for France, but a great search being ^ade by the Country
People, for Father (...) and others; the King and Sir Edward (...) were taken
in (...) near Peversham, and there plundered by the Mobily, they keeping
themselves a considerable time concealed.

Whilst these things happened, most People were ex^^ear^ly surpised at the
King's Departure; whereupon, the Lords that were in and about Town, both (...)
and Temporal, assembled (...) to ^^nsult what was best to be done i^ so (...),
and from thence adjourned to the Guild Hall, London, where the Lord Mayor had
summoned a Common Council, and thither sent for Mr. Skelleton Lieutenant of the
Tower, and caused him to deliver up the Keys to the Lord Lucas, constituting
him as Governor, and drew up a Declaration of their good meaning to the
Settlement of the Peace and Tranquillity of the Kingdom, which was signed by 29.
of them; and thereupon they sent some of their Body to wait upon the Prince
with it, as their good meaning and affection toward him, for having ventured
his Person, etc. for rescuing the Kingdoms from Popery, etc. The Lord Mayor,
Court of Aldermen, and Common Council Addressed likewise to the same Purpose;
and the Multitude got together, and pulled down the Chapples and Mass-Houses in
Lime-Street, Bucklers-Berry, St. John's, Wild-Street, Lincolns Inn-Fields, etc.
committing many Disorders upon the Houses of Ambassadors, especially, that of
the Spanish and Florentine Ambassador, and Envoy, which could not in that
juncture of hurry and confusion be remedied, though the Trained-Bands, and
Watches were up.

On the 12 th of December, the Lord Jefferys was taken in Hope and
Anchor-Alley, in Wapping, Disguised in the Habit of a Seaman, going for Coals
to New Castle, and brought before the Lord Mayor of London, attended by a
numerous Rabble; and by him (at his own Request) sent to the Tower, where he
soon after was charged with a Warrant, from the Lords at White^ Hall, and there
through Grief and ^ear, fell into a Mallady that swept him from the Stage of
the World, where he had Acted with too much Cruelty.

Notice being given to the Lords at White Hall, that the King was at Feversham,
they dispatched a Messenger to entreat his return; and accordingly, on the 16
th. in the Evening he came to his Palace, and sent the Earl of Foversham to the
Prince (who was then at Windsor) to invite him to St. James's; and put out an
Order for suppressing Tumults, and disorderly Outrages committed by the Rabble;
but the 18 th. the King removed to Rochester upon request, and the Prince came
to Town, attended with a numerous Train, through the shouts and Acclamations of
the People, and the Bells-Ringing, Bonefires likewise made, the Streets shine
in the Evening, and the King's Army, at his Command, being disbanded by the
Earl of Feversham; being ordered by the Prince to repair to their Colors,
Quarters were appointed at several Cities, Towns, and Villages, for the
English, Scotch, and Irish Forces; and all People to whom any of them had
embezled their Arms, etc. were commanded to restore them; and on the 20 th. of
December, the Lord Mayor being indisposed, the Aldermen and their Deputies
waited upon his Highness, being accompanied with some of the Common Council of
each Ward, to Congratulate him, upon his Happy Arrival at St. James's, which
was performed by Sir George Trebie, their Recorder, in a very Learned and
Eloquent Speech, and was very favorably received: And the Sheriff, Nobility
and Gentry, of the County of Norfolk, presented an Address to the same purpose,
carrying with it a deep Sense of their Acknowledgment of so great a Blessing.

And now by reason of this great Revolution the Nation being unsettled, and the
King having withdrawn himself from Rochester beyond the Seas, it was highly
thought convenient that a way should be found out to create a calmness in the
minds of the people; whereupon the Lords Spiritual and Temporal were appointed
to give their attendance, as likewise such Members as had served in the late
Parliaments, in the Reign of King Charles the Second, and Court of Aldermen,
together with the Members of the Common Council of the City of London, the
Lords assembled in the Lords House at Westminster on the 25 th. of December,
and unanimously concluded to Entreat His Highness to take upon Him the
administration of Affairs, and dispose of the public Revenues, etc. and take
into his Princely care the con^ition of Ireland, which by Tyrconnel's means had
mostly revolted: They likewise ^mplored him to Issue out His Summons for the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, being Protestants, as also his Circular Letters
to the Counties, Cities, Boroughs, to order the Elections of such a number of
Persons to represent them, as are of right to be sent to Parliament; and on the
the 26 th. the Commons and Aldermen, etc. waited upon his Highness at St.
James's; to whom he made the following Speech, viz.

YOU Gentlemen, that have been Members of the late Parliaments, I have desired
you to meet me bear, to advise the best manner how to pursue the ends of my
Declaration, in calling a Free Parliament, for the preservation of the
Protestant Religion, and restoring of the Rights and Liberties of the Kingdom,
and settling the same; that they may not be in danger of being again subverted.
And you, the Aldermen and Members of the Common Council of the City of London,
I desire the same of you; and in regard your Numbers are like to be great, you
may (if you think fit) divide your selves, and sit in several places.

Upon this they agreed to go to the House of Commons at Westminster, where they
chose Henry Powle Esquire for their Chairman, and resolved upon an Address, which
was drawn up to the same purpose; as that of the Lords, and Graciously received
on the 27 th. and the day following occasioned the like favorable Answer. And
now the Election coming on for their Sitting the 22 th. of January, least any
disturbance should happen by the Soldiers Quartering in Boroughs and
Corporations, an Order was Published, That they should March out of those
places a day before the Election, Garrisons excepted, and not return til the
Election was over: A Declaration was likewise Published for the due ordering
the Collection of the Public Revenue; and Money being wanting, the Citizens of
London very liberally upon His Highness's Letter, Lent between 2 and 300000 l.
to be repayed at Interest, at six Months; and thence as cheerfully continued it
for a longer time: And the suddainness of the affairs requiring the Soldiers to
Quarter in private Houses, a Declaration was Published to prohibit it, unless
such Houses as were willing to entertain them. And diverse of the Seamen having
deserted their Ships, were ordered to return at a set time; and for the better
Encouragement of the Navy, the Arrears and Wages that should grow due, was
promised to the Officers and Seamen serving in the Fleet, according to the
known Method. The Royal African Company, out of a sense of their Duty and
Respect, on the 16 th. of January at a General Court, Unanimously chose His
Highness to be their Governor for the Year ensuing, and presented him with
1000 l. in their Joynt-Stock: and the High Sheriff, together with the
considerable Gentry of the County of Cambridge, entered into an Association,
engaging themselves Solemnly to stand by His Highness with their Lives and
Fortunes, etc. and soon after the like was done by diverse others.

The 22 th. of January being come, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal assembled
at Westminster, the Lord Marquess of Hallifax Executed the place of Speaker in
the House of Lords, and the Commons chose Henry Powle Esquire to be their Speaker:
after which His Highness's Letter was read in both Houses, on the occasion of
their Meeting; and the Lords and Commons resolved upon an Address of Thanks,
and humbly therein desired him to continue the Administration of Affairs, till
further application should be made by them, to His Highness; and the 31 th. of
January, was appointed for a public Day of Thanksgiving in the Cities of
London and Westminster, and 10 Miles distance, for the great Deliverance; and
on the 14 of February all over England: and then the Lords and Commons went to
St. James's, to present their Address. The Soldiers, as well as the Seamen,
were likewise encouraged about this time, with promise of their Pay* and
Arrears, etc. and many Disorders being committed by unruly People in Forests
and Chaces, by Destroying the Deer, and cutting down Timber, a Declaration was
published for the preventing them, Commanding the Magistrates to be strict and
dilligent in apprehending the Offenders: and now the Prince having at the
supplication of the Lords and Commons sent for His Royal Consort, She passed
the Seas, Attended by diverse English and Dutch Men of War; and was received
with great Demonstrations of Joy at White Hall, where she arrived by Water on
the 12 th. of February, being that Night Visited by most of the Nobility at
Court; and the next Day in the Morning the Lords Spiritual and Temporal being
assembled at Westminster, and having agreed upon an Instrument of Writing, for
Declaring the Prince* and Princess of Orange, King and Queen of England, France
and Ireland, with all the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging; and
upon presenting it in the Banqueting House, having received their consent,
about Eleven of the Clock they were Proclaimed at White Hall, by the Officers
at Arms; and afterward at Temple Bar, at Wood^ street-End, and before the
Royal Exchange, with all the Ceremonies and Splendor that attends the
occasion, the People every where expressing their Satisfaction, by loud
acclamations, and four Regiments of the City Militia lined the way. So the Day
concluded with Ringing of Bells and Bonefires. And hereupon the King and Queen
jointly placed in the Administration of the Government, which King James was
Declared to have Abdicated by both Houses, as also the Succession settled in
case of Failure of Issue, a Proclamation was published, to continue all Persons
(being Protestants) who on the first of the last of December were in Office of
Sheriff, Justice of the Peace, Commissioners, Collectors, and other Offices and
Places concerning the Managing, Collecting, Receiving and Paying of the Revenue
of the Kingdom, should be continued in the said Office, till their Majesty's
Pleasure was further known.

The Papists in Ireland, Arming in great Numbers in that Kingdom; committed
about this time great Outrages on the Protestants, Plundering, Disarming, and
Imprisoning them, so that diverse as they could make their Escape fled for
England; yet the North parts held out against them, being in Arms under the
Lord Kingston and others making a very brave Defense; to prevent the going over
of other Papist's and Disafected Persons; the English Ports that lay favorable
to that Kingdom were ordered to be stopped. As for Scotland, it had submited it
self Voluntarily, to the Protection of King William and Queen Mary, yet the
Duke of Gourdon held the Castle against the whole Kingdom, being Guarded by
about 100 of his Accomplices mostly Papist's, but in the end was Obliged to
Surrender, as will appear hereafter.

On the 18 th. of February, the King went by Water to the House of Lords, in
all the usual Splendour and Majesty, and being Seated on the Throne, and the
Commons Attending, he made a very Gracious Speech to both Houses, Relating to
the Circumstances of Affairs; and then Returned to White Hall, and a
Privy Council of Honorable and Worthy Persons were Chosen, and the Papist's,
such as were not Housekeepers, commanded to remove from the Cities of London
and Westminster, etc. And a Universal Joy overspread the Kingdom, upon the
News of the Proclaiming the King and Queen, all the Cities and most remarkable
Towns shined with Fires, the Bells every where Ringing, great Feasting and
Drinking of Healths, etc.

The King having frequently Repeated His Good Will toward, and his Resolution
to Protect the Church of England; On the 21 st. of February, the Lord Bishop of
London, with the Clergy of the City, to the Number of 100 waited upon the King
and Queen, with an Humble Tender of their Fidelity, and were Graciously
Received, having the Honor to kiss their Hands; and the King gave them a
further Assurance of his Affection to that Church, and of all Protection and
Encouragement; Concluding, viz. I Assure you, that you shall ever find it so,
and may Depend upon it. On the 23 d. the King gave the Royal Assent to an Act
for Removing and Preventing all Questions and Disputes about the Assembling and
Siting of the present Parliament; and afterward went with the Queen to
Divertise himself at Hampton Court; and in the beginning of March, he was
pleased to Constitute Sir John May^ard, Anthony Kecke, and William Rawleson,
Sergeants at Law, since Knighted, Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal of
England; the Lord Willoughby of Ersby, Chancellor of the Duchy and County
Palatine of Lancaster, the Lord Lovelace, Captain of the Band of Gentlemen
Pentioners, and the Lord Lucas chief Governor of the Tower of London; and
diverse other Worthy Persons were put in Places of Trust. He likewise Granted a
Conge de Elire to the Dean and Chapter of the Cathederal Church of Sarum, with
his Letters Missive, for the Electing Dr. Burnet Bishop of that See, void by
the Death of Dr. Seth Ward: And Hearth-Money proving grievous to the Subjects,
especially the poorer sort, the King upon the humble Request of the Commons was
pleased to give his Consent, That the Act should be made null and void, for
which they returned him an Address of Thanks; and upon the same occasion the
Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council, made and Presented their Address.

On the 16 th. of March the King passed Two Acts, one for Impowering His
Majesty to apprehend and detain such Persons as he shall find just Cause to
suspect are Conspiring against the Government; and an Act for anulling and
making void the Attainder of William Russel Esquire commonly called Lord Russel;
and then made a very Gracious Speech, requiring them to settle the Oaths, that
Papists might be excluded, and Protestants, that were willing and able to
serve, might be admitted to places of Trust.

About this time we had News, That a great part of the Regiment of Foot, once
Commanded by the Lord Dumbarton, had revolted, and seized on the Money,
designed for their Pay, and Marching away with some Field Pieces, had
Proclaimed K. James, commiting several Disorders and Outrages in the County of
Suffolk, and other places; whereupon the Parliament besought his Majesty, to
Issue out a Proclamation, for apprehending and surpressing them, which was
accordingly done, and more Forces sent to quell them; however, at first they
prepared to make resistance, but the King's Horse being ready to attack them,
they threw down their Arms and surrendered upon Discretion, and were most of
them (the Officers especially) brought up to London; the greatest part of the
Soldiers were sent to the English Army, assisting the States General against
France; and several of the principal Officers were tried at the Assizes holden
for the County of Suffolk, and being found Guilty, cast themselves upon the
King's Mercy, expressing a hearty Sorrow for what they had done, and were
thereupon Reprieved.

The Coronation Day being appointed on the 11 th. of April, 1689. A
Proclamation was published to give Notice thereof, to such as had Claims, by
Tenure of Land, Service, Dignity, Places, Honor, Offices or Trust, that they
might timely make their Claims, in order to have things done regular, upon so
great and solemn Occasions. And the Lord Lieutenants of the respective Countys
were perfected. So that all things tended to good order and settlement in
England, but the Affairs of Ireland admitted of no such Happiness; for the late
King being Landed there with French Forces, and drawn to him a considerable
Army of Irish Papists. For a time we had but a Melancholy account of Affairs
in that Kingdom; however several places held out, and put a stop to the Torrent
of the Enemy; and such as were incapable of Resisting, were obliged to take
such Conditions as they could get.

On the 22 th. of March, Thomas Pilkington Esquire since Knighted, Elected to be
Lord Mayor for the City of London, for the remaining part of the Year (in the
room of Sir John Chapman, who Dyed in his Mayoralty) was presented to the Lords
Commissioners of the Great Seal, and afterward Sworn at the Hustings in
Guild Hall, according to the ancient Custom* and at Five in the Afternoon he
was Sworn without the Tower-Gate, by the Lord Lucas, Chief Governor of the
Tower, in pursuance of their Majesty's Writ directed to him, and of the ancient
usuage at such time as the Exchequer Court is not holden at Westminster. And
the Day before an Act passed the Royal Assent, for a present Supply for their
Majesty's.

The Convention of the Estates of Scotland met at Edinburgh, to consult the
settlement of the Affairs of that Kingdom, as it had been appointed the 16 th.
of March; they chose his Grace the Duke of Hamilton their President, and
settled their Committee of Five out of every Estate, for Examining the
Elections; and then took the matter of the Castle of Edinburgh into their
Consideration, and sent to the Duke of Gourdon, who yet held it out, requiring
him to put it into their hands, whereupon he required an Indemnity for all that
had passed, and a Security for the future, which the Convention condescending
to, in so far as he had acted as a Papist, they sent the Earls of Tweedale, and
Lothain, with an Indemnity in Writing, for himself and all that were with him,
upon which he desired 24 Hours to consider it; but though this was granted, it
appeared in the end that he only delayed to gain time, when after several
Messages, sent to and fro, the Convention sent up the Heralds at Arms in their
Formalities, to charge him in the Name and Authority of the Convention,
Immediately to deliver up the Castle, upon pain of Treason, and upon refusal,
he was Proclaimed at the Market Cross; and all Persons forbid upon pain of
Treason, to Converse, Correspond, or Treat with him, or to Aid, Abet, or
Succor him, and so they proceeded to Forfeit him. And the King of England's
Letter was read with great applause, and a Committee appointed to draw up an
Answer in the most thankful and dutiful manner; but there being a Letter
likewise sent by the late King James, brought by one Mr. Crane; before they
would suffer it to be read, they passed an Act, by the unanimous consent of the
House, asserting the Lawfulness of the Convention, notwithstanding any thing
that might be alleged in the said Letter to the contrary, and the Person that
brought it, was committed to the Custody of a Sergeant at Arms; but upon his
humble Petition, he in a few Days was set at Liberty, and obtained a Pasport to
return to his Master: And the Convention approved proved of all that the
Noblemen and Gentlemen at London had done, in praying His Majesty to take upon
him the Administration of the Government. The Viscount Dundee being Discovered
to have a secret Conference with the Duke of Gourdon, and upon being Summoned,
Flying with between 30 and 40 Horse, stronger Forces were raised, and 3
Regiments were sent from England, under the Command of Major General Mackay;
and thus passed over the Material Transactions of the Year, 1688. just a
hundred Years since the Spanish Invasion was defeated and brought to nothing.

In the beginning of the Year, 1689. the Lord Ross arrived with a Letter from
the Convention of Scotland, which he presented to his Majesty, viz.

May it please Your Majesty.
AS Religion, Liberty and Law, are the dearest concerns of Mankind, so the
deepest sense of the extreme hazard they were exposed to, must produce suitable
Returns from the Kingdom of Scotland, to Your Majesty, whom in all Sincerity
and Gratitude, we Acknowledge to be (under God) our great and seasonable
Deliverer; and we heartily Congratulate, that as God has Honored Your Majesty
to be an Eminent Instrument of the Preservation of his Truth. so he has
rewarded Your Undertaking with Success, in the considerable Progrese you have
made in Delivering us, and in preserving to us the Protestant Religion.

We return our most Dutiful Thanks to Your Majesty, for the accepting the
Administration of Public Affairs, and convening the Estates of this Kingdom;
and we shall with all convenient Diligence take Your Gracious Letter into our
Consideration, hoping shortly (by the Blessing of God) to fall upon such
Resolutions, as may be Acceptable to Your Majesty, secure the Protestant
Religion, and Establish the Government, Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom upon
solid Foundations, most agreeable to the General Good, and Inclination of the
People: As for the Proposals of the Union, we doubt not but Your Majesty will
so dispose the Matter that there may be an equal Readiness in the Kingdom of
England to Accomplish it, as one of the best means for the securing the
Happiness of these Nations, and settling a lasting Peace; we have hitherto, and
still shall endeavor to avoid Animosities or Prejudice which might disturb our
Councils; that as we Design the Public Good, so it may be done with the
General Concurrence and Approbation of the Nation; and in the mean time, we
Desire the Continuance of Your Majesty's Care and Protection toward us, in all
our Concerns, whereof the kind Expressions in Your Gracious Letter has given us
full Assurance.

Signed, etc.

On the 31 st. of March, Dr. Gilbert Burnet, Bishop Elect of Salisbury, was
Consecrated according to the Form prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer, in
the Chapple, in the Palace of Fullham, by the Bishops of London, Lincoln,
Landaff, St. Asaph, and Carlisle, by virtue of a Commission granted them, by
his Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury; and now by Reason of this great
Revolution, Hillary Term being omitted, an Act was passed for renewing of
Actions, and Processes lately depending in the Courts at Westminster, and
discontinued by the not holding the said Term, and for supplying the defect,
relating to proceedings at Law; an Act for exhibiting a Bill in the present
Parliament, for the Naturalizing the most Noble Prince George of Denmark; and
an other for punishing Officers or Soldiers that shall Mutiny, or Desert their
Majesty's Service.

On the 3 d. of April, at a Chapter held of the most Noble Order of the Garter,
Duke Frederick Marshall d' Schomberge, General of his Majesty's Forces, and
Master General of the Ordinance; and the Right Honorable William Earl of
Devonshire, Lord Steward of his Majesty's Household, were elected Knights
Companions of the Noble Order, and were invested with the Garter and George,
having been first Knighted by the Sovereign, with the usual Ceremonies; and the
Lord Bishop of Salisbury was sworn, and admitted Chancellor of the Order.

A great many Arms being imbezled by the Soldiers, that had formerly been
disbanded, or were diserted; a Proclamation was Published for their Discovery,
commanding the Delivery, and bringing in such Arms, and other Matters relating
thereto, with a value set to such as should bring them in or Discover them.

On the 5 th. of April, his Grace the Duke of Ormond was Installed in St.
Georges Chapple at Windsor, Knight and Companion of the Noble Order of the
Garter, with the usual Ceremonies; and about this time, the King published a
Declaration, to assure such English, as were in his Service in the
Low Countries, of full English pay, upon the English Establishment, as full to
all Intents and Purposes, as any other Regiment of his Subjects, remaining
within the Kingdom of England, and proceeded to make many Creations of Honor,
conferring them on worthy Patriots of their Country; and on the 9 th. of April,
coming to the Parliament House, He passed an Act for the Establishing the
Coronation. Oath; an Act for Naturalizing the most Noble Prince George of
Denmark, and settling his Precedence; an Act for Naturalizing Frederick Count
Schomberge, and others; and Two Regiments were Embarked for Ireland, under
Colonel Coningham, and Colonel Richards, and other Preparations made to
follow them, in order to relieve the Protestants that yet held out.

The Convention of the Estates of Scotland, for several Reasons mentioned in an
Act for that Purpose, declared King James to have forefaulted the Right of his
Crown, and that the Throne was became Vacant, and thereupon Voted, and Ordered,
that the Committee for settling the Government, should bring in an Act for
settling the Crown upon their Majesty's William and Mary, King and Queen of
England, and to consider the Terms of Destination of Heirs of the Crown; and
likewise, to prepare and bring in an Instrument of Government, to be offered
with the Crown, etc. And about this time, a Barbarous Murder was committed
upon the Person of Sir George Lockheart, President of the Sessions in that
Kingdom, one Cheesely shooting him through the Back, as he was going from
Church, because he had compelled Cheesely to allow his Wife and Children
Maintenance, for which the Murderer was tortured to oblige him to confess his
Accomplices, but he accused noman; whereupon he was sentenced to have his Hand
cut off, and nailed to the Gallows, and then to be hanged, and afterward hanged
in Chains, which was accordingly Executed.

The 11 th. of April being appointed for the Day of their Majesty's Coronation
at Westminster, great were the Preparations, and their Majesty's being come
from White Hall to Westminster, the Nobility, etc. being put in order by the
He^aulds, they came down into Westminster Hall, where the Sword and Spurs were
presented to them.

After which, the Dean and Prebendaries of Westminster, having brought the
Crowns, and other Regalia, presented them sevarally to their Majesty's, which,
with the Sword and Spurs, were delivered to those Lords that were appointed to
carry them.

Then the Procession began in this manner, Drums and Trumpets, six Clerks in
Chancery, two a Breast, (as all the rest of the Proceeding went) Chaplains
having Dignities, Aldermen of London, Masters in Chancery, Solicitor and
Attorney General, Gentlemen of the Privy-Chamber, Judges, Children of
Westminster, and of the Kings Chapple, Cheair of Westminster, Prebands of
Westminster, Master of the Jewel-house, Privy-Councellors, not Peers.

Two Pursuivants, Barronesses, Borons, Bishops, a Pursuivant, a Viscountess,
Viscounts, two^Heraulds, Countesses, Earls, a Herald, a Marchioness, two
Heralds, Duchess, Dukes, two Kings of Arms, the Lord Privy Seal, Lord
President of the Council, Archbishop of York, his Royal Highness the Prince of
Denmark, two Persons Repesenting the Dukes of Aquitain and Normandy; Then the
Lords who bore Their Majesty's Regalia, viz. The Earl of Manchester St. Edwards
Staff, the Lord Gray of Ruthin the Spurs, the Earl of Clare the Queens Scepter
with the Cross, the Earl of Northampton the Kings, the Earls of Shrewsbury,
Pembroek and Derby the Three Swords; Then Garter King at Arms, between the
Usher of the Black-Rod, and the Lord Mayor of London; the Great Chamber-Lain
single, the Earl of Oxford with the Sword of State, between the Duke of
Norfolk, Earl Marshal of England, and the Duke of Ormond Lord High Constable
for the Day, then the Earl of Bedford with the Queens Scepter of the Dove, and
the Earl of Rutland with the Kings, the Duke of Boulton with the Queens Orb,
and the Duke of Grafton with the Kings; the Duke of Somerset with the Queens
Crown, and the Earl of of Devonshire, who was made High Steward of England for
the Day, with the Kings; the Bishop of London with the Bible, between the
Bishop of St. Asaph, with the Patten, and the Bishop of Rochester, with the
Challice.

Then the King Supported, by the Bishop of Winchester, and the Queen by the
Bishop of Bristol, under a Canopy, boren by Sixteen Barons of the Cinque Ports;
His Majesty's Train boren up by the Master of the Robes, assisted by the Lord
Eland, Lord Landsdown, Lord Willoughby, and the Lord Dumblain, and Her
Majesty's, by the Duchess of Somerset, Assisted by the Lady Elizabeth Paulet,
the Lady Diana Vere, the Lady Elizabeth Cavendish, and the Lady Herrieeta Hyde.

After the King a Gentlemen of the Bedchamber, and 2 Grooms of the
Bedchamber; after the Queen a Lady of Her Majesty's Bedchamber, and 2 of Her
Majesty's Women; Lastly, the Captain of the King's Guard, between the Captain
of the Yeomen of the Guard and Band of Pensioners, followed by the Officers and
Bands of the Yeomen of the Guards; the Sergeants at Arms going on each side the
Regalia, and the Gentlemen Pensioners on each side the Canopy. Thus their
Majesty's in their Robes of Crimson Velvet, the King with a Cap, and the Queen
with a Circlet on her Head, all the Nobility in Crimson Velvet Robes, with
their Coronets in their Hands; and the rest of the Proceeding in their proper
Habits, Marched on Foot upon blew Cloth to Westminster-Abby.

Being entered the Church, and all duly seated, The Bishop of London, who
performed this great Solemnity, began with the Recognition, which ended with a
mighty Shout; then their Majesty's offered, and the Lords who bore the Regalia,
presented them at the Altar. The Littany was Sung by Two Bishops, and after,
the Epistle, Gospel, and Niceen Creed. And the Bishop of Salisbury Preached on
the Text of the 2. Samuel, 23, 3, 4. And after Sermon Their Majesty's took the
Oath; and being Conducted to their Regal Chairs, placed on the Theater, they
were there Anointed, and presented with the Spurs and Sword, and Invested with
the Palls and Orbs, and then with the Rings and Scepters; and about 4 of the
Clock the Crowns were put upon their Heads, at which the People shouted, the
Drums beat, Trumpets sounded, and the Great Guns were Discharged, and the Peers
and Peeresses put on their Coronets; then the Bible was presented to their
Majesty's, and after the Benediction, they vouchsafed to kiss the Bishops,
being Inthroned: First the Bishops, and then the Temporal Lords did their
Homage, and kissed their Majesty's Cheeks, whilst the Treasurer of the Household
threw about the Coronation Medals; then followed the Communion, and their
Majesty's having made their second Oblation. received the Holy Sacrament: Then
the Bishop read the Final Prayers, and their Majesty's retired into St.
Edward's Chapple, and being new Arrayed in Purple Velvet, returned to
Westminster Hall, wearing their Rich Crowns of State, and the Nobility their
Coronets.

The Nobility, etc. being Seated at the respective Tables, which was Furnished
just as they approached; the first Course of their Majesty's Table was served
up with the proper Ceremony, being preceded by the great Officers, and the High
Constable, High Steward, and Earl Marshal; and before the second Course,
Charles Dymoke their Majesty's Champion, between the High Constable and the
Earl Marshal, performed the Challenge, after which the Heralds proclaimed
Their Majesty's Style; and all being ended with great Magnificence, their
Majesty's in the Evening returned to White Hall, and the Streets were crowded
with Bone-fires, the Bells every where Ringing; and the next Day in the
Afternoon, the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, in Parliament Assembled, went
from Westminster to the Banqueting House, where they attended Their Majesty's,
to congratulate Them upon their Coronation, which was performed by their
Speaker, in a most Eloquent Speech; after which all the Members kissed Their
Majesty's Hands, and the rejoicing soon spread through all the Kingdom. And the
Committee of Scotland for settling the Government, having made their report,
and the Grievances and an Instrument of Government being read, and distinctly
considered, the whole Estates (except some few that were absent) with one
Voice, Declared King William and Queen Mary, King and Queen of Scotland, in the
same manner as had been done in England, Proclaiming it at the Mercat Cross of
Edinburgh, with the usual Form and Solemnity, and afterward at the other
Crosses of the Kingdom.

On the 19 th. of April the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons Assembled
in Parliament, Presented an Address to His Majesty in the Banqueting House, to
render him their most Humble and Hearty Thanks for His Gracious Declaration,
and repeated Assurances, that he will maintain the Church of England, as by Law
Established, and humbly pray him to Summon a Convocation of the Clergy; to
which the King returned a very Gracious and Suitable Answer.

On the 26 th. of April, the Commons waited upon the King in the
Banqueting House, and presented Him with the following Address.

WE Your Majesty's most Loyal and Dutiful Subjects, the Commons in Parliament
assembled, most humbly lay before your Majesty our most earnest Desires, that
your Majesty would be pleased to take into your most serious Consideration, the
destructive Methods taken of late Years by the French King, against the Trade,
Quiet, and Interest of your Kingdom, and particularly the Invasion of Ireland,
and supporting your Majesty's Rebellious Subjects there; not doubting in the
least, but that through Your Majesty's Wisdom, the Alliances already made with
such as may be hereafter concluded on this occasion by your Majesty, may be
Effectual to reduce the French King to such a condition, that it may not be in
his power hereafter to violate the Peace of Christendom, nor prejudice the
Trade and Prosperity of this your Majesty's Kingdom.

To this end, we most humbly Beseech Your Majesty, to rest assured upon this
our Solemn and Hearty Promise and Engagement, That when Your Majesty shall
think fit to enter into a War against the French King, we will give Your
Majesty such Assistance in a Parliamentary way, as may enable your Majesty,
under the Protection and Blessing, God Almighty has ever afforded you, to
support and go through with the same.

To this His Majesty was pleased to return Answer in the following Words.

I Receive this Address as a mark of the Confidence you have in me, which I
take very k^ndly, and shall endeavor by all my Actions to confirm you in it; I
assure you, that my own Ambition shall never be an Argument to Incline me to
engage a War, that may expose the Nation either to Danger or Expense; but in
the present Case I look upon the War, so much already declared in effect by
France' against England, that it is not so proper an Act of Choice, as an
inevitable necessity in our own Defense.

I only tell you, That as I have ventured my Life, and All that is dear to me,
to rescue this Nation from what it suffered, I am ready still to do the same,
in order to the preserving it from all its Enemies; and as I do not doubt of
such an Assistance from you, as shall be suitable to your Advice to me, to
declare War against a powerful Enemy, so you may rely upon me, that no part of
that which you shall give for the carrying it on with success, shall be
diverted by me to any other use.

And that the Protestants who had Fled from Ireland might not suffer want in
England, great care was taken to provide for them, and most People wherever
they came contributed liberally to their relief and assistance; and the King
was pleased to put forth a Declaration to encourage the French Protestants,
that should Transport themselves, their Families and Estates, into this
Kingdom; and a Proclamation Prohibiting the Importation of all sorts of
Manufactures and Commodities whatsoever, of the Growth, Production, and
Manufacture of France, in way of Trade, etc.

On the 1st. of May His Majesty was pleased to give the Royal Assent, to an Act
for raising Money by Pole, and otherwise, toward the Reducing of Ireland; an
Act for preventing Doubts and Questions concerning the Collecting the Public
Revenues, and a private Act to Sell Lands for Paying of Debts, etc.

For the better Supply and Support of Their Majesty's Navies, Two Proclamations
were Issued out, one to Prohibit Seamen from Serving Foreign Princes, and the
other for Prohibiting them from Deserting Their Majesty's Navies: and His
Majesty having been pleased to call by His Writ diverse worthy Persons, to take
upon them the State and Degree of Sergeants at Law; they performed the Ceremony
with all the Decency and Grandeur that usually attends it, and gave Rings with
this Motto, viz Veniendo Restituit Rem: and the King was further pleased to
Constitute

Sir John Holt, Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench.

Sir William Dolbin, Sir William Gregory Giles Eyers, Esquire Justices of the same.

Sir Henry Pollexfen, Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas.

Sir John Powel, Thomas Rokeby, Esquire Peyton Ventris, Esquire Justices of the same.

Sir Robert Atkins, Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer.

Sir Edward Nevill, Nicholas Lechmer, Esquire John Turton, Esquire Barons of the same.

John Trenchard, Esquire Chief Justice of Chester.

Sir George Treby, His Majesty's Attorney General.

John Summers, Esquire His Majesty's Solicitor General.

During these things, the French Fleet attempting to Land Forces in Ireland,
Admiral Herbert, with a Squadron of the English Ships stood over to Kingsale,
on the 24 th. of April, in hopes to meet them, and on the 29 th. his Scouts
made a Signal, that they discovered a Fleet keeping their Wind, which caused
the Admiral to keep His all Night, to hinder them getting into Kinsale, and the
next Morning had notice they were gone into Baltimore, being 44 Sail; whereupon
he stood away toward the place, but not finding them there, the Scouts however
got sight of them again in the Evening, to the Westward of Cape clear whereupon
steering after them, it was sound they had got into Bantry, so that the English
Ships lay off the Bay all Night, and by break of Day stood in, where they found
them at Anchor, who presently got under Sail, and bore down upon the English,
in a Line of 28 Men of War, and five Fireships; and when they came within
Musket Shot of the Defiance, being the head-most of the English, the French
Admiral put out the Signal of Battle, which they began with small and great
Shot; and the English made several Boards to gain the Wind, or engage them
close, but that way of working not being advantageous, the English Admiral
stood off to Sea, as well to have got his Ships into a Line, as to have gained
the Wind of the Enemy; but the French were so cautious in bearing down, that
this advantage and opportunity could not be obtained, so that our Admiral
continued Battering upon the Stretch 'till Five in the Afternoon, at what time
the French tacked, and stood further into the Bay; and the English Admiral's
Ship, and some of the rest being disabled in their Rigging, could not follow
them, but continued some time before the Bay, and gave them a Gun at parting.
In this Action Capt. George Aylmer of the Portland, with 1 Lieutenant, and 9
Seamen were Killed, and about 250 Wounded; and of the French (without doubt) a
greater number; and not without good Supposition, one of their great Ships
sunk; although they had double the number of Ships, and the advantage of the
Wind.

Upon this further Invasion of the French King, made upon the Kingdom of
Ireland; Their Majesty's of Great Britain, delay^ed no longer to Publish Their
Declaration of War against him, Given at Hampton Court, the 7 th. of May, 1689.
Seting forth Reasons, that moved Their Majesty's to denounce War; and the
Unjust and Perfideous Dealings of the French King, etc. as well against Their
Majesty's Subjects in Europe, as in America, etc. And to prevent, upon this
Rupture, any Disturbance from Papist's; an Act Entitled an Act for the better
Securing the Government, by Disarming Papist's, and Reputed Papist's passed.
And now the Case of Algernoon Sidney Esquire (who lost his Head on Tower Hill,)
being before the Parliament; amongst other Acts, one was passed, for Anulling
and making Void his Attainder.

Colonel Lundy, who had been Appointed Governor of London Derry in Ireland,
forsaking that place, as supposing it not Tenable upon the Approach of the
Irish Army, and it being likewise left by Coll- Richards, and Colonel
Coningham, who brought back the Regiments under their Commands, the
Inhabitants, and such as came in Arms, from other Parts to Assist them,
Resolving however, upon their Defense, Choose that Brave Gentleman Mr. George
Walker, a Minister of -- their Governor, and Major Baker his Assistant, who,
although the Irish took Kilmore, a Fort that lies advantageous to it; defended,
they it almost to a Miracle, against above 30000 Men, till it was Relieved by
Major General Kirk, with Provision, by Water; the Inhabitants, and Garrison,
having Eat all manner of unclean things, as Dogs, Cats, Rats, Mice, etc. And
thereupon the Enemy, having lost a great number of Men, and some of their best
Commanders, found themselves constrained to raise the Siege, after they had
lain before it, Battering with their Cannon, and Casting in Bombs, from the 19
th. of April, to the end of August, and a great party of the Protestants,
Fortifying themselves in the Isle of Inch, and other Places; made a Resolute
defense, beating off such as were sent to Attacque them, and frequently taking
great Booties, by which means they Subsisted, and held out, till they were
Succored and Recruted from England.

About this time the Papist's, were commanded by Proclamation, to leave London,
and Ten Miles about it, unless such, as were Excepted in an Act, for this
purpose; and we had the happy News, of the taking two French Men of War by the
Nonsuch Frigate, as likewise, a Privatier, and several of their Merchants, by
other English Frigates and Vessels.

On the 11 th. of May, ^he Commissioners Appointed to offer Their Majesty's the
Crown of Scotland, viz. The Earl of Argyle, Sir James Montgomery, and Sir John
Darlerimple the younger, met in the Council Chamber, about Three in the
Afternoon. and being Conducted by the Master of the Ceremonies, and Accompanied
by diverse Noble Men, to the Banqueting House; They presented a Letter to the
King, (who with the Queen, Sat under a Canopy of State) from the Estates of
Scotland; and then an Instrument of Government; after that, a Paper containing
Grievances, which they desired might be Redressed, and then an Address to His
Majesty for turning the Meeting of the Estates, of the aforesaid Kingdom, into
a Parliament, all Signed by his Grace Duke Hamilton, President of the Meeting,
and were Read to Their Majesty's, whereupon the King Returned the following
Gracious Answer.

When I Engaged in this Undertaking, I had particular Regard, and Consideration
for Scotland; and therefore I did Emit a Declaration in Relation to that, as
well as this Kingdom, which I Intend to make Good and Effectual to them: I take
it very Kindly, that Scotland has Expressed so much Confidence in, and
Affection to me; They shall find me willing to Assist them in every thing, that
concerns the Well, and Interest of that Kingdom, by making what Laws shall be
necessary for the Security of their Religion, Property, and Liberty, and to
Ease them of what may be justly Grieveous to them.

This was Received with the highest sense of Thankfulness and Satisfaction; and
the Corronation Oath, thereupon Tendered to the King and Queen; the Earl of
Argyle, Speaking the Words distinctly, and the King and Queen Repeating after
him, holding up Their right Hands, after the manner of taking Oaths in Scotland.

This done the Commissioners declared that the Estates of Scotland, had
Authorized them, to Represent to His Majesty, that the Clause in the Oath, in
Relation to the Rooting out of Heriticks, did not Import the Destroying
Heriticks, and that by the Law of Scotland, no Man was to be Persecuted for his
private Opinion, and even Obstinate, and Convicted Heriticks, were only to be
denounced Rebels, or Outlawed; whereby their Moveable Estates are Confiscated
for His Majesty, at his Repeating that Clause in the Oath; did Declare, That he
did not mean by those Words, that he was under any Obligation to become a
Persecutor: To which, the Commissioners Replied, that neither the meaning of
the Oath, nor the Law of Scotland, did Import it; whereupon His Majesty
Declared, He took the Oath in that Sense; And called the Commissioners, and
others present for Witnesses, and then the King and Queen Signed the Coronation
Oath; and the Commissioners, and several of the Scotch Nobility, had the Honor
to kiss Their Majesty's Hands.

The King taking a Progress to Portsmouth, etc. to view the Fleet, put in
there: was Pleased, in Consideration of the Service done against the French, in
Bantre-Bay, to give a Donative, of Ten Shillings a Man, to all that were in
that Engagement, which Amounted to the Sum of 2600 l. and Dineing on Board the
Elizabeth, he was Pleased as a Mark of His Great Satisfaction, in the Conduct
and Service of Admiral Herbert, to Declare His Intentions of Confering upon
him, the Title, and Dignity of an Earl of this Kingdom; and he was after
Created Earl of Torrington, etc. His Majesty was likewise Pleased to Confer the
Honor of Knighthood, on John Ashby Commander of the Defiance, and Captain
Clowdesly Shovel of the Edgar; and Returned, through the Repeated Acclamations
of the Seamen, and the Crowds of People that were on the Shore, gethered from
diverse Places, to Express the Satisfaction they had of seeing His Majesty in
those Parts.

The Castle of Edenburg, being still in the Hands of the Duke of Gourdon, it
was strictly Blocked up, and several Batteries were Raised against it; So that
all Communication with the Besieged were cut off, however, the Viscount Dundee
being Abroad, and having strengthened himself, proceeded to open Hostilities,
and amongst other Exploits, came with a Party of 50 or 60 Horse, to the Town of
St. Johns-Towns, and in the Night time surprised, and carried away the Lord of
Blair, a Member of the Convention, and two other Gentlemen; and having a Design
upon Inverness, wheither he had sent to demand Money of the Majestrates, he was
prevented by diverse Gentlemen, taking Arms, and Raising about 7 or 800 of the
Neighboring People; nor durst he Attempt to Enter Dundee, it being in a
posture of Defense; and the Commit of the Estates, Appointed Persons to
Receive the Duke of Gourdons Rents, for the use of the Public, forgiving a
years Rent to the Tennants, provided they live Peaceably, and did the like by
that of the Viscount Dundee's, and Orders were taken to Reduce the Bass, which
was held out against the Government; and a Party who had taken up Arms for
Dundee, and Attaqued Capt. Young, on his March to Kintyre, with a Detachment of
500 Men of the new Leavys, ^was Routed, many of them then killed, and others
taken Prisoners.

On the 24 th.* of May, His Majesty in the House of Lords at Westminster, gave
the Royal Assent to an Act, for Exempting Their Majesty's Protestant Subjects,
Dissenting from the Church of England, from the Penalties of certain Penal
Laws. An Act for Anulling, and making Void the Attainder of Alice Lisle Widow,
who was Beheaded in the West. And a private Act.

And now the Army being in motion, and War Proclaimed against France. Their
Majesty's, by Proclamation, Commanded a General Fast throughout the Kingdom, to
Implore the Blessing of Almighty God, upon Their Arms, etc. to be Religiously
and Solemnly Kept and Observed on the 5 th. of June, within the Cities of
London, and Westminster, and Ten Miles Distance; And on the 19 th. throughout
the whole Kingdom, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed. And Their
Majesty's were Empowered by an Act, to Commit without Bail, such Persons as they
should find Just Cause to Suspect Conspiring against the Government. And the
Du^ch Ambassadors Arriving, to Congratulate Their Majesty's, upon Their Happy
Accession to the Crown, in the Name of the States General of the United
Provinces, were Received at Greenwich, by the Earl of Sussex, Sir Charles
Cottrel Master of the Ceremonies, and Six Gentlemen of His Majesty's
Privy-Chamber; from whence they were Conducted in the Kings Barges to the
Landing place; the Tower Standard being Displayed; and at their Landing, they
were Complemented by the Lord Lucas, Governor of the Tower, and Sa^uted with
the Discha^ge of the Cannon; and from thence, being Attended by 16 Pages on
Horseback, and 60 Footmen in Liveries; they were Conducted, in Their
Majesty's Coaches, followed by Six Coaches of their own, and about 50 others,
belonging to the Nobility, to Cleveland-House at St. James's, Appointed for
their Entertainment, where their Excellencies were Complemented from the King,
by the Lord Cornwallis, and from the Queen, by Sir Edward Villers, Master of
the Horse to Her Majesty; from the Queen Dowager, by Mr. Sayers, Her Majesty's
Vice-Chamberlain; from the Prince of Denmark, by the Lord Cornbury, Master of
his Horse; and from the Princess, by Lieutenant Colonel Sandys, and soon
after, had their Audiences, with Regard due to their Charracter; and Their
Majesty's were on the like Occasion, Congratulated by diverse other Foreign
Ministers.

About this time, happened an Extraordinary Act of Bravery, which for its
Prodigeous Effect, may well be Incerted viz.

Robert Cas^n, Master of the Richards Advice a Collier, about 400 Tun, 6 Guns,
12 Men, 2 Boys, and one Passenger, meeting Two French Privatiers of Foulness,
one of 18 Guns, and a 130 Men; and other of 4 Guns, 55 Men, who Boarding the
Advice, were several time beaten off with considerable loss; so that after
several Attempts, and a Fight of Four hours, 20 of the French being killed, 12
wounded, and two that were left on Board taken Prisoners; the Privatiers stood
away, and left the Collier to Prosecute his Voyage.

The Estates of Scotland, on the 24 th. of May, having Received His Majesty's
Letter, Signifying to them, that at their Desire, he had Resolved to turn them
into a Parliament; Authorizing them to Adjourn themselves to the Fifth of June
following: That all their Members being Required to be present, they might
proceed to dispatch what Affairs should most Conduce to the Setlement of the
Nation; Thereupon they Ordered Unanimously a Letter of Thanks, to be Written to
His Majesty, for His most Gracious Letter to them, and then in Pursuance
thereof, Adjourned to the 5 th. of June. Giving Orders for all their Members to
be present on that day, and the Privy Council Assembling, during the Interval,
took upon them, the Care and Management of such Affairs, as properly belonged
to their Charge, giving Order for the Raising a new Battery against the Castle,
upon the Hill, within the Town Walls; whilst Major General Mackay Opposed the
Progress and Proceedings of the Viscount Dundee, who kept himself in
Lochquelabar, to Join the High-land-Clans, he expected to come to his
Assistance.

A Declaration was Published about this time, giving great Encouragement to the
Officers, Seamen, and Mariners, employed in the Navy, and diverse French Prizes
were brought into several Ports of this Kingdom, ^aden with Wines, Brandy, and
other valuable Commodities: And the French Fleet* was dared in the Harbor of
Breast, into which the greatest part was put for Succor and Shelter from the
English, who kept the Seas; and all Persons were forbid (by Proclamation) to
Trade or Traffic, with any Person or Persons whatsoever, in the Kingdom of
Ireland, without leave first obtained in that behalf, or to correspond, or to
have Communication with any Person, in any part or place within the same,
except such as are in Obedience to the present Government.

The Convention of Scotland meeting on the 5 th. of June, the Duke of Hamilton
acquainted them, that his Majesty had been pleased to send him a Commission to
represent His Royal Person in the ensuing Parliament; and that he had received
Instructions from his Majesty, for turning the Meeting of the Estates into a
Parliament, and then to Adjourn to the 17 th. and thereafter, not only to
consent to such a Law as may Redress the particular Articles of Grievances; but
likewise to any other Acts they should advise, for the securing the Religion,
Peace and Happiness of the Kingdom: After which, the King's Commission, and
Letters to the Estates was read; and the Lord Commissioner declared it was the
King's Pleasure, that the Earl of Crawford should preside in Parliament,
whereupon he was called to the Presidents Seat; and the Estates passed an Act,
declaring that the Three Estates met together on the 5 th. of June, 1689.
Consisting of the Noblemen, Knights, and Burgesses, are a Lawful and Free
Parliament, to all Intents and Purposes soever; and that it shall be
High Treason for any Person to Disown, Quarrel, or Impugn the Dignity and
Authority of this Parliament, upon any pretense whatsoever; And this Act being
touched with the Scepter, according to the manner of passing Acts in Scotland;
the President, by the Command of the Lord Commissioner, adjourned the
Parliament to the 17 th. of June; and diverse Persons who had been imprisoned
upon Suspicion of corresponding with the Duke of Gourdon, and the Viscount of
Dundee, were set at Liberty; and a Party of the King's Forces, upon notice that
some of Dundees Men had engaged the Lord of Grant, who had 30. Dragoons
allowed him to convey him to his House, advanced to the number of 150.
Dragoons, commanded by Sir Thomas Levingston, Colonel of the Scots Dragoons,
and Lieutenant Colonel Hawley of Berkley's Regiment, who met and encountered,
near a Rockey Hill, about 500. Men, most of the Macleans newly come up, whom
they beat, and pursued so closely amongst the Hills (whither they retired) that
about 100. of them were killed; and on the Kings part, only the Lord of
Andgour and a Captain of Berkleys, with 5 or 6 Draggoons.

These and other Proceedings, of the like nature, greatly discouraged the Duke
of Gourdon, who came to Terms of Articles, after several Parlies, which were
these.

THE Duke of Gourdon has so much Respect for all the Princes of King James the
Sixth Line, as not to Condition with any of them for his own particular
Interest; so he renders himself entirely to King William's Discretion.

I. That Lieutenant Colonel Winderham, Lieutenant Governor of the Castle,
shall submit himself to King William's Pleasure, his Life being secured, and
all the rest of the Garrison, shall have their Lives, Liberties and Fortunes
secured; and Passes granted to those that will take Oaths not to bear Arms
against the present Government.

II. The Garrison is allowed to march out with their Swords and Baggage,
belonging properly to themselves.

III. That all Gentlemen, Volunteers, Servants, and Others, within the
Garrison, shall have the same Capitulation, with the rest of the Garrison.

IV. That all manner of Persons shall have the benefit of the first Article,
who have kept Correspondence with the Castle, and who have not been in Arms,
and being at present at Edenburg, or in the same County, shall be indemnified,
and have the Benefit of the Capipitulation.

V. The Sick Soldiers shall have Liberty to dispose of themselves as they think
best, they behaving themselves as becomes.

VI. That all the Officers and Gentlemen, Servants and Soldiers, shall have the
same Benefit, which others have, they living peaceably.

VII. A considerable Post within the Castle shall be immediately (how soon
security is granted to the Garrison, for the above written Articles) put in
Possession of those Forces, under the command of Major General Lanier.

Upon these Conditions, the strong Castle of Edenburg, which had for a
considerable time been a Terror to the City, and parts thereabout, was
surrendered, and the Duke kept under Confinement, till the King's Pleasure was
known. And the Parliament meeting on the 17 th. of June, proceeded to pass an
Act for the asserting and recogniz^ng Their Majesty's Authority; and afterward,
all of them, except Two who withdrew, took the Oaths; and the like soon after
did most of the Members that were absent; after which, an Act was Read,
regulating the Articles; whereupon there rose a debate, and an adjournment of a
few days ensued.

The Parliament of England having prepared diverse Bills for the Royal Assent:
On the 22 d. of June, the King went to the Lords House.

And passed an Act for granting of their Majesty's an aid of 12 d. in the
pound, for one year, for the necessary defense of the Realm.

An Act for enabling the Lords Commissioners of the great Seal, to execute the
Office of Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper.

An Act for reversing the Attaindur^ of Henry Cornish, Esquire late Alderman of
(...) City of London, and diverse others, relating to Trade, and the Affairs of
private Persons; and this Month, there being a Paper Spread Abroad in Secret,
Entitled a Declaration of King James the Second; diverse Persons were Seized
and Imp^^soned.

Whilst these things passed in England and Scotland; a pretended Parliament was
Convened at Dublin in Ireland, who amongst other things, passed an Act, for
Papist's to pay their Yyths to their own Clergy; and an other for Liberty of
Conscience; Repealing Pointings; Acts, as likewise the Acts of Setlement and
Explanation; and made an Act, for taking off the Twelve Pence per Pound to
Ministers in Corporate Towns; and an Act for Attaindure of several thousand of
Persons by Name, and several French Protestants, that had fled theither for
shelter, were delivered to the Count de Avo^x, in order to be sent for France;
and money being wanting, a Copper Coin was made, and Ordered by Proclamation, to
pass Current for six pence, unless in the Treasury and Custom-house, although
it was not the value of one of our ^arthings; by which means, most of the
Current Moneys was Engrossed, to the great discouragement of the People; and
whilst the Body of the English Army, Commanded by the Duke of Schomberg, was
preparing to make a descent on that Kingdom, between 7 or 800 Irish, were sent
over into Scotland, to strengthen Dundee's Party, under the Command of Colonel
Cannon, in hopes to divert the King's Forces, and retard their passing the
Seas; but it had not its desired Ends, for diverse other Persons, who were to
join them, being discovered in a Letter, brought to the Lord High Commissioner,
by an unknown Hand, and by other ways, which occasioned the seizing of such as
were Accused, or suspected: In the End, the Design dwindled to little or
nothing, especially upon Dundee's being Slain, in a Battle against Major
General Mackay, in which, his Forces were Routed with considerable loss.

On the 24 th. of July, Her Royal Highness the Princess Ann of Denmark, was
Delivered of a Son, at Hampton Court, the Queen being present, the whole time
of her Labor; and the King, with most of the Persons of Quallity about the
Court, came into her Royal Highnesses Chamber before her Delivery; and the
Young Prince (whom the King was pleased to Declare Duke of Gloucester) was on
the 27 th. Christened by the Lord Bishop of London, by the Name of WILLIAM; the
King, and the Earl of Dorset, Lord Chamberlain of his Majesty's Household, being
Godfathers, and the Lady Marchioness of Hallifax God-Mother; and her Royal
Highness's safe Delivery, and the Birth of a Prince, was received with great
Demonstrations of Joy and Satisfaction throughout England.

About this time we had the account of the Defeat of Dundee in Scotland, and
his being Slain; after which happened another Encounter, briefly thus:

Major General Mackay having received Advice on the 31. of July, That the Enemy
was gone toward Angus, he marched from Sterlin, with a Detachment of Horse of
the Lord Colchester's Regiment, and some Dragoons, and coming the next day to
St. Johnstown, he understood that 500 of their Foot, and 2 Troops of Horse had
been sent thither, to Seize upon some Stores of Meal that was left there for
the use of the King's Forces, and were carrying it away to their main Body,
whereupon by speedy March, he over-took them in a Plain not far from St.
Johnstown, and immediately Charged their Horse, who brought up the Rear, and
having routed them fell upon the Foot, who were all killed and taken Prisoners,
together with Capt. Hacket, who Commanded them: the which, and the former
Defeat, caused those that were left, to retreat further into the North, and
labor for new Succors.

On the 14 th. of August the Soldiers near at hand, the better to keep them in
Exercise, and train them in War, marched to Hounslow Heath, and there Encamped,
but soon after they broke up, and the English Soldiers were appointed to Mount
the Guards at White Hall, etc. and take their Posts and Places as formerly, for
the Guard of Their Majesty's Persons, etc. And diverse Troops and Regiments drew
out from their Quarters, and Marched to High-lake, where the Ships for their
Transportation into Ireland, lay at Anchor. And a Declaration of War against
France, was Published in Scotland, Prohibiting likewise all Commerce with the
Subjects of France.

The Duke d' Scombergh arriving with English Army on the 13 th, of August, the
Lough of Carickfergus on Bangor-side, without any Opposition; he sent 2
Regiments to Bellfast, the Irish th^^ were there retiring before them, and the
Country came in with great store of Provisions, which proved so Cheap, that his
Grace sent a great part of what the Ships had brought over, back again. And
those in London Derry, the Inskilling Men, and other Protestants, being
hereupon Encouraged, and having well provided themselves by the Spoils they had
taken, upon several Defeats, they had given the Enemy, became very Formidable,
making In-roads at their Pleasure, and taking great Booties, though the Popish
Army upon their retreat from before Londonderry, had Burnt a great many
Villages, with much Forage, destroying what they could not carry away. And the
General still advancing with the English Army, the Enemy retreated before him;
whereupon having reduced several Places, and restored as he passed the Country
to some considerable Settlement, he some time after Encamped near Dundalk,
expecting a Favorable opportunity to set upon the Enemy

Mr. George Walker, late Governor o^ Londonderry, having been wellcomed an
caressed in Scotland, which he took in (...) way, arrived at Hampton Court, the
latter end of this Month, where he was received by their Majesty's, with many
expressions of the Gracious Sense they have of his Services, and as a present
mark of His Royal Favor and Bounty, His Majesty was pleased to bestow upon him
5000 l. assuring him that this should not at all lessen the Kindness he
intended to show him and his Family; and that he would likewise have a
particular care of the rest of the Officers, and other Gentlemen who had so
well behaved themselves at Derry. After which Mr. Walker presented his Majesty
an humble Address from the Governors, Officers, Clergy, and other Gentlemen of
the City of Derry, which was favorably received: and care was taken for the
supplying the Necessities of such as had been forced to Fly that Kingdom, to
avoid the Persecution; and it was ordered by the Lords of the Committee for the
affairs of Ireland, that all Persons that do receive half Pay from their
Majesty's upon the Irish Establishment, should Immediately Transport themselves
into Ireland, and repair to his Majesty's Army, under his Grace the Duke of
Schombergh, General of his Majesty's Forces.

And now upon the Publication of the King's Pardon in Scotland, to such as
would come In, in time, and lay hold on the Offered Grace; diverse Persons of
Note, and others, took the Advantage, and Submitted themselves. The
High-landers likewise dispersed, so that Colonel Cannon, who Commanded in
Chief, was Reduced, for the most part to the straightness of the Isle of Mull,
and greatly distressed for want of Provisions and other Necessaries, and to
straiten him the more, General Mackay Garrisoned diverse places in the North;
and diverse of the Heads of Clans, that had stood out, came in, and took the
Oath to the King and Queen, giving sufficient Surites for the Peace; and all
things seemed to promise a prosperous Issue to the Affairs of that Kingdom.

On the 20 th. of September. the Parliament met ar Westminster, pursuant to
their late Adjournment; and His Majesty having Signified his Pleasure to both
Houses, that they should further Adjourn to the 19 th. of October, the two
Houses Adjourned accordingly; and had further notice to meet by Proclamation.
The Parliament of Scotland was likewise Adjourned by Proclamation, from the
Eighth of October, to the 20 th. of December. And the King going to New Market,
was Highly Complemented by the Vice-chancelor of the Uniuersity of Cambridge,
and the Heads of the Houses, the Doctors etc. in their Formalities; to which,
His Majesty returned a very Gracious Answer; and then they were one, by one
presented by his Grace the Duke of Somerset, their Chancellor, and Admitted to
kiss the King's Hand; and the next day His Majesty went to Cambridge, and was
very Splendidly Entertained; and diverse Addrsses were Humbly Presented in this
Progress, from Sundry Corporations etc. which were very Favorably Received,

The Army in Ireland, being about this time Advanced some what near the Enemy,
a design was discovered in the Camp, Carried on by some French Papists, M^sqing
themselves under the Pretext of Protestants; for a Captain in one of the French
Regiments, being Informed by a Soldier, that four other Soldiers, and a
Drummer, that were Papist's, designed to go over to the Irish Army; he caused
them to be seized, and found Letters about one of them, to Mounsieur de Avaux;
who upon Examination, Confessed he had a Letter from one du Plessy a Papist,
serving as a private Centinal, in one of the French Regiments; though he had
been formerly a Captain of Horse in France, from whence he was forced to retire
upon account of a Murder, he had committed there, who being likewise seized,
upon Examination, Confessed that he had Written to the late King and de Avaux,
giving them an account, that there were diverse Papist's in the French
Regiments, and promising withal, to bring them over to the Irish Camp, upon
condition he might have the Command of them, and a Pardon in France; whereupon
he and his five Accomplices, being Tried before a Council of War, and the
design being Apparrent, they received Sentence of Death, and were Executed
accordingly; after which, the three French Colonels made a strict Inquiry,
what Papist's there were in their Regiments, and found 150 who by order of the
General, were Secured, and sent Prisoners to Carlingf^rd, in order to their
being Transported for England, and most of these had deserted the French
Service this Summer, and passed into Holland, and from thence to England, where
they Listed themselves in the Regiments of French the Protestants that were
then Leavying; the Officers Raising their Companies in so much have, that they
had not time to Examine them strictly; and perhaps their Disserting, and coming
over, might be a French Trick, to Embroyl our Army, but however, it was timely
discovered, and defeated.

On the 13 th. of October, Dr. Edward Stilling fl^et Bishop Elect of Worcester,
Dr. Simon Patrick, Bishop Elect of Chichester; Dr. Gilbert Ironside, Bishop
Elect of Bristol; were Consecrated in the Chapple of Fullham, by the Bishop of
London, St. Asaph, and Rochester, by virtue of a Commission Granted to them, on
that behalf; and the next day, Thomas Earl of Pembroek and Montgomery, was
Sworn one of the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, and took his place at
the Board accordingly. On the 19 th. the Parliament met at Westminster, whither
the King went Attended with the usual Solemnity, and being in His Royal Robes
Seated on the Throne, in the House of Lords, made a very Gracious Speech to
both Houses on the occasion of their Meeting, and after a short Prorogation of
three days, the Parliament met again; and His Majesty Refered them to what he
had said to both Houses, on the 19 th And for the better Encouragement of
erchants, and others that should carry Necessaries into Ireland, for the
Service of the King's Forces, an Order was Published to excuse the paying any
Duty or Custom from the first of November, for 3 Months ensuing.

On the 29 th. of October, Sir Thomas-Pilkington being continued Lord Mayor for
the Year ensuing, went toi Westminster in the Morning by Water, attended by the
Companys in their Barges, after the usual splendid manner, and being Sworn
before the Barons of the Exchequer, returned to Blackfriars Stairs, where he
Landed, and passed to Guild Hall, where their Majesty's were pleased to Dine
with him, as did a great many of the Nobility, and Members of the House of
Commons, with the Privy Counselors, Judges, Bishops, etc. The whole
Entertainment being to the high Satisfaction of all; and the King and Queens
Pictures were set up the Night before in the Court of Hustings, as also a
Triumphal Arch, etc.

The King about this time was pleased to Create Richard Lord Coot, Baron of
Coloony in the Kingdom of Ireland, an Earl of that Kingdom, by the Name of Earl
of Bellemont. And a French Man of War of 15 Guns, Laden with Arms, and bound
for Ireland, was taken by the St. Albans and Dover Frigates, and brought into
Falmouth the 6 th. of November; and they narrowly missed another of 36 Guns, on
Board which were reported to be the Ld. Dover, and the Marquess d' Albyville,
going to King James. On Board the Prize taken were 4000 small Arms, and a
considerable quantity of Powder, with several French Officers. And several
French Prizes were brought into other Ports.

Although the greatest part of the English Army in Ireland was in Winter
Quarters, yet Charlemont was kept Blocked up; and diverse Skirmishes happened
between Parties, in which the Irish were worsted, as at the Hills before
Charlemont, and at Newry Bridge and Town, etc. Loosing a great many of their
best men.

On the 16 th. of December, the King went to the House of Lords at Westminster,
attended with the usual Solemnity, and gave the Royal Assent to, An Act
granting to their Majesty's an Aid of two Shillings in the Pound for one Year.

An Act for Declaring the rights of the Subject, and settling the Succession of
the Crown. And some other Acts for Naturalizing Persons, etc.

On the 23 th. of December, the King passed an Act, to prevent Doubts and
Questions concerning the Collection of the Public Revenue.

An Act to punish Officers and Soldiers, who shall mutiny or desert their
Majesty's Service, and for punishing false Musters. And a private Act for
settling a Jointure, etc.

On the first of January a Chapter being held by the Sovereign, and Knights
Companions of the most Noble Order of the Garter, Frederick Elector of
Brandenburgh was chosen a Knight Companion of the Order, into the Stall of the
Late Elector of Brandenburgh his Father.

The King of Denmark having sent about 6000 Horse and Foot to assist their
Majesty's of Great Britain, Shipped in a very considerable Fleet, they,
notwithstanding the projects of the French to disappoint it, arrived safe in
England and Scotland, and were kindly received, and care taken for passing them
into Ireland, to which Service they were chiefly designed, being all well
Disciplined and well Accourtred Men.

On the 16 th. the King came to the House of Lords, and being Seated on the
Throne, the Commons attending, gave the Royal Assent to

An Act for a Grant to Their Majesty's of an additional Aid of 12 d. in the
Pound for one Year.

An Act for the Charging and Collecting the Duties upon Coffee, Tea, and
Chocolate, at the Custom-House: and a private Act.

And for the firmer settlement of the Kingdom of Scotland, by putting the
places of greatest Trust in confiding Hands, His Majesty has been pleased to
Constitute Lords Commissioners For the Great Seal.
The Duke of Hamilton, the Earl of Argyle, and the Earl of Southerland.
For the Privy Seal.
The Earl of Forfar, the Earl of Kintore, and the Lord of Carmichael.
For the Treasury.
The Earl of Crawford, the Earl of Cassels, the Earl of Tweddale, the Lord
Ruthuen, and Mr. Melvil.
For the Clerk Register's Office.
The Lord Betheaven, the Master of Burleigh, Sir Duncan Campbell of
Auclimbreak, Sir Thomas Burnet of Lays, and John Hay of Park. Sir George
Campbell of Cesnock, Lord Justice Clerk.


On the 27 th. of January, His Majesty being seated on the Throne in the House
of Lords, sent for the Commons, and gave the Royal Assent to

An Act for the renewing of the Poll Bill, and for an additional Poll.

An Act to prevent Vexations Suits against such as acted in order to the
bringing in their Majesty's: and Four private Acts. And then proceeded to make
the following Gracious Speech.

My Lords and Gentlemen.
I Am very sensible of the readiness you have showed to supply me with Money
for the carrying on the Wars I am engaged in; That I am glad of this occasion
to give you Thanks for your careful dispatch of that matter, which was
absolutely necessary for the common safety.

The best return I can make your Kindness, is to assure you, that, as far as it
will go, it shall be employed to the purposes it was given.

It is a very sensible Affliction to me, to see my good People Burdened with
heavy Taxes; but since the speedy recovering of Ireland is, in my Opinion the
only means to ease them, and to preserve the Peace and Honor of the Nation, I
am resolved to go thither in Person, and with the Blessing of God Almighty,
endeavor to reduce that Kingdom, that it may ^o longer be a Charge to this,
And as I have already ventured my Life for the Preservation of the Religion,
Laws, and Liberties of this Nation, so I am willing again to expose it, to
secure you the quiet enjoyment of them.

The Spring draws on, and it being Requisite I should be early in the Field, I
must immediately apply my Thoughts to give Orders for the necessary
Preparations, which that I may have the more leisure to do, I have thought
convenient to put an End to this Sessions.

Then Mr. Speaker, by His Majesty's Command, said

My Lords and Gentlemen,
IT is His Majesty's Pleasure that this Parliament be Prorogued to the second
Day of April next; And this Parliament is Prorogued to the second Day of April
next.

And thereupon His Majesty returned to his Palace.

FINIS.

