AN ANSWER TO THE ARTICLES AGAINST Master Calamy, Master Martial, Master
Burton, Master Peter's, Master Moleigne, Master Case, M. Sedgwicke, M. Evans,
etc. and many other painful Divines, who were impeached of High Treason by His
Majesty.

First answering particularly the Articles themselves, then showing the
misinformation of His Majesty by the Bishops, concerning the same.

Expressing the great care and vigilance of those Theologians, which they have,
and do daily undertake with great zeal, for the rooting out of Popery, the
confounding of Rome, and for the erecting the pious truth, and sincerity of the
holy Gospel of CHRIST.

London Printed for William Bond, and are to be sold over against the White
Horse in Grubstreet. 1642.

DOCTRINA PARIT VIRTVTEM

AN Answer to the Articles against Master Calamy, Master Marshall, Master
Burton, Master Peter's, Master Moleigne, Master Case, Master Sedgwicke, Master
Evans, etc. and many other painful Divines, who were impeached of High Treason
by His Majesty.
WHere virtue flourishes, there malice strives to confound, and emulation to
subvert. This Hell-nourished malice has been entertained in the hearts of some
malignant, and ill-affected Members to the Church, and in their inveterate
spleen they have endeavored to eradicate that Basis or firm foundation of
faith, which was laid in Christ by zealous Divines. I need not speak too
obscurely, for my meaning includes the Bishops, who have envyed the prosperity
of Religion a long time, and have diligently aboured to supplant the same by
preposterous introducement of Popery, Ceremonial superstitions, and Canonical
innovations. And whosoever that was zealous for the truth, and did in any
manner oppose them in their Prelaticall institutions, was either prosecuted by
them in the extreme severity of justice, (and that sometimes extended too
beyond its limits) or else suspended by them tam ab officio, quam abeneficio.
Thus they tyrannically insulted over the Church, and without any let or
contradiction usurped, whatsoever pleased themselves best. They have often
times deluded the King with calumnious, and Parasiticall suggestions, and by
that means, under a pretense of his protection, have surreptitiously inserted
diverse things unknown to His Majesty. But they themselves being found too
vitiously delinquent by the Parliament, were many of them arraigned of High
treason, and committed to the Tower, where they maliciously first forged
Articles of High treason against Master Pym, the Lord Kymbolton, etc. and
withal directed the same unto His Majesty, with a stupendous Declaration
concerning them: and implored his consent unto them. But they were intercepted
in that frustrate expectation: then they molded second Articles of high
Treason against Master Calamy, Master Marshall, Master Burton, Master Case,
Master Sedgwicke, Master Evan, etc. with many other painful Divines:
intimating again to His Majesty, that they were Traitors, and were great
disturbers of the Church, who did not only substract, or at least labored to
induce the people to substract lawful obedience to His Imperial Crown, but
also did derogate obsequious loyalty, both from His Royal dignity in
postponing him behind the Parliament.

But give me leave (gentle Reader) to discuss the verity of the thing, and to
answer these poor or at least false subjections against them. As for the first
Article, their actions can sufficiently testify to the contrary, for rather
then disturbers of the Church, they have labored to extract all divisions, and
disturbances from it, endeavoring to regulate the free power, and authority
thereof, according to the holy word of God, as it is specified, or at least
prototypically presignified in the Scriptures. For their substraction of
Loyalty from the Crown, and their laboring to induce the people to substract
their daily practice in their preaching can apparently nullify: for they have
always pressed, and exstimulated the people with great fervency of affection to
all possible obedience to his Majesty, and all requisite loyalty to his
imperial Crown. And seeing these two have been found false and erroneous,
the other consequently must be an untruth, for they have labored to bring the
people to become obsequious reciprocally, and mutually as well to the King, as
Parliament, so that by subsequent conclusion, no post-position can be found
inclusive in them. But I suppose, that it was the Bishops sole malice to
misinforme the King, having an intestine envy against them. For because they
would have introduced Popery, and these laborious Divines did beat it down to
the confusion of Rome, and its adherents, therefore they have labored by all
possible means (if they could) to supplant them, and subvert their intentions.
But (alas) God is more powerful than the Devil: men in authority may triumph,
and usurp too much arrogance over their brethren for a time, but at length the
same machination which they intended against others, shall fall on their own
heads. For these painful Divines have not only zealously opposed those
Romish innovations, which lately began almost to flourish in our Church: but
have likewise labored with all sedulity, care, and vigilance to reduce the
same to the sincere truth of the holy Gospel of Christ. Yet notwithstanding
they have been opprobriously scandalized by the Prelates, and their adherents,
having invective aspersions cast upon their innocuous names; the reason no man
can perfectly enucleate, unless their intents were to bring the Church to an
Anarchie: for if the pillars of the Church be shaken, yea taken away, the
structure can no longer remain, and the foundation it self will be everted.
Yet in spite of all their malice, they are defended from the Tyrannical minds
and intentions of the Bishops, and will maugre all their wolvish resolutions,
be preserved from their nefarious machinations against them: yet envy is a most
insufferable torment, and greater than any Tyranny, therefore I will conclude
with that sentence in Latin.

Episcoporum --
Invidia Siculi non invenere Tyranni
Majus tormentum. --

FINIS.

