HIS MAJESTY'S DECLARATION, Directed to all Persons of what degree and quality
soever, in the Christian World. With a LETTER from diverse Godly Ministers of
the CHURCH of ENGLAND, to the Assembly of the KIRK of SCOTLAND; Showing the
cause of these troubles. And a LIST of the Popish Vicker-Generalls, Jesuits,
Priests, and Friars, in England, and their Names and Places to them assigned,
in the several Provinces of England, and Wales, to exstinguish the PROTESTANT
Clergy, and Religion, and bring in, and settle Popery instead thereof.

Published according to Order.

London, Printed by JANE COE. 1644.

His Majesty's Declaration to all Foreign Protestant Churches.
CHarles by the providence of Almighty God, King of England, Scotland, France,
and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
To all those who profess the true Reformed Protestant Religion, of what
Nation, degree, and condition so ever they be, to whom this present Declaration
shall come: Greeting,
WHereas We are given to understand, that many false Rumors, and scandalous
Letters, are spread up and down amongst the Reformed Churches in foreign parts,
by the politic, or rather the pernicious industry of some ill-affected
persons, that We have an inclination to receed from that Orthodox Religion
which We were born, baptized, and bred in, and which We have firmly professed,
and professed and practiced throughout the whole course of Our Life, to this
moment, and that We intend to give way to the introduction, and public
exercise of Popery again in Our Dominions: Which conjecture, or rather most
detestable calumny, being grounded upon no imaginable foundation, has raised
these horrible Tumults, and more then barbarous Wars throughout this
flourishing Island, under pretext of a kind of Reformation, which would not
only prove incongruous, but incompatible with the Fundamental Laws, and
Government of this Kingdom; We desire that the whole Christian World should
take notice, and rest assured, that We never entertained in Our imagination,
the least thought to attempt such a thing, or to depart a jot from that holy
Religion, which when We received the Crown and Scepter of this Kingdom, We took
a most solemn Sacramental Oath, to profess and protect. Nor does Our most
constant practice and quotidian visible presence, in the exercise of this sole
Religion, with so many Asserverations in the head of Our Armies, and the
public attestation of our Barons, with the circumspection used in the
education of Our Royal Offspring, besides diverse other undeniable arguments,
only demonstrate this; But also that happy Alliance of Marriage, We contracted
betwixt Our eldest Daughter, and the Illustrious Prince of Orange, most clearly
confirms the reality of Our intentions herein; by which Nuptial engagement, it
appears further, That Our endeavors are not only to make a bare profession
thereof, in Our (...) Dominions, but to enlarge and corroborate it abroad, as
much as liet^ in Our Power. This most holy Religion of the Anglican Church,
ordained by so many Convocations of learned Divines, confirmed by so many Acts
of Parliament, and strengthened by so many Royal Proclamations, together with
the Ecclesiastic Discipline, and Liturgy thereunto appertaining; which
Liturgy, and Discipline, the most eminent of Protestant Authors, as well
Germans, as French; as well Danes, as Swedes and Switzers; as well Belgians as
Bohemians, do with many elogies (and not without a kind of Envy) approve and
applaud in their public writings, particularly in the transactions of the
Synod of Dort, wherein besides others of Our Divines (who afterward were
Prelates) one of Our Bishops assisted, to whose dignity all due respects and
precedence was given: This Religion We say, which Our Royal Father of blesled
memory, does publicly assert in that His famous Confession, addressed (as We
also do this Our Protestation) to all Christian Princes: This most holy
Religion, with the Hierarchy and Liturgy thereof, We solemnly protest, That by
the help of Almighty God, We will endeavor, to Our utmost power, and last
period of Our life, to keep entire and invioable, and will be careful,
according to Our duty to Heaven, and the tenor of the aforesaid most sacred
Oath at Our Coronation, that all Our Ecclesiastics in their several degrees
and incumbences, shall Preach and practice the same. Wherefore We enjoin and
command all Our Ministers of State beyond the Seas, as well Ambassadors as
Residents, Agents, and Messengers, and We desire all the rest of Our loving
Subjects, that sojourn either for curiosity or commerce in any foreign parts,
to communicate, uphold, and assert this Our solemn and sincere Protestation,
when opportunity of time and place shall be offered.

The Contriver of this Declaration, whether it was Digby or who ever it was,
does here in his Majesty's Name, Charge not only us with sending but other
Protestant Churches with receiving groundless Calumnies, and there upon came
these Wars to be raised. But if His Majesty will be pleased to believe the
Godly Protestant Ministers of this Kingdom they will justify for us that it
is the Hierarchy, and the Hierarchicall Factions, the Prelates, Papist,
Delinquents, and their adherents that have been and are the fomenters, and
Incendiaries of these our Confused conflicts.

A Letter Subcribed by diverse Godly Protestant Ministors in the Church of
England, sent to the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland.
Right Reverend in our Lord and Savior,
WE received with much joy and satisfaction, the answer of your General
Assembly, vouchsafed us to our Letters of the last year: Some of us in name of
our Brethren, thought it then fit by Master Alexander Henderson (a Brother so
justly approved by you, and honored by us) to return our desired thanks: And
we now further think it equal upon this occasion, to make a more public
acknowledgement of such a public favor: You were then pleased to give us
fair grounds to expect that Brotherly advice and endeavors, which the common
cause of Christ, and the mutual interest of the united Nations, command us now
again to ask, if not to challenge. We doubt not but your experience, together
with your intelligence, abundantly informs you of our condition, what various
administrations of providence we have passed through, and we still lie betwixt
hopes and fears, a fit temper for working, the God of all grace enable us to
improve it. As our hopes are not such as may make us secure; so neither do our
fears prevail to the casting away of our confidence. Your own late condition,
together with this Declaration of our present, may acquaint you with the
certain, though subtle Authors and Fomenters of these our confused conflicts,
which we conceive to be the Hierarchicall faction, who have no way to peace and
safety, but through the trouble of others. Our prayers and endeavors according
to our measure have been, and shall be for the supplanting and rooting up
whatsoever we find so prejudicial to the establishment of the Kingdom of
Christ, and the peace of our Sovereign. And that this Declaration of our selves
may not leave you unsatisfied, we think it requisite further to express, That
the desire of the most godly and considerable part amongst us, is, That the
Presbyterian Government, which has just and evident foundation, both in the
Word of God, and religious reason, may be established amongst us, and that
(according to your intimation) we may agree in one confession of Faith, one
directory for worship, one public Catechism and form of Government, which
things, if they were accomplished, we should much rejoice in our happy
subjection to Christ our Head, and desired association with you our beloved
Brethren: For the better effecting whereof, we thought it necessary, not only
to acquaint you with what our desires are in themselves, but also to You, that
is, That what shall seem most fit to the wisdom of that grave and Religious
Assembly, may be taken for the furtherance of our endeavors in this kind. We
understand that our Parliament has been beforehand with us in this
intimation, and it cannot be but our duty, who are so much concerned in the
business, to add what power the Lord has given, with you, to the same
purpose. This design and desire of ours has evennesse on the left hand, and
dissenting Brethren on the right; but we doubt not that as our hearts justify
us that our intentions are right, and such as we conceive tend most directly to
the glory of God, and peace of the Churches of the Saints: So (by your
brotherly concurrence in the most speedy and effectual way you can find ou^^)
the work will in Gods due time receive a prayed for, and hoped for issue.

We shall not need by any arguments from mutual National interest (thouuh we
know ye will not over-looke these) to enforce this request, the sam^ bond
wherewith we are all united in the Lord Jesus Christ, we are assured, will
alone engage your faithful endeavors in this business. To him we commit you,
with these great and important Affairs you have in hand. Be pleased to accept
of these, as the expression of the minds of our many Godly and faithful
Brethren, whose hearts we doubt not of, neither need you though their hands in
regard of the suddenness of this opportuniy, could not be subscribed, together
with ours, who are.

London, July 22. 1644. Your most affectionate Friends, and Brethren in the
work of the Lord. Sic subscriber.


In the next place, the contriver of this Declaration goes about to make the
world believe, that our fear of the bringing in of Popery, is grounded upon no
imaginable Foundation. But the truth of it is, we had great cause to fear it;
For there were Cardinals appointed in Rome to come over, and Vicker-generals,
Archdeacons, Deans, Priests and Friars, not only chosen, but planted in all
places throughout the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales, and all of
them had approbation from Rome, before they could be received by Authority of
the Romish Church in England.

And therefore, for more fuller satisfaction, That all the World may know how
His Majesty has been misled by a pernicious and wicked crew of Papists,
Priests and Friars; and how near this Kingdom was brought to be subjected to
Popish Religion. Here follows a Catalogue of the Jesuits, Popish Priests,
and Friars, that were appointed to be placed in their several places
throughout the several Diocese of England, and Dominion of Wales.

1. The Vicker-Generall for the Cities of London, and Westminster, the Counties
of Kent, Barks, Sussex, Surrey, Essex, and Hartfordshire, was chosen and
settled, his name, father Gregory Fisher.

2. For the Vicker-Generall for the Counties of Cornwall, Devon, Sommerset,
Wilts, Gloucester, and Hampshire: Master Hammon in Cornwall was chosen, a
notorious Friar.

3. For the Counties of Bedford, Huntington, Cambridge, Ely, Lincoln, Norfolk,
and Suffolk, was chosen Master Herbert.

4. For the Counties of Oxford, Buckingham, Northampton, (...), Stafford,
Warwick, Worcester, and Chester, was chosen Doctor B^svile.

5. For Wales, one Humphrey Hughes, and under him, Master (...) and Master
Barrington; the one for North Wales, the other for South Wales.

6. For the Counties of York, Derby, Nottingham, Linc^^^, (...) Rutland, were
nominated, Master Faulkner and Master (...) certain who was chosen.

7. For Lancashire, Westmerland, Cumberland, Northumberland, and Durham, Master
Holden, and Master Lab. Were nominated after, Master Tralloy, who was Vicker
before them.

These are called Vicker Generals, and were none of them placed without the
consent of the Pope, all of them being notorious Popish Priests, and Friars.

And besides these, there were also other Priests and Friars appointed, for
several charges throughout the Kingdom. A Catalogue of some already
discovered, here follows.

1. About London and Westminster, were father Musket, Archdeacon, Master
Webstar, Dean, and other Popish Priests; father Curtes, father Howard, Blaeklo,
Harrington, Barker, Holden, Filton, Hide, Clifford, Laborn, Drury, and others.

2. About Cornwall and those parts, Master Manger, Archdeacon, and other Popish
Priests, and Friars: Father Martin, father Woodward, two Warhams. White,
Hames, Brown, Newman.

3. In Bedfordshire, etc. Father Thomas, Green, Week, Everard, Garlton, Henry
Blacklo, Ely, Hoh, Marchand.

4. In Oxfordshire, etc. Master Button, Archdeacon, besides father B^rlo,
Breuerton, Venables, Laurence, Suttlo, Turbervil, Iennings, Ellis, Falkner,
Cheeks, Hughes.

5. In Wales, father Stephens, Vaughen, Pew, Permaunt, Williams, Barrington,
Powel, Perkins, Street, Holland, Remble, Lay, Green, Elliots, Morris, two of
the Prices.

6. In Yorkshire, etc. Father French, Arnold, Fathering, Hughes, Iackeson,
VVorthington.

7. In Lancashire, etc. Master Redman, Archdeacon, and other Priests and
Friars; Father Catreck, Walker, Blunderston, Nevel, Neatby, Lassels, Green,
Constable, Hodgeson, Strickland, Sands, Tolly, Sale, VVorthington, and father
Tunstall, besides many more.

All which, were placed there to extirpate the Protestant Religion, and bring
in Popery.

A Message not much unlike this Declaration, was sent from the King to the
Parliament, in September, 1642. At which time, the Lords and Commons sent this
Petition following to His Majesty.

May it please Your Majesty;
WE the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, do present this our houble
Answer to your Majesty's Message of the eleventh of this instant Month of
September. When we consider the oppression rapine, firing of houses, Murders
(even at this time whilst Your Majesty propounds a Treaty) committed upon
Your good Subjects by your Soldiers in the presence, and by the authority of
their Commanders, being of the number of those whom Your Majesty holds your
self bound in honor and conscience to protect, as persons doing their duties,
We cannot think your Majesty has done all that in you lies, to prevent or
remove the present distractions, nor so long as your Majesty will admit no
peace, without securing the afithors and instruments of these mischiefs from
the justice of Parliament, which yet shall be ever dispensed, with all
requisite moderation, and distinction of offenses, although some of those
persons be such, in whose preservation your Kingdom cannot be safe, nor the
unquestionable Rights and Privileges of Parliament be maintained: without
which, the power and dignity thereof will fall into contempt: We beseech Your
Majesty therefore to consider your expressions, That God shall deal with you
and your posterity as your Majesty desires the preservation of the just rights
of Parliament, which being undeniable in the trying of such as we have declared
to be Delinquents, we shall believe your Majesty, both toward your self and
Parliament, will not in this privilege we are most sensible of, denyus that
which belongs unto the meanest Court of Justice in this Kingdom: neither has
Your Majesty cause to complain that you are denied a Treaty, when we offer
all that a Treaty can produce, or Your Majesty expect, Security, Honor,
Service, Obedience, Support, and all other effects of an humble, loyal, and
faithful subjection, and seek nothing but that our Religion, Liberty, Peace
of the Kigdome, safety of the Parliament, may be secured from the open violence
and cunning practices of a wicked partee, who have long ploted our ruin and
destruction: And if there were any cause of Treaty, we know no competent
persons to Treat between the King and the Parliament; And if both cause and
persons were such as to invite a Trteay, the season is altogether unfit, while
Your Majesty's Standard is up, and your Proclamations and Declarations
unrecalled, whereby your Parliament is charged with Treason.

If Your Majesty shall persist to make your self a shield and defense to
those instruments, and shall continue to reject our faithful and necessary
advice for securing and maintaining Religion, and Liberty with peace of the
Kingdom, and safety of the Parliament, we doubt not but to indifferent
judgments, it will easily appear who is most tender of that innocent blood
which is like to be spilt in this cause; Your Majesty who by such persisting
does endenger Your self and your Kingdoms, or we who are willing to hazard
our selves to preserve both.

We humbly beseech Your Majesty to consider how impossible it is, That any
Protestation, though published in your Majesty's Name, of your tenderness of
the miseries of your Protestant Subjects in Ireland, of your resolution to
maintain the Protestant Religion, and Laws of this Kingdom, can give
satisfaction to reasonable and indifferent men, (...) time diverse of the Irish
Traitors and Rebels, the known favorers of them and the Agents for them, are
admitted to Your Majesty's presence with grace and favor, and some of them
employed in your service; when the Clothes, Munition, Horses, and other
necessaries bought by your Parliament, and sent for the supply of the Army
against the Rebels there, are violently taken away, some by Your Majesty's
command, others by your Ministers, and applied to the maintenance of an
unnatural War against your people here.

All this notwithstanding, as we never gave Your Majesty any just cause of
withdrawing Your self from Your great Counsel, so it has ever been, and shall
ever be far from us to give any impediment to Your return, or to neglect any
proper means of curing the distempers of the Kingdom, and closing the
dangerous breaches between Your Majesty and Your Parliament, according to the
great Trust which lies upon us. And if Your Majesty shall now be pleased to
come back to Your Parliament, without Your forces, we shall be ready to secure
Your Royal Person, Your Crown and Dignity, with our lives and Fortunes; Your
presence in this Your great Counsel being the only means of any Treaty
betwixt Your Majesty and them, with hope of success.

And in none of our desires to Your Majesty shall we be swayed by any
particular man's advantage, but shall give a clear Testimony to Your Maistie
and the whole world, That in all thing done by us, we faithfully intend the
good of Your Majstie ^ct of Your Kingdoms; And that we will not be diverted
from this end by any private or selfe-respect whatsoever.


One thing more is much to be taken notice of, which relisheth rather of
Digbies spirit, then of His Majesty's Penning, which is this; The Declaration
which is published in English, says thus, This most holy Religion, with the
Hierarchy and Liturgy thereof, we solemnly protest, etc. But in the Latin (
with the Plierarchy and Liturgy) is left out: so that indeed it speaks one
thing to us, and another thing to foreign Nations: And whereas those of His
Majesty's subjects are desired to uphold this Protestation when opportunity and
time shall be offered. I could wish that His Majesty would be pleased to
remember those many Covenants, by which He is bound to return to His
Parliament, and seek the peace and safety of His people, and not by protecting
a few Popish, Prelaticall, Jesuiticall, Incendiaries, and Delinquents; bring
Himself, His Posterity, and Kingdom to ruin. God Almighty be pleased to put it
into the Kings heart, to consider the bleeding condition of His poor people,
and cause Him to return to comply with His Parliament, to the stopping of this
great effusion of blood, and the settling of the Church, and Kingdom in peace
and tranquillity; which God grant.

FINIS.

