Pritchard Mayor.
Martis secund. die October. 1683. An. Reg. Regis Car. 2. Angliae, etc.
THis Court does desire Dr. Calamy to Print his Sermon Preached at the
Guild Hall Chapel on Sunday Morning last, before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen
of this City.

WAGSTAFFE.

A SERMON Preached before the RIGHT HONORABLE THE Lord Mayor, And the Court of
ALDERMEN, AT Guild Hall Chapel, Upon the 30th of September, 1683.

By BENJAMIN CALAMY, D.D. One of His Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary.

LONDON, Printed for W. Kettilby, at the Bishops-Head in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1683.

Romans III. 8. And not rather, as we be slanderously reported, and as some
affirm that we say, let us do evil that good may come? Whose Damnation is just.
IT is on all hands agreed that the Doctrine, from which was raised this
Impious and Damnable Conclusion mentioned in my Text, Let us do evil that good
may come, and on the account of which it was fathered upon St. Paul as his
Judgment and Opinion, was what he had some time taught concerning the
Illustration of the Glory of the Divine Goodness and Mercy, in pardoning the
greatest sins of Men. That which most prejudiced the Jews against this great
Apostle, was his Preaching the Gospel to the Gentiles; his departing from, and
rejecting his obstinate unbelieving Countrymen, and receiving the
uncircumcised Heathen into the Church, though they had been guilty of the
grossest Idolatries, and other enormous Vices which then reigned amongst them,
mentioned in the first Chapter of this Epistle. In defense of himself St. Paul
used to plead, that the more heinous and provoking the sins of the Heathen
World were, the more glorious and resplendent was the manifestation of the
Divine Goodness, in offering them Pardon and Salvation upon the Terms of the
Gospel; and that it was the incurable perverseness of the Jews, who would not
believe in Christ, which gave occasion to this magnifying of Gods Grace toward
the Gentiles.

Now these two things the Enemies of Christanity were ready to conclude from
this discourse of St. Paul.

1. If this be so, that the sins of Men give occasion to the further
manifestation of Gods Goodness and infinite Mercy, why then should God punish
the Jews or others for those sins which thus tend to his Glory? If our
unrighteousness, v. 5. commend the righteousness of God, what shall we say? Is
God unrighteous who takes Vengeance? (I speak as a man): that is, I only now
recite an Objection which some Men are apt to make against my Doctrine; Can God
in justice take vengeance of our Unrighteousness, when that serves to commend
and magnify his own Righteousness?

The same false Inference he repeats again, v. 7. If the truth of God has more
abounded through my lie unto his Glory, why yet am I also judged as a Sinner?
That is, If Gods faithfulness in performing his Promises made of old has more
abundantly appeared by reason of the Jews infidelity, if their refusing the
Gospel has contributed so much to the Honor of God, and the fuller discovery
of his Grace toward Mankind, why then are they complained of, and condemned as
Offenders?

To this Objection the Apostle does not think fit to give an elaborate Answer,
but only expresses his just detestation of any such wicked Conclusion, as some
ill Men would draw from his Doctrine, ver. 6. God forbid: For then how shall
God judge the World? Far be it from me to assert any thing that should in the
least reflect upon the Impartial Righteousness of the Supreme Judge of the
World.

The great God, who at first brought light out of darkness, and beautiful Order
out of indigested Chaos, who by an Invisible and Omnipotent Hand turns and
winds all Things and Actions how he pleases, and makes them often eventually
subservient and effectual to Ends clean contrary to their own proper tendency,
and the intention of the subordinate Agents, will so manage and overrule even
Sins and Impieties, the Rage and Malice, the Plots and Stratagems of wicked Men
and Devils, that they shall all in the upshot conspire to the advancing and
setting forth his own Glory: But in the mean time this is no thanks to wicked
Men, nor any excuse of their sin; but is to be ascribed solely to the
irresistible Power, and skilful Conduct of the Almighty Governor and Disposer
of all things both in Heaven and Earth. What Men Act purely to gratify their
own Lusts, to satiate their Revenge, or in order to the compassing their
Ambitious, Covetous, or any other evil or mischievous Designs, may yet be so
ordered and controuled by the Wise Providence of God, as that at last it shall
bring Honor to his Name, and great Benefit to others: But still the
wickedness, the guilt of the Actors themselves, is not in the least abated or
mitigated by this good Effect, which follows wholly against their will and
purpose.

I shall give an instance of this in that which is at present the great subject
of our thoughts and discourse. It is to be hoped, that our gracious God, who
has so wonderfully revealed the hidden and black Conspiracies of desperate Men
against the Person of our dearest Sovereign and his Government, will after such
a manner disappoint their Bloody Devices, as not only to prevent the intended
mischief, but also to make this Hellish Plot it self in the end contribute to
the greater security of our Prince, and to the establishment of his Government
both in Church and State, and that it shall serve to strengthen and confirm
that, which it was meant to ruin and overthrow: But all this does not in the
least excuse or justify the Plotters themselves, who justly suffer the utmost
Vengeance, notwithstanding this advantage we may possibly through Gods infinite
Wisdom, and the Care of our Governors, reap from their Treasonable and
Damnable Enterprises. Thus the Jews were worthily punished for their obstinate
unbelief, though God without their knowledge, and against their design, made it
an occasion of displaying his Grace and Mercy to the Gentiles.

2. A further and worse inference (if there can be worse) drawn from St. Paul's
Doctrine, was this, If the Glory of God is so much advanced by the sins of Men,
let us then sin freely without any dread or re morse, for what need we fear or
scruple doing that, from which so great good does come? By this means we may do
service and bring Honor to God, since the greater our sins are, the more will
they illustrate and commend Gods Mercy in pardoning of them.

Now this the Apostle in my Text first tells them is a Slander, or Blasphemy,
as the Original word signifies, a scandalous imputation fastened upon him and
his Doctrine, which he abhorred: Then he Censures the Doctrine it self as
Damnable, whose Damnation is just. Which words may signify either of these two
things.

1. If you refer them to the former part of the Verse, to those Slanderers of
St. Paul's Doctrine, then they signify that such Men who thus unjustly pervert
and abuse the Grace of God, by putting false Constructions upon, and drawing
such impious Consequences from it, are guilty of a most Pernicious and
Dangerous sin.

2. If you refer them, as many do, and as I shall now understand them, to the
wicked resolution set down in the Text, Let us do evil that good may come; then
they signify that it is a Damnable sin to commit any Evil, though thereby the
greatest Good might be obtained; which is the Proposition I shall now Discourse
of; That we must not venture to do the least Evil, no not for the sake of the
greatest Good; and I am very confident you will all readily grant, that this
point is very seasonable now to be insisted upon.

For we need not Travel into Foreign Countries, we need not consult the
Chronicles of past Ages, nor be beholden to Ancient Records, to fetch thence
Examples of those who have done the vilest and lewdest things imaginable, and
yet have cloaked all, and defended themselves by this Colorable Pretense, That
what they did was for the Glory and Service of God, and the Good of his People.
We have had too many sad Instances of this amongst our selves in this last Age.
For have not the most Execrable Murders, Treasons and Villainies been acted in
this Nation, and yet all pretended to be done for Gods sake, for the
preservation of Religion and the Gospel, and for the Safety and Liberty of the
People? The old Wheadling Pretenses of all Sedition and Rebellion. But I shall
not look back to former Times.

Have we not at this present Day heard of Men, who have undertaken the
Assassination of the most Gracious and Merciful Prince that ever wielded the
English Scepter, and of his Royal Brother, the overturning the present
Government, and bringing in all Confusion and Anarchy, and God knows what, (for
no one can tell, and it makes every Honest man's Heart Bleed within him but to
guess, what had been the fatal Consequences of such an Horrid Design, had not
Gods good Providence, which has all along been so watchful over our Sovereign,
Blasted and Defeated it) yet, is not all this Wickedness said to have been
contrived, and resolved upon out of great love to, and concern for the
Protestant Religion and Liberty of the Subject, and to secure us from Popery
and Slavery? They, good Men! designed nothing but what was honest, for the
Interest of Religion and the Nation, no matter what the Means were, that were
used in so good a Cause.

In nomine Domini incipit omne malum, and I think I may truly say, that neither
Ambition nor Covetousness, nor Pride, nor Revenge, nor Discontent, nor any
other Lust or Passion, that uses to animate Men to make Public Disturbances,
have yet been the cause of so much Disorder and Mischief in the World, as has
been occasioned by a Popish or Fanatic Zeal for Religion and Liberty; and
perhaps more Evil has been done that Good might come of it, than upon any
other pretense or account whatsoever.

This indeed is a weakness that most Men are more or less subject unto: When
they are once secure of the goodness of the Cause they are engaged in, and of
the greatness and necessity of the End they propound to themselves, their Eyes
are so wholly fixed upon it, that they easily become less wary and sollicitous
about the Lawfulness of the Means they use for the compassing of it, and are
apt in their heat to outrun or transgress the limits of their Duty. As it is
with one who eagerly follows his sport or game, when he is in close pursuit he
sticks not at any bad road, he leaps over all that is in his way, and will ride
over those dangerous places, which at another time he would with the greatest
care have avoided. So is it with men, whom a blind Zeal, not cool Reason or
sober Religion moves, they are rid by an headstrong impetuous passion, which
violently hurries them through thick and thin, through lawful and unlawful;
they swallow any Camel, so that they may at last obtain what they so earnestly
desire. Let us do evil, that good may come, whose damnation is just.

In the prosecution of this Argument, I shall first of all explain the
Proposition, That we must not do any evil, that good may come.

Secondly, I shall prove it to you, and give you some Reasons to establish you
in the belief of it.

Lastly, draw some seasonable Inferences from it.

1. For the Explication of this Proposition, That we must not do any evil, that
good may come, there need not many words.

By good here I understand whatever it is that is desirable or for our
advantage, either considered as Men or as Christians, whether it relates to
this life or next, whether it be public or private, temporal or spiritual,
whether it be our own or others; for the procuring of any, or all these good
things, we must not do any thing that is evil.

What we call Evil is of two sorts, either Natural or Moral, or as it uses
commonly to be expressed, the evil of pain, or the evil of sin; and of this
latter, of sins are these words only to be understood. As for the former,
outward temporal evils, which concern our Bodies or Estates, they must be
cheerfully endured and undergone in a good Cause, for a great End, rather than
omit a necessary Duty, or commit a plain Sin; there being more real evil in
sin, than in any outward pain or calamity that can befall us.

Now of things sinful, of which only I discourse, some are always such in all
Circumstances; other things there are which are in their own Nature
indifferent, but are evil and sinful only because they are forbidden by some
positive Command of God, which therefore in a case of great necessity or
charity, may be done for the sake of some good that follows. As we all know
David and those that were with him, to save themselves from perishing by
hunger, did eat of the Shewbread, which otherwise was not lawful for them to
eat, and yet were not blamed for it.

Be pleased therefore to observe, that I speak not now of the violation of such
positive Commands of God, as they are commonly called, which he himself has
declared are to give place to Works of mercy and doing good to our Brother; the
breach of them in such cases not being sinful; God himself dispensing with
those Laws in such extremities: But I speak now of things in their own nature
and intrinsically evil, and which are forbid by God because they are such; not
the least thing which is evil in its own nature may be done, though for the
procuring the greatest good. Which I shall endeavor,

2. To make out to you by Arguments drawn from these four heads. First from the
nature of moral good and evil. Secondly, from the consideration of Gods
Providence. Thirdly, from the example of Gods Condemning and Punishing evil
Actions, though donewith good Intention. Fourthly, from the pernicious
Consequences of such a Concession as this, that we may do evil for a good End.

1. This will appear from the nature of moral good and evil. It is an old Maxim
you may have often heard of, Bonum oritur ex causa integra, malum ex quolibet
defectu. To denominate an action morally good, there must be an Universal
Concurrence of all Conditions requisite thereunto.

It must be good as to the Object or Matter, the End for which it is done must
be laudable and worthy; it must be done after a right manner, in due
Circumstances, or else the Action cannot be said to be good. But now it is not
necessary that it should fail in every one of these respects to make it evil;
but a defect in any one of them certainly vitiates the action, denominates it
morally evil, though in all other respects it be according to the Rule.

If the Object be lawful, the manner of the performance regular, and it be
fitly circumstantiated, yet if it be done for a base, low, wicked End, this
undoubtedly quite mars and spoils the action, and renders it sinful; and for
the same reason, let the Intention be never so good and honest, the End we
propound to our selves never so great and excellent, yet if we fail in the
Object, if the thing we do is forbid by Gods Law, the Action, notwithstanding
the specious pretense of the glorious End to which it is directed, is a vicious
Action, and we are accountable to God for it as such.

This a great Bishop of our Church illustrates thus: Any one short Clause,
says he, or Proviso not Legal, is sufficient to abate the whole Writ or
Instrument, though in every other part absolute and without exception. A good
Intention therefore can no more warrant an Action that is in it self unlawful,
than the goodness of the Matter can justify what is done on a wicked Design.

Nay further, such is the contrariety between the nature of good and evil, that
what is really evil cannot be chosen as a fit means to produce any thing that
is good, any more than darkness can beget light, or than false Premises can
rightly infer a true Conclusion, or than (to use our Saviors Phrase) an evil
Tree can bring forth good Fruit.

God indeed (as I have already hinted) by his Omnipotent Wisdom does produce
good out of evil, by the same word of Power by which he brought something out
of nothing; by which he can make things act contrary to their own Natures and
proper Efficacy. But to do that which is really evil, in order to the obtaining
of some real good, is as if a Man should put his Hands into the flame to cool
it; or it is just like the policy of those Men, who would destroy the present
Government to preserve our Rights and Properties, and would pull down the
Reformed Church of England for the defense of the Protestant Religion.

2. I argue further, that to do evil that good may come, is a great affront to,
and distrust of the Divine Providence and Government of the World. So says
Job, cap. 13.7. Will ye speak wickedly for God, and talk deceitfully for him?
Does he stand in need of our sins to help him out at a dead lift to bring his
designs to pass? Has not he taken sufficient care of, and made sufficient
provision for us, unless we now and then stretch our Consciences in a case of
extremity? Cannot he uphold his Church or preserve his Religion, without our
venturing on a special occasion to strain a Point, and transgress our Duty for
the sake of them? Was he overseen in the making of his Laws, not considering at
first those inconveniences that might sometimes happen? As if what he had
Commanded us might prove inconsistent with his own Glory, or the Interest and
Safety of Religion, unless we in great prudence dispensed with his Laws in such
Cases. Now this is not only a bold infringement of the Divine Authority, but
also an unworthy Reflection upon the Wisdom of Gods Laws and Government.

This is evidently seen in those of the Church of Rome, who fondly imagining
that our Savior and his Apostles had not wrought Miracles enough for
Confirmation of their Doctrine, have coined abundance of other Miracles, which
they obtrude upon their easy Disciples as true, by them to supply what was
wanting in our Saviors. So lest Hell and everlasting Damnation should not be
sufficient to scare Men from their sins, they have added that gainful Invention
of their Purgatory. Which pious frauds (as they sometimes call them) are most
highly dishonorable to our Savior and his Religion, intimating as if his
Gospel had been very short and imperfect, unless some Men had interposed their
own Wit and Knavery to patch it up or complete it.

Thus the Laws of our Christianity plainly oblige us not to resist Lawful
Authority: But alas! This may possibly prove very dangerous Doctrine. What if
the King turns Papist or Tyrant? What then shall become of our Religion and
Property, if in no case we may resist, if we have no other remedy but Prayers
and Tears; if we are bound patiently and meekly to suffer those evils, that may
unjustly and contrary to Law be inflicted upon us by that Authority we are
subject unto? And so to prevent this inconvenience, Men choose to correct the
Rule of their Religion, to distinguish away Gods Law, rather than to trust God
with their Lives and Fortunes and Religion, in the resolved doing of their Duty.

Let us but suppose God to have done Wisely, and acted Considerately in all
that he has Commanded or Forbidden us, and it must then necessarily follow,
that we must never go against his Will, though it may seem to tend to never so
great or good an End. Since he, who had a perfect Knowledge and Comprehension
of all Events that either can or shall happen in the World, has prescribed us
such Laws by which we are always to govern our selves, for any one to think to
please him, or to promote his Glory and Service by acting contrary to these, is
surely the greatest presumption a Creature can be Guilty of, and a foul
imputation and disparagement cast upon the Wisdom of God.

When People are for taking the Church and Gospel out of Gods Hands into their
own particular regard, and will not think their Religion safe whilst they
defend it only by such means as God allows of, unless they have some Tricks and
Policies of their own, this certainly argues a base distrust of the Divine Care
and Providence.

3. Add to this the Examples that are in Scripture, of Gods Condemning and
Punishing what has been done against his Command, though with a good intention,
and for a great and worthy end. I shall mention but two Instances, one out of
the Old Testament, the other out of the New.

In the Old Testament (not to insist on that memorable one of Vzzah, who dyed
for saving the tottering Ark from falling) you find King Saul, 1 Samuel 15.
receiving Commandment from God by the mouth of Samuel to destroy all the
Posterity of Amalec. He very zealously sets about the work, and at first
destroys all, both Men, and Women, and Cattle, according to the word of the
Prophet. But afterward it comes into his head, that this waste was needlessly
made, and for the sins of Men why should so many goodly Cattle be lost? He
resolves therefore with himself to save the best and fattest of them, to offer
them for a Sacrifice to God, when he returned home with Victory. He thought he
could order things a better way, that it would be more for the Glory of God for
these Cattle to smoke in Sacrifice upon his Altar, than to be destroyed in a
strange Country. This one Act of Disobedience to a particular Command of God,
notwithstanding the Piety of his Intention, cost him his Kingdom. Behold, to
obey is better than Sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of Rams.

The Example I shall give out of the New Testament shall be that of St. Peter,
who out of great love to, and forward Zeal for his Master, when our Blessed
Lord was apprehended by the Ministers and Officers of the Chief Priests and
Elders, drew his Sword, and struck a Servant of the High Priests, and smote off
his Ear. It was done in defense of Christ himself; of the most perfect
Innocence that ever appeared in the World. It was against unjust violence. His
Sword was certainly drawn upon a more plausible pretense, than any can happen
in our Days: Yet mark, I beseech you, our Saviors rebuke of him, St. Math.
26.52. Put up again thy Sword into his place, for all they that take the Sword
shall perish with the Sword. Do nothing contrato Law, resist not Authority,
though it be to preserve the Life of thy Lord and Savior. For all they that
take the Sword, who draw or use it, when it is not put into their Hands by
those that bear the Sword, by the Supreme Magistrate who has the Power of the
Sword, shall perish by the Sword, fall themselves by it, or ^ncur the
punishment of Death.

That which is usually objected in this Case, is the Example of others
mentioned in Holy Scripture, who doing things not strictly justifiable, some
things plainly against Gods revealed Will, yet have not been Condemned, nay
seem to be Commended for them, on the account of the Goodness of the Design, or
the Effect which has followed. To which I shall return these two general
Answers.

1. That the Case is not the same with us now, as it was with those who lived
before the Law given by Moses, or as it was with the Jews under the Law. We are
now to govern our selves only by the written Will of God, not expecting nor
attending to any private motions, or incitations, or suggestions, especially
when they lead to any thing contrary to what is Revealed to us. But it was not
so before our Saviors time, when God did often discover his Mind, and give his
Commands to private Persons by special Revelations to them, exciting and moving
them to some particular Actions, which are no otherwise warrantable, than as
they were done at the instigation, and by the direction of God himself.

Such were Moses's killing the Egyptian, Phineas's slaying Zimri and Cobsi in
their unclean Embraces, Ehuds stabbing King Eglon, Elijahs consuming by fire
from Heaven the Messengers whom the King sent to apprehend him; these and the
like Actions are no more Exemplary to us, without infallible assurance of the
same Divine impulse by which these Persons were guided and acted, than
Abraham's Offering up his Son Isaac, or the Israelites spoiling the Egyptians
of their Jewels, can now justify the Murder of our Children, or the Robbing of
our Neighbors.

Nay, should any one of us have any such strong motion or instinct upon his
Spirit, inclining him to do any such Action, he ought not to compare it with
the private Commands given to those Worthies, but if it prompt him to any thing
forbidden by Gods Law, or that belongs not to his Place and Calling, he ought
utterly to reject it as a Diabolical temptation.

2. As for other Actions recorded in Scripture, that were evil in themselves,
but yet were done for a good End, (where there was not this private Divine
Warrant) they were neither commendable in them who did them, (though otherwise
very Good and Pious Persons) nor are they by any means imitable by us. I shall
Instance in the famous case of Lot, when he entertained the Angels; who offered
his Daughters to the impure Sodomites, Genesis 19.8. that by them he might Redeem
his Guests from the violation intended to them. Now though he was a singular good
Man, and highly in favor with God, yet it must, I think, be said that this was
a fault in him, and he ought to the utmost hazard of his life, have defended
both his Daughters Chastity, and his Guests too; and the prostituting of one to
secure the other, was not justifiable in him.

The same must, I think, be said of the Egyptian Midwives. They were loath to
obey the bloody Edict of King Pharaoh, and chose rather to tell a lie than
commit such Barbarity as they were commanded, though in strictness they should
have done neither, but peremptorily refused to have obeyed the King in this
Matter, whatever outward evil they had suffered for it; and when it is said,
Exodus 1.20. Therefore God dealt well with the Midwives: It is to be understood
that he rewarded them for their tenderness and compassion toward the Hebrew
Children, but not for the lie by which they excused themselves to Pharaoh. Non
est remunerata fallacia sed benevolentia: benignitas mentis, non iniquitas
mentientis. All this I say, supposing these Women told a lie though some have
quite otherwise interpreted their Words.

The hardest Case that I can think of is this of speaking an officious untruth;
when by a falsehood I may save the life of one or more Innocent Persons, of my
Prince, of my Father, or preserve my Country, or the like. This for so great an
End I suppose the best Casuists do allow, but then it is not because they judge
it at any time Lawful to do Evil, or to tell a lie, that Good may come, but
because they judge such an Officious untruth not to have in it the complete
Nature of a Lie, nor to be really Evil.

In short, the Examples of the Patriarchs, and Holy Men of Old, whose Praises
are mentioned in Scripture, ought not to be followed by us, without comparing
them with the Rule of our Religion; and whatever our Lord and Savior has
plainly forbidden us, we are upon no exigence or necessity of Affairs to do it,
whatever End it may serve, or whoever has done it before us.

4. And lastly, I argue from the ill Consequences of such a Concession as this,
that evil may be done for a good End. This one Principle sets us free from all
Authority either Divine or Humane, and every one may do whatever he thinks fit,
so his Intention and End be but good.

What we are to do, or what we are to avoid, if this Doctrine be admitted for
true, we are not to learn from Gods Law commanding the one, or forbidding the
other, but then every Man, according to his own Prudence, is to judge of Things
and Actions by their Convenience and Expediency to promote the Glory of God and
public Benefit; and so they are either Good or Evil according as they seem to
us, and our own Judgment and Opinion is the measure of lawful and unlawful, and
thus we are wholly (at least as to the Choice of Means) our own Masters and
Lawgivers.

Nay this Principle plainly overthrows all Justice and Faith amongst Men, all
Peace and Security in Societies, and makes all Government precarious and
insignificant, since every one is an Arbitrary Subject, and may obey or resist
the Laws and Constistutions of his Superiors, as they appear to himself to be
for or against the common good, of which every Person must judge for himself;
and every man's Life, Estate, and Fortune is at my disposal, if once I think it
most for the Glory of God, and the safety of Religion, that they should be
taken away.

You know our Savior tells his Disciples of some that should arise, who would
think they did God good service in killing of them. According to this Doctrine,
St. Paul was very innocent when he was so mad against the Church, and breathed
forth nothing but Slaughter and Destruction against the Christians: The
Gunpowder Traitors deserved to be Sainted, the Murderers of King Charles the
First, and all our late Plotters of both sorts were Martyrs, if a good End or
Intention would sanctify an evil action. But this is sufficient in so plain a
matter.

What remains is only to draw some few Inferences from what I have already
Discoursed.

1. Hence we may learn what is the true meaning of that Rule that is commonly
given to direct our Practice, that Of two evils the least is to be chosen,
which holds good only in these two Cases.

1. When two or more outward Evils are propounded to us, and we must undergo
one of them, ordinarily we may choose that which is least. This was the
perplexity David was reduced unto, 2 Samuel 24. after he had so grievously
offended God by numbering the People. God sent to him by the Prophet, and put
it to his choice, whether seven years of famine should come into his land, or
he would flee three months before his Enemies, or there should be three days
Pestilence? Here David chose the last, as the least, saying, Let us fall now
into the hands of the Lord; for his mercies are great, and not into the hands
of men. Thus a private evil is to be suffered rather than the public be
endangered; and Caiaphas said true, though he applied it ill, that it was better
one man should suffer than the whole Nation perish. Thus the most Tyrannical
and Arbitrary Government is to be preferred before none at all, and to be
oppressed under a Lawful Power, is better than Civil War and Confusion.

2. When two Evils are propounded to us, the one of Pain, which concerns our
outward Bodies or Estates, the other something to be done that is plainly
sinful, here we must choose the greatest outward loss or trouble, rather than
commit the least Sin; and this is our Wisdom so to do; a less Evil, when by it
we avoid a greater, having in it the nature of Good.

This was the Rule the Primitive Christians practiced and suffered by; when the
severest Punishments, the cruellest Tortures, nay, not the appearance of Death
it self in its ugliest visage, could ever make them consent to do any thing
unworthy of their holy Profession. And there is nothing that redounds more to
the Glory of God, and the Advantage of Religion, than the courageous suffering
of Evil for Righteousness sake, infinitely more than the doing of any Evil, for
the sake of our Religion, can ever effect. In these two Cases this Rule holds
good. But,

3. In another Case, which is sometimes put, and to which this Rule is applied,
it does not hold at all. That is, when two Evils are propounded to us, both of
them sinful, but one of necessity to be done, what must we do in this Case? May
we choose the less Sin to avoid the greater?

I Answer; no certainly. In this Case we must avoid both, and that it can never
be allowed to commit a less Sin to avoid a greater, appears sufficiently from
this one Reason, that if it were so, it would then be in the power of any Man
to commit what Sin soever he pleased. For if I have a spite against any private
Person, and would take away his Life, it is but Swearing or Vowing that I will
either kill the King or him. Now it being a less sin to kill any private man
than the King, according to this Rule of choosing the least sin, it would become
lawful to do it; and by the same Artifice I might make any sin I had a mind to
commit innocent and allowable, by bringing it into Competition with a greater
sin.

But if two or more sins are propounded to us, when we can choose any of them,
we must choose none, nor can there be any such real case wherein a man is under
a necessity of committing some sin or other, nor can any Circumstances make it
safe or advisable to venture on the least sin. So that in this instance this
Rule, that of two Evils, that is of two sins, the least is to be chosen, does
not hold.

2. From what I have said I would take occasion to entreat you all to beware of
being led into, or engaged in any Factious or Seditious Courses, by the
specious pretenses of Ambitious or Discontented men. For the carrying on any
evil Plot against the Public, it is absolutely necessary that the true Ends be
concealed, and such offered to open view as may be most apt to take with the
generality of men. An outward form of Godliness must be put on by all those,
who intend any very mischievous and black design, by which they may gain Credit
and good Esteem to themselves, and procure greater Countenance and Reputation
to their Party.

Never almost was there any great Sedition, Mutiny, or Rebellion contrived, or
brought to any Fortunate success, but by men pretending to greater Zeal for,
and Care of Gods Honor, and love to Religion, and hatred of Errors and Abuses,
and concern for the Peoples good, and for preserving their just rights, than
other men; though all this while they secretly intend the inslaving of them, and
overturning all Law and Order: by which fair glozing shows and disguises, they
deceive, if possible, the very Elect, men otherwise sober and Loyal.

At the beginning of our late troubles here in England, had those who set on
foot, and afterward continued that unnatutal Rebellion, at first clearly told
the world what they aimed at, the subversion of the Ancient Monarchy, the
taking away the Kings life, and banishing his Children, setting up themselves,
and subjecting the whole Nation to the power of the Sword; had this design been
but smelt and suspected at first, it had in all probability been crushed and
defeated, as soon as discovered and believed. At first therefore nothing was
talked of, but Religion, pure Ordinances, liberty of Conscience, Freedom from
Popish Innovations and Antichristian Ceremonies, true Gospel worship, a
preaching Ministry, and when by such pretenses and Artifices many were engaged
to their side, then by degrees they began to appear in their own proper colors.

And have we not been lately in great danger of being cheated and undone the
second time by the same Arts, and Fears, and Jealousies, and pretenses of
Reformation, and Religion, and almost by the same men too? And may we not at
last hope, that this repeated Experience will open men's eyes, that they may see
what tools they have been made by designing heads, how they have been cajoled
and imposed upon by fair pretenses; and some perhaps honest men, so I would in
charity believe, in the simplicity of their hearts, made use of to serve the
most horrid and treasonable Designs, which they never thought of, or little
suspected were driving on.

3. And especially, Let us all now be exhorted to take great care that our Zeal
for Religion never transport us beyond the bounds of our Duty.

Religion is certainly the greatest interest and concernment of Mankind. Dearer
it ought to be to us than our lives, for infinitely more than our lives are
worth depend upon it. And of all the several Religions that are professed in
the World, I am in my Conscience persuaded, that which is taught here, and
maintained in our Church of England as by Law established, is most Divine, most
Christian, most Apostolical and Primitive, most Pure and Rational, and for the
continuance of this Inestimable Blessing of God amongst us, and to our
Posterity after us (of which we have been for so long time through Gods Infinite
Patience to us possessed) for this we ought surely to be very Zealous. No lover
of God, or his own Soul, or his Country, can be indifferent or careless about
such a Matter. And as for my own part I do profess to have, so am I sure all
true Orthodox Sons of the Church of England must have, as ill thoughts and as
great a detestation of the Popish, as of any other Sect whatever that calls it
self Christian. The Church of Rome is undoubtedly the most corrupt and
degenerate part of the Visible Church of Christ now upon Earth; and I thank God
it is my Resolution, and it is the Resolution of all true and hearty Members of
our Church, and I pray God give us all Grace to stand to it, if ever we be put
upon the trial; I say it is our Resolution to part with all that this World
calls Dear, even Life it self, rather than ever own their Novel Articles for
true, or submit to their Usurpations, or Communicate in their Idolatrous
Worship.

But yet for all this, neither for the Preservation of this our most Holy and
Excellent Religion professed here in England, nor for the keeping out Popery it
self, (and then I have named the worst thing that I can) will I ever, by the
Grace of God, go beyond the Duty of my Calling, and that Station Divine
Providence has placed me in, nor will I ever lift up my Finger, nor open my
Mouth against the Lords Anointed, whatever his Religion may be, whether he has
any or none, whether he be a Nero or a Constantine, whether he Rules by Law or
against it. We must not wish him Evil, no not so much as in our secret
thoughts, whatever hard things we suffer from him; we must on no account
disturb or oppose his Government, or resist his Authority, and if we have not
opportunity of flying from such a Persecution, (as I now suppose, because I
would put the worst Case that can happen) or cannot by prudence decline it, I
know no other remedy the Gospel allows us, but Meek and Patient Suffering for
our Religion, after the Example of our Blessed Lord and Master.

This is the plain Loyal Doctrine of the Church of England, which her Ministers
have always Preached and Defended, both against Papists and Fanatics of all
sorts, and for which such an Outcry and Clamor of late Years has been raised
against the Clergy. And whenever we Teach you otherwise, give me leave in Gods
Name to charge you all to forsake us, and despise us at as high a rate as our
greatest Enemies now can do. Nay, if an Angel from Heaven preach any other
Doctrine, let him be accursed.

Zeal for the best and the greatest things in the World will not excuse private
men's taking upon themselves to reform public abuses, either against, or
without the consent of the Supreme Magistrate, nor will it hallow any action
for which we have not sufficient Warrant and Authority from Gods word. Ye
remember the Answer which our Savior gave to his Disciples, when they called
for Fire from Heaven to consume that Village of the Samaritans that would not
receive their Master, Ye know not what manner of Spirit you are of. They were
much mistaken when they thought they might do as Elias had done; that was no
ways agreeable to that Meek and Lowly Spirit which our Saviors Doctrine was
to beget in men, or to that taking up his Cross which our Lord called his
Disciples unto, or to that Patience and Resolution in suffering, by which
Christianity was to be propagated and glorified in the World.

For Conclusion of all, would we engage Gods Favor and Protection, that he
should continue to us those singular Mercies we yet enjoy; let us then at all
times adhere close to our Duty, as well when it is against our temporal
Interest, as when it is for it. Let us inviolably in all things observe the
Commands of our Religion, not only propound good ends, but be as careful to
choose Lawful means, and then God w^^ in some measure think himself as it were
obliged (...) show Mercy and Favor to us.

If ever any thing provokes God Almighty t^ bring those Calamities upon us,
which we seem (...) much to fear, it is our using indirect unlawful mean^ to
prevent their falling upon us. And is it not thu^ with us at this day? For
could our Common Enemy, I mean the Papists, have ever invented a more
successful Plot for the bringing in of Popery? could they have hoped for a
better opportunity, or greater advantages, for the recommending and introducing
their Religion, than what the abominable Wickedness and Treasons of those who
would be accounted the greatest Zealots against it, have now given them? By
doing of such horrid Evils, under pretense that good may come, have they not
given the greatest Blow and Wound to the Reformed Religion, and done their best
to bring that misery upon us, which they would be thought to have designed to
have kept off?

The Lord still in his infinite Mercy continue to preserve our most Gracious
Sovereign, and the Church, and these Kingdoms, from all either secret
Conspiracies, or open Assaults of Wicked Men, of what Sect or Denomination
soever, who think it Lawful to do evil, that good may come, whose damnation is
just.

FINIS.

