A SERMON Preached before the Artillery-Company OF LONDON, AT St Mary-le-Bow,
DECEMBER 2, 1684. And now Published at their desire.

By BENJAMIN CALAMY, D. D. One of his Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary.

LONDON, Printed for John Baker, Printer to the Honorable Society, at the
Three Pigeons in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1685.

To the Right Honorable Sir William Prichard Knight and Alderman, President of
the Artillery-Company.
To the Right Honorable Sir James Smith, LORD MAYOR, VICE PRESIDENT.
To the Right Worshipful Sir Matthew Andrews TREASURER.
As also to the Right Honorable Earl of Aran, Earl of Huntingdon, Earl of
Salisbury, Lord Cholmondeley.

To the Right Worshipful Sir Richard Temple, Sir Peter Daniel, Sir Samuel
Dashwood, Captain William Davies,

STEWARDS. And to the whole Court of Assistants, Field-Officers, Captains, and
Gentlemen, Professing and Exercising. Arms in that Renowned and Honorable
Society.
Right Honorable, etc.
SO many excellent Books have been of late Written in defense of Loyalty and
the Government, in answer to those virulent and Seditious Pamphlets and Libels
that have been Published amongst us, that we might reasonably hope there should
be hardly now left one disaffected Man in the Nation: Yet it appears by those
discontents that are still whispered, that there is great need of an
anniversary meeting of this Illustrious Society, which not only by their
Example does encourage others to be Loyal, but can also force those to be such,
who perhaps might have but little mind to it otherwise. And notwithstanding all
that has been said or Printed for obedience to Lawful Authority, there are
many so slenderly converted, and so ready on all occasions to Relapse, that
there cannot but be frequent use of some plain Discourses, to show the
wickedness, as well as mischievousness of all disloyal Principles. To do this
in some measure, is the honest design of the following Sermon, which is now
humbly presented to your favorable acceptance, By

Right Honorable, etc. Your most humble and most obedient Servant, Benjamin
Calamy.

A SERMON Preached before the Artillery-Company.
St. MATTHEW XXVI. 52. Then said Jesus unto him, put up again thy Sword into
his place: for all they that take the Sword shall perish with the Sword.


I Can easily imagine some amongst you upon the first hearing of these words
ready to tell me, that this advice of our Lords is by no means suited or proper
to this illustrious Assembly, consisting of Men so long Trained up, and so
excellently skilled in Martial exercises. To bid those, who so well know the
use of the Sword, to put it into its place, and suffer it to rust in its
Scabbard, sounds like a dismission or disbanding of this renowned and
honorable Society, and an hard censure of your noble Profession, as unlawful
or Antichristian, and infinitely dangerous too, if all they that take the Sword
shall perish by the Sword.

But if we better consider what our Savior here says, we shall not find any
thing in this Text against the use of the Sword upon a just and necessary
occasion, or when it is duly put into our hands by those, who have from God
the power of the Sword committed to them. For he did not command his Disciples
to fling it away, as of no further use under the Gospel; as if no other Sword
was now necessary but that of the Spirit; or as if all Christians were bound
tamely to yield up themselves an easy prey to violent and injurious Men, and in
no case to repel unjust force by force. No: our blessed Lord but a little
before, viz. the very same Night in which he spoke the words of my Text, had
advised his Disciples, those of them who had no Swords, to sell their Garments
and buy one; thereby allowing them to provide Arms sufficient for their defense
against lawless Robbers and Cutthroats, who were very common and numerous in
those Countries, through which they were to pass for the propagation of
Christianity.

Our Savior did never intend to ty all his Disciples hands, and expose them
naked to be Invaded and Assaulted by any one that had a mind to it. To oppose
force against unjust force is allowed to every Man by the Law of Nature, which
natural right our Religion has not canceled nor restrained, provided always
that we thus draw our Swords only against private Persons, and not against
those who have Warrant or Command of public Authority to vouch their force
against us; and that it be in such cases of extremity, where we cannot defend
our selves by the regular course of calling in the Assistance of the Law or
Magistrate.

Nay further, in the very words of my Text our Savior does expressly allow the
use of the Sword in the hands of the Supreme power, or by Commission and
Authority from it. For when he says they shall perish by the Sword, he means
by the Sword of the Magistrate, which shall justly cut off such Offenders.

Thus from the words themselves we have sufficient evidence, that our Savior
did not forbid the use of the Sword; either in our own necessary defense, or at
the Command and direction of the Supreme Governors: In which two cases only it
was ever lawful for private Persons. And in this matter the Laws of our
Religion have made no alteration. We may still defend our selves by the Sword
from the unjust Assaults of private Persons, when we have no other Remedy; and
the Sovereigns of every Nation and Kingdom have the same power over their
Subjects persons, fortunes and lives, that they had before Christianity
appeared in the World, that they had from the beginning, since Men first
entered into Societies, and lived under Government.

Our Savior therefore in my Text forbids the use of the Sword only on that
particular occasion, or the like, on which it was drawn by St. Peter, which was
this;

A great company of Soldiers, and other Officers from the chief Priests and
Pharisees, with the Traitor Judas to conduct them, were sent to Apprehend our
Blessed Savior in the Garden, whither he had retired. This the Disciples
thought a fit opportunity to show their courage and constancy to their Lord and
Master, by venturing their own Lives to rescue him from the mercyless hands of
his bloody enemies. They asked him therefore, Lord shall we smite with the
Sword? and St. Peter, who was naturally of a more hot temper and bolder spirit
than the rest of the Apostles, without tarrying for an Answer drew his Sword,
and struck at the chiefest and most busy of them, (some guess him to be the Man
that Commanded the Party, and had the Warrant to seize our Lord) and he out off
his ear. But our Savior liked not this rash and ungovernable zeal, and
therefore entreated those who had him in their power to suffer him but so long,
till by a Miraculous touch he healed the Wound, and turning to St. Peter, bad
him put up his Sword again into his place. For at present there was not the
least just occasion for it, (as great an one as he might think was now offered
to him) that his Cause stood not in need of any such irregular defense. It was
not for lack of help, that he thus quietly submitted himself, but out of
respect to that Authority, which employed these Soldiers and Officers. Had he
any desire to be forceably delivered out of their hands, did he want any to
fight for him, he could easily speak to his Father, and he would presently send
more than Twelve Legions of Angels to appear for his rescue. For he that takes
the Sword, that is at his own pleasure or for his own humor without sufficient
order or Authority, when it is not put into his hands, but he takes it without
warrantable direction, or uses it against a Lawful Authority, shall perish by
the Sword, shall and ought to suffer for so doing, is guilty of a capital
crime, for which he forfeits his Life to Justice here, and of a most grievous
sin, for which without Repentance he shall stand condemned hereafter. Put up
again thy Sword into his place, for all they that take the Sword shall perish
with the Sword.

Our Savior here plainly condemns all resistance of Lawful Authority by force
and violence, since he would not suffer the Sword to be drawn against those,
who acted by a just Authority, though what they did was barbarously unjust.
Whether it be in any case lawful by force and violence to resist Authority, is
truly styled the greatest case of Conscience in the world, since so very much
does depend upon the right resolution of it. And if it could be plainly made
out that our Savior, or his Apostles, did give Subjects right or liberty on
any pretense to take up Arms, or to fight against the Lawful powers, I should
look upon it as the greatest objection that could be brought against
Christianity. For it would be an eternal scandal, and indelible reproach
against our Religion, if it countenanced any thing, that was so manifestly
inconsistent with the peace of Societies and civil Government.

There is nothing more evident than that this principle, that it is Lawful in
some cases for Subjects by force to resist their King and Sovereign, does open
a wide door to all manner of disorder and confusion. For if it ever be Lawful
for Subjects to resist the Sovereign power, then it follows that the Subjects
have always a right to judge, whether their present case be such, as that they
may Lawfully resist in, and if they be Judges, this Proposition that subjects
may resist in some cases, of which themselves are Judges, is the same, as to
say, that they may do it whenever they shall think fit for to do it; and thus
any suspicion or discontent taken up against the Government, any grievance we
can fancy, any thing our Governor does that is misconstrued or misinterpreted,
will be thought a justifiable pretense for taking up Arms against him, which
necessarily lays the Foundation of everlasting Wars and troubles.

I might therefore sufficiently evince the falseness of this Principle from the
inevitable mischievous consequences of it; but it rather becomes the place I
now stand in to show how wicked and unchristian a Doctrine it is. And there is
nothing more plainly and solemnly condemned by the Laws of our Religion, than
for Subjects by force of Arms on any occasion to resist the Supreme Power and
Authority, let it be in one single person, or more, according to the different
forms of Government in several Countries: Or to speak as the case is amongst
our selves, it is never Lawful by our Religion on any pretense to resist the
King, or any Authorized by the King, whom we all acknowledge in the Oath of
Supremacy to be the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, and if he be the only
Supreme, there is no power on Earth equal or coordinate to his any more, than
there is any Superior.

Had we no other proof of this, as we have abundance, but these words of our
Savior to St. Peter, we might from them sufficiently learn his Mind and Will
concerning resistance of the Supreme Power. Where I shall observe first, what a
fair pretense and Plea St. Peter and the Disciples had for drawing the Sword or
taking up Arms, and then I shall explain the grounds or reasons upon which our
Savior forbad them, and so sharply rebuked St. Peter; lastly I shall draw one
or two inferences from the whole.

1. Consider what plausible pretense St. Peter and the Disciples here had for
the drawing of the Sword; and surely if ever there was or can be any case,
wherein resistance of Lawful Authority by force is justifiable, it must had
been so in this we are now discoursing of. For

1. This act of St. Peter was purely defensive. Here was no Plot or design laid
against the Chief Priests or Elders of the Jews, much less against the Life or
Dignity of Caesar, or the Authority of his Deputy in Judaea. No Combination nor
Association for the defense of our Savior, no holy League or Covenant taken,
nor engagement entered into to root out the Highpriesthood and Jewish Hierarchy,
and to stand by one another with their Lives and Fortunes; no naming of a
General, or listing of Soldiers in the Cause; no contribution of Plate or
Money for the carrying it on; no contrivance of any Insurrection or seizing the
Guards, or stirring up the people against the Government; no secret consults
about the management of the business; but only an hasty and rash attempt to
secure our Saviors Person from the violence offered to him; which if they had
by force effected, and actually delivered him out of the hands of the Officers
that came to apprehend him, there in all probability the Tumult would have
stopped, and no further damage or prejudice happened to the public State. So
that here was not any dangerous Conspiracy against the Government, nor a direct
taking up Arms against it, but their greatest fault seems to be only a
disorderly zeal for the Life and safety of their Lord and Master, to preserve
which they thought themselves in gratitude and honor bound.

2. The violence here offered to our Savior by Chief Priests and Officers was
as base and vile piece of injustice, as ever was acted by Men: Most foul
treachery in Judas, invincible malice in the Chief Priests and Elders against
the most innocent person that ever lived in the World. I may well call their
spite against him invincible, since those mavelous good works he had done
amongst them, all the kindnesses they had received from him, the incomparable
sweetness and obligingness of his temper and deportment could not subdue it.

Now this St. Peter and the rest of our Saviors intimate friends and followers
could not be ignorant of. They knew how the Rulers of the Jews had all along
laid their traps to ensnare him, invented their Sham-plots to find matter of
accusation against him, with what unwearied diligence they had Persecuted him,
and all that adhered to him, and were now at last resolved on his Death. And
who could be safe in their Lives and Estates, if such exemplary virtue and
innocence could not protect our Blessed Savior? So that here their civil
Liberties and Properties were highly concerned. If our Governors prevail, and
by such manifest injustice take away this Man's Life, the Lord knows who of us
by such wicked Arts and subornation of witnesses and methods of violence shall
go next. This is such an instance of Arbitrariness and Tyranny, as is not to be
endured by a free people.

3. It is further to be considered that not only their civil Liberties and
Birthright, but the true Religion was also in great danger. This person in
whose defense St. Peter drew his Sword was no other than the Son of God, the
Savior of the World, that great Prophet of whom Moses spoke of old time, and
whom their whole Nation had so long expected: That Divine Preacher of
Righteousness, whom God had sent into the World these last days to instruct
mankind, and discover his whole will to us, and by it to conduct us to eternal
Life. Now this feizing of his Person was a downright rejecting the true
Messiah, a design to root out his holy Doctrine, which his enemies doubted not
but would die with him. Who would not stretch a little and venture something in
so Sacred and so Glorious a Cause? Did it become the Disciples to stand upon
little niceties and punctilio's of duty, when they were haling away the Son of
God himself, as the vilest Malafactor, and all that was dear to them lay at
stake? or needed they to fear Gods displeasure, for rescuing one so dear to him
out of the hands of those wretched Miscreants, who would treat him with all
imaginable spite and cruelty? Thus you see it was their Love only and concern
for the best person, the best Religion, that inspirited St. Peter and the
Disciples with courage and resolution to attack the Soldiers and Officers that
came against their Master.

4. The force that was opposed, or the ressistance that was made was only
against the inferior and meanest Officers and Servants. The Sword was drawn
neither against Caesar himself, nor any sent by him as Herod or Pilate, nor yet
against any of the Chief Priests and Elders of the Jews themselves, but only
against some of their ordinary Malignant Servants and Officers; and that too at
a time when but very little power remained to the Jews, who could not judge in
Capital Causes, nor put any to Death by their own Authority. St. Peter might
have pleaded, that he designed no hurt or mischief to the persons of his
Governors, whom he acknowledged to be Sacred and Inviolable; that he owned the
Authority of the Chief Priests and Elders, did not fight against them, but for
them against their unjust Ministers, who came treacherously in the Night to
surprise our Savior, that they might deliver him up to Pilate the Roman
President; and this without any Commission from him, who had the chief
Juridiction in Jewry.

In short, St. Peter only resisted unjust and illegal Violence: He thought
himself under the strongest Obligations of Love and Gratitude to his Lord and
Master to do it. It was zeal for Christ inflamed him, he could not endure to
see the Son of God so basely used. Yet notwithanding all these Circumstances,
which I have alleged in his favor, he was severely reprehended by our Savior
for drawing his Sword, the fact was condemned, and those who should hereafter
imitate him by taking the Sword in like cases Sentenced as worthy of Death.

2. I proceed to enquire into the grounds and reasons, upon which our Savior
blamed and condemned this Fact of St. Peter, and we shall find these two.

1. Because he had no competent Authority to draw his Sword.

2. Because fighting in defense of our Savior and his Religion was utterly
inconsistent with his design, and the Nature of his Kingdom.

1. Because he had no competent Authority to justify his drawing his Sword. So
says our Savior, All they that take the Sword, of their own heads, who
without leave or Commission usurp the right of the Magistrate, shall suffer the
punishment due by Law to Murderers, who so sheddeth Man's Blood, by Man shall
his Blood be shed.

God Almighty is the sole Lord and Master of Life and Death. No Man has of
himself power over his own Life, much less over another, and consequently
cannot transfer any such power. What is therefore called jus gladii or the
power of the Sword must be put into the hands of the Sovereign by God alone,
whose Minister he is, and not by the people, who cannot give what they never
had. Who therefore Fights with the allowance, or at the Command of the Supreme
power, fights by Gods Authority too; by whose leave and appointment he takes
away the Lives of the Kings enemies. And to pretend to fight for God without
any Authority from the King, must either suppose a private direction, and
Commission from God, (which is all imposture) or it makes every private person
a Sovereign, which is indeed to destroy the Nature both of Sovereign and
Subject.

Our Blessed Savior here pronounces him worthy of Death, who should draw his
Sword either against or without a Lawful Authority, though it be to secure the
greatest innocence from the most unjust and illegal Persecution: And can we
then possibly desire a plainer, or more express Text of Scripture against all
resistance of Lawful Authority by force and violence, than these words of our
Lord. For if (excepting the case of private defense, in which the consent of
the Supreme Power is supposed) we are never to use the Sword, but when we
receive Authority to do it from the Public Magistrate, then to be sure it is
never Lawful to use it against him; unless we will imagine the King to
Authorize Men, and give them Commission to fight against himself, as those in
our late Rebellion did, who pretended to fight against his Person by his
Authority, a conceit as absurd, as Traitorous.

Now by this one precept of non-Resistance to the higher Powers our Savior
has best secured the Rights of Princes, the liberty of the Subject and the
Peace of Societies.

1. By this our Savior has secured the Rights of Sovereign Princes. This
being an essential part of the Sovereign power to be unaccountable and
irresistible. For that power which is to give account unto, or may be resisted
by any other power on Earth, is not the Sovereign power of a Nation, but it is
subject to those who cannot control it. Thus if it were Lawful for the Body of
the people in general or their representatives in any case to take up Arms, and
resist, then is the King Sovereign only during pleasure, and the people subject
no longer, than they shall think fit: And it is truly said, that He has only
an empty shadow of Power and Authority, who is clothed with the Robes of
Majesty, and is entrusted with the Scepter, whilst the power of the Sword is in
another hand. If by our Religion it had been on any pretense permitted to have
resisted, our Savior had utterly destroyed all the rights of Government, Kings
would have had a very uncertain precarious Title to their Crowns, he had made
their Subjects Judges of their Sovereigns actions, and consequently superior
to them; in a word, he had dethroned all Monarchs by transferring that absolute
uncontrollable Power, which in all Governments must be lodged somewhere, from
the King to the people.

2. By forbidding resistance our Savior has most effectually secured the
Rights, Liberties and Properties of the subject, which certainly are best
preserved under Government. For the greatest danger subjects are in is not from
their Prince, but from their fellow subjects; and for this purpose God has
instituted Government to secure us from the violence of other injurious
persons, without which we should live as amongst Bears and Tigers, nay without
it neither House, nor City, nor Nation, nor Mankind, nor Nature, nor the World
it self can subsist, as Tully speaks in his Third Book of Laws. When the Hedge
and Wall is once broken down, and the fence taken away, we strait become liable
to the incursions of all the Ravenous Beasts of prey, and to avoid Tyranny or
oppression of our Governors, we soon are made slaves to the meanest of the
people, as it usually happens in Civil Wars, and prosperous Rebellions. This
Doctrine therefore is so far from enslaving the people, or destroying their
Natural right of self-preservation, that it indeed teaches us the best way to
defend our selves, and secure our Liberties.

Public Government is always the best means of self-defence; and therefore to
resist, or to endeavor to overthrow the Government at any time, is to take
away and destroy the best means we have of defending our own Lives, Properties,
and Rights. It may indeed, as the case may some times happen, free us from one
Tyrant, but then it opposes us to the rage and lust of Ten Thousand. Our Rights
and Liberties are not any ways more certainly violated, than by civil
commotions and intestine Tumults, and broils: and oppression, under the worst
Government is not so great an evil, as the devastations and desolations that
are made by subjects resisting, and rebelling against their Sovereign. On which
account it is reported of the old Persians, that upon the Death of any of their
Kings the people were allowed some few days freedom from all Government, that
by the mischiefs, slaughters, outrages and rapines, committed in that short
interval, they might be convinced of the necessity and usefulness of
Government, and that the worst was vastly better than none at all.

Lastly, By this precept of non-resistance our Savior has provided for the
peace of Societies, which can never be maintained, where this principle is once
admitted, that it is lawful in some cases to resist the Supreme Authority. For
the best Governors, the most equal and just Governments are displeasing to
some or other. It is impossible that things should be always administered with
that exact fairness, and proportion, and success too, as not to offend some,
who shall think themselves oppressed and wronged; and if they think so, this
shall be ground enough to disturb the peace of the Kingdom.

Hence there must be eternal jealousies between the Prince and people; watching
for all advantages one against the other; continual undermining and weakening
one another interest and force; and nothing could be the result of such a
constitution, but endless tumult and confusion. So that it is a defeating the
very end of all societies; and liberty of defense, if allowed to private
persons against their superiors, would make the condition of subjects far
worse, than it can well be under the most absolute and illimited Monarchy.

I know here very Tragical Stories are told, and strange consequences drawn
from this Doctrine; that this makes us all slaves to the will and lust of any
vile wretch, that happens to be in the Throne, such as were Tyberius, Nero, and
the like, that one Arm unresisted may Butcher and Massacre an whole City or
Nation, that this is enough to turn a Kingdom into a Shambles, that it is not
to be thought that God would ever trust one Man with such unbounded power of
doing mischief, that to submit and sit still under such oppression and Tyranny,
as may arise from the abuse of unbridled power, is to throw away our Lives, as
Men weary of them, and that it is Mahumetan Doctrine, not Christian.

But after all this it is no less than Demonstration, that the case of the
subject is far easier and safer, whilst they are denied the Liberty of
resisting, than it would have been had the same been indulged to them, the
inconveniences on both sides being truly stated and weighed: as has been
evidently made out by several late Writers on behalf of the Government beyond
all fair contradiction; and for the proof of it all appeal to the late
Rebellion, called a Defensive War, and justified by this Doctrine of the
Lawfulness of resisting for the Preservation of our Rights and Liberties and
Religion, yet there was more Christian Bloodshed, more Lives lost in that
quarrel, more Estates plundered and Confiscated, more Families ruined and
undone, than by all the Persecutions and Tyrannies of all the Kings and Queens
of England since the Conquest. So that it is for the good and interest of every
subject, that would live quietly and peaceably and safely, that the Sovereign
power should be invested with an absolute unaccountable, irresistible
Authority, Subordinate to none but God himself.

And though honest Men may be in some danger from such power, when it happens
to be in ill hands, yet they would be continually in far greater danger, if it
might be resisted.

Was it thus Lawful on any account to take Arms, there would never be wanting a
pretense for it; and so the Government, like a Football, would be continually
tossed from one to another, till the strongest ran away with it, and he should
prevail no longer, than till another stronger than he came and trip'd up his
heels, and what security can there be for the Lives, Estates, and Liberties of
the subjects in the midst of such continual disorders and revolutions? This
therefore is no hard Law of our Saviors, that we should not take up Arms in
our own defense against the Magistrate, but very beneficial and profitable to
Mankind, since the mischief of such resistance is manifestly greater and more
fatal, than all the supposed inconveniences that can arise from the abuse of
power. Some few Men may fall a Sacrifice to the fury or malice of a wicked
Tyrant, but Thousands and Ten Thousands perish, when Men attempt to save their
Lives by Rebellion.

Our Savior and his Apostles could not but consider this, when they so
earnestly forbad all resistance to Authority; that such unaccountable power may
soon degenerate into Tyranny. They could not forget what grievous Tyrants then
Reigned in the World, most infamous for their Cruelty, Injustice and
Oppression; and yet these must not be resisted by Christians.

Nay if we consider the reason of the case, it will appear as necessary, that
we should be forbidden to resist those who Rule Arbitrarily and unjustly, as
well as the best and most gracious Princes. Since it is so easy a matter to
cheat the common people into a bad opinion of their Governors, who are always
apt to suspect the worst of those above them. And if it had been Lawful to have
resisted Arbitrary Power, every King good or bad would have been at the mercy
of the people. For what Prince can ever hope by the most equal Government, and
most mild administration to avoid the infamy of Tyranny and Arbitrary power,
when our present most Gracious Sovereign, and his Father of ever blessed Memory
could not do it. This is the first reason why our Savior on this occasion
forbad St. Peter the use of the Sword, not only because the time was now come
wherein the Messiah was to suffer and die, but because St. Peter had no
Authority for the drawing of it, and it was against the Lawful powers. All they
that take the Sword, shall perish with the Sword.

2. There was another reason for which our Savior condemned St. Peter's using
his Sword upon this occasion, because fighting in defense of himself and his
Religion was utterly inconsistent with his design, and the Nature of his
Kingdom. Thus himself tells Pilate St. John 18.36. My Kingdom is not of this
World. If my Kingdom were of this World, then would my Servants fight that I
should not be delivered to the Jews, but now is my Kingdom not from hence. The
Apostles were much mistaken, when they thought to show their zeal for their
Master by setting upon and destroying of his enemies. They had another warfare
to be engaged in. They were to glorify our Savior by suffering all manner of
evils cheerfully, and conrageously for his sake, and this our Savior taught
them by this rebuke of St. Peter.

He himself came into the World a pattern of meekness and lowliness, of the
greatest humility and most unwearied patience, and these were the Virtues that
were to crown his Disciples, and to recommend his Religion to Mankind. He did
not intend to send out his Apostles as so many Captains and Generals by force
to subdue the World to his obedience, but he sent them out as Sheep amongst
Wolves, exposed to all manner of evil treatment, which they were bravely and
generously to endure for the sake of their Master, and his Religigion was to
thrive, and flourish by being Persecuted, to get ground by being opposed, and
to be propagated by the passive valor and courage of Christians. Force of Arms
and the Sword were no likely means to beget in Men that Dovelike, Childlike,
innocent and quiet, meek and gentle Spirit, which his Doctrine was designed to
implant in all that were called after his Name.

Thus the posture of St. Peter confessing the name of Christ, with his Arms and
Legs stretched out upon the Cross at Rome, was much more becoming an Apostle of
the Crucificed Jesus, than brandishing his Sword in his hand, and fighting in
defense of his Master. And this way did the Primitive Christians and Martyrs
show their Love and constancy to their Savior, and his Religion, by suffering
gladly the spoiling of their Goods, by rejoicing in the midst of scorching
flames, not by fighting for it, or making it a pretense to Rebel.

Though they wanted not force nor numbers sufficient to have opposed their
Heathen Emperors, and shaken their Thrones, yet they willingly submitted to
the unjust Sentence of their Governors after the example of their Lord and
Savior; and the Apologist for them boasts, that none of them ever were found
Guilty of Conspiracies against the Emperors, their holy Discipline teaching
them rather to be killed, than to kill. Thus Mauritius who Commanded the famous
Thebaean Legion, which being all Christians yielded themselves to Death under
Maximianus told his fellow Soldiers, how much afraid he was lest they being
Armed should under pretense of defending their fellows have resisted the
Emperor, and hindered their Martyrdom: When, as he tells them, this was
forbidden by Christ, who would have that Sword, which the Apostle had drawn in
his defense, to be put up.

Here then, my Brethren, is the only case wherein Religion needs your valor,
or calls for your courage: Not to be ashamed of it in a wicked Generation, not
to forsake it because of the Cross, with which it may sometimes be attended; to
value pleasing God and your own Consciences above your Lives, or all this World
calls dear. This is like true Soldiers of Jesus Christ, this is to be like the
great Captain of our Salvation, and to follow him as our Leader, and by this we
shall gain admittance into his Heavenly Kingdom. But to fight for the setting
up of Christ's Kingdom, to Rebel that we may avoid suffering for our Religion,
or to take up Arms for the preservation of it was never heard of till the days
of our New Reformers.

In truth, all this noise about resisting for the preservation of our Religion
is a mere cheat and nonsense No earthly power can reach it, or hinder Men from
being as Religious as they will, or as God has Commanded them. It is only to
save themselves from suffering for their Religion, if the Supreme Magistrate
should at any time Persecute the professors of it, that raises all their
intemperate zeal and heat, and how agreeable that is with our Saviors Command
of taking up his Cross, I leave to every Man to judge. If St. Peter might not
draw his Sword to keep our Savior from suffering, much less may we to keep our
selves from it.

I shall only here add one observation, which I find made from this fact of St.
Peter's; that is, He who was so forward to draw his Sword in defense of his
Master, was the first that shamefully denied him, and Swore and Cursed that he
never knew him. The reason of which is guessed to be, that he was afraid of
being found out to have been the Person that smote the High Priests Servant,
and therefore would not own any Relation to our Savior; but however this be, I
find this very useful observation made upon it by an excellent Writer of our
Church, that thus it very often happens, this is commonly the fate of such Men,
who are so ready to draw their Swords upon all occasions for Christ, and his
Religion and Gospel, against their Superiors, that they renounce their
Savior, and all his Beligion, before ever they lay down their Swords again.
Witness those Traitors that embrued their wicked hands in his late Majesty's
Blood. What zeal for Religion did they first pretend? what tenderness of
Conscience, what honesty and integrity did they make show of? and when they
were entered and dipped in Rebellion, what Barbarity, what Villainy did they stick
at? what Law of our Religion did they not violate? what Commandment of our
Savior did they not scandalously break? Mind it when you will, they who are so
ready to fight for their Religion, are most afraid to suffer for it.

I only beg your Patience, whilst I draw two Inferences from what I have now
said.

1. It is generally enquired here, that if St. Peter upon so great an occasion
as this might not draw his Sword against the Public Officers, by what
Authority then does the Bishop of Rome as his Successor challenge to himself a
Superiority over Sovereign Kings and Princes, and a power to Authorize their
Subjects to take up Arms against the, and to depose them: I say, with what
color of reason can they claim this Right by virtue of their Succession from
St. Peter, when you see St. Peter himself had not leave to oppose or resist the
meanest Servants or Soldiers that came Armed with Public Authority? yet we
are told that no less a Man than Pope Boniface the Eighth undertakes to prove
from this very place, that St. Peter and the Church had the power of the
temporal Sword. He said unto him, put up thy Sword into the sheath using these
words thy Sword. Which I only mention to show you to what pitiful shifts Men
are put, how they are forced to wrack and torture the Gospels, when out of them
they would get something that should countenance Sedition or Rebellion. So
contrary is the Doctrine of Resistance to the plain Rules of our Religion, that
those amongst us who have defended it in Print, have at last acknowledged it a
Mystery hid from former Ages, and reserved for these last days of greater
Light. They were fain to pretend a new Revelation for it.

2. From our Saviors words it undeniably appears, that all taking up Arms
against our Sovereign Lord the King, or those Commissionated by him, let the
pretense be what it will, is a plain damnable Sin. No subject be he of what
rank or order soever, may draw the Sword, let the occasion be never so great,
without sufficient Authority, which he can have only from the Supreme Power it
self.

I do not say we are bound actually to obey the Supreme Authority in all
things. We have an higher Lord and Master in Heaven, to whom the greatest
Monarch is equally accountable for all his Actions, as his meanest Vassal. And
I must not for the sake of any inferior Authority, renounce my Faith and
Allegiance to that Heavenly King of Kings and Lord of Lords. The only
difficulty then is, if I must neither obey my Superiors, when they Command
things unlawful, nor yet by force defend my self, when they go about to punish
me for my disobedience, what remedy have I left me? Must we all lose our
Rights, Liberties, Religion and Lives, whenever they chance to be invaded by
our Governors, and sit still with our hands folded up within our Bosoms?

I answer, that against such inconveniences as these, which have sometimes
happened in the World, it is confessed that we have no other security, but the
providence of God, which is over all his works, and the goodness of our
Governors, who are under all possible moral obligations to rule with Justice,
mercy and equity, and if they fail in their duties they shall find God a severe
avenger. But however we are not to use any force toward them, any more than
Children may against a froward and unkind Parent. Fly from them we may, and get
out of their clutches, but we must not do the least evil to them, nor ever draw
our Swords against them. And it is the pleasure of God when such a necessity
lies upon us, that then we should exercise our Christian Patience, and commit
our Souls unto our Creator, being willing to lay down our Lives for his Honor
from whom we received them: As the Learned Grotius Comments upon the words of
my Text. This is the middle way the Gospel prescribes to us in such difficult
circumstances, when we cannot without Sin obey, and may not resist, then
quietly to submit our selves to suffer Gods will.

But thanks be to God, as to our selves in this Nation, these are only hard
cases supposed by those, who wished well at least to the late horrid
Conspiracy, on purpose to fright people out of their Allegiance and Obedience.
For we are so far from having any such occasion or pretense for resisting, or
using the Sword amongst us, that besides the plain unlawfulness and wickedness
of so doing, we have all the obligations, and endearments and interest to
engage us to live quietly and peaceably that Subjects can possibly desire.

Can we wish for, can we conceive a more Gracious Prince than him, whom God
has set over us, and hitherto preserved for the public good and benefit of
this Nation? How mild and gentle! how merciful and ready to forgive! So tender
of his peoples welfare, so careful of their Liberties and Properties, that it
appears they are far better and more safe in his hands than our own. Have we
not excellent Laws to secure to us our Civil Rights, and is not our Religion as
well established, as humane policy can do it?

Are we not on many accounts the happiest and most fortunate people in the
World, if we were but contented and pleased with our selves.

That a Nation of so great valor and natural courage, of so great skill in
feats of Arms, and of such undaunted Spirits, which if united would be able to
grapple with the strongest and most potent Kingdoms in the Earth, that has all
things in it self that can be called good, pleasant or desirable, should yet
weaken and destroy our selves by quarrelling amongst our selves or against our
own King, this is matter of wonder and astonishment to all the World beside.

The disloyalty of this Nation has much broken our reputation, and we once
thought we had almost recovered our credit again by the Triumphant Restoration
of his present Majesty, (whom God long preserve) till these late divisions, and
commotions, and fresh conspiracies, and renewed attempts against the
Government, have sunk us low in the esteem of all our neighbor Nations.

But Blessed be God, that this Poison of Faction and Sedition has not infected
all sorts of Men. There was preserved a remnant that never bowed their knees to
Baal, nor were carried away by the popular stream; who preserved their
integrity and Loyalty entire in the midst of that crooked and perverse
Generation. This Assembly here present is sufficient instance of the truth of
what I say.

May the King never want such Subjects of such skill and courage, of such
Loyalty and honesty to defend his Royal Person and happy Government against
Foreign Invasions, and intestine Factions and Rebellions. And give me leave to
end all with this Prayer, and I know you are such lovers of Peace, that you
will all say Amen to it, However necessary the terror of your Arms may be to
the defense of the King and Church, yet God grant that neither of them may ever
have occasion to make use of your Sword, or try either your skill or courage.

FINIS.
Three Books lately Published by Samuel Parker, D. D. Archdeacon of Canterbury.
1. AN Account of the Government of the Christian Church for the First 600
years.

2. Religion and Loyalty, the First part.

3. Religion and Loyalty, the Second part.

Also the right Foundation of Quietness, Obedience and Concord, by Clement
Ellis, newly published.

All sold by John Baker at the Three Pigeons in St. Paul's Churchyard.


