Tulse Mayor,

Martis decimo sexto die September. 1684. Annoque Regni Regis Caroli Secundi
Angliae, etc. trigesimo sexto.

THis Court does desire Dr. Calamy to Print his Sermon Preached at Bow-Church
on the Second of September Instant, (being the Day of Humiliation for the Great
Fire in the Year 1666.) before the Lord Mayor, and Aldermen, and Citizens of
this City.

WAGSTAFFE.

A SERMON Preached before the Right Honorable The Lord Mayor, ALDERMEN, AND
CITIZENS of LONDON, At the Church of St. Mary le Bow, September the Second,
1684.

BEING THE Anniversary Fast FOR THE DREADFUL FIRE In the Year 1666.

By BENJAMIN CALAMY D. D. Vicar of St. Laurence Jewry, and one of His MAJESTY's
Chaplains in Ordinary.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishops Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1685.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir Henry Tulse LORD MAYOR OF THE City of London, And
to the Honorable COURT of ALDERMEN.
Right Honorable,
IN Obedience to Your Lordships Commands I have published this following
Sermon, and now humbly present it to Your favorable Acceptance. The Discourse
was suited to the Day, plain and serious; the Subject Matter of it ordinary and
common, but highly useful and seasonable. And if any of the Inhabitants of this
great City are by the reading of it persuaded to, or better established in the
strict Practice of their Religion in all its several Duties, which respect
either God or Man, I have obtained my whole Design both in the Preaching and
Printing of it.

I beg Your Lordships Pardon, if I take this Opportunity to renew my most
thankful Acknowledgments of those many particular Favors I have received from
Your Lordship, by which I am bound ever to remain

Your most Obedient and Humble Servant, Benjamin Calamy.

A SERMON Preached before The Lord Mayor, On September the Second, 1684.
ISAIAH LVII. 21. There is no peace, says my God, to the wicked.


IT is not to be imagined, that the Design of this Anniversary Fast is barely
to call to mind those dismal Days wherein this Famous City was laid in Ashes,
and to hear the doleful Relation of that amazing Providence; but it was
intended as an Opportunity for the Exercise of serious Repentance: and to that
purpose we are now met, to lament our Sins, and humble our Souls in God's
presence, and to renew our Resolutions against all those Courses which once
plucked down such remarkable Judgments upon this Place, and will, unless we
reform them, at last prove our utter Ruin: And to improve the Consideration of
that dreadful Calamity to the same pious purposes, is my present Design, from
the Words now read unto you.

In the Verses immediately foregoing my Text the Prophet endeavors to revive
the drooping Spirits of those amongst the Jews, now in Babylonish Captivity,
who were truly penitent for their past Sins, and therefore called, v. 15. the
humble and contrite ones, with the Promise of God's Mercy to them, in bringing
them back at last to their Native Country; assuring those who put their trust
in God, that, though now far banished from it, yet they should again possess
their land, and inherit the holy Mountain. For God will not contend for ever,
v. 16. neither will he be always wroth. He knows our weakness, and how unable
we are to stand before him, when he is angry. He observed therefore their
Repentance, v. 18. and how they amended their ways, and would heal them, and
conduct them safely to their own Land, with abundance of Joy and Peace.

But if, after so signal deliverance, they should again fall back to their old
Courses; if, forgetful both of those sore Evils God had inflicted on them for
their Disobedience, and of his wonderful Mercy shown in redeeming them from
their Captivity, they should wantonly return, when restored, to their former
Provocations, he tells them, that they should by sad Experience find, that the
same Effects would still follow the same Causes, that Sin and Irreligion would
again destroy their Peace, and bring down God's severer Vengeance against them:
so that they should be like the troubled sea, which cannot rest, v. 20. always
unquiet and unsettled, in continual distraction and confusion. And now, that
they might not in the least doubt of the truth of all this, he confirms it by
the Authority of God himself, There is no peace, says my God, to the wicked.
They must never look to be an happy, flourishing People, as long as their Lives
and Manners were so corrupt and degenerate. This some Learned Men take to be
the strict meaning of the Words, and thus I shall now understand them.

Under this Word Peace in Scripture is often comprehended all manner of outward
Happiness and Prosperity; and taking it in this large sense, the Words do not
then respect wicked men considered singly by themselves, but as they are joined
together in Society and Community; to whom the Prophet declares, from the Mouth
of God, That there is nothing so destructive of the Political Happiness or
Welfare of any People, as prevailing Vice and Wickedness. Religion does not
only secure the inward Peace and Tranquillity of our Minds, and provide for
our future Felicity in the other World, but does mightily promote the temporal
Prosperity of any Kingdom or City in this: And, on the contrary, Vice and
Wickedness, especially where it abounds, and is become fashionable and
creditable, and has infected all Sorts and Ranks of Men, does certainly
undermine, and will by degrees overthrow the Peace and Happiness of any Society
or Community. There is no peace, says my God, to the wicked.

Many and weighty are the Arguments by which men may be moved to Repentance and
Amendment of Life. There is no Capacity we can be considered in, no Relation we
can stand in, but Religion is of mighty use and advantage to us in it; and, on
the contrary, Sin and Wickedness infinitely prejudicial and mischievous. But I
cannot think any Consideration more proper to this Assembly, or to the Occasion
of this Solemnity, than what my Text suggests to us, viz. the serviceableness
of True Religion to the Public Good and Interest, and the malign Influence
that Vice and Impiety has upon any Kingdom, City, or Body Politic; whence we
may learn, to what Causes ought to be imputed that dreadful Judgment of Fire,
which once laid this City waste; as also, what is the most successful Expedient
to preserve this City, and the whole Kingdom, from any such Public Calamity
for the time to come.

In the prosecution of this Subject, I shall first demonstrate the Truth of
what is here affirmed, and then make such particular Application to our selves,
as may be most suitable to the Occasion of our meeting at this day.

In order to the proving of this, That Wickedness does obstruct the Peace and
Happiness of any People or Society, I shall insist on these three Arguments.

1. The natural tendency of Vice and Wickedness. 2. The Consideration of God's
Providence, and his righteous Government of the World. 3. The Experience of all
Ages.
1. How contrary Vice and Wickedness is to the Temporal Peace and Prosperity of
any Kingdom or City, will appear from the natural tendency of Sin and
Irreligion, which necessarily produces many Public Mischiefs, which we can no
ways avoid, but by leaving those Sins which are the natural Causes of them:
and, on the other side, the true Fear of God, and hearty Obedience to his Laws,
do in their own nature, and direct consequence, conduce to the Public Interest.

Most of the Duties of Religion are so absolutely necessary to the good Order,
Quiet, and Peace of Societies, that Men have found it highly expedient to
oblige one another to the observance of them by Civil Sanctions and Humane
Laws: and should the wisest Men, the greatest Politicians on Earth, set
themselves to find out the best and most useful Rules of Living, for the
securing the Public Peace and Happiness of Kingdoms or Cities, they could
pitch on no other but those very same Precepts which God has given us, of
doing to all as we would be done unto, of mutual Love and Charity, of strict
Justice and Temperance, of Faithfulness, and Meekness, and Patience. And lest
Men should not be sufficiently moved by the Divine Threatenings, the wisest
Governments have always added Temporal Punishments, to restrain Men within
those Bounds which Religion has prescribed to us, without which all Humane
Societies would presently fly in pieces, and the World be overrun with
Disorder and Confusion.

It is a common Observation, That even Societies of wicked, lawless Men, who
combine together to do mischief and injury to others, yet are forced to bind
themselves to the practice of some Virtues, without which they cannot hold
together. Thieves and Robbers promise to be just and faithful to each other;
and the very Powers of Darkness take care to preserve Order and Unity amongst
their miserable Subjects, without which, our Savior tells us, the Devil's
Kingdom cannot stand.

But what Effect Religion has upon Societies, will better be understood, if we
consider distinctly, first, the Principles of Religion, and then the Duties and
Offices of it, and show what Influence they both have upon the Public Peace
and Safety.

1. As for the Principles of Religion, the Belief of a God, and a Future Life,
these are the very Basis and Foundation of all Society, without which it can
never subsist. This is sufficiently acknowledged even by Atheists themselves,
whilst they affirm, as Tully expresses it, the whole Opinion of the Gods to
have been feigned by wise Men, for the sake of the Commonwealth, that so
Religion might engage those to their Duty, whom Reason could not. They would
suspect all Religion to have been a Politic Contrivance of Civil Sovereigns
and crafty Lawmakers, by the Fears of an Invisible Power to keep Men in awe
and order. There was a time at first, as they tell us, when Men's Lives were
disorderly and brutish, and the Will of the stronger was the only Law: After
which they consented and agreed together to make Civil Laws, that so the
Disorderly might be punished. But Temporal Penalties not being sufficient to
deter Men from secret Injuries, at last when Mankind happened to be under one
Universal Monarch, there arose a mighty sagacious and prudent Prince or
Minister of State, the Author of a further Invention, to scare Men from private
as well as from open Injuries; and that was, by feigning a God, Immortal and
Omnipotent, who hears, and sees, and takes notice of all things: and from hence
the noise of a God came to ring over the whole World, and to fill all Places
with Temples and Altars. Thus they would represent Religion as a mere Engine of
State, and Mystery of Government, to possess the Minds of the Vulgar with the
Belief of a God, and a Life to come, thereby to render them more tame and
gentle, submissive and obedient: And this alone has continued the Cheat in the
World to this day, because this Device has proved so strangely successful for
the Ends of Government, to serve which it was first invented; and hence it
became the Interest of States and Kingdoms to maintain and cherish such
Apprehensions in those subject to them.

I have not time now to confute or expose this wild Supposition, for which
there is not the least Ground or Evidence; but I think I may draw these three
Conclusions from this Atheistical Suggestion, which will be not a little to my
present purpose. As,

1. That by the Confession of the greatest Enemies and Haters of Religion, the
Principles of it are very useful and beneficial to Mankind Admitting all they
say for true, yet it is great pity that Religion has not its Foundation in
Nature and Reason, it being so advantageous to Government, and it laying such
strong Obligations upon People to quiet and orderly living, that without it the
Earth would be but one vast howling Wilderness, and Men so many Beasts of Prey,
continually worrying and devouring one another.

2. If the Principles of Religion were all false, if they be all Imposture and
Cheat, yet it is best for Men to be kept ignorant of this Secret, the Belief of
them being of so great consequence to the Welfare of all Kingdoms and
Societies. If we are imposed upon in the Matters of Religion, yet it is against
our Interest to be undeceived.

3. It follows further, That they are the greatest Enemies of Mankind, and of
the Nation or City they live in, and ought to be looked upon, and avoided as
the most dangerous Disturbers of the Public Peace, and the very Pests of
Humane Society, who go about to root this Belief out of the Minds of Men, and
to set them free from those Fears which Religion propounds to them; this being
the readiest and shortest way to dissolve all Government, and disband all
Societies.

Take away the sense of Religion, and the Consideration of a Superior
Invisible Power, who takes notice of all we do, and will one day call us to a
strict account, and Men have no other Rule left to guide themselves by, but
their own Will and particular Interest. All Fences are then broken down: Every
Man may do any thing he can safely, and nothing is unlawful to be done by him
who has but Power enough to justify it, and can defend himself when he has
done it: There can be no Security to Governors, no Confidence one in another;
there is nothing we can call our own, no Obligation to stand to our Promises
and Covenants, or to obey the Laws of the Society we are Members of, any
further than we see it is for our own private Benefit; and of this then every
Man is Judge for himself. So true is that excellent Saying of Plutarch, That a
City might be as well built in the Air, without any Earth to stand upon, as a
Commonwealth can be either constituted or preserved without the support of
Religion.

2. If we consider the Offices and Duties of Religion, we shall find most of
them plainly subservient to the Public Peace and Happiness; and, on the
contrary, Irreligious Practices do naturally lead to Disorder and Confusion, so
that there is hardly any Vice, but what brings some notable Damage to the
Public. So says St. James, c. 4.1. Whence come wars and fightings amongst
you? are they not hence, even from your lusts, which war in your members?

Unbounded Avarice and Ambition, implacable desire of Revenge, unmeasurable
coveting of what is other Men's, unjust Oppression of those whom we have at any
advantage, these are the fruitful Parents of Public Disturbances and
Confusions. Luxury, and Sensuality, and Prodigality consume the Wealth and
Treasure of a Nation. Idleness, Intemperance, and untamed Lust, effeminate and
enfeeble the Minds of Men, destroys their Courage and Spirit, and so lays them
open to the Assaults of their Enemies.

Irreligion and Profaneness break in pieces the Bands of Community; and they,
who make nothing of those Obligations which God's Laws have laid upon them,
will not be held by any that Men can make; and their Allegiance to their
Earthly Sovereign is always to be suspected, who have cast off all Subjection
to the Lord of Heaven and Earth.

Lying, Falsehood, Injustice, Uncharitableness, and contempt of an Oath, (which
is the certain Effect of vain Swearing in common Discourse) these destroy all
mutual Good Will, and Faith, and Trust amongst Men, which are the great Joints
and Ligaments by which the Members of any Body Politic are knit and fastened
together.

Unreasonable Appetites and Passions make Men uneasy and troublesome one to
another, and are the necessary Causes of Enmity, Division, Strife, and every
Evil work; and by disuniting of Men one from another, they apparently make way
for the dissolution of any Society.

Pride and Discontent naturally make Men Factious and Unpeaceable, dispose Men
to endeavor Changes and Alterations, in hopes of bettering themselves; and the
Sin of Schism, and unnecessary breach of Christian Communion, even as a
Physical Cause, does usher in the Ruin of the State, as well as of the Church.

Thus I might run over all manner of Sins, and show how they all, more or less,
weaken the Sinews and Strength of the best-constituted Government, where they
are commonly practiced. So that should God Almighty stand Neuter, and not
concern himself in the Affairs of this lower World; had he left Mankind, as the
Epicureans thought, wholly to their own Counsel and Conduct, and should never
trouble himself to inflict any Evils upon us for our Disobedience to him; yet
the natural Consequences of our own Sins, the ill Effects they have upon the
Kingdom or City we live in, would be no little Punishment for them. And this we
learn from the Mouth of God himself, Deuteronomy. 5.29. O that there were such an
heart in them, that they would fear me, and keep all my commandments always,
that it might be well with them, and with their children for ever! Where God is
pleased to represent it, as a Learned Man observes on that Place, as a thing
even quite out of his own power, to make it well with an impious people: O that
they would fear me, that so it might be well with them! as if it were
impossible, from the very Nature of the thing, for God to make a People happy,
whist they continued vicious and unreformed: So necessary, so indispensible are
Piety and Virtue to the Establishment of a Nation.

Religion inspirits Men with all those good Qualities and Dispositions that
tend to Peace and Unity, which is the Life and Soul of all Society: It
extirpates all those Vices and Passions which are the Causes of Enmity and
Division; teaches every Man to keep his own Rank and Place, to mind his proper
Duty, to give to every one his Due, and to prefer the Public Good before his
own Private Advantage. It inclines and obliges Men to all mutual Offices of
Love and Kindness. It makes Magistrates just and merciful, Subjects faithful
and obedient, out of Conscience, for God's sake. It secureth every Man's
Interest, and Fortune, and Reputation, every Man in his particular Station
contributing his best to the Common Welfare.

We cannot possibly frame in our Minds the Idea of a more happy State of
things, than would presently be, if the Fear of God, and Love of Righteousness,
and general Practice of Religion, did every where prevail amongst us. There
would be then no Discontents, nor Complaints heard in our Streets, no
Jealousies or frightful Suspicions, no Sidings, or Parties, or divided
Interests, no Separations and opprobrious Nicknames of Distinction, which are
the mortal Diseases of the Body Politic, and the never-failing Symptoms of a
decaying State. How safely and pleasantly should we all live! A Kingdom or City
blessed with such Inhabitants, what would it be but an Heaven upon Earth? And
tho it is hardly to be hoped that ever such an happy Change should be found
amongst us, that Religion should gain such an universal Conquest over the Minds
of all Men, yet let me say, That to those small Relics of Virtue and Piety
which are yet to be found amongst us, it is chiefly owing that Mankind live
together in any tolerable Peace and Security.

Thus Sin has a natural tendency to make not only the Sinner himself
miserable, but the Society also of which he is a Member; whilst, as Solomon
tells us, Prove. 14.34. Righteousness exalts a nation, raises it to the
highest degree of Prosperity and Glory. To which I shall only add the
Observation of that great Roman General Scipio, That it was impossible for any
State or City to be happy, stantibus moenibus, ruentibus moribus, though their
Walls were never so firm and good, if their Manners were decayed and corrupted.
But this is not all.

2. We must consider, that God Almighty is no idle and indifferent Spectator of
the Actions of Men. He is no such soft and delicate Being, (as some have
imagined him) taking his own Ease and Repose within the spacious Circuits of
Heaven, whilst, unconcerned at the Affairs of Mortals, he lets this lower World
go as it will. No, his careful Providence is extended even to the meanest thing
which his Power created; much more it is conversant about whole Kingdoms,
Cities, and great Societies of Men: And this is the settled Course and Method of
his Government.

Though he often suffers some particular Men to thrive and flourish in their Sin
and Impiety, and does not always call single Persons to an Account in this
Life, but reserves them for the future Vengeance; yet he deals otherwise with
Bodies Politic: He will not permit them ordinarily to pass unpunished in this
State, this Life being the only time wherein he can reckon with Men as joined
together in Civil Societies; and therefore, besides all the Evils Men bring
upon themselves by their Wickedness, the Great Sovereign of the World does by
way of Exemplary Justice inflict sore and desolating Calamities, such as
Plague, Fire, Sword, Famine, and the like, as the due Reward of their incurable
Obstinacy in Sin and Disobedience. Prevailing and crying Sins of a Nation or
City, without timely Repentance, never escape Public Judgments.

And indeed, it is in a manner necessary for the Government of the World, and
preserving some good Order in it, and keeping up in Men the awe of an Invisible
Power, upon high and public Provocations, when Men insolently bid open
Defiance to the Laws of God; I say, it is necessary that God should manifest
his Power and Displeasure, by some remarkable Punishments, inflicted on Places
generally infamous for their foul Ingratitude toward, and horrid Contempt of
his Divine Majesty.

When Sin and Irreligion mightily abounds, and has gained reputation amongst
foolish people, and, like a great Flood, carries all before it; when it has
once got an Head, and formed a strong Party, and Men of all Conditions and
Qualities are engaged on the side of Vice and Profaneness, all Reason and
Argument shall at such a time be easily run down, and the soft voice cannot
then be heard: God must appear in a great Storm, with Thunder and Lightning, as
he did of old to the Israelites, if he would have the Inhabitants of the Earth
look up to him, or would convince them of their Folly and Danger.

Such public Judgments are rightly compared to public Executions, which are
sometimes necessary for the Support of the Government, and making People to
stand in dread of the Laws. They serve especially to excite in the generality
of Mankind a more quick and lively sense of God's Power over, and Presence with
them, to rouse Men out of that Stupidity and dull Lethargy, which long and
prosperous continuance in Sin betrays them into. I will cause you to pass under
the rod, says God by the Prophet, and then shall you, and all that hear and
see it, know, that I am the Lord.

Thus, did not that miserable Fate, which befell Sodom and Gomorra, serve to
awaken the neighboring Cities and Countries, when they beheld the bright
Flames to ascend toward Heaven, to inquire into the Causes of such Severity,
and to examine themselves, whether they were guilty of the same Sins, which had
so highly incensed God? And would not they have been glad to have been at good
terms and at peace with that Almighty Being, who has such dreadful Punishments
in store for the Refractory and Impenitent?

And was it not thus with us, at the the time of the late terrible
Conflagration, which we are this day more particularly to call to our minds? I
appeal to all amongst you, that were then present at it: Did you not then
humbly acknowledge the Hand of God in it? Did you not then accuse your selves
and did not your Consciences loudly charge you with those Sins, that you could
not but think did fully deserve so severe Vengeance? Did not some of you blame
your Covetousness, and niggardly hoarding up those many Goods, which now
suddenly perished in the merciless Flames? Did not others of you curse your
Injustice, and Falseness in your Trades? others, your Intemperance and Riot?
and many in this City, their odious Hypocrisy, and base prostituting Religion
to unworthy Ends, which, with other Sins, provoked God to so great Anger? Did
you not then make many serious Promises of better living, should you any ways
escape, or ever recover so great a Calamity? What would you not then have
undertook, nay, performed, only to have been assured, that in so short a time
you should be again restored to your Dwellings, Trades, and Possessions; that
this City should so soon rise out of its Rubbish and Ashes, and all of us
return to live in greater splendor and ease than we did before? And O had we
lived answerably to those Vows and Promises which this surprising Providence
did then extort from us in the day of our Fears, what an holy, what an happy
City had this been!

But, alas! do not the same Vices, to say no worse, reign amongst us, which did
before Sixty six? So that we have great cause to fear, though I am loath to speak
it, that it is even now time for God to think of some more smarting Punishment,
more grievous than any we have yet felt, which may give some check to the
overflowing Atheism and Wickedness of this Age. And doubt not, but he will do
it in his due time, unless we stop his Hand by a general Reformation.

God does not take any delight in such Severities. It is no pleasure to him to
make such havoc in the World. This is his strange work: He is very loath to be
brought to it. He does not willingly grieve any particular Man; much less does
he love to exercise his Power in laying whole Cities and Kingdoms waste: But
only, when he is concerned in Honor to vindicate his Authority, his Laws, his
Name, from bold Profanations, and open barefaced Affronts, then neither our
Wealth, nor Power, nor Policy, can secure us from the Omnipotent Arm of Divine
Justice. And indeed, it is very great Impudence for us to expect or hope, that
God should bless or protect that People who live in open Rebellion against him.

By all this it appears, that Vice and Wickedness is not only by its own
Malignity apt to destroy us; but also, where it prevails and abounds, does, as
it were, necessitate God Almighty to visit such a People, especially when they
are irreclaimable by any gentler Methods, with such signal and remarkable
Judgments, as may keep the World in some awe of him, and make them confess,
That there is a God who judges the earth.

Whereas the general Practice of Religion recommends and intitles us to the
Almighty's Protection, engages him on our side, secures to us the constant
Succors and Aids of Divine Providence. God will watch over our Cities and
Houses, will bless our Land with Increase, will deliver us from all our
Enemies, and think nothing too much, or too good for us. Seek ye the kingdom of
God, and the righteousness thereof, in the first place, and all these things
shall be added to you.

3. In the last place, I appeal to the Experience of all Ages,; and we shall
certainly find the State and Condition of any Kingdom or Society to have been
more or less prosperous, according to the Manners that have prevailed amongst
them: Which was of old acknowledged by the Orator, in that known Saying, Omnia
prospera eveniunt colentibus Deos, adversa spernentibus; The People that have a
care of Religion, are always successful; but unhappy, when they are Irreligious.

God indeed may defer pouring forth his Wrath for a while, to give Men time and
space of Repentance; but at last, when their iniquities are full, (as the
Scripture expresses it) Divine Vengeance has overtaken them, which has
commonly been so much the sorer, the longer it has been delaied. If we look
therefore upon any one whole Kingdom, or great City, as joined together in one
Society, we shall generally find, that according as Virtue, Justice,
Temperance, Sincerity, and Fidelity has flourished amongst them, so long have
they thrived, grown Great, Powerful, and Wealthy, and abounded with all Good
things; and never hardly were there any Times or Places famous for Public
Profaneness, Debaucheries, and Contempt of Things Sacred, but they also
remarkably bore the sad Tokens of the Divine Displeasure.

There is nothing more evident than this in the whole Story of the Jews, that
as long as they continued constant to the Worship of the True God, in that
manner he had prescribed to them, they either lived in Peace, or their Arms
were always successful, and their Land flowed with Milk and Honey: But when at
any time they fell into Idolatry, it was always attended with some mortal
Disease, or the devouring Sword, or a long Captivity. Their Sins would poison
their Air, blast their Corn, weaken their Hands in the Day of Battle, till at
length, after many various Dispensations of Mercy and Judgment, when they
refused to be amended by the Preaching of the Son of God himself, their City
was sacked and burnt by the Roman Legions, their glorious Temple demolished,
their Polity dissolved, and their whole Nation involved in one common Ruin.

But because it is usually objected in this Case, That God has not dealt so
with other People and Nations, as he did with the Jews, whose Political
Sovereign and Governor he was after a more peculiar manner; and that we are
not to argue from Gods special Providence toward them, nor draw his
Proceedings with Jerusalem into a President to other Kingdoms and Cities; we
may therefore search into Profane Histories, and every Age will give in some
Testimony to this Truth.

If we inquire into the Causes of the Dissolution of those Potent Empires and
States which once were so famous in the World, or of the Destruction of those
great and populous Cities, of which the bare Names only now remain, and we can
hardly find out the Places where they once stood, we shall see abundant reason
to impute their Ruin to their own Follies and Wickedness. Either they fell
into Parties and Divisions, and so crumbled into Pieces, or their Strength and
Wealth being wasted by Ease and Luxury, they were exposed to the Fury of a
Foreign Enemy; or else by the Cry of their enormous Sins provoked God to
overthrow them by Inundations, Earthquakes, Fire, or some such depopulating
Judgments. This is particularly observed by almost all that treat of this
Argument, concerning those mighty Revolutions which happened in the Four first
Monarchies, as they are commonly called

That which gave occasion to the enlarging the Babylonian Monarchy, and made it
spread so fast and wide, was neither their own Courage nor Counsel, but the
Transgressions and Provocations of the Eastern Nations, which moved God to give
them over as a Prey to the King of Assyria, whom he calls by the Prophet the
rod of his anger, and made use of to destroy and cut off nations not a few. And
when the Lord by him had performed his whole Work, and the Sins of Babylon were
ripe for Vengeance, then did God raise up Cyrus. who at a time of a great
Feast, in the midst of their Jollity and Security, entered into that City, and
fulfilled all those Threatenings which God's Prophets had often denounced
against that People.

When, in process of time, the Persians had sunk into the same Vices for which
God had destroyed the Babylonians, how easily and suddenly were they conquered
and overrun by Alexander and his Grecians, to whom God gave Success vastly
beyond their own Hopes, greater than they themselves could expect, either from
the Number or Strength of their Armies?

After which, the Grecians themselves, being softened by Persian Luxury, and
infected with the Vices of Asia, soon submitted to the Romans; of whom the
forenamed Cicero affirms, Non calliditate ac robore, sed Pietate and Religione
omnes gentes nationesque superavisse; That they overcame all the Nations, not
by Force or Craft, but by piety and Religion.

And of them it is commonly taken notice of in the Roman History, That whilst
their Senators and People inviolably maintained that strict Justice,
Faithfulness, and Sobriety, that was so remarkable in the first Founders of
that great Empire, so long they flourished, and enlarged their Dominions, till
at last they were themselves enslaved to the Vices of all the Nations they had
subdued; and then how miserably were they harassed with Civil Wars? and in the
issue became a Prey to Barbarous People, God giving them up to be overrun by
the Goths, and Vandals, and Hunns, a cowardly and contemptible People, if
compared with the Romans, whose Success yet was so strange and unaccountable,
that it could not be attributed to any Second Causes, but only to the Hand of
God, by them punishing the Christians of the West, then grown luxurious, and
almost incorrigible by too much Felicity; as one of their Generals, Attila,
styled himself Flagellum Dei, God's Scourge to chastise the Wickedness of that
People.

Should we go no further than our own Country, our own Historians do all along
observe, That those great Desolations which have been made in this Island,
either by Foreign Invasions, or Intestine Divisions, or Infectious Diseases,
were always preceded by a notorious degeneracy and corruption of Manners. And
against this, I believe, there are but few Exceptions; and where there are any,
such single Instances are not according to God's ordinary established Rule and
Method, according to which we ought to expect he will always deal with us.

By this time, I hope, you are all convinced of the evil nature of Vice and
Wickedness, where it prevails and abounds; how contrary it is to, and
destructive of the Public Peace and Prosperity of any Kingdom or City. What
remains, is to make some particular Application to our selves; which I shall
do, by drawing these four Inferences.

1. Hence we may learn, what great disservice they do unto, and what great
dishonor they bring upon Religion, who make pretense of it to the embroiling
and disturbance of Societies, and the breach of the Public Peace. Government
and Society was settled in the World from the very beginning of it, by the
general Providence of God, as being absolutely necessary for our common Peace
and Safety; and therefore nothing ought to be admitted, as any part of Revealed
Religion, which is plainly inconsistent with this Prime and Original
Institution of God.

I should call that any thing rather than Religion, which makes Men Factious
and Seditious, that prompts them to public Outrages and Mischiefs, that
teaches them to burn Cities, and to make Stirs in a Kingdom, that inspirits Men
with a fierce Zeal which transgresses all Bounds, keeps no Place or Rank,
observes no Mean or Decorum, that is promoted by secret Plots, and open
Rebellion. If such a Religion could be supposed to come from Heaven, we might
change the Words of St. Paul, and more truly say, That God was the Author not
of Peace, but of Confusion. But in this last Age the false Visard and Mask of
Religion has been so often pulled off, and such deformed Visages have appeared
to have been disguised under it, that it is to be hoped, that the People of
this Kingdom or City will not be easily cheated again into a Belief of the
Honesty or Good-meaning of any Persons who join in a Party against the Lawful
Government they live under, let their Pretenses be what they will.

It is otherwise with True Religion: It is quite of another Genius: It begets
other Tempers and Spirits in Men. The wisdom that comes from above, is first
pure, then peaceable. Especially our Christianity is so admirably fitted for
the benefit and advantage of Societies, that were there no Obligation to the
Practice of it from the Considerations of another Life, yet all wise Men would
think themselves bound to the observance of the Chief Laws of our Savior, were
it only out of respect to our Peace and Security in this present World.

2. Since the Public Welfare depends upon the Manners of Men, we may thence
conclude, how much it is the Interest, as well as Duty, of all Governors and
Magistrates, in their several Places, to discourage and punish all Vice and
Wickedness, and to countenance and promote True Religion, which is the great
Instrument of Political Happiness. The more the Fear of God, and the Practice
of Righteousness, prevails amongst the People, the more easy and safe will the
Government be; and therefore Religion does fully reward the Civil Powers for
all the Protection they can give it. True Religion tends so much to the
Establishment and Prosperity of any Nation, that they whose Office it is to
look after the Public Good, cannot do any thing better for themselves, or for
the People committed to their Charge; for the securing their own just
Authority, or maintaining the People in Peace and good Order, than by all means
to preserve and increase amongst them a Reverence and Obedience to Almighty God
and his Laws.

This will keep them in firm subjection to their Superiors; this will unite
them one to another in Love and Charity; and, which is never to be forgotten,
this will procure Gods Blessing both upon Governors and People.

And since Christians are unhappily divided into several Denominations and
Communions, take that Church, I beseech you, into your especial Care and
Patronage, whose Principles do most effectually contribute toward Men's orderly
and quiet living together in Societies. If you can find any Church or Body of
Christians in the World, whose Doctrines are more Loyal, whose Government is
better consistent with Monarchy, whose Practices have been more peaceable at
all times, than the Reformed Church of England, I would even exhort you then to
forsake and renounce ours, and not only tolerate, but establish and set up
that Church amongst us. But in this certainly our Church has no Competitor.
Peaceable and quiet living under the Civil Government, always was, and is still
the Glory of the Church of England: This Praise she stands upon, and
challenges as due to her; and on this account does she with confidence
recommend her self, and all her true Members, to the Care and Protection of
those who are in Power and Authority, that they would be so just as to defend
that Religion, that Church, which does best defend and support the Public
State.

3. Hence we may learn the true Cause of all those Public Evils and Calamities
that have befallen this Kingdom or City of late Years. Our Sins have been the
Natural Causes of some of them, the Meritorious Causes of others. Some we have
brought upon our selves, as the necessary Effects of our own wicked Courses;
others God in Justice has inflicted upon us, as the Punishment of our
Disobedience.

I shall not now undertake to give in a Catalogue of those many Sins that we in
this City have been notoriously guilty of. I had much rather leave that Work to
your selves, for every Man to smite upon his own Breast, in which he will find
a faithful Monitor, I mean his Conscience, which will impartially tell him
wherein he has provoked God, and contributed to those Judgments and
Distractions we have labored under, if so be he will but patiently attend to
its Suggestions, and give it leave and opportunity freely to speak unto him. I
am sure it much more becomes us all this Day to give Glory to God, and to take
Shame to our selves, and to charge and accuse our selves, than wholly to shift
off all the Guilt and Blame upon others.

We are very apt indeed to impute these Public Evils to other Causes; we are
very curious in guessing at the immediate Instruments of them; and, which is
worst of all, too many amongst us have been on all occasions ready to lay all
Public Miscarriages and Misfortunes at the Door of their Governors and
Superiors: whereas the true Cause has been from our selves; wherein no one
can acquit himself, though some far more innocent than others. But I shall rather
choose to spend that little time your Patience can yet allow me, in persuading
you all to amend, than in ripping up the Vices of this Age, or City, or several
Parties of Men amongst us, for which we may justly suppose God has visited us
with the Plague, this dreadful Fire, and (which was no less punishment) those
unnatural Divisions and Heats which of late so violently broke out amongst us,
and threatened sudden Ruin both to Church and State.

4. And lastly, This Doctrine, which I have now proved to you, teaches us the
best Expedient to prevent such Judgments for the future, and to settle us in
firm Peace; which is, a general Reformation of our Lives and Manners.

Blessed be God, the Case is much mended with us since the dreadful Burning of
London. Our City has been many Years rebuilt, and that more splendid and
glorious than before. We miss not that number of Inhabitants who were swept
away by the devouring Plague; nor hardly now do we feel any of the dismal
Effects of that terrible Fire. We seem to have weathered out those sore
Calamities. And though of late our intestine Animosities arose to such an height,
as that we all feared a woeful Interruption of our Peace, yet God has not as
hitherto delivered us into our own Hands, nor suffered us to destroy our
selves. Nay, things tend at present toward an happy Settlement and Composure,
and we begin to entertain hopes of living in quiet and safety, every man
sitting under his own vine and figtree. The Face of our Heavens is more clear
and serene, and the black Clouds that presaged so dreadful a Storm, seem in
some measure to be dispersed. Yet let us not deceive our selves, and rashly
conclude, that the bitterness of death is now past: For, as I said at first,
the same Causes will always produce the same Effects; and if the same Sins
still continue amongst us, they will soon be attended with the same, or worse
Desolations and Confusions.

If this be the natural Effect of prevailing Atheism, Profaneness, and
Contempt of Religion, of Hatred and Division, to weaken a Nation or People, to
unsettle a Kingdom, to unhinge the Government, and dissolve all Societies, let
us not fondly think, that God Almighty will always miraculously interpose, and
hinder these natural Consequences of Things. I say, God will not by
extraordinary ways preserve those who obstinately persist in such Courses which
naturally lead to their own Destruction.

What Peace then can we expect amongst us, if, after all these Vicissitudes of
Divine Providence toward us, we still continue unreclaimed? When so many not
only neglect Religion, as a thing full of trouble, but scorn it, as unworthy
of, and below them; when they are ashamed to own their Belief or Fear of God,
as if it were a sign of a vulgar Spirit and mean Parts; when Men exercise their
little Wits in abusing and deriding the most serious and sacred things; What
Villainies or Treasons are not such Men ripe for? What can oblige them, or tie
their Hands?

What Peace can there be in a Land or City where such prodigious Debauchery
reigns? where such horrid Oaths and Perjuries abound? where Men sin without
shame, nay, glory in it as an Accomplishment? Shall not God visit for these
things?

In short, What Peace can there be, as long as there remain amongst us such
bitter Envyings and Heart-burnings, such unchristian Separations and
Contentions, such Complaints and Discontents under such happy Circumstances of
Affairs, as that no Nation under Heaven is in the like? These Vices and bad
Dispositions do naturally tend to our Ruin, besides that they highly provoke
God Almighty against us.

I come not hither at this time to prophecy evil things against this City or
Kingdom, nor would I amuse you with needless Fears. I know well this has been
the great Art used by the Enemies of our Peace to raise Disturbances amongst
us, by possessing the Peoples Minds with strange Jealousies and Suspicions, as
if all things were running to ruin, and our Laws, Liberties, and Religion were
all now at stake, and in extreme hazard. The only thing I would earnestly
desire you to consider, is, That the greatest Danger we are in is from our
selves, and consequently, the way to preserve our Peace is to reform our selves.

And now at this time, when our most Gracious Sovereign, whom God long
preserve, has taken particular care of us in this City, and has done what in
Him lies to prevent our undoing our selves, by putting the Government of it
into safe Hands, and making several Public Reformations amongst us, let us all
in our several Stations be prevailed upon to do our part, every Man to turn
from the evil of his ways, to fear God, to honor the King, to love his
Neighbor, and mind his own private Duty, and to carry himself as becomes a
Christian, in all his several Relations he stands in to other Men, whereby we
shall make God our Friend, and become hearty Friends one to another.

Wise Men, by subtle Policies and Contrivances, may divert our Trouble and
Danger for a while; but it will never be well long with us, till the true
Christian Spirit of Love, and Charity, and Meekness, and Submission, and
Obedience, generally prevail amongst us. Then indeed we should soon see happy
Days, and be freed from those Fears and Disturbances that have so long troubled
our Israel. This is the best Project for Insuring our new Houses, and
continuing those great and manifold Mercies, both Spiritual and Temporal, which
we in this City yet enjoy above any other People, to us, and to our Posterity
after us. How quiet, how settled a People should we be, if we would but give
credit to the Word of God, and follow our Blessed Savior's Directions!

And let not any one now think this a mean and pitiful Contrivance, and that
himself has far better Models and Projects for our Settlement, with which his
politic Head labors and is in pain, till he be delivered of them in all
Companies; since the State and Condition of Humane Affairs is so disposed by
God's wise Providence, that there can be no lasting Peace without the practice
of Virtue and Religion.

Nor let any one think, that by thus reforming himself, he being but one, and
perhaps but of small Interest or Influence in the City or Kingdom, it will be
of very little concernment or advantage to the whole; for it is plain, that our
Reformation must begin from single Persons, and so proceed by degrees. It has
sometimes indeed happened, that there has been a sudden general Reformation of
the Manners of Men throughout an whole City or Nation, as at Niniveh upon the
Preaching of Jonah, upon some great Fright or extraordinary Judgment, when all
the People, as one Man, have turned from the evil of their ways. But this is
not our Case. Our Reformation must be accomplished (to borrow an Illustration)
as this famous City of London was rebuilt; the Foundation of which was not all
laid at the same time, nor continued Streets raised at once, but at first here
a House, and there a House, to which others by degrees were joined; and every
private Man took care to build his own House, and Authority took care of
Public Buildings, till at last single Houses were united into whole Streets,
whole Streets into this beautiful and glorious City. Thus our Reformation must
take its beginning from some few, from whom others may take Pattern and
Encouragement, till at length it generally prevails; and why should not good
Examples be as effectual to reclaim this Age, as bad ones have been to debauch
it?

To conclude all; Of all the great Arguments which our Religion affords us, to
engage us to the leaving our Sins, and amending our Lives, I have this day
insisted on this one, viz. That it is the only certain Way and Method of
securing the Peace and Happiness of this City, and of our Native Country. There
may be many amongst us whose Minds are not considerably affected with the
Apprehensions of future Rewards and Punishments; yet sense of present Good or
Evil makes deep and lasting Impressions upon them: Who, tho they seem to have
no regard for their everlasting Happiness in the other World, yet are ready to
hazard their Lives, to expose their Estates and Fortunes, to sacrifice all that
Men usually count dear, to the Service and Preservation of their Country; and
now one would think it should not be altogether impossible to persuade such
Persons, for the same Reason, to live soberly, righteously, and godlily in this
present World. Shall a Man be ready at any time to venture and loose his Life,
and be loath to leave his Sins for the Public Good and Safety?

For your Countries sake therefore, as you value the Welfare and Prosperity of
this Kingdom, and this great City; as you desire the continuance of those many
singular Blessings which yet through God's Patience we are possessed of; as you
would avoid the repetition of those Judgments you have already smarted under,
or the inflicting of new and greater; in the Name of God, I exhort you all to
repent and amend. Our Sins are many and great; they have (as I have shown you)
a natural tendency to Ruin and Confusion; their Cry is gone up to Heaven
against us. Delay not therefore to seek the Lord whilst he is to be found, and
to turn to him with your whole Hearts; and then shall God be reconciled to us,
and turn away his Wrath from us, and prevent those Judgments we fear, and
remove those we labor under, and bless us with Peace, and Plenty, and
Prosperity. Happy are the people that are in such a case, yea, happy are the
people whose God is the Lord.

I only add, That such a general Reformation of our own Tempers and Lives is
vastly more our Duty, infinitely more for our private Advantage, and the
Public Good of the whole Kingdom, than all our Heat and Zeal for Reforming of
Public Grievances, or for amending the State, or other Men. There is no peace,
says my God, to the wicked.

FINIS.

