SOME CONSIDERATIONS About the CASE OF SCANDAL,

OR Giving Offense TO Weak Brethren.

LONDON: Printed by H. Hills Jun. for T. Basset, at the George in Fleetstreet;
B. Took, at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard; and F. Gardener, at the White
Horse in Ludgate Street. 1683.

Of giving OFFENSE TO Weak Brethren.
IT has been often observed concerning our Dissenting Brethren, that when they
are urged to mention any one thing required of the People in the Public
Worship of God in our Parish Churches, judged by them absolutely sinful, on the
account of which their separation from us is necessary, and consequently
justifiable, they either put us off with some inconveniences, inexpediences or
corruptions, (as they call them) some things appointed and used, which in their
opinion render our service less pure and spiritual; (the chief of which
exceptions have been considered in several Discourses, lately written with
great temper and judgment for the satisfaction of all honest and teachable
minds:) Or else some of them tell us, that they are indeed themselves
sufficiently persuaded of the lawfulness of all that is enjoined, they do not
see but a good Christian may serve God acceptably and devoutly our way, and may
go to Heaven living and dying in our Communion; but then there are many other
Godly, but weaker Christians of another persuasion, with whom they have been
long joined: And should they now, at least totally, forsake them, and conform,
they should thereby give great offense to all those tender Consciences, which
are not thus convinced of the lawfulness of holding such Communion with our
Church, in Prayers and Sacraments, as is by Law required. Which is a sin so
Heinous and of such dreadful Consequence, that our Savior tells us, St. Matt.
18. 6. Whosoever shall offend one of these little ones which believe in me, it
were better for him that a Millstone were hanged about his Neck, and that he
were drowned in the depth of the Sea; and in St. Paul's account it is no less
than Spiritual Murder, a destroying of him for whom Christ dyed, Rom 14. 15.

Now this Case of giving Offense to weak Brethren, I have undertaken briefly to
consider, where I once for all suppose (as all those must do who make this the
ground of their refusing to Communicate with our Church) that nothing is
amongst us imposed as a condition of Communion, but what may be done without
sin; for were any thing in it self sinful required by our Church, there could
be no room for this Plea of Scandal: That alone would be sufficient reason for
Separation from us. I Discourse therefore at this present only with such, who
for their own particular could well enough join with us, but dare not do it for
fear of Offending those, who yet scruple and are dissatisfied at the use of our
Prayers and Ceremonies.

Nor do I design exactly to handle the whole Doctrine of Scandal, or
Elaborately explain all the places of Scripture concerning it, or state the
Cases there treated of; Nor shall I now meddle with the Duty of Governors and
Superiors, how far they ought to condescend to the weakness, ignorance,
prejudices, and mistakes of those under their care and charge; but I shall
confine my self to this one Question.

Whether there does lie any obligation upon any private Christian (as the case
now stands amongst us) to absent from his Parish Church, or to forbear the use
of the Forms of Prayer and Ceremonies by Law appointed, for fear of Offending
or Scandalizing his weak Brethren?

Here I shall First of all inquire, what is the true notion of a weak Brother.
Secondly, What it is to Offend such an one. Thirdly, How far and in what
instances we are bound to consider the weakness of our Brother.

First, For the resolution of this Question it is necessary to know, what is
the true notion of a weak Brother. Now a weak Brother or weak in Faith in
Scripture denotes one newly converted to Christianity; and so neither thoroughly
instructed in the principles, nor well settled in the practice of it, the same
whom our Savior calls a little one, and the Apostle a babe in Christ. 1 Cor.
3. 1.

Conversion to Christianity is often called our new birth, and consequently at
Men's first entrance into the Christian Church, they were for a while reckoned
as in an Infant state; and accordingly were to be most tenderly handled and
nursed, and gently used, with all favor and indulgence, not driven faster than
they were able to go; till by degrees, by the improvement of their knowledge
they came to be of full Age, as the Apostle expresses it, Heb. 5. 14.

They were at first to be fed with Milk, to be taught the easiest and plainest
Doctrines, against which least exceptions could be made; (as our Blessed
Savior himself would not at first tell his Disciples of the shame and
sufferings he was to undergo, and when he did speak of them it was covertly and
obscurely, so that they did not perfectly understand him, lest they should by
it have been presently discouraged and tempted to have forsaken him;) no
unnecessary burdens were to be laid upon them, which might render their new
Profession grievous to them; every Stumblingblock and prejudice was to be
removed out of their way, that might occasion their falling; the grown
Christians and proficients were Charitably to condescend to the capacity of
these Novices, and make allowances, and for a time bear with their Ignorance
and many mistakes and Childish humors, and deny themselves their own Liberty,
and become even as Children with them, as if themselves were of the same mind
and understood no better, than these raw beginners.

Now these fresh Disciples, little ones or Babes are the same with those St.
Paul Romans 14. calls weak Brethren, weak for want of Age or Growth, or as the
Original word rather signifies, Sickly and Feeble; like a Man beginning to
recover from a wasting Disease, his distemper, tho cured, yet hangs a long time
upon him, the Dregs of it still remain: He must for a while be carefully
attended and watched, since every little thing discomposes him, and hazards a
relapse. So was it with these first Converts. As soon as ever they were brought
to acknowledge Jesus to be the Son of God, and were willing to become his
Disciples, they were immediately Baptized, tho as yet they understood but
little of the Nature or design of the Gospel. The Apostles and first Preachers
of our Religion were in have to make more Proselytes, and therefore presently
Baptized all that were willing to it without that previous Instruction and
Preparation, which afterward, when Churches were settled, was made necessary
before Heathens or Jews could be admitted by Baptism. Thus the same day the
Apostles Preached Christ to the Jews, Acts 2. they Baptized about three
thousand of them, and Philip without any delay Baptized the Eunuch, as soon as
he professed to believe that Jesus was the Son of God: and the Jailer and his
Household were Baptized the same hour at midnight, at which Paul and Silas
spoke unto them the word of the Lord. After their Baptism they were to be
tutored and trained up in their new Religion, where great care was to be taken,
great prudence and caution used toward them, lest they should suddenly fly
back and repent of their change; for having been bred up, and so long lived
Jews or Gentiles, and then of a sudden turned Christians, they retained still a
great love and kindness for many of their old Customs and Opinions, they had
mighty and inveterate prejudices to overcome, the Old man was by degrees to be
put off, and therefore they were at first treated with all the tenderness and
condescension imaginable, the stronger and wiser Christians would not stand
rigidly on any little matters, would for the present tolerate many things,
which were necessary afterward to be done away, hoping that in time they might
be better taught, and be brought off those mistakes they now Labored under.

Had the Apostles in the beginning plainly told all the Jews of the ceasing of
their Laws, the abrogation of their Ceremonies and Worship, the no necessity of
Circumcision, the taking in of the Gentiles, they would never have born such
Doctrines, they would never have become Christians upon such terms, nor ever
endured those Teachers, who seemed to make so little account of Moses and their
Temple. Now to gain these St. Paul became weak himself, tied up himself while
amongst these Jewish Converts to such observances, which he was really free
from, as if he had the same doubts and were of the same opinion with those weak
Christians, and advises all others who did understand their Liberty, yet to
oblige their Brethren by the same inoffensive carriage.

This then was the difference between the strong and the weak, the strong were
the well-grounded understanding Christians, that knew it was lawful for them to
Eat all kind of Meats, that Christ had set them free from the burdensome Yoke
of the Jewish Ceremonies, the weak, tho Brethren, that is, believers in Christ,
yet abstained from some Meats, judging them unlawful or unclean, and observed
days, and Zealously retained the Mosaical rites, not being yet sufficiently
instructed in that Liberty our Savior had purchased for them, or in the nature
of his Kingdom, which consisted not in Meat or Drink, but in Righteousness and
Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost. Hence I observe,

1. That the rules which are laid down in Scripture concerning weak Brethren
principally respect those times when our Religion made its first appearance in
the World, and were temporary provisions for the easier proselyting men to the
Faith of Christ, or the better securing and fixing those that were already come
into the Church. They are not standing Laws equally obliging all Christians in
all Ages, but were suited to the Infant state of the Church, or rather to its
condition whilst it was but an Embryo, till Churches were formed and settled,
and our Christianity had got firm Footing and Possession in the World. Thus St.
Paul tells us, 1 Cor. 9. 19. For tho I be free from all Men, yet have I made my
self servant unto all, that I might gain the more. And unto the Jews I became
as a Jew, that I might gain the Jews; to them that are under the Law, as under
the Law, that I might gain them that are under the Law. To them that are
without Law, as without Law (being not without Law to God, but under the Law to
Christ) that I might gain them that are without Law. To the weak became I as
weak, that I might gain the weak: I am made all things to all men, that I might
by all means save some. And this I do for the Gospels sake, that I might be
partaker thereof with you. This was the Apostles design in all these
Compliances and Civilities to win many to the Faith of Christ, by these wise
arts to insinuate himself and his Doctrine into them: but when he had once made
his way, he then taught them another lesson, and behaved himself after a far
different manner. Now to do as St. Paul did, would always be the duty and
wisdom of one in his circumstances, who had his office and was to propagate any
Religion amongst Heathens and Infidels; like a Master that deals not so
sharply with his Scholar at his first entrance into the School, as he thinks
fit to do afterward. But the directions St. Paul gave, and according to which
himself practiced at the first planting of Christianity, do no more agree with
our times, wherein Christianity is become the National Religion, countenanced
by the Civil Laws and Authority, and so generally professed by every one
amongst us, that we hardly know of any other Religion, than the same Clothes we
did wear in our Infancy would serve us now when we are of full Age.

We ought indeed to be very careful of Children, and lead them by strings, and
remove every straw and rub out of their way, lest they stumble and fall, but it
is ridiculous to use the same care toward grown men. None of us Labor under
those prejudices the first Christians did, who forsook a Religion in which they
had been bred, and long lived; and as to the Jews had left a way of Worship
commanded them by God himself, confirmed to them by many Miracles and Wonders,
delivered to them from their Fathers by a constant succession of Prophets sent
from God. There is not now amongst us any such competition between two
Religions, but every one learneth Christianity as he does his Mothers Tongue.
The Apostles therefore and Governors of the Church carried themselves toward
these new Converts, as God Almighty did toward the Children of Israel, when he
brought them first out of Egypt. He for a while led them by a Pillar of Fire
and of a Cloud, gave them Water out of the Rock, and rained down Bread and
Flesh from Heaven. This he did for them whilst in their passage, thus
extraordinarily provide for them, and in some cases even humor that People,
lest upon every little pretense they should return back to the Garlic and
Onyons of Egypt; but after they were settled in the Land of Canaan, he then
left them in their own hands, by ordinary Common means to take care of and
provide for themselves, he did not show the same indulgence to them, as he did
whilst they were in the Wilderness.

St. Paul would not take that reward that was due to him for Preaching the
Gospel, but himself Labored hard night and day, because he would not be
chargeable to his Converts, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 9. and this he did for the furtherance
of the Gospel, that all might see he did not serve his own Belly. But surely
our Dissenting Brethren do not think themselves obliged by this Example, in
places where Public maintenance is settled on Ministers by Law, to refuse to
take it, and earn their own Bread by some manual occupation, tho thereby they
avoid giving offense to Quakers, and those who call them hirelings, and say
they prophecy only for filthy lucre.

Thus it is usually observed, that St. Paul writes quite after a different
manner to the Romans and to the Galatians, tho upon the same subject. In his
Epistle to the Romans amongst whom he had never yet been, he pitieth and
pleads for the weak Christians, charge that they should not be despised or
cast off, that no cause of offense should be given them, but to the Galatians a
People that had been fully instructed in the nature of their Christian Liberty,
amongst whom himself had planted the Gospel, and had been present in person,
and so knew that they understood better; when some of them fell into the same
Error, thinking Circumcision and the observation of the Mosaical Law necessary
to Christians, he chides them sharply and rebukes them more severely; Who has
bewitched you O foolish Galatians, etc. He who would condescend to the Ignorant
Novices amongst the Romans, would not in the least comply with the Galatians,
that had or ought to have had more knowledge and light: and afterward when the
reason of such forbearance ceased, when the nation of the Jews had rejected
Christ, and the Gentile world was come into the Church, the observation of the
Mosaical Law, and the distinction of meats contained therein, was so far from
being tolerated in those, whether Jews or Gentiles, who through mistake thought
themselves obliged to it, that it was condemned by the Rules and Canons of the
Church. The sum of all this is, that whatever Argument may be drawn from St.
Paul's discourses about weak Brethren by way of Analogy, or Similitude, or
Parity of reason, yet there are no such weak persons now amongst us, as those
were for whom the Apostle provideth, or as those little ones were for whom our
Savior was so much concerned.

2ly, I would desire our Dissenting Brethren to consider by what pretense they
can challenge any privilege belonging to them under the notion of weak
Christians, when according to their own opinion and conceit of themselves, they
are of all men furthest off from being such in any sense. This is as if a man
worth a Thousand pound per annum, should Sue in forma pauperis.

They who take upon themselves to be teachers of others, wiser and better than
their Neighbors, the only Sober and Godly party, and are too apt to despise
all other Christians as Ignorant or Profane, with what color of reason can
they plead for any favor to be shown, or regard to be had to them in
compliance with their weakness? Tho they love to argue against us from the
example of St. Paul's condescension to the uninstructed Jews or Gentiles, yet it
is apparent that they do not in other cases willingly liken themselves to those
weak believers, or Babes in Christ. They have really better thoughts of
themselves, and would be Leaders and Masters in Israel, and prescribe to their
Governors and give Laws to all others, and do prefer their own private opinion
(which they call their Conscience) before the Judgment of the wisest men, or
the determinations of their Lawful Superiors. And if in all instances we
should deal with them as weak persons, turn them back to their Primmer, advise
them to learn their Catechism, they would think themselves highly wronged and
injured.

If the several Dissenters amongst us did in good earnest look upon themselves
as weak, that is, Ignorant, Wavering, half Christians, did they think their
dislike of the Constitutions of our Church to be the effect of such weakness,
they would be either more careful to hide it, or would more diligently seek out
for remedy; they would be more modest and humble, not so forward to judge and
condemn what they do not understand; they would not encourage one another to
hold out and persist in this their weakness, nor breed up their Children in it,
nor so Zealously endeavor to instill the same prejudices and mistakes into all
with whom they converse. But the truth is, they ordinarily look upon their
opposition to the orders of our Church as the effect of an higher illumination,
greater knowledge than other Men have attained unto, they rather count us the
weak Christians, if some of them will allow us so much; for otherwise if they
do not take us for the weaker and worse Christians; Why do they separate from
us? Why do they associate and combine together into distinct Congregations, as
being purer, more select Christians than others? Now tho such persons as these
may be in truth very weak, of little judgment or goodness, notwithstanding this
conceit of themselves and their party, yet these are not by any means to plead
for indulgence under that Character, nor to expect we should forgo our just
Liberty to please and humor them.

And that this is nothing but the plain truth is sufficiently evident from this
one observation, that many amongst them will grant our Reformation to have been
very excellent and laudable for those days of Darkness and Ignorance wherein it
was first made: But we now, say they, see by a clearer light, have greater
knowledge, and have arrived to higher perfection, and so discover and cannot
bear those faults and defects, which before were tolerable. Now who does not
see that these two pleas are utterly inconsistent and destructive of one
another? to desire abatement of the Ceremonies, and abolition or alteration of
the Liturgy in compliance with their weakness, and to demand the same because
of the greater knowledge and light they now enjoy, above that Age wherein this
present Constitution of our Church was established. This shows they will be
either weak or strong according as it best suits with the Argument they are
managing against us; they are contented to be reckoned as weak, only that on it
they may ground a plausible objection against us

3 Those who are really weak, that is, Ignorant and injudicious, are to be born
withal only for a time, till they have received better instruction. We cannot
be always Babes in Christ, without our own gross fault and neglect; he is
something worse than a weak man who is fond of, and resolutely against all
means of Conviction persists in his Ignorance and mistake. The case of young
beginners and Novices is very pittiable, who have not been taught their lesson,
but the same condescension is not due to those, who are ever learning and yet
are never able to come to the knowledge of the truth, not for want of capacity
to understand, but for want of humility and willingness to be instructed. Such
who are peevish and stubborn, whose Ignorance and Error is Voluntary and
affected, who will not yield to the clearest reason, if it be against their
interest or their party, can upon no account claim the privileges of weak
persons.

It is a great piece of inhumanity and cruelty to put a stumbling block in the
way of a blind man, but he walks at his own peril, who has eyes and will not
be persuaded to open them, that he might see and choose his way. Thus our
Savior answered his Disciples when they told him that the Pharisees were
offended at his Doctrine, Let them alone, they be blind leaders of the blind.
And if the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the Ditch, St. Matt. 15.
14. They were resolved not to be satisfied with any thing our Savior said or
did, they watched for an advantage and sought occasion against him. It was
their Malice, not their Ignorance, that made them so apt to be offended. Of
these therefore our Savior had no regard, who were so unreasonable and
obstinate in their opposition.

Not that I would be so uncharitable as to condemn all, or the generality of
our Nonconforming Brethren for malicious and wilful in their dissent from us.
God forbid that I should pass such an unmerciful sentence on so many (as I
believe) well meaning, tho miserably abused persons, to their own Master they
stand or fall. But however,

1. I would out of charity to them beg earnestly of them, that they would
thoroughly examine whether they have Conscientiously used all due means in their
power for information of their judgments concerning those things they doubt of;
whether they have sincerely endeavored to satisfy themselves, and have
devoutly Prayed to God to free their minds from all prejudices and corrupt
affections, and have patiently considered the grounds and reasons of their
Separation from us; for unless it be thus really with them, their weakness is
no more to be pitied, than that man's Sickness, who might be cured by an easy
remedy if he would but vouchsafe to apply it, or would submit to good Counsel.

2. I must say that old and inveterate mistakes, that have been a thousand
times answered and protested against, are not much to be heeded by us. If
people will by no means be prevailed upon, having sufficient light and time
allowed them, to lay aside their Childish apprehensions and suspicions, they
can hardly be thought to deserve that compassion and tenderness St. Paul
prescribes toward weak Brethren. I shall give one plain instance. Let us
suppose that at the first Reformation of Religion amongst us some very weak
(and such they must be if honest) were offended at the Church's requiring
Kneeling at the receiving the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, as seeming to them
to imply the adoration of the Bread and Wine, and as likely to harden some
Ignorant People in that monstrous conceit of Transubstantiation: But now after
so many public Declarations made by our Church, wherein she avows that no such
thing is intended, after the constant profession of so many, that have used
that decent Ceremony, that they abhor the Doctrine of Christ's bodily presence,
nay after the courageous sufferings, even death it self, of those that first
Established this Reformation, rather than they would worship the Host; if after
all this, people shall still clamor against this gesture as Popish, and be
offended with those that use it, as if thereby they gave divine honor to the
Elements, all that I shall say is this, it is a great sign that it is not
infirmity only, to which condescension is due, but something worse that raises
and maintains such exceptions and offenses.

This I suppose holds true even in things where the offense arises from their
doubtful or suspicious nature, that are capable of being misunderstood and
abused, and may be apt through mistake to provoke or tempt others to evil. Yet
if there be no moral evil in them, and the doing of them is of some
considerable consequence or advantage to me, I am bound to forbear them no
longer, than till I have taken due care to inform others rightly of the matter,
and warn them of the danger, till I have endeavored to rectify their
judgments concerning the innocence of my action and intention, and given them
notice of the evil that might possibly by my action happen to them. If I dig a
pit, or lay a block in the way, whereby others not knowing any thing of it are
hurt and wounded, here I stand chargeable with it, and am guilty in causing
them to fall; but if they are plainly and often told of it, and being
forewarned yet will run into the danger, they are then only to thank
themselves, and it is purely their own fault. Now if it be thus in cases that
are liable to suspicion and misinterpretation, it holds much more in our
Ceremonies and the orders of our Church, where the offense that is taken at
them arises not so much from the nature of the injunctions, as from men's gross
Ignorance, misconceit or perverseness. Thus men are no longer weak in Scripture
sense, than they are inculpably Ignorant, or which is all one, the Plea of
weakness is gone, after that sufficient instruction has been given or offered
to them, and other allowances made according to men's different capacities of
understanding. This shall suffice for the first thing propounded, to show what
is the true notion of a weak Brother.

2 I proceed to give you an account what it is to offend such an one. Because I
write for the use of the Common people only, I shall not trouble them with the
several significations of the Greek word which is Translated Scandal or
offense, nor distinctly consider the several places of Scripture where it is
used, only so far as plainly to show, First, that people are generally mistaken
in the sense they have of it. Secondly, What it is truly to offend or give
offense.

1. That people are generally mistaken about the sense of offending or giving
offense. For by it they commonly understand displeasing or grieving another,
and making him angry with them, and so consequently they think themselves in
Conscience bound to forbear all those things, which godly persons do not like
or approve of, or is contrary to their fancy and judgment. It is notorious,
that most of the ordinary sort of Dissenters, who assign this as the reason of
their not conforming to the Established Laws of the Church, because by doing so
they shall offend their Brethren, mean nothing else by it, but that they shall
fall into disgrace with, incur the displeasure and provoke the anger of those,
with whom they have held Communion for a long time in religious exercises.
They, good men, will be mightily troubled and vexed to see or hear such a sad
thing, and this is taken by many amongst them for an heinous crime, even the
same which St. Paul calls Scandalizing a weak Brother, to do any thing which
may chance to put any of their Godly Brethren out of humor.

The occasion of this false apprehension is in all likelihood the Ambiguity of
our English word offend, which is used in the Translation of our Bibles. In our
Language it signifies to displease, or to do something which another dislikes;
but the Greek word, which is so rendered, signifies to lay a stumbling block in
the way of another, which causes him to fall, or to ensnare and deceive him
into something that is evil, as I shall show more largely presently. We must
not therefore interpret the places of Scripture, where offend or offense are
found, by the common importance of the words amongst us, but by the undoubted
signification of the Original word, which all learned men agree to have quite
another sense.

It must not be concealed that there is one place in the famous fourteenth
chapter of the Romans that seems to favor this popular conceit v. 15. If thy
Brother be grieved with thy meat, now walk thou not charitably, and it is
the only one I know of that sounds this way, but surely it is more reasonable,
that this one verse should be interpreted by all the other places of Scripture
about this matter, than all the rest explained agreeably to this single verse.
Nay it sufficiently appears that by grieving our Brother, is not meant
displeasing him, or making him sorry or sad, but wounding or hurting him, and
so it is used to denote, that which causes grief or sorrow. For in the very
next words it follows, destroy not him with thy meat for whom Christ died; and
what is here expressed by grieving is v. 13. called, putting a stumbling block
or an occasion to fall, and v. 21. it is good neither to eat Flesh, nor drink
Wine, nor any thing whereby thy Brother Stumbleth, or is offended, or is made
weak; all which signify the same with being grieved. To be offended or grieved
is not to be troubled at what another has done out of pity and concern for his
Soul, but to receive hurt our selves from it, being by it drawn or deceived
into some sin, and our own fall occasioned by what our Brother has done, is
that which creates the grief and trouble. But because this mistake does so
generally prevail amongst many, as I hope, well disposed people, who think that
they must not do any thing, at which good men are displeased or grieved, I
shall offer these few things to their consideration.

1. That thus to censure and condemn the actions, and to be displeased and
angry with the persons of those that differ from them, or refuse any longer to
join with them in their Separate Congregations, is a great instance of
peevishness and uncharitableness, and is that very sin which St. Paul often
warns his weak believers against, viz. that they should not rashly judge those
who knew their duty, and understood their Christian liberty better than
themselves. This seems to be the same with that Argument the Papists use to
persuade men into, or to keep them in their Communion, as the safest way to
Heaven; since they so confidently damn all Men, whom, tho never so unjustly,
they thrust out of their Church. Because some of our Dissenting Brethren are so
froward and unmerciful in their censures, and so fond of their own way, as to
brand all that return to the Church with the infamous names of Apostates,
Time-servers, Men that have made Shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience, and
have forsaken Christ for fear of Persecution, and the like, therefore all
those, who are convinced of the lawfulness of Conformity, yet ought still to
continue with them in their Separation, left they provoke and irritate their
anger and displeasure against them; and thus any company of men, that shall
join together and resolve to quarrel with all that do not as they do, or that
shall leave their society, must oblige all for ever to remain with them, for
fear of giving them offense. If what I do is not evil in it self, it cannot
become such, because another Man is causelessly angry with me for doing of it.
Let but those, who Separate from us, mortify all pride and overweening opinion
of themselves, and their own way, let them lay aside all Zeal of parties and
little singularities, and learn to judge righteously and soberly of themselves
and others, and then the cause of all this offense will be soon removed.

2. they that pretend that this fear of offending, that is, displeasing their
weak Brethren hinders their compliance with the Church, ought seriously to
examine themselves, whether it is not really only the care of their credit, and
reputation with their party, that keeps them from Conformity. They are loath to
lose that share they have in the affections of so many, or to sink in that
estimation they have obtained of great Sanctity, by joining with the strictest
and purest Christians. For undoubtedly Men's reputation amongst a party is a
very great temptation to detain them in Error, and is a mighty prejudice to
their understanding and receiving the truth, or the doing of their Duty, when
it will expose them to reproach and opprobrious nicknames. Thus our Savior
said of the Jews, John 5. 44. How can ye believe, who receive honor one of
another, and seek not the honor that comes from God?

When therefore Men tell us, it will be a Scandalous thing for them now to
conform, they often mean nothing else by it, but that it will be unhandsom, and
a disgraceful thing for them to change their mind, and confess their mistake,
and retract what they have so long, and so Zealously defended. Or else let them
look well, that it is not some paltry secular interest, that lies at the
bottom, they dare not Offend their weak Brethren, that is; they are afraid they
shall lose their trade, they shall disoblige many of their good customers, they
get their livelihood by such a Congregation, and therefore they must continue
of it. But this is truly to become the servants of Men, such as these are the
most rank Men-pleasers, and therefore it is good advice of Mr. Baxter in his
Cure of Church divisions, p. 141. Please men in all things lawful for their good
and Edification; and become all things to all men in a lawful way: But depart
not from the principles or practice of Christian Union, Communion, Charity or
Sobriety, to please a dividing hot brained Party, nor to escape their sharpest
censures.

3. If to displease our weak Brother were the sinful offending him, condemned
by St. Paul, it would prove an intolerable Yoke upon Men's Consciences, would
beget endless perplexities and difficulties, so that we should not be able to
do any thing, tho never so indifferent, with a quiet and well assured mind,
since as the World now is, some one or other will in this sense be Scandalized
at it. By doing we shall anger some, by forbearing we shall provoke others; and
since those, who call themselves weak, are divided and shattered into several
Sects and Factions, each condemning all the other, it is impossible for us to
comply with any one of them, but we shall thereby displease all the rest. He
therefore, that would with a good Conscience perform his duty, in whatever
place he lives, or relation he stands in, must displease both good and bad Men,
as things now are amongst us. It is a very small thing, as St. Paul tells us,
to be judged of Men, when they pass their unwarrantable censures upon us, and
our actions; and they, who govern themselves by the opinions and fancies of
others, can never tell whither they shall be led by this principle. They are
slaves to the Party they espouse, and must run with them into all the Folly and
Extravagance they can be guilty of; or if at last they are forced to leave
them, they shall in the end be more hated and despised by them, than if they
had never humoured them at all.

4. I add only, that according to this Rule, that we must not do any thing
which may displease or grieve our weak Brethren, we do in effect submit our
Judgments and Consciences to the conduct of the most ignorant and injudicious
Christians, and yield to them that Power and Authority over us, which we deny
to the Magistrate and our Lawful Superiors; and it cannot but seem a very hard
case, that they who are so tender of their Christian liberty, and think it so
highly infringed and violated by the determinations of their Superiors about
indifferent matters, should yet suffer themselves to be thus straightly tied up
by the wills and passions of their weak Brethren. If this were so, says Mr.
Baxter, p. 134 of the forenamed Book, the most Childish and Womanish sort of
Christians, who have the weakest judgments, and the strongest wills and
passions must rule all the World; for these are hardliest pleased, and no man
must displease them. Whatever condescension therefore may be due to the weak
and Ignorant, yet it was never intended that they should govern the wiser, and
better instructed Christians in all their actions; and who can Govern more
Absolutely, than they whose wills must never be crossed, and whom none must
displease? From all this I conclude, that this cannot be the sense of
Scandalizing or giving Offense, viz. doing of something, which another takes
ill, or is angry with us for it.

2. I am now in the Second place to show, what is the true meaning of Offending
or Scandalizing in Scripture. The Greek word which we Translate Scandal or
Offense signifies either a Trap and Snare, or else more commonly something laid
in the way of another, which occasions his stumbling or falling, by which he is
bruised and hurt, and so consequently, whatever it was that hindered Men from
becoming Christ's Disciples, or discouraged them in their new Profession, or
tempted them to forsake that Faith they had lately embraced, is called a
Scandal or Offense. It is sometimes rendered an occasion to fall as Romans 14. 13.
occasion of stumbling, as 1 John 2. 10. a stumbling block, Revel. 2. 14. or a
thing that does Offend, as St. Matt. 13. 41. In all which places there is the
same Original word.

Hence to Offend or Scandalize any one, as it is commonly used in the New
Testament, is to do something, which tends to estrange or fright Men from the
Christian Profession, to beget in them hard and unworthy thoughts of it, or is
apt, when they are converted, to turn them from it, and make them repent of
their change. Of this I shall give some few instances out of the discourses of
our Savior and his Apostles.

Thus our Blessed Lord, St. Matthew. 17. 27. is said to have paid tribute, lest
he should Offend or Scandalize the Jews. This was more than he was bound to;
for he tells us, the Children are free. But he did it, that he might not give
any occasion to his Enemies to represent him to the People, as a contemner of
their Law, or an Enemy to Caesar, (according as you understand that Tribute to
be paid either to the Romans or the Temple) and so prejudice them against his
Person and Doctrine. Thus our Saviors own Countrymen, who were acquainted with
his Father, and Mother, and Kindred, who knew the meanness of his Birth and
Education, Mark 6. 3. were Offended or Scandalized at him. They were astonished
at the great things he did, and the greater things he spoke, and would in all
probability have believed on him, had they not known his mean Original and
employment. Is not this the Carpenter, the Son of Mary, etc. After the same
manner, when our Lord, St. John 6. 61. had discoursed of eating the Flesh of
the Son of Man, they that heard him, taking it in a gross carnal sense, were
Offended or Scandalized at him. They began to doubt of his being a true
Prophet, or the Messiah, who would teach his Disciples to turn Cannibals.

Thus again our Savior, before the night in which he was betrayed told his
Disciples, St. Matt. 26. 31. all of ye shall be Offended or Scandalized,
because of me this Night; that is, shall fly away and shamefully forsake me,
when you behold my hard usage, and dismal sufferings. So Christ Crucified, 1
Cor. 1. 23. to the Jews was a Scandal or stumbling block; that is, they had set
their minds and hearts on a temporal earthly King, and expected to be freed
from the Roman Yoke, and to be restored to their former Dominions and
greatness, as the effect of the coming of their Messiah, and therefore could
not be persuaded to own him for their Prince, and Savior, and the Son of God,
who was put to such a Cursed and Ignominious death. In the same sense they who
heard the Word of God, Mark 4. 17. and received it with gladness, but having no
root in themselves, when Affliction or Persecution arose for the Words sake,
were presently offended or Scandalized; that is, were ready to leave and
renounce that Profession, that was likely to cost them so dear.

After the publishing of the Gospel by the Apostles, that which most stumbled
the Jewish Converts, was the danger Moses's Law and their Temple Worship, and
the singular preeminences of the Seed of Abraham, seemed to be in of being
undermined by Christianity. They were strangely wedded to their Legal
observances, fond of Circumcision and those peculiarities, which distinguished
their Nation from the rest of mankind, they were jealous of any Doctrine, that
encroached upon their Privileges, or tended to bring them down to the same
level with the Uncircumcised World. This mightily Offended them, and hardened
them against Christianity; whereas on the other side, the Gentile Converts with
as much reason, were afraid of putting their Necks under so heavy a Yoke, or
being brought into subjection to the Jewish Law, and there was no such
effectual way to scare them from Christianity, as when it came attended with
the burden of the Mosaical Ceremonies; which were an Offense to them; that is,
did discourage them from believing in Christ, or continuing in his Faith. Now
to prevent the mischiefs, that might arise from these different apprehensions
amongst the Christian Proselites, was the occasion of the meeting of that first
Council at Jerusalem; mentioned Acts 15. and of those directions which St. Paul
gives Romans 14. concerning our behavior toward weak Brethren.

Another case there was concerning eating of things offered to Idols, of which
St. Paul discourses in his first Epistle to the Corinthians, chap. 8. and 10.
the sum of which seems to be this, that the stronger and wiser Christians ought
to abstain from eating what had been offered to Idols, tho as ordinary meat, in
the presence of any one, who with Conscience of the Idol, did eat it as a thing
offered to an Idol. For such there were in the Church of Corinth so weak, as
not yet to have quite left off their Idolatrous Worship, and a Christians
eating what had been Offered in Sacrifice before such an one might serve to
harden, and confirm him in his Error, whose Conscience being weak is defiled.
Of whose Soul St. Paul professed himself to have so great regard, that he would
eat no such meat as long as the World lasted, rather than lay such a
stumbling block before, or wound their weak Consciences. In all these places
and many more that might be named (for the fuller explication of which I refer
you to interpreters, and those that have written largely on this subject) no
less than Apostasy from the Christian Faith was the sin, into which these weak
Christians were so apt to fall, and by an undue use of our Liberty to give
occasion to another forsaking the Christian Religion, whereby our Savior
loses a Disciple, and the Soul of our Brother perishes, is the proper sin of
Offending, or giving Scandal.

I shall mention but one place more, which is Revel. 2. 14. where Balaam is
said to have taught Balac, to cast a stumbling block or Scandal before the
Children of Israel which relates of his enticing them by the Daughters of Moab
to Fornication and Idolatry, and by that means provoking God against them. So
that in the most general sense to Scandalize or Offend any one, is, to give
occasion to his sin, and consequently his ruin and undoing; and this I suppose
will be granted by all, that do not receive their opinions from the mere sound
of words. Hence I shall conclude these few things.

1. The better Men are, the harder it is to Scandalize them: Those are not such
Godly persons, as they would be thought, who are so ready at all turns to be
Offended; for how can they be reckoned to excel others in knowledge or goodness,
who are so easily upon every occasion drawn or tempted to sin? Thus Mr. Baxter
himself tells the Separatists in his Cure of Church Divisions. Usually, says
he, men talk most against Scandalizing those, whom they account to be the best,
and the best are least in danger of sinning; and so they accuse them to be the
worst, or else they know not what they say; for suppose a Separatist should
say, if you hold Communion with any Parish Minister or Church in England, it
will be a Scandal to many good people: I would ask such an one, Why call you
those good people that are easily drawn to sin against God? Nay, that will sin
because I do my duty: Therefore if you know what you say, you make the
Separatists almost the worst of men, that will sin against God, because another
will not sin.

The great thing our Nonconformists pretend unto above other men is tenderness
of Conscience, by which they must mean, if they mean any Virtue by it, a great
fear of doing any thing that is evil; and this, where it is in truth, is the
best security that can be devised against being Scandalized or Offended, by
what other Men do; that is, against being drawn into sin by it. So that they do
really disparage and severely reflect upon the Dissenters, who are thus afraid
of giving them Offense, as I have explained it.

2. No man can with sense say of himself, that he shall be Scandalized at what
another man does; for it is as much as to say, that by such a person and
action, he shall be led into sin ignorantly, and his saying this confutes his
ignorance: If he knows it to be a sin, he is not betrayed into it, nor does he
fall into it through ignorance and mistake (which is the case of those that are
Scandalized) but wilfully commits it. This a great Bishop compares with the
peevishness of a little Child, who when he is commanded to pronounce the word
he has no mind to, tells you he cannot pronounce that word, at the same time
naming the word he pretends he cannot speak. Such Nonsense it is for a man to
forbid me doing any thing upon pretense it will be a Scandal to him, or make
him through mistake fall into some sin, when by this it is plain, that he knows
of it beforehand, and so may, and ought to avoid the stumbling block that is
laid before him, and the danger that he is exposed unto. Surely says Solomon,
Prove. 1. 17. in vain is the Net spread in the sight of any Bird.

If to Offend or Scandalize, any one is to tempt and draw him into some sin,
whereby his Conscience is wounded, there then can be no fear of giving Offense
by our Conformity to the orders and usages of our Church, because there is
nothing appointed by or used in it, but what may be complied withal without
sin: For this, as I before observed, is supposed in the Question I at first
propounded to discourse of; that he, who absented from his Parish Church for
fear of Offending his weak Brethren, was convinced in his own mind of the
lawfulness of all that is enjoined; and therefore by his own Conformity, he can
only engage others to do as he has done, which as long as he is persuaded to
be lawful, I do not see how he can be afraid of Scandalizing others by it, or
making them to sin by his Example, unless he will imagine his Brethren, not so
weak, but so wicked, as to Worship the Host, because he Kneels at receiving of
the Sacrament, and to adore the Cross because he bows at the Name of Jesus, or
that they will renounce all Religion because he has forsaken their ways of
Separation: This cannot but prove a vain excuse for me to forbear doing that,
in which there is really no evil, lest by the Authority of my example I make
others sin in doing the same innocent action; which in this case is so far from
being to be feared, that if by my example I prevail with others to return into
the Communion of our Church, they are not thereby at all Scandalized, but I
have done them a most signal kindness and benefit.

If it be said, that tho what I do is in it self lawful, yet it may minister
occasion or provocation to others to do something else that is unlawful, and so
I become truly guilty of giving Offense; I Answer, that we are accountable only
for the natural tendencies, or probable effects of our actions, which may be
easily foreseen and prevented. Remote probabilities and contingencies and bare
possibilities come not into reckoning, nor are they at all to be weighed. If in
every action I am bound to consider what advantage a wicked sensual Man, or a
weak silly man might take, and what Arguments he might possibly thence draw to
encourage himself in sin and folly, or excuse himself from the care of his Soul
and Religion, this would open the door to infinite Scrupulosity and trouble,
and I should hardly be able to do or speak any thing without the incurring the
guilt of giving Scandal. Now this being supposed, I dare boldly challenge any
Man to name any one sin either against God, our Neighbor, or our selves, that
our Conformity does give any real probable occasion unto; and it is very
uncharitable to conceit, that our Nonconforming Brethren will out of mere
perverseness, or spite and revenge run into sin, on purpose to make our leaving
them criminal and vicious; which if any should be so wicked as to do, yet they
would lose the design of their malice, and prove the only guilty persons
themselves.

The only thing I imagine can be further said in this case is, that tho I am
well satisfied my self, yet by my Conformity I may tempt and provoke others
that are not satisfied concerning the lawfulness of it, nay those who judge it
absolutely sinful, yet rather than stand out, or being moved by the opinion
they have of my goodness and Wisdom, to follow my example with a doubting or
gainsaying Conscience. Suppose a Master of Family that used to frequent the
private Meetings, and his Wife and Children and Servants used to follow him
thither; but afterward, by reading of such good Books as have been lately
written, is himself satisfied concerning the lawfulness of going to Church, and
at last thinks it his duty so to do, only he is afraid that the rest of his
Family to please and humor him, will be apt also to forsake the private
Meetings, and go along with him to Church, tho it be altogether against their
judgment and Conscience: Or suppose him a man of eminency amongst his
Neighbors, on whose favor many do depend, of great interest and reputation,
by whose example many are swayed and led. Tho himself does conform upon good
reasons and principles, yet his example may invite many others to it, tho they
have received no satisfaction concerning the lawfulness of it.

Now here I desire these three things may be considered.

1. It is certain that it is as unlawful to go to the Separate Meetings against
ones Conscience, as it is to go to the public Church against ones Conscience.
Why then ought not this man to be as afraid, when he leaves his Parish Church
and frequents the private Congregation, lest he should draw some to follow him
thither with a doubting Conscience; as well as he fears, if he leaves the
Meetings and resorts to his Parish Church, some not satisfied concerning the
lawfulness of it, should come after him thither? The influence of his Example,
interest, reputation, is the same in both instances; the danger of giving this
Scandal is equal; that therefore which ought to determine his practice must be
his own Judgment and persuasion.

2. Such an one, who has been a Separatist, but is now himself satisfied of
the lawfulness of Conformity; ought to take great care and pains in
endeavoring to satisfy others also, especially those, whom he has any cause
to think to have been led into the ways of Separation by his example: He must
not be ashamed to own his former mistake, to set before them the reasons on
which his change is grounded, and must do this publicly and frequently,
persuading others to use the same helps and means, which were so effectual for
his own conviction. And thus he does all that lies in his power to prevent
this ill effect, and shall not be further answerable for the consequences of
what he does.

3. It is truly observed by some, that considering the known temper of the
Nonconformists, it is not very likely any such mischief should ensue, viz. that
by the example of one or more leaving their Separate Assemblies, others should
be moved to follow them against their own Judgment and Conscience. It is
abundantly notorious how they have used to treat those that have deserted them;
with what irreconcilable enmity they have prosecuted them, looking upon them
as their worst Enemies, passing more grievous censures upon them than upon
those who have all their lives long continued in our Communion.

4. I proceed in the last place to observe from what I have discoursed
concerning giving Offense, that if to Offend any one, be to lead him into sin,
then we may Scandalize and give Offense to others, as soon by pleasing them and
complying with them, as by dipleasing them and going contrary to their mind and
humor.

St. Paul, who Circumcised Timothy, Acts 16. 3. in favor of the weak Jews that
he might insinuate and ingratiate himself into them, refused to Circumcise
Titus, Galat. 2. 3. tho he made the Jews angry by it, yet he would not give
place by subjection, or submission and condescension to them, no not for an
hour: He considered the different states and conditions of the persons he had
to deal withal. He complied to Circumcise Timothy, lest all the Jews with him
should have forsaken the Christian Faith, and for the same reason he denied to
Circumcise Titus, lest those of Jerusalem should think he was of opinion, that
the Jewish Law held still in force, and so the Cross of Christ should become of
no effect to them. He pleased indeed the former for fear of driving them from
Christianity, and for the same reason he displeased the latter, lest he should
give them occasion to think the observation of Moses's Law always necessary. He
had truly Scandalized them, if he had done as they would have had him: He had
Offended them in the true Scripture sense, if he had pleased and humoured them;
and this is the most ordinary way of Scandalizing Christians amongst us, by not
plainly telling Men of their faults and mistakes, by not speaking freely and
roundly to them, nor acting courageously, whereby they become hardened and
confirmed in their folly and ignorance.

To this purpose I cannot but repeat the words of Mr. Baxter in the Book I have
so often cited; Many a time, says he, I have the rather gone to the
Common Prayers of the public Assemblies for fear of being a Scandal to those
same men that called the going to them a Scandal: that is, for fear of hardening
them in a sinful Separation and Error; because I knew that was not Scandal
which they called Scandal; that is, displeasing them, and crossing their
opinions; but hardening them in an Error or other sin, is true Scandalizing.
Understand this, or you will displease God under pretense of avoiding Scandal,
p. 135.

Thus by complying with our Dissenting Brethren we really do them that mischief
which we would avoid, and fall into the sin of giving Scandal, whilst we are
running from it; We countenance and encourage their sinful Separation and
Division; we confirm them in their dangerous Errors and Mistakes; we by our
practice condemn those things, which yet in our Consciences we allow and
approve of, and by our Authority and influence harden others in their
unreasonable prejudices and opposition against the lawful Commands of their
Superiors. They think us of the same mind with themselves, whilst we do the
same things, and that we judge as ill of the Church of England, as long as we
refuse to Communicate with it, as themselves do; and thus we give occasion to
their sin, and those infinite mischiefs which have happened both to Church and
State, upon the account of our Religious disputes and divisions; which surely
ought to be well thought of and considered by a sort of Men amongst us, who
shall go to Church in the Morning, and to a Conventicle in the Afternoon; who
halt between both, and would fain displease neither side, but indeed give real
Offense to both. From all this I think it is very plain, that he, who is
satisfied in his own mind of the lawfulness of Conformity, but is afraid of
giving Offense by it, if he be true to this principle, ought to hasten the
faster to his Parish Church, that he might not Offend those very Dissenters of
whom he would seem to be so tender; and thus I have done with the Second thing
I propounded to show, what is meant by Offending or Scandalizing,

3. It remains in the Third and Last place to enquire; how far, and in what
instances we are bound to consider the ignorance or weakness of our Brother? In
Answer to this, that I may proceed with all the clearness I can, I shall now
suppose notwithstanding all I have already said, that our Dissenting, Brethren
are truly weak persons, and that there may be some danger of their being
through their own fault Offended by our Conformity; yet taking this for
granted, I shall plainly show that he, who is in his own mind convinced of the
lawfulness of coming to his Parish Church, and using the Forms of Prayer and
Ceremonies by Law appointed, ought not to forbear doing the same for fear of
giving such Offense to his weak Brethren. There are many other things to be
considered in this Case, besides this matter of private Scandal; and if there
be greater evil in, and greater mischief to others, and a more public Scandal
does follow our forbearing Communion with the Church and withdrawing into
private Assemblies, than can happen by our leaving them and returning to the
Church, and complying with its orders, we ought then to conform notwithstanding
the Offense that is imagined may be taken at it. For these two things, as I
suppose are agreed on all hands; one is, that nothing which is sinful may be
done to avoid Scandalizing others; the other is, that to avoid a less Scandal
being taken by a few, we must not give a greater Scandal and of vastly more
pernicious consequence to a much bigger number of persons; and by these two
Rules I shall now judge of the Case at first propounded.

1. Nothing that is sinful may be done to avoid others being Scandalized, which
is directly the Apostles Doctrine, Romans 3. 8. That we must not do evil, that
good may came; nor is any necessary duty to be omitted out of prudence or
charity to others, lest they through Error or Ignorance be hurt by it: We must
not to prevent the greatest sin in another, commit the least sin our selves,
nor disobey Gods Law, and so run the hazard of our own damnation, tho it be to
save the Soul of our Brother. Thus Calvin tells us, Instit. lib. 3. c. 19. Quae
necessaria sunt factu, nullius offendiculi timore omittenda sunt. Whatever is
necessary to be done by virtue of Gods Command is not to be omitted for fear of
Offense; and again in the same place, Hic Charitatis rationem haberi decet, sed
usque ad aras. Our charity to our Brother ought to be limited by this, that we
do not for his sake displease God.

The very best things and actions may be perverted by Men of ill-disposed or
weak minds, false consequences and unjust inferences may be strained from them;
as we know the grace of God in the Gospel was abused into an argument for
licentiousness, and Christ himself is said to be set for the fall of many, St.
Luke 2. 24. but still this does not Cancel our obligations to universal
obedience to Gods Law, nor can it alter the nature of good and evil, duty and
sin; which are no such uncertain contingent things, as to depend upon the
constructions others shall make of our actions, or the conclusions they shall
draw from them. God Almighty in the making of his Laws has a perfect
comprehension of all the accidental events, that may happen either through the
weakness or wickedness of Men; and we must not think our selves to be wiser
than God, taking upon our selves to dispense with his Commands without any
allowance from him, as if himself had not foreseen those inconveniences which
may arise from our doing our duty: it can therefore never be, that obedience to
God should give any real Scandal; and whatever Offense may be taken at my doing
of my duty, it is a contradiction to imagine it imputable to me, as a sin or
fault, (for it is to suppose one to disobey God, in obeying him) but they alone
are chargeable who are Offended by it.

Now by the express Command of God, we are obliged to obey the lawful
injunctions of our Superiors, whether Civil or Ecclesiastical; and if any are
so hardy as to deny this, they must seek for another Bible out of which to
judge of Gods will; for there is hardly any one duty of Religion more plainly
Commanded, more frequently and earnestly pressed in the New Testament, than
quiet and peaceable subjection to Authority, both in Church and State, in all
things lawful, and that not only to avoid punishment, but for Conscience sake;
and to refuse obedience in such things, is a sin against the fifth Commandment.
That the Conformity required by our Church, contains not any thing in it
unlawful, must be granted, as I have already observed, by all those who make
use of this Plea of Scandal, from all which the necessary Conclusion is,

Since we may not redeem a Scandal by disobedience to God, since God has
plainly required our submission to those whom he has set over us in all
things, lawful; since it is acknowledged by those I now discourse with, that
Conformity to the Church is enjoined by a competent Authority, and is lawful; I
say the necessary conclusion is, that no Man can with a good Conscience refuse
to conform only for fear of Scandal.

Our Dissenting Brethren, when they are urged with this Argument neither do nor
can deny any of the Premises, they must confess that no sin may be committed
upon any account whatsoever, and that a Man is not bound to provide for his
Brothers safety by wounding his own Soul; they cannot deny but that God has
Commanded us to be subject to Lawful Authority in all things lawful, but then
to evade the force of this reasoning, they have endeavored to load the
conclusion with some seeming difficulties and absurdities, which they pretend
follow from this principle, that we are bound to obey, notwithstanding the
Scandal that may ensue upon it. The chief of these I shall mention, and briefly
return an Answer to them.

1. It is pleaded that those precepts, which contain only rituals, are to give
place to those, which do concern the welfare of Men's Bodies, and much more to
those, which do respect the welfare of our Brothers Soul; so that, when both
together cannot be observed, we must neglect or violate the former, to observe
the latter: That this is true even of some Commands given by God himself; to
which purpose our Savior does produce that saying of the Prophet Hosea, I will
have Mercy and not Sacrifice. Now if Sacrifices prescribed by God himself,
which were so considerable a part of the Divine Worship under Moses 's Law, yet
were to give place to acts of mercy, how much more are the positive injunctions
of Men, that concern only the externals and circumstantials of Religion, to
yield to the Royal and indispensable Law of Charity, of which this duty of not
giving Offense to others, is such an Eminent part. Thus says Mr. Jeans in his
Second Part of Scholastical Divinity, What Laws of any Earthly Wight whatsoever
concerning Ceremonies can be more obligatory, than the Commands of God touching
the externals of his Worship and Service; and yet it is his will and pleasure,
that these externals of his Worship should be laid aside for the performance of
outward works of mercy: If therefore the sacred Ordinances of God are to give
way unto works of mercy unto the bodies of Men, surely then much more is the
trash of human inventions to yield unto a work of mercy to the Souls of Men.

In answer to this, it is readily acknowledged that when there does happen any
such interfering between two Commands of God, the one Positive, the other
Moral, the Positive ought always to give place to the Moral; and by the same
reason the positive Commands of our Superiors ought certainly to give way to
the Moral Commands of God, which are of eternal and immutable obligation. They
cease to bind us either in case of absolute necessity, or when they plainly
hinder our performance of any Moral duty to God or our Neighbor; and the
Church is presumed to dispense with its orders, as God Almighty does allow the
neglect of his own positive Institutions in such circumstances. But then this
is only, where the necessity is urgent and extreme, the sin we must otherwise
commit evident and certain; and at last our Obedience is dispensed withal only
for that one time.

Thus in a case of necessity, Our Savior St. Matthew. 12. 5. acquits David and
his followers of all blame, who being ready to perish for hunger, did eat of
the Shewbread, which otherwise, was not lawful for them to eat; but had they
taken a particular fancy to that Bread, and refused to have eaten of any other,
because that best agreed with their Stomachs and was most pleasing to their
Palate; can we think our Savior would have so easily excused them? Or which is
nearer to our Case; because God did prefer acts of Mercy before Sacrifices
where both could not be done, yet this would not have justified any man's wholly
leaving off Sacrificing, or refusing to do it at Jerusalem, inventing another
way of Worship, as more expedient than Sacrificing, or choosing another place
to Sacrifice in, which might be more convenient for all the Jews than that City
was. We may leave our Prayers, forsake the Church to save the life of our
Neighbor, or to quench the firing of his House, but still this would be but a
pityful pretense for our wholly absenting our selves from Chruch, and constant
neglect of our Prayers, because in the mean time our Neighbors life may be
invaded, or his house fired by ill Men, of which there is great store in the
World, and so he may stand in need of our help, which is a more acceptable
Service to God than any acts of Devotion. So that however this Argument may
serve to excuse the omission of some things Commanded by lawful Authority, by
those who otherwise are perfectly conformable, in extraordinary cases which
very rarely happen, and for which no provision could be made by Law; yet to be
sure this will not at all help those, who bid open defiance to the Laws, stand
out in manifest opposition against them, live in plain disobedience and
contradiction to them as it they were altogether free from them, nay set up a
distinct way and form of Worship of their own, and all this because they are
loath to Offend those, who are not satisfied of the wisdom and goodness of what
is appointed.

Thus our Dissenting Brethren can gain but little by this Plea if granted to
them; for upon this account of exercising mercy and charity toward their
Neighbors, they can be excused from Obedience to their Superiors in such
cases only, in which they may be excused also from the observation of the
Sabbath, from Prayer public or private, from Worshipping of God either in the
Church or in a Conventicle, nay from Obedience to God himself; had he pleased
in the Scriptures positively to have required whatever is at present enjoined
by our Church; and let them well consider, whether if God had plainly in his
Word prescribed all that our Church does Command, they would have thought it
safe to have refused compliance with such divine impositions, because they were
unreasonably offensive to some Godly people: If our Dissenters will but
acknowledge themselves bound to submit to the determinations of their
Superiors about the things in controversy between us, so far, as the Jews
were bound to obey the ordinances of God concerning his external Worship
delivered by Moses; and that they are freed from such obligation to obey the
Laws of their Governors only in such cases, as the Jews were excused from
offering their accustomed Sacrifices, or as they think themselves at liberty to
break the Sabbath, to omit Gods Public Worship, I suppose this dispute would
soon be at an end, for they dare not own, that the Scandal others may take at
such things, which yet are to give place to moral duties, is sufficient to void
their obligation to the doing of them.

Mr. Jeans (whose objections I shall the rather consider because of his
eminency amongst the Presbyterians, tho I find my self somewhat prevented by a
late Writer, who has taken particular notice of them) thus puts the
Question, Suppose, says he, the greatest Monarch upon the face of the Earth
should command the meanest and lowest of his Slaves, upon some important affair
to ride Post through such a City, without any of the least stay or diversion,
and then it should happen that a company of little Children should be playing
in the Streets, can this Slave think that he is obliged to ride over them? No
surely, he ought to use all means, and take all care possible to execute his
Commission without doing any hurt, or damage to any person whatever; but if he
would have stated the case right, it should have been done thus; suppose this
Slave should utterly refuse to do as he was Commanded, and for his
justification should plead, that he must be forced to ride through many Towns
are Cities, where are many little Children, who are often playing at the Doors
or in the Streets; he knows not but that some of them may be in his way, or
chance to run between his Horses legs, and therefore to avoid the doing of this
mischief, which might possibly happen, he resolves not to stir one foot from
his own home. Is this pretense sufficient to excuse his disobedience? No more
can our Nonconformity to the rules given us by our Superiors be innocent,
because some may be Scandalized at our Obedience.

2. It is further said that Scandal is in the nature of it spiritual murder,
and if where Authority has determined our choice, we must hold to their
determination, any Scandal to the contrary notwithstanding, it seems then in
case the Magistrate command it, we may lawfully murder the Soul of our
Brother, wound his weak Conscience, and destroy with our meats, our Ceremonies,
the work of God, and him for whom Christ died. It is good, says St. Paul, Romans
14. 21. neither to eat Flesh, nor to drink Wine, nor any thing whereby thy
Brother stumbleth, or is offended, or is made weak. But our Prelatists, says
Mr. Jeans, determine quite otherwise. If Authority enjoin it, it is good, say
they, to eat Bread, drink Wine, wear a Surplice, use the sign of the Cross in
Baptism, tho thereby never so many Brethren stumble, or are offended, or made
weak.

But all this is mere bugbear, fitted only to fright Children and such weak
persons, as we are now treating of; for it can never be shown, how wearing a
Surplice, or Kneeling at receiving of the Sacrament, or Crossing the Infants
forehead, has any tendency toward the scaring Men from Christianity, or
making them to deny Christ, and forsake and grow weary of his Religion, which I
have sufficiently proved to be the only proper Scandalizing of our Brother,
which St. Paul so highly aggravateth, and charge with the guilt of destroying
and murdering his Soul; none of these things do directly and immediately lead
or tempt any man to any sin: Whatever Scandal may follow is wholly accidental,
and the fault and mistake of those only, who are Offended, and to provide
always against such Scandals is an impossible undertaking; for they may follow
the most innocent actions, nay the most necessary duties, and this Argument
concludes as strongly against obedience to any other Command of God, if by it
my Brother may stumble, or be offended, or be made weak, as it does against
submission to our Superiors in things lawful.

They that make these Objections do not sufficiently consider, that by Gods Law
we are bound to obey the Lawful Commands of our Superiors; and it is not only
the Law or Ordinance of Man, of which they seem to make so little account, but
it is the Law of God also, that is violated by our disobedience to our
Governors in things Lawful: The Comparison therefore ought not to be only, as
they make it, between an human Authority determining some indifferent things,
and the divine Law of charity to the Soul of our Brother, but between the
divine Command of obedience to our Superiors, and the avoiding of Scandal:
Here we affirm, that we cannot be bound to transgress a plain Law of God, or
which is all one in this Question, a lawful command of our Superiors for fear
of some evil that may by chance happen to some others through their own fault;
and we prove it by this reason, which our Dissenting Brethren must own for true
and good, because every one is bound to have a greater care of his own than
others Salvation, and consequently rather to avoid sin in himself, than to
prevent it in his Brethren.

If it be here asked, as it is by some, whether any human Authority can make
that action cease to be Scandalous, which if done without any such Command had
been criminal upon the account of the Scandal that followed it, I Answer, that
no Authority, whether divine or human, can secure that others shall not be
Offended by what I do out of obedience to their Commands, but then it does free
me from all guilt and blame, by making that to become my duty to do, which if I
had done needlessly without any great reason, and my Brother had been hurt and
his Conscience wounded by it, might have been justly charged with
uncharitableness, greater or less according as the Scandal was more or less
probable to follow.

This must be granted, that the Laws of God or Man, otherwise obligatory, do
not lose their binding force because of some Scandal, that may possibly happen
from our Compliance with them, or else all Authority is utterly void and
insignificant, and every Man is at liberty to do all things as himself
pleases; for, to borrow the words of the excellent Bishop Sanderson, To allow
Men under pretense that some offense may be taken thereat, to disobey Laws and
Constitutions made by those that are in Authority over us, is the next way to
cut the sinews of all Authority, and to bring both Magistrates and Laws into
contempt; for what Law ever was made, or can be made so just and reasonable,
but some Man or other either did or might take offense thereat. Whether such a
Constitution or Command of our Superiors be Scandalous or no, every one must
judge for himself; and so according to his own private opinion of the goodness
or hurtfulness of what is required, he is free to obey it or not, which is
directly to dissolve all Government, and to bring in certain disorder and
everlasting confusion, every one doing what is good in his own Eyes.

3. It is said, that Avoiding of Scandal is a main duty of charity; May
Superiors therefore at their pleasure appoint, how far I shall show my charity
toward my Brothers Soul? then surely an inferior Earthly Court may cross the
determinations of the High Court of Heaven: This Mr. Jeans urges also out of
Amesius; but it is easily replied,

That here is no Crossing the determinations of God, since it is his express
will, that in all lawful things we should obey our Governors, and he who has
made this our duty, will not lay to our charge the mischiefs, that may
sometimes without our fault through the folly and peevishness of Men follow
from it, and certainly it is as equal and reasonable, that our Superiors
should appoint how far I shall exercise my charity toward my Brethren, as it
is, that the mistake and prejudice of any private Christians should set bounds
to their Power and Authority, Cancel the public Laws, or that every ignorant
and froward Brother should determine, how far we shall be obedient to those,
whom God has set over us either in Church or State.

But to give a more full Answer to this we must know, that, tho charity be the
great duty, especially of the Christian Religion, yet duties of justice (as
they are commonly called) are of stricter obligation than duties of charity,
and we are bound to pay our debts, before we give an alms. Now obedience to
Superiors is a debt we owe to them, which they have right to exact of us, so
that they may accuse us of injury, if we perform it not. But a great care to
hinder sin in others, or not to Scandalize them is a duty of charity, which
indeed we are obliged unto as far as we can, but not till after we have given
to every one what is his due and right. It is therefore no more Lawful for me,
says the forenamed most Judicious Bishop Sanderson, to disobey the lawful
Command of a Superior, to prevent thereby the offense of one or a few
Brethren, then it is lawful for me to do one man wrong to do another man a
courtesy withal; or than it is lawful for me to rob the Exchequer to relieve
an Hospital. According to that known saying of St. Austin, Quis est qui dicat,
ut habeamus quod demus pauperibus, faciamus furta divitibus? Who is it, that
siath it is lawful to steal from the rich, what we may bestow on the poor? or
to refuse to pay Taxes, on pretense that you know those who have more need of
your money?

To this Mr. Jeans replies, Suppose, says he, the care of not giving offense
be in respect of our Brother but a debt of charity, yet in regard of God it is
a legal debt, since he may and does challenge it as due, and we do him wrong if
we disobey him: Here I grant indeed, that both are required by God at our
hands, that we should be obedient to our Superiors, and that we should be
always ready to show charity to our Brethren; but then I say, this is not the
charity which God requires, when I give to those in want, what is none of mine
own. This is not an instance or expression of that love and kindness, which by
the Law of God we owe to our Brother, to do him good by wronging our
Superiors. God has obliged Servants to be merciful to the poor to their
power, as well as to be true and faithful to their Masters; but that is no part
of the mercy which God requires from them; to give away their Masters goods
without his leave; tho it were to those who stand in great need of relief. God
has Commanded all Christians to have a great care of being any occasion of
their Brothers sin or fall; but then this must necessarily be understood only
of things subject to our own ordering and management. In all cases, wherein we
are at our own disposal, we are bound charitably to regard our Brother. But in
instances, where our practice is determined by Authority, our Superiors only
are to consider the danger of Scandal; we must consider the duty we owe to
them, this being a matter wherein we cannot show our charity without violating
the right of our Superiors; It remains then, in the words of another great
Bishop, in what case soever we are bound to obey God or Man, in that case and
in that conjunction of circumstances we have nothing permitted to our choice,
(and consequently there is no place for any act of charity) and have no
Authority to remit of the right of God or our Superior; and to comply with our
Neighbor in such Questions, besides that it cannot serve any purposes of
piety, if it declines from duty in any instance, it is like giving Alms out of
the portion of Orphans, or building Hospitals with the Money and spoils of
Sacrilege.

4. It is further said by Mr. Jeans out of Amesius; If determination by
Superiors is sufficient to take away the sin of Scandal, then they do very
ill, that they do not, so far as is possible, determine all things indifferent,
that so no danger may be left of giving Offense by the use of them. Then the
Church of Rome is to be praised in that she has determined so many indifferent
things. Then St. Paul might have spared all his directions about forbearance
out of respect to weak Brethren, and fully determined the matters in debate,
and so put an end to all fear of Scandal.

This truly seems a very odd way of arguing, and all that I shall say to it
is, that it supposes nothing else worthy to be considered in the making of
Laws, or in the determinations of Superiors about indifferent things, but only
this one matter of Scandal; and the project it self, should it take, would
prove very vain and unsuccessful. For tho we truly say, that we are bound to
comply with the Orders and Ceremonies of the Church of England, they being but
few and innocent and so giving no real ground of Offense; yet we do not say the
same upon supposition our Church had determined all circumstances in Gods
Worship she possibly could, which would perhaps have been a yoke greater, than
that of the Ceremonial Law to the Jews; nor if she had prescribed as many
Ceremonies as the Church of Rome has done, which manifestly tend to the
disgrace and Scandal of our Christian Religion; and as for the course St. Paul
took, it is plain that some things upon good reasons were determined by the
Apostles, as that the Gentile Converts should abstain from blood, and things
strangled, and offered to Idols, which decree, I presume, they might not
Transgress out of charity to any of their Brethren, who might take Offense at
such abstinence, and other things for great reason were for a time left at
liberty, which reason was taken from the present circumstances of those the
Apostles had to deal withal; tho afterward, as I observed before, when that
reason ceased, determinations were made about those things which St. Paul had
left at liberty, and if St. Paul had determined the dispute about meats and
days one way, they, who had followed so great an Authority, whatever had
happened, had surely been free from the sin of Scandal; but still the Scandal
had not been prevented, but all the contrary part had been in danger to have
been utterly estranged from Christianity; and that was reason sufficient why
St. Paul did not make any determinations in that case. For Governors are not
only to take care to free those that obey them from the sin of Scandal, but
also to provide, that as little occasion, as is possible, may be given to any
to be Scandalized.

There are other Objections offered by Mr. Jeans, out of Amesius and
Rutherford, against this Doctrine of our obligation to obedience to Superiors
in things lawful, notwithstanding the Scandal that may follow; but they either
may be Answered from what I have already said, or else they chiefly concern the
case of Governors, and are brought to prove that they act uncharitably, and
give great Offense contrary to St. Paul's rules, who take upon them
determinately to impose unnecessary rites by which they know many good Men will
be Scandalized, but this is not my present business to discourse of, tho I
cannot forbear saying these two things, which I think very easy to make out.

1. That our Church of England has taken all reasonable care not to give any
just offense to any sort of persons, and the offenses that have been since
taken at some things in our Constitution could not possibly have been foreseen
by those who made our first Reformation from Popery, and so they could not be
any reason against the first establishment: Nor,

2. Are they now a sufficient reason for the alteration of it; unless we can
imagine it reasonable to alter public Laws made with great wisdom and
deliberation as often, as they are disliked by, or prove Offensive to private
persons. If this be admitted, there then can never be any settled Government and
order in the Church; because there never can be any establishment, that will
not be liable to give such Offense. They who now take Offense at what the
Church of England enjoins, on the same or a like account will take Offense at
whatever can be enjoined, and the same pretenses of Scandal will be good
against any establishment they themselves shall make; for tho they will not use
these reasons against their own establishment, yet in a short time others will
take up their weapons to fight against them, and what served to destroy the
present Church will be as effectual to overthrow that, which shall be set up in
its room: so that whatever alteration is made, if this be allowed for a
sufficient ground of it, viz. to avoid the Offense that some men take at the
present constitution, yet still we shall be but where we were, and new Offenses
will arise, and so there must be continual changing and altering, to gratify
the unreasonable humors and fancies of Men; and should any one party of
Dissenters amongst us get their Form of Government and Worship established by
Law, I doubt not but they would Preach to us the very same Doctrine, we do now
to them. They would tell us that private persons must bend and conform to the
Laws, and not the Laws to private persons; that it was our own fault that we
were Offended; that our weakness proceeded from our unwillingness to receive
instruction; that the weak were to be governed, not to prescribe to their
Governors; that we must not expect that what was with good reason appointed
and ordered should be presently abrogated or changed out of compliance with
Men's foolish prejudices and mistakes. It is sufficiently known how strict and
rigorous both the Presbyterians and Independents are and have been where they
have had any advantage, and what little consideration or regard they have had
of their Dissenting Brethren, tho they would have us so tender of them.

Thus much I think sufficient to show that the Precept of Obedience to
Superiors in things Lawful is more obligatory, than the Precept of avoiding
Scandal; whence it follows that it is our duty to obey in such instances, tho
Offense may be taken at it, because no sin is to be committed for the avoiding
Scandal.

I might from this head further argue, that if we must not commit any sin to
avoid giving Offense, then it is not Lawful to Separate from our
Parish-Churches upon that account; because all voluntary Separation from a
Church, in which nothing that is unlawful is required as a condition of
Communion, is the sin of Schism, and that is a sin of the blackest dye and
greatest guilt, noted the in Scriptures for an act of carnality, a work of the
Flesh and of the Devil; for the necessity of our coming to Church, and
Worshipping God in the same public place with our Neighbors, and submitting
to the Government, Discipline and Customs of that particular Church we live in,
does not depend only upon the Statutes of the Realm which enforce it, and the
Command of the Civil Magistrate who requires it; but by the Law of our Religion
all needless Separation or Division amongst Christians, breaking into little
Parties and Factions, from whence comes strife, envying, confusion and every
evil work, is to be most carefully avoided, as the very bane of Christianity,
the rending of Christ's body, and as utterly destructive not only of the peace,
but of the being of a Church. So that should all the Laws about Conformity and
against Conventicles be rescinded and voided, should the Magistrate indulge or
connive at the Separate Assemblies, yet still this would not make our joining
with them not to be sinful. Since to preserve the unity of Christians and one
Communion, is the necessary duty of every member of the Church, and it can
never be thought a justifiable thing, to cut off our selves from the Communion
of the Church or the Body of Christ, out of compliance with any erring or
ignorant Brethren. But the sinfulness of withdrawing from the Communion of our
Church, either totally or in part, has been so evidently shown in some late
discourses written on that subject, that I do despair of convincing those of
the danger of it, who can withstand the force of all that has been already
offered to them: I only conclude thus much, that there is far more of the sin
of uncharitableness in such Separation and Division, than there can be in all
the Offense that is imagined to be given by our Conformity.

From what I have already at large discoursed it plainly follows, that they are
things merely indifferent, not only in their own nature, but also in respect to
us, in the use of which we are obliged to consider the weakness of our
Brethren. What is our duty must be done, tho Scandal follow it: What is evil
and sinful ought to be left undone upon the score of a greater obligation, than
that of Scandal; but now in matters, wherein our practice is not determined by
any Command, we ought so to exercise our liberty, as if possible to avoid
giving any Offense to our Brethren. This is an undoubted part of that charity,
which one Christian ought always to be ready to show to another, by admonition,
instruction, good example, and by the forbearance of things Lawful, at which he
foreseeth his Neighbor out of weakness will be apt to be Scandalized, to
endeavor to prevent his falling into any sin or mischief; and this we teach
and press upon our People as much as Dissenters themselves can, in obedience to
St. Paul's rules about meats and days, things neither in themselves good or
evil, nor determined by any Authority, and therefore they were every way a
proper instance, wherein Christians might exercise their charity and compassion
one to the other; and in such cases St. Paul declares, that he would rather
wholly forego his liberty, than by these indifferences endanger the Soul of his
Brother; as in that famous place 1 Cor. 8. 13. If meat make my Brother to
offend, I will eat no Flesh while the World stands, lest I make my Brother to
Offend; where by Flesh and meat is to be understood such as had been Offered
unto Idols, which tho lawful for a Christian to eat at common meals, yet the
Apostle would wholly abstain from, rather than wound the weak Conscience of a
Brother. If I by the Law of charity (as the Reverend Bishop Taylour says,
Great exemp. p. 420) must rather quit my own goods than suffer my Brother to
perish, much rather must I quit my privilege. And, We should ill die for our
Brother, who will not lose a meal to prevent his sin, or change a dish to save
his Soul; and if the thing be indifferent to us, yet it ought not to be
indifferent to us whether our Brother live or die.

After this manner do we profess our selves ready to do or forbear any thing in
our own power, to win and gain our Dissenting Brethren to the Church. We grant
that those, who conform, are obliged by this Law of charity not needlessly to
vex and exasperate our Dissenters, nor to do any thing which they are not bound
to do, that may estrange them more from the Church; but to restrain themselves
in the use of that liberty God and the Laws have left them, for the sake of
peace and out of condescension to their Brethren. We dare not indeed omit any
duty we owe to God, or our Superiors either in Church or State, nor can we
think it fit and reasonable, that our Apostolical Government, Excellent
Liturgy, Orderly Worship of God used in our Church, should all be presently
condemned and laid aside, as soon as some Weak men take Offense at them; but in
all other things, subject to our own ordering and disposal, we acknowledge our
selves bound to please our Brother for his good unto Edification.

I only add here, that this very rule of yielding to our Brother in things
indifferent and undetermined ought to have some restrictions and limitations,
several of which are mentioned by Mr. Jeans, whom I have so often named; as
First, That we are not to forbear these indifferent things, where there is only
a possibility of Scandal, but where the Scandal consequent is probable; for
otherwise we should be at an utter loss and uncertainty in all our actions, and
never know what to do. Secondly, Our weak Brethren must have some probable
ground for their imagination that what we do is evil and sinful, or else we
must wear no Ribbands, nor put off our Hats, but come all to Thou and Thee; and
for this exception he gives this substantial reason, that if we are to abstain
from all indifferent things, in which another without probable ground imagines
that there is sin, the servitude of Christians under the Gospel would be far
greater and more intolerable, than that of the Jews under the Mosaical
administration. Thirdly, This must be understood of indifferent things that are
of no very great importance; for if it be a matter of some weight and moment,
as yielding me some great profit, I must only for a while forbear it, until my
Brother is better informed. Lastly, We must not wholly betray our Christian
liberty to please peevish and froward people, or to humor our Neighbor in an
erroneous and superstitious opinion; for which he quotes Mr. Calvin, who in his
Comment upon 1 Cor. 8. 13. tells of some foolish Interpreters, that leave to
Christians almost no use at all of things indifferent, upon pretense to avoid
the Offense of Superstitious persons.

Now tho all this is generally true, yet I think there are no certain
unalterable rules to be laid down to direct our practice in this affair. For it
being an exercise of charity, must be determined by the measures of prudence
according to circumstances, and we may as well go about to give certain rules
for Men's charity in other cases, and fix the proportion, which every Man ought
to give of his estate toward the relief of the poor, as positively to tell how
far a Man must deny himself in the use of indifferent things, and forego his
own liberty for the sake of his Brother, and so I end this head with those
words of the learned Dr. Hammond in his little Treatise of Scandal: This whole
matter is to be referred to the Christians pious discretion or prudence, it
being free to him either to abstain, or not to abstain, from any indifferent
action (remaining such) according as that piety, and that prudence shall
represent it to be most charitable and beneficial to other Men's Souls. Thus I
have done with the first proposition, that nothing sinful is to be committed to
avoid Scandalizing others.

2. I proceed now to the Second, that to avoid a less Scandal being taken by a
few we must not give a greater Offense, and of vastly more pernicious
consequence to a much bigger number of persons: Not that such a case can ever
happen, wherein we must necessarily give just Offense to one side or other, and
so are uncharitable, whether we do or forbear to do the same action; for then
we should be under a necessity of sinning, which implies a contradiction, but
yet it may and often does happen, that some weak persons may take Offense at my
doing, and others be more Offended at my forbearing to do the same thing, and
thus whether I do it, or not, I shall give Offense, tho not justly, nor through
my own fault, to some one or other. In such circumstances therefore we are to
consider, which way is given the greater and more dangerous Offense, and it can
never be either prudence or charity to abstain from that, which may Scandalize
our Brother, when by forbearance a greater and more public Scandal is
ministered to others; for in this case we have greater reason on the account of
Scandal it self to do, than to forbear that action, as all that write on this
subject do and must acknowledge, and for which they usually quote that saying
of Bernard, Prudenter advertendum est scandalum scandalo non emendari, etc. We
are prudently to mark that one Scandal is not mended by another; which kind of
emendation we should practice, if to take off offense from one party, we give
offense unto another.

This was the occasion of that famous Contest between the two great Apostles
mentioned in the second Chapter of the Epistle to the Galatians, St. Peter had
freely conversed with the Gentile Christians, and had eat with them all kind of
meats; but afterward when certain believing Jews from Jerusalem, who were
still (...) to the dissatisfaction and Offense of all the other Dissenters, who
have as good a right to this Plea of weakness as themselves.

3. Hereby great Offense is given to all those who do conform; for this
Separation from the Church is a public condemning of the Government, Orders,
Discipline or Doctrine of our Church, and is apt to breed scruples and
perplexities in well meaning, but less knowing members of it, and by degrees
produces a distaste or dislike of our Worship, and plainly hinders the efficacy
of the ordinances of Christ as administered in our Church, whilst it creates
prejudices in people against them as impure and corrupt; and why there should
not be a due regard had to those many, who are Offended at our Dissenters
Conventicle Worship, as well as of those, who are said to be Scandalized by our
Church service, I cannot at all guess. I shall only say here, that irreverent
sitting at the receiving the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, Men's unmannerly
wearing their Hats in time of Divine Worship, and oftentimes putting them off
but half way at their Prayers, their indecent postures and antic gestures at
their devotions, the extravagancies and follies (not to say worse) some of them
are guilty of in their extemporary effusions, the strange uncouth Metaphors and
Phrases they use in their Preaching; in a word, the slovenly performance of
Divine Worship amongst the Dissenters is much more Scandalous, then all the
Ceremonies of our Church can ever be.

4. Consider the Scandal that is hereby given to Magistrates and our
Superiors, by bringing their Laws and Authority into contempt; concerning
which the forenamed Mr. Jeans in his first Edition of his Discourse about
Abstinence from all Appearance of Evil, has these words, If, says he, it were
better to be thrown into the bottom of the Sea with a Millstone about ones
Neck, than to offend a little one, a poor and illiterate Artizan, what
expression shall we then find answerable to the heinousness of a Scandal given
to a Pious Magistrate, to a Religious Prince, to a Parliament, and Convocation,
to an whole Church and Commonwealth?

5. By this Separation from the Church, great Scandal is given to the Papists;
not that they are displeased at it; they are not indeed offended in that sense,
but this serves wonderfully to harden them in their false and Idolatrous
Worship; it increases their confidence, that their Church is the only true
Church of Christ, because amongst them only is found Peace and Unity; and this
is a mighty temptation to many wavering Christians to turn Papists: insomuch
that Mr. Baxter has told us, that Thousands have been drawn to Popery, or
confirmed in it by this Argument already, and he says of himself, that he is
persuaded, that all the Arguments else in Bellarmin, and all other Books that
ever were written, have not done so much to make Papists in England, as the
multitude of Sects among our selves. This indeed is a great Scandal to our
Protestant Religion, and is that which the Papists are on all occasions so
forward to object against us, and hit us in the teeth with; and by our hearty
uniting with the Church of England, we may certainly wrest out of their hands
the most dangerous weapon they use against the Reformation.

6. This tends to the Scandal of Religion in general. It prejudiceth men
against it as an uncertain thing, a matter of endless dispute and debate; it
makes some Men utterly reject it as consisting mostly in little trifles and
niceties about which they observe the greatest noise and contention to be made
or as destructive of the Public Peace of Societies, when they see what
dangerous feuds and quarrels commence from our Religious Differences, and all
the disorder and confusion that they have caused here in England, shall by some
be charged upon Christianity it self.

Thus our causeless Separations and Divisions open a wide door to Atheism, and
all kind of Profaneness and Irreligion: After this manner it was of old, and
always will be, where there are Parties in Religion, and one contends that
their Separation is lawful, and the other that it is unlawful, the Common
people soon become doubtful and ready to forsake all Religion.

I might add here, that such Separations necessarily occasion breach of
Charity; they beget implacable enmities and animosities: Hence comes strife,
emulation, envying, one Party continually endeavoring to overtop the other,
watching for one another halting, rejoicing in one another sins and
misfortunes, constant undermining one another, to the disturbance of the
Public Government, and endangering the Civil Peace; of all which and much more
than I can now mention the present distracted condition of our Nation is so
great and undeniable an evidence, that there need no more words to show the
mischiefs that attend such Divisions; and now let any one judge, whether the
Peace and Unity of the Church, the maintaining of Charity amongst Brethren, the
keeping out Popery, and Atheism, the preservation of the Authority of the
Magistrate, and quiet of the Society we are Members of, the honor and credit
of our Religion. Lastly, Whether giving Offense to all both Conformists and
Nonconformists, those only excepted of our own particular Sect and Division,
nay Scandalizing them also in the true and proper sense of Scandal, be not of
far greater and more weighty consideration, than the fear of displeasing or
grieving some few weak dissatisfied Brethren; Woe to those, by whom Offenses
come. But these things I have very lightly touched, because they have been the
subject of many Sermons and discourses lately published.

To sum up all I have said,

Since they, who dissent from the Church of England, are not such weak persons
as St. Paul all along describes and provides for; since we cannot by our
Conformity really Scandalize or Offend them in that sense, in which the
Scriptures use those words; since tho we did give Offense to them by our
Conformity, yet that would not excuse us from doing our Duty, and by refusing
to Conform we should do both them and others greater hurt and mischief; I think
I may safely conclude, that there cannot lie any obligation upon any private
Christian (as the case now stands amongst us) to absent himself from his
Parish Church, or to forbear the use of the Forms of Prayer or Ceremonies by
Law appointed, for fear of Offending his weak Brethren.

I end all with one word of Advice. First, to those who are not convinced of
the lawfulness of Conformity. Secondly, to those who are satisfied that it is
lawful.

1. To those who are not convinced of the lawfulness of Conformity, and
therefore urge so hard that they ought not to be Offended by us. I would
beseech them that they would take some care and make some Conscience to avoid
giving any needless Offense to those of the Church of England, and this cannot
but be thought a reasonable request, since they require all others to be so
tender of them. They ought not therefore to meet in such numbers, nor at the
same time at which we assemble to Worship God in our public Churches. Let them
not affront our Service and Common Prayers, nor revile our Bishops and
Ministers, nor put on their Hats when at any time they chance to be present at
our Service in our Churches, nor talk nor read in Books, nor make sour faces at
our Devotions, and when they observe these and other the like rules, they may
then with a better grace (tho with little reason) find fault with our
Conformity as Offensive to them. I would be loath to say any thing, that should
exasperate or provoke any of the Dissenters whose satisfaction I design: I very
well know their weakness, that they cannot endure to be told of their faults.
However I must tell them, that there are no sort of persons in the Christian
World professing Religion and Godliness, that have done such Scandalous things,
as some of those who call themselves Protestant Dissenters. I forbear to name
particulars.

2. As for those who are satisfied concerning the lawfulness of Conformity, I
would desire them so to order their return to the Church, as not to give any
just Offense to those whom they forsake; that is to say, that they would do it
heartily and sincerely, that all may see they Conformed with a willing mind,
being persuaded that it is their duty so to do, and not merely to satisfy the
Law, or to save their Purses, or to get into an Office, or to capacitate them
to Vote or the like. For such a kind of Conformity, as some practice, and call
Occasional Communion, which is coming to Church and Sacrament to serve a turn,
is truly Scandalous to all good Men of what persuasion soever.

FINIS.

