His Majesty's Declaration to the Ministers, Freeholders, Farmers, and
substantial Copyholders of the County of York: Assembled by His Majesty's
special Summons at Heworth-Moor, near the City of York, on Friday the 3. of
June. 1642.
WE would have you to be assured that we never intended the least neglect unto
you in any former Summons of the Country, Our love, as well as Our protection,
extending to all Our Subjects, But as you are a great Body, time and
convenience must be observed in your Assembling.

That you may know the general Reasons of Our being here, you must understand,
That when We found it neither safe, nor honorable, to expose Our Person to the
tumultuous and licentious proceedings of many (which to this day are
unpunished) who did disorderly approach near Our Court at Whitehall, We trusted
this part of Our Dominions chiefly to reside in; whereas most of the Gentry
already have, so We assure Our selves the rest of you will give Us clear
testimony of your service and obedience, which we will never use otherwise then
for the defense of the true Orthodox Religion professed and settled in Queen
Elizabeth's time, and confirmed by the Authority of the Statutes of this Realm,
the defense of the Laws and Fundamental Constitutions of this Kingdom (as the
justest Measure and Rule for Our Prerogative, and your Liberties and Rights;)
and lastly, for the preservation of the Peace of this Kingdom.

As for Our own Zeal to the Protestant profession, We refer all the world to
Our daily exercise of, and Our Declarations concerning it, and execution of the
Laws against the Papists; so likewise We cannot but declare Our Self most
heartily sorry to find such Separatists and Schismatics, who presume against
the Law, to foment new Doctrines and Disciplines to the disturbance of Church
and State.

For the Law, it being the common inheritance of Our people, we shall never
enforce any Prerogative of Ours beyond it, but submit Our Self to it, and give
you, and all Our Subjects the fullest latitude of it, both for the liberty of
your Persons, and the propriety of your estates. And for the inviolable
confidence and assurance hereof, as We take God (the Searcher of all hearts) to
witness Our real intention herein, so We shall no longer desire you to stand
for the defense of Our Person, Honor, and just Prerogatives, then we shall
maintain the Laws of the Land, the liberty of your persons and the propriety of
your Goods.

And for the clear understanding of Our Resolutions to maintain Peace, we may
have the confidence and happiness to refer (against all malignity whatsoever)
to Our former Sixteen years Reign; (too long to dissemble Our Nature) if in all
this time We never caused the effusion of one drop of blood, it must needs be
thought, that in Our riper judgment in Government, We should never open such
Issues as might drown Us and Our Posterity in them: But we are sure to have no
enemies, but in the defense of the true Protestant Profession, the Right of the
established Laws, and for the preservation of peace, and certainly all these
must be all yours, as well as Our enemies.

And to the end that this present Posture wherein we meet, should not affright
you with the distempers of the times, the Example of the two Houses having made
Us prepare for a Guard to Us and Our Childrens Persons, We wish you to look
into the Composition and Constitution of it, and you will find it so far from
the face or fear of War, that it serves to secure you, as well as Us, from it:
For Our Choice is of the prime Gentry, and of one Regiment of Our Trained
Bands, which cannot be thought to oppress the Country-(being their own) nor
war with themselves. And we further assure you, We never intended to use
Forraigners or disaffected in Religion: And that you may fully assure your
selves of Our sole dependancy upon the love and service of Our own People, to
live and die with them, We have armed these Our Subjects; which had been most
irrational, if we had ever intended to have used Strangers: And further, you
may perceive that We receive none, but such as stand clear in Loyalty and
Religion, for which reason We have caused the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy
to be given them. Likewise, to prevent any distempers at home, We have, and
shall put the Trained-Bands of all this Our Kingdom under the Command of
Persons of honor, confidence, and affection to their Country, straightly
charging, upon their Allegiance, no Officer to accept any command in them, nor
Soldiers to obey any, save such as are authorized by Us. And for the
prevention of any innovated power over you, you shall have Us here to govern
you, and the Souldiory to protect you in peace, and to relieve you against all
oppressions; for that, as we have told you before, must arise from some great
violation (which we hope God will prevent) and not from this preparation of our
Subjects. Therefore let none of you be affrighted with vain fears; if such a
War should follow, it follows the authors home to their own doors: And such (by
the confidence of Our Person with you) We assure Our Self you are not.

Here We had left you to your fidelity and duty, had not some malicious
insolence in Our former meetings sent forth most presumptuous Summons,
deceiving Our people, and presuming upon Our Royal Authority; and these
present themselves as great Defenders or Religion, peace, and liberty; Whereas
they become infectious, and contagious to the people, seducing them into vain
fancies and delusions, as may appear by their Warrants which we could trace to
some pulpits, as We are credibly informed: And you see it were just in Us, to
punish these as Authors of sedition, but that it would be too great a favor,
for it would honor them with the Title of Martyrdom, for Gods cause, as they
vainly pretend: But you may now see from whence this Spirit comes, that would
make Us to be in the Act of destruction of Religion, Our person a disturber of
the peace, and ready to introduce slavery. These here are all the foreign
Forces We have, or ever shall intend to have, to act these great designs,
notwithstanding the vain fears hitherto imagined. So that you see it is high
time that these fancies were dispersed and driven away, that We might be
repaired in Honor and Interest, and you enjoy the blessing of peace and
happiness; the advancement whereof shall be Our study and comfort: and
therefore We shall (when you shall think it a convenient time) ease you in the
number of the Trained-Bands: And for your Billet-money, it had been long since
paid, but that no part of the Subsidies (which We passed for that purpose) came
to Our hands, and We shall not be wanting in any thing that lies in Us, for
the full satisfaction thereof: And shall make Our Grace and Bounty to you
answerable to your best fidelity and loyalty, as occasion shall be offered to
Us.

Imprinted first at York, and now Reprinted at London for Edward Husbands.
1642.


