THE FIXED SAINT Held forth in a Farewell SERMON PREACHED At Mary-Aldermanbury,
London. August 17. 1662.

By Mr. EDMOND CALAMY.

LONDON, Printed in the year 1662.

To the Reader.
THe good acceptance that Mr. Calamy's work of faith and labor of love have
found, and the good success they have had among the people of God have
encouraged us to the recommendation of these his last words (wherewith he
commended his people to God, Causab. Enthus l. 6.
and the word of his Grace, Cic. de Somn^ l. 2.
which is able to build them further, Arist de vita^ and More. l. 2. p. 118.
and give them an inheritance among them that are sanctified) to the world.

There is something considerable in the last words of all men; so there are two
things useful and seasonable in these. 1. The cause of affliction to humble us.
2. The use of affliction to instruct us: by the one we learn, That a living man
should not complain, Lam. 3. 39^
a man for the punishment of his sin. By the other^ we learn, That though no
affliction for the present seems joyous, 1 Pet. 1 6, 7, 8,
but is grievous: yet it may yield the peaceable fruit of righteousness to them
who are exercised thereby, wherein we rejoice, though now for a season we are
in heaviness through manifold temptations, that the trial of our faith being
much more precious^ then that of gold, might be found unto our praise, and
honor, and glory at the appearing of Christ, whom we have not seen, yet love
him, in whom now, though we see him not, yet do we believe and rejoice with joy
unspeakable and full of glory.

Mr. Calamies FAREWELL SERMON. August 17^h Ann. Dom. 1662.
Sam. 24. 14. And David said unto Gad, I am in a great strait; let us fall now
into the hand of the Lord (for his Mercies are great) and let me not fall into
the hand of man.
IN which words we have three parts.

1. David's great perplexity and distress, I am in a great strait.

2. David's resolution.

1. Affirmative* Let us fall into the hand of the Lord.

2. Negative, Let me not fall into the hands of man.

3. We have the reason of David's choice, For the mercies of God are great, the
mercies of wicked men are cruel, therefore let me not fall into the hands of
men; but the mercies of God are many and great, therefore let us now fall into
the hands of God.

1. For the first, that is, David's great distress, wherein we must speak.

1. To the distress it self: Then 2. To the person thus perplexed, I am in a
great strait: David a great man, David a godly man.
1. In the perplex^ty it self, we shall consisider:

1. The reality of this perplexity. 2. The greatness of it.
1. For the reality of it: after David had sinned in numbering the people, God
sends the Prophet Gad to him, and puts three things to his choice, as you may
read in ver. 12. God was determined to make David smart for numbering the
people, but leaves it to David's liberty, whether he would have seven years
famine, or three months to flee before his enemies, or three days pestilence:
this was a posing Question, and David had cause to be in a great strait; for
these objects are not amiable in their own nature, they are objects to be
avoided and declined; in the first view of them they seem to be equally
miserable, therefore David had cause to say he was in a strait.

This perplexity was not only real, but exceeding great: I am in a great
strait: and there are two things made this so great.

1. The greatness of the punishments proposed, Famine, Sword, and Plague: these
are the three besomes with which God sweeps mankind from off the earth: these
are Gods three iron whips, by which he chastises sinful man: these are the
three arrows shot out of the quiver of Gods wrath, for the punishment of man,
they are, as one calls them, Tonsurae humani generis. In Revel. 6. you shall
read of four Horses, when the four first Seals were opened: a white horse, a
red horse, a black horse, and a pale horse: after Christ had ridden on the
white horse propagating the Gospel, then follows the red horse, a type of War,
then the black Horse, an Hieroglyphick of Famine; then the pale horse, the
emblem of Pestilence. Now God was resolved to ride on one of these horses, and
David must choose upon which God should ride; this was a great strait: Let me
present David's lifting up his eyes to Heaven, and speaking to God thus: O my
God, what is this message thou have sent me? Thou offerest me three things: I
am in a strait, I know which to refuse, but which to choose I know not: shall
the Land of Canaan, a Land flowing with milk and honey, shall this Land endure
seven years famine, and be turned into a wilderness, and dispeopled? and shall
I, whose hands thou have taught to fight, and whose fingers to war, shall I
that have subdued all my enemies, shall I in my old age, and all my Captains,
fly three months before our enemies and be driven to Caves and Rocks to hide
ourselves? O thou my God, who art my refuge, shall I and my people be a prey to
the pestilence that walks in darkness and destruction, that walks at noon
day? O my God, I know not what to do, I am in a great strait.

2. The second reason why this strait was so great, was because of the guilt of
sin that lay on David's spirit: for David knew that this severe message was the
fruit of the sin he committed in numbering the people: but you will say, why was
it a sin in David to number the people? Moses had often numbered the people,
three times, and it was not counted sin; Josephus answers, the sin of David
was, because he did not require the half Shackle he was to have had from all
were numbered Exodus 30. 12. 13.

Others said, he sinned in numbering all ages, whereas he was to number but from
20 years; but these are but conjectural reasons: I conceive the sin of David
was because he did it without a lawful call, and for an unlawful end, si^e
causa Legitima: he sinned in the manner rather then in the matter; for there
was no cause for him to number the people but curiosity, and no end but vain
glory: go through all the tribes of ^srael and number the people, that I may
know the number of my people, ver 2. David's heart was lifted up with pride, and
creature-confidence; he begins to boast of the multitude of his people, and to
trust in an arm of flesh; therefore God sends the Prophet to David to prick the
bladder of his pride: as if God should say, I will teach you to number the
people, by lessening the number of your people. Now the burden of his sin did
add much to the burden of his heavy message; ver. 13. After David had numbered
the people, his heart smote him: the message smites him, and his heart smites
him, and he said, I have sinned greatly in that which I have done: now I
beseech thee take away the iniquity of thy servant, for I have done very
foolishly. If David had been to suffer this great punishment out of love to
God, or for a good conscience, he would not have been so distressed: There are
two sorts of straits in Scripture: some suffered for God and a good conscience:
and there are straits suffered for sin.

1. There are straits suffered for God and a good conscience. Heb. 11. 36, 37.
those Martyrs there were driven to great straits: but these were straits for
God and a good Conscience, and these straits were the Saints greatest
enlargements, they were so sweetened to them by the consolations, and
supportations of Gods Spirit; a prison was a paradise to them. Heb. 10. 34.
they look joyfully at the spoiling of their goods. Acts 5. 41. they departed
from the presence of the Council, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to
suffer shame for his name. Straits for a good conscience are greatest
enlargements; therefore Paul gloryeth in this strait, Paul a prisoner, etc.

2. There are straits suffered for sin, and these are envenomed by the guilt of
sin: sin puts poison into all our distresses and perplexitys Now such was the
strait into which David was now driven: it was a strait caused by sin, and that
made it so unwelcome and uncomfortable: so that from hence I gather this
Observation.

Doct. That sin and iniquity brings persons and nations into marvelous
labyrinths and perplexitys: into true real and great molestations: a man free
from sin, is free in the midst of straits: a man guilty of sin, is in a strait
in the midst of freedom.

After Adam had sinned in eating of the forbidden fruit, the whole world was a
prison to him: Paradise it self was an Hell to him, he knew not where to hide
himself from the presence of God. After that Cain had murdered his Brother
Abel, he was brought into such a strait, that he was afraid that every one that
met him would slay him. Alas poor Cain, how many was there then in the world?
we read but his father and mother, yet such was his distress, that he cries
out, every one that met him would slay him, Gen 4. 14. Into what a strait did
sin bring the old world? the deluge of sin brought a deluge of water to drown
them. Into what a strait did sin bring Sodom and Gomorrah? the fire of lust
raining in Sodom and Gomorrah, brought down fire from Heaven to destroy them.
Sin brings external, internal, and eternal straits upon persons and nations.

1. Sin brings external straits; sin brings Famine: Sword, and Plague; Sin
brings Agues and Feavours, Gout and Stone, and all manner of Diseases: yea, sin
brings death it self, which is the wages of sin. Read Levit. 26. and Deuteronomy. 23.
and you will see a black roll of courses, which were the fruit of sin. Sin
brought Sion into Babylon; and when the Jews had murdered Christ, forty years
after they were brought into that distress, when the City was besieged by Titus
Vespatian, that they did eat one another, the Mother did eat her child; that
whereas David had a choice which of the three he would have, either Famine,
Plague, or Sword: the poor Jews had all three concatenated together in the
siedge: sin brings all manner of external plagues.

2. Sin brought persons and Nations into internal st^aits: sin brings
soul-plagues, which are worse then bodily plagues: sin brings hardness of
heart, blindness of mind, a spirit of slumber, a reprobate sense; sin brings a
spiritual famine upon a Land; it brings a famine of the word, Amos 8. 11. sin
causes God to take away the Gospel from a people: sin brings internal plagues:
sin wakens conscience, and fills it full of perplexities: Into what a strait
did sin drive Judas, after he had betrayed Christ? Into what a strait did sin
drive Spira? St. Paul gloried in his tribulations for God: but when he speaks
of his sin, he cries out, O miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from
this body of death? David a valiant man when he speaks of sin, says, they are
too heavy a burden for him to bear: A wounded conscience who can bear! says
the Wiseman.

3. Sin brings eternal straits: O the strait that a wicked man shall be
brought into at the great and dreadful day of judgment, when all the world
shall be on fire about him; when he shall call to the mountains to hide him,
and to the rocks to cover him from the wrath of God: then will he cry out with
David, I am O Lord, in a great strait. And when the wicked shall be condemned
to Hell, who can express the straits they then shall be in? Bind them hand and
foot, and cast them into everlasting darkness, Matthew. 25. When a wicked man
shall be bound with everlasting chains of darkness, then he will cry out, I am
in a great strait. Consider what Dives says to Abraham: he desires that
Lazarus might but dip the tip of his finger in water, and that he might cool
his tongue: not his whole body, but his tongue: but that would not be granted.

It is impossible the tongue of man should set out the great straits the damned
suffer in Hell, both in regard of the greatness and everlastingnesse of them.

This is all I shall say for Explication.

Use 1. I chiefly aim at the Application: Does sin bring Nations and Persons
into external, internal, and eternal straits? then this sadly reproves those
that choose to commit sin to avoid perplexity. There are thousands in England
guilty of this, that to avoid poverty, will lie, cheat and cozen, and to gain
an estate will sell God and a good conscience: and to avoid the loss of estate
and imprisonment, will do any thing: they will be sure to be of that Religion
which is uppermost: be it what it will. Now give me leave this morning to speak
three things to these sort of men: and O that my words might prevail with them!

1. Consider it is sin only that makes trouble to deserve the name of trouble*
for when we suffer for Gods sake, or a good Conscience, these troubles are so
sweetened by the consolations of heaven, that they are no troubles at all:
therefore in Queen Mary's days the Martyrs wrote to their friends out of
prison, If you knew the Comforts we have in prison, you would wish to be with
us: I am in prison before I am in prison, says Mr. Sanders.

Famous is the story of the three Children: they were in a great strait when
cast into the fiery Furnace; Bind them hand and foot, and cast them into the
Furnace: but when they were there they were unbound, Dan. 3. 25. says
Nebuchadnezzar, Did not we cast three men bound into the midst of the fire? and
lo I see four men loose walking in the midst of the fire, and the form of the
fourth is like the Son of God. I have often told you, when three are cast into
the fire for a good Conscience, God will make the fourth: therefore, I say,
straits and sufferings for God are not worth the name of straits. David was
often driven into straits, 1 Samuel 30. 6. he was sore distressed when his Town
was burnt, and his Wives and Children taken captive by the Amalekites: I, but
that was a distress of danger, not of sin: therefore he encourages himself in
the Lord his God. Iehosaphat was in a great strait, 2 Chronicles. 20. 12. We know
not what to do, says he: this was a strait of danger, not caused by his sin,
and God quickly delivered him: but the strait that David was in, was caused by
his sin, and that made it so bitter. I am loath to enlarge here: Saint Paul was
in a great strait, Phil. 3. 23. but this was a blessed strait, an Evangelical
strait, says Saint Chrysostom, He knew not whether to die for his own sake, or
to live for the Churches sake, were best; he was willing to adjourn his going
to Heaven for the good of the people of God: Nay, christ was in a strait, Luke
12. 15, I have a Baptism to be baptized withal, and how am I straightened till it
be accomplished? I am to shed my blood for my Elect: that is the Baptism he
speaks of.

This was a strait of dear affection to the Elect of God: all these were
blessed straits: but now a strait caused by sin, these are imbittered and
envenomed by the guilt of sin, and sense of Gods wrath. It is sin that makes
straits deserve the name of straits: therefore you are spiritually mad that
commit sin to avoid straits.

2. There is more evil in the least sin, then in the greatest outward calamity
whatsoever: this the world will not believe: therefore Saint Austin says, That
a man ought not to tell a lie, though he might save all the world from hell:
for there is more evil in one lie, then there is good in the salvation of all
the world. I have often told you the story of Saint Austin:says he, If hell
were on one side, and sin on the other, and I must choos one, I would choos
hell rather then sin: for God is the Author of hell, but it is blasphemy to say
he is the Author of sin.There is a famous story of Charles the ninth King of
France,he sent a message to the Prince of Condy a zealous Protestant, gives him
three things to choose, either to go to Mass, or to be put to death, or to
suffer banishment all his life long: says he, Primum Deo juvante nunquam
eligo: The first (God helping) I will never choose, I abhor the idolatry of the
Mass: but for the two other, I leave it to the choice of the King to do as he
pleases, there is more evil in the least sin them the greatest misery.

3. The third thing I would have you consider, that whosoever goes out of Gods
way to avoid danger, shall certainly meet with greater danger. Balaam went out
of Gods way, Numb. 22. 22. and God sent an Angel with a drawn sword, and he
riding upon an Ass, ver. 26. the Angel stood in a narrow place, where was no
way to go from the right hand or from the left: if his Ass had not fallen under
him, he had been run through by the sword of the Angel. Jonah for fear of the
King of Nineveh went out of Gods way, but he met with a mighty Tempest, he met
with a Whale: What do you do when you commit sin? you make way to be cast into
the eternal prison of hell: you destroy your precious souls to save your
perishing bodies.

Use 2. If sin be the father and mother of all perplexity and distresses, then,
I beseech you, let us above all things in the world abhor sin: all the curses
of the Bible are all due only to a sinner; and all the curses not named in the
Bible: for that is observable, Deuteronomy. 28. 36. every plague that is not written
in the book shall light upon him: there are strange punishments to the workers
of iniquity, Job. 31. 3, Is not destruction to the wicked a strange punishment
to the workers of iniquity; sin it brings the sinner to little ease: little
ease at death, little ease at the day of judgment, and little ease in hell,
tribulation and anguish: the word in the Greek is (...), little ease to every
soul that does iniquity. Oh my beloved, will you promise me to look upon sin,
and consider it in all its woeful consequents, as the father, mother, and womb
out of which come external, eternal, and internal straits? more particularly
there are twelve sins I especially command you to take heed of and avoid.

1. Take heed of covetousness: the love of the world will pierce you through
with many sorrows; the love of money is the root of all evil; the love of the
world drowns men in perdition,

2 Take heed of the sin of pride: into what woeful strait did pride bring Haman!
God crossed him in what he most desired: God made him hold the stirrup, while
Mordecai rode in triumph; and God hanged him on the Gallows which he had made
for Mordecai.

3. Take heed of drunkenness; look not on the wine when it gives its color in
the cup, etc. drunkenness will bring you into snares, it will bite like a
Serpent, and sting like an Adder, etc.

4. Take heed of disobedience and rebellion against the Commandments of God:
it brought Jonah to the three nights and three days in the Whales belly.

5. Take heed of fornication, and adultery, and all uncleanness; this brought
Sampson to a woeful strait: this brought David and Solomon into great perplexity.

6. Take heed of oppression, and all acts of injustice: this brought Ahab into
a great strait, insomuch that the dogs licked his blood.

7. Take heed of unnecessary familiarity with wicked men: this brought
Iehoshaphat into a great strait.

8. Take heed of mis-using the Prophets of God: this made God destroy the
Children of Israel without remedy, 2 Chronicles. 36. 15, 16.

9. Take heed of coming profanely to the Lords Table: this brought the Church
of Corinth into a great distress, insomuch as the Apostle says, For this cause
many among you are sick, and many weak, and many fallen asleep.

10. Take heed of loathing the Manna of your souls: this brought the people of
Israel into woeful misery, that God destroyed all their carcasses in the
wilderness, save Joshua and Caleb.

Take heed of slighting the Gospel: this brought Queen Mary's persecution, as
many learned and godly men that fled for Religions sake out of the Land, have
confessed their unthankfulness for, and unfruitfulnesse under the Gospel in
King Edward the sixth's time, brought the persecution in Queen Mary's time.

11. Take heed of losing your first Love: that makes God threaten to take away
his Candlestick.

12. Take heed of profaning the Christian Sabbath, which is much profaned
every where; a day that Christ by his resurrection from the dead has
consecrated, to be kept holy to God: Certainly, if the Jews were so severely
punished for breaking the Sabbath, which was set apart in memory of the
Creation, surely God will severely punish those that break the Sabbath set
apart in memory of Christ's Resurrection. May be some will say, I have committed
many of these sins, but am not brought into any strait. Remember it was nine
months after David had numbered the people, before he was in this strait: but as
sure as God is in heaven, sin will bring straits sooner or later; though a
sinner a hundred years, yet shall he be accursed: may be thy posterity makes
way for thy damnation: and this is thy greatest distress, that thou go on in
sin and prosperity.

Use 3. If sin brings a Nation into mavelous labyrinths, learn what great
cause we have to fear that God should bring this Nation into great distress,
because of the great abominations are committed in the midst of it; our King
and Sovereign was in great straits in the days of his banishment, but God has
delivered him; God has delivered this Nation out of great straits, but alas,
we requite God evil for good, and instead of repenting for old sins, we commit
new sins. I am told there are new oaths invented, oaths not fit to be named in
any place, much less here: Certainly the drunkenness and adultery, the
oppression and injustice, the bribery and Sabbath breaking, the vain and wicked
swearing and for-swearing this Nation is guilty of, must of necessity provoke
God to say of us as he did of them in Jeremiah 15 29 Shall I not visit for
these things, says the Lord? shall not my soul be avenged on such a Nation as
this? God will not only punish us, but be avenged on us. There is no way to
avoid a national desolation, but by a national reformation.

Lastly, learn what cause you of this Congregation and Parish, what cause you
have to expect that God should bring you into great straits, because of your
great unthank^ulness and unfruitfulness under the means of Grace, you that have
so long enjoyed the Gospel; you have had the Gospel in this place in great
abundance; Doctor Tailor he served an apprenticeship in this place* Doctor
Staughton served another apprenticeship: and I, through divine Mercy, have
served three apprenticeships, and half another almost, among you; you have had
the Spirit of God seven and thirty years in the faithful ministry of the Word,
knocking at the door of your hearts, but many of you have hardened your hearts.
Are there not some of you, I only put the Question, that begin to loath the
Manna of your Souls, and to look back toward Egypt again? Are there not some
of you have itching ears, and would fain have Preachers that would feed you
with dainty phrases, and begin not to care for a Minister that unrips your
Consciences, speaks to your hearts and souls, and would force you into heaven
by frighting you out of your sins? Are there not some of you, that by often
hearing Sermons, are become Sermon-proof, that know to sleep and scoff away
Sermons? I would be glad to say there are but few such; but the Lord knows
there are too too many that by long preaching get little good by preaching,
insomuch that I have often said it, and say it now again, there is hardly any
way to raise the p^ice of the Gospel Ministry, but by the want of it: And that
I may not flatter you, you have not profited under the means you have enjoyed;
therefore you may justly expect God may bring you into a strait, and take away
the Gospel from you: God may justly take away your Ministers by death or
otherwise. Have you not lost your first love? why did God take away the Gospel
from the Church of Ephesus, but because they lost their first love? Are you not
like the Church of Laodicea, that are neither hot nor cold? therefore God may
justly spew you out of his mouth; what God will do with you I know not, a few
weeks will determine: God can make a great change in a little time: we leave
all to God; but in the mean time let me commend one Text of Scripture to you,
Ierem. 13. 16. Give glory to the Lord your God, before he cause darkness, an^
before your feet stumble upon the dark mountains, and while ye look for light,
he turn it into the shadow of death, and make it gross darkness. Verse 17. But
if you will not hear it, my soul shall weep in secret places for your pride,
and mine eyes shall weep sore, and run down with tears, because the Lord's
flock is c^rried away captive. Give glory to God by confessing and repenting of
your sins, by humbling your souls before the Lord, before darkness come, and
who knows but this may pre^^nt darkness.

FINIS.

