A Full and Final Proof OF THE PLOT From the REVELATIONS: Whereby the TESTIMONY
of Dr. TITUS OATS and Mr. WILL. BEDLOE is demonstrated to be Jure Divino, And
all Colors and Pretenses taken away that might hinder the Obstinate from
Assenting to the Truth and Sincerity of their EVIDENCE.

Dedicated to all Roman Catholics and Infidels.

By E. C. Doctor of the Civil Law.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Princes Arms, and Jacob Sampson,
next door to the Wonder Tavern in Ludgate Street. M DC LXXX.

THE PREFACE To the MEMBERS of the Romish Church.
NOtwithstanding the Dedication of this Pamphlet be directed to you, I have,
contrary to Custom, addressed it to those of our own Church; the great zeal I
ever had for her Prosperity causing me to observe a considerable Party under
her shelter that expressed but a cool resentment of a Plot, though they cannot
deny one; and my design being as well to confirm the wavering, as to soften the
obstinate, I inferred, they could not be without a just claim to the meaning of
these Papers: And thinking it not proper to link you together, I have chose
rather to make of you Standers-by, and Hearers, in order to a conversion,
whilst I freely exert and lay my self out upon them. I hope to obtain my end
here, whatever ill success I meet with from you; it being the only way I can
propose to secure us from the effect of a Plot; for it is well known, after your
Conspiracies are discovered, your first Artifice is to insinuate an opinion of
your Innocence, and then to induce Men to argue against, and question
Circumstances, by your Arts adulterated and made contradictory, and lastly, to
drill them on to a disbelief of all; than which nothing can he more menacing
the safety of the Government; your Interest hereby being unshaken, and a
Liberty given of entering into new Cabals, and of acting as with more security,
so with more power and strength. I wish you could part with a little of that
stiffness and obstinacy which is seen amongst you all, Reason then might
probably hope to be caressed, and Matters without bitterness impartially
discussed; but I confess I always had slender hopes of your acknowledging a
Conviction in Cases of this nature; and therefore am prone to think my labor
will turn to no account upon so hard and stony a Ground. However, I could not
but give you this opportunity of being disabus'd, in imitation of St. Paul, who
thought it the Duty of his Apostolical Function to preach the Gospel in many
Places where he was assured beforehand it would never be received. I know
there are great difficulties to be encountered before you dare think of owning
a Plot; for the most of you are so enslaved, nose-ring'd, and dragged by your
ambitious Priests, that a Man under their Tuition has no more to do with his
own Soul, than a Bear with his Snout, that veers and answers to every check of
his testy Keeper. A Popish-Priest accounts himself God's Churchwarden of
Souls, seizes them, and manages their Eternal Concerns as he pleases; the
Consciences of his seduced Flock exactly resembling the Poors Boxes that are
made to receive any thing he shall think fit to put in, Brass, Copper, or any
other base Metal; How should we expect then a Confession from you, when your
Priests keep the Keys, and you cannot unlock without them? or if you could,
conscious of the great disparagement and disgrace that would accrue to your
Religion thereby, you would think it your best Interest to deny and for swear
any criminous Informations against you. Again, there is a sort to most of you
comparatively harmless, I mean the modish Sparks of your Church, who will not
acknowledge a Plot in point of Honor, lest it should condemn that Religion
which they believe entailed upon them with their Ancestors Estates; and
therefore judge it as great a scandal to change hereditary Errors, as to assume
new Coats of Arms, and deface the old, both of them being esteemed as the
Ancient Bearings of their Families. But in short, whatever guesses me may make
at the Reasons of your aversion to reveal and discover, this is undeniably
plain and palpable, That you are so muzled by Infallibility, that you must
believe upon pain of damnation every thing your Church says, both in relation
to this Plot, and all other Affairs in the World touching his Holiness. But I
look upon this as a Curse the Almighty usually annexes to a false Religion, to
give the Members of it over to be deluded and infatuated, to have their
Judgments corrupted and depraved, and to create in them a disposition to
believe all manner of Lies, Falsehoods and Dissimulations: And then the
Consequence of this delusion is their having a perverse Notion of Good and
Evil, an inverted sense of Sin and Villainy, which is the sole Cause of that
violent ferment and fever we so often find in distempered Governments. It Is
from hence the Sacred Heroes of your Church endeavor to destroy the Morals and
Religion of Nature it self, to raze out and annihilate the first and greatest
Principles of Humanity; as to account it no breach of the 6th Commandment to
kill any that shall not favor their Designs, or cherish their Opinions; to
state it as a Meritorious Act to murder the Lord's Anointed, when they have
branded him with the mark of Heretic; as assuring the impious Aggressor he
will be hurried to Heaven, though the Almighty has declared he shall be damned.
These outrages of Barbarity they practice, as necessary Requisites to promote
the Interest and Pomp of your Church; the Commission of all kinds of Sins, they
account but a slight cracking the Tables of Stone, which because it is done
upon the score of God and Religion, any of their wicked Casuists can cement,
and make more firm than ever. Religion heretofore recommended it self to the
World by the Piety and Virtue of its Votaries; they that led the best and most
innocent Lives, were concluded to be of the soundest Opinions, and worthy the
Imitation of Good Men; but now the Scene is changed, a modern fashion has
invaded us that is better received, and more zealously practiced: Men in these
times choose their Religion by the viciousness of her Professors; he that can
show the largest Catalogue of Crimes, is supposed to have acted best for the
Honor and Reputation of his Church; the most eminent Sinner is adjudg'd the
greatest Saint; and as we reckon him a sneaking Butcher that never stole a
Hide, or killed a Sheep, so he, by the Pope, is reputed a rascally Jesuit, of
a spurious Litter, that has not fired a House, or stabbed a Justice. The first
Order and Discipline in your Seminaries, for the training up Youth, is long
since taken to pieces, and a new one Instituted; your Novices are instructed
not in talkative Argument for Religion, but a real athletick Contest for it;
your Schools of Disputation are turned into those of Fencing; and he that can
boast himself the greatest Proficient in the Art of Poisoning, slight of
Stabbing, and skill in making Fireballs, is esteemed better qualified for the
Service of Holy Church, the Defense of her Usurpations, than either of her
Impertinent Champions Baronius or Bellarmine. And I must confess, you have hit
upon right Measures, this is infallibly the most expedite and successful manner
of promoting Religion that can be; that of Reason and Argument is very
teadious, and People are won but slowly by it; in this Case, if you meet with a
Man tough and tenacious of his own Sense, it is but cutting his Throat, and the
Work is done; for it is in effect gaining a Proselyte by destroying a Heretic.
Gentlemen, in short, I am of opinion, it is as impossible to find a violent
Papist without a Head full of crafty Designs and Tricks to advance the credit
of his Religion, as it is to conceive any Man to be careless and negligent of
the thing he most esteems and values; but that which most impetuously drives
you on in the pursuit of your aims, is a persuasion that your Works justify,
and are merit of themselves to save you, without the necessary condition of a
good Life; and within this Magic Circle the Devil himself wants skill to
fright you; no hazards, no wickedness can daunt you. Hanging and Quartering you
embrace as the Illustrious Badges of Martyrdom, and what we term the ignominy
and desert of Traitors, you call the Glory and Reward of Saints; so that
Justice which should lop off and deaden your Villainies, by this means seems
preposterously to assist and succor them, and to give life to new Plots by
preventing the old. And, Gentlemen, will you not confess there is a Plot? Will
you deny that your Priests are of such restless and furious Tempers? Will you
still style it the slander of Innocence, the misfortune of Good Men, and the
affliction of Saints? with the same Impudence we expect you will deny the noted
Powder Plot, the savage Massacre in Ireland, the several Barbarous
Assasinations in France, others in Poland and Lituania. You will deny too, that
some of your harmless Jesuits were hanged in, and the rest drove out of China
by the Emperor for their Plots and Underminings there. It Is not long since
they grew so dangerous in the Court of France, that they were sentenced to
perpetual banishment by that Monarch; and though by their subtilties and arts
they have wound themselves in again, yet he employs them with the same fear and
circumspection the Common People do Fire, which though it be necessary to warm
them, and boil or roast their Meat, yet are they loath to trust it out of
sight, without a faithful Watchman. Therefore, Gentlemen, be better natured,
acknowledge you have your share of evil and turbulent Men; they are in all
Societies more or fewer, it is no shame to own it. This is all I desire and beg
of you, 'twill be a great Point gained, and the most reasonable request in the
World, for then you cannot say it is impossible there should be a Plot; there
may be one, and there may not, shall be your Card, which is the fittest
Preparative I can hope or wish for in order to your candid reading the
following Pages.

Farewell.

A Full and Final Proof OF THE PLOT From the REVELATIONS: Whereby the TESTIMONY
of Dr. TITUS OATS and Mr. WILL. BEDLOE is demonstrated to be Jure Divino, etc.
Dear Brethren of the Church of England,
THE prevailing Motive (as I hinted before) toward this Essay, is my great
Concern at the unbelief of some, and the doubts of others about the late Popish
Plot; having heard Men of all sorts and Qualities in Coffee-houses, and at
other public Meetings, constantly singling out this for the Topic of their
Discourse. Amongst this Mixture of Men, as their Sense is differing, so their
Opinions are various; some doubting and questioning many Circumstances of the
Evidence; others objecting against the Reputation and Honesty of the Witnesses;
one condemning the Plot in gross, looking upon it as a Forgery, and mere
Fiction of Interest to depress the Romish Faction; another concluding it a sly
Trick of demeur Jack Presbyter to set the Papist and the Loyal Protestant to
worry one another; to weaken and enfeeble the Party of the Church of England,
and then, like a Rebellious Cheat, to vault himself into the great Saddle of
Government. It Is not my purpose to determine which of these Designs the Plot
was formed for; a Plot there was, and for ought I know still is, against the
best of Kings, the Purest of Religions, and the freest of Governments: And of
how dangerous a Consequence it is not to have a firm and earnest belief of this
Plot, is the whole design of this Pamphlet to insinuate. As I always thought,
usurping the Sovereignty of Censure, and assuming the Monopoly of Judging, was
not to be tolerated; so on the other side I ever looked upon a looseness of
talking, and liberty of thinking any thing, no less insupportable, and
therefore concluded extravagancies in belief were as punishable by the
Magistrate, as Corruptions in Manners; Errors in Opinion upon any small disgust
of the disaffected Party being soon hatched into disorders and breaches of the
public Peace and Repose. Thus it is in relation to the Plot; if every Man must
be his own Carver, and permitted to believe what he pleases of it, it will soon
dwindle into a Chymera, and vanish into the contempt of a Romance; for whilst
one denis what the other believes, and a third rejects what both of them
believe, and so forward, till there are as many Opinions as Men, and these
proceeding from perverse Apprehensions, Passions or Interest, must necessarily
enervate the force and reality of a Plot; for though all the matter of Fact and
Substance of it be not disowned by any one singly, yet if you take them all
together, and allow every man the refusal of his Particular, you will find by
calculation the whole Fabric no more than a strong Phantasm, or Enthusiastic
Vision; and this great Machine but a stately Paper-Building contrived to amuse
and afright an easy and credulous People. It Is necessary therefore in this
distraction to establish an Hypothesis, on which to rear a certain and unerring
Belief; humane Reason, I know, wants Sinews to effect it, every one being
conceited of his Talent, and thinking it as much against the privilege and
freedom of Nature to have Sense imposed upon him, as Chains: We must have
recourse to a more awful Standard, to a Supreme Being, that has an absolute
Authority over our Opinions, a despotick Power to control our Thoughts, and to
set up an universal unanimity in Belief sifted from the spurious Whimsies of
Ignorance and Conceit. To settle in all Men such an entire confidence and
assurance of this damnable Conspiracy, I do my business, if I prove, that the
Evidence of Dr. Titus Oats and Mr. William Bedloe is Jure Divino, of Divine
Authority, and that whatever they say in reference to the Plot, can be no
Contrivance or Figment of their own, but the Dictate of a Spirit long since
promised out of the Revelations by John the Divine. My intended Explanation of
the Text I hope will put the Plot out of all Controversy, and force us all to
confess, that Dr. Oats and Mr. Bedloe discover by Illumination, or a
Supernatural Light, and thereby render their Evidence unquestionably true Jure
Divino. To be short, the Holy Record in John is this, And I will give power
unto my two Witnesses, and they shall prophecy one thousand two hundred and
threescore days clothed in Sackcloth. Revelat. Chap. 11. v. 3.

Ruminating with my self upon the aptness of these words to the present times,
I was invited by my curiosity to reflect and dive into their sense, whereupon I
found they related to other Chapters, as well as the matter in this; their
Latitude comprehending all the remarkable Revolutions foretold by John. But
above all this Verse has such a direct, immediate aspect and intuition upon the
Fall of Babylon, threatened in a following Chapter, which our Protestant Divines
conclude to be the Church of Rome; that it seems to squint only, and look awry
at other Passages, but to appear with a full and gazing face upon this
Prediction. The Prophecy of the Downfall of the Sea of Rome we all know to be
yet uncompleated; the foreboding Signs and Tokens of this Calamity are two
preliminary Witnesses that shall prophecy; and as it is Gods usual Method when
He intends to strike, to give warning of the Blow; so here it was revealed to
John to declare, That the Almighty would send two Witnesses to prophecy, and
give Evidence of the Whoredoms and Villainies of this Spiritual Strumpet, to
discover the dark Intrigues of this Hellish Plot, to bring the Conspirators to
a just Punishment, to free us all from the Tyranny and Yoke of Popery, and
finally to batter down that Monster of Religion, and Bawd of Sin and Iniquity,
the Pope himself. It may perhaps be asked, why Holy John mentions two Witnesses
indefinitely without offering at some description of the Instruments in this
Great Work? I answer, 'twas policy in him to mention them by the general
character of Witnesses; he would not give plain and signal Marks of the Persons
that were by an Eternal Providence pitched upon to over-turn this damnable
Design, an Ignatian sort of People, whom he well knew to be ready charged with
revenge and malice, by such a light given of the Discoverers, might have
murdered or strangled them as Instruments intended to mischief their Cause, and
quench the red-hot Iron upon the Anvel. Without doubt he could have supplied us
with their Names, at least their two first Letters, for this any ordinary
Jugler can do by erecting a Scheme, or casting a Figure; but then this would
have exposed the Divine Mysteries to the busy curiosities of prying Men, who
too often impiously attempt to rifle the Cabinet of Heavens Decrees, and
prostitute them to humane Knowledge: I cannot believe that John talked at
random as Men do in their Dreams, many of his Prophecies have been fulfilled;
and to say he was not privy to the mystic Sense he uttered, were to make no
more of a Prophet than a Puppet, that squeaks by the Voice, and moves by the
Hand of the Manager.

The next thing to be explained is the latter part of the Verse, which says,
They shall prophecy one thousand two hundred and threescore days clothed in
Sackcloth.

By this is suggested Dr. Oates's first disclosing the Intrigue, and heard with
prejudice and aversion, to his great discouragement; telling a wonderful and
strange Story, a hideous and dismal Conspiracy, and not believed; at length
they shall both be received as Oracles of Truth by the Parliament; but by
reason of some Occurrences and Conjunctures of State, that Great Council shall
be Prorogued, and afterward Dissolved; then shall these two Witnesses Prophecy
in Sackcloth, i. e. they shall be for some time under a Cloud, exposed to the
public Censure and Infamy of Cheats, being deprived of that which chiefly
invigorated their Evidence: However, they shall still prophecy, and stoutly
adhere to their first Affirmations, though sorrowful and dejected, and with
heavy Hearts, and sad Countenances, for the safety of the Kingdom, preach up
the imminent danger of a Plot; and so from Parliament to Parliament, till one
thousand two hundred and threescore days are expired, they shall with great
constancy and hopes of Justice expect to have a final Period put to it. And
this I dare avouch is no distorted or wrested Sense of this branch of the
Verse, but a free and natural understanding of the Metaphor. And Ver. 7. of the
same Chapter. When they have finished their Testimony, the Beast that ascends
out of the bottomless Pit, shall make War against them, etc. which interpreted,
is, the Jesuits, with the Remains of an inveterate and cruel malice, shall
persecute, and be ever attempting to revenge the ruin of their Cause upon the
Persons of these two Witnesses. But I foresee it will be asked by the Curious
and Inquisitive, why are only two Witnesses named by the Diviner, when there is
so great a Herd of guilty Reformades come in to give their Testimony of, and
assert the same numerical Plot? why should these be omitted, who are certainly
assisting to win our persuasion of it, and but two mentioned? why, I Will tell
you: Dr. Oats and Mr. Bedloe were the Principal Men commissioned by Providence
to unravel this Bottom of Iniquity; the rest were only followers appointed by
secret Purposes of the Divine Will to Corroborate and Dignifie the Evidence of
the former; it being rather an attendance of State and Triumph annexed to their
Testimony, for the greater splendour of the Protestant Cause; for 'twas not
necessary to intimate any but the Capital Witnesses; the Evidence of Dr. Oats
and Mr. Bedloe being in Law sufficient to hang all the Subjects in England, if
they were guilty. Two Oaths in Court for the King and Country are like a brace
of Dragons that depopulate whole Cities, and devour all they approach; the
zealous breath of honest Witnesses in point of Treason, carrying the same force
with a strong West-wind of Egypt, that in a trice scours and cleanses the Land
from Locusts, Malefactors, and Traitors.

Thus I hope I have made out the sense of John's Prophecy, and I appeal to all
the Orthodox Divines in Europe, if this be not the most proper and genuine
Exposition of the Text.

And now what strange Impiety will it be for any body to deny or question the
Truth of this Plot? We must not censure where Heaven has set his Stamp; when
the Testimony comes from the Eternal source of Truth and Wisdom, it is our duty
to believe, though we despair to apprehend; for where we cannot rely upon our
Reason, we must exercise our Faith. Every good Christian and Loyal Subject
ought to believe as much of the Plot as is positively sworn, nor does it become
us to question or stagger at any thing that they with so much courage and
assurance have asserted. It Is impossible in this case to be imposed upon, or
allured into the snare of Falsehood; for if John were inspired, which we believe
as certainly as the Miracle of Cloven Tongues, we are sure to be grounded upon
a firm Faith: His Prophecy being a secret of Divinity imparted to Illustrate
the Attribute of Gods Goodness, we have no more reason to boggle at the Truth
of the two Witnesses, than the Doctrine of an Apostle: It Is impossible for them
upon this Basis to speak a Falsehood; they are Engines, the Diviner says,
actuated by Him, Witnesses He has chosen to lay open the Destruction our
Enemies designed us. And as it is from hence both irrational and highly
irreligious to deny the Being of a Plot in general; so to clip and pare part of
it off, and believing it by halves, is no less impious; for owning the
Discovery of the whole to Inspiration, 'twere to imply a Contradiction in
Divinity to condemn part, and approve of the rest. We must therefore
acknowledge every tittle of it, or it will be to no purpose to believe it
mincingly. It Is not my design here to discourse of the Probabilities of Men's
Innocence, or Guilt, by weighing Circumstances and Matters in a Humane Method,
and in the Scale of Partial Reason; mine is a shorter and more compendious way,
and not liable to fundamental Errors; Heaven has revealed the Plot, and it is
needless for me to make wrangling scrutiny into it; for after I have done my
best in such a search, I must, whether I will or no, acquiesce in a Supine
Judgment of its truth, because Holy John has said it, and I told you before
whence he had it. But if we should stoop a little to the Cavils of the
Contentious, what would this avail or signify? What if you allege you have
good reasons to doubt of the Truth of some Particulars laid to the charge of
the late Malefactors? Why, suppose you have, the main of the Accusations, and
that which hanged them, was High Treason; the throng of such important business
in a Witnesses Head may easily be conceived to justle out trivial Circumstances
of Time and Place, and trapan him unawares into a false Computation: The
Witness believes it was so and so, there done, and in such an order of time,
and then punctually swears to it; this is no Crime in Conscience; if he errs,
it is only a fault in memory; and so not a Lie, but a mistake, which a Court of
Justice readily passes by and pardons: This Maxim being in vogue with us, as
well as the Romish Casuists; Nemo peccat nisi actu voluntario. So this bubble
of an Objection vanishes. But to humor the Captious a little further. Granting
these are Lies couched under, and mixed with the Truth of the Evidence, and
supposing the Witnesses Knaves, which is the utmost Malice can do; yet cannot I
think there is any reason to separate our selves from a total Belief of every
thing they say, since the main of the Plot, in spite of the most seared
obstinacy in Nature, will compel us to acknowledge a great part of it: And
though we wholly depend upon them for our information, and pin our Faith upon
their sleeves, yet ought we not to be so uncharitable, as to bring a suspicion
of Imposture upon the whole: It Is true, in this case we are liable to abuse,
and if they will deceive us in some things, they may; but for as much as we
want a certain Criterion to judge of, and winnow Truth from Falsehood, and that,
if I choose to be my own Conductor, it is an even Wager but I embrace a Lie, and
reject a saving Truth; therefore if there were a hundred times more of the Plot
sworn than there now is, I think it prudence to swallow all, and disgorge none;
nay, I affirm, if there were ten Millions of Lies, I am obliged by the Law of
Nature slightly to believe them all, rather than earnestly dissent from one
precious Truth, which, unespous'd, would prove my utter ruin; for otherwise
the bloody Machinators have as fair play at our Throats as ever, and the
Discovery will be as ineffectual to frustrate their Designs, as looking upon a
Train of Powder with a lighted Match laid to it, will hinder it from taking
fire: The Sum is then, seeing we cannot distinguish between Truth and Falsehood,
it behooves us passionately to embrace both together for our own safety and
preservation. And pray let this be a Bugbear to no body; for what is there in
all this? Shall I keep a clutter and ado about Assent and Dissent, and in the
interim have my Throat cut for my Curiosity? Shall I grin, and have an ill
opinion of the Evidence, because the Plot is not contrived as I would have
formed it, had I been a Conspirator? This is such Nonsense, as nothing but a
pragmatical conceited Ass would be guilty of: We thank them very heartily for
their Critical Wisdom and Skill in Plots; I am rather persuaded they are angry
and peevish, because it was not rightly projected, and would be though to storm
at the folly of the Design, when they secretly blame the ill fortune and
success of the Undertakers. But it may very materially be urged, That in this
mist of Evidence innocent Men may be condemned wrongfully, their Estates
forfeited, and their Lives taken away, to the great scandal of Government, and
the impious abuse of the Sword of Justice. To this it is answered, That in Cases
of this moment and weight relating to the Body-Politick, it is better that now
and then an Innocent suffer, than that all Malefactors escape; for as in the
Body-natural, laboring under a Fever, the Chyrurgeon, to preserve the whole
Mass from dissolution, draws from it both good and bad Blood together; there
being so subtle and close a union between the corrupted and sound part of it,
that no Art or Skill of his can free the Body of one, without taking a Portion
of the other: So in matters of Justice, it is impossible for any Magistrate to
make such nice discriminations between Innocence and Guilt, as he shall be sure
always to punish one, and acquit the other; bare Innocence being no vindication
of it self, must bring proofs and violent presumptions to plead for it; when
these are wanting, the Law devests her of that Title, and sets her in the rank
of Criminals. But above all, the Witnesses that are upon their Oaths are to be
heard and believed, notwithstanding any contrary conjectures and surmises, an
Oath being to be esteemed and valued with all reverence as the most Sacred
Engagement in the World: And for as much as a Witness is obliged to stake his
Soul (a thing of inestimable price) to the Body of every Man to be Arraigned
and Tried, I think a Judge and Jury are bound in Conscience to belive one,
before the defense of the other; the damnation of a Witnesses Soul being a far
greater loss, and infinitely above any advantage he can propose to himself from
the destruction of his Body whom he Impeaches. There being therefore this vast
disparity between the Condition of the Accused and the Evidence, we ought to
listen to no Stories, or imaginary Allegations of honesty in the reputed
Offenders, but to lay them aside, and proceed to sentence them as Criminals;
and Justice all this while remains unblemished; the Witnesses being her
Compurgators, though, if they be surprised in a Falsehood, they can be none of
their own. Thus the Reputation of well Governed Societies skreens it self from
all Imputations of Cruelty; and the Person condemned is not hereby so much
injured in his Temporal Estate, as bettered in his Spiritual, the most
Important Concern of his Being; for if a Witness is pleased to forfeit Heaven
by Perjury, the dying Man has a clear Conscience to support him under his
misfortune, and it is probable may be a greater Gainer by a Sentence of Death,
than a Concession of Life, having a blessed opportunity tendered of claiming
Salvation by a signal Instance of Innocence to that God, who never fails to
consider it in the other World. But to drive the matter to a higher Point: I am
of opinion, That a Jesuit, Priest, or any other fiery Papist, ought to be
hooked within the Penal Cognizance of the Law, as effectually as if he stood
convicted of being a Party to the Conspiracy; but this, they say, would be
barbarous and most unparalled Injustice, because there are no overt Acts
tending to the prejudice of the Government. But I look upon every the least of
Persons beforementioned to be as so many Plotspies, and as deserving
punishment as a Scout from the Enemies Camp by Martial Law: Though they cannot
all perhaps be proved to engage in the beginning of the Plot, they will be sure
to be seen in the end of it: And State-Doctors say, Physic by way of
prevention or anticipation, is safer than Remedies applied to encounter a
Disease upon the spot; it being very difficult when the Savage Beast has
fastened upon the Throat of Government to shake him off before he has strangled
it. Again, suppose Jesuits, Priests, and other the zealous Bigots of the
Romish Religion have not yet actually committed any mischief, or been
corporeally active in any distractions amongst us; yet ought we not to be so
simply good-natured to look upon them as harmless, inoffensive Persons,
Intenders of the public Peace and Tranquillity: Are we not acquainted with
their Tenets, their Principles, the absolute Dominion the Pope has over them,
their obligation to blind Obedience, without the liberty of disputing the most
impious of his Commands; the constant charge given them to promote their
Religion upon any Terms, the vilest courses and means imaginable; their
accounting it no murder to Assasinate a Heretic Prince, and all His Subjects,
when the Holy Vizier has excommunicated them; but on the contrary, the highest
merit and claim that they can prefer to the most glittering Crown of Saints;
and all these horrible Credenda owned and defended in the Volumes of the most
Learned, and best Casuists of their Church; since, I say, we are as certain
that this is the Substance of their Religion, as that Goodness, Patience and
Loyalty is the Sum of ours; and that these Principles are not by them to be
maintained in notion only and speculation, but as the deposited Bullion of the
Soul, upon advantageous occasions to be brought forth, and minted into action;
we have more reason to fear them, than those that have already made their
attempts; for as much as we cannot guess when they will pour upon us, their
malice being quick and sudden, and like a Granada, bursting on all sides into
Death and Ruin. We all know that Treason but intentionally proved, comes
within the Verge of the Law, and Condemnation is awarded accordingly; and why
pernicious, destructive, rebellious Opinions publicly owned and abetted,
should not have the same force to condemn, I see not the least jot of reason:
He that harbors an ill and dangerous Principle in his bosom, lodges an Enemy
and Traitor in the Country of his Prince, that lies couchant under that Covert,
till he has a fit opportunity to rouse, and fly in the face of Majesty. Every
violently evil Man ought to be capitally secured from a power of doing
mischief; for seeing we cannot execute his bad Principles without himself, and
whilst there is life, thene will be Villainy, it is but justice they both should
suffer together; and in this Case, though the Man perhaps, in pursuance of his
Judgment, for want of a due time to humor his secular Interest, never was a
notorious Rogue in practice, yet this preponderates nothing; for whether he
acts or no, the Vicious, Traitorous Will ought to pass for the Deed; it is High
Treason in intellectu, and that is enough.

But I find my too great Passion and Love for Honesty, Integrity, and
Allegiance has unawares made me deviate from my purpose, it being far from my
design to think to convince any one of the reality of all and every part of
this Plot by dint of ratiocination; and therefore I did at first institute
another Method, which I intend to end with, and which is the only Expedient to
allay our heats and animosities; it is this must hinder us from contradicting
one another; it is this must make us come to a combination in Judgment
concerning the Plot, to believe it, and make no more hums nor has about the
matter of it; for we are told by Divine Authority, it is a damnable design
against our Throats; we may believe too little, but not too much of it; and I
do not think in so doing I enlarge and stretch my Conscience; that is not to
meddle here, being a Judge only of Reason, and her Jurisdiction confined to
Equity: In this Case I do but load my Faith, which Heaven has made with a flat
bottom, not to be sunk by a moderate burden. And as I am in obedience obliged
to receive, so in duty am I forbid curiously to examine and flaw-find the Plot,
which Prohibition is only intended as a means to prevent differences and
disputes amongst us. Do we seriously consider the Sense of the wisest Heads in
the Nation, the Judgment of many cunning Daniels that have been most
laboriously sollicitous in our Interest, the unanimous Declaration and Vote of
the House of Commons, the faithful and ingenuous Reports of the Privy Council,
the sagacious Opinions of all the Judges, we are no more able to resist the
Evidence of this Plot, than we can with Christianity reject Articles of Faith
agreed and concluded on in a general and lawful Council: Therefore in framing
doubts about it, we implicitly Tax the Government with silliness and credulity,
and do in effect call our Rulers Fools, and Magistrates Asses. It Is an approved
Opinion, That in all Great Assemblies and Consults for the welfare of a Good
King, a true Religion and Government, there is a presiding Spirit to direct and
steer their Resolutions: God Almighty, ever when he is pleased himself to be
the Discoverer of the Enemies of his Church, enlightening the Ministers of
Justice, enlarging and amplifying the Powers of their Understandings, that they
may be able to grapple with Stratagems and Intricacies, and to pierce through
the darkest Shades and recesses of Night: So that the assiduous care of the
King and His Council, the incessant Prosecutions of Parliament, the Vigilance
and Activity of Justices of the Peace, do as fully evince the reality of a
Plot, as all the oral Depositions of the Witnesses; these extraordinary Motions
being never raised in public Magistrates but by Divine Instigation to confront
malicious against a People whom Heaven has a mind to protect. What a folly is
it then for Men to shufle and cut, to carp at one Passage, and laugh at another
of the Plot* and when they have done all they can to expose the matter of it,
to take Sanctuary at Slander, asperse and vilify the Witnesses, derogate from
their Integrity, bespatter their Lives, and rail against Irregularities of
their Conversation? this can be nothing certainly but the virulent spleen and
malice of such who are not to be answered, but physick'd for satisfaction,
purged from those gross humors that thus fly up into, and annoy the Head. But
if there be really any adult, personal vices, or extravagancies of the
Witnesses, these are so far from proving a Ground to suspect the credit of what
they say, that it bespeaks rather an itch of objecting, than a rational scruple
in the Calumniators; for St. Ambrose says, Veritas a quocunque est, est a
Spiritu Sancto; and at this rate we have a Fathers word for it, the Devil, when
he speaks truth, does it by Divine Impulse; it is not his being the Father of
Lies that will evacuate a Truth; and therefore let the malice of our
Adversaries urge what it can, Truth is Truth in spite of Hell. In fine, there
is a Plot, a Plot of many years standing, assisted and encouraged by a
Conjunction of Popish Interest throughout all Christendom; the total
extirpation, ruin and murder both of Man, Woman and Child threatened, intended,
and resolved on; and shall we not believe there is a Plot? for my part, I think
it a necessary Article to be inserted in my Creed; it being certain, that
nothing but a mistrust of it can prevent the due effect which the Discovery
should have upon the Public: I am so satisfied and convinced from all outward
Circumstances of the real existence of a Plot, that I Will suffer my self to
believe all Impossibilities, rather than be persuaded there is none. I
passionately repeat once more, and lay it home to your Consciences, That Dr.
Oats and Mr. Bedloe are Mediums and Pipes employed by the Almighty to convey
the Knowledge of this Masterpiece of Villainy to us: I have demonstrated this,
leo any Man prove the contrary; for unless you pronounce John an Impostor, I am
in the right; you cannot without Atheism deny the Antecedent, ergo you must own
the Sequel; from whence will follow this Corollary; If you believe not these
Witnesses, Dr. Oats, and Mr. Bedloe, the Prophets you have now with you,
neither would you believe one though he rose from the Dead.

FINIS.

