HIS MAJESTY'S LETTER OF INSTRVCTION DIRECTED AND SENT to the JUDGES of ASSIZE
of the several Circuits, AT THE LAST SUMMER ASSIZE.

Printed, by His MAJESTY'S Command, AT OXFORD, February 7.

By LEONARD LICHFIELD Printer to the University. 1642.

HIS MAJESTY'S LETTER OF INSTRUCTION directed and sent to the JUDGES of Assize
of the several Circuits.
TRusty and well-beloved, We greet you well. We call to mind, that in former
times the constant Custom was, by the Mouth of the Lord Keeper for the time
being, at the Court of Star Chamber, in the end of Trinity Term, to put the
Judges of Assize (shortly after to undertake their several Circuits,) in mind
of such things as were then thought necessary for the present, for the good
government of the Kingdom. This course in Our Judgment* We do so well
approve of, that although We want that opportunity which We and Our Predecessors
then had, of Communicating Our thoughts to Our Judges, for the good of Our
People: yet We do still retain the same care for the safety and prosperity of
Our good Subjects; And much more by how much the distempers and distractions of
the present times, unhappily fallen, have given Us more occasion. We have
therefore thought it fit to supply this defect by these Our Letters; wherein
beside the general care of Our Justice committed to Us by God, and by Us
delegated to Our Judges by Our several Commissions, We recommend unto you in
your Circuit, as We shall do to the rest of your Brethren in their several
Circuits, more especially these particulars following.

First, That ye take care by all the best means you can, to suppress Popery
in all those Counties whither you are to go, by putting the Laws made against
them in due execution: And that you take the like care to give a stop to the
overhasty growth of Anabaptisme, and other Schisms, as far as by the good
Laws of this Land you may, and to punish the delinquents with an equal hand;
and those especially of either sort, whom you shall discover to be seditiously
stirrers and moters of others, to any Act of disobedience to Us, and to Our
Government. And that in your Charges and otherwise, as you shall have fit
opportunity, you assure Our good Subjects in Our name, and in the word of a
King (who calls God to witness of His integrity and sincerity therein) That by
His gracious assistance, We are constantly resolved to maintain the true
Protestant Religion established by Law in this Church of England, in the purity
thereof, without declining either to the right hand or to the left, as We found
it at Our Access to the Crown, and as it was maintained in the happy times of
Queen Elizabeth, and King James (Our deer Father) both of happy memory; and
therein both to live and dye.

Secondly, you shall let Our people of those Counties know, That according to
Our Kingly duty and Oath, We are also constantly resolved to maintain the Laws
of this Our Kingdom, and by, and according to them, to govern Our Subjects,
and not by any Arbitrary power, whatsoever the malevolent Spirits of any
ill-affected to Our Person, or Government have suggested, or shall suggest to
the contrary; and that we shall also maintain the Just Privileges of
Parliament, as far as any of Our Predecessors have done, and as far as may
stand with that Justice which We owe to Our Crown, and to the honor thereof.
But that We may not, nor will admit of any such unwarranted power in either or
both houses of Parliament, which in somethings has been lately usurped, not
only without, but against Our Royal Consent and Command; And We require and
Command you, as there shall be just occasion offered, in a legal way, that you
take care to preserve Our just Right in those Cases.

Thirdly, We charge you, as you tender the Peace of the Kingdom, (in the
government whereof, according to Our Laws, you Our Judges of the Law have a
principal part under Us) that you take care for the suppressing of all
Insurrections (if any such should happen) and of all Riots, and unlawful
Assemblies, under any pretense whatsoever, not warranted by the Laws of the
Land, and whosoever shall transgress therein, that you let them know, that
they must expect that punishment which by the Law may be inflicted upon them,
and at your hands We shall look for such an account herein, within your
Circuit, as becomes the quality of the place wherein you serve Us.

Fourthly, Because these distempers of the present times, unhappily stirred up,
and fomented by some, under specious, but unjust pretenses, are probable to
stir up loose and ungoverned persons, under hope of impunity, as far as
they dare, to make a prey of Our good Subjects, We strictly charge and command
you to take the best order you can in those Counties, that Rogues and
Vagabonds, and other disorderly people may be apprehended, dealt with, and
punished according to the Laws, whereby the good and quiet People of Our
Kingdom may be secured, and the wicked and licentious may be suppressed. And We
Charge and Command you to give it in Charge in all the Counties whither you are
sent by Our Commissions, that Watches and Wards, be strictly kept in all
Parishes and Places convenient, whereby the Laws made against such disorders
may be put in due execution.

Fifthly and lastly, you shall let Our People of those Counties know from Us,
and by Our Command, That if they shall prefer unto Us, or unto you in Our
stead, any thing wherein they hold themselves grieved, in an humble and fitting
way, and shall desire a just reformation or relief, We shall give a gracious
Ear unto them, and with all convenience return them such an Answer, as shall
give them cause to thank Us for Our Justice and Favor.

And when ye shall have published Our clear intentions to Our People in these
things, least, at the first hearing, they should not so fully apprehend Our
sense therein, you shall deliver a Copy of these Our Letters to the Foreman of
the Grand Jury, and to any other, if any shall desire Copies of these Our
Letters for their better information, you may deliver the same.

And to the end that Our Service in your Circuit may not suffer through the
absence of Our learned Council; Our will and Command is, That you assign in
every place of your Sessions some of the ablest Lawyers who ride that Circuit,
to be of Council for Us, to assist in such pleas of the Crown, as may be most
necessary for Our service, in the examination and punishment of notorious
delinquents.

Of all these things We shall expect that good Account from you, as We shall
from the rest of your Brethren Our Judges, to whom We have also written to the
like purpose, (of whose fidelity and good affections We are confident,) as
becomes Us to look for from you, and for you to render to Us, from whom you
have so great a trust committed.

Given at Our Court at YORK the 5 of July 1641.


