A Copy of the Mittimus and manner of Imprisonment of Mr. Edmund Calamy.
FOr as much as I have received a Certificate from and under the Hand and Seal
of the right Reverend Father in God Gilbert Lord Bishop of London, that Mr.
Edmund Calamy late Curate of the Parish Church of St. Mary Aldermanbury in the
said City of London, being (according as is provided and enacted by the late
Act of Parliament made for the Uniformity of Public Prayers, etc.) by reason
of his Inconformity disabled to preach or read a^y Lecture or Sermon, in any
Church or Chapel within his Majesty's Realm of England, or Dominion of Wales,
and town of Barwick upon Tweed, and continuing and remaining still so disabled,
did since the Feast of St. Bartholomew last past, upon two several days, viz,
on Tuesday the twenty sixth day of August last past, and upon Sunday the twenty
eighth day of December, 1662, in the said Church of St. Mary Aldermanbury
presume and take upon himself (without any lawful approbation and licen^e
thereunto) to preach or read two several Sermons or Lectures publicly before
the Congregation then and there in the said Church assembled, contrary to, and
in contempt of Authority of the said Act of Parliament: These are therefore (as
I am required by the said Act in his Majesty's Name to will and command you to
receive into your custody within the Gaol of Newgate the Body of the said
Edmund Calamy brought unto you therewith, and him there detain for the offense
aforesaid, for the Term of three Months from the day of the date hereof,
without Bail or Maine prise, according to the tenor and effect of the Act of
Parliament aforesaid. And this shall be your Warrant therein, dated this fifth
day of January. 1662.

Upon notice the 5 day of January instant that a Warrant was issued against the
sa^d Edmund Calamy by his Lordship to apprehend him, the said Edmund at night
personally appeared before his said Lordship, and desired his Lordship that he
might have favor not to be committed till the next day, and promising (wi^h
other sufficient persons that he would the six^h of January about eleven of the
clock peaceably render his Body to the Goal of Newgate upon sending a
Mittimus; his Lordship took the word of himself and Sureties, and ^hereupon by
Mr. John Marshall, one of the City Marshalls and sworn Constable sending the
said Mittimu^ at the time desired, he the said Mr. Calamy went with the said
Marshall, and now is Prisoner in the Gaol of Newgate.

Eli trembling for fear of the Ark.

A SERMON Preached at St. Mary Aldermanbury, Dec. 28.1662: BY EDMUND CALAMY,
B.D. Late Minister there. Upon the preaching of which he was committed Prisoner
to the Gaol of Newgate Jan. 6. 1662.

TOGETHER, With the MITTIMUS and manner of his Imprisonment, annexed hereunto.

OXFORD, Printed in the Y(...) (...)

An Advertisement to the Reader.
We believe you have heard of the Imprisonment of Mr. Edmund Calamy; as also
of the matter of fact, viz. for preaching; being dis-inabled thereunto for his
Nonconformity to the present state of affairs in the Church of England. Many
(we have heard) do blame him for his imprudency, in acting against a known Law,
but Nemo omnibus horis sapit; yet we are so bold as to say, he is the more
excusable, for as much as it was in a time of need: Do you not know what
David did when he was an hungered, and those that were with him, Matthew.
12.3, 4, etc. It Is well known Mr. Calamy went to Church with no intention to
preach, but to hear, but the Minister that was expected, failing, Mr. Calamy
being present was entreated and encouraged by some eminent persons there to
perform the work; who presently answered their desire, and it may be that
Scripture was urgent, 1 Cor. 9.16, etc. so that he preached not as Curate, or
Lecturer, but only occasionally, and that not in contempt of Authority. We
suppose you are desirous to see the Sermon, we have therefore gratified your
desire, and assure you that this is faithfully and exactly as he delivered it;
read it therefore, it is Verbum tempestivum. Farewell.

1 SAMUEL 4.3. And when he came, ^o Eli sat upon a seat by the way side,
watching, for his heart trembled for the Ark of God.


THat you may the better understand this text, you must know, that what ever
God threatened against old Eli, in the second and third chapters, it was
because he did not restrain his two wicked sons from their lewd courses, and is
here ex^cuted in this fourth chapter; and therefore we read in the beginning of
the chapter, that four thousand of the children of Israel were slain by the
Philistines; and the Elders of Israel met together to consider what they might
do to repair this great loss; they confess that it was the Lord that had
smitten them; Wher^fore has the Lord smitten us? But they foolishly imagined
that the way to repair the loss, would be by fetching the Ark from Shil^e, and
carrying it into the battle; whereupon they appointed Hophni and Phineas to
take the Ark of the Covenant, and carry it into the battle, thereby imagining,
that the presence of the Ark would secure them from ruin: But herein they were
miserably mistaken; for the reason why they were smitten, was not because the
Ark was in the Camp, but because sin was in the Camp; for as Augustine
observes, The Ark wherein the two Tables were, would not pro^^ct those that had
broken the two Tables; the Ark of the Covenant would not preserve those that
had broken their Covenant with God; therefore notwi^^ stan^^ng the presence of
the Ark, there were thirty thous^^^ o^ the children of I^rael slain in the
battle, and Hop^ni and Phineas that bore the Ark, were slain, and the Ark
its^lf was taken prisoner.

But now let us consider what old Eli was doing all the while the battle was
fighting: The good old man was 98. years old, he was not able to go to the
battle; but he got upon a seat by the way side, near the battle where it was
fought, and th^re he sits watching what will become of the Ark: And lo Eli sat
upon a seat by the way-side, watching; for his heart tr^mbled for the Ark of
God: For fear lest the A^k of God should be taken. He was not troubled what
should become of his two sons, he was not troubled what should become of the
people of Israel; but all his trouble was for the Ark of God; he sat by the
way side wa^ching, for his heart trembled for the Ark of God.

In the words we have three par^s.

1. We have old Eli's solicitousness concerning the Ark, H^ s^te watching, etc.

2. His fearfulness; Old Eli trem^l^d for fear of the Ark.

3. Old Eli's preferring the safety of the Ark before the safety of his two
sons, and before the safety of his wife and children: Old Eli sat wa^ching,
for his heart trembled for the Ark of God. But you will say unto me, What was
this Ark, this Ark of God? Why should old Eli tremble for fear of the Ark? Why,
I will ^ell you; This Ark was the holiest of all the holy things of God; it was
so holy, that it made every place holy where it came: Solomon brought the
daughter of Pharaoh out of the City of David, unto the house that he had
builded for her; for h^ s^d My Wife shall not dwell in the house of David King
of Israel, because the places are holy whereunto the Ark of the Lord had come;
2 Chro. 8.11. This Ark was the dwelling place of God: Pray observe sirs, this
will make way for an excellent discourse by and by. This Ark of God was the
habitation of God, Psalm. 9^.1. The Lord sits between the Cherubins; no^ the
Cherubins were placed over the Ark; this Ark was the speaking place of God, it
was the place where God met the people of Israel when he gave them answer
concerning any doubt: They came to consult with God before the Ark, Exodus 25.21,
22. Thou sha^t put the Mercy-seat above the Ark, and there I will m^et thee,
and commune with thee from above the Mercy seat, from between the two cherubins
which are upon the A^k for the testimony of all things which I will give thee in
commandment unto the childr^n of Isra^l. This Ark for which old Eli was so
solicitous, it was God's footstool, and all the people of Israel did worship at
this footstool, fall down before this foo^stool, Psalm. 99.5 Let us come and
fall down, and worship at his footstool, h.e. before the Ark; this Ack was the
strength of Israel, so it is called Psalm. 78 61. He delivered his strength into
captivity; that is, the Ark; the Ark it was the glory of Israel, and it was the
strength of Israel, nay, let me add, this Ark was the terror of the Enemies of
God; therefore when the Ark came into the battle, the Philistines were afraid,
and said, What shall become of us? woe to us, for God is come down into the
camp, 1 Samuel 4.9. For indeed this Ark was called Jehovah: When the Ark was to
move, there was a cry, ( Number. 35.) Arise O Lord, and let thine enemies be
scattered. In a word, the Ark was a pledge and visible symbol of Gods gracious
presence with his people; as long as the Ark was safe, they were safe; as long
as the Ark was with them, Gods presence was with them, the token of Gods
presence was with them; but when the Ark was taken away, that was a sign that
God was gone; his protecting, preserving, comforting presence was gone; and
therefore no wonder this good old man was so troubled for fear left the Ark of
God should be taken prisoner: I call him a good old man; but many learned men
think old Eli was not a good man; indeed his fault was great in not punishing
his two sons; but surely, surely he was a good man; and there are these two
reasons to make it out that old Eli was a godly man: The one is this, That he
took the punishment of his iniquity so patiently, when young Samuel had told
him what the Lord had intended against him; It is of the Lord (says he) let
him do what seems him good. Secondly, He was a good man, as appears in the
Text, his solicitousness what should become of the Ark, and the trembling of
his soul left the Ark of God should miscarry.

Now before I speak to the point of Doctrine, I must further tell you, that
this Ark was a type of Jesus Christ's for as God spoke by the Ark, and from the
Ark, so God speaks to us by Christ. And then secondly the Ark was a type of the
Church of Christ* for as the Ark was a preserver of the ^wo Tables of the Law,
so the Church of Christ is a preserver of the Scriptures. Thirdly, The Ark was
a type of the Ordinances of Christ; for as God did communicate himself to his
people by the Ark, so God by his Ordinances does communicate his counsels, his
comforts and his graces unto his people. The Ordinances of God are Oraculum,
the speaking-place of God, by which he conveys himself to his people.

The Text now being thus expounded, there are these two excellent conclusions
to be learned from it.

First, When the Ark of God is in danger to be lost, the people of God have
thoughtful heads, and trembling hearts.

Secondly, That a child of God is more troubled, and more solicitous what shall
become of the Ark, than what shall become of his wife and children; or his
estate; he lays more to heart the danger the Ark of God is in, than the danger
his wife, children and estate is in.

First, When the Ark of God is in danger to be lost, the people of God have
thoughtful heads, and trembling hearts.

But if I may put this doctrine into a gospel dress, take the doctrine thus:
That when the gospel is in danger of losing, when the Ministry is in danger of
losing, when gospel ordinances are in danger of being lost, then the people of
God have trembling hearts, and careful and solicitous heads. I do not say when
the Ark is lost, for that was death to old Eli, he broke his neck, he was so
troubled when the Ark was lost; it cost the life of old Eli's daughter, Phineas
wife; when the Ark was taken prisoner, she took no comfort in her child that
was newly born, she regarded it not; they told her a man-child was born, that
she had a son; but she regarded it not; for said she, The glory is gone, the
glory is departed from Israel. Therefore I do not say, when the ark of God is
lost, but when it is in danger of losing, when the Gospel is in danger, and the
Ordinances of God in danger of being lost, then the people of God have
trembling hearts and careful heads.

Thus we read Exodus 33.3, God threatens he would no^ go with the people of
Israel; I wi^^ n^^ go with you, for you a^e a stiff-neck^d people; and they
were ^o troubled for the loss of Gods presence, that they put off their
ornamen^s; When the people ^eard this evil ty^ings, that they should lose the
presence of God, they mourned, and no m^^ pu^ on his Ornaments. You shall read
that they were without the presence of God twenty years, 1 Samuel 7.2. And i^
came to pass, that while the Ark abode in Ki^ah jearim, that it was long, for
it was twenty years; and all the h^use of Israel lamented after the Lord, that
is, after the Ark, after the presence of God speaking from above the Ark. So
you shall read of Uriah, Da^id would fain have had him gone down to his wife,
and make merry, but mark what Uriah answered, 2 Samuel 11.1^. The Ark, and Israel
and Judah abide in Tents, (mark it I p^ay) and my Lord kno^e^h ^he serv^nts of
the Lord ar^ in the camp in the open field; and shall I go down to my house to
eat and to drink, and to be merry, and to lie with my wife? as thou li^^st, and
as thy soul lives, I will not do this thing. We read also of Elias, that he
was very zealous for the Lord of Hosts, 1 King. 19 10. The c^ildren of Israel
have forsaken their Covenant, they have thrown down thine altars, and slain thy
Prophets, and I am very zealous.

Now all this proves, that when the ark of God is in d^nger, the people of God
have very much trembled; and there are these reasons for it why the people of
God are so much troubled when the ark of God is in danger.

First, Because of the love that they beat to the ark of God; as God loves the
gates of Sion more than all the dwellings of Jacob; so the people of God they
love the Gospel, they love the Ordinances, they love the Ministry and the
faithful Ministers of Jesus Christ above all other things in the world; and
therefore says David ( Psalm. 26.8.) O Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy
house, and the place where thine honor dwells, and in Psalm. 27.4. One thing
have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after, that I may dwell in the
house of the Lord all the days of my life. Now you know love stirs up
affection. You have heard me tell the story of Croesus youngest son to Croesus,
who when he saw his father ready to be killed, though he never spoke all his
life time, yet the very love that he did bear to hs Father, burst the strings
of his tongue, and he cried out, O kill not my father, kill not my Father: Such
is the love that the Saints of God have to the ark of God, that it must break
forth, and they cannot be silent, that they cannot but tremble for fear the ark
should miscarry; For Sions sake they cannot hold their peace, and for
J^rusalems sake they cannot rest, til the Lord make the righteousness thereof
to go forth as brightness, and the salvation thereof as a Lamp that burns.

Secondly, The people of God cannot but be troubled when the ark is danger,
because of the interest that they have in the ark of God; Now you know interest
stirs up affection; when a man's own house is on fire, or when another man's
house is on fire, as you have had a sad and lamentable accident much to be laid
to heart, that happened yesterday morning, a very sad accident, and such as I
suppose if the Minister that was appointed to preach, had been here, he would
have studied to have affected your h^arts with that providence, and indeed it
is not to be ^orgotten: How suddenly may we after we have been feasting, be
burnt to ashes? Truly it was a very sad providence, and ought to be laid to
heart. Now interest as I said, stirs up affection; how are they ^ffected that
have an interest in those that were burned! how are they afflicted with that
sad providence! Why now the people of God have an interest in God; God is the
Heaven of a child of God, God is the portion and inheritance of his people; and
when he begins to forsake them, they cannot but grieve and be affected: and so
the Ordinances of God they are the Jewels, the Treasures of a Ch^^stian, and he
cannot but be troubled for fear of losing the Ordinances. Jesus Christ is the
joy of a Christian, and when he is departing from them, they cannot go and be
merry at such a time.

Thirdly, The people of God cannot but tremble when the ark of God is in
danger, because of them m^schiefs that are coming upon a Nation when the ark of
God is lost; Woe be to that Nation when the ark of God is gone from it. The
Trojans had the Image of Pallas, and they had a tradition, that as long as that
Image was preserved among them, their City should never be conquered; and
therefore they kept it in a Tower, and called it Palladium. And the Romans had
a Buckler, and they called it Anselam, and they had a tradition, that as long
as that Buckler was kept safe, Rome should never be taken; and they said that
Buckler came down from Heaven. But sure I am, when God is present with a Nation
to protect them, where the gospel is preserved in purity in a Nation, that
Nation cannot but be safe; but when the ark of God is gone, when the gospel is
gone, then the Palladium, then the Ans^^am, then the safety of a Nation is
g^ne. My beloved, had I the tongue of men or Angels, I was not able to express
^he misery of a Nation where the ark of God is gone, give me leave to set it
forth bri^fly a little in a f^w particulars, which I shall but just name.

First, When the a^k of God is taken, then the ways of Sion mourn, and none
come to her s^lemn assembli^s; this was the complaint made in Lament. 1.4. The
ways of Sic^ moura, because none come to her solemn Assemblies. And is not
this matter of sadness?

S^condly, When the Ark of God is taken, the Minis^^rs of Christ are driven
into corners; and that is matter of heart-trembling.

Thirdly, The souls of our wives and children are in danger to miscarry, when
the Ark of God is taken, and the Gospel gone.

Fourthly, The enemi^s of God will then be ready to blaspheme and say, Where is
now your God? W^ere is now your A^k? Now the en^mies of God triumph o^^r the
people of God, and as David says, P^al. 42 10. As with a Sword in my bones
mine E^emies rep^oach me daily, while they continually say unto me, Wh^re is
n^w thy God?

Fifthly, When the Ark of God is taken, Jesus Christ is t^en trampled under
feet, the Ordinance of God are shut of door; then Bla^phemy, Atheism, and all
manner of wickedness comes in like an armed man.

Fourthly, Another reason why the people of God must needs tremble when the ark
is in danger, is, because of their acc^ssariness in losing of the A^k: An^ this
was that which made old Eli so much tr^mble, because he kn^w it was for his
sins that the Ark was taken Prisoner; and that God suffered it to be taken
away, he knew that his not punishing his two sons was one great cause of the
great slaughter that the people of Israel met withal, and that made him to
tremble. There is n^ person here in this Congregation this morning, but his
heart will tell him, if ^ver the ark of God should be lost in this N^tion, that
he has contributed something toward the loss of it: I sa^, there are no^e of
us so holy, bu^ ^ur consciences must ac^us^ u^, that we h^v^ contributed
something toward the lo^s of the ark, if it should be ^ost. And this Mr.
B^ad^ord that blessed Mar^y^ a^k^no^ledged in his prayer, as you have it
record^d in ^^e Book of Martyrs. Lord (says h^) it was my untha^kfulness that
that caused the untimely death of King Edward (...) 6^h. And those Christians
that were banished and fled in Q^. Ma^yes days, they profess^d wherever they
came, that G^^ for their untha^kfulness had taken the gospel from (...). We may
all of us say, For my sins', and for thy sins the ark of God is in danger, and
t^erefore we had need always to have trembling hear^s and solicitou^ heads what
will b^come of the ark of God. And so much for the explication of the Doctrine.

I come now to the application; and if it be the prop^rty of a true ^^ild of
God to be so solicitous when the a^k of God is in danger, and to have such a
trembling he^rt for fear the ark should miscarry, then '^is a certain sign
there are but few that are children of God in truth. Oh where is the man or
woman that is like old Eli, that ^ets trembling for fear of the ark? I suppose
you all believe (and you have cause so do) that my coming hith^r this mo^ning
was not by way of d^sign, but merely by the providence of God; and therefore
that which ^ow I say, was not premeditated for this assembly. It must not be
denied but that the ark of God is in danger to be lost, and that upon this
double account.

First, In reference to the many sins that are in the Nation: Let me tell you,
There is not one sin for which God has taken away the ark from any people, but
that sin may be found among us: Did the Church of Ephesus lose the Candlestick
because she left her first love? and have not we done so? Did the Church of
Laodicea lose the Candlestick? You know the gospel is called the Candl^stick;
and was not the gospel removed from them because of their lukewarmness? And are
not we guilty of lukewarmness? Did the people of Israel here lose the Ark
because they abhorred the offering of God? and do not we do so? are not the
sins of the people of Israel among us? Nay, are not the sins of Germany and all
other Nations among us? and can any man that is here before God this day, that
considers the unthankfulness, the great profaneness that there is in the
Nation, but must confess, Surely the ark is in danger, and God may justly take
it away. I will not make a catalogue of our sins, for that is not my purpose; I
might tell you of our Commonwealth sins, drunkenness, uncl^anness, bribery and
oppression; I might tell of our Sanctuary sins, the prophaneing of Sabbaths,
and so of all our other sins, of unthankfulness, unfrui^fulness; you of this
place, sirs, God may well take the ark from you; and indeed, it was the great
respect I had to you of this Parish, whom I shall ever own, and praise God for,
as long as I h^ve breath in me; it was my respect I bear to you, would not let
me send you home this morning without a Sermon. Is there any of you of t^is
Parish or Congregation, that can say, God may not justly unchurch you, and take
away his Gospel from you? You have had it now in three famous successions, Dr.
T^ylor, Dr. Stoughton, and my pains in three or four and twenty years among
you: Do not your consciences tell you now, that God may justly unchurch you,
and take away the power of the Ministry? for I count that an unchurching, when
we want the power of the Ministry, a soul-searching Ministry, when we want a
faithful Minister to go before us; and that is one reason why we may safely say
the Ark of God is in great danger of being lost.

Secondly, I have another that I may without prejudice say, and that is the
abundance of Popish Priests and Jesuits that are in the midst of us, the
growing and increasing of Pop^ry, and that proneness that is in people to run
headlong back again to the Garlic and Onions of Egypt: This argument is
sufficient to make us all believe the ark of God is in danger. Nay, shall I
add, The discontentments and divisions that are in the Nation? and Christ
himself has said, That a Nati^n divided against it self cannon stand. But I
leave these things to your consideration. I believe now there is not one that
hears me this morning, but will confess the Ark of God is in danger of being
lost. But now where are our old Elies? Where ^re such as Phineas wife, such
women as she, that would not be comforted? Where are our Moseses, our Ur^ah's,
our Elias's? where are those that lay to heart the danger of the Ark of God? M^
brethren, you complain of taxes, of the decay of trade, you complain of this
and that civil burden; But where is the man, where is the man that complains
and bemoans the danger that the Ark of God is in? Most of you are of Gallios
temper, of whom it is said, Act. 8 that he cared for none of those things; had
it been for civil matters, he would have hearkened; but when it came to matters
of Religion, Gallio cared not for it, nor regarded it not. My brethren, every
man is troubled about m^um and tuum, about his civil concernments, and very
solicitous what shall become of him; but who lays to heart, who regards what
shall become of the Ark of God? there is a strange kind of indifferency and
lukewarmness upon peoples spirit^, insomuch that most people so they might have
their trading and their civil burdens removed, they care not what becomes of
the Ark; there is a T^xt I would have you turn to, though I cannot spend time
in opening it, because I shall be prevented; it is in Ho^. 79. Strangers have
^e^oured his streng^h, and he knew it not; ^ea, gray hairs are here and there
upon him, and he knows it ^ot. Shall I say, gray hairs are upon the Gospel? I
come not here to prophecy this morning; I do not say the Gospel is a dying, I
say not so; but I say it has gray hairs; for we have had the Gospel above a
hundred years now in England (pray mark) and therefore it is in its old age;
and I dare challenge any Scholl^r to show me any Nation that ever enjoyed the
gospel a hundred years together, except this Nation of England; and we have
enjoyed the gospel above an hundred years: Therefore I may truly say it has
gray hairs after an hundred year^; that is, no wonder gray hairs are here and
there; yet no man knows it, no man regards it, and no man lays it to he^r^.
Shall I spend a little time to show you what a sin t^is is, not to be affected
with the danger the Ark of God is in? Consider it in these two particulars
briefly.

First, It Is a sign you love not the gospel, if you have no love to the Ark;
for had you any love to it, you would be troubled more for the danger the Ark
is in, then for any outward danger what ever,

I have read a remarkable story among the Romans, that when any man was accused
for his life, all his friends and relations put on mourning garments; and when
he went to answer for his life, all his Kindred and Relations followed him in
mourning before the King, therein showing the love they bore to his person in
danger. And beloved, did you love the Ministry of the Gospel, did you love the
Ordinances of Christ, you would all put on mourning garments when they are in
danger; and because you do not, it is a sign you have no love to the gospel.
And then again

Secondly, It Is a sign you have no interest in the gospel; for interest will stir
up affection; it is a sign sirs, you are not concerned in the gospel; ^or if it
were your concernment, you would be affected with it; for I said but even now,
it is impossible that those that are concerned in the late lamentable fire,
(the like has not happened in London since the Gu^-powder got fire near the
Tower, when so many houses were blown up by the powder; that was a sad,
lamentable time indeed; but since that) the like has no^ been seen in London;
and it is impossible but that those that had interest in it, should be aff^cted
with it: You have no interest in God, if you are not troubled at the loss of
his presence; you have no interest in Christ, and in the Ministers of Christ,
if your hearts tremble not, nor fear at the loss of them. Nay, let me say,

Thirdly, There is a curse of God pronounced against all those that lay not to
heart the afflictions of Joseph; give me leave to read to you Amos 6.6. Woe to
them that are at ease in Zion, that trust in the Mountain of Samaria, that put
far from them the evil day, that lie upon beds of ivory, that eat the Lambs out
of the flock. and dance to the sound of the Viol, that drink wine in bowls,
but are not grieved for the afflictions of Joseph. Oh woe, woe to you that make
merry, and never consider the danger the ark of God is in.

Use 2. The second Use is, To beseech you all; being this day unexpected, it is
possible my coming may do much good, it may prove a good providence: Let me
beseech you then, that you would declare that you are the people of God in deed
and in truth, in following the example of old Eli: Five things I would persuade
you to:

First, That you would believe that the Gospel is not entailed upon England;
England has no Letters Patents for the gospel; the gospel is not perpetual and
immovable; God took away the ark, and forsook Shiloh; God took away the ark not
only from the children of Israel, but took away the Temple, unchurched the
Jews, unchurched the seven Churches of Asia; and we know not how soo^ he may
unchurch us: I do not know any warrant we have to assure our selves that we
shall enjoy the gospel anoth^r hundred years. I suppose many here know that I
have often told you, God knows how to remove his Candlestick, yet not to
destroy it; God will never destroy his Candlesti^k, his Church; but God often
removes his Church from one Nation to another; he has removed h^s Church out
of the East (for Greece was once the most famous Church in the world) this
place now the Church is gone from; God knows how to remove his Candlestick,
though he never breaks and destroys it.

Secondly, I would likewise persuade you to this, That E^glands ark is in
danger of being lost, were it only for the sins and prodigious iniquities that
we are guilty of. Oh the strange and unheard of ingratitude that is in the
Land! but I will say no more of that, because I will speak nothing but what
becomes a sober and peaceable Minister; yet I would have you be persuaded of
the great danger the Ark of God is in.

Thi^d^y, Oh that I could raise you up to old Eli's posture! R^m^mber the Tex^,
He sat watching, and his heart trem^led for fe^r of the Ark; and to move you
to this, consider wh^t a sad condition we should be in, should the Ark be lost:
Alas! what good would your Estates do you, if the Ark of God be taken away? How
can you look upon your wives and children with comfort, if the Ark of God be
gone? Wherein does England^ glory go beyond other Nations? other Nations are
more wealthy then England; the Turk has mo^e wealth than any Protestant King;
the Heathen Nations have more of the glory of the world then any Christian King
has, more outward pomp, and rich apparel; What then is the glory of Engl^nd,
but the Gospel? And if the gospel be gone, our glory is gone, and all our
comfor^s are gone. Remember Phineas Wife; they came and told her she had born a
son, but it was no great comfort to her, she regarded it not, she hearkened not
unto them, but called his name Ichabo^; why so? f^rth^ glory is departed from
Israel. Oh! when the glory is gone, who would desire to live? I am loath to tell
you ^h^ story that I have heard of from unqu^stionable Authors, of Chrysostom;
he was but one man, who yet when ^o ^eave Constan^inople, when he was put out
of his pl^^^, and banished, the people of Consta^tin^ple were so ^ff^^t^d with
Chrysostom, that they all went to the (...) petitioned for their Minister,
saying, They (...) soon miss the Sun out of the Firmament, as miss Chrysostom.
But I will not enlarge upon these things.

Woe, woe, the sad, lamentable, and woeful condition that we shall be in, if the
ark of God be taken; and therefore we had need sit trembling for fear of the
ark.

Fourthly, Another thing that I would persuade you to, is this, Not to mourn
immoderately neither: I would willingly speak some comfort to you, God only
knows when I shall speak again; and therefore before I leave you, I would not
send you home comfo^tless: Mourn not therefore as without hope; for I have four
arguments to persuade me, that the ark of God will not be lost, though it be in
danger of being lost.

Arg. 1. The first encouraging argument is this, Because God has done great
things already for this Nation, and I argue like Man^a's wife, Surely (says
she to her Husband) if Go^ ^ould have destroyed us, he would not have done so
much for us; but God has done so much for us, that surely he will not now
forsake us; and that may be some ground of hope, that though our hearts do
tremble, yet let them not sink within us.

Secondly, Another encouragement of hope is from the abundance of praying
people in the Nation: There are many that pray to God night and day, that the
ark of God may not be lost; and let me assure you one thing this morning, God
never did destroy a praying and reforming people; when God intends to destroy a
Nation, to take away its ark, he takes away the spirit of prayer from that
people; where God continues a spirit of prayer, there God will be present, and
there God will continue his ark; you all know if there had been but ten good men
in five Cities, God had spared the five Cities for ^he ten men's lakes. Now
through mercy there are many hundreds that fear God in this Nation, and that do
not give God rest night nor day, but cry to God for mercy on the Nation; and
who knows but for their sakes God may continue the Gospel to us?

Thirdly, Another ground of comfort is this, and I am much affected with it,
God has dealt with England not by way of Rule, but by way of Prerogative: For
beloved, we have had Church and Sermon-sins in the midst of us all along Queen
Elizabeth's days, King James, and King Charles the first his days; we have
also been an unthankful Nation, and our Ministers have threatened ruin and
destruction upon us from year to year; but God has hitherto saved England by
way of Prerogative, though we have those sins among us for which he destroyed
other Nations; yet God has spared us, because he will spare us, according to
that Text, I will be graci^^^ to whom I will be gracious. God is not tied to
his own (...), God may make an exemption; and who knows whether God may not
make England an exemption from his common Rule?

Fourthly, Another ground of comfort is this, God is now a pouring out his
Viols upon Antichrist, and all those Wars that are in Christendom, shall end in
the ruin of Antichrist: Observe this, and carry it home with you. I say, God
is pouring out his Vials upon the Throne of the Beast, and all those Wars that
are in Christendom, shall end in the ruin and destruction of Antichrist, both
Easte^n and Western Antichrist; and though some drops of these Vials may drop
upon the Reformed Churches, and they may smart for a while, God may severely
punish them; yet it is but for a little while, but the Vials shall all be
poured upon Antichrist, there shall it rest, there shall it center; indeed the
Lord may chastise his people, and scourge all the Reformed Churches before the
Vials be all poured out; I say, God may scourge all the Reformed Churches, and
a sound of persecution may go through them all, which are called drops of these
Vials; but the Vials are intended for Antichrist, and shall all end in the
ruin of Antichrist, and in the fall of Babylon, which is ground of great
consolation to the people of God; and whatsoever becomes of us, yet our
children, and our childrens children shall see the issue of these Vials poured
out at last upon the Whore of Babylon, to the ruin of Antichrist and all his
adherents.

Fifthly and lastly, to draw to a conclusion; I am to exhort you all to
contribute your utmost endeavors to keep the ark of God from being lost. Now
here I should show you what the Magistrates must do to keep the ark from being
carried into captivity, and what the Ministers must do, and what the people
should do.

First, What the Magistrates are to do; and not being to speak to them, I shall
speak little of them. The Magistrates are to use their Authority for the
settling of the Ark; for the Ark of the Covenant will be like Noah's Ark, always
floating upon the top of the waters, till the Magistrates that are set over it,
will endeavor to settle it. Thus we read of David, and Sam. 6. David and all
his men were gathered together, thirty thousand men, all his noble men went in
great pomp to the fetching home of the ark; you may read the chapter at your
leisure. And in 2 Chronicles. 5. 2. there you find Solomon and all his Nobles with a
great deal of pomp fetching home the ark. Oh how should this encourage our
Nobles and our Magistrates, that they might be solicitous in settling the ark of
God. Give me leave to say thus much to Magistrates, You must not do as the
Philistines did, they had the ark, bu^ what did they do with it? why they set it
up in the house of Dagon; but Dagon and the ark will never agree; always when
Dagon and the false Religion goes in at one door, the ark and the true Religion
goes out at the other door: We must nor therefore put the ark and Dagon
together.

Secondly, What must the Ministers do to keep the ark from being lost? Why the
Ministers that bear the ark must be ho^y, the ark will never prosper upon the
shoulders of Hophni, and Phineas; carry that home with you: it is not your
wicked Ministers that can sertle the ark; it is not your profane, drunken
Ministers; no, it must be the godly, sober, pious and religious Ministers. How
holy ought they to be that draw near to the God of holiness? So much for the
duty of Ministers.

Thirdly, What must the people of God do? why there are four things that I will
commend to you, and I will commend you to God. First, Do not idolize the ark.
Secondly, Do not undervalue the ark. Thirdly, Do not pry into the ark.
Fourthly, Do not meddle with the ark unless you have a call. Fifthly, keep the
Covenant of the ark. Briefly of these, and I have done.

First; do not idolize the ark; that was the sin of the people in the Text,
they thought the very presence of the ark would have secured them; and
therefore they carried the ark into the camp; though they did not repent and
reform, yet they thought if the ark were in the camp, they were secure; and
thus many think, if they can get a good Minister, certainly God will bless them,
though they themselves be never so wicked. This is to idolize the ark; there is
nothing that will secure a Nation, but repentance and reformation; it is not the
having the gospel, but the living answerable to the gospel, that will secure the
gospel. Take heed therefore of idoliziog the ark.

Secondly, We must not undervalue the ark, this was Michal her sin; David
danced before the ark, and Michal mo^ked him; but said David, it is before the
Lord, if this be to be vile, I will be more vile still. There are some men
b^gin to say, What need we have any preaching, will not reading of prayers serve
the turn? What need we preach, say others, what need is there of so much
preaching? will not once a day serve? What needs all this? Oh! but firs, this
is so undervalue the ark; and the faithful Ministers of Christ must say, if
this be to be vile to preach twice a day, to fast, and pray for the safety of a
Nation, we will be more vile still*

Thirdly, We must not pry into the atk; this was the sin of the Be^hshemites,
God destroyed 50000. of them for lo^king into the ark: You must not be curious
in prying into wha^ God has not revealed: There are great thoughts of heart
when God intends lo deliver his people; give me leave to speak plainly to you:
There are many that talk of 1666. they think the year of deliverance shall be
that year when Antichrist shall be destroyed; and there is a Book printed to
prove that Antichrist shall be destroyed in 1666, and there are strong
impressions upon the hearts of many learned men as to the year 1666. some go to
the year 1669. for the ruin of Antichrist; some pitch upon a time that is
nearer, which I am loath to name to you: But truly my Brethren, if you would
have my judgment (and I am glad of this opportunity to tell you so this
morning) this is to pry too much into the ark: Remember that text, and live by
it, it is not for you ^o know the times and seasons, you must not say, such and
such a year; for when that year is come, you find you are deceived, it is the
way to make you atheists, to believe nothing: Certainly those Ministers do no
good to the Church, that prescribe times and seasons, for when those seasons
are come, and we find our selves disappointed, after that we will believe the
Minister no more. Give me leave to tell you a story, in the year one thousand,
(which I have from ancient Authors) wherein it was believed throughout all the
Chri^tian world, that the day of Judgment should begin, and great humiliations
and repentance was in all Christian Churches; but when they saw the year end,
and the day of Judgment happened not, they al^ fell to their old professions,
and afterward would believe nothing. It Is more dangerous then you imagine, for
men to pitch on times and seasons. Gods time is the best time, and he that
believes, makes not have: We must not pry too much into the Ark, lest the
punishment of the Bethsh^mites be our portion.

Fourthly, You must not meddle with the Ark, unless called to it; this was the
sin of Uzzah, he touched the Ark (you know the story) the Ark was in danger of
falling; he (good man) meaning no hurt, to keep up the A^k, to touch the Ark,
but it neither did him good or the Ark, for he was destroyed himself, making a
breach, and hindering the carrying home of the Ark. We have had great disorder
heretofore, and God is now punishing us for that disorder: There was abundance
of well-meaning men that usurped the Ministerial Office; and (forsooth) they
were afraid the Ark was falling, and they laid to their shoulders; but their
touching the Ark, undid the Ark, and themselves too, and brought a scandal on
the Gospel. If you would have the Gospel settled remember, They that are
Consecrated must touch the Ark.

Fifthly and Lastly, if ever you will preserve the Ark, keep the Laws that the
Ark preservs; for in the Ark were the first and second Table of the Law; now
these two Tables, the first and second Table of the Law you must keep; keep the
Law, and God will keep the Ark; but if you break the Law, you forfeit the Ark.
The Ark is called the Ark of the Covenant; keep the Covenant with God, and God
will preserve your ark; but if you break your Covenant made with God in your
Baptism, and the Covenant renewed at the Sacrament; if you break this Covenant,
God will break the ark and you.

And thus (beloved) I have adventured out of that great affection I bear to
you, to give you this morning this discourse. The Lord give a blessing to what
has been spoken.

FINIS:

