THE LETTERS FROM HIS MAJESTY, and from the OFFICERS of HIS MAJESTY'S ARMY, TO
THE EARL OF ESSEX at LESTITHEN, Inviting him to Peace, and his refusal
thereof.

OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the University. 1644.

THere cannot be a better expedient for removing the calamities and miseries of
this languishing Kingdom, then clearly and plainly to inform the World, and
the Consciences and understandings of all men, who they are that will not
suffer the blessing of Peace to return to us. For however the inclinations of
many are so seduced, and their understandings so corrupted, that they are not,
or seem not, to be convinced of the horror and odiousness of this Rebellion,
yet none have owned so much blood-thirstinesse, so much folly and inhumanity,
as to declare to the People, That Peace is not good for them, (though they have
used all possible designs and Engines of Wit, Malice, and Perjury, to involve
them in a desperate and eternal War) presuming that whatsoever absence there
is of courage and conscience, of Religion and Loyalty, that they are yet too
wise and decerning in their own interest, barefaced to affect Famine, Ruin
and Desolation, and therefore in the midst of their blood and Rapine, in the
very act of invading and infesting the Kingdom with foreign Forces, and
basely betraying the Wealth, Blood, and honor of their Country to strangers,
they would feign be thought solicitous and importunate for Peace.

Upon this ground, and for this reason (how perverse soever the hearts of many
are to the cleerest evidence, and how insolently soever even this overture was
entertained, and since scornfully commented on) it is necessary to publish to
the World, the last attempt made by His Majesty, to prevent the further
effusion of Christian English Blood, with all the circumstances both of the
sending and reception, that all men may see the difference between the spirit
and temper of a just and gracious King, and of men whose Pride and Ambition
have broken the bounds prescribed to them by Law and Religion; and how hard it
is for Persons who have once assumed and usurped a power too great for them, to
quit and depart from that power, though they see it inconsistent with the
preservation of themselves and their Country; and that all men may confess
(what Judgment soever it shall please God to lay upon this miserable Kingdom)
that he, to whom he entrusted it, left no means unattempted, that either
public consultations, or private conjectures could think expedient to redeem
it from those Judgments; and that himself descended (notwithstanding the
greatest discouragement and provocation that ever Prince endured) in his
Princely and Fatherly care of his People, to all imaginable Arts and Offices,
which might remove the present, or prevent the growing mischiefs.

His Majesty having always principally chosen (though he has consented to,
and embraced all Counsels and occasions that looked that way) those seasons to
desire and solicit for Peace, in which he might be understood to have some
advantages in War, (witness his Messages and Declarations after the Battle
at Edgehill, after his taking of Bristoll, after the relief of Newarke,) no
sooner freed himself from the attendance of Sir William Wallers Army (having
routed a considerable part of it, taken ten Piece of Cannon, and some
principal Officers prisoners) and put himself into the head of an Army much
superior in common understanding to the force he was to contend with; then he
considered how to prevent that effusion of blood, which a Battle would
produce, and to procure such a Peace, as seemed to be wished by those, with
whom he was to fight, and was the same he had always desired. It was too
evident upon so many, and a very late refusal, that such an overture would
meet with nothing but scorn and insolence at Westminster, where without form
or Liberty of debate, Counsels, and Resolutions are imposed by the fury and
violence of those, who are too much concerned in the guilt and benefit of the
Rebellion, to submit themselves to the old Laws and Government. And many were
of opinion that the Earl of Essex himself was so conscious of being made an
instrument of so much misery and devastation to his Country, so sensible of the
condition of the Nobility, Gentry, and Commons of England, of the Religion,
Laws, and Liberties of the Kingdom, by this Invasion of the Scots, that he
would willingly embrace any opportunity to relieve and redeem himself, and
his fellow Subjects from that thraldom, and captivity he could not but see
designed for them, and to preserve the Religion, Laws, and Privileges of
Parliament, which he was bound and trusted even by his Commission of General
to defend, and which he saw without a speedy Peace could not be preserved.
Hereupon His Majesty having drawn His Army to Liskard within very few miles of
the Earls Forces, on the sixth of August vouchsafed to send a Letter, all
written with His own Royal Hand, to the Earl of Essex (then at Listithen) in
these words.

ESSEX, I have been very willing to believe, that when ever there should be
such a conjuncture as to put it in your power to effect that happy settlement
of this miserable Kingdom, (which all good men desire) you would lay hold of
it. That season is now before you, you have it at this time in your power to
redeem your Country and the Crown, and to oblige your King in the highest
degree, (an Action certainly of the greatest Piety, Prudence and Honor) such
an Opportunity as perhaps no Subject before you has ever had, or after you
shall have. To which there is no more required, but that you join with Me
heartily and really, in the settling of those things which we have both
professed constantly to be our only aims. Let us do this, and if any shall be
so foolishly unnatural as to oppose their Kings, their Countries, and their
own good, we will make 'em happy (by Gods blessing) even against their wills.
The only impediment can be want of mutual Confidence, I promise it you on my
part, as I have endeavored to prepare it on yours, by my Letter to Hertford
from Evesham. I hope this will perfect it, when (as I here do) I shall have
engaged unto you the word of a King, that you joining with me in that blessed
work, I shall give both to you and your Army such eminent marks of My
Confidence and Valor, as shall not leave a room for the least distrust
amongst you, either in relation to the public, or to your self, unto whom I
shall then be

Liskard AUG. 6^ Your faithful Friend.
Jf you like of this, hearken to this bearer, whom J have fully instructed in
particulars, but this will admit of no delay.




This Letter was delivered by the Lord Beauchamp; the Earl having read it,
Master Richard (who attended on the Lord Beauchamp) told him, that he was to
desire a safe pass for Mr Harding to come to him, who had authority from His
Majesty to make particular Propositions in order to Peace; his Answer was, he
would not permit Mr Harding to come to him, neither would he have any Treaty
with the King; whereupon Mr Richard replied, that he was commanded from His
Majesty to let him know his very earnest desire of Peace, to prevent that ruin
and desolation which would inevitably ensue this unnatural War; that the
Peace His Majesty desired, should be established by the settlement of the true
Protestant Religion, the Laws of the Land, the Liberties of the Subject and
the Privileges of Parliament, and that the Earl might be assured that this
was His Majesty's Real Intention, His Majesty would give any security He could
propose, as well by the Trust, Power, and Confidence he would put in himself,
as by any other the most solemn way of engagement that could be devised. The
Earl seeming not moved with what was said to him, was then desired to return
an Answer to His Majesty's Letter, he replied he would make none, and so turned
away.

This strange neglect of His Majesty and His Message, produced no other effect
with His Majesty then an opinion, that there could be no reason, for a man to
refuse all that he pretended to desire, but only a doubt in the security of
the promise, which no man could so well ask, as His Majesty himself could
offer, and therefore His Majesty was pleased, that they by whose assistance he
was principally to manage the War, should be his security for a Peace; and so
the next day after His Majesty understood what reception his Letter had, this
other, under the hands of the chief Officers of His Army, was sent to the
Earl of Essex, in these words.

MY LORD,
WE having obtained His Majesty's leave to send this to your Lordship, shall
not repeat the many gracious Messages, Endeavors and Declarations which His
Majesty has made, and have been so solemnly protested in the Presence of God
and men, That we wonder how the most scrupulous can make any doubt of the
real, and Royal Performance of them. But we must before this approaching
Occasion tell your Lordship, that we bear Arms for this end only, to defend
His Majesty's known Rights, the Laws of the Kingdom, the Liberty of the
Subject, the Privilege of the Parliament, and the true Protestant Religion
against Popery and Popish Innovations* And this being the professed Cause of
your Lordships taking Arms, We are confident, that concurring in the same
Opinions and Pretenses, We shall not by an unnatural War weaken the maine
strength of this Kingdom, and advance the Design of Our common Enemies, who
long since have devoured Us in their hopes. My Lord, the Exigent of the time
will not suffer Us to make any labored Declarations of Our Intentions, but
only this, That on the Faith of Subjects, the Honor and Reputation of
Gentlemen and Soldiers, We will with Our Lives maintain that which His
Majesty shall publicly Promise in order to a bloodlesse Peace, nor shall it
be in the Power of any private Person to divert this Resolution of Ours, and
the same We expect from you; And now We must take leave to protest, That if
this Our Proffer be neglected, (which We make neither in fear of your Power,
nor distrust of Our own, but only touched with the approaching miseries of
Our Nation) That what Calamities shall oppress Posterity, will lie heavy on
the Souls and Consciences of those that shall decline this Overture; which We
cannot hope so seasonably to make again, if this Conjuncture be let go; And
therefore it is desired that your Lordship, and six other Persons may meet Our
General to morrow (at such an indifferent Place as you shall think fit)
attended with as many; or if you shall find That any way inconvenient, to come
in Person, That then your Lordship will appoint such or so many to meet with
the like number from hence, that may consider of all means possible to
reconcile these unhappy differences and misunderstandings that have so long
afflicted the Kingdom. And for the Security of your Lordship, and those that
shall come with, and be employed by your Lordship, We do engage our Faith and
Honor, and do expect the same from your Lordship, desiring withal your very
speedy Answer, which must be a guide to our Proceedings. Concluding, that if
this shall be refused, we shall hold our selves justified before God and Men,
whatsoever shall be the success, so we rest

From the Army the 8. of August. 1644. Your Lordships humble servants MAURICE.
Tho. Wentworth. Lindsey. Lo. Hopton, Northampton. Cleveland. Tho. Blagge.
Joseph Bamfeild. Anth. Thelwell. Joh. Owen. Tho. Stradling. Robert Howard. John
Stocker. Edw. Porter. Gil. Armestrong. Rich. Nevell. Tho. Pigat. Jo. Brown.
Ad. Scroope. Amy Pollard. Ia. Hamilton. Rich. Thornhill. Io. Topping. Ja.
Dundasse. Giles Strangewayes. R. Smith. James Carry. Brainford. Percey. Jacob
Asteley. Rich. Cave. Bar. Stewart. Barnard Asteley. Theo. Gilby. Will.
Leighton. Will. Murrey. Tho. Blackwell. Tho. Bellingham. Richard Page. Bar.
Jenckes. Hen. Miller. Rich. Fielding. Tho. Weston. Paul. Smith. G. Mouldsworth.
Phil. Honywood. Tho. Culpeper. William Leake. Jo. Luntler. Io. Monck. Cha.
Fawlke. Rich. Samuel. Arth. Slingsby. Geo. Goring. Joseph Wagstaffe* Tho.
Basset. Char. Lloyd. Geo. Lisley. Will. Saint Ledger. Hen. Lunde^ford. Barth.
Fell. Hen. Shelley. Tho. Paulet. Thom. Kyrton. Anth. Brochet. Devery Leigh.
David* Stringer. Ja. Mowbray. Cha. Compton. Ed. Not. Alex. Standish. Io.
Ridech. Io. Steward. Io. Gambling. Io. Grienvile. Arth. Heningh^^. James
Haswell. Will. Maxwell.



This indeed procured an answer, (which His Majesty's could not) but such a one
as would not suffer the bleeding wounds of this poor Kingdom to be closed up:
the Earl has only power to kill, murder, and destroy: none to save, cherish,
and protect, or to join with those that can. The Answer was this.

MY LORDS,
IN the beginning of your Letter you express by what Authority you send it. I
having no Power from the Parliament (who have employed me) to Treat, cannot
give way to it without breach of Trust. My Lords, I am*

Lestithen, Aug. 10. 1644. Your humble servant, ESSEX.
For his Highness Prince MAURICE, and the Earl of FORTH.




Let the World now Judge, without looking back upon that blessed flourishing
condition this Kingdom enjoyed, before these men frighted our Peace from us,
at a time when we wanted nothing but gratitude to God and the King, to
acknowledge the fullest measure of happiness that ever Nation was possessed
of; only reviewing those very gracious Messages and Solicitations on His
Majesty's part for an Accommodation from that at Nottingham to this present; I
say, let the World Judge who they were that procured this War, and who they
are that will not suffer the War to have an end; who it is that endeavors
and desires to preserve the true Reformed Protestant Religion, and who to
confound and destroy it with all License, Impiety, and Profanation; who it is
that would maintain and defend the Laws of the Land, by which the Liberty and
Property of the Subject is established, and who it is that cancells all those
Laws, and subject's the freeborne Subjects to the most unlimited, lawless,
arbitrary power and servitude that ever Christian State groaned under; lastly
who it is that labors to uphold and vindicate the Privileges of Parliament,
and who to dissolve and pull up Parliaments by the roots, by usurping an
unnatural power not belonging to Houses of Parliament, and confounding that
power which in truth does belong to them, with admission of Foreigners and
Strangers, and abridging themselves of their own Rights, by which only
Parliaments can consist. If there be Courage and Conscience enough to take
these things to heart, and the preservation of these be indeed the end and
resolution of all good men (and without the preservation of them no happiness
is to be hoped for) they will in a peremptory and constant love of Peace join
with those who endeavor Peace, and not suffer men who grow fat and rich with
the blood and spoils of their Brethren, and whose greatness and authority
cannot be preserved but by these distractions, to sacrifice their poor Country
to their own Pride, Lord Brook. Sir John Hotham. M. Hambden. M. Pym. M.
Fiennes. M. Arthur Goodwin. M. John Hotham, etc.
Covetousness and Ambition. However let the Contrivers of this most unnatural
and unparalelld Rebellion assure themselves, however God may permit them to be
instruments of his Vengeance upon this unhappy Kingdom, that as he has
already showed his Judgments in a very exemplary manner upon many of the
principal of them, so he will not suffer one of them to live to receive the
fruit and benefit of his prosperous wickedness.

FINIS.

