The Farewell SERMONS of Mr. Calamy Mr. Watson Mr. Sclater Dr. Iacomb Mr. Case
Mr. Baxter Mr. Ienkins Mr. Lie Dr. Manton Mr. Ashes funeral Mr. Collins.



An EXACT COLLECTION OF Farewell Sermons, PREACHED By the late London-Ministers.
VIZ. Mr. Calamy, Mr. Watson, Dr. Iacomb, Mr. Case, Mr. Sclater, Mr. Baxter, Mr.
Ienkin, Dr. Manton, Mr. Lie, Mr. Collins.
To which is added, Their PRAYERS before and after Sermon. AS ALSO, Mr.
Calamy's Sermon for which he was Imprisoned in Newgate: His Sermon at Mr.
Ashe's Funeral: And, Dr. Horton's at Mr. Naltons Funeral. The last Edition,
being much Enlarged, and more Perfect, than any yet Extant.

2 SAMUEL 23. 1. Now these are the last Words of David, the sweet Singer of
Israel. Printed in the Year, 1662.

THE PUBLISHERS TO THE READER.
THE words of dying men usually are very serious, weighty, and much regarded.
The ensuing Notes, being the Preachers last Legacies to their several
Congregations, a little before their Civil, though Voluntary, Death; by reason
of the great Concourse of people that were then assembled in all Churches, to
hear their dying Pastors preach their own Funeral Sermons whilst they were yet
alive; many being too distant from them, or too much disturbea by the crowd,
fell short of their share and portion in them; others having lost much of what
they committed to their memories, addressed themselves to their friends that
writ: But it being found too tedious a work to satisfy the desires of all by
Transcriptions, some who had taken after them as follows, by the importunity
of many, have been prevailed with, for the satisfaction of their friends, to
expose their Notes to public view. It is not to be expected (though all care
and faithfulness has been used) that the Picture should answer the Person in
all things; what defects therefore, in any kind, may be found herein, we humbly
pray, may not be imputed to the Reverend Authors, but unto the Publishers
hereof. We conceive we need not add any thing to take off that clamor that is
cast upon them, as if out of an humor, faction, or which is worse,
disobedience to Authority, they refused to conform; Enough is said by
themselves, to give an account, why they chose to take up their Cross and
follow Christ in a way of conscience and fidelity.

Reader, we will detain thee no longer from partaking of the fruit we here
present thee with; but conclude, praying that the Lives of these worthy
Ministers Hearers, may be their legible Epistles, seen and read of all men; and
that their Conversations may be such as becomes the Gospel of Christ, that
whether they (yet again) come and see them, or else be absent, they may hear of
their affairs; that they stand fast in one spirit, striving together for the
Faith of the Gospel. Farewell.

Mr. Calamy's Prayer at Aldermanbury.
OH most Holy, and ever ^lessed Lord God! thou fillest Heaven and Earth with
thy presence, we pray thee fill all our hearts with the presence of thy Grace,
and let it appear that thou art in the midst of us, with that powerful
assistance of thy Spirit, that we may receive a token of love from thee at this
time. It is a singular favor that the doors of thy Sanctuary are open to us,
and that yet we may meet together in thy Name, we pray thee continue it to us,
and sanctify it to us, that every Sabbath may add to our Statur^ in Jesus
Christ. We confess we have forfeited all our mercies, we have heard much of
God, and Christ, and Heaven with ou^ ears, but there is little of God, Christ,
and Heaven in our hearts.

We confess, many of us by hearing Sermons, are grown Sermonproof; we know how
to scoff and mock at Sermons, but we know not how to live Sermons.

It is a miracle of free Grace, that thou have not taken thy Gospel from us ere
this time; but thou art a merciful God, and though we cannot please thee, yet
Mercy pleases thee; and we have no argument to bring along with us to beg thy
^avour, but thy mercy in Jesus Christ.

We pray thee, that thou will glorify thy Sovereignty, in being gracious to
us, and pardon our many and great transg essions.

Thou make use of the malice of men for thy glory, thou killest Goliath with
his own sword, oh help us to put our trust in thee, thou that can kill and
cure by killing.

Bless these Nations of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and find out yet a way
to save us; pour down thy blessings upon the head and heart of our Sovereign
CHARLES by thy Grace, King of Great Britain; thou have done great things for
him, let him do great things for thee; bless him in his Royal Consort, in his
Royal Relations, in his Council; bless the Magistrates and Ministers o^ this
Realm; Lord forgive us, for we live as if we had been delivered to work
wickedness, we cannot sin at so cheap a rate as others do, we pray thee humble
us under our great and grievous sins, give us Repentance unto Salvation, and a
lively faith through the blood of Jesus Christ: quicken our graces, forgive our
sies, make alive our souls: let us be such as thou would have us to be; make
us Christians, not only by an outward profession, but an inward conversation;
that we may live in Heaven while we are on Earth, and come to Heaven when we
shall leave the Earth.

To that purpose, bless thy Word un^o us at this time, and give us all grace,
to make conscience what we hear and how we hear; And all for Jesus Christ his
sake, to whom with thy blessed Self and Spirit, be all glory and honor*

Amen.
Mr. Calamy's Farewell Sermon. August 17. 1662.
2 SAMUEL 24. 14. And David said unto Gad, I am in a great strait; let us fall
now into the hand of the Lord (for his mercies are great) and let me not fall
into the hand of man.
IN which words we have three Parts.

1. David's great perplexity and distress, I am in a great strait. 2. David's
resolution. 1. Affirmative, Let us fall into the hand of the Lord. 2. Negative,
Let me not fall into the hand of Man.
3. We have the Reason of David's choice, for the mercies of God are great. The
mercies of wicked men are cruel: therefore let me not fall into the hands of
men. But the mercies of God are many, and great: therefore let u^ now fall into
the hands of God.
1. For the first, that is, David's great Distress, wherein we must speak,

1. To the distress it self: Then

^* To the person thus perplexed: I am in a great strait: David a great man,
David a godly man.

1. In the perplexity it self, we shall consider: 1. The reality of this
perplexity. 2. The greatness of it.


1. For the reality of it: after David had sinned in numbering the people, God
sends the Prophet Gad to him, and puts three things to his choice, as you may
read in verse. 12. God was determined to make David smart for numbering the
people, but leaves it to David's liberty, whether he would have seven years
famine, or three months to flee before his enemies, or three days pestilence:
This was a posing Question, and David had cause to be in a great strait; for
these objects are not amiable in their own nature, they are objects to be
avoided and declined; in the first view of them they seem to be equally
miserable, therefore David had cause to say, He was in a great strait.

2. This perplexity was not only real, but exceeding great: I am in a great
Strait: and there are two things made it so great.

1. The greatness of the punishments proposed, Famine, Sword, and Plague: these
are the three beesoms with which God sweeps mankind from off the earth: these
are Gods three iron-whips, by which he chastisetl^ sinful man: these are the
three arrows shot out of the quiver of Gods wrath, for the punishment of man:
they are, as one calls them, Tonsurae humani generis. In R^ 6. you shall read
of four Horses, when the four first Seals were opened: A white-horse, a
red-horse, a blackhorse, and a pale horse: after Christ had ridden on the
white-horse, propagating the Gospel, then follows the red-horse, a type of
War; then the black-horse, an Hi^roglyphick of Famine: then the pale-horse, the
emblem of Pestilence. Now God was resolved to ride on one of these horses, and
David must choose upon which God should ride; this was a great Strait: Let me
present David, lifting up his eyes to Heaven, and speaking to God thus; O my
God, what is this message thou (...) (...) thou offerest me three things; I am
in a strait* ^ (...) which to refuse, but which to choose I (...) (...) (...)
the Land of Cannan, a Land flowing with (...) (...) (...) shall this Land
endure seven years famine, (...) (...) (...) into a Wilderness, and
dis-peopled? And shall I, whose hands thou have taught to fight, and whose
fingers to war, shall I that have subdued all my enemies, shall I in my old
age, and all my Captains, fly three months before our enemies, and be driven
to caves and rocks to hide our selves? O thou my God, who art my refuge, shall
I and my people be a prey to the pestilence that walks in darkness, and
destruction that walks at noon day? O my God, I know not what to do, I am in
a great Strait.

2. The second reason why this strait was so great, was, because of the guilt
of sin that lay on David's spirit: for David knew that this severe message was
the fruit of the sin he committed in numbering the people. But you will say,
Why, was it a sin in David to number the people: Moses had often numbered the
people: three times, and it was not counted sin Josephus answers, The sin of
David was, because he did not require the half-shekel, which he was to have had
from all were numbered, Ex. 30, 12, 13. Others say, He sinned in numbering all
ages, whereas he was to number but from twenty years: but these are but
conjectural Reasons. I conceive the ^in of David was because he did it without
a lawful Call, and for an unlawful End. Sine causa legitima: he sinned in the
manner rather then in the matter: for there was no cause for him to number the
people, but (...)* and no end, but vain glory: Go through all the tribes of
Israel and number the people, that I may know the number of my people, ver. 2.
David's heart was li^red ^p with p^ide and creatureconfidence: he begins to
boast of the multitude of his people, and to trust in an arm of flesh;
therefore God sends the Prophet to David to p^ick the bladder of his p^ide; as
if God should say, I will teach you to number the people by lessening the
number of your people. Now the burden of his sin did add much to the burden of
this heavy message: Ver. 13. After David had numbered the people, his heart
smote him: the message smites him, and his heart smites him, and he said, I
have sinned greatly in that which I have done: now I beseech thee, take away
the iniquity of thy servant, for I have done very foolishly. If David had been
to suffer this great punishment out of love to God, or for a good Conscience,
he would not have been so distressed: There are two sorts of straits in
Scripture: some, suffered for God and a good Conscience: and there are straits,
suffered for sin.

1. There are straits suffered for God and a good Conscience, Heb. 11. 36, 37.
Those Martyrs there were driven to great straits: but these were straits for
God and a good Conscience, and these straits were the Saints greatest
enlargements, they were so sweetened to them by the consolations and
supportations of Gods Spirit; a Prison was a Paradise to them, Heb. 10. 34.
they took joyfully the spoiling of their goods, Act. 5. 41. they departed from
the presence of the Council, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer
shame for his name. Straits for a good Conscience are great Enlargements;
therefore Pull gloryeth in this strait, Paul a prisoner, etc.

2. There are straits suffered for sin, and these are envenomed by the guilt of
sin: sin puts poison into all our distresses and perplexities. Now such was the
strait into which David was now driven: it was a strait caused by sin, and that
made it so unwelcome and uncomfortable: so that from hence I gather this
Observation;

Doct. That sin and iniquity brings Persons and Nations into mavelous
labyrinths and perplexities: into true, real, and great molestations: a man
free from sin, is free in the midst of straits; a man guilty of sin, is in a
stra^t in the midst of freedom.

After Adam had sinned in eating of the forbidden fruit, the whole world was a
prison to him: Paradise it self was an Hell to him, he knew not where to hide
himself from the presence of God. After that Cain had murdered his brother
Abel, he was brought into such a strait, that he was afraid that every one that
met him would slay him. Alas poor Cain, how many was there then in the world?
we read but of his father and mother, yet such was his distress, that he cries
out, every one that met him would slay him, Genesis 4. 14. Into what a strait did
sin bring the old world? The deluge of sin brought a deluge of water to drown
them. Into what a strait did sin bring Sodom and Gomorrah? The fire of lust
reigning in Sodom and Gomorrah, brought down fire from Heaven to destroy them.
Sin brings external, internal, and eternal straits upon persons and Nations.

1. Sin brings external straits; sin brings Famine, Sword, and Plague; sin
brings Agues and Feavours, Gout and Stone, and all manner of Diseases: yea, sin
brings death it self, which is the wages of sin. Read Levit 26. and Deuteronomy. 28.
and you will see a black role of curses, which were the fruit of sin. Sin
brought Sion into Babylon; and when the Jews had murdered Christ, forty years
after they were brought into that distress, when the City was besieged by Titus
and Vespasian, that they did eat one another, the mother did eat her child. And
whereas David had a choice which of the three he would have, either Famine,
Plague, or Sword; the poor Jews had all three concatenated together in the
siege: Sin brings all manner of external Plagues.

2. Sins bring Persons and Nations into internal straits: sin brings
soul-plagues, which are worse than bodily plagues: sin brings hardness of
heart, blindness of mind, a spirit of slumber, a reprobate sense; sin brings
a spiritual famine upon a Land; it brings a famine of the Word, Amos 8. 11. sin
causes God to take away the Gospel from a people: Sin brings internal plagues:
sin awakens Conscience, and fills it full of perplexities: Into what a strait
did sin drive Judas, after he had betrayed Christ? Into what a strait did sin
drive Spira? Saint Paul gloryed in his tribulations for God: but when he speaks
of his sin, he cries out, O miserable man that I am, Who shall deliver me from
this body of death? David a valiant man, when he speaks of sin, he says, They
are too heavy a burden for him to bear: Awounded Conscience who can bear! says
the Wise man.

3. Sin brings eternal straits: O the strait that a wicked man shall be
brought into, at the great and dreadful day of Judgment, when all the world
shall be on fire about him! when he shall call to the Mountains to hide him,
and to the rocks to cover him from the wrath of God: then will he cry out with
David, I am, O Lord, in a great strait. And when the wicked shall be condemned
to Hell, who can express the straits they then shall be in, Bind them hand and
foot, and cast them into everlasting darkness: Matthew. 25. When a wicked man
shall be bound with everlasting chains of darkness, then he will cry out, I am
in a great strait. Consider what Dives says to Abraham: he desires that
Lazarus might but dip the tip of his finger in water, and that he might cool
his tongue: not his whole body, but his tongue: but that would not be granted.

It is impossible the tongue of man should set out the great straits the damned
suffer in Hell, both in regard of the greatness and everlastingness of them.

This is all I shall say for the Explication.

Use 1. I chiefly aim at the Application: Does sin bring Nations and Persons
into external, internal, and eternal straits? then this sadly reproves those
that choose to commit sin to avoid perplexity. There are thousands in England
guilty of this, that, to avoid poverty, will lie, cheat, and cozen, and to gain
an Estate, will sell God and a good Conscience: and to avoid the loss of estate
and imprisonment, will do any thing: they will be sure to be of that Religion
which is uppermost, be it what it will. Now give me leave this morning to speak
three things to these sorts of men: and, O that my words might prevail with
them!

1. Consider; It is sin only that makes trouble to deserve the name of trouble;
for, when we suffer for Gods sake, or a good Conscience, these troubles are so
sweetened by the Consolations of Heaven, that they are no troubles at all:
therefore in Q. Mary's days the Martyrs wrote to their friends out of Prison,
If you knew the Comforts we have in prison, you would wish to be with us: I am
in prison before I am in prison, says Master Sanders.

Famous is the story of the three Children: they were in a great strait when
cast into the fiery Furnace; Bind them hand and foot, and cast them into the
Furnace; but when they were there, they were unbound, Dan. 3. 25. says
Nebuchadnezzar, Did not we cast three men bound, into the midst of the fire?
and lo, I see four men loose, walking in the midst of the fire, and the form of
the fourth is like the Son of God. I have often told you, when three are cast
into the fire for a good Conscience, God will make the fourth: therefore, I
say, straits and sufferings for God are not worth the name of straits. David
was often driven into straits. 1 Samuel 30. 6. he was sore distressed, when his
Town was burnt, and his Wives and Children taken captive by the Amalekites: I,
but that was a distress of danger, not of sin: therefore he encourages himself
in the Lord his God, Iehosaphat was in a great strait, 2 Chronicles. 20. 12. We know
not what to do, says he: this was a strait of danger, not caused by his sin,
and God quickly delivered him: but the strait that David was in, was caused by
his sin, and that made it so bitter. I am loath to enlarge here: St. Paul was in
a great Strait Phil. 3. 23. but this was a blessed strait, an Evangelical
strait, says Saint Chrysostom, He knew not, whether to die for his own sake,
or to live for the Churches sake, were best; he was willing to adjourn his
going to Heaven for the good of the people of God: Nay, Christ was in a strait,
Luke 12. 15. I have a Baptism to be baptized withal, and how am I straightened
till it be accomplished? I am to shed my blood for my Elect: that is the
Baptism he speaks of.

This was a strait of dear affection to the Elect of God: all these were
blessed straits: but now, straits caused by sin, these are imbittered and
e^venomed by the guilt of sin and sense of Gods Wrath. It is sin that makes
straits deserve the name of straits: therefore you are spiritually mad that
commit sin to avoid straits.

2. There is more evil in the least sin, than in the greatest outward calamity
whatsoever: this the world will not believe: therefore St. Austin says, That a
man ought not to tell a lie, though he might save all the world from hell: for
there is more evil in one lie, than there is good in the salvation of all the
world. I have often told you the story of Saint Austin: says he, If hell were
on one side, and ^in on the other, and I must choose one; I would choose Hell
rather then Sin: for God is the Author of Hell, but it is blasphemy to say, He
is the Author of sin. There is a famous story of Charles the ninth, King of
France: he sent a message to the Prince of Condy, a zealous Protestant, gives
him three things to choose, either to go to Mass, or to be put to death, or to
suffer banishment all his life long: says he, Primum, Deo juvante, nunquam
eligam: The first (God helping) I will never choose* I abhor the idolatry of
the Mass: but for the two other, I leave it to the choice of the King (...) do
(...) he pleases: there is more evil in the le^st sin then the greatest misery.

3. The third thing I would have you consider, is that whosoever goes out of
God's way to avoid danger, shall certainly meet with greater danger. Balaam
went out of God's way, Numb. 22. 22. and God sent an Angel with a drawn sword,
and he riding upon an Ass, verse. 26. the Angel stood in a narrow place, where
was no way to go from the right hand or from the left: if his Ass had not
fallen under him, he had been run through by the sword of the Angel. Jonah for
fear of the King of Ni^veh went out of God's way, but he met with a mighty
tempest, he met with a Whale: What do you do, when you commit sin? you make way
to be cast into the eternal prison of hell: you destroy your precious souls, to
save your perishing bodies.

Use. 2. If sin be the father and mother of all perplexity and distresses,
then, I beseech you, let us above all things in the world abhor sin: all the
curses of the Bible are all due only to a sinner; and all the curses not named
in the Bible: for that is observable, Deuteronomy. 28. 36. every plague that is not
written in the book shall light upon him: There are strange punishments to the
workers of iniquity, Job 31. 3. Is not destruction to the wicked a strange
punishment to the workers of iniquity? sin it brings the sinner to little
ease: little ease at death, little ease at the day of judgment, and little
ease in hell, tribulation and anguish: the word in the Greek is (...), little
ease to every soul that does iniquity. Oh my beloved, will you promise me to
look upon sin, and consider it in all its woeful consequents, as the father,
mother and womb out of which come external, eternal, and internal straits? more
particularly, there are twelve sins I especially command you to take heed of
and avoid:

1. Take heed of Covetousness: the love of the world will pierce you through
with many sorows; the love of money is the root of all evil; the love of the
world drowns men in perdition. 2. Take heed of the sin of Pride: into what
woeful straits did pride bring Haman! God crossed him in what he most desired:
God made him hold the stirrup, while Mordecay rode in triumph; and God hanged
him on the Gallows which he had made for Mordecay. 3. Take heed of Drunkenness;
look not on the wine when it gives its color in the cup, etc. drunkenness will
bring you into snares: It will bite like a Serpent, and sting like an Adder,
etc. 4. Take heed of disobedience and rebellion against the Commandments of
God: it brought Jonah to his three nights and three days in the Whale's belly.
5. Take heed of fornication, and adultery; and all uncleanness; this brought
Sampson to a woeful strait: this brought David and Solomon into great
perplexity. 6. Take heed of oppression, and all acts of injustice: this brought
Ahab into a great strait, insomuch that the dogs licked his blood.

Take heed of unnecessary familiarity with wicked men: this brought Iehosaphat
into a great strait.

8. Take heed of misusing the Prophets of God: this made God destroy the
children of Israel without remedy, 2 Chronicles. 36. 15, 16. 9. Take heed of coming
profanely to the Lord's Table; this brought the Church of Corinth into a great
distress, insomuch as the Apostle says, For this cause many among you are
sick, and many weak, and many fallen asleep. 10. Take heed of loathing the
Manna of your souls: this brought the people of Israel into woeful misery; that
God destroyed all their carcasses in the wilderness, save Joshua and Cal^b.
Take heed of slighting the Gospel: this brought Queen Mary's persecution, as
many learned and godly men that fled for Religion's sake out of the Land, have
confessed: Their unthankfulness for, and unfruitfulness under the Gospel in
King Edward the sixth's time, brought the persecution in Queen Mary's time. 11.
Take heed of losing your first Love: that makes God threaten to take away his
Candlestick. 12. Take heed of profaning the Christian Sabbath, which is much
profaned every where, a day that Christ by his resurrection from the dead has
consecrated, to be kept holy to God: Certainly if the Jews were so severely
punished for breaking the Sabbath, which was set apart in memory of the
Creation; surely God will severely punish those that break the Sabbath set
apart in memory of Christ's Resurrection. May be, some will say, I have
committed many of these sins, but am not brought into any strait. Remember, it
was nine months after David had n^mbred the people, before he was in this
strait: but as sure as God is in heaven, sin will bring straits sooner or
later; though a sinner live au hundred years, yet shall he be accursed: May be,
thy prosperity makes way for thy damnation: and this is thy greatest distress,
that thou go on in sin and prosperest.
Use 3. If sin brings a Nation into mavelous labyrinths, learn what great
cause we have to fear that God should bring this Nation into great distress,
because of the great abominations are committed in the midst of it: Our King
and Sovereign was in great straits in the days of his banishment, but God has
delivered him: God has delivered this Nation out of great straits; but alas,
we requite God evil for good, and instead of repenting of old sins, we commit
new sins. I am told there are new oaths invented, oaths not fit to be named in
any place, much less here: Certainly the drunkenness and adultery, the
oppression and injustice, the bribery and Sabbath-breaking, the vain and wicked
swearing and for-swearing, this Nation is guilty of, must of necessity provoke
God to say of us, as he did of them in Jeremiah 15. 29. Shall I not visit for
these things, says the Lord? Shall not my soul be avenged on such a Nation as
this? God will not only punish us, but be avenged on us. There is no way to
avoid a national desolation but by a national reformation.

Lastly, learn what cause, you of this Congregation and Parish, what cause you
have to expect that God should bring you into great straits, because of your
great unthankfulness and unfruitfulness under the means of Grace, you that have
so long enjoyed the Gospel; you have had the Gospel in this place in great
abundance; Doctor Tailor he served one apprenticeship in this place; Doctor
Staughton served another apprenticeship; and I, through divine Mercy, have
served three apprenticeships, and half another almost, among you; you have had
the Spirit of God seven and thirty years in the faithful ministry of the Word,
knocking at the door of your hearts, but many of you have hardened your hearts.
Are there not some of you, I only put the question, that begin to loath the
Manna of your souls, and to look back toward Egypt again? Are there not some
of you have itching ears, and would fain have. Preachers that would feed you
with dainty phrases, and begin, not to care for a Minister that unrips your
Consciences, speaks to your hearts and souls, and would force you into heaven
by frighting you out of your sins? Are there not some of you, that by often
hearing Sermons are become Sermon-proof, that know how to sleep and scoff away
Sermons. I would be glad to say, there are but few such; but the Lord knows
there are too ^oo many that by long preaching get little good by preaching;
insomuch that I have often said it, and say it now again, There is hardly any
way to raise the price of the Gospel Ministry, but by the want of it: And that,
I may not ^latter you, you have not profited under the means you have enjoyed;
therefore you may justly expect God may bring you into a strait, and take away
the Gospel from you: God may justly take away your Ministers by death or other
ways. H^ you not lost your first love? Why did God take away the Gospel from
the Church of Ephesus, but because they lost their first Love? Are you not like
the Church of Laodicea, that are neither hot nor cold? therefore God may justly
spew you out of his mouth: what God will do with you, I know not* a few weeks
will determine: God can make a great change in a little time: we leave all to
God: but in the mean time let me commend one Text of Scripture to you* Ierem.
13. 16. Give glory to the Lord your God, before he cause darkness, and before
your feet stumble upon the dark mountains, and while you look for light, he
turn it into the shadow of death, and make it gross darkness. Verse 17. But if
you will not hear, my soul shall weep in secret places for your pride, and mine
eyes shall weep sore, and run down with tears, because the Lords flock is
carried away captive. Give glory to God by confessing and repenting of your
fins, by humbling your souls before the Lord, before darkness come, and Who
knows but this may prevent darkness?

Mr. Calamy's Sermon Preached at Alderman-Bury Church, Dec. 28. 1662. For which
he was Imprisoned in Newgate.
1 Samuel 4. 13. And when he came, Lo, Ely sat upon a seat by the way side,
waiting; for his heart trembled for the Ark of God.
THat you may the better understand these words you must know that whatsoever
God threatened against old Ely, in the second and third Chapters, because he did
not restrain hi^ wicked So^ from their lewd Courses, is here Executed in this
Chapter * therefore we read, there were four thousand Israelites slain by the
Philistines; And the Elders of Israel met together to consult how to repair
this great loss* the confess, it was the Lord that had smitten them* (...)
say they, Wherefore has the Lord smitten us to day before the Philistines: And
they conclude, the way to repair this their loss, it was, to fetch the Ark of
the Covenant of the Lord from Shiloh, and carry it into the (...) whereupon
they appoint Hophni and Phinehas to (...) it, whereby they imagined that the
presence of the A^k would save them from ruin, but herein they were miserably
mistaken; for, this judgment befell them not because the Ark was not in the
Camp, but because the sin was in the Camp: The Ark of the Covenant would not
preserve those that had broken Covenant with God* And therefore there was a
great slaughter of the (...)* li^es, and were slain thirty thousand men, and
H^* and Ph^ were slain, and the Ark it (...) (...) (...). But what was old Eli
doing? He was ninety and eight years old, and was not able to go to the Battle,
but sits upon a seat by the way-side near the Battle; and there he sits,
thinking what shall become of the Ark: And lo, Ely sat upon a seat by the way
side, watching: for his heart trembled for the Ark of God, for fear lest the
Ark should be taken: He was not troubled, what should become of his two Sons,
or what should become of the people of Israel, but what should become of the
Ark of God.

In the words are three parts.

1. Old Elies solicitousness for the Ark. 2. Old Elies heart-trembling for fear
of the Ark. 3. Old Elies preferring the safety of the Ark before the safety of
his two Sons, Wife, and Children.
He sat upon a Seat by the way-side watching, for his heart trembled for the
Ark of God.

But what was the Ark of God? why should old Elies heart tremble for fear of
the Ark?

I Answer: This Ark was the holiest of all the things of God; it was so holy,
that it made every place holy where it came, 2 Chronicles. 8. 11 And Solomon brought
up the daughter of Pharaoh, out of the City of David, into the House that he
had built for her: for he said, My wife shall not dwell in the House of David
King of Israel, because the places are holy, whereunto the Ark of the Lord has
come. This Ark was the dwelling place of God, it was the habitation of God,
Psalm. 99. 1. The Lord Reigns, he sits between the Cherubims. Now these
Cherubims were placed over the Ark: it was the speaking place of God; he met
his people there, and there he gave an answer to them: Exodus 25. 21, 22. And
thou shall: put the Mercy-seat above upon the Ark and in the Ark thou shall put
the Testimony that I shall give thee: And there will I meet with thee, and I
will commune with thee from above ^he Mercy-seat, from between the two
Cherubims which are upon the Ark of the Testimony, of all things I shall give
thee ^n commandment unto the children of Israel. This Ark was Gods Footstool,
and all the people of God worshipped before the Footstool of God, Psalm. 99. 5.
Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship at his footstool, for he is holy. The
Ark, it was the glory and the strength of Israel, Psalm. 78. 61. And he
delivered his strength into captivity, and his glory into his enemies hand; And
it was the terror of the enemies of God: And therefore when the Ark came into
the Battle, the Philistines were afraid, and said, Woe unto us, for God is come
down into the Camp: And indeed this Ark was called Jehovah, Number. 10. 35. And it
came to pass, when the Ark set forward, that Moses said, Rise up, Lord, and let
thine enemies be scattered: And when it rested, he said, Return, O Lord, unto
the many thousands of Israel. In a word, the Ark was a pledge, and a visible
symptom of Gods gracious presence with his people; as long as the Ark was
saved, they were saved; and when the Ark was with them, Gods presence was with
them; but when the A^k was gone, God was gone; his comfor^ing presence, his
protecting presence, and his preserving presence: And therefore no wonder that
this good old man sat watching here for fear of the Ark. I call him, good old
man: Many are of opinion that he was not good, because he suffered his Sons to
be so wicked; and indeed his fault was great, but surely he was a good man, and
I have two reasons to prove it: First, in tha^ he took the punishment of his
iniquity so patiently; It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. And
secondly, he was a good man, as appears, in the Text, by his solicitousness for
the Ark: He sat trembling, etc.

Now this Ark was a Type of three things.

First, I^ was a Type of Jesus Christ; for God spoke From the Ark: so God
speaks to us by Christ. Secondly, It was a Type of the Church of Christ: for ^s
the Ark was the preserver of the two Tables of the Law, so the Church of Christ
is the preservative of the Scriptures. Thirdly, The Ark was a Type of the
Ordinances of Christ: for as God did communicate himself by the Ark, so God by
his Ordinances communicates his Counsels, comforts and graces unto his people:
The Ordinances of Christ, they are the Oraculum by which he conveys himself
unto his people. Thus I have showed you what the Ark was.
I shall gather two Observations from the words:

1. That when the Ark of God is in danger of being lost, the people of God have
thoughtful heads, and trembling hearts. 2. That a true child of God is more
troubled, and more solicitous what shall become of the Ark, then what shall
become of Wife and Children or Estate.
I shall begin with the first.

Doct. That when the Ark of God is in danger of being lost, the people of God
have thoughtful heads and trembling hearts.

Or, if I may put this Doctrine into a Gospel-dress, take it thus:

That when the Gospel is in danger of losing, when Gospel Ordinances are in
danger of being lost, and Gospel Ministers in danger of losing; that then the
people of God have trembling heads, and careful and solicitous hearts about it.

Mark what I say: I say not, when the Ark is lost; for that was death to old
Ely, that broke his neck: and it cost the life of Ely's daughter in Law: when
the Ark of God was taken she took no comfort in her child, though a man-child
she regarded: For the glory is departed from Israel, the Ark of God is taken.

I say not when the Ark of God is lost: but I say when it is in danger of
losing: when the Gospel is in danger, the Ministers of the Gospel in danger,
and the Ordinances in danger to be lost; then the people of God have trembling
hearts, and careful heads. When God threatened the Israelites, that he would not
go with them they were troubled for the loss of Gods presence, and would not
put on their ornaments, Exodus 33. 3, 4. I will not go in the midst of thee, for
thou art a stiffneck^d people, lest I consume thee in the way: And when the
people heard these evil tidings they mourned and no man did put on his
ornaments: 1 Samuel 7. 2. And it came to pass, while the Ark abode in
Kiriath-jearim, that the time was long, for it was twenty years, and all the
house of Israel lamented after the Lord: that is, after the presence of God,
speaking from the Ark. 2 Samuel 11. 10, 11. David would have had Uriah to have
gone down to his house and made merry: And Uriah said unto David, the Ark, and
Israel, and Judah abide in Tents, and my Lord Ioab, and the Servants of my Lord
are encamped in open fields: shall I then go into mine house to eat and to
drink, and to lie with my Wife? As thou liv^st, and as thy soul lives, I will
not do this thing. 1 King. 19. 10. And Elijah said I have been very zealous for
the Lord God of Hosts: for the children of Israel have forsaken thy Covenant,
thrown down thine Altars, and slain thy Prophets with the swerd, and I, even I
only am left, and they seek my life to take it away. Thus you see when the Ark
is in danger, the people of God mourn and are sorrowful.

And there be four Reasons, why the people of God are so much troubled when the
Ark of God is in danger.

Reas. 1. Because of the great love they bear to the Ark of God; As God loves
the gates of Sion, more then all the dwellings of Jacob, Psalm. 87. 2. So the
people of God love the Ordinances of God, and the faithful Ministers of Christ,
Psalm. 26. 8. Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place
where thine honor dwells. Psalm. 27. 4. One thing have I desired of the Lord,
that I will seek after, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days
of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his Temple.
Now, love stirs up the affections: As young Croesus, though he were dumb,
yet seeing his Father like to be Killed, cried out, Do not kill my Father: Such
is the love of the Saints of God to the Ark, that they cannot be silent, they
cannot but tremble when they see the Ark in danger: And for Sions sake they
cannot hold their peace: and they cannot be silent until the Lord make the
Righteousness thereof go out like brightness, and the Salvation thereof as a
Lamp that burns.

2. The people of God are troubled at this, because of the interest they have
in the Ark of God: Now, interest stirs up affections, as when another man's
house is on fire: as you had a lamentable and sad providence this last week,
and it is not to be forgotten, how suddenly in all our feastings, God may dash
all our mirth. Now consider, how were they affected that had an interest in
those that were burned: so the people of God have an interest in the Ark: God
is the Haven of a Child of God, the portion and inheritance of a Child of God;
and when God begins to forsake them, they cannot but be afflicted and troubled:
The Ordinances of God are the Jewels of a Christian, and the Treasure of a
Christian; and the loss of them cannot but trouble them: And Jesus Christ is
the joy of a Christian, and therefore when Christ is departing, they cannot bu^
be much afflicted at it.

3. The people of God are much troubled when the Ark is in danger, because of
the mischiefs that com^ upon a Nation when the Ark of God is lost: woe be (...)
that Nation when the Ark is gone. The Heathens ha^ the Image of Apollo, and
they conceived, that as lon^ as that Image was preserved amongst them, they
could never be worsted, but be preserved; and the Romans had a Buckler, upon
which they had a Tradition, that as long as that Buckler was preserved, Rome
could not be taken. Shall I give a hint, and set it out a little in five
particulars.

1. When the Ark of God is taken, then the ways of Sion mourn, and none come
to the Solemn Assemblies: It was the complaint of the Church, Lament. 1. 4.
That is matter of sadness. 2. When the Ark of God is taken, then the Ministers
of Christ are driven into Corners: And that is matter of hearttrembling. 3.
When the Ark of God is taken, then the souls of many are in danger: when the
Gospel is gone, your souls are in hazard: There is cause of sadness. 4. Then
do the Enemies of God Blaspheme, and are ready to say, Where is your God? then
do the Enemies of God Triumph, Psalm. 42. 10. As with a Sword in my Bones mine
Enemies reproach me: while they say daily unto me, Where is thy God? 5. Then is
Jesus Christ trampled under foot, and the Ordinances of God defiled and
trampled on; and then Blasphemy and Atheism comes in like an Armed man.
4. The people of God must needs tremble when the Ark is in danger, because of
their accessariness to the losing of the Ark; and this was that which made old
Ely so much troubled, because he knew it was for his sin that God suffered the
Ark to be taken: He knew that his not punishing his two Sons, was one great
cause of that great slaughter the people of Israel met withal, and that made
him tremble. There is no person here in this Congregation, but his heart will
tell him, he has contributed something toward the loss of the Ark. None of us
so holy but our consciences must accuse us, we have done something that might
cause God to take the Ark from us: And therefore Mr. Bradford, that blessed
Martyr, said in his Prayer, Lord it was my unthankfulness for the Gospel, that
brought in Popery in Queen Mary's days: and my unfruitfulness under the
Gospel, that was the cause of the untimely death of King Edward the Sixth: And
those that fled in Queen Mary's days, sadly complained that they were the
cause of Gods taking away the Gospel from England. O Beloved, it is for thy sin
and my sin, that the Ark of God is in danger; and therefore the Lord give us
trembling solicitous hearts, what shall become of the Ark.

I come now to Application.

Use 1. If this be the property of a true child of God to be solicitous when
the Ark of God is in danger, and to have such a trembling heart for fear of the
Ark, then this is a certain sign there are but few that are the children of God
in truth. O where is the man, and where is the woman, that like old Ely, sits
watching and trembling for fear of the Ark! And that will appear by these
Reasons.

First, In reference to the many sins in this Nation; for let me tell you,
there is not one sin for which God ever took away the Ark from any people, but
it is to be found in England: Did the Church of Ephesus lose the Candlestick,
because they had lost their first love? And have not we lost our first love to
the Gospel, and to the Ordinances? And did the Church of Laodicea lose the
Candlestick, because of lukewarmness? and are not we lukewarm? Did the people
of Israel, as here in the Text, lose the Ark, because they abhorred the
offering of God? and do not we do so? Are not the sins of Israel amongst us?
the sins of Germany, and the sins of all other Nations about us? And can any
man here before God this day, in this Congregation, that considers the great
unthankfulness of this Nation, and the great profaneness and wickedness of
this Nation, but they may conclude the Ark is in danger, and God may justly
take the Ark from us?

I might tell you of the drunkenness, adultery, covetousness, injustice, and
uncharitableness, etc. that does abound amongst us; and I might tell you of
Sanctuary sins, profanation of Sabbaths and Sacraments, out unthankfulness,
and unfruitfulnesse, and unworthy walking under the Gospel: And you of this
place, God may very well take the Ark even from you. And indeed it was the
great interest I had in you, the which while I live I shall ever own; and that
great affection and respect I had to you, that I would not send you home this
day without a Sermon, and let you go without a blessing. Now, can any of you in
this Parish, and this Congregation; can any of you say, God may not justly take
the Gospel from you?

Secondly, Shall I add, the discontents and divisions in the Nation, as Christ
says, A Nation divided against it self cannot stand; but I leave these things
to your considerations; I do believe there is none here but will confess the
Ark of God is in danger to be lost. But now where are our old Elys, to sit
watching and trembling for fear of the Ark? Where is Phinehas his Wife, that
would not be comforted, because the Ark of God was taken? Where are our
Moses's? our Elijah's? our Uriah's? Where are they that lay to heart the
dangers of the Ark? You complain of Taxes, and decay of Trading; of this civil
burden, and that civil burden; but where is the man or the woman that complains
of this misery, the loss of the Ark? Most of you are like Gallio, he cared not
for these things; if it had been a civil m^ter, then he would have meddled with
it; but for Religion, he cared not for that: every man is troubled about meum
and tuum, about civil concernments; but who lays to heart, who regards, what
shall become of Religion? There is a strange kind of indifferency* and
lukewarmnesse upon most peoples spirits; so they may have their Trading go on,
and their civil Burdens removed, they care not what becomes of the Ark. There
is a Text of Scripture, I shall not spend much time in opening it, but I would
have you well consider it, Hos. 7. 9. Strangers have devoured his strength, and
he knows it not: yea gray hairs are here and there upon him, yet (...)
knows not. Shall I say, gray hairs are upon the Gospel? I come not hither to
prophecy: I say not, the Gospel is dying, but I say it has gray hairs: for you
have had the Gospel a hundred years and above, and therefore it is in its old
age: and I dare challenge any Scholar to show me an example of any Nation that
has enjoyed the Gospel for a hundred years together. Now that gray hairs is at
a hundred years, is no wonder: well, gray hairs are here and there, and yet no
man lays it to heart.

Now shall I spend some time to show you what a great sin it is, not to be
affected with the danger that the Ark of God is in: Consider but three
particulars.

First, it is a sign you do not love the Gospel: if you had any love to it, you
would be troubled more for the danger of the Ark, then for any outward danger
whatsoever.

Secondly, it is a sign you have no interest in the Gospel, for interest will
stir up your affections: it is a sign you are not concerned in the Gospel, for
if you were concerned in it, you would be affected with it; as those that were
interessed in those persons in that lamentable fire the last week, it is
impossible but they should be affected: and so it is asign you have no interest
in God and Christ, if your hearts do not tremble for fear of the loss of the
Ark.

But thirdly, there is a curse of God pronounced against all those that do not
lay to heart the afflictions of Joseph, Amos 6. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Woe be to them
that are at ease in Sion, and trust in the mountain of Samaria: ye that put far
away the evil day: that lie upon beds of Ivory, and stretch themselves upon
their Couches: that eat the Lambs out of the flock, and the Calves out of the
midst of the stall: that chant to the sound of the Viol, and invent to
themselves instruments of Music: that drink Wine in bowls, and anoint
themselves with the chief ointments: but they are not grieved for the
afflictions of Joseph. Woe be to you that enjoy your fullness of outward things,
and make merry therewith, and never consider the afflictions of Gods people,
and the danger of the Ark.

Use 2. For exhortation, To beseech you all, that God by a providence has so
unexpectedly brought this day to hear me; (and there may be a good providence
in it, possibly I may do good herein:) I say, let me beseech you all, to
declare, you are the people of God in deed and in truth, by following the
example of old Ely, to be very solicitous for the Ark of God; and let me exhort
you to five particulars,

First, let me persuade you to believe, that the Gospel is not entailed upon
England: England has no Letters Patents of the Gospel; the Gospel is
removeable: God took away the Ark and forsook Shilo, and he did not only take
away the Ark, but the Temple also; he unchurched the Jews, he unchurched the
seven Churches of Asia, and we know not how soon he may unchurch us: I know no
warrant we have to think that we shall have the Gospel another hundred year^:
God knows how to remove his Candlestick, but not to destroy it: God does often
remove the Church, but does not destroy it: God removed his Church out of the
East, as the Greek Churches were famous Churches, but God removed them, and now
the Turk overspreads that Country.

Secondly I would persuade you, that Englands Ark is in danger to be lost: were
it only for the ^ins of England, those prodigious iniquities amongst us, and
that strange unheard of ingratitude that is in the Land: but I will say no more
of that, because I would speak nothing but what becomes a sober Minister of the
Gospel.

Thirdly, I would persuade you, and O that I could raise you up to old Elies
practice: He sat watching, for his heart trembled for fear of the Ark: He had a
thoughtful head, and aching heart, for the Ark of God that was in danger: And
that I might move you to this, consider what a sad condition we are in if the
Ark be taken: what will your Estate do you good? or what will all your
concernments do you good, if the Gospel be gone? Wherein does England exceed
other places? there is more wealth in Turkey then in England: And the Heathen
Nations have more of the glory of the world, then any Christian King has: What
is the glory of England? What is the glory of Christianity but the Gospel? If
the Gospel be gone, our glory is gone. Pray, remember Eli his Daughter in Law,
the wife of Phinehas: she hearkened not though a Man-Child was born, and would
receive no comfort, but called his name I^habod: for the glory is departed from
Israel, the Ark of God is taken: O when the glory is gone, who would desire to
live! I am loath to tell you the story of Chrysostom, he was but one man, yet
when he was banished Constantinople, the people all petitioned for him, and
said, They could as well lose the Sun out of the Firmament as lose Chrysostom
from among them.

Fourthly, Let me persuade you not to mourn immoderately, neither be
discouraged: I would willingly speak something to comfort you before I leave
you, I know not by what strange providence I came here this day, and the Lord
knows when I shall speak to you again: therefore I would not send you home
comfortless: O therefore, mourn not as without hope; for I have four arguments
to persuade me, that the Ark of God will not be lost, though it be in danger of
losing.

First, because God has done great things already for this Nation: and I argue
like Manoahs wife: Surely, if God had intended to destroy us, he would not have
done that he has done for us; He that has done so much for us, will not now
forsake us. And therefore, though our hearts tremble, yet let them not sink
within us.

Secondly, I argue from the abundance of prayingpeople that are in this Nation,
there are many that night and day pray unto God that the Ark may not be taken:
and let me assure you, God did never forsake a praying and reforming people.
When God intends to destroy a Nation, and take away the Ark, he takes away the
spirit of Prayer, but where God gives the spirit of Prayer, there God will
continue the Ark. You all know, that if there had been but ten good men in
those five Cities God would have spared them: We have many hundreds that fear
God in this Nation, that do not give God rest, but night and day pray unto God
for this Land: And who knows but, for their sakes, God will spare the Ark?

Thirdly, another ground of comfort is this, that God has hitherto dealt with
England not by way of Rule, but by way of Prerogative. We have had unchurching
sins all the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and of King James: and the godly
Ministers have been threatened ruin, from year to year: but God has hitherto
saved England by way of Prerogative. God has spared us, because he will spare
us: according to that Text, I will be gracious to whom I will be gracious. God
will not be tied to his own rule: and, Who knows but God will deliver us?

Fourthly, another ground of comfort is, that God is now pouring out his Vials
upon Antichrist, and all this shall end in the ruin of Antichrist: God is
pouring forth his Vials upon the Throne of the Beast; and all these
transactions shall end in the ruin of Antichrist: Though some drops of these
Vials may light upon the reformed Churches, and they smart for a while, and God
may severely punish them; yet it will be but for a little while, but the Vials
shall be poured out, upon Antichrist: God may scourge all the reformed Churches
before these Vials be poured o^t, and persecutions may go through them all, the
which I call drops of these Vials: but the Vials are intended for Antichrist,
and shall end in the ruin of Antichrist: and whatsoever becomes of us, yet our
children, and our childrens children shall see the issue of the Vials poured
out upon the Whore of Babylon: This I speak for your comfort.

Fifthly, I am to exhort you, that you would all of you contribute your utmost
endeavor, to keep the Ark of God from being taken: and here I shall show you,

1. What the Magistrate should do. 2. What the Minister should do. 3. What the
People should do.
First, What the Magistrate should do. I shall say but little of them, because
I am not now to speak to them. They are to use their Authority for the settling
of the Ark; for the Ark of Covenant will be like the Ark of Noah, always
floating upon the waters, until the Magistrates settle it. Thus David 2 Samuel 6.
1, 2. he gathered together all the chosen men of Israel, thirty thousand to
fetch home the Ark. So Solomon, he assembleth the Elders of Israel, and the
heads of the Tribes, the Nobles, the chief of the Fathers of the children of
Israel unto Jerusalem, with a great a deal of pomp, to bring up the Ark of the
Covenant of the Lord into its place. O that God would encourage our Nobles and
Magistrates, that they might be solicitous to settle the Ark: Magistrates must
not do as the Philistines: they had the Ark, but what did they do with it? They
set it up in the house of Dagon, but Dagon and the Ark could never agree: Where
false Religion comes in at one door, the true Religion goes out at the other;
you must not put the Ark and Dagon together.

Secondly, What must the Ministers do to keep the Ark from losing? They must
endeavor after holiness; the Ark will never stand steady, nor prosper upon the
shoulders of Hophni and Phinehas. A wicked, profane, drunken Ministry will
never settle the Ark; it must be the sober, pious, godly ministers that must do
it: How holy must they be, that draw nigh to the God of holiness?

Thirdly, What must the people of God do, that the Ark may not be lost? There
be five things I shall commend unto you, and then commend you to God.

1. You must not Idolize the Ark. 2. You must not undervalue the Ark. 3. You
must not pry into the Ark. 4. You must not meddle with the Ark without a lawful
call. 5. You must keep the Covenant of the Ark.
First, You must not Idolize the Ark: that was the sin of the people in the
Text; they thought the very presence of the Ark would excuse them, and keep
them safe, and therefore they carried the Ark into the Camp: though they
reformed not, and repented not, yet they thought the Ark would save them.

So many there, be that think the Ark will save them, though never so wicked:
but nothing will secure a Nation but repentance and reformation.

Secondly, Do not undervalue the Ark: this was Michals sin, 2 Samuel 6. 14, 15,
16. When David danced before the* Ark, and Michal mocked him, and despised him
in her heart: but, says he, it was before the Lord, and if this be vile, I
will be more vile. Some men begin to say, What need we any Preaching, will not
Prayers serve? Others say* What needs so much Preaching, will not once a day
serve? Now this is to undervalue the Ark: therefore let us say, as David, If to
Preach the Word, if to fast and pray for the Nation: If this be vile, then I
will be more vile.

Thirdly, We must not pry into the Ark: this was the sin of the men of
Bethshemesh, 1 Samuel 6. 19. They looked into the Ark, and God smote them, and
cut off fifty thousand and threescore men. Be not too curious in searching
where God has not discovered or revealed; For example, there be great thoughts
of heart, when God will deliver his people, and set his Churches at liberty;
And many men talk much of the year 1666. that shall be the year wherein
Antichrist shall be destroyed: And there are strange impressions upon the
hearts of many learned men, as to this year; some go to the year 1669. and
others pitch upon other times; but truly, if you will have my judgment, and I
am glad of this opportunity to tell you, This is to pry too much into the Ark:
Remember the Text, Act. 1. 17. It is not for you to know the times or the
seasons which the Father has put in his own power. And thus to conclude upon
any particular time, if you find you are deceived, it is the way to make you
Atheists, and that afterward you shall believe nothing: And those Ministers do
no service, or rather ill service to the Church of God, that conclude of times
and seasons.

A Popish Author says, that in the year (...) (...), there was a general
belief over the Christian world, that the day of judgment should be that year;
but when they saw it happened not, they fell to their old sinning again: and were
worse then before, and believed nothing. Well Gods time is the best, therefore
let not us pry too much into the Ark.

Fourthly, you must not meddle with the Ark, unless you have a lawful Call to
meddle with it. This was the sin of Uzza, 2 Samuel 6. 6, 7. the Ark was in danger
of falling, and the goodman, meaning no hurt, to keep up the Ark, took hold of
it; but he destroyed himself and made a breach, and hindered the carrying of the
Ark.

We had a great disorder heretofore: abundance of well-meaning people usurped
upon the Ministerial Office: they were afraid the Ark was falling, and
therefore they touched the Ark, they laid hold on the Ark: but their touching
the Ark has undone the Ark, and themselves too. O take heed of touching the
Ark.

Fifthly, If ever you would preserve the Ark, then keep the Covenant of the
Ark, keep the Law which the Ark preserves: the Ark was a place wherein the Law
was kept, the two Tables; keep the Law, and God will keep the Ark: but if you
break the Law, you will forfeit the Ark: The Ark was called the Ark of the
Covenant; keep Covenant with God, and God will preserve the Ark: but if you
break the Covenant of the Ark, the Covenant made in Baptism, and that Covenant
often renewed in the Sacrament: if you break Covenant, God will take away the
Ark.

Mr. Watson's Prayer at Walbrook.
O Lord God, All our springs are in thee. It is good for us to draw ^igh to
thee through Jesus Christ; Thou art all fullness, the quintessence of all
sweetness, the Center of all blessedness; thou art the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and in him our Father, thou art our light, thou give us these blessed
opportunities of enjoying communion with thy self, God blessed for ever.

These mercies are forfeited mercies, we have abused the blessings of thy
house, we have grieved thy blessed spirit; therefore it is just with thee to
deprive us of these comforts, and to make us know the worth of these mercies by
the want of them.

Lord, we desire to judge our selves, that we may not be condemned with the
world; righteous art thou, O Lord, and just in all thy judgments; we confess,
we are unworthy to have any converse with so holy a God; we are polluted dust
and ashes, not worthy to tread thy Courts, and it is of thy mercy that we are
not consumed. How often have we plucked fruit from the forbidden tree? We have
sinned presumptnously; against the clearest Light, and the dearest Love always
have we sinned; thy footsteps have dropped fatness: thou have shown mercy to us;
but the better thou have been to us, the worse we have been to thee: thou have
loaded us with thy mercies, and we have wearied thee with our sins; when we
look into our selves, oh the poison of our natures; what ever the Leper did
touch, was unclean; thus do we by our spiritual leprosi^ infect our Holy
things; our Prayers had need have pardon, and our tears had need have the blood
of sprinkling to wash them; how vain are our Vows? how sensual are our
affections We confess, we are untuned and unstrung for every Holy action; we
are never out of tune to sia, but always out of tune to pray: we give the world
our male affections, and our strongest desires; we should use this world as if
we used it not, and alas we pray as if we prayed not, and serve thee as if we
served thee not; there is not that reverence, nor that devotion, nor that
activeness of says that there should be. Lord, if thou should say, Thou
woul^st pardon all our sins to this time, only judge us for this prayer, we
unto us: what breathing^ of unbelief and hypocrisy is there now, when we
approach unto thee* we pray thee pardon us for Christ's sake; Who can tell how
o^t he dot^ offend? we can as well reckon the drops of the Ocean, as number
(...) sins: we have filled the number of the Nations sins, but have not fill^
thy bottle with our tears. This is that that does exceedingly aggravate (...)
sins, that we cannot mourn for sin; we can grieve for our losses, but (...)
cannot mourn for our unkindnesses; we have crucified the Lord of life; sin has
not only defiled us, but hardened us; nothing can melt us but the love of
Christ, nothing can soften us but the blood of Christ: oh* withold not thy
mercies from us, oh help us to eat the Passover with bitter herbs, let us look
on Christ and weep over him, let us look on a broken Christ with broken hearts,
and on a bleeding Christ, with bleeding hearts: let us mourn for our
dis-ingenuity, that we should grieve that God that (...) ^wayes doing us good.
Oh humble us for our unkindness, and for (...) sake blot out our
transgressions; they are more then we can number, (...) more than God can
pardon.

Though we have lost the duty of Children, thou have not lost the goodness of a
Father; let us be held forth as patterns of mercy, so shall we trumpet forth
thy praise to all eternity: whatever afflictions thou layes^ upon our bodies,
let not our sins be unpardoned; let not sin and affliction be together upon us,
let there be peace in Heaven, and peace in the Court of Conscience; we have
found this part of thy word true, In the world we shall have trouble; let us
find the other part true, In Jesus Christ we shall have peace. Oh let peace and
holiness go together; make (...) new creatures, that we may be glorious
creatures; without faith Christ will not profit us; when we can call nothing in
the world ours, let us call Christ, ours. Lord, draw thine Image every day more
lively upon us; a more lively hope, and a more inflamed love to Christ. Let us
have a spirit of courage and resolution, keep us from the fallacies of our own
hearts, keep us from the defilements of the times, make us pure in heart that
we may see God, that we may have Gospel-spirits, humble spirits, meek spirits;
As Christ did take our flesh, let us partake of his Spirit. Why do thou
imbitter the breast of the creature to us, but that we should find the
sweetness of the promises? There is as much in the promises as ever, let us
live upon God, let us cast anchor in Heaven, and we shall never sink.

Shower down thy blessings, (even the choicest of them) upon the head and heart
of our dread Sovereign, Charles, by thy appointment, of England, Scotland,
France and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith; Let Him see wherein His
chiefest interest lies; let Him count those His best Subjects, that are Christ's
Subjects; Bless Him in His Royal Consort, i^ His Royal Relations; the Lords of
his privy Council; let them be a terror to evil doers, and encouragers of those
that do well.

Bless all thine Ordinances to us, make them to be fullness of life to every one
before thee; we are come this day to partake of them, oh pour in wine and oil
into our souls; let us be as a watered Garden; let this blessed Sacrament be a
poison to our lust, and nourishment for our grace Hear ^s* be our God, follow
us with mercy, crown us with acceptance, and all for Christ his sake; whom not
feeing we love, in whom believing we rejoice; To Christ, with Thee, and the
holy Spirit, be glory, honor, and ^raise, now and for ever,

Amen.
Mr. Watson's Farewell Sermon.
2 COR. 7. 1. Having these promises, dearly Beloved, let us cleanse our selves.
IT is the Title that I intend now, by the help of God, to insist upon, that
sweet Parenthesis in the Text ( Dearly beloved) wherein you have the Apostle
breathing forth his affections unto this people: he speaks now as a Pastor, and
he speaks to them as his spiritual Children.

Dearly beloved: where you have.

First, the Title, Beloved. Secondly, The Exhortation to Holiness, Let us
cleanse our selves. Thirdly, The Means how we should be cleansed and
sanctified, Having these promises.
It is the first of these that I intend: the Title that the Apostle gives to
his children, Dearly beloved.

From hence observe this Doctrine.

That the affections of a right Gospel-Minister toward his people are very
ardent.

Dearly beloved, there are two things in every Minister of Christ that are much
exercised: his head and his heart; his head with labor, and his heart with
love: his head with labor in the work of the Ministry. I^ done aright, it is a
work fitter for Angels than for men^ it is our work to open the Oracles of God,
even thos^ sacred profound things that the Angels search into and if God did
not help us, we might soon sink under the weight of such a burden: and as a
Minister's head is exercised with labor, so his heart is exercised with love,
and it is hard to say which of the two exceeds: his Labor or his Love. Thus is
it here in the Text, my dearly beloved: In these words, we have Saint Paul
laying siege to these Corinthians, and laboring to make a happy victory, to
conquer them with kindness, dearly beloved. Saint Paul's heart was the spring
of love, his lips were the pipe, the Corinthians were the cistern into which
this spring did run. This holy Apostle was a mirror and pattern of love,
toward the sinning Corinthians: Paul's tears did drop toward the praying
Corinthians, his love did burn: holy Panl was a Seraphin, his heart did burn in
a flame of affection to his people: how many passages do we find scattered in
his Epistles? he tells this people, which sometimes he did write to, and
sometimes he preached to, He looked after their souls more then their silver, 2
Cor. 12. 14. We seek not yours but you: As a tender nurse cherishes her chlld
with the breast, so Saint Paul gave his people the breast-milk of the Word, in
1 These. 2. 8. This man of God did not only bestow a Sermon upon his people, but
was willing to impart his very Soul to them, if it might save theirs, 1 These.
2. 7. We were willing to have imparted to you our own souls, because you are
dear unto us: Such was Saint Paul's affection to his people, that without a
complement he loved them more then his life, Phil. 2. 17. And if I be offered
upon the sacrifice and service of your faith, I rejoice with you all: that is,
as if he had said, If it be so that my blood be poured forth as a sacrifice, if
my death may be any way serviceable unto you, if it may help forward the
strengthening and confirming of your faith, I am willing to die, I rejoice to
do it: so full of affections was this Apostle, that he could not choose but
love his people, though the more he did love, the less he should be loved: in 2 Corinthians. 12. 15. oh how did Paul sweeten all his Sermons with love, in 2 Cor.
12. 15. if he reproved sin, yet he was angry in love; he dipped the pill in
sugar, Gal. 4. 9, 10, 11. How turn ye again to weak and beggarly elements! you
observe days, and months, and years; I am afraid of you, lest I have bestowed
upon you labor in vain; Brethren, I beseech you, be as I am. See how Saint
Paul chides their sins, and yet at the same time courts their souls: No sooner
did he la^ce the wound, but presently he poured in wine and oil into it: so did
Paul love his people, that he would not justly give any offense to the weakest
believer. 1 Cor. 8. 13. If meat make my brother to offend, I will never eat
flesh more whilst the world stands. Paul was like some tender mother, who
forbears to eat those meats that she might, for fear of hurting the child that
she gives suck to. Thus you see he was a spiritual father made up of love: and
surely, my brethren, this affection in some degree is in all the true Ministers
of Jesus Christ, they are full of sympathy and bowels unto those over whom the
holy Ghost has made them Overseers.

I shall only glance at the Reasons, why it will be thus, and why it should be
thus, that such flaming affections there should be in all Christ's Ministers to
their people.

It will be thus for these two Reasons briefly.

First, from that principle within that teaches Love. Grace does not fire the
heart with passion, but with compassion. Grace in the heart of a Minister
files-off that ruggedness that is in his spirit, making him loving and
courteous. Paul once breathed out persecution: but when Grace came, this
bramble was turned into a spiritual Vine, twisting himself about the souls of
his people with loving Embraces.

Secondly, there will be this ardent love in a minister heart, from that
spiritual relation that is between him and his people: he is a spiritual
Father: and shall we think him to be without bowels! 1 Cor. 4. 15. Though you
have ten thousand instructors, yet have you not many fathers; for in Christ
Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel. Some he begets unto Christ,
others he builds up in Christ. Does not a Father provide cheerfully for his
children? can a father see bread taken from his child and not have his heart
affected with it? Is it not a grief to a parent to see his child put out to a
dry Nurse?

Secondly, there should be this ardent love and affection in all Gods Ministers
for this reason, because this is the liveliest way to do most good: knotty and
stubborn hearts will soonest be wrought upon with kindness. The fire melts
the hardest metal; the fire of love with Gods blessing will melt the most
obdurate ^inner. A Boanerges, a son of consolation, who comes in the spirit of
love and meekness, is the fittest to do a piece of Gospel-chirurgery, to
restore and put such an one in joint again that is overtaken with a fault. Gal.
6. 1. Restore such a one with the spirit of love and weakness. Thus much in
short for the doctrinal part.

Give me leave now to make some application.

And first, here are several Inferences that may be drawn from this: As

First, see here the right character of a Gospel-Minister: He is full of love,
he exhorts, he comforts, he reproves, and all in love; he is never angry with
his people, but because they will not be saved? How loath is a Minister of
Christ to see precious souls, like so many jewels, cast overboard into the
dead Sea of hell? A conscientious Minister would count it an unhappy gain, to
gain the world and lose the souls of his people: he says, as the King of
Sodom to Abraham, Give me the persons, and take thou the goods, Genesis 14. 21.

The second branch of Information is this; Are true Gospel Ministers so full of
love? then how sad is it to have such Ministers put upon a people as have no
love to souls? The work of the ministry, it is a labor of love: Oh how sad is
it to have such in the ministry, that can neither labor nor love? that are
such as are without bowels, that look more at tyths then at souls? It must
needs be sad with a people in any part of the world to have such ministers set
over them, as either poison them with error, or do what in them lies to damn
them by their wicked example: How can the Devil reprove sin? how can the
Minister cry out in the Pulpit against drunkenness, that will himself be drunk?
Romans 2. 22. Thou that teach, A man should not steal, do thou steal? Thou
that say, A man oughtnot to commit adultcry, do^st thou commit adultery? We
read that the snuffers of the Tabernacle were to be made of pure Gold, Exodus
37. 23. Those who by their calling are to reprove and snuff off the sins of
others, they should be pure gold, holy persons. In the Law God did appoint the
lip of the Leper should be covered; he ought to have his lip covered, he should
not be permitted to speak the Oracles of God, who though he be by office an
Angel, yet by life is a Leper.

Thirdly, See from hence the happiness of a Minister who is placed among such a
people as give him abundant cause of love: How happy is he that can say to his
people from his heart, (...) My dearly Beloved! And here let me speak by way of
encouragement to you of this Parish. I find St. Paul commending the good he saw
in his people, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 3, We are bound to thank God always for you,
beloved, because your faith grows exceedingly. Here Paul is commending his
people. In imitation of this Apostle, let me at this time speak a commendatory
word to you; I have exercised my Ministry now among you for almost sixteen
years, and I rejoice and bless God that I cannot say, The more I love you, the
less I am loved; I have received many signal demonstrations of love from you:
though other Parishees have exceeded you for number of houses, yet I think not
for strength of affection. I have with much comfort observed your reverent
attention to the word preached; you rejoiced in this light not for a season,
but to this day: I have observed your zeal against error, and, as much as could
be expected in a critical time, your unity and amity: this is your honor, and
if for the future there should be any interruption made in my Ministry among
you, though I should not be permitted to preach to you, yet I shall not cease
to love you, and to pray for you: but why should there be an interruption made?
where is the crime? Some indeed say, that we are disloyal and seditious?
Beloved, what my actings and sufferings for his Majesty have been, is known not
to a few of you: but however, we must go to Heaven through good report, and
through bad report: and it is well, if we can get to glory, though we pass
through the pikes. I shall endeavor that I may still approve the sincerity of
my love to you. I will not promise that I shall still preach among you, nor
will I say that I shall not; I desire to be guided by the silver-thread of Gods
word, and of Gods providence: my heart is toward you: there is, you know, an
expression in the late Act, that we shall be now shortly as if we were
naturally dead; and if I must die, let me leave some legacy with you before I
go from you: I cannot but give you some counsel and advice for your souls, and
I hope there is no hurt in that: There are, my beloved, these twenty
directions, that I desire you to take special notice of, which I would leave as
advice and counsel with you about your souls.

First, I beseech you, keep your constant hours every day with God: the godly
man is a man set apar^, Psalm. 4, 3. not only because God has set him apart by
election, but because he has set himself a part by devotion. Give God the
Aur^rae filium, begin the day with God, visit God in the morning before you
make any others visits: wind up your hearts toward heaven in the morning, and
they will go the better all the day after. O turn your Closets into Temples:
read the Scriptures: the two Testaments are the two lips by which God speaks to
us; these will make you wise unto salvation: the Scripture is both a glass to
show you your spots, and a laver to wash them away: besiege heaven every day
with Prayer: thus perfume your houses, and keep a constant intercourse with
heaven.

Secondly, get good books into your houses: when you have not the spring near
to you, then get water into your cistern; so when you have not that wholesome
preaching that you desire, good books are cisterns that hold the waters of life
in them to refresh you. When David's natural heat was taken away, they covered
him with warm clothes, 1 Kings 1. so when you find a chilness upon your souls,
and that your former heat begins to abate, ply your selves with warm clothes;
get those good books that may acquaint you with such truths as may warm and
affect your hearts.

Thirdly, have a care of your company: Take heed of unnecessary familiarity
with sinners: we cannot catch health from another, but we may soon catch a
disease: the disease of sin is very catching: I would be as fraid of coming
among the wicked, as among those that have the plague, Psalm 106. 35. They were
mingled with the heathen and learned their works: if we cannot make others
better, let us have a care that they make not us worse. Lot was was a miracle,
he kept fresh in Sodomes salt water. My beloved, take heed of the occasions of
sin: evil company is an occasion of sin. The Nazarites in the old Law, as they
might drink no wine, so they were forbidden grapes, whereof the wine was made,
as you read in Numb. 6. to teach us, that all occasions of sin must be avoided:
evil company is, ^ellus animarum, the Devils draw-net, by which he draws
millions to Hell: How many families and how many souls have been ruined and
undone in this City by evil company? many there are that go from a Playhous to
a Whorehous, and from a Tavern to Tyburn.

Fourthly, have a care whom ye hear; it is our Savior Christ's counsel, Mat. 7.
15. Beware of false Prophets, that come to you in sheeps clothing, but
inwardly are ravening wolves. Let me tell you, the Devil has his Ministers as
well as Christ: Rev. 12. 15. The Serpent cast out of his mouth water as a flood
after the woman: that is, as the learned exponnd it, Satan by his Ministers and
Emissaries cast out the flood of Arrian doctrine to drown the Church. There are
some, who by the subtilty of their wit have learned the Art to mix error with
truth, and to give poison in a golden cup. Take heed, who you hear, and how you
hear; be like those noble Beroeans, that searched the Scriptures whether the
things that they preached were so or not, Acts 17. 11. Your ears must not be
like spunges that suck in puddle-water, as well as wine; but your ears must be
like a fan, that fans out the chafe, but retains the pure wheat: you must be
like those in the Parable, Mat. 13. 48. that gathered the good fish into
vessels, but cast the bad away. The Saints are called Virgins for their wisdom:
they will not let every one defile their souls with error; they have a
judicious ear, and a critical palate, that can distinguish betwixt truth and
error, and put a difference betwixt meat of Gods sending, and the Devils
cooking.

Fifthly, study sincerity, Psalm. 51. 6. Behold thou desire truth in the
inward part: be what you seem to be: be not like Rowers in a Barge, that look
one way and row another: Do not look heavenward by your profession, and row
hel-ward by your conversation: do not pretend to love God, and not love sin:
Simulata sanctitas, duplicata iniquitas: Counterfeit piety is double iniquity.
Let your hearts be upright with God: the plainer the Diamond is, the richer it
is; and the more plain the heart is, the more does God value this jewel: A
little rusty gold is far better then a great deal of bright brass: a little
true Grace, though rusted over with many infirmities, is better then all the
glistering shows of hypocrites: A sincere heart is Gods current coin, and he
will give it grains of allowance.

Sixthly, as you love your souls, be not strangers to your selves; be much and
often in the work of self-examination; among all the books that you read, turn
over the book of your own heart; look into the book of conscience, see what is
written there: Psalm. 77. 6. I communed with mine own heart: Set up a
judgment seat in your own souls; examine whether you have grace or not: prove
whether you are in the faith: be as much afraid of a painted holiness as you
would be afraid of going to a painted heaven: Do not think your selves good,
because others think so: let the Word be the touchstone, by which you try your
hearts: let the word be the looking glass, by which you judge of the complexion
of your souls: For want of this self-searching, many live known to others, and
die unknown to themselves.

Seventhly, keep up your spiritual watch, Mat. 13. 37. what I say unto you I
say unto all, watch: if it were the last word I should speak, it should be this
word, watch. O what need has a Christian to be ever upon his watch! the heart
is a subtle piece, and will be stealing out to vanity, and if we are not
careful it will decoy us into sin: we have a special eye upon such persons as
we suspect: thy heart is a supicious person: O have an eye upon it, watch it
continually: it is a bosom-traytor. Job set a watch before his eyes* Job 31. 1.
We must every day keep sentinel: sleep not upon your guard: Our sleeping time
is the Devils tempting time: Let not your watch-candle go out.

Eighthly, you that are the people of God, do you often associate together, Mal.
3. 16. They that feared the Lord, spoke often one to another. Christ's Doves
should flock together: one Christian will help to heat another: a single coal
of Juniper will soon die; but many coals put together, will keep life one in
another. Conference sometimes may do as much good as Preaching: one Christian
by good discourse drops holy oil upon another, that makes the lamp of his grace
to shine the brighter. It is great wisdom to keep up the trade in a
Corporation. Christians by meeting often together, setting good discourse on
foot, keep up the trade of Godliness, that else would decay and soon be lost.
Is not the communion of Saints an Article in our Creed? Do not then live so
asunder, as if this Article were blotted out. The Naturalists observe there is
a sympathy in Plants; they say, some Plants bear better when they grow near
other Plants, as the Vine and the Elm, the Olive and the Myrtle, thrive best
when they grow together: It is true in Religion, the Saints are trees of
righteousness, that thrive best in godliness when they grow together.

Ninthly, get your hearts screwed up above the world; Set your affections on
things above, Col. 3. 3. We may see the face of the Moon in the water, but the
Moon is fixed above in the Firmament: so though a Christian walks here below,
yet his heart should be fixed above in Heaven: in Heaven there is our best
Kindred, and purest Joy, our Mansion House; O let our hearts be above: it is
the best and the sweetest kind, of life: the higher the birds flies, the
sweeter it sings: and the higher the heart is raised above the world, the
sweeter joy it has. The Eagle that flies in the air, is not stung by the
Serpent: those whose hearts are elevated above the lower Region of this world,
are not stung with the vexations and disquietments that others are, but are
full of joy and contentment.

10. Trade much in the Promises: the Promises are great supports to faith;
Faith lives in a promise as the fish lives in the water: the Promises are both
comforting and quickening: they are mitralia evangelii, the very breasts of the
Gospel: as the child by sucking the breasts gets strength; so faith by sucking
the breasts of a promise gets strength and revives. The promises of God are
bladders to keep us from sinking when we come into the waters of affliction:
the Promises are sweet clusters of grapes that grow upon Christ the true Vine:
O trade much in the promises: there is no condition that you can be in, but you
have a promise: the promises are like Manna, that suit themselves to every
Christians palate.

11. All you that hear me, live in a calling. Jerome gave his friend this
advice, To be ever well employed, that when the Devil came to tempt him, he
might find him working in his vineyard. Sure I am, the same God that says,
Remember the Sabbath Day to keep it holy; says also, Six days shall thou
labor. The great God never sealed any warrants to Idleness: an idle professor
is the shame of his profession, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 11. I hear there are some, says
the Apostle, that work not at all, but are busibodies: such we exhort, by our
Lord Jesus Christ, that with quietness they work. Solon made Laws to punish
idleness; and Seneca says of an idle man, Spiritum trahit, non vivit, He draws
his breath, but does not live; he is not useful: but a good Christian acts
within the spear of his own calling.

12. Let me entreat you to join the first and the second Table together: piety
to God, and equity to your Neigbour: the Apostle puts these two words together
in one verse, (...), Titus 2. 12. That we should live righteously and godly:
Righteously, that relates to morality; Godly, that relates to piety and
sanctity: always remember this, every Command has the same Divine stamp and
authority as another Command has. I would try a moral man by the duties of the
first Table, and I would try a professor by the duties of the second Table:
Some pretend faith, but have no works; others have works, but they have no
faith: Some pretend zeal for God, but are not just in their dealings; others
are just in their dealings, but have not one spark of zeal for God. If you
would go to heaven, you must turn both sides of the Table, the first and second
Table; join piety and morality together: as we blame the Papists for blotting
out the second Commandment, let not the Papists blame us for leaving out the
second Table.

13. Join the Serpent and the Dove together, innocence and prudence, Mat. 10.
16. Be wise as Serpents, and harmless as Doves. We must have innocence with our
Wisdom, else our wisdom is but craftiness; and we must have wisdom with our
innocence, else our innocence is but weakness: We must have the harmlesness of
the Dove, that we may not wrong others; and we must have the prudence of the
Serpent, that others may not abuse and circumvent us. Not to wrong the truth by
silence, here is the innocence of the Dove; not to betray our selves by
rashness, here is the wisdom of the Serpent: how happy is it, where these two
are united, the Dove and the Serpent? the Dove without the Serpent is folly,
and the Serpent without the Dove is impiety.

14. Be more afraid of sin than of suffering: A man may be afflicted, and yet
have the love of God; but he cannot sin, but presently God is angry: sin
eclipses the light of Gods countenance; in suffering, the conscience may be
quiet. When the hail beats upon the tiles, there may be music in the house;
and when there is suffering in the body, there may be peace and music in the
conscience; but when a man sins wilfully and presumptuous^y, he loses all
his peace. Spira abjured his faith, and he became a terror to himself, he
could not endure himself; he professed he thought Cain and Judas in hell did
not feel those terrors and horrors that he felt. He that will commit sin to
prevent suffering, is like a man that lets his head be wounded, to save his
shield and his helmet.

15. Take heed of Idolatry: In 1 Ioh. 5. 21. Little children, keep your selves
from Idols. Idolatry is an Image of jealousy to provoke God, it breaks the
mariage-knot asunder, and makes the Lord disclaim his interest in a people:
What kind of Religion is Popery? it is the mother of many Monsters. What
Soul-damning doctrines does it hold forth, as the meriting of salvation by good
works, the giving of pardons, the worshipping of Angels, Popish indulgencies,
Purgatory, and the like? it is a Soul-damning Religion, it is the breeder of
ignorance, uncleanness, and murder; the Popish Religion is not defended by
strength of Argumenr, but by force of Arms; keep your selves from Idols, and
take heed of Superstition. That is the Gentleman Usher to Popery.

16. Think not the worse of Godliness because it is reproached and persecuted:
wicked men being stirred up by the Devil, do maliciously reproach the ways of
God; such were Julian and Lucian: though wicked men would be godly on their
deathbeds, yet in the time of their life they revile and hate godliness; but
think not you the worse of Religion because it is reproached by the wicked.
Suppose a Virgin should be reproached for her chastity, yet chastity is never
the worse: if a blind man ^eer the Sun, the Sun is never the less bright.
Holiness is a beautiful and glorious thing; It is the Angels glory, and shall
we be ashamed of that which makes us like the Angels? There is a time coming
when wicked men would be glad of some of that holiness that now they despise;
but they shall be as far then from obtaining it, as they are now from desiring
it.

17. Think not the better of sin, because it is in fashion; think not the
better of impiety and ungodliness because most walk in those crooked ways.
Multitude is a foolish argument: Multitude does not argue the goodness of a
thing; the Devils name is Legion, that signifies a multitude. Hell-road is
this day full of Travelers; esteem not the better of sin because most go this
way; do we think the better of the Plague because it is common? The plea of a
multitude will not hold at Gods bar; when God shall ask you, Why did you
profane my Sabbath, why were you drunk, why did you break your Oaths? to say
then, Lord, Because most men did so, will be but a poor plea: God will say to
you, Then seeing you have sinned with the multitude, you shall now go to Hell
with the multitude. I beseech you as you tender your souls, walk Antipodes to
the corruptions of the times; if you are living Fish, swim against the stream;
dead fish swim down the stream. Ephesians. 5. 11. Have no fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them.

18. In the business of Religion, serve God with all your might, Eccl. 9. 10.
Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy might; for there is no work
or device in the grave whither thou go. This is an Argument why we should do
all we can for God, serve him with all our strength, because the grave is very
near, and there is no praying, no repenting in the grave; our time is but
small, and therefore our zeal for God should be great. David Danced with all
his might before the Ark, and so should we act vigorously for God in the sphere
of Obedience. Romans 12. 12. Fervent in spirit, serving the Lord. Take heed of a
dull lazy temper in Gods service; you must not only say a prayer, or read a
prayer, but you must pour out your soul in prayer; not only love God, but be
sick of love to God. God in the old Law would have the coals put to the
Incense, Lev. 16. 13. and why so? to typifie that the heart must be inflamed in
the worship of God; your Prayers must go up with a flame of Devotion. I confess
Hell will be taken without a storm, you may jump into Hell with ease; but it is
all up hill to Heaven, and therefore you must put forth all your might, Mat.
12. 11. The violent take heaven by force. Heaven is not taken but by storm: do
you no see men zealous and very active for the Devil, and for their Lusts? and
shall they take pains for Hell, and will not you take pains for Heaven?

19. Do all the good you can, while you live, to others. God has made every
Creature useful for us; the Sun has not its light for it self, but for us; the
Fountain runs freely, and so does the myrrh drop from the Tree; every Creature
does, as it were, deny it self for us; the Beast gives us its labor, the Bird
gives us its music, and the Silkworm its silk: Now has God made every thing
useful for us? and shall not we be useful one for the good of another? O labor
to be helpful to the souls of others, and to supply the wants of others: Jesus
Christ was a public Blessing in the world, he went about doing good; we ate
all members of the body politic; nay, are we not members of the body mystical,
and shall not every member be helpful for the good of the body? that is a dead
member that does not communicate to the good of the body. O labor to be useful
to others while you live, that so when you die* there may be a miss of you;
many live so unfruitfully, that truly their life is scarce worth a prayer, nor
their death scarce worth a tear.

20. Every day spend some thoughts upon Eternity* O Eternity, Eternity! All of
us here are ere long, it may be some of us within a few days or hours, to lanch
forth into the Ocean of Eternity. Eternity is status interminabilis, says
Roetius; no prospective-glass can see to the end of Eternity. Eternity is a sum
that can never be numbered, a line that can never be measured; Eternity is a
condition of everlasting m sery or everlasting happiness. If you are godly,
then shall you be for ever happy, you shall be always sunning your selves in
the light of Gods countenance; if you are wicked, you shall be always
miserable, ever lying in the scalding Furnace of the wrath of the Almighty.
Eternity to the Godly is a day that has no sunsetting; Eternity to the Wicked
is a night that has no sunrising. O, I beseech you my Brethren, every day
spend some time upon the thoughts of Eternity. The serious thoughts of an
Eternal Condition would be a great means to promote holiness.

1. The thoughts of Eternity would make us very serious about our Souls. O my
Soul, thou art shortly to fly into Eternity, a condition that can never be
reversed or altered; How serious would this make us about our heaven-born
souls? Zeuxes being once asked why he was so long in drawing a Picture;
answered, Aeternitati pingo, I am now painting for Eternity. Oh how fervently
would that man pray, that thinks he is praying for Eternity. Oh how accurately
and circumspectly would that man live, that thinks, upon this moment hangs
Eternity.

2. The thoughts of Eternity would make us slight and contemn all the things
of this world. What is the world ^o him that has Eternity always in his eye?
Did we ^hink seriously and solemnly of Eternity, we should never overvalue the
Comforts of the world, nor overgrieve the Crosses of the world.

1. We should not overvalue the Comforts of the world. Worldly comforts are
very sweet, but they are very swift, they are soon gone; the pleasures of the
world are but for a season; just like Noah's Dove that brought an Olive branch
in her mouth, but she had Wings, and so did presently fly from the Ark; so are
all outward Comforts, they bring an Olive branch, but they have wings too, with
which they fly away.

2. The thoughts of Eternity would make us not to over-grieve the Crosses and
Sufferings of the world. What are these sufferings to Eternity? Our Sufferings
says the Apostle, are but for a while, 1 Pet. 5. 10. What are all the
Sufferings we can undergo in the World, t^ Eternity? Affliction may be lasting,
but it is not everlasting. Our Sufferings here are not worthy to be compared to
an eternal weight of Glory.

And thus, my Beloved, I have given you these Twenty Directions for your
precious Souls: I beseech yo^ treasure them up as so many Jewels in the Cabinet
o^ your breast: Did you carry these Directions about you^ ^y would be a most
excellent Antidote to keep yo^ from sin, and an excellent means to preserve the
zeal (...) Piety flaming upon the Altar of your Hearts.

I have many things yet to say to you, but I know no^ whether God will give me
another Opportunity; (...) strength is now almost gone: I beseech you, let
these things which I have spoken, make deep impressions upon all your souls.
Consider what has been said, and the Lord give you Understanding in all things.

Mr. Watson's Sermon* at St. Clements.
ISAIAH 3. 10, 11. Say to the Righteous, It shall be well with him; for they
shall eat the fruit of their Doings. Woe unto the wicked, it shall be ill with
him; for the reward of his hands shall be given him.
THis Text is like to Isreal's Pillar of Cloud, it has a light side and a dark
side; it has a light side to the godly, Say to the righteous, It shall be well
with him: and it has a dark side to the wicked, it shall be ill with him. Both
you see are rewarded, both the righteous and the wicked; but there is a vast
difference, the one has a reward of Mercy, and the other a reward of Justice.

I shall begin with the first of these, Say ye to the righteous, It shall be
well with him. This Scripture was written in a very sad and calamitous time, as
you may read in the beginning of the Chapter, The mighty man, the man of war
does cease, the prudent and the ancient, both the Judge and the Prophet shall
be taken away. This was a very sad time with the Church of God in Jerusalem; if
the Judge be taken away, where will there be any Equity? and, if the Prophet be
taken away, where will there be any Piety? the whole body Politic was now
running to ruin, and almost in the rubbish: Now in this sad juncture of time,
God would have this Text to be written; and it is, methinks, like a Rainbow in
the Clouds. God would have his people comforted in the midst of all these
afflictions; Say ye to the righteous, It shall be well with him.

The Proposition that lies in the words, is this: That however things go in the
World, It shall be (...) with the righteous.

This is an Oracle from Gods own mouth; and therefore we are not to question or
dispute it; Say y^ to the righteous, It shall be well with him; I might
multiply Scriptures for the proof of this, but I shall instance but in one,
Eccles. 8. 12. Surely, I know that it shall be well with them that fear God. It
is a golden Maxim, not to be disputed; I know it shall go well with them that
fear God,

For the illustration of this, consider two things;

First, What is meant here by the righteous man. Secondly, Why, however things
go, it shall be well with him.
First, Who is meant here by the righteous man. There is a Threefold
righteousness.

First, a legal righteousness, and so Adam in this sense was said to be
righteous, when he did wear the robe of Innocence; Adam's heart did agree with
the Law of God exactly, as a well made Dial goes with the Sun. But this
righteousness is lost and forfeited.

Secondly, There is a Moral righteousness, and thus he is said to be righteous,
who is, adorned with Moral Virtues, that is prudent, just, temperate, and the
like.

Thirdly, There is an Evangelical righteousness, an^ that is meant here. And
this Evangelical righteousness is twofold: A righteousness by Imputation, and a
righteousness by Implantation.

First, There is a righteousness by imputation, and that is, when Christ's
righteousness is made over to us; an^ this righteousness, beloved, is as truly
ours to justify (...) as it is Christ's, to bestow upon us.

Secondly, There is a righteousness by implantation, which is nothing else but
Gods infusing of the seed and habits of grace into the heart, the planting of
holiness in a man, and making him partaker of the divine Nature: Now this is to
be righteous in the sight of God, to have a righteousness of imputation, and a
righteousness of implantation. And so much for the first thing.

The second thing is to show you why, however things go in the world, it shall
be well with this righteous man; and it must needs be thus, for two reasons.

First, Because he that is righteous, has his greatest evil removed, his sin
is pardoned; and therefore it must needs be well with him. Sin is a thorn in a
man's Conscience; now when this thorn is plucked out in forgiveness and
remission, then is it well with that man. Forgiveness of sin, in Scripture, is
called, The lifting off of sin; so it is in the Hebrew, Job 7. Lord why do
thou not lift off my sin? It is a Metaphor taken from a weary man that goes
under a burden, ready to sink under it, and another man comes and lifts off
this burden; so does the great God, when the burden of sin is ready to sink
the Conscience, Gods lifts off this burden from the Conscience, and lays it
upon Christ's shoulders, and he carries it; now he that has his burden thus
carried, it is well for him, however things go. Pardon and forgiveness of sin
it is a crowning blessing, it is a Jewel in a Believers Crown: Pardon of sin is
a multiplying mercy, it brings a great many mercies along with it; whom God
pardons, he adopts; whom God pardons, he invests with holiness and with glory.
Pardon of sin is such a mercy, that it is enough to make a sick man well, Isa.
32. 24. The Inhabitants shall not say, They are sick, the people that dwell
therein shall be forgiven their iniquity. The sense of pardon takes away the
sense of pain; it must needs then be well with the righteous, his greatest evil
is removed.

Secondly, However things go, It shall be well with the righteous, because God
is his portion, Psalm. 16. 5. The Lord is the portion of my inheritance, the
lines are fallen to me in pleasant places. In God, all things are to be found;
and all that is in God, is engaged for the good of the Righteous; His power is
his, to help him; His wisdom is his, to teach him; His spirit is his, to
sanctify him; and His mercy is his, to save him. God is the righteous man's
portion; and can God give a greater gift to us, than to give Himself to us? God
is a rich portion, the Angels riches; God is a safe and a sure portion, for his
Name is a strong Tower. He is a portion that can never be spent, for he is
infiniteness; and he is a portion can never be lost; for he is Eternity; Thou
art my portion for ever, Psalm. 73. 26. And surely, it is well with them that
have God for their portion: Is it not well with them that are happy? Why, if
God be our portion* we are happy, Psalm. 144. 16. Happy is the people whose God
is the Lord. And so much for the Doctrinal part.

The Application of this point may afford abundanc^ of comfort to every godly
man, to every person fearing God in this Congregation. God has sent me this
day with a Commission to comfort you, O that I might drop in the oil of
gladness into every broken and trouble^ spirit; Say to the righteous, it shall
be well with him: Here'^ good news from heaven, however things are, yet still
i^ is well with the righteous.

But here is a great question to be answered, How dot^ it appear that it is well
with the righteous? for we often see it is worst with him; he is deprived of
his comforts he is made the reproach of the world for Christ, ye^ many times he
loses his life? how then is it well wit^ the righteous?

I answer, yet still is it well with the righteous: thoug^ he meet with trouble
in the world, and one wave rise^ upon the neck of another: yet is it well with
the righteous, as appears in these following particulars:

First, All the troubles that a righteous man meets with, turn to his good, and
so it is well with him: That Is a famous Scripture, Ier. 24. 5. Whom I have sent
out of this place, into the Land of the Chaldeans, for their good. Gods own
Israel were transported into Babylon among their enemies, for their good. The
troubles of the righteous are only a means to purge out their sins, and that is
for their good. I have read a story of one Peleus, who running at another with
a sword to kill him, by accident the sword only run into his Impostume, and
broke that. Thus all the evils and troubles of the righteous, do but serve to
cure them of the Imposthume of pride, and to make them more humble. When the
body of a Saint is afflicted, his soul that revives and flourishes in grace;
like two Laurel trees that I have read of, that when one withered, the other
flourished; so, when the body is afflicted, yet grace flourishes. God does
distill out of the bitterest drugs, his glory and our salvation. That that the
world looks upon as a punishment, that God makes medicinal, to heal the soul.
Well then may it be well with the righteous; the rod of God upon a Saint, is
but only Gods pencil, whereby he draws his Image more lively upon the soul. God
never stretches the strings of his Viol, but to make the music so much the
sweeter.

Secondly, In the midst of, all the troubles that befall the righteous, yet
still it is well with them, in regard of those inward heart-revivings that God
gives them; we see a godly man in misery; but we see not his comforts; we see
his prison grates, but we hear not that sweet music that he enjoys in his
Conscience. God sweetens to his people outward troubles with inward peace. It
is the title that is given to God, 2 Cor. 6. 7. The God that comfort them
that are cast down. The Be can gather Honey as well from the Thi^tle and
bitter Herb, as from the sweet Flower: and a Child of God can gather joy out of
his sorrow; out of the very Carcass sometimes he fetches Honey.

When the body is in pain, the soul may be at ease, as when a man's head aches,
yet his heart may be well; Thus it is well with the Righteous, God gives him
inward comforts that revive him, and sweeten his outward pain.

3. In times of calamity and trouble, yet still is it well with the Righteous,
because many times God hears his people in the time of trouble; in a storm God
will have a care of his Jewels, he will hide them, and suffer them not to be
carried away; and thus he makes good that Scripture literally, Psalm. 91. 4. He
shall cover thee with his feathers, and under his wings shall thou trust, no
evil shall touch thee. God oftentimes verifies this Scripture literally, he
makes his Angels to be his Peoples Lifeguard to hide them and to defend them.
When a Flood was coming on the World, God provided an Ark to hide Neah in; When
Israel was carried and transported into Babylon, God hides Ier^my, and gives
him his life for a prey, I^r. 39. 11, 12.

And in this sense the Saints of God are called his hidden Ones. Psalm. 83. 3.
Why so? not only because they are hid in Gods decree, and hid in Christ's
wounds, but oftentimes God hides them in time of common danger and calamity;
they are hidden Ones; Thus God reserved to himself seven thousand that had not
bowed the Knee to Baal; the Prophet knew not of any, but God knew of seven
thousand that he had hid; and in this sense it is well with the Righteous in
time of public misery.

But you will say, Sometimes it is worse than all this with them; sometimes the
Righteous dye and perish, and are carried away with a tempest; How is it well
with them then? Yes, yet still it is well with the Righteous; though their Life
be taken away, yet still it is well with them, and that in a twofold sense.

First, Many times God takes away the Righteous by death in great mercy; he
takes them away that they shall not see the miseries that are coming upon a
Land; as Virgil the Heathen Poet said, They were happy that dyed before their
Country, meaning, before they saw the ruins of their Country. And truly many
times God takes away his Children in mercy, that they shall not see the
miseries that are coming on a Land; you have a pregnant and clear Scripture for
this, 1 King. 14. 13. He only of the House of Jeroboam shall come to his grave;
it is spoken of A^ijah his Son, He only shall come to his grave, because in him
there was found some good thing toward the Lord God of Israel. God would put
this man into his grave betimes in mercy, because he should not see the evil
that was coming upon the Land. You have a parallel Scripture to this, 2 King.
22. v. ult. It is spoken of Josiah, I will gather thee to thy Fathers, thou
shall be gathered to thy grave in peace, and thine eye shall not see the evil
that I will bring upon this place. Why, Josiah died in battle: How is it said
then, that he went to his grave in peace? the meaning is this, because Josiah
was an holy man, he had made his peace with God, and so went to his grave in
peace; and because he should not see the evil approaching, therefore God
gathered him to his grave in peace.

Jerome speaks thus of Nepotian: itseems Jerome lived to see some troubles
before he died: Meeting with some storms; Now (said he) how happy is my friend
Nepotian that sees not these troubles? happy is he that is gotten (...) of the
storm, and is in the haven.

Thus Luther died in mercy before the troubles of Germany began to break forth.
Thus it is well with the Righteous, though they do die; God takes them away in
mercy, that they may not see approaching evils.

Secondly, Though the righteous do die, are taken away, and perish in astorm,
yet is it well with them, because death cannot hurt them; it can neither hurt
their Bodies, nor yet their Souls; the Body is safe, it does not perish, though
it does die; the bodies of the Saints are very precious dust in Gods account;
the Lord locks up these Jewels in the Grave, as in a Cabinet; the bodies of the
Saints lie mellowing and ripening in the grave, till a blessed time of
resurrection: How precious is the dust of a Believer! though the World mind it
not, yet it is precious to God. The Husbandman has some Corn in the Barn, and
other Corn in his ground; the Corn in the ground is as precious to him as that
in the Barn: Why, the Bodies of the Saints in the grave, are Gods Corn in the
ground, and God makes a very precious account of this Corn; the bodies of the
Saints shall be more glorious and blessed than ever at the resurrection.
Tertullian says, the Bodies shall be then Corpora Angelica; the Body shall be
angelified, in regard of that beauty and luster which shall be put upon it: As
it is with a piece of silk, or cloth, that is died of a Purple scarlet color,
it is made more bright and illustrious than it was before. Thus it is with the
bodies of the Saints, they are dyed of a brighter color at the resurrection,
they are made like Christ's glorious body, Phil. 3. 20. Thus, shall it be well
with the righteous in their bodies; they shall not perish.

Secondly, At death it shall be well with the righteous, as to their souls. O
it shall be a blessed time; Methinks it is with a Saint at the time of death,
just as it was with Paul in his voyage to Rome; the ship did break into many
pieces, but yet he got safe to shore; so it is with a believer, though the ship
of his body may be snap't and broken at death; yet the passenger is safe, the
soul gets safe to shore even to the heavenly* Jerusalem; then surely it is well
with the righteous at his death; the day of a believer's death is the birthday
of his blessedness; it is his ascension-day to heaven; his death-day is his
mariage-day with Jesus Christ; faith does but Contract us here, but at death
the Nuptials shall be solemnized in glory; and shall it not be well with the
righteous? they shall see God face to face: And says Austin, Ipse Deus sufficit
ad praemium. It will be heaven enough to have the ^ight of God. The Saints
shall then enter into joy; joy now enters into them here, but then they shall
enter into joy; they shall drink of that pure river that runs from God the ever
lasting Fountain.

Thus you see it shall go well with the righteous, however things go, though
troubles come, though death it self come; and therefore let those that are the
people of God, comfort themselves with these words.

To conclude this first point, what encouragement is this to all you that hear
me now, to begin to be righteous! This Text may tempt us all to be godly. Say
to the righteous, It shall be well with him; when things go never so ill with
him; yet still it shall be well with him: Grant that all things are ill with
you in your estate, in your relations; yet then, if you are righteous, all
things shall be well with you; your pardon is sealed, you are an Heir of Gods
Promises, all things shall work for good; you have God for your Father, you
have heaven in reversion for your inheritance; and is it not well with you? how
may this make us all in love with godliness, how* may this tempt us to be
godly? For if ever we would enjoy happiness, we must espouse holiness; Say to
the righteous, it shall be well with him. And so much for the first
proposition. The godly man's comfort in life and death.

Now if this will not prevail with men to make them leave their sins and become
righteous. I must pass in a few words to the next branch of my Text, to scare
men out of their sins, to affright them out of their wickedness: Woe to the
wicked, it shall be ill with him, for the reward of his hands shall be given
him. This, my beloved, is* the dark side of the cloud, and it may cause in
every* wicked man that hears me, a pa^pitation and trembling at the heart, Woe
to the wicked, it shall be ill with him, And so the Proposition is this:

That when things seem to be well with wicked men, it shall be ill with them at
last.

Though things seem to be well with the wicked, they have more then heart can
wish, yet it shall be ill with them at last; Vae improbo! Woe to the wicked; it
shall be ill with them. In Eccles. 8. 11. It shall not be well with the wicked,
nor shall he prolong his days, that are as a shadow, because he fears not
God. The God of Truth has pronounced it, this is as true as God is true, It
shall not be well with the wicked.

Now that I may a little clear this to you, I shall demonstrate it to you in
these following Particulars:

1. It is ill with the wicked in this life. 2. It is ill with him at his death.
3. It is ill with him at the day of Judgment. 4. It is ill with him after the
day of Judgment.
First, It is ill with the Wicked in this life. There Is hardly a wicked man
that hears me, that thinks so: when he has the affluence and confluence of
outward comforts, when he eats of the fat, and drinks of the sweet, he will
hardly believe that Minister that tells him it shall be ill with him; yea, but
it is ill with the wicked even in this life; foris it not ill with that man
that has a curse, yea the curse of God, entailed upon him? My Text pronounces
a curse against the sinner, Vae improbo, Woe to the wicked: And can that man
thrive that lives under a curse? Clouds of blood and wrath hang over the head
of a wicked man; he is heir to all the plagues that are written in the Book of
God; all God's curses are the Sinners portion, and if he dies in his sins, he
is sure to have the portion paid him. Woe to the Wicked; every bit of Bread he
eats, he has it with a curse, like poisoned Bread given to a Dog; every drop
of Wine he drinks, he swallows down a curse with it. Woe to the wicked, there is
a Curse in his cup, there is a curse on his table; God has said, Woe to him.

We read of Belshazzar, Dan. 5. 4, 5. that when he tasted the wine, he
commanded to bring the gold and silver vessels taken out of the Temple; then
they brought the gold and silver vessels, and drank wine, and praised the gods
of gold and silver. He was very jovial: but in the midst of his cups and
joyallity, woe to the Wicked; for in the same hour there came forth the fingers
of a Man's hand, and wrote over against the Candlestick on the wall a curse and
woe. Woe to the wicked; let a sinner live till he be a hundred years old, yet
still he is accursed, Esaias 23. 20. Though a sinner live a hundred years old,
yet shall he die accursed; his gray hairs have a curse upon them.

Secondly, It shall be ill with the wicked at the hour of death, and that in
two respects; Death puts an end to all his comforts, and death is a beginning
of all his miseries.

First, Death puts an end to a Sinner's comforts. There shall be no more
indulging of the Flesh, and pampering of it; no more cups of Wine, and no more
Music to be seen or heard then. In Rev. 18. 14. and 22. The things that thy
soul lusts after, are departed from thee; the voice of the Harpers, Musicians
and Trumpeters shall be no more at all in thee; it is spoken of the destruction
of Rome. Thus may it be said of a wicked man at death, All joy and pleasure is
now departed from thee; no more shall thou hear the voice of the Harp, Organ,
or Trumpet: no more shall the Sinner be clothed in Scarlet robes, or adorned
with sparkling Diamonds; Now, all oil and balsome, all joy and gladness, at
death shall cease and depart from the Sinner.

Secondly, As death puts a period to a Sinners mirth, so it lays a foundation
for all his sorrows. Usually before death does close the eye of the Sinners
body, the eye of his Conscience is first opened.

Every sin at the hour of death stands with a drawn sword in his hand: Those
sins that delighted the sinner formerly, now terrify and affright him. All his
joy and mirth is turned into sadness.

As sometimes you have seen Sugar lying in a damp place, dissolve and turn to
Water: Thus all the sugarly Joys of wicked men, at the hour of death turn to
water, even the water of tears and sorrow.

Thirdly, It shall be ill with a wicked man at the day of Judgment, when he is
cited before Gods Tribunal, when he shall leave courting his wickedness, and
stand at Gods Bar to answer for it.

You read of Foelix, that when he heard Paul speak of Judgment, Foelix
trembled. Josephus observes that Foelix was a wicked man; and she that then
lived with him, her name was Drusilla, whom he had enticed away from her
Husband, and lived in sin with her: Now when Foelix heard Paul speak of
Judgment, he trembled; his conscience that checked him for his sin.

Now, if Foelix trembled at the hearing of Judgment, what will sinners do when
the day of Judgment shall come; when all men's secret sins shall be made
manifest, when all their midnight wickedness shall be written upon their
Foreheads, as with the point of a Diamond?

At the day of Judgment, my Beloved, there will be two things:

1. The Legal Trial. 2. The Sentence.

1. The Legal Trial. God will call forth sinners by Name, and say, Stand forth,
Hear thy charge, Let me see what thou can answer to it? What can thou say
for all thy Sabbath-breaking? for all thy Drunkenness and Perjury? for all thy
Revenge and Malice? for all thy persecuting of my Members? what can thou say
for all these? Guilty or not guilty? Thou Wretch dare not say, Not Guilty;
for have not I been an eyewitness of all thy wickedness? Do not the Books
agree, the Book of thy Conscience, and the Book of my Omniscience? and can
thou plead, Not Guilty? Here the Sinner will be amazed with horror, and run
into desperation.

2. After this Legal Trial, follows the Sentence; Ite Maledicti, Go ye cursed;
What, ^o from the presence of Christ, in whose presence there is fullness of
joy! and go from Christ with a curse! That word Depart, said St. Chrysostom,
is worse than the torments themselves.

And, Beloved, remember this ye that go on in a sin; when once the Sentence is
past, it can never be reversed; This is the most Supreme Court of Judicature,
from whence there is no Appeal. Here on earth, men can remove their Cause from
one Court to another, from the Common Law to the Chancery; but if once the
Sentence be past at this Judgment-barr, there is no removing your Cause This is
the highest Court, there is no appealing any where else. And thus you see it is
ill with the Wicked at the day of Judgment.

Fourthly, It shall be ill with the wicked after the day of Judgment. Oh! then
there is but one way, and they would be glad if they might not go that way; But
they must go that way even to prison, yea to hell. Luke 16. 23, 24. In hell he
lift up his eyes. Hell is the very center of Misery, the spirits of torments
stilled out.

The Scripture tells us in Hell there are three things:

1. Darkness. 2. Fire. 3. Chains.

1. Hell is called a place of Darkness. In Jude v. 13. To them is reserved the
blackness of darkness for ever* Darkness, you know, is the most uncomfortable
thing in the world: A man that goes in the dark trembles every step that he
goes: Hell is a black Region; there is nothing but blackness of darkness: It
must needs be a dark place, where there shall be a separation from the light of
Gods presence. Indeed Austin thinks, that there shall be some little
sulphurous light: But suppose there be, that light shall only serve the damned
to behold the tragedy of their own misery, to see themselves tormented.

2. In Hell there is Fire; it is called a ^urning L^k; Rev. 20. 15. Whoso^ was
not found written in the bock of Life, was cast into the l^ke of fire. You
know, Fire is the most torturing Element, it makes the most dreadful impression
upon the flesh. Why, Hell is a place of Fire. It is disputed among some of the
learned, what kind of fire it is: I wish we may never feel what kind of fire it
is. Austin, Peter Lumb^rd, and others affirm, That it is a material Fire, but
far hotter than any culinary fire; the fire on your hearths is but painted fire
compared to this. But I rather think, the fire of the damned is partly
material, and partly spiritual. Partly material, to work upon the body; and
partly spiritual, which is the wrath of God to torment the Soul: This is that
L^ke of burning fire, Oh! Who knows the power of Gods anger? Who can dwell with
these burnings? It is intolerable to bear these scorchings, and it is
impossible for the damned to escape them.

3. In Hell there are Chains of darkness: In the 6. ver. of the Epistle of
Jude, Those sinners that would not be bound by any law of God, shall have
chains of darkness to bind them. But what is the meaning of this phrase, Chains
of darkness? I suppose it may be this, to intimate to us, That the wicked in
Hell shall not have power to walk up and down; which, perhaps, would be a
little ease to them, though a very little: yea, but they shall not have so much
as that little ease, but shall be chained, tied, and staked fast with chains of
darkness, that they shall not stir: And this is very terrible.

Suppose a man did always lie upon a down-bed, if he might not stir off the
place, it would be very painful to him, though on a bed of down; How terrible
then will it be to the damned, that must lie under the scorchings of Gods fury,
chained down, and not be able to move? And thus shall it be to the wicked.

And to add to the torments of Hell, there are two things which show it shall
be ill with the wicked, let them die when they will.

1. There is the Worm. 2. There is the Serpent.
1. There is the Worm, ^o torture the spirit; and this is no other but the worm
of Conscience, Mark 4. 44. Where their worm never dies: How dreadful will it be
to have this Worm gnawing continually! Melancthon called it, a hellish fury.
Conscience will be just as if a Worm full of poison were gnawing the heart of a
man: Those sinners that would never hear the voice of Conscience, shall for
ever feel the worm of Conscience.

2. There is the Serpent, and that is the Devil, called, the old Serpent,
Revel. 4. As there is the biting of the Worm, so there is the stinging of the
Serpent. The damned in Hell shall be forced to behold the Devil, that damned
Monster. I remember what Anselm says, I had rather endure all the torments of
this life, than see the Devil with bodily eyes: But this sight of the Devil the
wicked shall see whether they will or no; and not only see, but shall feel the
stingings of this old Serpent.

Satan is full of rage against Mankind, and he will show no mercy; as he puts
forth all his subtilty in tempting men, so he puts forth all his cruelty in
totmenting men.

And this is not all; there are two things more that aggravate the torments of
hell, to show that it shall be ill with the wicked.

1. These agonies, these hell-convu^sions, shall be for ever. Rev. 14. 11. The
smoke of their torment ^scended for ever and ever, and they shall have no rest
day nor night. Thus is it in hell; they would die, but they cannot; Mors sin^
morte, the wicked shall be always dying, yet never dead; always consuming,
yet never consumed; the smoke of their furnace ascends for ever and ever. Oh!
who can endure thus to be for ever on the wrack; this word Ever breaks the
heart of the wicked: They think a Sabbath long, and a Sermon long, and a Prayer
long; they cry out, When will these be over? Oh! how long then will it be to
lie in hell torments for ever and ever? After the wicked have lain there
millions of years, their torments will be as far from ending as they were the
first hour they came there.

2. The damned in hell shall have none to pity them. It is some comfort and
ease, to have friends pity us when we are on our sick beds, or under any
affliction; but the damned shall have none to pity them: Mercy will not pity
them, that is turned to fury: Christ will not pity them, he is no more advocate
for them: Angels will not pity them, for they rejoice to see the vengeance;
they insult and glory to see the justice of God executed upon them. Oh! how sad
is it to lie in the scalding furnace of Gods wrath, and to have none to pity
us? Gods bowels will be locked up, and his heart will be hardened to damned
sinners; then they shall call and God will laugh at them, Prove. 1. 26. I will
laugh at your calamity. Hear this, all you that go on in sin, It will be ill
with the wicked: O therefore turn from your sins, lest God tear you in pieces,
and there be now to deliver, or help you.

For the Application of this point.

First, What a confounding word is this to all the wicked, that go on
desperately in sin, that add drunkenness to thirst? Never was there such an
inundation of wickedness, as there is now adays: Men sin, as if they would sin
to spite God; as if they would dare heaven to punish them: men sin so
greedily, as if they were afraid, Hellgate would be shut up ere they could get
thither. How many are there that sin manfully? that go to Hell stoutly in their
wickedness? as Seneca speaks. These are in a sad condition. Remember what the
text says, Woe to the wicked, it shall be ill with them; ill with them in life,
in death and after death. A wicked man lives cursed, and dies damned. Sinners
are Gods standing mark that he shoots at, and he never misseth the mark. You
know what the Scripture says, There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. It
is a saying of Latimer, That is very sad fare, where weeping is the first
course, and gnashing of teeth is the second.

But whence may this gnashing of the teeth come?

1. It arises from the extremity of the torments that the damned suffer; this
makes them gnash their teeth with horror, they are not able to bear it, and
yet they know not how to avoid it.

2. The Wicked gnash their teeth out of envy, to think that the godly are happy
and blessed; those whom they reproached, hated and persecuted, they are happy
in glory, and they themselves are thrown down into Hell; this cuts them to the
heart to think of it, and makes them gnash their teeth, Luke 10. There shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth, when you shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and
Jacob in the Kingdom of God, and you your selves thrust out. And this is the
first use, showing the misery of a wicked ^han; if all the curses in the Bible
will make him miserable, he shall be miserable. God will make his Arrows drunk
with his blood.

Secondly, Take heed that none of you here be found in the number of the
Wicked: Take heed of being of this black Regiment: beware of the Devils
colors; fight not under this Banner: It shall be ill with the Wicked; the
Sinner and the Furnace shall never ^e parted.

In a word, I beseech you take heed of those sins that bring to Hell fire.
There are, says St. Bernard, fi^ry sins that bring men to hell fire. What are
these fiery sin? Why, they are the fire of Malice, the fire of Passion, the
fire of Lust, the fire of Concupiscence, and the fire of Revenge: these fiery
sins, bring men to fiery plagues, to Hell fire. When you are tempted to any
^in, think with your selves, How can I bear the lying in the fierceness of the
Wine Press of Gods wrath for ever?

I have read a story of a Virgi^, that being tempted by a young man to commit
folly; says she to him, If you will grant me but one request, I will do what
you desire. What is that? said he. Why, do but hold your Finger one hour in
this burning Candle. No, he would not do that: Said she to him, Will not you
for my s^ke hold your Finger one hour in the Candle, and would you have me lay
my Soul burning in Hell for ever, for the satisfying of your Lust? and thus she
refuted that temptation.

Why, Does Satan tempt you to Wickedness? hold up this Text against the Devil,
as a shield to quench his fiery darts; Satan, it will go ill with the wicked;
If I embrace thy temptation, I must be under thy tormenting for ever. O
therefore learn to be Righteous, It shall be well with the Righteous: Take heed
of living and dying in sin, It shall be ill with the Wicked: the God of Heaven
has said it.

I will conclude all, with a saying of Austin, says he, When a man has been
virtuous, the labor is gone, and the joy remains: when a man has been wicked,
the pleasure i^ gone, and the sting remains.

Dr. Iacomb's Prayer at St. Martin's, Ludgate.
BLessed God, thou art a God blessed for ever; thou give mercy to all
returning and repenting sinners; Thou art worthy to be praised by all that draw
^igh unto thee.

Thou have vouchsafed to us one Sabbath more, oh that we might all of us be in
the spirit upon this Lord's day; that, whatever we do, we may do it in the
strength of God, that we may offer spiritual sacrifices to God this day,
through our Mediator the Lord Jesus.

It is a very great condescension, that thou should suffer such as we are to
come unto thee* O Lord, we are unclean, we are unclean; from the crown of the
head to the sole of the foot, we are overspread with the Leprosy of sin; all
the faculties of our souls are defiled; our understandings are darkened, our
wills are corrupted: We have affections, but they are Carnal; we have hearts,
but they are impure; we have consciences, but they are seared. And as our
inward man, so our lives are unholy; as the fountain is, so is the stream:
besides that our general guilt that we brought into the world, we are guilty of
innumerable actual transgressions against thy holy Law. We think, oh Lord,
there are not greater sinners in the world than we: Our sins are attended with
many aggravations.

We have sinned against prayers, against vows, and promises; we have had as
much light shining before us, as any in the world have had: Great is our
unbelief. Oh that we could ^ay these things to our hearts!

We do r^fuse to come to Christ, we go about to establish a righteousness of
our own, and neglect the righteousness of God by faith in Jesus Christ: how are
our hearts glewed to the present things of this world! oh what do we do for thy
glory! how u^reformed are we under all the ways of God that he has taken to
make us a holy people! Give us a sight of our sins; oh Lord, we confess,
sometimes we do make some formal confession, but we do not find our hearts
melted for sin as they should.

Oh take away from every one of us this heart of stone, and give a heart of
flesh; give us tender hearts, make us sensible of all our departing from thee.

Oh let us look upon Him whom we have pierced, and let us mourn that the water
of penitential sorrow may ^low from us; we are strangers to our selves; we do
not see what a Hell there is in our natures; oh how should we put our mouths in
the dust, and loath our selves, if so be there might be hope!

Oh Lord, convince us of sin; give us such a sight of sin as may make us fly to
thee; give us such a sight of our own guilt that may prepare us for the grace
of God; now we are stung with the fiery Serpent, help us to come to Jesus
Christ our hrazen Serpent; give us thy holy Spirit, to bring us out of the
state of nature; oh let that God that made us creatures, make us new creatures;
oh Lord, we are thine own work, but we are dead in trespasses and sins; give us
grace, and speak a word to them that are dead: put out thine almighty power,
and draw some sinner to Christ this day: and those that have any breathings
after thee, oh thou that gave them that desire, carry on thine own work in
them: where thou have begun a good work* carry it on: let sin, as the house of
Saul, grow weaker and weaker, and grace, as the house of David, grow stronger
and stronger. Oh increase our faith; oh Lord, in this time we do not only stand
in need of grace, but of a great measure of grace; oh help us by faith to rely
upon God, that thou may help us at last. Bless with us all thine, remember
thy people from one end of the world unto the other; thy people are very low;
this is a time of Jacob's troubles; the bush is burning every day, (...) thou
the hope of Israel, and the Savior thereof, show thy self in mercy to these
nations We bless thee for all thy meroies, that thy judgments do not feize
upon us every day, that thou do not sweep us away, that thou do not rain
fire and brimstone on England, as thou did on Sodom; our sins cry aloud to
Heaven for vengeance; God is greatly provoked every day, and it is a miracle of
patience that yet thou have not destroyed us. God can pardon the sins of the
Nation at once, but we are not fit for pardon; we d^ not humble our selves, oh
Lord, humble us. Give repentance to England from the highest to the lowest,
that we may return unto thee.

We desire to bless thee, that our enemies have not had their wills over us;
they said, they would pursue, and overtake, and satisfy their lusts; but God
did blow upon them, and they did sink in the mighty waters; and thou have yet
preserved thy Church: we pray thee do not leave us, nor remove thy Gospel,
whatsoever thou do. Pour down the best of thy blessings upon thy Servant and
our Sovereign, Charles, by thy Grace, of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland
King: bless him with the blessings of Heaven and Earth; make Him a blessing to
all of us: bless him in all His Relations: the Lords of the Privy Council: Look
on them that have desired an interest in our prayers: Known to thee are all of
them, know their souls in this time of adversity; make their beds in their
sickness; give faith to them that complain of unbelief; give the spirit of
Prayer to those that complain they cannot pray. Be a Counselor to those that
want Counsel in their affairs either by Sea or Land, let thy blessing go with
them wherever they go: spare the lives of children, if it be thy will.

Prepare us for thy good and holy Word: let it be a savor of life unto life,
and let it come with power unto us. Oh let us hear it as Thy Word: n^i as the
word of a poor man, but as the Word of God: And all for the Lord Christ his
sake, for whom we bless thee: to whom with thee and the Spirit of Grace, be
given Glory and Honor for evermore,

Amen.
Dr. Iacomb's Forenoon Sermon.
JOHN 8. 29. And he that sent me, is with me: the Father has not left me
alone: for I do always those things that please him.
THese are the words of our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; they are
spoken by himself, and they are spoken of himself; though yet, in a sober and
modest sense, they are applicable to all his members: That which Christ here
affirms, is, that the presence of God was always with him; and this is first
propounded, He that sent me is with me; and then it is amplified, and the
Father has not left me alone: and then thirdly, the reason of this is annexed;
for I always do those things that please him.

I shall speak but very little of the words as they do refer to Christ; he
tells us, his Father was with him; he did not leave him alone in all the
troubles and difficulties that he met withal in the finishing the great work of
man's Redemption; still God was with him: It is true, there was a time when
Christ was without the sensible manifestation of his Father's presence, when he
cried out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Why, but yet even then in
truth and in reality his Father did not leave him; for though he had not the
evidences of his Father's presence, yet he had the influences of his Father's
presence. It would take up much time to show you how in all Particulars the the
Father was present with Christ: I will only speak this one word, and instance
in this one thing; God's assisting presence was always with him, both in his
active, and also in his passive obedience; and indeed, he had that work to do,
and those miseries to suffer, that, if God had left him, if he had not been
mightily assisted by the Divine Nature, Christ as mere man could neither have
done, nor have suffered what he did; but the Father was with him, to support
him; Isa. 42. 1. Behold my servant whom I uphold. You shall find that Christ
did act faith upon this, in Isa. 50. 7. The Lord God will help me, therefore
shall I not be confounded. Ver. 9. The Lord will help me. So to the same effect
is Psalm. 16. 9. And you shall find this made good to him in the Scriptures, in
his greatest necessities.

Take a Double Instance.

In the first place* After he had been engaged in that Combat with Satan, you
read of in Matthew. 4. (The strongest Combat or Due^ that ever was fought;
wherein you have the Prince of Peace, and the prince of darkness; the Lion of
the Tribe of Judah, and the roaring lion that seeks how to devour; both of them
putting forth their utmost strength, and endeavoring to overcome each the
other: Now I say) in this Combat the Father did not leave Christ, but he helps
him; for he sends an Angel for to minister unto him, Mat. 4. 11.

So in Christ's bitter Agony in the Garden, just before his bitter passion and
death upon the Cross, the Father did not leave him alone; for he sent an Angel
unto him to strengthen him, Mat. 22. 43. and so in several other places, and in
several other things I might instance; but I shall pass this by. I but now, Why
did the Father thus stand by Christ? he gives you the reason of it in the Text,
because he always did the things that pleased him: This I shall open in a
double respect.

First, Christ's undertaking the Work of our Redemtion: it was very well
pleasing unto his Father, that poor lost und o^e sinners should be brought back
again unto God, and restored unto his love and favor: I say, the Father was
infinitely well-pleased with Christ in this undertaking, Isa. 53. 10. The
pleasure of the Lrrd shall prosper in his hand; the pleasure of the Lord, that
is, the Work of our Redemption; wherein God the Father took great pleasure or
delight; therefore when Christ was publicly in ^he eye of the world to enter
upon this great Work, the Father sends him out with this witness, This is my
beloved Son, in whom I am well-pleased. He speaks not only of his well-pleasing
to his Person, but also to his well-pleasing as to his Undertaking.

Secondly, as the Work it self was pleasing unto God, so Christ's managing of
^his Work was all along pleasing unto his Father: and that does appear in this,
that Christ in all things kept to his Father's Commission, and to his Father's
Command: I say, in all things he kept to his Father's Commission; he did
nothing here upon Earth, but what was within the compass of his Commission;
for, says he, in the verse before the Text, I do nothing of my self, but as my
Father bids me. So also he acted in conformity to his Father's Will; that was
the rule and square by which Christ ordered all his actions; his eyes was still
upon his Father's Will; whatever he willed him to do, that he did* whatever he
willed him to suffer, that he suffered; and thus he always did the things that
were pleasing to his Father. But I do not insist further upon the words, in
this reference; For my design is to bring down the words unto our selves, to
those that are the members of Christ; for there is the same disposition of
heart in all Believers to please God: In all things to please God, this was the
frame and temper and carriage of Christ: so it is the frame and temper of every
true Believer; and this is a part of our likeness unto Christ; As you know
there is a blessed resemblance and similitude between Christ and his Members;
they have the same spirit that Christ had, only in a different proportion; for
he had it without measure; they have the same grace as Christ had for
substance, though not for degree; Of his fullness we all have received grace for
grace; that is, as many interpret it, grace answerable unto grace: As the print
in the wax, answers to the print in the Seal; and as face answers to face: so
grace in believers, answers unto that grace that was in Christ: They are to
show forth the virtues of Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 11. Now this was the grace, and
virtue, and holiness of Christ; that He always did the things that pleased his
Father. Why this is in all believers, only with this difference; it was actual
performance in the one, it is but endeavor in the other; it was perfect in the
one; it is sincere, but imperfect in the other.

Christ always did the things that pleased God; a Believer endeavors always
to do the things that please God; he does not always do so; witness David in
the Case of his uncleanness, when he displeased the Lord, as it is in 2 Samuel 11.

The Observation I intend to speak to, shall be this:

They that please God, and endeavor always to do the things that please God,
such God will be with: such the Father will not leave alone; especially in
times of suffering and trouble. (For I will bring it to that Case.)

Indeed God will not leave such at any time; for that promise is exceeding
full, Hebr. 13. 5. I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. I do not know any
one promise in all the Bible, that is expressed with such an Emphasis as that
Promise is; such a multiplication of Negatives in the Original. But especially,
God will not leave such in an afflicted and suffering condition.

In the prosecuting of this, I will speak to four things: First, I will show
you when a man may be said to do the things that please God. 2. I will confirm
the truth of the Doctrine. 3. I will show you in what respects God will be with
them that desire to please him, in a suffering condition. 4. I will give you
the grounds and reasons of it; and then I shall come to the Application.

For the first: We please God in what we do, when we act, 1. In a suitableness
to Gods nature: And 2. In subjection to Gods Law: For pleasing of God lies in
these two things. As that pleases a man which is suitable to his disposition,
and is correspondent with his Command: We do the things that please God, when
we do that which God does; and when we do that which God commands: When we hate
sin, as God hates sin; when we are holy, as God is holy. You shall find it in
Col. 1. 10. That you may walk worthy of God, unto all well-pleasing. Observe,
This walking worthy of God, is walking suitably, or walking answerably to God.
Mat. 3. 8. Bring forth fruit worthy of repentance; or, bring forth fruit
answerable to repentance; so, to walk worthy of God, is to walk suitable to
God, to his Nature: Now then, observe what follows, that you might walk worthy
of God to all wellpleasing; then we please God, when we walk suitably unto God:
So also when we act in a blessed conformity to God, to his Law; for nothing can
please the good God, but what is good: Now the Law being the measure and
standard of all goodness, nothing can be good, but what bears conformity to
this Law, which is the will of God. God is well pleased, when his will is
observed: As you know, you that are Masters, your servants please you when they
do your will. That inference of the Apostle for this is very apposite, Romans 8.
8. So then, they that are in the flesh cannot please God. What is this same
inference grounded upon? because the carnal mind is enmity against God; for it
is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can; so that they that are in
flesh cannot please God. Why? Because there is that principle in them, as
carries out a real enmity to the Law and Will of God; it is as if the Apostle
had said, They will not be subject to Gods will, nor obedient to Gods commands;
there is a principle of enmity in them against these things, and so cannot
please God: God is pleased when his will is fulfilled, and his commands
observed; to please God, is, in all things so to act, that whatever we do, we
may express a likeness to Gods nature, and a blessed subjection to Gods
revealed will; and this is the first thing.

A second thing is the proof of the Doctrine; they that thus please God, he will
be with them, he will not leave them alone; especially in an hour of trial:
For, my brethren, assure your selves of this, That which the Father did for
Christ, he will do for all his Members; it is true, Christ's sufferings, being
greater than ours possibly can be, and so his relation to God being higher than
ours is; (he a Son by eternal Generation, we only by Adoption) he had the
presence of God in a more glorious manner then we can expect; but yet in our
Sphere according to the measure of our trial, and according to our capacity, we
shall as really have the presence of God with us, as Christ had with him; that,
as we are partakers of Christ's sufferings, so we also shall be partakers of
Christ's support; He that will be present with believers in heaven, as he is
with Christ, he will be present with believers here on earth, as he was with
Christ in all his forrows and sufferings.

Now for the confirming of this comfortable truth, I need not speak much: Many
promises you have in Scrpture for it, and whatever God has promised, he will
certainly make good: Turn to that one promise instead of many, Isa. 43. 2. When
thou passest through the water, I will be with thee; through the rivers, they
shall not overflow thee; when thou walk through the fire, thou shall not be
burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. And you shall find too that
the Saints have experienced it, in all ages God has made it good. Jacob was a
man that met with many sharp trials, God exercised him with many troubles; you
shall find that when he was going to Padan-Aram, and was in a very afflicted
condition, Genesis 28. 15. God comes unto him, and says, Behold I am with thee,
Genesis 31. 5. His father frowned upon him, but the God of his fathers helped him:
Joseph, ( Genesis 29. 20.) his master took him, put him into prison, a place where
the Kings Prisoners were bound; he was in the prison, but the Lord was with
Joseph. The Prophet Jeremy was thrown into a dungeon, but the Scripture says,
God was with him. The three Children were thrown into the Furnace of fire, but
there was a fourth with them, and that was the Son of God, Dan. 3. 25. Paul
when he was brought to his trial, all men forsook him, but God stood by him, 2 Timothy 4. 16. So the Christians in all their sharp sufferings, 2 Cor. 4. 9. they
were persecuted, but not forsaken; persecuted by men, but not forsaken by God.
God has abundantly made out this, and does so still, that he will never leave
those alone in a time of suffering, who desire unfeignedly in all things to
please God.

Now the third thing is to show you in what respects God is with such: why this
presence of God is an active presence: God is not merely with his people, but
he is with them in an active way: for this is a certain truth, God is working
when the Saints are suffering, I will open this in several particulars.

First, God is with such in his teaching presence. Gods correction, and Gods
instruction they usually go together; and where there is the chastening of Gods
hand, there is also the teaching of Gods Spirit, Psalm. 90. 12. Blessed is the
man whom thou chastenest, and whom thou teach. Christ, though he were a Son,
yet learned obedience by the things that he suffered: God teaches his upright
ones many lessons in a time of adversity, which they never learned in a time of
prosperity. For we are like idle boys, or bad Scholars, that learn best when
the rod is over us: In a prosperous condition Gods speaks to us, and we mind
him not, Ier. 2. 21. I spoke to thee in thy prosperity, but thou would not
hear: and this has been thy manner from thy youth upwards: In prosperity God
speaks once and twice, as Job speaks, but we will not hear; but in the time of
adversity God opens the ears: Judge. 8. 16. As Gideon taught the men of Succoth
with thorns and briars: so does God teach his people by afflictions: and oh the
many blessed truths that they learn, when they are under the rod. When they
want liberty, Oh what a mercy is it to have liberty then! When they have not
Ordinances as before, what a mercy is it to have Ordinances then! Oh what an
evil thing is it then for them, that they have departed from God* God teaches
them these things then: sin is never so bitter, mercy is never so sweet, as in
a time of suffering: Oh how vain and empty is the creature then! Oh how sweet
is communion with God then! I say, such things as these God teaches then.

Secondly, God is with such in his guiding presence, Psalm. 73. 24. Thou will
guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive me unto glory. When Israel
was in the Wilderness, then they had the cloud to guide them. It is a blessed
thing to live under the conduct and direction of the wise God: we never have so
much of this as in an hour of travel: indeed the people of God never fly so
much to God for direction as at such a time: as Saul, when he was in distress,
then he calls for the Ephod. And thus it is with us under affliction; then we
look to God.

Thirdly, God is with them in his preserving and hiding presence: God is the
Saints hiding place, their Shield, their Buckler, their Rock, their Defense:
the Scripture-expressions are many to hold out Gods protection as to his
people: God has a constant care over them to preserve them and save them; oh
but especially in a time of trouble: as the Mariner is never so careful of the
Ship as under a storm; So God is never so careful of his Church and people as
under an affliction. Jeremy is in the Dungeon, now God saves him: Daniel is in
the Den, now God saves him; The three Children in the Fire, now God saves them:
Peter is in Prison, now God saves him: The Mother never tends the Child so
carefully, as when the child is sick; and Providence is never so tender to the
people of God, as under a suffering condition.

Fourthly, God is with them in his comforting presence: 2 Cor. 4. 1. Who
comfort us in all our tribulation: and usually we have most of consolation
from God, when we have most of tribulation from without: as our sufferings do
abound, so our consolation does abound much more: The Child that is beaten when
it is well, is cherished when it is ill: when persons are sick, then you give
them Cordials: God gives the best of comforts in the worst of times: when the
burden is heavy upon the back, then the peace of Conscience is great within:
the worse it is without, the better it is within: when men discover most of
anger, then God discovers most of love.

Fifthly, God is with such in his strengthening presence, to enable them, and
to support them, to undergo whatever he is pleased to call them unto: this is
the way of our good and gracious God, he always gives ou^ strength as he lays
on affliction: he never leaves his Children alone in this respect: he will be
with them to support them: though it may be not to deliver, yet he will
cerrainly be with them to support; the rod and the staff they go together,
Psalm. 23. 4. the afflicting rod, and the supporting staff: when one hand is
upon the Saint to afflict, then the other hand is underneath the Saint to
support: Isai. 41. 10. I will uphold thee, I will strengthen thee; fear not, I
will help thee; yea, I will uphold thee with the right hand of my
righteousness. This David found, I cried unto the Lord in my distress, he
answered me, and strengthened me in my inward man, Psalm. 138. 3. Oh when men
afflict, God supports: when men put the Children of God into deep waters, then
God takes them by the chin, and holds them up, that they shall not sink and be
drowned.

Sixthly, God is with them in his sympathizing presence: Oh he has a tender
sense of all the sorrows and calamities of his people! Oh it grieves him when
they are grieved! they that touch them, touch the Apple of his eye: in all
afflictions he is afflicted, Saul, Saul, Why persecutest thou me? Every blow
that is given to them, God bears a part of it himself: As they are sensible of
Gods dishonor, so God is sensible of their sufferings; it pains him to the
heart to see his Children wronged and abused by a malicious world.

Seventhly, He is with them by his sanctifying presence: all their troubles are
to do them good, and to make them good: and therefore the furnace it is but to
refine them from their dross: the pruning hook of affliction, is but to cut off
their luxuriant branches: God takes the sharp knife into his hand and lances
them, but it is only to fetch out their corruption: By this shall the iniquity
of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit to take away his sin.

Eighthly, God is with them by his quickening presence, to make their Prayers
more servent, to make their requests to the throne of Grace more importunate.
The children of God cry most to him when they suffer most from men, and their
prayers are best when their condition is worst: Prayer shortens affliction, and
affliction heightens Prayer: God is with them to hear their Prayers. Oh the
Prayer of the afflicted that comes up to Heaven! God hears the sighs and g^ones
of his oppressed ones, their tears pierce the Heavens, they call upon God in
time of trouble, and pour out their sorrows before the Lord, and he does hear
them.

Ninthly, God is with them by his raising presence, to raise up their hearts
higher, to elevate their souls, and bring them more near to himself. Gods
people when they meet with troubles in the world, oh nothing so sweet unto them
as the enjoyment of God: then no life so sweet unto them as the life of faith;
then they relish a sweetness in the promise: then every smile of God, oh how
welcome is it! then all the affections of their souls center in God, and run to
God: as in winter time all the sap of the tree runs to the root: in summer time
it spreads it self in the body, but in the winter it goes to the root: when a
man is sick* all the blood goes to the heart: so, in a suffering condition all
the affections of the soul go to God.

But now what are the Reasons why God will not leave his people that thus
desire to please him?

Why, 1. God loves them, therefore he will not leave them; persons we love, we
cannot leave: especially when they are in a distressed condition; and as God
has set his love upon them, so they have set their love upon God, they love
God. Psalm. 91. 15. you h^ve there an expression, Because he has set his love
upon m^, therefore I will deliver him: he shall call upon me, and I will answer
him, I will be with him in trouble. God is ^ God of bowels, of great pity and
compassion, and therefore he will not leave his people in a time of distress:
you know bowels how they stand in you toward them that are in misery; it goes
to the heart of a merciful man, to leave a person in misery: Oh how great are
the bowels and compassions of God Is Ephraim my son, is he a pleasant child?
Oh, my bowels are turned within me, I will have mercy on him.

2. Such as please God shall have his presence under suffering, because now
they need God most: if God will not leave his people as to temporal supplies,
because they need such and such things; they need meat, and they need
clothing: surely much more God will not leave his children as to spiritual
supplies, under times of distress, because then they need God. Oh what can a
Believer do, or what can a Believer suffer when God leaves him? his strength is
in God, his support is in God, his comfort is in God; his All is in God, and
therefore if God now leave him, what will become of him? he needs God at all
times, but never so much as when his condition is dark and troubled What was
Sampson, that man of so great strength, when his hair was gone? And what is a
Believer when his God is gone?

3. God loves to see his people cheerful in a time of suffering* and therefore
he is with them; he loves not that they should walk dejectedly. When God is
present, Paul and Silas can sing in prison: the Apostles can rejoice, that God
honors them to be reproached for him. When God is present, the people of God
are not only che^rfull under tribulation, but can glory: their Cross is their
Crown: but if God be withdrawn, what can there be? drooping hearts, and pensive
sorrows.

4. God will not leave them, because they will not leave God: God will not
leave them because they suffer for his sake: were they not tender of Gods
glory, and careful to please him, they might be free from suffering as well as
others; but it is for Gods sake they suffer; For thy sake, we are killed like
sheep all the day long.

Lastly* It is thus, because God will make it appear to all the World, that he
puts a difference between them that desire to please him, and other men: God
has a value for such: Do but see how Moses argues the case with God ( Exodus
33. 13.) and so on, where he comes to God with a great request, that God should
show him his way that he might know it: Why says God to him, My presence shall
go with thee. Moses said unto him, It is well thou art pleased to promise so
great a mercy; If thy presence go not with me, carry us not hence: for wherein
shall it be known that I and thy people have found grace in thy sight? Is it
not in this, that thou go with us? Observe* Moses pleads with God, How his
favor and love, and mercy, should be with them, unless he were present with
them? And so God, he walks with his people in trouble; for how should the world
see that God regarded them, and did favor them, unless he manifested his
presence unto them in a time of trouble and affliction?

Dr. Iacomb's Afternoon Sermon.
JOHN 8. 29. And he that sent me, is with me: the Father has not left me
alone: for I do always those things that please him.
I Was upon these words in the morning; having spoken something to them as they
refer to Christ who spoke them here of himself: I then brought them down to
his Members, Believers: and so propounded this Observation from them, That
whoever they are that desire to please God, to do the things that are pleasing
to him, God will be with such, end the Father will not leave such al^ne
especially in a time of suffering and trouble.

In the prosecuting of this point I spoke to four things, which I shall not now
repeat, but come to the mark which I intend at present; and that is to make
some Application.

1. Let me endeavor to prevail with every one of you, so to carry your selves
in your several places and capacities, that whatever you do, you may please God.

It was a blessed testimony that was given of Enoch, Before his translation he
had this testimony, that he pleased God. Oh how happy will they be at the great
day of Judgment, who shall be singled out by Christ, before Angels and Men;
and Christ shall say of them, This was the Man, or this was the Woman that
pleased God! There is a great deal of pleasing in the World, but there are
(...) very few that make this their business, to please God; therefore I would
have you shun that which is sinful, and press after that which is matter of
Duty.

1. There are some that mind nothing but to please themselves, to promote their
own interest, to love their own ease, to indulge themselves in their own carnal
delights; but they never mind the good of others, or the pleasing of God; the
Apostle speaks of and against these, Romans 15. 1, 2, 3.

2. There are others that look no further than the pleasing of men; if they can
but keep fair with men, and shun the displeasure of men, that is all they aim
at: but, my Brethren, what a poor thing is it to please man, and displease God?
what a poor thing is it to have Man to be our Friend, and God to be our Enemy?
to have the smiles of a poor dying perishing Worm, and to lie under the frowns
of the great God?

Indeed, there is a good pleasing of men, to please them for their Edification,
as the Apostle speaks, Romans 15. 2. and so the Apostle speaks of himself, 1 Cor.
10. 32. Even as I please all men in all things, that is, in all things that are
of an indifferent nature, not simply civil, nor simply good, in all such things.

This Apostle was of a yielding and complying spirit, that he might thereby the
better insinuate himself into the affections of men, and be more instrumental
to the glory of God in the work of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9. 22. To the weak became
I as weak, that I might gain the weak; I am made all things to all men, that I
might by all means save some; and this I do for the Gospel sake.

But now in matter of Duty, such things as are expressly determined by God, and
so are either good or evil; in these things the Apostle would be no pleaser of
men: If I should please men, I should not be the servant of Christ, Gal. 1. 10.
It is good to please other^ to their Edification; but we must not please others
to their own ruin and condemnation; It is good to please men, when we can so
do, and not grieve God.

Instead of pleasing men, let it be your constant care and best endeavor in
all things to please God: my Brethren, this is a duty of so great importance,
that, was I now to take my leave of you, and should certainly know that I
should never speak to you more* as we are come very near to that; for though I
speak to you as a living man, yet I speak to you as a dying Minister, this, I
say, is a duty of that weight and importance, that I know not what to press
upon you more material then this; consult but two places of Scripture, Col. 1.
For this cause we do not cease to pray for you: What was the thing the Apostle
in this his constant Prayer did beg of God for them? It was this, That they
might please God; and when he was taking his leave in the winding up of his
Epistle to the Hebrews, Now the God of peace that brought again from the dead
our Lord Jesus, the great shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the
everlasting covenant, make you perfect in every good work to do his will,
working in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight. I need not go beyond
the Text for Motives to stir you up to these Endeavors: For

( Motive 1.) First, Consider what that God is which I would have you endeavor
to please; He is that God which made Heaven and Earth; that God before whom all
this World is as nothing, but as a little dust in the balance, and as a drop
of water to the bucket; that God whom Angels adore and worship; that God who by
a word from his mouth is able to bring the whole Universe into nothing. Will
not you study to please this God? But further consider what this God is to you:
He is the fountain of your being; he is the God of all your mercies; he is your
Creator and Sovereign; he is your Maker and Lawgiver. It is he that by a smile
can make you happy, and by a frown can make you miserable; it is he that has
Heaven and Hell at his disposal, who opens and none can shut* who shuts and
none can open. He that must judge every one of you either to eternal
blessedness, or else* to eternal torments; it is he in whose hands your breath,
your life, your soul, your All is; will you not endeavor to please this God?
as the Prophet argues in point of fear, Isa. 51. 12. Who art thou that art
afraid of a man that shall die, or of the Son of man that shall be made as
grass, and forgettest the Lord thy maker? Oh poor Creature, Who ar^ thou that
go about to please a mortal dying man, and do not go about to please the
Great God, thy Creator and Sovereign!

2. Consider that relation wherein you profess your selves to stand to God; he
is your Master; you his Servants; he is your Father, you his Children; he is
your Lord, you his Subjects: You know all that are in close Relations, will
study to please them that are above them, as the Servant his master, the child
his father, the subject his Prince; All persons that are in a state of
inferiority, will study to please their Superiors, especially when they do
depend upon them. Oh! how infinitely is God above those Relations! Alas, there
is but a very little distance betwixt you and your Servants, and yet you expect
they should please you; will you not therefore please God? especially
considering your dependence upon him.

3. You shall not lose by pleasing God; that is enough to put us upon this; He
that pleases God, profits himself; in that very act wherein we please God,
we profit our selves: Men can do but little for us, and yet upon what they can
do, we study to please them.

Let me open this in a few particulars:

1. If you will sincerely endeavor in all things to please God, God will give
you a gracious return to all your prayers. Oh what a mercy is this for a man to
have his prayers answered by God! 1 John 3. 22. Whatever we ask, we receive of
him, because we keep his commandments, and do those things that are pleasing
in his sight. Never expect that God should hear any Prayers, if we do not
endeavor to do those things that please him.

2. Do you please God, and he will please you; Mercy pleases us, and Duty
pleases God. Now when we please God in a way of Duty, he will please us in a
way of Mercy: If we order our ways so as to please God, he will order his
ways so as to please us.

3. Great is the benefit of pleasing God, even as to men; and this Solomon sets
before you, Prove. 16. 7. When a man's ways please the Lord, he makes even his
enemies to be at peace with him; and he has such another expression, Prove. 22.
11. He that loves pureness of heart, the King shall be his Friend: the meaning
of this Scripture is this, When we keep close to God, and walk in compliance
with his will, and make it our great design to please him, He will give us to
find favor in the eyes of men: He that makes God his Friend, God will make
that man's Enemies to be his Friends. Men are possibly full of anger, revenge,
and exasperation: be it so; do you desire to please God* God can turn their
hearts toward you; God can sweeten them in their spirits, and take away that
venom that is in them: so you know he did in the case of Esau to his Brother
Jacob.

4. This is the way to Heaven and Happiness; God will be pleased before the
Sinner shall be saved Heb. 11. Enoch before his translation had this testimony
that he pleased God; there is no way to Heaven but by this way: the Child
pleases the Father, and then the Father gives him the Inheritance. So it is
here.

5. Let me return to the argument in the Text* God will never (...) them alone,
that desire sincerely to please him. (...) this should be a very prevailing
Motive to you* (...) now; Please God, and he will never leave you, no not in a
time of distress and trouble. Here is the great difference betwixt a faithful
God, and a false Man.

In time of trouble and adversity men leave us and forsake us; in time of
prosperity then they flatter as, and preten^ a great deal of friendship and
kindness: But as no man looks upon the Dial when the Sun is under a cloud; so
these very men that pretend so much of Kindness and friendship; if so be we do
but come under a frown, or into trouble, then their Friendship and Kindness is
at an end, as Paul said, No man stood by him when he came to be tried before
Nero; all men forsook him, but God did not forsake him. The Wiseman has an
expression, Prove. 17. 17. A friend loves at all times, and a brother is born
for adversity; But where shall we find such a friend? and indeed where shall we
find such a brother? But now if you will please God, God will stand by you when
all men leave you; When you have the greatest need of God, he will then stand
by you; If you be in a Prison, he will be with you; If you be banished, he will
be with you: If Sin does not part God and you, certainly no Affliction shall
part God and you.

Study to please God; Oh, is it not a sad thing for God to leave you? that is
the saddest of all; when we lose God, we lose all, Hos. 9. 12. Woe unto them
when I depart from them. What are all your mercies if God leave you? no more
than if a man should have a fair pleasant House, and never see the Sun more.

Oh do the things that always please the Lord, and he will never leave you;
under mercies, under afflictions, he will be with you, and then your mercies
shall be very sweet, and your afflictions shall not be very bitter; You know
how earnest Moses was Number. 10. 31. with his Father in law, Hobab the Midianite,
Leave us not I pray thee, forasmuch as thou know how we are to encamp in the
wilderness, and thou may be to us as eyes. Oh keep God to you, especially
when you are entering into the wilderness of trouble, God will be to you
instead of eyes; he will be your Counselor, your Comforter, your Guide, your
Treasurer, your Portion, your All.

I might add one thing more in the last place.

Study to please God, because he is so easy to be pleased; this is a motive to
us to endeavor to please those persons who are easy to be pleased; a Child
that has a Father that is easy to be pleased, a Servant that has a Master
that is easy to be pleased, will study to please them. Sincerity pleases God,
though in the midst of much infirmity; He is so gracious and merciful, that
whenever a poor sinner does but desire to please God, he will accept of those
desires; If we can but please God, it is no great matter whether we please men
or not.

I shall conclude this branch with 1 These. 4. 1. We beseech you brethren, and
exhort you in the Lord Jesus, that as you have received of us how you ought to
walk and please God, that you would abound more and more.

Use. By way of direction: I should here show you how you are to please God. I
told you in general in the morning this pleasing of God lies in two things.

1. In suitableness to his Nature. 2. In subjection to his Law.
If you would please God in all your Actions, look to this, That what you do,
may bear some resemblance to his Nature, and hold forth obedience to his Law.

Consult the Will of God, and in all things act in conformity to that Will; do
not allow your selves in the Commission of any known sin, for that will
certainly displease God; as it was said of David when he took Bathsheba to
Wife; but, says the Text, The thing displeased the Lord. Do not bauk any known
duty, for that will displease God. In a word, be holy in all manner of
Conversation.

This being too general, I shall not insist upon it; only in a word, more
particularly,

Do those things now, make Conscience of those Duties which now lie upon you,
in the doing of which you will certainly please God: And they are such as these:

Be steadfast in the good ways of God; in the midst of a backsliding and
apostatizing age, stand fast to the law of God, Phil. 4. 1. Contend for the
faith which is delivered to the Saints, (the 3d. Verse of the Epistle of Jude.)

Be not ashamed to own Christ before all the World; if you be ashamed of him on
Earth, he will be ashamed of you in heaven; and woe be to that Sinner whom
Christ is ashamed to own.

Reckon Reproaches for the Name of Christ better than the Pleasure of sin that
is but for season.

When God calls you to it, assert the purity and spirituality of
Gospel Worship; Do not place Religion in a few Shadows where the Substance is
neglected; but chiefly mind Self-denial, Mortification, Crucifixion to the
World, keeping up close Communion with God.

Love the people of God, whatever the World say or think of thee; for God is
highly pleased when he sees his Children loved.

Keep up Religion in your Families, whatever scorn or contempt is cast upon
you. Oh that you would labor to be of Abraham's spirit; I know, says God, he
will command his Children and his Household after him, and they shall keep the
way of the Lord, Genesis 18. 19.

I do not know any one better means for the keeping up of Religion in this
Nation, than for Masters of Families to be conscientious in the discharging of
this Duty.

Be good in bad times; be Patterns of good works to those that shall behold you.

Let no Reproach or Obloquy make you to abate your exact walking with God;
whatever you meet withal in the ways of Holiness and a strict life, say, If
this be to be vile, I will be more vile.

Make Conscience of a strict observation of the Lord's day; take heed of that
Sacrilege of stealing away holy time; of prostituting that to common and civil
use, which is impropriated and dedicated to the service of God.

Pray for, and love, all those that have been instrumental for your spiritual
good in the work of the Ministry, whatever dirt is now thrown in their Faces,
and though you never get more good by them.

Forget not to distribute to the necessities of God's people, that are many of
them in a low condition; for this is a sacrifice of a sweet Odor, and
well-pleasing to him.

Carry your selves with all Patience and Christian Meekness toward them that
wrong you: Pray for them that are your Enemies; and when you are reviled,
revile not again; but commit your selves to that God which judges Righteously.

Do your Duty to Superiors, and to those that are in Authority.

So carry your selves, that it may be with you as it was with Daniel; they had
nothing against him, saving in the matter of his God.

Bauk not any Duty for Suffering: Choose the greatest of Suffering, before the
least of Sin.

In a word, So walk as it becomes the Gospel: And finally, I speak to you, as
the Apostle spoke to them, Phil. 2. 16. Holding forth the word of life, that I
may rejoice in the day of Christ, that I have not run in vain, nor labored in
vain.

The third Use is for comfort, to all those that do conscienciously endeavor
in all things to please God; the comfort lies in this, you may suffer; but
whenever you suffer, the Father will not leave you alone; pleasing of God does
not secure a man from suffering from men, sometimes it rather exposes a man to
suffer from men: But now, though it does not prevent suffering, yet it takes
away the sting and venom of suffering; it makes it to be like Sampson's Lion,
when it was slain, he found nothing but honey in the belly of it. Oh! the
presence of God in a time of affliction, is exceeding precious; it turns gall
in honey, thorns into roses. Be not troubled into your thoughts, about what you
may undergo; if God be with you, all will be well; if God comes, when the cross
comes, the weight of it shall never hurt you: what is a prison when God is
there? My brethren, though estate leave you, relations leave you, all your
comforts leave you; so long as God does not leave you, it will be well;
therefore do not fear, be not dejected or discouraged. Isa. 43. 1, 2. Fear not,
O Iac^b; why so? when thou passest through the water, I will be with thee. We
have more reason to be afraid of prosperity, with God's absence, than of
adversity with God's presence. A good God will make every condition to be good;
it is not a prison but a palace, where God is: they that do the things that
please God, whatever condition they may be brought to, the Father will not
leave them alone. Ministers may leave you, the Means of Grace and Ordinances,
in a great measure may leave you; your creature-enjoyments and comforts may
leave you; but here is a God that will never leave you; Oh bless his holy name.

Fourthly, is this pleasing of God a duty of so great importance and benefit?
Then be tender and charitable in judging of those that do differ from you and
others, upon this account, because they dare not displease God. I may seem, in
this caution, to aim at my self, and others of my brethren in the work of our
Ministry; but I am not here at present to take my last farewell; I hope I may
have a little further opportunity of speaking to you; but if not, let me
require this of you, to pass a charitable interpretation upon our laying down
the exercise of our Ministry; there is a greater Judge than you, must judge us
all at the great Day; and to this Judge, we can appeal before Angels and Men;
that it is not this thing or that thing, that puts us upon this dissent, but it
is conscience toward God, and fear of offending him. I censure none that
differ from me, as though they displease God; but yet, as to my self, should I
do thus and thus, I should certainly violate the peace of my own conscience,
and offend God, which I must not do; no, not to secure my Ministry; though that
either is, or ought to be, dearer to me than my very life; and how dear it is,
God only knows. Do not add affliction to affliction, be not uncharitable in
judging of us, as if through pride, faction, obstinacy, or devotedness to a
party, or, which is worse then all, in opposition to authority, we do dissent;
the Judge of all hearts knows, it is not so. But it is merely from those
apprehensions which, after prayer, and the use of all means, do yet continue;
that doing thus and thus, we should displease God; therefore deal charitably
with us in this day of our affliction. If we be mistaken, I pray God to
convince us: if others be mistaken, whether in a public or private capacity, I
pray God in mercy convince them; but however things go, God will make good this
truth to us; in this work he will not leave us, and our Father will not leave
us alone; for it is the unfeigned desire of our soul, in all things to please
God.

Mr. Case's Farewell Sermon.
REVEL. 2. 5. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and
do the first works; or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove the
Candlestick out of his place, except thou repent.
CHrist here prescribes precious physic for the healing of this languishing
Church of Ephesus: It Is compounded of a threefold ingredient.

1. Self-reflection, Remember from whence, etc. 2. Holy-contrition and
humiliation before the Lord, Repent. 3. Thorough-Reformation, Do thy first
works.
I left the last time upon the second of these, namely, Repentance; and that
which I did upon this part of Christ's advice was, not so much to open to you
the nature of Repentance (which is not so proper for this place) as to give in
a catalogue or list of such special sins, as Christ does expect that all his
people in these three Nations should lay to heart, and repent of before the
Lord. I gave you, in a list, eleven special sins that we should repent of, and
humble our selves for, before the Lord. As,

1. Omission of duty. Prayer, reading the Word, Meditation, etc. Any thing will
be for excuse to lay by duties, and we are secretly glad of an excuse. 2.
Remisness in duty. In things of the world we are all in all, and all in every
part; a man cannot thrust another thought into us; but in Prayer, how many
things are we doing? 3. Hypocrisy. How unlike are we at home, to what abroad?
and in company, to what in secret? 4. Pride. In apparel, houses, parts, blood,
birthright, yea, of grace it self, of humility, Ministers, Ordinances, etc. 5.
Covetousness. Never did covetousness invade the professing party as now: The
more goods men get, the less good they do. 6. Sensuality. Voluptuousness,
wantonness: Christians let themselves loose to the Creature; lay out their
affections on things below, as if that part in the Serpents curse ( to lick the
dust of the earth) were the^r own ss well as his. 7. Anim^sities and divisions
amongst Christians: many have been active to kindle, but few to quench
divisions. 8. Uncharitable censuring one anoth^r. 9. Formality in duty. Witness
1. Unprepared coming. 2. Unsutableness of spirit to: And 3. Want of reflection
after duty, how we have sped, what we have got; Sabbath, Sacraments, come and
goes, Monday morning finds us the same as before.

Misspent-Sablaths. Some profane, others idle away the Sabbath, etc.


11. Neglect of our Bibles in our (...) and Closets. I pray God it forego not
some great evil coming upon you, as before the massacre in Germany it was
observed, etc. I proceed. 12. The want of mutual forlearance among Christians
Alas, Christians know not how to bear one with another in the least kind of
measure. Oh the short-spiritedness amongst Christians, they cannot bear one
anotherb^rdens, they cannot bear with one another. It Is very sad, that we that
stand in need of so much forbearance, should express so little to our Brother:
It Is an Argument we know not of what spirit we are of (as Christ told his
Disciples.) Oh! how unlike to are we that God whom we profess to be our God? He
is longsuffering, patient, full of goodness, gentleness, mercy, etc. we can
bear nothing, we can suffer nothing one from another. 13. Our great murmuring
against Reformation and Reformers (God has heard the voice of our Murmuring,
Exodus 16.) As if there had been nothing that would have undone us but
Reformation: and truly God seems to speak such a word as that was, Numb. 7. 5.
in displeasure and anger, I will make your murmurings to cease: I will take
away* the cause of your murmuring: I would have reformed you, and you would not
be reformed: As Christ to Iernsalem, I would, but you would not, Mat. 23. The
time may come when we would, and God will not: when we shall cry, Other Lords
have had dominion over us, etc. Isa. 26. 13. but thou, Lord, set up thou thy
government: rule thou over us: and God may say, No, it is too late* I would have
healed you, and you would not be healed. 14. The great neglect of the care of
our Families. Truly it is not the least sin that threatens the removal of our
Candlestick. How generally have the duties of Religion been let fall in our
Families; reading the Word, singing Psalms, etc. Time was, when one could not
have come through the streets into London on an evening in thee weekday but we
might hear the praises of God, singing of Psalms; now it is a stranger in the
City, even upon the Lords own day. Oh! how have Governors of Families cast off
the care of the souls that God has committed to them? How careless are they of
the souls of their yoak-fellows that lie in their bosoms, of their children,
the fruit of their loins; Masters of their servants, etc! And in the mean time
are ready to stand up and justify themselves with the boldness of Cain, to say
to God, Am I my brothers keeper? Am I the keeper of my yoak-fellow, children,
servants, souls? yes, thou art the keeper, etc. God has put them unto thy
trust, and if they perish through thy fault, they may die in their sins, but
their blood shall be required at thy hand. God will say to thee, as he did to
Cain, Thy brothers blood cries in my ear. 15. Our indifferences as to matter
of faith and doctrine: That we have not been more zealous for the truth of
Christ, that great trust and depositum which has been committed to us: We have
accounted it no matter of what opinion or judgment men be in these latter
times. It Is an universal saying, No matter what judgment men be of, so they be
Saints: as if truth in the judgment did not go to the making up of a Saint, as
well as holiness in the will and affections: As if Christ had not come into the
world to bear witness of the truth, which was his great design: as if it were
no matter, if God have the heart, so the Devil be in the head: as if no matter,
that be full of darkness, so the heart be for God. 16. The unsutableness of our
conversations to the Gospel of Christ: It Is the only thing the Apostle puts the
Philippians in mind of, and commits to their care, Phil. 1. 27. And truly, in
these unhappy days, it has been the only thing men have neglected and
despised. How little care, that our conversations should honor the Gospel?
etc. 17. Our living by sense, and not by faith. Surely (my Brethren) among all
the sins in England that the people of God have cause to be humbled for, there
is not any whereby we have more provoked God, than by that sin of Unbelief.
Murmuring, and Infidelity, have been our two great sins, for which, it is the
wonder of Gods mercy that he has not caused our carcasses to fall in the
wilderness: He may take up that complaint of us, that he did of Israel, Numb.
14. 22. Because all those men which have seen my glory and my miracles which I
did in Egypt and in the wilderness, and have tempted me now these ten times,
and have not hearkened to my veice; surely they shall not see the land, etc.
And this is the lamentation we may take up, that truly to this very day we have
not faith enough to carry us from one miracle to another, from one deliverance
to another, from one salvation to another: let one deliverance pass over our
head, and no sooner one wave rises higher than another, but we are ready to cry
out with Peter, Lord save m^, I perish: and well were it, if our fears did
issue into tears and cries after Christ: we rather are ready to cry out, as
those in Ezekiel. 37. 11. Our bones are dried, and our hope is lost, we are cut
off for our parts. We are a people that never knew how to honor God in any
distress God has brought us into; never learnt to glorify God by believing:
if we cannot see him, we cannot believe him: surely that which God has done
for us, in such a succession of miracles, it might well at least have been food
for our faith during our sojourning: In our pilgrimage we might have learned by
all that we have seen to believe God: we might have made experience to be the
food of our faith: and upon all the providence of Divine Power, Wisdom, and
Goodness, we might have discoursed our selves into belief, as David, 1 Samuel 17.
37. The Lord that delivered me out of the paw of the Lion, and of the Bear, he
will deliver me out of the hand of this Philistine. So Paul, He has delivered,
and does deliver; we trust, he will also deliver.

Oh my Brethren! we dishonor God, and starve our faith, by forgetting our
experiences, while we proclaim by our own Unbelief, That we have a God that we
dare not trust. If we perish, we may thank our selves for it: surely, if we
miscarry, that account may be given for it which we find, Mat. 13. 58. Because
of their unbelief. There is a Rest of God before us; if we do not enter in, it
is because of our Unbelief.

18. Want of sympathy with the bleeding, gasping, groaning, dying Churches of
Jesus Christ. They have been in great afflictions round about; have called unto
us, Pity me! Oh! pity me my friends! for the hand of God is gone out against
me. We cannot look any way, but we see cause of bitter mourning; but we have
not laid the blood of Germany, Lithuania, Piedmont, etc. to heart; therefore
God may justly lay it to our charge. Want of fellow-felling with our Brethren
in their afflictions, it is a kind of Persecution, a kind of being accessory to
their Sufferings. That we have not mourned, wept, bled with them; that we have
not lain in the dust, smote on our thighs, etc. God may justly say to us, as
Amos 6. 6, 7. They shall go captive with the first that go captive* because
they are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph. The word in the Hebrew
signifies, None of them have been Sick for the affliction of Joseph: Oh my
Brethren! when did we go to bed sick for the afflictions of Gods people abroad?
when did their miseries cost us an hours sleep? or a meals-meat? when did we
lie in the dust, and cry out, Ah Lord! their Glory? Because we have not shed
tears for their blood, God may justly say, The next turn of Persecution shall
be yours, Because you have not been afflicted in the afflictions of my people,
etc. 19. Our grievous unsensibleness of Gods Dishonor. Religion never suffered
the like, as it has done* these latter days, by the pride and hypocrisy of
some Pretenders to it; Gods name has been thereby blasphemed by an evil and
hypocritical generation; the people of God have lien under the greatest
reproaches and contempts that ever any did under the heavens; and yet all this
while we have not been concerned in it: carried our selves as if unconcerned in
the reproaches of Religion; Blasphemies reflected upon the name of God. Who, in
these times of Blasphemy* have gone in secret? lain in the dust? and cried with
holy Ioshuah, What will thou do unto thy great name? Josh. 7. 4. We have not
labored to preserve in our own Souls, or stir up in our Brethren, a holy sense
of Gods name, as those primitive Saints, Mal. 3. 16. Where are they that have
been affected with, and afflicted for, the sufferings of the name of God? Oh
consider! how little is God and Religion beholden to us for our tears, sighs,
or groans? What is become of that Child-like spirit, that was wont to possess
the spirits of Gods people? It Is perished, and with it, without special timely
Repentance, we shall perish also. 20. That Epidemical sin of Self-seeking, and
self-pleasing. Oh my Brethreu! we may revive that complaint of the Apostle, All
seek their own, not the things which are Jesus Christ's, Phil. 2. 21. This, This
has been the source of all our miseries. While some had power in their hands
to have done great things for God, what did they do, but neglect the interest
and trust in their hands, and fell a feathering their own nests, and building
to themselves Houses, and Names, that they thought would continue for ever: and
to divide the spoil among themselves, as if their own game they hunted: and
others in inferior stations began to divide, and every one began to snatch, as
if the dust of the earth would not serve every one for a handful; and in the
mean time, a sea of Error, like an inundation, has been ready to overturn us.
Yea, all men seeking to be pleased, not to please; whereas our duty is, to
study to please, not to be pleased, etc.
You see, in all this, I have not mentioned one of those gross prophanesses
that stare Heaven in the face, as Drunkenness, filthy and abominable Whoredom,
Fornication, poured out in every place; horrible Blasphemy, contempt of God and
Religion, profanation of Gods Sabbath, etc. because I speak now to those that
are Professers. I have been giving in a Catalogue of the sins of those that
profess the name of Christ, that relate to Christ by a special Engagement and
Relation; these have been the sins of Gods family.

And if we would have God repent of the evil of punishment, we had need to
make haste to repent of the evil of sin: We have been a long time in sinning,
we had need be a long time in repenting. I tell you Christians, we have been
these last 20 years doing nothing else but sinning against God; and, should God
let us live twenty years more, it would be too little to weep for the
provocations thereof. Learn to lay these and other sins so to heart, that God
may never lay them to charge.

The third advice Christ gives here for the prevention of the removal of her
Candlestick, is, Reformation, [ Do the first works.] Reformation, that indeed
is a fruit and evidence of sound Repentance: Repentance is nothing else but the
breaking of the heart for and from sin.

I have spoken of it merely as it is the contrition of the Soul for sin; I come
to speak a word of the other part, as it consists in turning to God, and doing
our first works.

This is the method God prescribes his people, Lam. 3. 39. Wherefore does a
living man complain, etc. under Gods asflicting hand, instead of reforming? Men
are prone to fall a complaining, not only naturally, as Irrational creatures
may under some pinching extremity; but sinfully, i. e. when their natural grief
is let out in a distempered and inordinate manner; when natural groans are
accompanied with unscriptural affections, which vents it self.

1. Sometimes upon the affliction, as if but one intolerable burden in the
world, and God must needs lay that upon them, Lam. 1. 12. and 3. 1. and 5. 10.
2. Sometimes of instruments; thus Esau complains of his brother; Is he not
rightly called Jacob, a Supplanter? of his Father, Have thou but one blessing,
etc. Genesis 27. 3, 4. of any thing rather than of himself; he does not say, Am I
not rightly called Esau? What a wretch am I that have despised and sold my
blessing? Mostly, we complain of that which deserves no blame, the guilty of
the innocent; 1 King. 18. 7. Isa. 10. 5. Ier. 8. or we pore too much upon
second causes, or complain of instruments; not of our selves; or of wicked men,
not of wickedness; of their Cruelty, more than of their Blasphemy; of their
injuries against us, more than as Gods enemies; or more of revenge in our
Complaints, than murmuring; our complaints concerning their afflicting us, not
accompanied with our Prayers for their Conversion, etc. 3. Sometimes of God
himself: not as one of his children, who complains, 1. To God, not of God; thus
Christ, My God, my God, etc. 2, With a holy Considence, My God, my God; two
words of faith, for one word of fear, etc. 3. In his complaints, is very tender
of Gods glory; afraid to think or speak a hard or uncomely thought, or word,
of God. 4. Carefully distinguishes between what God does, and what man does;
observes and separates the unrighteousness of men from the righteousness of
God. 5. With humble inquiry what cause there may be of this dispensation, Job
10. 2. and 34. 31. 6. With a disposition to bring up his will to God; not that
God should bring down his will to him; if it be possible, let this Cuppass;
however, glorify thy Name, provide for thy own glory, and do with me as thou
please. But a sinful Creature, is sometimes ready to call Providence in
question, Ezra 8. 12. or to break forth and charge God foolishly, either of too
much severity, Ez. 18. 2. 25. or of too long delay, Isa. 49, 14. or their
mournings are turned into murmurings, Numb. 14. 27. or their complaints are
mixed with unbelief, Psalm. 78. 19. or their punishment, not for their sin; and
nothing will satisfy them but deliverance.

Now this is not the way; for this way of complaining is,

1. Fruitless; a House on Fire is not quenched with tears; Murmuring will not
scatter the Clouds.

2. Causeless; Thou have thy life for a prey, Ier. 4. 5, 6. What a living man
and complain, and that when it is for the punishment of his sins? This kind of
complaining is causeless; if you compare sin and punishment together, there is
no proportion, for sin is a transgression against an infinite God; punishment
but an affliction upon the finite Creature: Sin is an evil-against God;
punishment an evil against the Creature: Or, if you consider what sin is in its
nature, it is a contrariety to Gods nature^ God is holy; Sin impurity) A
contradictiou to God's will; (God says, Do this; the Sinner says, I will not:
God says* Do not this abominable thing which I hate; the Sinner says* I will:
It is the transgression of God's pure and holy Law; nay, it is a practical
blaspheming against all the Names of God; the rape of God's mercy, and the dare
of God's Justice, the challenge of God's Power; Sin gives the lie to God's
Truth, and the fool to God's Wisdom. And what can Sin do more than to take away
God's good Name? God's Being? and that, Sin would do. Or, it is causeless, if
you consider against whom sin is, i. e. God himself, who is a jealous God; now
a Sinner takes another Lover into his bosom before his eyes; yea, he is a holy,
righteous, omnipotent, almighty, living God: Thoughts of this may well keep us
from complaining. Indeed, whatever our affliction be, we have as much cause to
give thanks as to mourn; whether you consider, whatever the punishment be, it
might be worse; or do but look well into it, you will see more Mercy than
Affliction, Psalm. 119. 75.

3. Sinful. There is in it, 1. Unthankfulness; while we complain of one
Affliction, we overlook a thousand Mercies; whereas true Grace is ingenuous,
and can see a little Kindness mingled with a great deal of Severity. The Church
of God in captivity comparing her afflictions with her mercies, breaks forth;
It is of the Lord's mercy that we are not consumed, Lam. 3. 22. Blessed be God,
it is not yet so bad, but it might be worse; 2 Cor. 4. 8. We are troubled on
every side, yet not distressed: though laid wait for, beset on every side, put
to strive and struggle, yet we escape; God gives an issue in the Temptation: we
are perplexed, but not in despair; we are not so helpless that we know not
whither to turn our selves; we have a God to go to, as bad as things are; the
name of the Lord is a strong Tower: persecuted, but not forsaken; we are shaken
out, but not to shivers; persecuted, but not conquered; our God has not
utterly forsaken us: Cast down but not destroyed; Ps. 118. 13. we are cast
down, but not cast off. Thus Luther, They may thrust me back; but they cannot
thrust me down; they may crush me, but they cannot kill me: or, they may kill
me, but they cannot hurt me; they may show their teeth, but they cannot devour.
Is it a Fever? it might have been eternal flames; Is it Scarcity? it might be
universal famine; Is it the danger of losing the Gospel? it is the mercy of God,
it is not gone already: Are we in Captivity? we might have been in Hell; Are we
in Prison? it might have been Tophet: The Lord has chastened me sore, but he
has not given me over unto death, Psalm. 118. 18. Though men have lost their
Bowels, Gods compassions fail not; God's as faithful as ever; he has taken
away some of our mercies, but he has not taken away all; he has left us more
than he has taken: They are new, they are renewed every morning; when old
mercies are spent, God sends us new; he is the Father of M^rcies, begets new
mercies every moment. Who can number or measure his mercies of one day?
whatever our Fears are, Oh blessed be God, he loads us with mercies.

Now the Complainer over-looks all these; there is much unthankfulness in it,
and that is* a kind of Atheism, She knew not that I gave her corn and wine, etc.
Hos. 2. 8.

2. Pride; Only by pride comes contention; men never quarrel with God about
their Condition, but it is long of the pride of their heart. Proud man would
fain sin, and not hear from God; would take liberty to sin, but would not have
God take liberty to punish, I say 8. 3. God must take notice of our Duties, not
our Sin^. God shall hear of it, if he take not notice of our prayers; but it
shall be by complaining, if he take notice of our sins. A proud man whatever he
has, it is no more than his due; and whatever he wants, God's his debtor, Hos.
6. 13.

The want of a Complement undoth them in the midst of honor: If we want but
one thing our hearts would have, surely Nature is proud and ready to pick
quarrels with God on the least occasion; nay, if he will not give that mercy we
would, take all, etc.

3. Rebellion; God strikes him for sin, he strikes against God, Ier. 31. 18.
God draws one way, and he another, etc.

4. Unbelief. He that complains of his punishment, never believed sin to be so
great an evil, or God to be such a One as revealed in the Word.

5. Interpretative Blasphemy.

1. While we dispute our afflictions, and wrangle with the present
dispensation, what is it but to make our selves wiser than God? We seem to tell
God how it might have been better, and so we do as it were give God Counsel:
When he calls for Obedience, is not that Blasphemy to set up our wisdom against
God's? 2. While we complain of Punishment, we take Sin's part against God; we
do as it were justify sin, and judge God: God is unrighteous to punish such a
sin as this with such grievous Afflictions. 3. By complaining we do as it were
summon God to our Bar, to come and give an account of his actions at our
Tribunal. What poor miserable Creatures are we, that in our Afflictions are so
far from helping our selves, that we commonly add to our own misery!
No Affliction is intolerable, till Sin come in it.

The yoke God has made easy, we make intolerable, and make God to be our
enemy, while he by Affliction would become our friend.

Now this being found, not to be the way; that which God counsels and advises,
is,

1. Self-Examination: [ Let us search and try our ways.] Sin and Hypocrisy
lies close and deep; therefore we must take pains, dig to the bottom, set up a
Tribunal in our own Conscience, summon, try, judge our selves over* and over, in
Gods presence: He stands at our Close^ Doors, to hear what we will say, Ier.
8. 6. before execution; what Indictments we will bring in against our selves.

We can tell what such a Drunkard, such an unclean person, etc. has done; but
no man says, What have I done? My pride, my unthankfulness, my unfruitfulness,
etc.

2. Reformation: [ and turn again to the Lord.] Sin is aversio a Deo and
conversio ad creaturam, Reformation is a turning again from the creature to God.

3. Frequent and fervent Prayer: [ Let us lift up] There Is the frequency, let
do nothing else but pray; lets be continually lifting up our Prayers; make your
houses houses of Prayer: Thus David, Thou foughtest against me without a Cause
(Did he take Counsel against Princes to be disloyal? To take up Arms? No.) But
I gave my self unto Prayer, Psalm. 109. 4. Therefore if you prayed before, now
do nothing else; it notes habitual and constant Prayer. [ our hearts with our
hands] to crave, and as it were to pull down mercy, as if we would wrestle with
God, and say, Nay, I will not let thee go, until thou bless me, Genesis 32. 26. it
notes our fervency: And for our encouragement, it is [ unto God in the
Heavens.] which expresses his Sovereignty, Omnisciency, Omnipotency,
Everlastingness, etc.

4. Judging our selves, or Confession of sin [ We have transgressed.]

5. Aggravating our sins [ and have rebelled]* i. e. we have turned sin into
Rebellion; Rebellion has been the aggravation of our sins; we have sinned
against the clearest light, dearest love, etc. Nehem. 9. Ezra 9. Dan. 9.

6. fastifying God [ thou have not pardoned,] A word, not of murmuring,
complaining, or accusing God of hard dealing; but by way of justifying God; we
have transgressed, therefore thou have not pardoned: Why should thou repent
of the evil of punishment, when we have not repented of the evil of sin? Thou
have punished us less then our Iniquities deserve.

So in the Text [ Do the first works]. Sin is a departure from God; Repentance
a coming back again to God. Turn thou to him from whom the Children of Israel
have deeply revolted. The soul has many turnings and windings; but that is the
best motion of all, when the Soul (with the Dove) returns to God, from whom it
came.

Apostasy is the loss of our first love: Repentance is the Recovery of it, and
Reformation is the doing of our first works. I have not time to enlarge, as I
desired; I shall only offer a few things, that may help to quicken you to this
great duty.

My Brethren, we have no great cause to boast of Englands first love: Never so
good as it should be, yet many can remember when England has been much better
then it is.

Time was, when Doctrines have been more sound; Discipline more exercised for
the suppressing of sin and profaneness; Ordinances kept more pure from sinful
mixtures; when London kept Sabbaths better then now; loved their Godly
Ministers more then now; honored them that were set over her, for their works
sake; would have thought nothing too good for a faithful Minister; when
Christians loved one another with a dear hearty fervent love; when there was
less Complement, but more real love and affection among Christians; when
Christians improved their meetings, converse, Christian Conferences, and other
soul-duties to better purpose then now; not to foolish disputations, or wanton
sensual excesses, but to their mutual edification; when they improved their
time for comparing their evidences, communicating their experiences, and
building up one another in their most holy faith; when there was more industry
in Professors than now, to bring in Converts; when private Christians thought
it their duty to be subservient to the work of their Ministers, to bring in
others to Christ, especially their Family.

Time was, when more care of Young Converts then now; when none could have
looked out after Religion, but some or other ready to lend them their hand, and
show them the way, explaining it clearly to them; but now Young Converts may be
snapt into separations and error, and none looks after them.

Time was, when more care of the truly godly poor; when error was more odious;
when Popery was more hated then now; when the name of a Toleration would have
made Christians to have trembled; when Christians were better acquainted with
their Bibles; when more time spent in secret Prayer; when more tender of one
another Names and Honors, would heal one another Reputations, and would
spread the lap of Charity over those mis-reports and scandals that might be
cast upon them; when Christians rejoiced more in one another good, and mourned
in one another sufferings; when Christians did more earnestly contend for the
faith once delivered to the Saints, etc.

Oh do you, not only your first works, but our forefathers first works: Be as
zealous for God and his truths, as tender, mutually careful of one another, as
they.

Our fears be very great, but truly our provocations be greater; our dangers
are great, but our sins greater: yet here is a word, here is matter of
encouragement, that yet there is Balm in Gilead, Physic of Christ's own
composition, for the reviving and healing of a backsliding people. Christians,
Christ Jesus is become your Physician, he has prescribed you a potion made up
of these 3. ingredients, Self-Reflection, Holy Contrition, Through Reformation.
Christians, now take this Receipt, Christ advises you, if you will not, there
is no way but one, Or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy
Candlestick.

There is yet a means or two I find in Scripture for the preventing of
threatened ruin that has been very near, that God has prescribed for a people
or person in great danger, when ready to be cut off and destroyed.

Now that which I would commend unto you, in reference to what you should beg
of God for England, is,

First, In your addressing your self to God for that mercy your souls are set
upon, and you wrestle with God for, that you would make some special Vow to
God. I find the Saints have done so, when reduced to great Straits, not knowing
what to do: Thus Jacob vowed a Vow, saying, If God will be with me, and will
keep me in this way that I go, and will give me bread to eat, and raiment to
put on, so that I come again to my fathers house in peace; then shall the Lord
be my God. And this Stone which I here set for ^ pillar, shall be Gods house,
Genesis 28. 20, 21, 22, The specialed thing Jacob vow, is, that he would continue
in the pure worship of his forefathers, that he would still honor God as his
God, in that way he would be worshipped; the special thing is, that he would
build a house for the worship of God; here he would erect a place of public
worship. And thus Israel vowed a vow unto the Lord, and said, if thou will
indeed deliver this people into my hand, then I will utterly destroy their
Cities. Numb. 21. 2. They vowed a vow they would not spare any of the enemies
of God, it he would deliver them into their hands. Thus Iepthah, Hannah, David,
etc. Judge. 11. 30. 1 Samuel 1 11. Psalm. 132, 1, 2. Certainly in times of great
distress, it is not improper or uncomely, but that which God may expect and take
well, that you make some special Vow, if God would prevent your fears; if God
would continue forfeited mercies, dearer to you then your lives, you would set
apart some special thing for God, something for the propagation of the Gospel
abroad, for the maintenance of a godly Ministry at home, for setting up the
preaching of the Gospel in the dark co^ners of the Kingdom, etc. This must have
some cautions with it; as

1. We must be sure our Vow be of what is in our own power; we must not make
vows of that which is none of our own, I hate Robbery for burnt^offerings. We
must not make a vow. to God of that which has been unjustly or untighteously
taken away, or withheld from any. It Is Sacrilege instead of a Sacrifice. 2. It
must be of things warrantable and justifiable by the Word. 3. It must be of
such things that we are not bound to do, before vows, by the standing
obligation of Religion, and of our Profession; but of something that is in our
own choice, that we will voluntarily make a free will offering to God. 4. We
must take heed that we do not entertain a fupe^itious thought of our own Vows,
as if we had merited a mercy at Gods hands by our vows; God looks for some
special vow at our hands, that we may show how much we prise and value the
mercy we would have, that we would be content to part with any thing, though to
the half of our Estate, for it.
2. Another thing I find, is, that in the mean time we should do something by
way of extraordinary bounty and charity to the relief of Gods indigent
Servants. Thus the Prophet Daniel, Wherefore, O King^ let my counsel be
acceptable to thee; Breakoff thy Sins by Righteousness, and thine Iniquities by
showing mercy to the poor, if it may be a lengthening of thy tranquillity, Dan.
4. 27.

The Prophet advises him to break off his sins by righteousness, there is
Reformation; and besides Reformation, that he would do something in an
extraordinary way to the relief of the poor. Mercy to the poor, what is that?

Interpreters conceive, by the poor here, he understands Gods poor, i. e. the
poor Jews, that were now in the Babylonian Captivity; he advises he would do
something by way of sympathy to the Jews, to ease their yoaks and oppressions;
break off thy iniquities by pitying and shewing^ mercy to thy poor Captives
under thy power now at this time; take off their yoke, ease their burdens, and
restore them to their liberties again. Thus do ye to those that have been the
instruments of your Conversion* or Edification, set apart something
extraordinary for their relief and supply. The Prophet Daniel seems to advise
this to the King, as it were, by way of satisfaction.

The^e be two things in Repentance; in wrongs we have done there must be
Confession, and Satisfaction or Restoration: He seems to advise this to make up
complete Repentance; namely, to make Restoration and Retribution of what he had
injuriously taken from the Jews. Oh then! let me say, without breach of
Charity, that whatsoever, except it be in this case of extraordinary supplies
for his poor, it will be found but making Restitution and Satisfaction. It may
be upon a twofold ground.

1. With some it may be truly Restitution and Restoration of what he has taken
away by unjust means, God knows how; that is between God and their own Souls,
what unlawful means has been used to augment the heap, and swell their Estate.

If there be any that hears me this day, whose Consciences shall tell them,
that they have increased their Estate by undue and unwarrantable means; Oh
Restore^ Restore, break off your Iniquities by showing mercy, etc. by making
Reparation as you can; it will be but like Zacheus giving half his goods to the
poor, and restoring four*fold, etc. in a liberal Contribution to the poor.

2. It will be Restitution in another sense, in reference to an unjust
withholding; some have got injuriously, and I am afraid too too many have kept
injuriously: Have we not robbed the poor by an unjust denying of what God has
commanded us to distribute to their necessities? There is that withholdeth more
then is meet, etc. Prove. 3. 17. and 11. 24. It may be God has given you so
much; there is God's share, there is the Ministers portion, etc. Now all that you
have withheld beyond the Rule of Scripture, is all stolen goods, and, like a
Wheat-sheaf on fire, will burn down the whole ba^n of Corn.

That which I would exhort you to, is, Every one to set apart some considerable
part of your Estate, and account it as a hallowed thing, dedicated to God, as a
thing which to touch were Sacrilege; that you may be ready on all occasions in
all regular and due ways, to bring out for the relief of the Poor; you know
objects abounding in every place, and you may expect warrantable means for
dispensing of what God shall put into your hearts in this matter.

Mr. Sclater's Farewell Sermon.
1 JOHN 5. 1. and ^1. Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, is born of
God' and every one that loves him that begat, loves him also that is begotten
of him.

Little Children, keep your selves from Idols.


THis General Doctrine I have already delivered unto you from this Text, which
indeed is the marrow and substance of the whole Chapter, That Gospel-believing
is a Duty, which they that really perform, are highly privileged by, to their
greatest advantage^

I have spoken concerning Gospel-believing, and that it is a duty, and that
they that do really perform it are highly dignified and privileged by it, as
has been made to appear from the Chapter; that which remains to be done, and
shall be, as God enables the work of this morning, is, to make improvement of
this Doctrine, which is one of the most material and momentous Doctrines that
can be preached to us. Gospel-believing it has most precious privileges
entailed upon it; whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, that Jesus is
the Son of God, that Jesus is come in the Flesh, is bor^ of God, knows God, and
shall be eternally blessed of God, and with God; surely then, the World runs
upon a very great mistake. I have hinted something already to that purpose, but
I have left the more full discussion and discovery of the matter until now.
Why, who is there among the generality of common Professors that is not very
pregnant to hold forth this to be their Faith? If so be that it should be put
to the Question; Friend, What is your Faith, what Belief are you of? Why, not
one in a thousand, I think, but will be apt to say, Why truly I will give you
this Account: There is a Gospel which is preached among us, and in the World;
and this Gospel does hold forth this for true Doctrine* That Jesus, the Son of
Mary, that was born at Bethlehem* is the Christ, is the Messiah which was
promised by the Father, and which the World did live in expectation of so long;
This Jesus, I believe is the Son of God, this Jesus I verily believe is come in
the Flesh, and he is come to be the Savior of the World; this is the Belief,
and that which is the common profession that is made by the generality of
people. Why, but will you consider now this Text, and other Scriptures which
speak fully to this purpose, Whosoever does believe this, That Jesus is the
Christ, the Son of God and that he is come in the Flesh, whosoever believes
this, is of God, is born of God. And it does clearly appear, and may be most
convincingly made out, that many thousands that profess their belief concerning
these things, yet notwithstanding are not born of God. Why certainly, there
must needs be a great and gross fallacy in the business; Gospel-faith and
Believing, it is not so common a thing as many take it to be; and therefore if
this be Gospel-faith, and that which does interest persons in such great and
precious privileges, truly it concerns us to look well to it, that we be not
mistaken concerning this Belief. Now this I would say, there is something in it
to be considered with respect to the time wherein Christ appeared visibly to
the World, and the aftertimes wherein the Apostles did hold forth these great
Doctrines of the Gospel concerning Christ. And this we are to say, that in such
a time as that was, when this was the Critical point, as it were, the
discriminating thing; in such a time for any to make this profession, and to
hold forth this to be their Faith, and Belief, that Jesus is the Christ, the
Son of God, it was of high signification, and might very well, as to man, beget
a comfortable confidence and hope concerning such persons; that certainly they
were born of God, as to man, and according to rational Charity it might be very
probable, that in such Persons as did thus believe, and profess this to be
their Faith and Belief, there were some blessed beams upon their Souls; for,
mark ye, it has been thus in the World, and among the people of it, concerning
matters of God and Godliness, that there has been such and such a Truth, that
has been the Critical Truth, as I said; that has been, as I may so say, the
Shibboleth whereby people are distinguished one from another. I allude to that
passage in Judges concerning the Gileadites: they made a profession of
themselves to be such and such, and they were put to it to pronounce
Shibboleth; they that could not speak out the word, and clearly pronounce it,
they were not judged to be the persons that they professed themselves to be;
but they that could do it, held their liberty: so, sometimes such and such a
Doctrine is ordered out to be a distinguishing point, upon the account of the
desperate opposition that the World makes against it; and upon this account the
Priests and the Rulers, and the rest of the World were desperately bent against
Christ; they called him Jesus, but could not endure him to be called Christ the
Son of God; it was an Act and Decree amongst them, That whosoever should
confess Jesus to be the Christ, should be put out of the Synagogue, should be
excommunicated. Now for persons at such time, wherein it was as much as their
Liberty, it may be their Lives were worth, to own that Jesus Christ was the Son
of God; for persons now at such a time to own this Jesus, that was in so mean a
condition, to be the Christ, there is very much in it, infinitely more then for
persons now to take up this profession. Why? because this Doctrine has
obtained in the World, and it is a Doctrine among Papists as well as
Protestants; there is no such danger now for Persons to be of this Belief. But
shall I say this, That for all that, to believe this really according to the
right account, and true genuine interpretation of Gospel-believing, the Case is
the same with them and with us at this day, setting aside the consideration of
time and times; the danger then, and the encouragement now; the Case is the
same: Gospelbelieving of these truths according to a genuine interpretation of
Gospel-believing, it is the same now as then, and then as now: And therefore we
must consider and look further.

I would put these few things to your consciences: You profess this to be your
faith, you believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, that he is come in
the flesh; these things you profess to believe, and if you do so indeed, you
are highly privileged people, blessed of God, and shall be to all Eternity.
But do you not mistake? Do you believe this, that Jesus is the Christ? How came
you by this belief? What account can you give of it? How were you brought over
to this Belief? Did you not come to this Faith and Belief by common report? You
were born to this Doctrine; You look upon it as that which is the benefit you
have by your being born in a Nation, and among a People that profess the Name
of Christ, and this has been instilled into you by education, and upon this
account you take it: Did you ever buy this truth? It is a truth that Jesus is
the Christ, how came it to be yours? Did you ever buy this truth? Buy it? I say
buy it? For the very truth is, we are never able to make out a good Title to
any Gospel Truth, until such time as we can say we have bought it: How? why,
by serious meditation; studying the Scriptures, searching into them, seriously
pondering and weighing of them, crying mightily to God, that he would manifest
them to us, and encountering temptations from without, from within; being at a
point willing to engage liberty and estate, and life, and all, for this truth's
sake: Can you say, We have pondered, and are so fully satisfied about it, as
that if all the world should come in a way of contradiction, and rise up in
opposition to us, and come with fire and sword to beat us out of this truth;
yet we are resolved to stick to it? Can you give such an account of your
selves, that you have not taken it up on a common report, but are able to say,
there has been an inward Revelation made of these things to your souls, that
there has been a sanctified work of the Spirit upon your understandings, that
you come to see into the mystery of these Gospel restimonies? Is there an
habitual frame of spirit wrought in you, whereby you are carried out to close
with every truth of God, and to close with it upon this account, because of a
divine authority stamped upon it? When we give assent to common truths, but not
with a common spirit, but in the strength of an inward conviction, we assent to
it upon the account of an unction that we have received from the Holy One; and
we assent to this and that truth upon the account of a divine authority which
we see to be stamped upon it, and withal we find that there are suitable
workings of our heart in the loves and desires and delights of them to these
truths (as there will be a kindly working of the heart, where there is a right
assent suitable to the truths assented to) as, If there be a threatening, the
Soul assents to it, and will tremble before God: If a promise be made, or a
Gospel-revelation, it will be accompanied with a holy rejoicing in God, that
ever he should make such a Promise or Revelation; and then there will be a holy
resolution of spirit, Come what will come, I will never part with this truth. I
have bought the truth, that was my duty; and having bought it, I will never
sell it, that is my duty too: Can we give such an account as this? But then
withal let me a little further improve that which I have already spoken from
the Chapter.

You say this is your belief, That Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; but,
can you give an account of those privileges that are entailed upon this
belief? For you must know that the privileges which belong to such, will serve
as Evidences that they are such.

Now if you believe, it is your privilege to be bo^ of God; and this being
born of God must be the evidence of this belief; Can you give an account of you
being born of God? If you are not born of God, you do not believe, That Jesus
is the Christ. Can you giv^ an account of your overcomming the World? Are yo^
such as are enabled to stand out in opposition to the e^rors, and heresies, and
corrupt doctrines and pract^ses that are in the World? Can you be^r up again
the lust of the eye, the lust of the flesh, and the pri^ of life? If you are in
slavery to the world, in bondage to the beggarly rudiments of the world, you
are mistaken, That Jesus is the Christ: For he that believes according to a
true interpretation of Gospel-believing, That Jesus is the Christ, does
overcome the world, and by virtue of this belief he is enabled to get a
conquest over the world, and over corruptions that are in it through lust.

And then again, You profess to believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of
God: Oh! but you are able to give an account that you have believed into this
Jesus, and upon this Jesus? for that is it the Text holds forth; He that
believes that Jesus is the Christ, does believe on Jesus the Christ* Are you,
by virtue of this believing which you profess, drawn out to a closing with
Christ? do you roll your selves upon him? own him for Righteousness and
Salvation, and are willing to yield your selves up in subjection to him? You
believe, Jesus to be the Christ; but do you believe on that Jesus whom you
profess to be the Christ? Now this being thus laid down as a Foundation, I
would infer thus, and so go on to a farther branch of this Application; Either
you do really believe with a Gospel-believing these Truths and Doctrines
concerning Christ, or you do not; Why, they that profess they do, but in truth
they do not, there is a clear and manifest contradiction which this profession
meets withal, and that upon the accounts I have formerly given: As alas, this
Profession suffers contradiction generally; generally, the Professors of this
Faith, that Jesus is the Christ, do clearly make a flat contradiction; and I am
very confident that there are thousands, that, if they should be put to the
Trial, Will you stick to this Truth? If you do, it shall cost you the loss of
your Liberty, and Estates; nay, your Life shall go for it. Oh I am very apt to
think that you shall have thousands that will turn their backs upon this
Profession, renounce this Profession. Now concerning such, this I would say.

First, that the Condition of such persons as are not right in
Gospel-believing, is a most mournful and miserable Condition; however it may be
with them in other respects, yet it is sad to think what a Condition they are
in; for consider first of all, they that do not perform this Great Duty of
Gospel-believing according to the truth and reality of it, I will tell you what
they do, they do give God the lie, they do by interpretation tell God to his
face, that he is a very Liar; and what higher blaspheming can there be than to
give the lie to the God of Truth! every one will be apt to bless themselves,
and say, Oh far be it from me, God forbid that I should be charged with such an
horrid impiety as this! Oh but, Brethren, the very truth is, it is a very
common thing, by interpretation to give the lie to God; and all that do not
believe according to that Gospel-believing that you have heard, do tell God to
his face that he is a Liar. How does that appear? Why take a little help, such
as I am able to give you; To profess that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God,
that he came to be the Savior of the world, is ordered out to be our
Righteousness, is sent of God to preach Liberty to Captives, to heal diseased
Souls, and to deliver poor Creatures from the bondage of the Devil; these
things People generally profess to believe; but mark you now, they never come
to Christ, nor never set in with him upon this account, and to this purpose; Oh
Lord thou art the Jesus, the Anointed of God; I come to thee for life, I am a
poor dead Creature, I am in a state of unrighteonsness, and thon art given to
be for Righteousness; Lord, I fly to thee for it, I am a poor diseased
creature; the Plague is upon my soul, and thou art appointed to heal the Soul
of the Plague; I come to thee for healing. There is not one of thousands that
come thus to Christ. Will you now see how the lie is given to God? I profess
for my part, says one, I know no such matter; Jesus is the Christ, and I
profess to believe so, and he is appointed of God for such and such things; he
is sent to preach liberty to the Captives; I know not that there is any such
bondage. Christ came to save sinners; alas I know no need of any such salvation
by him; he came to heal diseased souls; I am well enough, what need have I of
Christ? What is this, but to give the lie to God? He that receiyes not Christ,
makes God a liar; for he does in effect say, Lord thou say so and so
concerning the World; I know nothing of all this; and so the lie is given to
God; And is it nothing, to give the lie to the great God, the God of truth? And
I tell you while you profess this Jesus to be the Christ, the Son of God, and
in the mean time fly not to him; you believe him to be the Son of God, and
that all Authority is given unto him, and you will not subject to his
Authority, why you give the lie to God, and is this nothing?

2. Consider the sad condition of such as believe not according to a right
Gospel-believing; they are such as are liable to the dreadfullest touches from
the Devil that possibly can be; He that believes is born of God, overcomes the
World, and is enabled to keep himself, that the wicked one does not touch him
with a mortiferous touch; but I tell thee whatever thou art, that art under the
powerof unbelief, thou art in danger of a dreadful touch from the Prince of
darkness; and if thou live and die in a state of unbelief, thou will fall
under the power of condemnation. Remember what our Savior speaks, and consider
well of it, You stand out in opposition to my Doctrine; but I tell you, Except
you believe that I am He, you shall dye in your sins; A dreadful word! you
shall die in your sins, and what then, be damned eternally. This is the
condition of all such as are in a state of unbelief: but then, on the other
hand, in case we be able to give a good account of our believing that Jesus is
the Christ, the Son of God, and of our believing on him concerning whom these
Testimonies are given, Oh what cause have all such to rejoice in their
condition! The condition of such persons is happy beyond all expression and
comprehension, who have owned these Truths, owned that Jesus of whom the
faithful Testimonies are given.

Now all the Chapter, according to the account I have given you, comes in to
the purpose of comforting and rejoicing the heart of such Persons. Here is your
comfort now; really believing according to a right interpretation of
Gospel-believing, this is your privilege, you are the Persons that are born
from above, you are the Persons that shall be enabled to over come the World,
to bear up against all opposition that Men and Devils can make against you; you
are the Persons that have the Witness within you, and you shall be able to bear
up against all the contradictions of Sinners; you are the Persons that have
Christ, and have eternal life by him: you shall have it; nay, you have it
already. He that believes on the Son of God, has eternal life; he has it in
the beginnings of it, and shall have it in the complete state of it; being
brought over to Gospelbelieving, you may come with boldness to God in a way of
prayer, with holy confidence that whatever else you ask believing, you shall
have a good account of it; God does not neglect any believing prayer of a
believing soul: And all the Privileges of the Gospel are entailed upon you,
and you are entitled unto them; and you shall have the Benefit of them while
you live, and when you die unto all Eternity. Well may it be said of such a
Person, Blessed is he and she, that has believed with a Gospel-believing
Gospel Truths and Testimonies concerning Christ, and on Christ, on whom those
Testimonies are given; for there shall be a full and perfect accomplishment of
whatever God has spoken with his mouth concerning such.

And then lastly, If the Grace of God has brought us over to a closing with
Christ, of whom these truths and testimonies are given; why, the last Branch of
the Application is but this, That you would but justify your Believing, and
labor to manifest the reality of your Believing according to the Gospel by a
suitable walking; This is that that shall be the cloling up of this Application.

Oh Brethren, Let us consider well: our Savior tells us in Mat. 11. Wisdom is
justified of her Children. Why, if ever we mean to approve our selves to be
Wisdom's children, our care must be for to give in our Justification of
Wisdom's sayings, and for to carry it in a congruousness and suitableness unto
that Gospel-believing which we profess to be by grace brought over to. Why, but
what is that, you will say? Why, consider the Text, and see what remains of the
Chapter. I shall make it out, give it up to you in this way:

Why, First of all this is one special Duty that lies upon you, That you would
study your Mercy, and know what God has been to you, and done for you, and how
highly you are dignified, and not to be always in a fluctuating state; and
upon the questioning and disputing point; but to come to some well grounded
confidence; that you may be able to say, We know that this and that is our
condition, and this and that is our dignified privilege that we are planted
under.

Do but mark how the Point in hand does charge this upon us, in the thirteenth
verse of this Chapter, These things have I written to you that believe on the
Name of the Son of God, that you may know that you have Eternal Life. Here is
your duty according to what the Text it self does charge upon you; if you be
such as by grace are brought over to a Gospel-believing, the Apostle John that
did write this Epistle, and I, from it, preach unto you into the Name of the
Lord, and by authority from him, tha^ this is your duty, to know that you are
Persons that have Eternal Life, that you are such as Christ by his blood has
made a purchase of Eternal Life for; that he has by his blood once for all
entered into the Holy place, that is not made with hands, that he might prepare
for you, and that youmight have, the possession of those blessed mansions that
he has made preparation of.

Eternal Life it is yours, and you may be bold to claim it, and you are bound
to hope and rejoice in the expectation of the full enjoyment of it, and not to
be always upon the question, and disputing point, but to go on with a holy
confidence toward God, according to what the Apostle expresses, 1 C^r. 2. We
know, that when this Earthly Tabernacle shall be dissolved, we shall have an
house not made with hands, etc.

But then a second thing that I have to charge upon you, is this; That you
would acknowledge with all thankfulness and enlargedness of heart to God, the
riches of his mercy, and grace to you, that has been pleased to cull you out
of an unbelieving world, and bring you over to the Gospel, and to the
participations that are by Christ, according to the Gospel: Oh! This you should
set your hearts upon, by admiring the riches of God's grace; and say, Lord, Why
should thou manifest thy self to me, and not to the world! That many
thousands should live and die in the total ignorance of Christ, and the
Gospel-mysteries, or else live and die in an empty profession; and yet that God
should be pleased to pitch upon me! This is that that the Text does hint unto
us in the nineteenth verse of this Chapter. Oh! says he, in a triumphing
manner, We know that we are of God, and that the whole world lies in
wickedness: Oh! our mercies and the riches of grace that has appeared to us,
while the whole world that lies in wickedness, is put into the Malignant evil
One, lies in the Devil; for he is the malignant evil one, while the whole world
lies in the Devil in malignity! Oh! It is a sad condition infinitely more sad
than for a man to lie in the most noisomest stinking ditch, or in the
loathsomest kennel; why this is that that heightens the mercy to poor souls
that are called by grace according to the purpose of God, that while the whole
world lies in wickedness, and so are like to lie; yea, and to lie in hell to
all Eternity, that God should please to lay you in the bosom of his Son, and to
take you into the arms of his mercy; this is that that should heighten our
thankfulness. I may make use of that expression which we find in Acts 14. when.
Paul and Barnabas came unto a company of Heathens, and they saw what great
things were done by them, and took notice of the gracious spirit that they
discovered; sure* say they, The Gods are come among us in the likeness of men.
Considering the state of times, and what an height of wickedness many at this
day are grown up unto, the dreadful swearing, blaspheming of God and his ways:
Truly, judge of it your selves, Whether we may not say, The devils are come
among us in the likeness of men. Why now, oh! How should we heighten our love
and thankfulness to God, that should please in free grace to bring us over to
close with Jesus Christ!

But then fourthly, As many as are brought over to Gospel-believing, this is
your duty, To study and endeavor, what you can, your advantages in Faith; and
so the Apostle gives it in charge here in the Chapter in verse 13. These things
have I written to you that believe on the Name of the Son of God, that you may
know that you have eternal life, and that you may believe on the Son of God.
This is that you should set about. If God has brought you over to a closing
with Christ, and an embracing of the testimonies concerning him, believe more
and more, labor for your advancement, and let it be your Prayer, Good Lord
increase our Faith: Labor that you may be clear in your apprehensions of
Gospel-mysteries, and that you may be more strong in your adherence to Christ,
of whom those Gospel-testimonies are given, and that you may not only come to
have an adhering-faith, but to an assuring-faith; that you may not be like
waves tossed and tumbled up and down; but that you may come to be rooted, and
established, and grounded in your faith; that you may not come to be unsettled
by* Heresy, corrupt Doctrines, or the Apostasy of others, but that you may be
steadfast and unmovable.

Yet further, fifthly: This is to be given in charge to such as do believe
according to the Gospel, that they carry it sutably to a believing state, as in
those particulars that I have insisted upon, so in a deportment congruous and
suitable to the privileges which belong to believing: You are born of God;
carry it as men and women that are so indeed: What! Born of God, the Sons and
Daughters of God? What! and not live according to God? and not study conformity
to God? I remember, what he speaks there concerning Amnon, How is it, that thou
being the Kings Son, art lean from day to day? How is it, that we that profess
to be the Sons and Daughters of God, are lean and lank, not more improved? that
we do not show forth God, and express Christ? This lies in the beginning of the
Chapter, If you be born of God, remember that you be born of him that is the
God of Love; And therefore you are to manifest this birth, and your believing,
and your being born of God, by loving God, and by loving them that are born of
God: He that believes is born of God; and he that loves him that begat,
loves him that is begotten of him. The God of Love, does beget a People of
Love; a loving God, a loving People: And this is that that you should express
your Believing by, and your Adoption by; by the Love you bear to God, and the
children of God.

A hateful spiteful spirit, where it does discover it self, speaks those
persons not to be born of God, but of the Devil, carry it as Believers, as
persons of God, by studying a conformity to God, and by keeping his
Commandments, subjecting your selves to his Authority; not living according to
your own Lusts; but according to the Laws and Rules which God has given you:
says the Apostle here, This is the Love of God, that we keep his Commandments:

It is not love in Word, and in Tongue, but in reality; a love discovering it
self by a conscientious care to hold conformity to all the Will of God: And if
any should object, This is a hard saying, Who can bear it? says the Apostle;
No such matter, there is never a Believing Soul will say, The Commandments of
Christ are grievous or burdensome; no, they are leight to them that are brought
over to the faith of the Gospel.

And the last thing I have to charge upon you, upon the account of your
Gospel-believing, and being brought over to a closing with Christ, it is this,
(and so, upon the matter, I have given you an account of the substance of this
precious Chapter, having reduced it to that general Doctrine I propounded
before:) I say, the last thing is this, That you would walk suitable to a
Believing state, by being very careful concerning your Worships that you do
perform, that they be according to God, and according to the Gospel; and this
is that which the Apostle closes the Chapter withal, in the 21 Verse, Little
Children, keep your selves from Idols, Amen. As I take it, in the former
Translation, it was Babes, Babes, keep your selves from Idols; Here it is,
Little Children.

I observe, in this Epistle, the Apostle makes a distinction of Believers into
three Ranks, as you shall find in the second Chapter, I write unto you Little
Children, I write unto you Young men, and I write unto you Fathers; in the
close of the Epistle, he concludes with this Charge, to Little Children. Now,
whether he includes all the rest under this Title of Little Children, I forbear
to dispute: But sure I am, it is a duty lies upon one and other, whether they
be Babes, or Young men, or Aged Fathers in Christ; Whatever our rank and
condition be, I am sure of this, This is a great Duty that lies upon all that
will approve themselves in Godliness, and to be brought over to the faith of
the Gospel, that they look to their Worships, and that they take heed of Idols;
as if he should say, He that is born of God, he keeps himself that the wicked
One does not touch him. Oh Little Children, show forth that spiritual Ability
that by grace you are furnished withal, by being able to keep your selves from
Idols.

It might be said, What is this to us? Are we in danger of Idols? True, well
might the Apostle give in such a Charge to them in those times, when the
greatest part of the World were in a state of Heathenism, and in estrangement
from Christ, and the mysteries of the Gospel; But this I say, It does really
concern Christians in Gospel Times, that have had the breakings out of the
Gospel Light, and the knowledge of Gospel-mysteries, to be careful of this
Charge, that they keep themselves from Idols. There were the Idols of the
Heathens; grant it, and so still there are a generation of People that our
Souls should mourn over to consider their state, that are wrapped up in ignorance
of God, know nothing of the true God, and of our Lord Jesus Christ; and it is
the state and condition of the Jews at this day; and what a sad condition are
they in! Grant it, that they do not worship Idols after the manner of the
Heathens; yet they worship not the true God, because they worship not God in
Christ: for, says the Apostle, Whoever sins, and abides not in the Doctrine
of Christ, he has not God; He that abides in the Doctrine of the Christ, he
has the Father and the Son: And so the Jews at this day, they not abiding, not
owning the Doctrine of Christ, they have not God, because they have not the
Father and the Son; this is their condition: And thus, I say, there were not
only the Idols of the Heathens, Oh! but sadly be it spoken, there are Idols
among Persons pretending to Christ, and Gospelfaith, and the Doctrine
concerning Grace by Jesus Christ.

How many Idols and Idolaters are there? I might tell you, the Covetous person
(...) an Idolater, the Voluptuous person; and the Self*justit^ary sets up his
own Righteousness, and Idolizeth that: But I say this, there are Idols among
Christians; Pap^sts hold forth the Name of Christ; but yet what woeful Idolatry
there is among them? There was the Dragon-worship in the time of the Heathens,
and in the room of that, there is come up the Beast-worship, and of that
Worship the generality of the world runs upon; and it concerns us to keep from
Popish Idolatry, it being the grossest Idolatry that ever was, because there is
the fairest pretense of worshipping JESUS, and yet they turn him into an Idol.
What else means their worshipping and bowing to Images, their breaden gods, and
the like? Oh! therefore it concerns us to keep our selves from Idols; And there
is a Scripture, if it were but well studied, would cause trembling of Heart,
and make all that have any care of their Souls to look about them; that
Scripture I refer you to, it is in Revel. 13. compared with the 20th. In Revel.
13. 11. whereas before there was Dragon-worship, it is said here, I beheld
another Beast coming out of the Earth, and he had two Horns like a Lamb, and
he spoke as a Dragon, and he exercises all the Power of the first Beast before
him, and causes the Earth, and them that dwell therein, to worship the first
Beast, whose deadly wound was healed: now look at the 8. verse, says he, And
all the dwellers upon the Earth shall worship him, whose names are not written
in the Book of life, of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world. Oh! it
is a terrible word, and that that should make us to fear and tremble, lest in
any kind we should be drawn into the Worship of the Beast; for as many as were
not written in the Book of Life of the Lamb, they were drawn into the Worship
of the Beast. This is that that should make us keep our selves from Idols, from
whatsoever has but so much as a Tincture of Superstition and Idolatry; and the
rather, considering that other Scripture in the 20th. of the Revelation, and
the last verse, And whosoever was not found written in the Book of life, was
cast into the lake of fire; All that are not written in the Lambs Book of life,
are prevailed to perform the worship with the Beast; and not being writ there,
must be tumbled into the Lake for ever.

This therefore concerns us, to keep from Idolatry, from whatsoever has a
tendency that way, and that has any tincture of Superstition upon it; and
consider with your selves, that our Duty is in matters of Worship, and in
things concerning the Worship of God, to see to it, that we keep a humble
dependence upon God, that we walk not according to the will of men, but
according to God; You were bought with a price, be not Servants of Men. We are
to walk by a Line, by a Plummet; and what is not warranted by the Word of God,
or maintainable by Arguments drawn from it, we should not close with.

And for the closing up of all, do but consider how this Chapter, and the
things that I have spoken to you, and preached from it, how they do all
influence this Exhortation, Little children, keep your selves from Idols, see
to it, that you approve your selves in holy worship to God, and the Lord Jesus.
Do but argue thus, You profess to be Believers; and is it not your duty to
answer to this profession? Your Faith is a pure Faith, and an obediential
Grace; it is a Grace that will tutour you to hang upon Christ, and his
Appointments, and Institutions: And therefore, being Believers, study to keep
your selves from Idols, and whatever is not consonant to the will of God
concerning Worship.

You believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; keep your selves from
Idols in this respect; for he is come into the World, and has showed the
pattern of his House: And then, You are born of God; carry it like a people
that are born of God, that are highborn, and credit your holy Profession, by
keeping a dependence upon that God of whom you are born: And then, being
Believers, you are born of God, and have overcome the world, and therefore show
forth your Heroic spirit, by standing out in opposition to Idols, and whatever
is contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power of godliness.

You have an Unction from the Holy One, and this engages you to look to it,
that you keep your selves from Idols; And then we know (says he) that the Son
of God is come, and has given us an understanding, that we may know him that
is true; and we are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ. And
thereupon he brings in this, Little children, keep your selves from Idols: as
if he should say, This is the true God, God in Christ, Jesus Christ the Son of
the Father, this is the true God, and he has eternal life with him; other Gods
are false gods, and what benefit will you have by following them, and
performing worship to them? Nothing but eternal death; false gods can bestow no
eternal life upon you; but this is the true God, and he can give you eternal
life; And therefore, Little children, keep your selves from Idols.

And now yet one word more. I would not occasion any discomposure of spirit
that is not becoming you; But this I must say, for ought I know, You have the
words of a Dying man; and we use to say, that the words of Dying men they are
(...) to take somewhat a deep impression; I mean, a Dying man, not in
properness of speech according to nature; and yet, if it should be so, I hope
there would be cause of rejoicing on my part; But I speak the words of a Dying
man in respect of Ministerial Office.

I suppose you all know there is an Act come forth by Supreme Authority; and it
is not for us to quarrel at all, but to submit to it, and hold correspondency
with it, so far as we can with a good Conscience; and there being many
Injunctions that many, besides my self, cannot comply withal, therefore we are
willing to submit to the penalty inflicted.

This, I say: You have for many years had the benefit of my poor Labors; I
have fulfilled near up toward 40 years, and have performed my service to God,
Christ, and his People, and I bless his Name, not without acceptance and
success. My Work, so far as I know, in this course, and in the Weekly course,
is now at an end; my Desire is, that you whose Hearts have been inclineable to
wait upon God in the way of my Ministry, may be kept faithful to God, and that
you may have the blessing of the everlasting Covenant coming upon your Souls,
and that you may have the power of this Doctrine, held forth in this Sermon,
put forth upon your hearts; that as you do believe that Jesus is the Christ,
that Jesus is the Son of God, that as you profess these things, you may carry
it suitably to your profession, that you may walk in Love to God, Love to
Christ, and Love to one another; that you may labor to manifest a noble
generous Spirit in overcoming the world in Errors, Corruptions, false
Doctrines, and unwarrantable Worship; that you may in all things labor to
approve your selves: And, Little Children keep your selves from Idols.

Amen.
Mr. Baxter's Farewell Sermon.
COLOSS. 2. 6, 7. As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk
in him, Rooted and built in him, and stablished in the faith, as ye have been
taught, abounding therein with thansgiving.
O Mitting the division, and in part the opening of the words, the Observation
is this;

That those that have received Christ Jesus the Lord, must accordingly be
rooted, built up in him, and stablished in the faith; and walk in him as they
have been taught, and abound herein with thanksgiving.

This receiving of Christ signifies to believe in him. It is not only to
receive his Doctrine or Benefits, but to receive his Person, to receive him as
related to us, for the uses and end for which he came into the world, and for
which he offers himself to souls by the preaching of the Gospel. Sinners have
lost and undone themselves; Christ comes to be the Physician of souls; he will
not save the unwilling and despisers of his grace, while they continue in their
unwillingness. He will save them by the way of covenant; while he consents and
tenders them his grace, he will have them consent to the terms of his covenant.
The consent of the heart expressed by our covenanting with him, is this receiving
of Jesus Christ. He is willing to be our Physician, and when we take him to be
so, we receive him. He is willing to save us from the guilt and power of sin,
willing to be our Lord, Head, Intercessor with God, Justifier, and All unto us;
and if we consent to this, and take him as offered, this is receiving Christ;
with whom his benefits are also received, the remission of sins, in-dwelling,
renewing, comforting-Spirit, title to everlasting life, etc. In the receiving
Christ, all this is received.

Receiving of Christ contains these two things, or these two things are
essentially contained to make up the nature of saving Faith: i. e. to believe
the Doctrine of the Gospel concerning Jesus Christ to be true, and to consent
that the goodness, that is therein revealed and proposed, shall be ours. To
believe what Christ is, and what he has done; so far to believe it, as here we
are resolved to venture our souls, (though there may be some weakness through
our faith's imperfection) and believing this Gospel to be the certain Word of
God. Then next, to entertain the Christ that is offered in this Gospel to be
ours, with all the benefits that accompany, and to all the blessed ends to
which he is revealed: Thus, the water of life is freely tendered to all that
are athirst, and there is no more required but, Come and drink.

Then there is two things employed, that are the immediate products of this
saving Faith, and inseparable from it: i. e. trusting on him as the Redeemer,
and obeying him as a Lord. To rest upon him as a Redeemer, Romans 15. 12. And
here, as far as the soul feels entertainment and encouragement by Christ,
overcoming his doubts that Christ will reject him, etc. so far he has
quietness of soul in Christ, and will trust his soul upon Christ. And then, the
obeying of him in order to our full recovery, (as a Patient must obey his
Physician) in using his remedies, and means he prescribes for killing our sins,
restoreing our souls to Gods love, and being with him to eternity.

The nature of Faith is, to receive Christ; the sincerity of it lies in the
suitableness of the act to the object; that we receive him as He is: Now in
Christ there is something essential to this act; that he be a Savior, and our
Savior, etc. And there is something makes unto the well-being, and fuller
attaining of the end; The first are the objects of Faith it self, as it is of
absolute necessity to Salvation: The second sort are, the objects of Faith, as
it is strong, and makes to the well-being of a Christian. All that is essential
to Christ, as a Savior, and Redeemer, is to be believed by him, that will
approve himself a true Believer. And thus to receive Christ as the eternal Son
of God, made Man, the Redeemer of the World, ruling us upon the right of
Redemption, justifying us before God, bringing us to God, and interceding for
us: And thus Christ must be received according to his Offices, and as those
uses, for which he is given to the soul, do import and and imply.

For the Application of this point.

First, let us begin with those that our business at present does not mainly
lie on. Must men walk in Christ as they have received him? What shall we say to
those that have not, will not, receive him, that stop us at the door, that we
cannot bring in the Doctrine of Christ; that will not receive the principles of
Christ? How can we bring them, and build them up, that will not suffer the
Foundation to be laid, the seed to be received? Have thou not received Christ?
Then thou have refused Christ, been a despiser of the Gospel of Christ, which
will prove thy great condemnation. What is it for thee to bear the Name, and
not to have the Spirit of Christ? Do not go upon conjectures: It Is one thing to
number thy self with those that are Christians, as to outward appearance; and
another thing to open thy heart, and deliver up thy self to Christ's
Government; and as a lost sinner, to receive him to those ends a Savior must
be received. And remember, this was no small Work, God's sending Christ into
the World; no small thing, to fetch thee from Hell and Satan, to wash guilty
Souls from all their sins, and to bring them to everlasting glory. If these
great things be rightly understood and believed by thee, if Christ be
understood well as Christ, it must be done with a wakened, humbled,
self-resigning heart, making the greatest matter in the World of these things:
Has thy soul been seriously taken up about thy own recovery? And have thou
received Christ as a man that was ready to be damned? as one that had a load on
his soul heavier than all the Mountains of Earth, to ease and deliver him? As
one, that was under the frowns of God, in an estate of enmity, receives
reconciliation? Have thou received Christ, as if thou had received Heaven in
him? Believe it, these are great Transactions, and will affect thy heart; and
it is not a sleepy or jesting matter thus to receive Christ. Consider what it
is to receive Christ.

First, If you have received Christ, you have received the great Reconciler,
that binds up the brokenhearted, quiets those that tremble under the
threatenings of God, for fear he should forsake, and cast them off for ever.

Secondly, If thou have received Christ, thou have received a perfect enmity to
all sin, that will never let thee rest in sin, but be persuading thee from it,
and conflicting in thee against sin in thy soul: If thou have received Christ,
thou have not received a friend for sin, that will plead for, or give thee
leave to commit sin: but one, that though he bear with thee in thy weakness,
yet abominates thy sin. If thou have received him as a Lord and Master to rule
thee, to be consented and subjected to him, and to be ruled by none but in
subordination to him, who will break those in pieces that refuse his
Government. Obedience and not verbal Profession is the thing he requires. Have
thou entertained Christ to be the Master of thy words, thoughts, and deeds,
whose Government thou live under, more than under any in the world?

Thirdly, If you have received Christ, you have then received the beginning of
felicity and full contentment to your souls; having found none in your sins,
you have it discovered to you where it is; therefore with gladness you go on:
and so far as you have hopes of attaining it, so far you have great
contentment, etc.

Fourthly, In a word, If you have received Christ, you have fallen out with
sin; subjected pleasures, profits, and honors to him; and you have received his
Spirit, and this Spirit has made you new, and maintains a War within you
against the flesh, etc.

If this be not thy case, Oh that thou knew what a case thou art in! For
then,

First, What the better art thou for all his blood shed as yet, if thou were
this day to dye? What would Christ's blood do to the cleansing and saving of thy
soul?

Secondly, How can thou look thy sins in the face, and think on what thou
have done and art? How can thou look inward into thy defiled heart, and not
tremble, when thou have no more shelter from the wrath of God?

Thirdly, How can thou look God in the face, who is a hater of sin? How can
thou read his Attributes, think on his Threatenings, etc.

Fourthly, How can thou think to have any duty accepted, any prayer heard, or
rewarded? etc.

Fifthly, How can thou think on the day of Judgment, on the time when thou
must receive thy final sentence, if thou have not received Christ? Oh what a
thing is a Christless heart! etc.

Quest. What shall I do that I may receive Christ?

Answ. First, Till Christ be thine, and has brought peace from Heaven to thy
soul, let no peace be there to keep him out: I do not say, Overwhelm thy self
with sorrow; but, let sorrow dwell there, and let holy cares and solicitousness
about thy spiritual state be there till Christ come, and quiet and reconcile
thee to God.

Secondly, Read and believe the Gospel; see there what Christ is, and thy
necessity of him: Believing will open the door to entertaining of him; assent
will procure thy consent.

Thirdly, Keep up no Idol in thy heart against him: Turn out that that keeps
out Christ. How dear soever it seems now, at last thou will see it more
necessary to detest, than keep it.

I come now to exhort all poor weak Christians, that they would make after
confirmation, and grow to a greater measure in Grace, as they have received
Christ. It is not enough to be conceited that you have been converted; and it
will not be enough to the assurance of your conversion, or safety of your
souls, that you think you are converted, and sit down there: he that is content
with the opinion that he has Grace, and therefore desires to have no more,
because the promise of salvation is made to the Truth of Grace, it is a sign he
never had Grace; strength in Grace, is your own felicity, it is part of your
happiness: Your eternal happiness will partly consist in your personal
perfection; and without personal perfection, all heavenly glory will not be a
perfect felicity. If you have fixed your Anchor in Gods Promises, this engages
you to look up, make after, and proceed, etc.

Take these Motives.

First, Consider, there is the same reason to move thee to grow and proceed, as
there was to move thee to thy first believing. Why did you become Christians,
but because of the necessity of the riches and excellencies of Christ, and that
there was better things in Christ, than in the World? And are they not so
still? Is the case changed? If Christianity was reasonable then, it is
reasonable now; if it was necessary to begin, it is necessary to hold on; and
proceed in your Race, till you have obtained the Crown.

Secondly, Your receiving Christ essentially, contains in it an obligation to
proceed and go further, actually to trust and obey him, whom you have taken for
your Lord and Savior from the very offices and relations of Christ received.

If I be a Father, where is my fear? If I be a Master where is my Honor? If I
be a Savior, where is your Confidence in me, Submission to my saving-work,
Obedience to my healing Precepts? If I be your Lord and Master, why do not you
learn of me as your Master, etc?

Your first Covenant engages you to proceed in fulfilling the things promised
in your Covenant, etc. Better not to have promised to be his people, than to
promise and break this promise. The very Mercies also you received from him,
pardoning your former sin, entertainment in his Church, and all the blessings
there found, are as so many obligations to proceed.

3. Ever since we came home to Christ, we have had an addition of Reasons,
besides the first Reason we had to believe: Every day brings in new, etc.
Certainly, if a little were desirable, more were more desirable: If the people
that stood afar off, and never tried what Christ and Grace is, were bid to come
in, those that have tried and tasted, are bound to proceed much more: You have
the Spirit of God, experiences of his love, tasted the bitterness of sin, have
had some trial of the truth of such things of which we speak, when others have
eyes, and see not, etc. And will you turn back that have tasted? etc.

4. Consider how much has been lost upon many a soul for want of care to take
rooting, and to proceed? How much labor of the Ministry, mercies of God, pains
and care of their own? I speak of those that have seemed sincere, not been
indeed so; that have many times comforted the hearts of their Ministers and
Friends, and have had some kind of comfort to themselves in that taste they
have had of the good Word of God. How many times has the Preacher been gladded
to see such a one come to him, seemingly with a broken heart, seeming to set
himself in the way of life? yet the flesh prevailed for want of Confirmation.
How many years have some spent in duty, in hearing, prayer, gracious society,
profession of Religion? yet afterward the World has drowned all. What cause
have you to see, you lose not the things you have wrought?

5. Consider, how much of the Work of your own salvation since you are
converted, is yet undone. Though you are sure your conversion is true, how many
temptations to resist, enemies to conquer, duties to perform, and Heaven to be
taken upon all those terms, as is the tenor of your Christianity! therefore
you had need to stand fast, and having done all, to stand; you had need not
only to believe but to wait and be patient in believing, and to proceed in the
way you have chosen.

6. The want of strength and building up, makes the lives of many full of
lamentable languishingweaknesses, scandals unto others, pain, calamity, and
trouble to themselves. How long in healing? And how much smart and pain, while
the fruit of their own folly is cured? How easily, and how frequently do
temptations prevail? And hence, as in a Wilderness, they are going one step
forward, another backward, no evident keeping in God; and all through the fruit
of their own languishing weakness. The fruits of the sins of Professors have
been such, that it should make you do all you can possibly, to escape the
troubles at home, and reproaches abroad.

7. A life of spiritual weakness is usually a burden unto him that has it; it
does not only occasion his falling into sin, and so renews the wounds of his
soul, but is a constant burden to him; not that any measure of Grace is
troublesome, but that which consists with so great a measure of remaining
corruption, this is the burden: Sickness is burdensome though there be life.
Methinks you should not then be reconciled to your fears: you should methinks
see so great a difference between the sick and well, that for your own
peace-sake you should seek after confirmation: Every duty they do is their
pain, which is another pleasure: prayer, etc. their burden; sometimes tired,
wearied, dull, etc. presently overwhelmed with temptation: every duty is a
grievance to them, through the weakness of their grace, and by their corruption.

8. Christians that are weak and not confirmed, lose abundance of the fruit of
Gods Ordinances, that are improved by others: How many a truth that tastes
exceeding sweet to others, has no great relish to them, nor growth by it! A
healthful man has more relish in ordinary fare, then a sick person in
varieties: The full stomach loathes the Honeycomb.

9. The weak and unconfirmed Christian is unprofitable, comparatively unto
others: not that the Church would wish the weakest Member out; but
comparatively, unconfirmed Christians are very unprofitable unto others: like
little children in the family, that must be looked to, make work for a great
many more about them. What does a sick person? but the work of others is to
feed, support, and be a help to him. The Church of God has need of strong
Christians that can pray in faith and fervency for others, and you can scarcely
pray for your selves. Consider when the Church needs a great deal of help, will
you sit down with low seize and little things, when so many hundreds
about you need so great assistance?

10. Weak persons are many times the troublers and very dangers of the Church;
many calamities have been occasioned by them. The sins of Professors have
occasioned the displeasure of God on the Church: their Errors hindered Truth,
and made Divisions. When Christians have not so much strength as to know Truth
from Error, that hearken to every one that speaks with likeness: What have
these Christians done in the Church! What mercies have been driven away? so
far, that I think the Church of God, since the Apostles days till now, has
suffered more by the sins of Professors, then by the malice of their enemies.
And how can thou expect God will save thy soul, when thou have set the Church
on fire, and been so great hinderance to others, that many should perish
occasionally by thy example? etc. The greatest sufferings of the Church have
come from the miscarriages of the Church.

11. Such have been the great dishonourers of Christ, and the Graces of ancient
Christians. The glory of their profession, their charity, self-denial,
heavenly-mindednesse, patience, etc. preached the Gospel to the World more
effectually then ever their words could do. God expects your Lives should be a
considerable means for the Conversion of wicked men: the same God that has
commanded Ministers to teach others by their Doctrine, has commanded you
should live for the conversion of the World; that your zeal, humility,
patience, charity, self-denial, should win souls to God. And if it be a sin to
give over preaching when we may, surely so to give over living, etc. If woe
unto me if I preach not the Gospel, then woe unto you if by your lives you
preach not the Gospel. How many sinners have you about you, and how do you
wrong and rob the ungodly of that Ordinance God has appointed for their
conversion and salvation? You are persons that take the bread out of their
mouths, the means that should save them out of their hands, while you deny them
one of the commanded means of salvation, i. e. the eminent example of your
lives: And if it be so great a sin to stop Preachers mouths, how great a sin to
neglect this Ordinance? Nay, are you not a dishonor to the Church? Is it not
because of Professors ill lives, that the profane deride Religion, while they
see not that glory in it that should overpower an unbelieving and denying
soul, and should indeed effectually manifest it is excellency? Are these the
Professors, that are proud, stubborn, passionate, censorious, self-conceited,
as contemptuous, and envious as any others? I know the World is apt enough to
slander, and the Servants of God bear a world of unjust reproaches: but oh that
there were not this occasion, etc.

12. Those that are not confirmed and established in grace, the Devil, when he
has prevailed by a temptation on themselves, can easily make them his
Instruments to draw and tempt others from their duty, to discourage them in
their Religion, and to do that mischief in the world he has done by temptation
on their own soul. It Is ordinary for Satan to make use of lapsed, distempered
Christians, to be the instruments of his temptations to those that are better,
etc. An honest Christian will not so easily hearken to a drunkard, or swearer,
as to a Professor he had good thoughts of, Gal. 2. 13.

13. For want of strength and establishment in grace, poor weak Christians are
a very great encouragement to the carnal hopes of wicked men. I think, scarce
any thing in the world hinders our preaching more then this; when the wicked
see those that make the greatest profession no better then themselves, and in
some things worse; this hardens him against all the convictions that can be
brought against him: Tell him he cannot be saved without conversion, he looks
upon Professors, sees them contentious, worldly, peevish, passionate, etc. sees
some sin or other; this makes him think, he is as well as they: Must there be
so much ado to bring men to this state? Is this the difference? (say they) etc.

14. Methinks it should be some trouble to an honest heart, that yet we must be
so like to the children of the wicked One: and the weakest christians, are the
likest to the wicked: I do not mean weakness in gifts, or knowledge, etc. but
a weakness in practical saving knowledge, love of God, self-denial,
mortification, heavenly-mindednesse, etc. they that are in these the weakest
Christians, are the next and likest to the wicked: And does not this grieve
thee, that, though thou art not a child of the Devil, thou art so like one? We
should not be conformed to the World, nor like to them in any thing, no not in
outward vanities: but to imitate the fashion of the World, as to inward
corruptions, to go in their garb when a palpable vanity, to have so much of
their pride, peevishness, malice, worldliness. Oh, look upon thy heart with
humiliation.

15. Consider what a dangerous and lamentable standing those have, that be not
established, etc. You stand, but it is as unrooted plants or trees that stand
shaking in the wind: beholders are always looking when they fall: you stand,
but it is as a sick man, wavering, reeling, like Lot's wife, looking back, and
always upon every occasion ready to repent: You have been Believers, little
things perplex and trouble you; little tribulations and afflictions discompose
and disturb you; little temptations make you question the Scripture, the
Providence of God, his love and care of his people, and the great foundations
of Religion: Foundations seem to shake, because you are shaking and tottering,
etc. And what is like to become of such a soul? If thou stands shaking under
small temptations for want of confirmation, what will thou do when a Papist, or
Quaker, etc. shall so speak concerning Religion, which thou art not able to
answer? and so the surest foundation seems nothing when thou have so weak hold:
Our greatest afflictions, next to the misery of the ungodly, is, to think of
our weak ones, what will become of them: and ^e ily we do expect a considerable
part of our Congregations should be carried away: those that are Christians and
know not why, yet have not humility enough to make use of others, and to keep
close to those that should assist them. Remember when you see such times when
seducers are able to say the worst, shall make the strongest assaults on the
weak ones, how many will be like to fall? Again, sichness, death, dying times
will come, when you shall find a little grace will not easily do your work; and
though you perish not, yet you may faint, and to your sorrow find the want of
confirmation. You cannot but know how the strongest are put to it in trying
hours, or at death. Will slack and unsettled hopes of another life, such
distempered hearts fight and encounter with such trials? Never think of dying
comfortably, if you follow not after confirming grace.

16. It should humble you the more, that you have been so long, so many years
in the School of Christ, and love God, etc. no better: Should not you in this
Appren^iceship have learned better your Religion, and been ^eachers of others,
when perhaps, if in the principles you are assaulted, you will show your
weakness as soon as any. May not Christ say, Have I been so long time with you,
and yet have you known, lived, etc. no better? reached no higher? attained no
further? weaklings still? Nay consider in this time what advantage have you had
for growth? A tree planted on a barren wilderness, may not grow so much as in a
fruitful place: but you have had the plenty and power of the Ordinances of
God, the choicest of the means and helps of salvation.

17. Consider, the nature of true grace tends to this: will you cross the
nature of it? shall we be such weaklings in Religion, which cross so the
nature of grace? For grace, the more it is exercised, the more it increases.

18. Heaven it self is perfection, and the work of a Christian is to press
toward heaven, and therefore it is to press toward perfection. You should make
toward the end, in a manner and way that is suitable to the end. Persons that
enjoy so much already, and hope for so much greater, should not put off God
with such little things.

19. Little grace shall have but little glory. You know not how great a
difference there is between the least and highest in the Kingdom of God. Nay,
it is not only for a Christian to desire to be glorified, but to enjoy the
highest degree in glory: to serve God with the best, and improve his Talent to
the utmost, that his heavenly reward may be according. A Christian should not
slight it when it is tendered to him, and in his eye.

Quest. But how shall I know I have attained this confirming grace?

Answ. These signs following show a Christian confirmed and strong in grace,
which I will name, that you may know what to aim at, and what to desire. There
is not so great a difference between a King and a Beggar, between the greatest
health and sicklyest man, as between a strong useful Christian, and a poor
l^nguishing so^l, etc.

1. A confirmed Christian is one that can resist many sub^il and strong
temptations, not only a single temptation, but when Satan assaults on every
side, with errors on both extremes, with importunities of several parties, with
temptations of prosperity offered, of adversity felt or feared; strong
temptations that seem to lay a necessity of yielding on a weakling, that makes
him say, I must do it to save my liberty, family, life, etc. A strong Christian
can say, there is no necessity: he can make light of those temptations that
seem to be a necessity to other persons: he can confute a subtle Sophister, and
deal with a cunning Adversary: Satan cannot so easily go beyond and out-wit him.

2. He can do great, excellent, and useful works, is serviceable to God if he
have opportunity in business of greatest consequence; he does not serve God
only in some little and inconsiderable things, but in his place sets himself to
the Work of God, does the great Work of his Majesty faithfully: The service of
God to him is more easy and delightful, as to go ten miles is more easy to
the healthful, than one to a sickly person; he can go through God's service
with pleasure, ease and delight, without tyring, fainting, siting down, or
giving over.

3. He can digest the hard Truths and Providence of God, that are ready to
puzzle, perplex, and overset the stomach of a weak Christian: He has laid his
foundation, to which he reduces all things of difficulty, and by the help of
those great truths he has received, he can easily see through the difficulties
of all that are yet before him. He can tell how to reconcile those things in
Scripture that seem contradictions: where he meets with a difficulty, he can
easily discern the cause is in himself, and that there is an undoubted way of
reconciling them, though he has not attained to it. He can easily quiet his
soul under the most difficult providence, and interpret them so as is
consistent with the truths of God, which must expound them: he reconciles
Promise with Providence, and Providence with Scripture: whereas a weak
Christian is ready to say, A hard saying who can ^ear this and that? And it is
the difficulty of these kinds of Truths, that make so many turn their Religion,
because not able to digest the hardest. Truths of God. Cross providence makes
them question God's love, and c.

4. He is one that can exercise various graces without setting one against
another, destroying or contradicting one another. He can do many works, believe
many Truths, perform many Duties at once. He can rejoice and sorrow at once,
and make his sorrow an help to his joy, and his joy an help to his sorrow; and
so exercise both, in that nature as will not directly hinder or weaken one
another. He can tell how in such a time as we are in, to rejoice, yet to be
humble: to be cast down at God's feet in the sense of the sins we have
committed, and of God's displeasure, and c. yet to rejoice in the mercies we
have, and do expect to possess. He does not look all upon sin, all upon
affliction, or all upon mercy: but can eye every thing, and give every thing
its part: can exercise graces methodically, gives truths and providence their
proper place in his meditations and affections: and this makes his life
orderly, beautiful, regular and useful: whereas a weak Christian, let him set
himself against one temptation, he is taken in another: if he humble himself in
soul, he can do nothing but humble, weep, grieve, fear, and be ready to cast
away all comfort, all sense of the love of God: if he set himself to the
consideration of the grace of Christ, he is apt to forget Humiliation, and to
be puffed up with spiritual Pride, and c. Thus he has not skill, strength and
ability to carry on all the whole work of grace together.

5. A strong Christian sinks not under those burdens that would press down and
overwhelm a weak Christian: he can bear heavy burdens, and more easily away
with them, making it a recreation to bear some things that another would sink
under, and cannot bear. It is thy weakness that makes thee make such a stir,
when God lays on thee personal, family, public afflictions; that makes thee
shrink under them: strength of grace would enable to see God and glory in the
midst of them, and to say, All shall work for my good: it would enable thee to
get advantage, and be bettered by them. Had thou strength enough to improve
them, thou would take comfort from them, and support thy self under them: but
when thou have not strength enough to understand God's meaning, to see the Duty
then called for, to improve all for God, to do that service to God thou
should do in such a condition; no wonder if thou have not grace to support
and comfort thee in that condition. Whereas the confirmed Christian by strong
faith, love, and patience, can carry great burdens, and c.

6. They are helpful to many, and troublesome unto few. They are the useful
Persons in the family and place where they live: it is they can counsel others
in their doubts, help them in their straits; that can bear up the weak when
ready to sink, that can hold others by the arm when not able to go upright;
that tend God's little ones; And, if it were not for these, what would God's
little ones do? They are so furnished with patience, which God has given them
for the use of the weak ones in his family, and though they are troublesome, or
do that which might be a disturbance to them, they will not thrust them out. It
is they that comfort the feeble, support, provide for, strengthen, and confirm
the rest; and, were it not for these, what backsliding hearts should we have?
and c. And they are comparatively, troublesome to few, (though, while
corruption cleaves to them, they shall sometimes be:) It is not they that are
censuring their Brethren, that are stirring up division, and make all that
feud, that is in the Church: if they might be hearkened unto and regarded,
there would be quietness and composure (for if ever there be peace, it will be
by the strong ones:) But weak ones in grace are the burdens and troublers of
the family: you may know they are the weak ones in God's house, in that they
are those that are always crying; complaining, making firework in the family,
backbiting, censuring their Brethren, quarrelling with one or other, and c.
these peevish, troublesome souls are the weak ones, and c.

7. The strongest in grace are the best able to stand, work, and suffer alone.
Though in duty they should not be alone, when they can have society; and though
they are most humble) therefore sensible they need of others) and will not
throw away any of their helps, yet if all forsake them, they will stand to it
still: they go not to Heaven merely for company sake: they be not Christians
merely because such and such are Christians: If all the world forsake Christ,
they will stick to him, unless Christ leave them to their own weakness. But the
weak Christian has a great deal more need of comfort and support, and lives a
more dependent life: they cannot stand, work, suffer alone: if their Minister
fall, they fall: if their Relations change, they change; if there be not some
body at hand to confute an Adversary, they yield: if there be not some body to
keep life and warmth, they grow cold in every duty: in affliction they can step
on no longer then led by the hand, and c. have Christians to support, and to
quiet, and moderate their passions, and to teach them the Doctrine of patience:
they can hold up no longer than they are refreshed with cordials: What would
become of you, should God let you stand by your selves? and c.

8. The strong Christian is one that can best live without creatures upon God
alone (and a weak Christian is one that has most need of the creature, and can
least live upon God alone) under the censures of the godly, frowns of the
wicked, without riches, honors, pleasures; can have quietness and contentment
in God, whether he have any thing or nothing, wherever he is, and c. The more
necessity thou art in of having something besides God for thy consolation, the
more weak thou art: there must be comfortable provision in the family, health,
ease, liberty; there must be supply; I know not how to be poor, disgraced, and
c! This impatient soul is the feeble soul: Impatience is nothing but the fruit
of weakness. The strong Christian can live upon God alone: therefore if men
make as if they were undone, if lost in their estates, it is a certain sign of a
lamentable weakness of a sick soul.

9. That is the best and strongest Christian, and most confirmed in grace, who
is most employed and abides in love of God, in love to God: That has the fear
of God, but goes beyond fear, and loves most, and abides most in the love of
God: That makes it his great business to feed upon, and study the love of God
to him, and to return love to him again. The more God's Love is on thy heart,
and the more thou live in the fruit of that love, the stronger Christian. But
he that lives most by a kind of constraining fear, though he may be sincere, he
is but weak: where there is nothing but fear and no love, there is no
sincerity; but where there is some little measure of love, fear is such a
tyrant that it will many times cloud it, so that almost all his life seems to
be moved and managed by fear: and in this there is much lothness and
unwillingness, and they had rather do otherwise then they do: According to the
measure of love is the strength of grace.

10. He is the strongest Christian that has most pure and most universal Love
to others, that can love all men, even an enemy, with true, unfeigned love,
even with such love as belongs to a Christian: that can love every Christian,
and not a party only, with the pure and fervent love which belongs to
Believers: that can love every child of God, and not those only that are of his
own opinion, or have done him good, but all because they are children of God,
with a sincere and special hearty love. That is the weak Christian that picks
and chooses, that is staggering when he comes to loving an enemy: that takes in
those that agree with him in judgment, and makes those almost the only object
of his love; that would confine his affections to some narrow society, some
little Sect, party, or parcel of Believers, and cannot love Christians as
Christians: And hence it is, division is the effect of enmity, or of weakness
in grace, for want of the universality of love. I would make no question to
prognostic the healing of all divisions within this Nation, could I but
advance all that are concerned in it, to the right temper of Christian love.
It Is the weak Children in Christ's Family that falls out, when we have not
enough love to reach to all, and to love a Christian as a Christian, etc.

Quest. What must be done by those that are converted to keep them where they
are, to help them unto growth, to make them letter, to further their
confirmation, to secure their salvation, that they may after all attain to the
Crown?

Answ. I shall leave with you twenty Directions; and as many as there are,
there are not more then you must practice; and take them as if they were the
last Directions I should give you; and take them as practicals, not as
notionals, that you must live upon as long as you live.

First, See that the foundation be soundly laid in your head and heart in
matters of your Religion. In your head, i. e. that you well understand what
Religion is, what the Christian Religion is: what God is: what it is for God to
be yours, in his Attributes and Relations unto you: what he is, and will be
unto you: what you are and must be unto him: what sin is, how odious, wherein
its evil consists: what is sin, and what not: what sin has done in the world,
and what state it has brought transgressors into: what Christ is, what he has
done for man's recovery and redemption: what he has wrought, gives, and offers
to the world: The end and design of God in the work of man's redemption: The
tender of the Gospel Covenant of grace, freeness, largeness, and excellency of
the grace of this Covenant: The end of our Religion: the everlasting glory that
is revealed in the Gospel, what it is, how sure, and how great. When you
understand these things, get a sound and radicated belief concerning the Truths
of the holy Scripture revealing all these things: And think it not enough that
the Scripture is true, or that you are resolved so to believe, but get the best
grounds for your belief, be well established on those grounds: Read the
Scripture much, till you are acquainted with, and relish the matter and
language, and feel the power, until all be delightful to your souls in reading.
And be not ashamed to understand the Fundamentals: look to your Catechisms: The
Fundamentals of Religion you must understand and receive. And when you have got
them into your head, be sure you get them into your heart, and never think any
truth received as it ought, till it has done some special work on your heart;
till you believe that God is Almighty, Just, Holy, etc. and all the Attributes
of God have made their holy impression on your heart: that the sanctifying
knowledge of God has warmed your affections, captivated your souls, that God
be enthroned in your hearts, by the belief and knowledge of your minds: Know
your selves so as to be humble: know Christ so as he may be sweet unto you, and
exalted by you: set up Christ in your souls nearest to your hearts: know sin so
as to hate it, etc. It Is the entertainment of the good things of the Gospel by
the Will, that is the principal part of your Religion. It Is a matter of
lamentable consequence in all your lives, when there is not a sound work at the
heart: how little life will there be from any truth in reading or hearing? The
Fundamentals of Religion must be so received, as not only to have an old heart
mended, but a new heart made. Thus understand, believe, and give up thy heart
to that thou believe and understandest.

2. Know and remember, the work of your Salvation must be as long as you live;
and that you have never done, till you have done living. I give this direction,
because I find something in Christianity, the remainds of Carnality is apt to
hinder, etc. and some Professors, when converted, they are reconciled to God,
and safe, etc. but there is a great deal to be done after, etc.

3. Understand well, Wherein it is your confirmation, stability, rootedness,
and growth in Religion does consist. The chief part of your growth in Grace is
not, to know more things then you knew before: but to grow in the knowledge,
belief, entertainment, and improvement of the same truths, that at first you
did receive: (not that you may not or should not know more, for the clear
knowledge of the Fundamentals guide you unavoidably to the sight of many other
truths; which a darker knowledge of those Fundamentals will not discover to
you.) It Is not an addition to your former knowledge, but the clearer knowing,
sounder believing, heartier entertaining and improving of the truths you knew
at first; as the health of a man consists not in having every day variety of
food, but in the partaking and digestion of the same food, that is fittest for
him: get but a more perfect conviction, or concoction of what you knew before,
and this is your growth. You may grow in the knowledge of Gods attributes by
knowing them more clearly, orderly, distinctly, satisfactorily and believingly
then before. There is a world of difference in the manner of knowledge, between
a dark and a clear knowing of things. Grow in greater love to them, and greater
skill in entertainment, improvement, and practice of them.

4. Grow downward in humility, and inward in the knowledge of your selves: and
above all, maintain a constant abhorrence and jealousy of the sin of Pride:
grow in humility, and fly from Pride; keep a constant apprehension of your
unworthiness and weakness, of the odiousness and danger of the sin of spiritual
pride (so called, because exercised about spiritual things) of being pufft up
with pride of any thing in your selves, of being too confident in your selves.
Below in own, and expect not, nor desire others good thoughts of you. Humility
lies not in humility of opinion, speech, garb, or carriage: but in opposition
to high thoughts of our own parts, gifts, godliness, when we think of these
above their worth: still remember Psalm. 25. Prove. 26. 19. Isai. 57. 15. Ioh.
22. 29. As ever you would grow in grace and be confirmed Christians, keep a low
esteem of your selves; be mean in your own eyes, be content to be mean in
others; and hearken not to secret flatterers that would puff you up. Take heed
of any thing that would puff you up, etc.

5. You must understand that you are Disciples in Christ's School, where
Ministers are his teachers and guides: the Ordinances his means for his peoples
good; and the Scripture, the Book you must learn: therefore keep in this order:
keep under these Guides, commit your souls to those that are faithful, and fit
for souls to be entrusted with. And when you have done with humble
submissiveness to their teaching, keep in this School under those officers in
their Discipline, and dwell in the Catholic Church and Communion of Saints,
and understand the duty of Pastors and People, Heb. 13. 17, 18. 1 These. 5. 12.
Obey them that have the Rule over you. If God had seen the poor Christians
sufficient to support themselves, he would never have made it the duty of all,
to be marshalled and ranked in several Schools, Ranks, Orders, and all to walk
in this Order to Heaven. If you withdraw from under Christ's Officers and
Ordinances, you are in danger of being snatched up as straglers.

Quest. What shall we do? Whom shall we take for our guides, if God take them
away, etc?

Answ. It Is not the denial of public liberty that loses that loses that
relation between a Pastor and his Flock, nor any word from man should cause a
poor soul to trust it self for guidance of Salvation to one that is not able: a
man's soul is not to be hazarded upon damnation, by being deprived of the
Officers and Ordinances of Christ, and cast upon the conduct of a blind guide,
merely for the pleasuring of a mere man.

6. Be sure you understand the nature of Churchunion, and necessity of
maintaining it, and abhor all ways that are truly Schismatical, that would
rent and divide the Church of Christ. As you must not, under pretense of
avoiding Schism, cast your soul upon apparent hazard of damnation; so you must
maintain the necessity of Church-Union and Communion: when Christ's members
walk in Communion with Christ's members, supposing that which is singular to
the generality of judicious men. Take heed of any thing that would withdraw you
from the Communion of the generality of those that are sound in the Faith. Take
heed of withdrawing from the main body of Believers. Christ is the Head of his
Church, he will never condemn his Church; walk in those substantials Christ's
Church has walked in. Divisions among Christians is a sin God has described,
as odious, and tending to the ruin of Christians. Be very suspicious of any
that would draw you from the main body of Believers, and keep Communion with
the Universal Church of Christ, with the generality of the godly in love and
affection, etc.

7. Be sure your own hearts and ways be the matter of your daily study; and
when hypocrites have their work abroad, let yours be much at home; while they
make it their business to censure this and that man, let the main of your
business be in dressing the inward of your own hearts, in keeping all right
between God and you. Observe your hearts inclinations; if any inordinate
inclination after any thing, set a special guard: mark which way your thoughts
go, that you may know your inclinations by your thoughts. In an especial
manner, preserve tenderness of Conscience, fear of sin, loathfulness to
displease God, let truth have the mastery, maintain such a Conscience that
dares not sin to save your lives; be sure you sin not wilfully, obey the light.

8. Be sure to keep up continually a lively apprehension of the state and place
of your everlasting happiness, to live by faith upon the unseen world. Know
where your happiness lies, and what it is, that you grow not to carnal
apprehensions of your happiness. Live upon Heaven, and let that be it that
shall animate your faith to duty: and all that you may still be weary of
vexations, and sensible of the vanities here below: Let your conversation be
above. Be confirmed in your apprehensions of the certainty and excellency of
eternal blessedness; grow more in Heavenly-mindedness and in satisfaction of
soul, in the hopes you have of these things.

9. Understand the nature, method, and power of temptations how to resist them,
and live in watchfulness. Be not a stranger to Satan and his methods of
tempting, what you have to watch against and oppose, where you must be armed.
Understand the nature of Christian watchfulness; keep up a constant resolution
and courage in resisting, especially the temptations you carry about with you,
of your calling, constitution, company, and of the times; set them down,
remember them, keep a special Observation of them all: and say, This and this
it is I am in danger of; and it is my integrity and salvation that is in danger,
and here place a special guard, and make it your business to resist. The
principal cause of Christians negligence in this, is the security of their
Consciences, and love of their Sins: did you know your danger, you would better
look after your safety, 2 Cor. 2. 11.

10. Especially understand how much the flesh and carnal self is an Enemy to
God and your souls: and how much you are engaged by the Christian Covenant to
live in a warfare against your selves, and against your flesh. You must not
think the life of self-pleasing is consistent with Religion: understand how you
are bound to take the flesh for your enemy, to watch against it, and to live in
a continual combat with it, Col. 3. 5. The flesh is your chiefest enemy: the
very senses themselves are all grown inordinate, and the work of faith is very
much seen in its exercise this way; if you get an opinion that you may eat, and
drink, and cloathe, etc. and do all things to gratify your selves, etc. then
no wonder if you find but little increase in spirituals, while you grow so
carnal. Understand and practice the duty of Self-denial. Self is the very heart
of sin: Humor it not, under pretense of liberty in Religion.

11. Give not way to a formal, heartless, seeming Religiousness, Customariness,
without the life: but keep your souls in a continual seriousness and awakedness
about God, Immortality, and your great Concernments. If one duty be dead, take
heed lest that incline you to a deadness in another, and so grow to a customary
deadness* Take heed of spiritual slothfulness, that makes you keep your hands
in your bosom, when you should be doing for your souls: stir up to, and in,
duty, when you have but little time for life eternal: do not pray as if you
prayed not, or hear as though you heard not: but, when upon duty, doing Gods
service, do it with all the seriousness and vigor you can; To grow lazy and
negligent is the declining way: Use such considerations as may stir you up,
Romans 12. 11. Tit. 2. 14.

12. Remember always the worth of time, and greatness of your work, and
therefore so value time, as not negligently or slothfully to lose a moment: it
will quickly be gone, and when you are at the last you will better know its
worth: harken to no temptation that will draw you to any trifling, abusing,
wasting of your precious time. If thou have no argument against thy sports,
trifling pleasures, etc. but this, It loses my time, take it for a greater
argument then if it lose thee thy money, friends, or any thing in the world:
especially value the preciousest of your time, your Youth, your morning hours,
especially the Lords day; lose not any part of it, but improve it with your
selves and families: lose not a moment of the Lord's Day, nor any of thy
precious time thou can spare and redeem: if thou have lost any, be humbled
for it, and be careful to redeem the rest: look back, Do you approve of the
time that is past? could you not have spent it better? remember what you have
lost, let that quicken you; look before you, remember what is to be done, and
do that first which must be done, and then leave trifles to that time you have
to spare. It is ignorance and idleness, and not want of work, that makes any
think they have time to spare. Ephesians. 5. 16. Col. 4, 5.

13. Make a careful choice of your company; you cannot travel well to Heaven
alone, especially when you may have company: Thrust not your selves into every
company, Ephesians. 5. 7. converse as much as you can with those that will help you,
that are warm when you are cold, knowing where you are ignorant, believing when
you are doubtful, etc. Especially for your constant companions, live with
those that will be a frequent help to you: Masters choose the best servants that
fear God: Servants, choose to live with those that will help you in the fear of
God: for Husbands and Wives, make choice of those that will intend upon
Religion; take heed of being unequally yoaked, and of thinking to get well to
Heaven, while you presume to unite your selves with those that with great
advantage will hinder, not help your Salvation.

14. Keep a constant guard upon the Tongue, especially take heed of those
common sins that disgrace has not d^iven out of the world, but have got some
kind of credit amongst some professors: namely idle talk that wastes precious
time, makes us unfruitful to one another, backbiting especially, can they put
but a Religious pretense upon it, or if they backbite those that differ in
opinion. Remember that terrible passage, Pro. 18. 21. ^Ia. 1. 26. and 3. 5, 6.
Psalm. 39. and 35. 28. Avoid idle talk, backbiting, etc. Watch over your
tongues: and if any are by nature addicted to a laxity of tongue, and multitude
of words, there lies a double obligation on you in point of danger and
necessity, above all others to keep a careful watch over your tongue, you
should rather speak fewer words then others: and if you find your selves
inclined to speak against any behind his back, reprehend your selves and avoid
it.

15. Learn the holy skill of improving every condition that God shall cast you
into; learn how to live to God in every condition: ^ you have skill and heart,
there is advantage to be got by all; that prosperity may strengthen you in God,
encourage you in his service; that adversity may wean you from the world, help
you to repentance, raise you to God, and give you more then it took away. Know
the danger and duty of every condition, study them before they come upon you,
that they do not surprise you: learn to know what is the danger, duty, and
*particular temptation of every condition, and in that condition* you are most
likely to expect a fall into: prepare for affliction as the common lot of the
Saints, take it as no strange thing when it overtakes you: know how to abound
and how to want. A great deal of a Christians safety and comfort lies in this,
to study the temptation and duty of every condition before it come, that so you
may have your remedy at hand, and fall to your work and commit your selves to
God.

16. Be as conscionable and strict in the duties of your relations, and
dealings with men, proportionably as in the duties of holiness, more directly
to be performed to God; make as much conscience, care, study, diligence, about
being just, that you wrong no man in buying or selling, as you do in duties of
holiness, hearing, praying, receiving. In your trading make conscience of
justice and faithfulness as well as in the worship of God, and in your own
personal behavior; in your calling be diligent, not slothful in business,
etc. And so in the duties of your relations: Oh that Parents knew what a charge
lies on them concerning the souls of their Children, etc. So Masters, look to
your servants, and be as conscionable in doing your duty for their souls good*
and being faithful to them, and compassionate over them, as in your duty to
God: keep up family duties with life, seriousness, diligence and vigor: the
life of Religion in the world must be kept up very much in families.

17. Make it your study and care to do all the good you can in the world; let
doing good be the principal part of your business; think that the safest and
happiest life in which you can do greatest good: suffer not opportunities to
slip out of your hands; take them where you have them, and seek where you may
have them. Look not only where you may get good, but where you may have
opportunities to do good to others: every Talent must be answered for; your
knowledge, health, etc. cause it as you will answer for it; and know it is one
of the greatest Mercies in the world, for God to give you hearts in doing good
with that he has given, Heb. 13. 16. not for applause; but be good Husbands
for God, and consider which way you may attain your ends best, by what you give
or do. Thus, be rich in good works.

18. Live still as before the living God, approve your hearts to him, as
knowing you stand or fall unto his Judgment. Avoid carefully all offenses unto
men, for the Lords sake, and their conscience sake; take heed of scandal* and
receive all the good from *others you can, but stick not too much on man's
approbation: disregard not suspicions or reproofs of Godly men, but make not
man's praise to be any part of your reward; it is a small thing for me to be
judged of men. Be not much troubled at it, if you cannot please all: the
bawlings of the malicious should not disturb a soul that is quietly housed with
God: that soul is not well stablished in faith that can be so disturbed and
distempered by the wrath or words of malicious men. Remember, God himself
pleases not all; the most of the world are enemies to their Maker upon the
acco^nt of his Holiness, Justice, etc. and can thou think to please all?
Appeal from the world and your selves unto God, for the consolation of his
approbation, and for your felicity: this will save you from hypocrisy, and
keep you from the temptations and vexations of the censorious world.

19. Be every day as serious in your preparation for death and judgment, as
those that are always certain that it will come, and know not the moment when
it will come ( Mat. 24. 49.): Use often to think seriously beforehand, what
Death is; what thoughts, what trials, death will put a man upon: what
temptations usually accompany our approaching death: what you shall most need
at such a time as that: what thoughts are likeliest to possess you then: what
you are likeliest to wish for, when you must needs die, about spending your
time, expending your estate, conversing with others, etc. Ask your selves, What
will I wish I had done or been, when I come to die? Think what will be most
dreadful to a dying man? for thus you have time to escape his judgment: will
it not be sad, to think on a life lost in vanity, drenched in wordliness,
unreconciled to God, or at least in utter uncertainty of his love? God has not
foreshewed what will be a dying man's terror to torment thee, but to get out
that terror; that which will be most terrible at death, conquer and destroy it
presently. They that were ready went in with the Bridegroom, and the door was
shut, (Mat. 25. 10.) Oh happy thou, if while the door is open thou be found
ready to go in: woe, if when the door be shut, thou have thy preparation to
make, thy graces to seek. Bethink, what you will either wish or fear when you
come to dye, and when you will say, This should have been done, etc. Let it now
be done.

20. Rise speedily after every fall by sound repentance, and a fresh recourse
to the blood of Christ, Covenant of Grace, and his intercession. Lie not secure
in any sin into which thou art lapsed: take heed of delaying and trifling, when
thy particular repentance should be exercised. Renew thy Covenant, and after
thy rising, deal faithfully with thy self and God, favor not thy sin, nor
flesh, go to the quick, leave no corruption at the bottom; If called to make
restitution, to shame thy self before men by confession, stick not at it; take
the plainest course, that is the way of God: And let not any thought of shame,
dishonor, or loss hinder it; for the more it costs thee to rise from sin, the
likelier it is thou art sound in thy conversion, and the more comfort will thou
have; otherwise the fears and pains of thy disease will be upon thee, when the
through Cure would have prevented it; quarrel not at any man's Reproof, though
they miscarry in it, have mentioned thy faults with passion, etc. take that
which is good and be thankful. And after every fall sit not down in perpetual
distress, but, as Christ takes the honor of thy cure, take thou the comfort of
thy cure, when recovered. See thou art truly risen by repentance, and returned
to him whom thou have dishonored --. Thy care must be to see thou be sincere
in thy return, and then walk comfortably. See that Satan make thee not to walk
so as to rob thee of thy comfort, and God of his honor.

Thus having given you twenty Directions, I shall reduce all to these eight
Particulars.

1. Do not think, strength of grace will be got with ease: you must do that,
that in other things is done for the attaining of strength, increase, and
confirmation. A man cannot attain Knowledge in Law, Physic, or any Art,
without studying, diligence, unwearied labor and patience, through that time
that is necessary to attain it. Set your selves to the reading of the
Scripture, and other good Books; study good Truths: Think not to attain mastery
in a day: And if ever such a conceit come into your minds, that you are strong
confirmed Christians, do not easily entertain it: there must be time, industry,
and diligence: ordinarily, suspect the conceit you may have of strength and
confirmation; you must grow by degrees: God's Method is, to begin like a grain
of Mustard Seed: we are not born men. Labor in the proper means with patience:
infused gifts are given according to the manner of acquiring them: God gives,
as if our acquisition did attain it: never think of having this without
patience, labor, and diligence.

2. Grow up in the Church of God, and under his Officers, and Ordinances, and
among his people: Do not transplant your selves from the garden and Vineyard of
the Lord, if you will thrive: no prospering in the Commons where weeds will
choke, etc. Keep within the Church of God, in the communion of his People,
among his Servants, under the guidance of his Ministers, for that is the duty
of Ministers to bring up, train up, and help the weak ones, till they grow to
be strong: they are to be God's Nurses, and helpers of the weak in the House of
God: Do not think to prosper by breaking over the hedge, under pretense of any
right of holiness whatsoever, following any party that would draw you to
Separation.

3. Make it, amongst others, the principal study of your lives, to study the
love of God in the Redeemer, the nature of the new Covenant, and the infinite
goodness revealed in the face of a Mediator: how it was his design to attract
the hearts of men to the love of God, by revealing his infinite love in the
Redeemer; unto what end Christ came for, even to represent God's goodness in
sinners hearts, of their being reconciled to him, and ravishing them with his
love. Study the glory and ravishing love of God, and unspeakable goodness in a
Redeemer.

4. Live not by sense, or upon wordly hopes, nor in the exercise of it: See
that you live a mortified life: take heed of glutting your selves with
creatures, or letting your hearts out to any creature, or letting any creature
be too dear to you: live not too much on any sensible thing, or upon any
worldly hopes or expectations. Shut your eyes to the world; let not your
desires run out to the world, and live as much as you can upon the (...) to
come.

5. Let (...) (...)-suspicion always make you fear^ of temp^, and keep you out
of the Devils way: Would you keep your standing, grow better and strong in
grace? Let not the pride of your hearts, or confidence of your strength, make
you to meet among any unlawful communion, see any enticing spectacle, or
thrust your selves upon temptation: you are never safe, if you thrust your
selves upon temptation: Think with your self, My weakness is great, I must not
gaze upon this entising object, lest my heart take fire; I am not so strong as
to be able to stand against such, etc.

6. When you cannot attain unto that heat of internal affection you should, be
sure to walk uprightly with God: sin not wilfully; keep your garments clean:
Set his Law before your eyes, sin not wilfully for a World: be but found in the
way of duty, and God will bless you, and meet you in that way: be as exact in
obedience, as if you had that frame of soul you desire.

7. In a special manner, keep all your bodily senses and desires in subjection;
mortify the flesh, keep under your carnal desires in due subjection to the
Spirit; let none of your senses take the reins out of your hands: Keep a
dominion over your Senses.

8. Lastly, All your life long be longing to die: let the work of your life be,
to learn to dye. Consider what necessity to the safety and comfort of death it
is to consider frequently, what assaults will be made upon dying men, that you
may every day fortify against it; to consider what graces and duties will be
most needful and useful then, that you may be most conversing with, and
exercising those graces and duties. He that has well learned to die, is no
weak Christian. The strength of your grace lies in the exercise of these
things, faithfully practice them and you will stand when others fall: you will
have comfort, when others cast away their comfort; you will die in peace, when
others die in horror.

Mr. Jenkins's Prayer at Christ-Church, July 13. 1662.
MOst blessed and holy Lord God, thou art infinitely beyond our apprehensions,
who wast infinitely ^ppy before the world was made, and want none o^ thy
(...), (...) their services (...) make thee more excellent, t^en thou art in
thy self: we d^ily w^nt thee, thou never want us, thou a (...) to make use
of Ordinance^, Ministers, S^baths, as thy Institutions to accomplish (...)
bring about the great work of thy glory and ma^s S^lvation, yet Lord thou do
not need them, thy Spirit is not made ^fficacious by these things, but it is
that that makes these things (...), though thou art pleased to tie us to them,
when we may (...) them and duly en^y them yet thou do not tie thy self to
them: we desire in these our add^esses t^ eye the happiness of Saints that
depends ^on him that depends upon none. We are here in thy presence by thy
goodness and grace? O^ whether should we go but to thee, and how should we come
but by thee, o^ strengthen our says, kill ou^ corruptions inflame our love,
give us assurance of thy love to our souls: o^ that God would teach us ^ow to
pray, that we may tast^ and se^ how ^ood the Lord is t i^ day, that ou^ souls
may be filled (...) with marrow, the we may by ou^ own experience be able to
say, it is good for us to (...) (...) ^o God, and that a day in thy house is
better th^n a thousand elsewhere: that there may be a comm^ion between us and
God, let there be a di^union between us and si^: we confess we brou^ht sin
enough into the world with ^s, to cause the^ to withdraw thy ble^ed self from
us, and to cast such unprofitable servants as we are into utt^r dark^ss, we
have bin (...) long time in thy school, and ye^ how dull are (...) we mig^ have
bin teachers of others, but we need our selves be tau^ht which a^e the first
Principles of the Oracles of God, we l^ve less ^en we know, and we do less then
we love, we have neither done (...) good, nor received that good which we
should, or might have done and received: we have been trees that have cumbered
the (...) i^ thy Orchard, but we have brought fo^th no fruit. ^o unto us that
we have not known the day of our visitation; many of us have one foot in the
grave, and yet we have lived without God in the wo^ld, we are wise in every
thing, but in our own salvation; we live as if ^ell were a privilege: those of
us that have some knowledge of thee, have great cause to repent that we have
walked so unworthily of God: which of us pray continually, and fervently, or
live the life of faith: we confess we neither take our afflictions humbly, nor
our mercies thankfully, nor ^ant our comforts contentedly, nor fill up our
relations fruitfully: we live as if hell were a scarecrow, as if all the
threatenings of thy word were an empty noise, as if there were a either s^ess in
heaven, nor bitterness in hell. When we come into thy pr^, (...) are our
hearts? what earthly dispositions do w^ (...) a^ with (...)? the sins of our
prayers cry louder then the supp^ (...) (...) prayers, what hypocrisy and
formality cleaves unto us. ^f thou do not look upon the iniquities of our
holy things with an eye of pity, w^t (...) ^ecome of us? O Lord be pleased to
smell a sw^t ^avour of ^est and peace through thy dear Son. O Lord, it is only
his precious (...) (...) can sprinkle our hearts* and quiet our consciences,
and no other thing: we do renounce all our own works, and we cry in our selves,
un^one, undone.

It is through thy beloved Son that we are accepted, and therefore to that end
bring us to him by a saving operation on thy part, and by our lively trust
through the Covenant of thy grace on our part: let there be such a unity
between Christ and us, that all the power of bell may not be able to separate
us from thee: speak peace to our hearts, sti^l our consciences, (...) I have
received a sacrifice for you, I shall bef^iend y^u: I will be just and faithful
to ^or ^ive your sins, my lawis ^elly fulfilled by another, though broken by
you: my justice is fully satisfied ^y another, though provoked by y^u; my wrath
is ceased by the means of another, though ince^sed by you.

Oh Lord, what a cordial would this be ^ can not thou amongst this great
multitude of people espy some that through the Spirit of thy Son would worship
thee in ^ine ow^ way: speak peace to every such soul. Is there any soul before
thee O Lord to whom thou have given the grace of desire* O Lord give them grace
according to their desire: and thou which di^t regard us when we were running
from the^: do not reject us now we are drawing near th^e, and thou which bidst
us believe by the command of thy lord, help us to believe by the operation of
thy Spirit, draw us that we may be able to follow thee: thy loving kindness is
better then life.

Some do say Who will show us any good? but Lord, lif^ thou up the light of thy
countenance upon us, and that will glad our hearts more then in the time when
increases Corn, or wine, or Oil Let it be s^ir above head when it is dirty
below: let us see one contrary in another, let us confute an eye of sense with
an eye of ^aith, and when we come to see nothing here that can gratify our
senses, let us have something to quiet our souls.

We would ^ain be at war with sin that we may be at peace with thee: though we
cannot return as much as we have received, yet help us to return as much as we
can: give us repentance unto life, repentance from dead works: a mourning far
greater for the remembrance of sin then we had pleasure in the committing of
sin, those secret distempers in our souls, that no eye sees but thine, let us
cry out, wretched men that we are, who shall deliver us from this body of sin
And as the fear ^f condemnation does decrease, so let the fear of transgression
in crease: and because O Lord that thou have not made us to ble^ with thy
greatness O Lord make us to blush with thy goodness; let us as truly desire
that heaven would enter into us in the way of holiness here, as we desire to
enter into heaven in the way of happiness hereafter.

Let us see that our kindness to sin is cruelty to our Savior, let not that
live quietly one minute with us that would not let Christ live: let us see
there is nothing small, by which the great God is (...), and an immortal soul
is damned: we are to be in the w^rld but ^r a while, to take a (...) or two and
b^ go^: oh that we mi^ht make it the business of our life to get into Christ,
though it be the scorn of men and burdensom^ to nature, yet this is that which
will (...) us p^ace at the la^: let us be what we profess our selves to be, let
us love Christ and evangelically keep his commandments, let us live by Faith,
let us keep thy commandments, let us be above the wo^ld in the would, above
the love of life, and above the fear of death, let not the smil^ of the wo^ld
allure us, nor the frowns thereof affright us from thee, but in all these
things let us ^e more then Conquerours through Jesus Christ. Let us love him
much whom we cannot love too much; ^elp us to be above the power of hell, let
us ev^r say, My soul it is go^d for me to draw nigh to God. Let us ^e willing
rather to be saved with a few than go to hell in a crowd, let us live as if
eternity were long, and life but sho^t: let us thrive in holiness, and be
brought (...) to t^y self by every dispensation; let us in t^i our day ^w the
(...) that concern our peace, before they be hid from ou^ ^s, and know the time
of our visitation: and though God suffer l^ng, he will strike at last. O^ Lord,
bow the heavens, and come down among us at this time, and be with the
unwo^thiest of thy Servants, and g^e unto i^ a door of utterance, and to this
great people a door of ^t a^e, and let them be all ^aught of God, and let them
mo^e truly find that the great God is teaching to the heart, when that a weak
worm it speaking to the ear, let all the work be done by thee, an^ let all the
praise redound unto thee, and let ^im that is with us, be great the^ he that is
in the world, behold us in the Son of thy love; smell a swee^ savor of rest,
on these our poor prayers, speak peace t^ ^ur consciences* rebuke the Tempter,
t^d him under our ^eet shortly, ^aise us up to newness of life, let us ^emember
when that which is perfect is come, that which is imperfect shall be done away:
he^r us, an^ ^elp us, through our dear Redee^: let us live for him here, and
^ith him hereafter, and all for his sake, whom not seeing we love, in whom
believing we rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of glory: to whom with
thee, and thy Spirit, be glory and honor, now and for ever.

Amen.
Mr. Jenkins's Forenoon Sermon.
Heb. 11. 38. Part of that verse. Of whom the world was not worthy.
THe Apostle in this excellent Chapter, that by some is deservedly called a
little book of Martyrs, does discover to us the triumph of faith: the noble
victory of this excellent grace against all the difficulties, oppositions it
meets withal, therein sets down a threefold excellency of faith, one is, that
it does assent unto truth, though never so improbable.

2. That it does put men upon duties, though never so irrational, or against
carnal interest.

3. That it enables us to suffering, though never so afflicting and difficult;
and this third part is that which my Text speaks of. These worthy men of God
they overcame all the bitterness of the world, as well as the sweetness of it.

Now in these verses the Apostle does these two things.

1. He here sets down the greatness and the smartness of their sufferings,
which are by some learned men reduced to three heads.

1. Those sufferings that were to tempt them and to drive them from God, and
their holy profession by those pains and tortures they were to undergo. 2.
Those sufferings they underwent in dying, and the cruelty of those deaths that
were laid upon them. 3. Their sufferings in reference to their wandering and
leaving of their worldly comforts rather then they would loose God. But we need
not be so curious in the distribution of their sufferings it may suffice us
that they were steadfast in the midst of all, and would never be brought to
forsake God and his truths for any of them.
2. You have here the ex^cies of the sufferers, and that is here in that
expression which I shall, God willing, make the subject of my discourse this
morning, that these men, these persons when they were under all the distresses
and troubles that they were under from the world, yet they were such of whom
the world was not worthy.

Brethren, this excellency of these Saints and servants of God under their
trouble is considerable in my Text two ways, that we may proceed clearly and
distinctly.

1. In reference unto the world, unto the wicked, and so it is said their
excellency was so great, that the world was not worthy of them. 2. It is
discovered from that estimation that judgment that the Apostle does here pass
upon them, who tells us that he accounted them to be such as though they were
under all these troubles and distresses, yet they were a people of whom the
world was not worthy.
I shall pass by the former of these, and only mention it as it falls in with
the latter, and that is this.

The due estimate that this blessed Apostle does raise upon this holy
persecuted company of Saints, when they were under all their troubles, yet this
holy man of God who was enlightened by the Spirit of God, and so was able to
pass a right estimate, and due judgment upon things and persons, he tells us
the world was not worthy of them, and then from the second I draw this
observation.

That a godly man* one truly regenerated, does see an extraordinary beauty,
worth, and excellency in the people of God in the bitterest of all persecutions
and troubles that does b^fall them, or that a godly man, a gracious heart, one
that has spiritual spectacles does see an excellency and worth in the people
of God in the midst of all trouble and persecution that can hefall them. I know
you judge this to be both a necessary and seasonable point* In the prosecution
of it, I shall first handle it Doctrinally, and then come to those profitable
and useful Improvements of it, by way of Application, that the Point deserves.

1. For the Doctrinal explication of it, two things must be spoken to.

1. Wherein the high esteem of a gracious heart does appear, wherein it does
discover it self to the Saints and People of God in their sufferings. 2. Whence
it is, and how it comes to pass, that godly men have this high and honorable
esteem of* the Saints and People of God in this trouble and distress of theirs.
For the first of these wherein it does appear that they have so high and
excellent an estimation of them* I shall give it you in five or six particulars.

1. It does appear in this, in that they are not ashamed of them in their
troubles; they are not ashamed to own either their persons, or the faith that
they do profess in their troubles: the s^ciery of the People of God, and the
fellowship of their very faith* and their profession, is that that is highly
respected by a gracious heart, let the Saints lie under never so great
distress: You shall see this concerning Moses in the 25. and 26 verses of this
Chapter, that he ch^se rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then
to enjoy the (...) of si^ for a season: the meaning is this, he rather chose to
be looked upon as an Israelite, and with them to be afflicted as an Israelite,
then to enjoy all the pleasures of Pharaohs Court. The profession of the true
God, and the owning of the true Faith that Israel was to stand up for and to
own, this was that that Moses could not desert; and thence it was that he would
not desert their persons and society; and therefore you may re^d it at large in
the story of Exodus, that he went and visited his Brethren when they were in
their afflictions, and their Brick kills: so that there is the first thing;
they are not ashamed of their faith or society.

A second Discovery, wherein they show so great a valuation and estimation of
the Saints and people of God, is this, They sympathize with them, and have a
fell wfeeling with them in their sufferings: If it goes ill with the Church and
People of God, all the comforts they have are as nothing to them, if one Member
suffers all the rest suffers; and if i^ goes well with the Church of God, it
goes well with them. You have an excellent example of this in Nehemiah, in the
first and second Chapters of his Book, that when that holy man had the greatest
favor of one of the greatest Princes then upon earth, yet he looks with a s^d
countenance, because of the afflictions of the people of God. I might give you
many Instances of this; that is a famous one in Psalm 137 verse 5. If I forget
thee, oh Ierus^lem, let my right hand forget her cunning: A common resembance
of this is very good: As it is with two strings in an Instrument that are tuned
together if one be struck at the other trembles: so if one Servant of Christ be
in a suffering condition, another suffers with him; and this, as one says, is
the damp of all a Believers worldly delights, he suffers with him, if not by
him, he transfers their troubles to his own soul.

3. Herein is discovered the high valuation that the people of God have of
suffering Saints, in that they can plead for them, and take their parts, when
they are never so much despised, dispraised, abused, and out of favor.

That I may give you some clear Instances of this, you may see it in the case
of Jonathan, how he pleads for good David before his cruel father Saul, though
Saul by reason thereof, calls him a cursed son, and fell foul on his Mother,
telling him he was the son of a wicked woman. So you shall see it in the case
of ^sther, that though it was death for her to go in to the King, and plead for
her people, nay it was death by a Law, yet says she, If I perish I perish; I
am resolved, let what will come of it, in I will go, and speak a good word for
the people of God, I can but die, but I cannot be silent.

4. Herein is discovered the high valuation that the people of God have of
suffering Saints, in that they will relieve them, and help them, and supply
them with all those needful good things that they can; and if they cannot do
for them what they would and should do, yet they will do what they are able to
do. You have a famous Instance of this in Ebed-melech, in Jeremiah 38. verse 8.
and so on; that when the King and his Princes was so angry with Jeremiah, as
that they had thrown him into a dungeon, this good man does nor only go to
plead with the King for him, but would never leave him until he had gott^n him
some enlargement: and at verse 11. He took with him thirty men, and went into
the house of the King, under the Treasury, and took thence old cast clout^, and
old rotten rags, and let them down by cords into the dungeon to Jeremiah. and
Ebed-melech the Ethi^pian said unto Jeremiah, put now these old cast clouts,
and rotten rags, under thine arm-holes, under the cords.

Mark how witty this good man was in his loving contrivances, for fear the
cords should hurt the arm-holes of this good man, he lines them with rags,
though indeed they were lined more with love than with rags, but these ro^en
rags was not fo^tten by God, and therefore God pro^ises that he should have a
merciful deliverance, and that he should not partake of the sword, and those
other miseries that were to fall upon that people for abusing of Jeremiah: You
have another instance of Obadiah in 1 Kings 18. 4 King Ahab was a great
persecutor of the Saints and people of God, now at the 4. verse, When Jezabel
cut off the Prophets of the Lord, Obadiah took an hundred Prophets and hid them
by fi^ty in a cave, and fed them with bread and water: I will not undertake to
Prophecy to you this day, but it may come to that, bread and water may be very
good commons for an honest Prophet, and faithful servant of Jesus Christ: for
this was their condition, while the false prophets and Idol Priests was
feasting at Iezabels Table: Here note the gracious disposition of good Obadiah,
as well as the providence of God in this Act. I will name you one Instance
more, and it is a most excellent one that will make all the people in the world
in love with Gods Saints, especially Gods Ministers above all the rest, It is
in 2 Timothy 1. 16, 17, 18. you shall there find that blessed Paul, the
excellentest servant that ever Christ had, one of them in the world, he was
thrown into bonds and imp^isonments, all forsook him, but says he a^ verse 16.
The Lord give mercy to the house of Onesiphorus, for he often refreshed me, and
was not ashamed of my chain: ^ow did he show it? why at ver. 17. when he was at
Rome (which was the place where Paul died, and where the cruellest Nero (as
some conceive) then Ruled) yet notwithstanding, Nero was my enemy, and Caesar
resolved my death, and all men were against me, this good man sought me out:
[he did not meet me in a by* lane, or a narrow corner, where he could not miss
me] but he sought me out, and was troubled until he could find me, now says
Paul, The Lord grant unto him that he may find mercy of the Lord in that day:
I profess Sirs, I had rather have the prayers of Paul, then all the preferments
of Pharaohs Court: It is the greatest treasure thou can have in all thy
house* to have the prayers of Gods people; It is more then to have all the
preferments that thou can possibly have in the world: And you that have
showed your great and liberal love in the late Collection to some of Gods
servants, I do from my soul bless God for it, and pray that you that have been
willing to part with pebbles for Christ, may receive pearls from him; truly
Sirs, y^a, that whatever you have done for his, may be ten thousand times made
up by him, mercy in that day, and that you may have that will be something
worth.

Shall I add another discovery of the love of the people of God to other
Saints in their troubles and sufferings, and that is their great and deep
supplication to God for them, never do they go to pray unto God, but Zion is in
their thoughts: I am confident it is so with some, and am persuaded it is so
with all, they never pray that God would give them their daily bread, but they
pray likewise that his Kingdom may come: David was a man under great trouble,
as in the reading of the 51. Psalm; I believe you will find he was under the
greatest and forest troubles that ever was, under trouble of conscience,
soul-trouble, which is the soul of trouble, and yet they could not make him
forget Zion, as you may see at the 18. verse of that Psalm, Do good in thy good
pleasure unto Zion: And though they sit in cieled houses, yet so long as it is
ill with the people of God, they must pray, and if they cannot overcome men
with their prayers (which yet they must endeavor) yet they will endeavor to
overcome God with their prayers, and Jerusalem is never out of their thoughts
when they come to pray to God: And therefore as one observes, though the
sufferings of the people of God be precious in his sight, so also in the sight
of his Saints too. I come now to open the second thing, to show you whence it
is that there is this high estimation in the people of God, of the people of
God, when they lie under their troubles, and there are two heads of Reasons for
it.

First in regard of those people of God that do behold their troubles, and them
under their troubles: And, Secondly, in regard of those people of God that are
under their troubles, and thus beheld by them.

First, in regard of those people of God that are thus, that do behold those
that are under these troubles and distresses, in regard of themselves, they
have this high valuation of them, and that in these three regards.

1. The people of God that look upon others in the time of their trouble, they
are such as though differenced from them in regard of their outward estate,
they may be honorable themselves, and well themselves, yet they have an
interest in the same head, and belong to the same body that they do, they are
not wooden legs, not glass eyes of that body, but they are real, and true
members, they are not in Christ by way of visible profession, but by way of
invisible implantation; now, if so, says the Apostle, If one member suffers,
another does, so that now they are interested in the same common Savior, and
belong to the same common head, and therefore Christ tells you he is called the
Savior of the body, and the head of the whole: And faith that lays hold upon
Christ, is called the like precious faith, because the faith of one believer
does as truly lay hold upon Christ, though not so strongly as the strongest
faith does, and in this regard it is that they set such a high valuation upon
the people of God: Outward disproportion as to their birth, and education, and
preferment puts no difference in a spiritual sense between Believer and
Believer. A King and a beggar* all one in Christ; a Jew, or a Greek; a great
Scholar, or a poor ignorant man, as to their spiritual state all one, all made
happy the same way: all are of the same head, as to their spiritual relation
and condition, they are all under one (...) of happiness, though may be on
shall have a greater and another a lesser degree, yet they are, as to the kind
of it, all m^de partakers of one salvation. And then another thing is this,
because they look at spiritual excellencies, and (...) able to discern
spiritual excellencies: they have a renewed judgment, and a new eye, as they
look upon their old sins with new eyes, so they look upon their company with
new eyes; those ways and practices that they looked upon before as lovely and
excellent, now they look upon as vile and base, Prove. 12. 20. and those that
they looked upon as vile and base, they look upon as lovely and excellent:
those that they cared not for their company, they look upon as more excellent
then their neighbor, as David says, in Psalm 16. My goodness, Lord, extends
not to thee, but to the Saints that are in the earth, and to the excellent, in
whom is my deligh^: Here was now the renewed estimation that God bestowed upon
David's judgment, to see these the excellent ones of the world, which
worldlings despised: A carnal eye sees no glory, but in carnal objects and
persons; worldly men see no beauty, but in worldly men, they bless the covetous
whom the Lord abhors, and they will speak well of a man when he does good to
himself, when he is in his worldly grandeur and glory, but now a spiritual eye,
he discerns spiritual excellency in the meanest Saint.

Brethren, observe this notion, it is an easy thing for a man to discern glory
and luster in a Picture, or the like, but not so easy for a men to understand
true work: Now a skilful eye discerns a great deal of curiosity in the holiness
of the lives and ways of gracious hearts, but wicked men want this way of
discerning; there is a workmanship in the people of God. You are his
workmanship, s^ith the Apostle, now this workmanship of God, so far as it is
expressed in the life, a godly man is very much taken withal, not with the
worldly grandeur and gaudiness of a child of God, but with the workmanship, the
spiritual excellency that is in him: A beast can see the shining of a Diamond,
but knows not the worth of it, it will rather lick up a lock of hay then a
Diamond, though of never so great a value: a wicked man wants a spirit of
discerning: The four Monarchs of the earth are expressed by four beasts, which
shows their cruelty, not their curiosity, in observing that of God which may be
observed: As a child is taken with the gayness of his lesson, but a learned man
is taken with the learning of his lesson: so a wicked man is taken with the
gayness and trappings of Religion, but a godly man is taken with the spiritual
excellency that is in Religion.

Thirdly, a child of God is one that imitates God, he esteems and judges of the
people of God as God judges of them: As a child you shall see, he esteems as
his father esteems, if the father cannot endure to have such a one come to his
house, if the child sees that man come, he will not love him, and so if the
father loves such a man, the child will love him too: As now the Courtiers,
they follow the example of a King, and whom the King favors they honor and
cringe too; why so whom God favors, a godly man favors, God does not judge of
men as men do, by his gay apparel, or gold ring, or great birth, alas, he that
wants bread is more highly esteemed of in Gods sight then such, and so he is in
a godly man's account: A godly man is conformable to God, and a follower of God
as a dear child; now you shall see what an estimate God puts upon his people:
God is more taken with one humble broken hearted sinner, and one humble
contrite breathing of a soul, then with all the gold and silver in Solomon's
Temple, not many noble, not many mighty does God set his heart upon, but where
he sees his Image; he who has the Image of God, he has the love of God; there
is the first reason in regard of the people of God, that are beholders of
others.

A second reason is taken from the people of God that are beheld: and here I
shall name you five or six Considerations.

1. The people of God, they that are truly such in the midst of all their
present distresses, let them be what they will, yet their end shall be happy:
now men do not regard men according to what they have in present possession,
but according to what they shall have; the poorest man here in the world that
is rich in faith, he shall be rich in glory and honor, the people of God are
heirs of glory, and therefore they are said to be heirs of God, and co-h^irs
with Christ, 1 John 3. 2. Beloved, now are we the Sons of God, and it does not
yet appear what we shall be; The people of God are to be looked upon according
to what they shall be, not what they are, here they are Princes, though under a
disguise, they are coming, though not come to their Crown, those, says a
Saint, that are now scorned, reproached and buffeted, and libelled, shall shine
in heaven, when Christ shall appear, they shall appear with him in glory, they
are heirs born to great Estates.

The second reason is this, They are for the present very useful and beneficial
to the world, they are those for whose sake the world was made, and they are
the very pillars of the world, to hold it from shattering about your ears; they
are the great common blessings of the world, as the Sun and Stars are the
common blessings of the world, and fire and water, so these are the common
blessing^ of mankind for which he will spare the world, those that are pulled
down by the world, are they that keep the world from being pulled down; they
are the soul of the world, the wicked are but the carcass of it; and if God had
gathered in all the world of his people once, the world should not continue one
hour, as Sodom was destroyed when Lot was taken out.

Third Reason is, The highness and excellency of their performances, and of all
the good things they do; there is a worth in every holy work, in every
supernatural employment, in every holy prayer, in every thing a godly man does
there is such a goodness in the work, that all the wealth in the Indies cannot
recompense; and therefore says Luther, I had ratber do the least truly good
work then obtain all the Conquests and Victo^ies of Caesar and Alexander. Now if
their good works shine so before men, is it possible a gracious heart should
see it and not be taken with it? There is nothing does so much take with holy
men as holy performances: and therefore as a man that is learned, when he sees
another learned man make a learned Oration, he wishes he could do so too; so a
godly man, when he sees another man can pray and live holily. Oh, says he,
that I could do so too, and be so holy as he is.

4. A fourth Reason is, The present privileges of the people of God, not only
what they have in reversion, but their present privileges: Why but are the
privileges of the people of God so great? Yea* the very present enjoyments of
the Saints and people of God, the explanation of them would deserve many
Sermons; they shall be freed from all evil, there shall nothing hurt them;
their lusts may be destroyed, but their souls shall never be destroyed. What a
privilege is this for a man to be shot-free; do with him what you will you can
never hurt him; you may disgrace him, you may torture him, kill him, but yet
you cannot hurt him; whatever befalls them turns to their benefit; they may be
afflicted, but not hurt by affliction; the greatest hurt the world does to them
tends to their greatest good: worldlings may take away their head, but they
cannot take away their crown: there is nothing of evil can be evil to him that
has a good God: this a Child of God has for the present, and not only so, but
there is the real communication of a saving interest in all that is good; all
that God is, all that he has, and all that he does is theirs: Is not this a
glorious privilege? The power of God is his to protect him, his love his, so
as to be set upon him; the righteousness of God his, so as to acquit him from
his sins; the very righteousness of God is a very great blessing and happiness
to the Children of God, and they may not only appeal to the Bowels of Gods
Mercy, but to the Bar of his Justice. So that now I say, all that God is, is
his; the faithfulness of God is his, in keeping his Promises; the care of God,
in defending and protecting of him, and so all the providence of God, all that
he does shall tend to the good of his people: as he says, All is yours, life
is yours, and death is yours, and all these things shall do you good: Psalm 25.
10. that is a rare Scripture, All the ways of God are mercy [oh sweet] and
truth [oh very comfortable] to them that are in covenant with him. Mercy, so
that they are enough, Gods Providence shall do them good: and Truth, so as
that they shall certainly do them good. In one word, Earth, Heaven, and God and
all shall be laid out to do them good; Is not this a great privilege? In this
world they may go to God and tell him wherein they are troubled and pained, or
afflicted, and they are never so welcome to God in their petitions, as when
they ask most from him; when they come to ask riches, and the like, God will
give them to them so far as they may be for their good, but so great is the
privilege of a believer, that God does delight in him most, when he does ask
most from him, and he will give him whatever he desires that may make them
good, or do them good, and may be for his good. God is exceedingly taken with
them when they ask peace, and pardon; peace of conscience, and pardon of sin,
strength against sin, power to overcome their l^sts, and to withstand
temptation: the people of God may have from him all that they want, or can
regularly wish for.

5. Here is something more considerable, these people that lie under troubles
and distresses, they are such now as have an incomparable near and dear
relation unto God, they are the elect of God set apart for him, and though God
has a common propriety in, and relation to all the world, yet he has a
peculiar relation to his people, and therefore they are called his jewels, his
house, his garden, and his portion* and indeed, as God is his peoples portion,
so his people are his portion, they are those that God has laid out a great
deal for, and that he has been at a great deal of cost to purchase. In one
word they are the glory of God, they are his spouse, children, house, treasure,
portion vineyard, garden, they are his all, can we look upon these now, and not
look upon them as excellent.

Lastly, They are such as have the image of God set upon them, imprinted upon
them, and all the good they do, it is an immanation or ray from that
incomparable holiness that seed of God that is in them, you read concerning
righteousness and holiness that we are renewed in it according to his image,
now I remember one observes excellently upon this portion of Scripture an image
does not represent any under excellency in a man, but it does represent
something that is eminent about his body. If you were to take the picture of a
man, you would not take the picture of his back, or of his feet, or hands, but
of his face: the people of God they discover Gods bounty indeed, in some
regards as they are men, and have wit, and wealth, and worldly dignity, but
this is not the image of God, the image of God is that which is the
representation of (...) excellency, as the power of God is the hand of God, and
the wisdom^ of God is the eye of God: so the holiness of God that is the (...)
of God, now the people of God ^re his beauty, in (...) they are the
representation of his holiness, 2 (...). 1. 4 Be ye holy as your heavenly (...)
is hol^. Rom 3. 23. (...) likeness to God is a likeness to him in the (...) of
his excellency, in having the divine nature, in having ^he life of ^od, in
having the glory of God which is grace, and there is more of God in grace then
in all the works that ever God did in the world, there is much of God seen in
the making of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, but in giving a man a new nature, in
changing his heart, and sanctifying of him, and giving him a principle of
regeneration, and the making of him become a blessed Saint, and from a cursed
nature to sit him for heaven; God shows more the excellency of his name in
this, then if he should have made ten thousand suck visible transient w^rlds as
we look upon. Thus I have given you the Doctrinal explication of the words, now
give me leave to make some little Application, and I would raise these
following inferences.

1. What excellency shall there be seen in the people of God in heaven at the
day of Judgment, if there be now such a beauty upon them, are they now so
amiable when they are in their rags, what shall they be then in their Robes,
are they now so amiable upon a dunghill, what shall they then be upon a throne;
and therefore says he, the Lo^d Jesus Christ shall be admired in all them that
believe, as a house keeper is admired in his entertainment, so at the day of
Judgment the Lord Jesus will so cloth this people with glory, that he shall
be wondered at. Oh what a head is he that has such members, that are so
beautiful! what a Lord is he that has such attendance; and therefore
remember, the next world is the day of the people of Gods appearance, here they
are in their non appearance, it does not yet appear what they shall be, the
very wicked themselves shall admire them.

2. I gather from hence what we are to (...) of those that have no regard
either for religion or religious ones, either for godly men or godliness any
further then it is adorned with outward beauty, and (...) ornament, there are
some that if religion and the ways of God be persecuted, and frowned upon by
the great men of the world, and be not looked upon with a favorably eye from
authority, farewell Religion then, these love the child for the nurses sake.
When Religion is in fa^hion, then they can come to Gods people, and ^ringe to
them, and the like. But as the shot Deer when i^ has the arrow sticking in its
side, all the rest will run from it: so when godly men have an arrow in their
side, and are under persecution and oppression, then farewell Religion. What is
this but to look upon Religion as inferior to worldly grandeur, and dignity.
If I love Religion for prosperity, and for the countenance of authority, it is
certain I love these things more their Religion. All that I shall say is this,
thou shall never (...) communion with those in their glory, whom thou do
undervalue for their grace, if Religion here be your contempt, happiness shall
never be your reward, and if the people of God be too bad for you here, they
shall be too (...) for you (...).

2. I would note the excellency of holiness, and Religion, and godliness above
all worldly excellencies whatsoever. If a man be in reproaches and
persecutions, he is never the better for all his worldly endowments, these all
leave him, but now holiness, the excellency of it lies in this, that it draws
forth an admiration for its excellency notwithstanding all opposition. Set a
giant in a valley, he is a giant still; a pearl is a pearl though on a
dunghill; and a holy man is a holy man, though never so much disgraced and
contemned by men. But now let a wicked man be never so high and honorable,
this man is a base man in the account of God, and in the sight of Gods people.
Dan. 11. 21. It is said of Antiochus Epiphanes, who was accounted the admired
great prince of his time, yet he is called a vile person. And that John the
Baptist who had a jeathern girdle, and locusts and wild honey was his food,
yet Christ says of him he was the honourablest man born of women; and on the
other side, when Herod was cried up, the voice of God and not of man, what was
he in the account of God and the Spirit, why he is struck dead, and made meat
for worms. There is a silent Majesty and dignity in reproached piety, when
there is a silent ignominy and baseness in advanced wickedness; a poor minister
of Jesus Christ when he is cast out by the world, and thinks he shall be
counted the scum of the world, yet let him not be troubled; as it was with
Christ, it is with the servants of Christ, the Lord Jesus when he was here upon
earth, no man under so much ignominy, and reproach, and persecution, yet all
this while Jesus Christ had a secret glory that shined through all these
ignominies and disgraces, you read he was laid in a manger; but then he was
worshipped, sometimes you shall read he had no money, but yet then he could
command that a fish should be caught, and he could have money, sometimes a
weary, and yet at that very time converts a woman. Look through the whole
course of his life, there was a secret glory under all his ignominy, when he
was brought before his enemies, yet then they fell down before him; take heed
of dishonouring God. Thus it is with the people of God, they are in distress
and poverty, but there is a secret dignity that beams forth; as the Apostle
says, the Spirit of God and glory rest upon you; If you be persecuted for
righteousness sake blessed are you; on the other side, when rich men are in
high esteem is there not a secret disgrace to be in a high place, and yet to be
a swearer, a drunkard, a whoremaster.

4. You see the way of it, how a man may get a good name: would you be as those
holy men are said to be that obtained a good report through faith? I will tell
thee the way, be a holy man, take heed of sinning, take heed of dishonouring
God, this will make thee that thy name shall never rot, and God will have thee
in everlasting remembrance.

5. I note from hence the certain happiness of those beholders that do see this
excellency and worth in the people of God under worldly contempt, and under
worldly ignominy and disgrace: for the comfort of these let me tell them, if
there be any thing in the world a sign of a gracious heart it is this, to love
holiness, for holiness sake when it is advanced is good: but to love holiness
when it is upon a dunghill, and is spit upon and persecuted, that man shows the
truth of grace, and the strength of grace too: It is a sign not only of a true
sight, but of a strong sight, to pierce so as to see a godly man beautiful in
sufferings, and remember this for certain, the Lord will have an eye to thee.
There is a great deal of comfort may come to thy soul in all thy distresses,
here is a ground of comfort.

First, In thy infirmities: Do thou love holiness when it is compassed about
with sorrows, and troubles, and persecutions? Certainly Christ will see the
truth of thy grace in the midst of all thy infirmities, and he will know a
little of his own in the midst of a great deal of ours; but then in our outward
trouble there is comfort* Do you think if you regard not Gods people in their
sufferings, that he will regard you in your sufferings? If you remember the
godly poor, God will make your bed in your sickness, God will remember what you
did at such a time, such a visit thou gave to such a one of mine in pri^on*
and such a time tho^ did so and ^o; those that have k^pt close to ^od in
their outward highness* he will never c^st them off for their lowne^s; you ^an
see nothing of grace in our selves, nothing but hypocrisy; yet c^st ^ou say,
Lord, I love thee in thy Image, I love the Lord J^s Christ in his wo^st (...),
I love him in his Members; this has brought many a servant of God comfort in
the ^wangs of his conscience: But then there is abundant comfort to the people
of God at the last day, when they shall appear before all the world, when they
that have persecuted Christ, and his Church, and people, do fear and tremble,
yet then may thou say, Remember, Lord, what I have done, it is a token I am
one that thou in^endest good too, because thou have kept me faithful to thee
and thy cause: Do you think a Judge will condemn that man that has saved the
life of his dear W^fe? but when you shall appear before the Judgment seat at
the great day, and every pot of water, and every rag that thou have given to
the Spouse of Christ, shall be remembered, do you think he will not reward it.

To conclude all, let me note but this one thing* that now the people of God
from hence should learn, and that is, not to be discouraged in any outward
re^roach or trouble that can befall them in this world; remember at that very
time God has a good opinion of you, though you be never so mean and low in
(...) account of the world; yet the Saints of God, who are the only wise men in
the world, these have a good opinion of you, and love you, and pray for you,
and pity you. I profess the love of one Saint is that that makes amends to a
gracious heart, for all the hatred and persecution that he endures from all the
sinners in the world: and then remember, that even the wicked themselves will
have a good opinion of you, when you do not comply with their superstitious
ways and practices; and if all this will not comfor^ you, remember your own
consciences, which is as a thousand witnesses, will one day comfort you, and
though you are under disgrace* and contempt, and reproach from wicked men, yet
remember, no man is a miserable man for any opinion another has of him: so
long as God keeps thee close and faithful to him, either thy conscience does
comfort thee, or it shall, and it is a good conscience that will give the best
acquittance.

And then to conclude all for thee, to have the whole number of God^ people to
look upon thee to be an unworthy and vile man, I look upon it to be a greater
disgrace, then to have all the ignominy and disgrace that the world can lay
upon you; remember, when godly men are ^fraid of you, you have very much cause
to be afraid of your self; and remember, there is much reason for you to put
you upon the looking and narrow enquiry into your own hearts and ways* when
the people of God, that God has given his Spirit too, stands at a distance
from you, and are afraid to come nigh you.

Mr. Jenkins's Afternoon Sermon.
Exodus 3. 2, 3, 4, 5. And the Angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a flame of
fire out of the midst of a Bush; and he looked, and behold the Bush burned with
fire, and the Bush was not consumed. And Moses said, I will now turn aside and
see this great sight, why the Bush is not burnt. And when the Lord saw that he
turned aside to see, God called unto him out of the midst of the Bush, and
said, Moses, Moses, And he said, Here am I, And he said, Draw not nigh hither;
put off thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou stand is
holy ground.
LET us take a short view of the foregoing Verses; and that this may be the
more useful and profitable ^o us, we may take notice, That as in the former
Chapter ther^ is described Moses's preservation to his future employment; so in
this Chapter there is described his preparation, and his sitting for that
employment, i. e. by a Vision, or rather a suitable Apparition, in which God
discovered unto Moses his care of the people, of whom Moses was to be a speedy
deliverer. You have here in the word^ read unto you, the preparation afforded
to Moses for the great work, of being called to be Isreal's deliverer, and in
this preparation you may take notice of these three principal parts.

1. An Apparition that is here presented to the view of Moses, A burning,
though not a consumed Bush. 2. Moses care to observe it, I will turn aside and
see this great sight, why the Bush is not burned. And then, 3. Gods Monitory
Precept, or Admonition, which he afforded unto Moses, when he was drawing near
to see this wonder, in which we have principally considerable two parts.
1. This Precept propounded, 1. Negatively, That be should not draw near. 2.
Affirmatively, That he should put off his shoes from off his feet. 2. You have
considerable the Reason or Argument, whereby God does back this Precept or
Admonition, i. e. Because that place whereon he stood was holy ground, The time
would fail me if I should go over all these parts, we shall only touch on the
two former, the Apparition which Moses saw, and Moses's desire to observe it,
of which I shall only speak transitorily, and insist on the latter more fully
which I chiefly intend.
1. For the Apparition, or emblematical discovery of the estate of the Church
in the burning, and yet unconsumed Bush. And herein take notice of three things.

1. The lowness and weakness of the Church, represented by a bush. 2. The
cruelties of the Churches enemies signified and represented by Fire. 3. The
eminency of its preservation, though in the fire, yet unconsumed.
And in this only take notice, that the Church is compared to a bush for two
reasons: 1* In regard of its deformity, and blackness, and uncomlinesse. 2. In
regard of its weakness and brittleness. The Church is uncomly in regard of
sin, and weak in regard of suffering, and God see^ it best that it should be
thus with them to humble them, and to show his goodness to accept them, and to
love them, and make them long for their future beauty, and hereby God makes
them more conformable to their Head, hereby he makes them endeavor to look
after inward beauty and glory, hereby he puts them on a life of faith, and
takes them off from living by sense, and creature comforts, and from being
entangled with creature comfort, and hereby he shows how little he regards the
beauty and glory of this life, which he denies to the best of his people: And
hereby he shows, that there is a better state of appearance and glory
approaching; and therefore the people of God are not to be censured under their
blackness and deformity, either in regard of sin or suffering; their happiness
is not to be judged by its outward appearance, because this life is but the
obscurity of the Church; we see them like the Tents of Kedar, but we do not see
how like the Curtains of Solomon they shall be. 2. The people of God should
take heed of expecting that glory of this world, which is not promised to them,
and to set their hearts on Heaven. And you may see the reason, why wicked men
stumble so much at the outside of God's Worship because there is no outward
bravery and beauty to allure them to the true Worship.

2. The Church is compared to a Bush, in regard of its weakness and
brittlenesse* Note, That it is not compared to a strong sturdy Oak, but to a
weak brittle Bush. God loves to bring his Church into a low and weak estate and
condition; as it is here compared to a Bush, so other*where to a Vine, a Dove,
a Lamb and a Sheep, all weak creatures* Sometimes the Church is said to be
fatherless and destitute; and as our Lord Jesus Christ, the Head of the Church,
was said to be weak, a worm and no man; and as the Apostle said, Suffered
through weakness. And this makes them to trust in God, and puts them to rest
on his strength; When we are weak, then are we strong, outward weakness will
make us look the more to Christ for spiritual strength; the weakness of our
state does show the spiritual strength God gives to his people for the
upholding of them. And this weakness of his Church does exceedingly confound
his enemies, when so weak a company shall be delivered not only against, but by
the strength of men; and hereby God does gain to himself the greater glory in
their deliverance, for remembering them in their weak estate. Hereby the people
of God, a^e made the more thankful, both for their preservation in, and
deliverence from their powerful adversaries. You ^ee, here is a large field
opened unto me, for the discoursing upon the Church's weakness, which whether
it be more suitable to the Text, or to the Times, I leave to you to judge. But,

2. Consider the cruelty of their opposition: that is set forth and ^epresented
by the fire that burned in the Bush. Afflictions, and especially persecuting
o^es, are in Scriptu^e f^equently set out by fire, as, The fiery trial, the
fire of Affliction. This does not only discover the rage and cruelty of men,
but also the benefit and utility that comes to the Church by Affliction; for
the Afflictions of the Church are not as consuming, but trying fire; as the
fire in a Furnace is to Gold, it only takes away the dross; nor like the fire
of hell, which has heat without light, but the School of persecution has light
as well as heat, the School of affliction is the School* of teaching, God
teaches his Saints excellent Lessons by the light of that fire, But I pass by
that, I might now insist upon the third thing. --

3. Consider the eminence of their preservation, It was not consumed; the
Church of God was hot, but not altogether and wholly consumed; let the fire be
never so hot and spreading, the Church of God shall have a being; if the Church
be less in one place it will be greater in another; what it loses in one place
it gets in another; and God will have a Name among his people on earth; A man
may as well attempt to blow out the light of the Sun with a pair of bellows, or
batter it with snow-balls, as to root the Church out of the world; for it is
impossible to root Christ's Church out of the world* And if you take notice of
particular Believers, it is not consumed, in a way of hurting and destroying
them; and consider, their graces are not consumed, their welfare is not
destroyed; this fire cannot burn them up, though it burn upon them: But as he
will mittigate and allay the fire, so as that it shall not decrease their
strength, so he will cleanse his people by the fire, so as that it shall burn
up nothing but their dross, and what makes them offensive unto God, and what
may make them hurtful one to another. But I pass it by, these things to the
second general Part, viz

2. Moses care to observe God's admonition, That he would turn aside and see
this great sight, why the bush was not burnt. Moses was an excellent
Naturalist, and yet here he was posed; he could see no reason in nature by all
the learning of the Egyptians, how this thing should come to pass that a
flaming fire should be in a brittle bush, and yet the bush not consumed; And
yet I do not conceive (as some Jesuitical Expositors upon the place do) that
Moses did turn aside so much out of curiosity, as to understand what it was
that God did intend by it, and would have him to learn by it. And doubtless
when Gods works are great, our observations should not be small; when his
providence is eminently lifted up, we should no be cast dawn; when the hand of
God is upon us, we must not shut our eyes, I am very far from being a
Phanatique, and to give credit or be led by unscriptural revelation; but let me
tell you, the times wherein we live are strange times, in regard of strange
sights and apparitions, and I question if there have not bin some as wonderful
as this in our times, but I shall not now mention them; though it be a
forfeiture of your modesty to give a reason for them, yet they do portend some
strange things; the hand of God is not to be neglected, though it cannot be
perfectly conceived; and it is the nature of a Wicked man to have Gods works
far out of his sight; be sure to lay them up in your hearts, And thus far you
may take notice of them, To trust that God that has all the Elementary Meteors
in his power, and at his command; and this learn to tremble and dread before
that God that has you in his power, and can do with you and all other things
as he pleases.

3. You have here considerable the Admonition of God, or the Monitory precept
God lays down to Moses, i. e. he forbids him to draw nigher, and then bids him
to pull off his shoes: the reason of the former will be easily understood in
the opening of the latter; I shall therefore in it briefly take notice of two
things.

1. An Injunction, put off thy shoes. 2. The Argument whereby he does back
this, Because the place whereon he stood was holy ground.
For the opening of the former, the Injunction, put off thy shoes, I shall not
give the diverse glosses and diverse Interpretations which men, with more wit
then weight, have endeavored to make of this Scripture; he plain meaning is
this, which is given us by Thed^et, put off thy shoes, God's scope, and drift,
and i^ent he^eby was, to require of Moses reverence, when he was to receive a
Message of very great concernment and importance about his Church; the design
of God was in this to prepare him to obedience, therefore God requires that of
him then, which servants were wo^t to do when they came to their Lord and
Master, to show their reverence to them, servants used to come barefoot to
their Masters, to testify reverence to the commands of them on whom they
waited: Nudare pedes signum reverentiae. And the putting on the shoes is in
Scripture, as well as among other Writers, held as a token of domination or
masterly Power. Hence some conceive, John spoke of Christ as one that had his
shoes on; and of himself, as one hat was unworth^ to unty his shoes. And the
P^phet Isaiah, by a sign of putting off his shoes, is commanded by God to put
off his shoes from off his feet, and to walk naked and barefoot; and he did
so, Isa. 20. 2: which denotes the servility of the People, in token that God's
people were to be in a low condition in captivity. So we read of Mour^ners in
Ezekiel, chap 21. 17. that were of a low spirit, they are said to go without
shoes, or unshod. And, my brethen, on the other side, when God would show the
freedom of his people, and their deliverance from servitude, he is said to put
shoes on their feet, Ezech. 16. 10. And the reception of the Prodigal into his
Fathers house, and the freedom and privilege his Father intended him,
(acording to some learned men, intended by that expression in Luke 1. 22.) is
set forth by putting on shoes upon his feet. So that I take the meaning of this
command to be so much; Show by this thy reverence, thy humility, thy due
submissiveness, thy subjection of spirit, together with thy servile readiness
to do whatsoever I shall command thee. Calvin has this Note upon the Text, if
so excellent a servant of God as Moses had need to be quickened to reverence
and obedience by such a ceremony, certainly we that are more backward to
hu^ility and obedience, should by our reverent behavior, when we come into the
presence of God; signify (...) the reverence of our souls by our outward
expressions, and likewise quicken and fortify the inward graces of our souls
by the outward gestures of the body, (especially in prayer) as kneeling, and
lifting up the hands, uncovering of the head, and the like; for the presence of
God is great, and it is the presence of the great God indeed; we that are not
only by the Law of Creation so infinitely below him, but also in regard of that
illegal Law of sin, so much against him, should testify our humility before
him, and subjection to him, when he calls for it by our reverence.

2. The Reason by which this is b^ckt, Because the place whereon Moses di^ stand
was holy ground. The meaning I take to be this. I^ is holy in regard of that
visible and miraculous taken, symbol, and sign of my presence that is here
discovered in this Place, not because the place was (as I ^o not understand how
any place is) of its own na^re holy, but God did testify, that that Place
being the place of his special presence, had thereby a holiness, there being
now a sign given by God to Moses, that he was extraordinarily and miraculously
there. And thus I have opened the second Branch, whereon this Injunction was
backed; This place was holy; so it was then. Now I do not understand how I can
discourse of this so profitably unto you, concerning the holiness of places,
unless we take notice of the holiness of places now in the time of the Gospel,
and consider, whether, and how, in these times, one place may be said to be
holy or holier then another. And truly I am not put on this employment
willingly, nor the handling of this subject; and if it were not extorted from
me by something, I do not say that I have seen, but that I have read, that was
written by men, and those none of the meanest neither, the learned of the
Papists, I should not now have chosen to have entered upon this task, concerning
the holiness of places, in opposition to whom, I have entered upon this
discourse: I will give you two expressions, which one of the devoutest, and the
other of the learned of them has; the learned of them, accounted so at
least (though, blessed be God, his weapons have not been formidable to the
Church) is Bellarmine, his words are these, Templum consecrandum merito
venerabile and divina virtute praeditum est, The Temple consecrated is
deservedly holy, and venerable in worship, and endowed with divine virtue and
efficacy, the Temple ought to be looked upon as honorable and venerable. And
for the other, Durandus, he tells us, So great is the Religion and Holiness of
Churches, that those things should be, and may be forbidden to be done in them
(he means perpetually, or else he says nothing, for we grant as much) which in
other places may duly and lawfully be done.

In the handling of this Question, How we are to judge and conceive of the
holiness of places in the times of the Gospel? I shall endeavor, first, to
explain it, and then faithfully and truly endeavor to resolve and determine
the same.

First then, for Explanation, I shall here endeavor to open these two things
to you; first, what it is for a place to be holy, or wherein the nature of the
holiness of places consists: secondly, what that is that is the foundation or
cause of the holiness of places, and both these must in our discourse, and
likewise apprehension, be accurately distinguished.

I. What it is for a place to be holy, this is two ways to be considered: 1.
generally; 2. more particularly.

1. More generally, The holiness of a place does consist in the separation
thereof, the setting it apart, the distinction and discrimination in the way of
some excellent pre-eminence, or the exa^ting of it before and above all other
places: Thus the notion of the holiness of places is taken in Scripture, Exodus
30. 31, 37, 38. you shall there read, that the Lord tells them in the 31.
verse, concerning the ointment that he prescribed, and likewise the composition
of it for his service, This shall be an holy anointing ^yl unto me throughout
your generations. Now see how God does discover this to be holy, On man's flesh
it shall not be poured, neither shall you make any other like it after the
composition of it. Here was a discrimination as well to the using of it, as to
the making and composition of it; as none was to (...) such an ointment as this
was, so none was to use it in their ordinary and common employment: so that now
the holiness thereof did consist in the distinction and disc^imination of it
from other uses, and likewise from all other ointments. And this is further
expressed concerning the holy perfumes in the 37. and 38. verses, there was to
be a difference between this and other perfumes; and this was the holiness
thereof. And so you shall find it, not only concerning holy things but likewise
concernig holy persons, Levit. 20. 24. 25. I am the Lord your God, which have
separated you from other people; you shall therefore put a difference between
clean beasts, and unclean. (...), herein is the holiness of the people, that
they were a diffe^ced and severed people. And hence it is you read in
Deuteronomy, chap. 26. 18, 19. that God is there said to avouch his people,
openly to discover himself to assert it that they are his people; their
holiness was a discrimination, a separation from the rest of the people. And in
Deuteronomy. 7. 6. and 14. 2. you have there the very same things described and
discovered to you. And now for this I shall desire you to take notice of
comparing two places of Scripture, which discovers the holiness of places, in
Deuteronomy. 19. 2, 7. Thou shall separate three Cities for thee in the midst of thy
land, which the Lord thy God gives thee to possess it. And at the seventh
verse, Wherefore I command thee, saying, Thou shall separate three Cities for
thee. Now you shall have this again propounded to you in Joshua. chap. 20. 7.
And they sanctified Kedesh in Galilee in Napthaly, and Sechem in mount Ephraim,
and Kiriath-arba (which is Hebron) in the mountain of Judah. Mark the
Scripture, that that was called Separation in Deuteronomy. 9. 2. 7. is here called
Sanctification; therefore the word in the Hebrew is, And you shall sanctify,
or, make holy these places; that is, holy, by the separation or them unto that
employment that I shall appoint. Hence a thing is said to be unholy in
Scripture when it is common, is not separated and set apart to holy employments
and services, and from every thing that is of a civil concernment. And hence
you read in Acts 10. 14. in the Vision that Peter had, God bids Peter kill and
eat. But Peter said, Not so Lord, for I have never eaten anything that is
common or unclean. That that is unclean and unholy, in a way of legal
unholiness, is said to be common, not set apart. Heb. 10. 29. you shall there
read this notion clearly discovered to you in the New Testament, Of how much
sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden
under foot the Son of God, and has counted the blood of the Covenant,
wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing. An unholy thing is a common
thing. So that now what is sanctification in the former part of the verse, is
called commonness and uncleanness in the latter part. But not to give you any
more instances of this nature, the general nature of holiness is
discrimination, or separation.

2. To answer it more particularly, this setting apart, or discrimination, or
separation of places for holy uses, must have these two properties.

1. A place that is holy, it must have such a separation from other places, as
that it must be alienated from all uses but holy uses, it must not at all be
employed to civil uses, for the employing of it unto civil uses must be looked
upon as sinful and unlawful. Thus in the Scripture, when times, things, or
persons are reputed as holy, they are to be exempted from common employment;
the Sabbath day, a holy day, In it thou must not do any manner of work. The
Vessels and Utensils of the Temple were holy, and therefore were not to be used
to ordinary uses; and this, as some think, was the great sin of Belshazar, that
he would offer to drink in the Vessels of the Temple. And so the garments of
the Priests were holy, and not to be used by secular persons. And the
Tabernacle and the Temple were holy, and not to be used in civil employments.

2. More particularly, concerning this holiness, I desire to show you what it
is, by showing you, it must be such a holiness and separation, as that the
service done to God in those places must be accounted and looked upon as a
better service, and more accepteble, then if so be it had been done elsewhere,
more acceptable to God, and advantageous to our selves. Now as places are said
to be holy, in regard they are only to be for holy services, so,

2. Holy in regard that holy services are only to be done there, with
acceptance or advantage, at least with so great acceptance. And therefore I
desire you to take notice, that places in Scripture were said to be holy, which
did sanctify the Worship which was done in them, and sanctify the
Worshippers, and so the very places are part of worship: and so not only places
in which God was worshipped, but by which God was worshipped. And thus the
Sabbath was sanctified, and so the performance of Gods worship therein, made
Gods service more acceptable and sanctified. And so the Altar, when it was
holy, it made the gift the more holy and sanctified, and so the more
acceptable, the Altar sanctified the gift, M^t. 23. 18, 19. And so the Incense
was acceptable to God, as being put into such a Censor. And so the service done
to God in such Garments was more acceptable, because done in them which God had
instituted and appointed for Aaron and his Sons to wear. And so I have opened
the first thing in the explanation, and that is to show you, wherein ho^iness
consists, and how it is that places or things may be said to be holy; and I
think I have sufficiently cleared the notion to you.

2. To show, what the cause or the foundation of this holinese is; for this, my
Brethren, I shall desire you also to take notice of it more generally, and then
more particularly.

1. More generally, That the cause and the foundation of a place, or any other
things holiness, it is its belonging to God, Gods peculiar relation to it, and
propriety in it, declared as he shall please: And therefore to be holy, and to
be Gods, are words of the like importance, or equivolent, its being Gods, and
his having a relation to it, is the foundation and cause of its holiness. And
therefore if you look into Exodus 13. 2. you shall there find God commands,
that they should sanctify unto him all the firstborn, it is mine; there now
is that which is the cause, and reason, and ground of its being sanctified, or
holy, it is God himself, God has a propriety in it. And therefore I desire you
to look into Luke 2. 23. it will open this notion to you; there you shall see,
that this command is again repeated, but yet in other words, and therefore ye
says, As it is written in the Law of the Lord, Every male that opens the
womb shall be called holy to the Lord; that which is said in one place to be
sanctified or separated, is here said to be holy; and therefore holy, because
separated to God, Levit. 27. 30. All the Tithes of the land is the Lord, it is
holy unto the Lord; it is holy, and therefore holy because because it is the
Lords. So that here is the general answer. This is the foundation, ground and
cause of its holiness, Gods peculiar propriety in it, it is the Lords.

2. More particularly, That the declared propriety that God has in any place,
or his relation to a place, or its belonging unto God, that is the foundation
of its holiness. This belonging unto God, or Gods propriety in it, is declared
two ways.

Its belonging unto God is declared. 1. From his presence. 2. From his Precept.


1. By his presence. Now the presence of God that was the foundation of the
holiness of a place, was twofold. 1. Extraordinary. 2. Ordinary.


1. The Extraordinary presence of God was by his miraculous Apparitions. and
discovering himself by some miraculous token, vision, sign, or manifestation of
his presence, as now here in this burning, and not consumed ^ush; here was a
miraculous ^oken of Gods presence. We shall and in the fifth of Joshua, and the
last verse, God commands Joshua to put off his shoes, Loose thy shoes from
off thy feet, for the place whe^eon thou stand is holy ground. And Joshua
did so. And therefore, as I conceive, hence it is, the Mountain in which Christ
was transfigured is called, The holy Mountain, 2 Pet. 1. 18. And this voice
which came from Heaven we heard when we were with him in the holy Mount. Why
holy? Not as if it were holy at that time when the Apostle writ that Epistle,
but it were manifest, there was an extraordinary manifestation and sign of Gods
presence, and so long as this extraordinary manifestation of Gods presence
continued it was called holy. And this miraculous manifestation of the
gloriousness of Christ's Godhead ceasing, the holiness of that place ceased
also. And remember this place now, of Gods extraordinary miraculous
manifestation of himself in the Bush, was holy for that time, and no longer,
wherein he did manifest himself; for otherwise, in the time of the Law, it were
unholy to offer up sacrifice there.

2. As the presence of God was extraordinary, so it is ordinary, which is two
fold. 1. The presence of his standing residence in a place, by some visible or
external Symbol; or else, 2. The presence of God is a spiritual presence, in
the religious services and performances of his people, in the place of their
Meetings and Assemblies. Now concerning the first of these.


1. The presence of God, by the more visible and lasting tokens of his
presence, which was chiefly afforded in the time of the Levitical Pedagogue; so
the Altar, Temple, Ark, and Mercy-seat, were symbols of Gods presence among
that people, by them God signified his presence* he recorded his name there by
those visible tokens of his presence; and therefore the Ark was said to be Gods
face: and when the Ark was lifted up, it was said, Let God arise* and let his
Enemies be scattered. Hence they so much rejoiced when the Ark came into the
City of David, because it was the sign of Gods presence, and mourned when it
was taken away captive. And God is said to deliver his glory into captivity;
that is, the token of his glorious presence: and as long as this continued, God
was looked upon as there present; and thither the people went to pray, and
offer Sacrifice. And thus God more fixedly declared his durable relation to a
place by these tokens, and while these continued in a place, he was looked upon
to be there.

2. Gods ordinary presence is considerable in the Religious services of his
people, and this I call the rather the more spiritual presence of God; this is
that presence of God in the Ordinances, which we have, we hope, this day, and
which Christ did promise, Mat. 18. 20. Where ever two or three are met together
in my name, there am I present in the midst of them; not in the midst of the
place, but of them, when they do perform holy and institute worship. This
spiritual presence of God is that that is afforded in the use of those
Ordinances of Praying, Hearing, and Administration of Sacraments; his presence
is there to accept of these, and to bless them, and make them operative, and to
assist in these, and to enable both Minister and people to go through their
duty by his own power. Nor can Gods presence be ordinarily expected, but in
this his own way. Now then,

2. You must know, that as the presence of God is the foundation of a places
sanctity, and as it is several, so you must know, Gods propriety in, and
relation to a place is declared by his Precept; the precept of God is Gods
propriety in a place, as well as his presence; thus it belongs to him by
command to make it holy, he may do what he will, and choose out what places he
will to be holy. He to whom all things belong, surely may have some places and
things more proper to himself and peculiar; so the Temple of old, and the
Tabernacle, those places of Levitical and Ceremonial worship, was separated and
set apart by God, by Divine Institution. Hence we have many commands.

1. God commands, that such a House, and such a Tabernacle shall be built, and
this had been unlawful to do, had it not been commanded. 2. He directs the
manner, and the mode, and that all things should exactly be done according to
the pattern in the Mount. And, 3. God does command it should be in such a
place, in the thrashing floor of Arumnah the Jebusite, and that place that
himself had chosen. 4. He commands that he will be served in these places
peculiarly, rather then in any other place, he would not have these places
changed for others. Herein this place typifi'd Christ, one that is only able
to make our services acceptable* Hence it is said, Ex. 23. 17. Three times in
the year all the M^ies shall appear before the Lord. And Act. 27 the Eunuch
there went unto that place that God had commanded. 5. He does command, that he
would have these places reverenced, and no civil employments used there when
the holy service was doing, and that after the service was done, at that very
time the place should be only for God. 6. And lastly, He annexed a promise unto
that place, that he would accept of a duty done there rather then in any other
place, even because it was done there; hence they prayed in the Temple, rather
then in their private houses, Lu. 2. 27 and when they could not be present, by
reason of Gods providence, in the Temple, if they do but look to the City and
the Temple God accepted of their duty, 1 Kin. 8. 44 48 So that God did promise,
that that place that he had instituted for his worship and service, that the
service performed there should be more acceptable to him then elsewhere. This
shows the reason and foundation of a places holiness the precept of God, and
the promise and presence of God. And thus I have opened to you the second
thing. Now having thus explained and opened the Question to you.
2. I come to resolve the Question, according to what I think in my conscience
to be the truth of God; and this I shall do two ways.

1. By granting that which must not be denied. 2. By denying what must not be
granted.
1. By granting what must not be denied; and here I grant willingly these four
things.

1. That in the time of the Gospel, it is not only lawful, but it is often very
commendable and necessary, to design and dedicate places unto God. Now when I
say, it is lawful to design them, and to dedicate them. I pray you bear me
witness, I do not say it is lawful to consecrate them, or to sanctif^e them;
and say, it is lawful to design and dedicate them. Now for this take not^ce,
that between 1. the designing and appointing of a place; 2. the dedication of a
place: and 3. the consecrating of a place, there are these differences.

1. Concerning the designation of a place; Then is a place designed, when it is
appointed to be made use of for the most convenient for such a service, as
Tuesday and Wednesday may be appointed for Lecturedayes, not consecrated. Now
you must know, that this designation of a day may be altered, and so may a
place; if such a place be designed, it is in our power to make use of it, so as
to leave off the use of it when weplease.

2. As to dedication, I mean so lawfully to dedicate a place, which is of our
own right to dispose of; so to dedicate it, as not again to be able to revoke
it, or call it back from such a use and purpose. It is lawful and commendable
for a rich man, to dedicate so much ground or money, for building a House for a
Free School, or for the poor, and to give it away from our selves, and from our
own right and power; and if so be that a man has power or propriety over a
place or thing, it is lawful for a man to alienate such a thing. And yet this
you must know by the way, that this Dedication that now is in the time of the
Gospel, does very much differ from that Dedication of Free-will-offering unto
God in the time of the Law; for they were dedicated to God in the time of the
Law immediately, that is, to his immediate Worship; it was part of Gods
Worship, it was a part of Religion to do that thing: whereas it is not now
dedicated to the immediate worship of God, but it is dedicated immediately to
such a Parish, or Minister, or Place, or company of People, that we have a good
will to gratify; and so it more remotely redounds to God's glory, not
immediately: For God has not declared in his Word the same acceptance in the
Gospel of things done in an immediate way, as he had in the time of the Law, of
which acceptance now we have no such promise. And therefore it is observable,
as one speaks concerning that Benefactor in the Gospel to the Jews, He has
loved our Nation, and builded us a Synagogue, it is not said, for God; but for
us; This man out of love to us has bestowed these things to God; which, though
a giving our selves out of our own power, yet it does differ from the
Free-will-offering in the time of the Law. Ay, but now, Sirs, ye must know,
that sanctification, or consecration, that is a great deal more; when we
sanctify a thing, or consecrate a thing, this thing that is so consecrated, it
is so holy, that there must nothing at all of unholiness, or of a civil or
secular employment and concernment be done in it. Now we do not dedicate a
thing, but there may be secular things in an ordinary and civil way done in
them; and our services are not more acceptable for the place, nor the places
less holy because of those civil employments. There is the first concession,
that in the time of the Gospel there may be a designment and dedicating of
places, and it is not only lawful but commendable.

2. I grant, that in times of the Gospel, some places are to have Religious
services performed in them, rather then in other places; I mean, places of
natural convenience and fitness for the meeting of people together, whereby
they may be free from disturbance, from the violence of Enemies, and from
tempestuous weather. As public meetings, whereby we have the society of Gods
people, their examples to stir us up to zeal, and their joint help in Prayer
and holy performances, to go along with us, that we may join our forces
together and with a great force wrestle with God, and overcome him which is
invincible. And therefore, my Brethren, I desire you to bear me witness this
day, that I plead for public Ordinances, and for the purity of Gods Ordinances
to be administered in public places, rather then other places, so that I do
here profess, that I do avowedly and openly declare my judgment to be for
public meetings in public places, and the purity of God's Ordinances, if they
may be enjoyed without humane mixture, which may hurt and pollute them.

3. I grant, that in the time of holy service, we are not then to use secular
employments at that time in those places, as eating, drinking, and talking, it
being unsuitable to the work in hand, and howsoever they may be lawful at
another time, yet unlawful then, because against the Apostles command, Let all
things be done in decency, and in order; and that which is unsuitable to the
commands of God, the taking his Name in vain. My Brethren, I will go further
with you, we are to abstain from all other Religious services, when not in
season; and therefore when the Minister is in Preaching, we must not run into
our places and kneel down, as some people do, and fall a Praying. And I cannot
but wonder, that they that do so much cry up Uniformity and Sanctity of places,
that yet they should confute their judgment by their practice, that they
should pray secretly when the whole Congregation is a praying vocally; and it
may be the Congregation is singing a Psalm, or the Minister Preaching, and then
they go to their Prayers; I pray where is the Uniformity, Decency, and Order
they so much stand for.

Lastly, I grant, that after the performances of holy duties, in places wherein
we meet for the worship and service of God, it is our duty to abstain, not
only from filthy and indecent actions of a natural or moral filthiness,
unseemly, as looked upon by men against God's Law; but from all those civil,
moral, lawful actions, at other times, that may reflect any dishonor upon the
work that has been done, or upon the work that shall be done, or that may
render the place unmeet for religious services afterward: And this is that
that one calls a Negative, or a Privative reverence, a reverence, or not doing
something, not because the place is more holy, but for decency and order,
considering the religious duties performed in that place. So that things
subservient to Religion call for a Negative reverence, and are not so to be
used, as that the Religious services which are there performed and transacted,
should be made disgraceful and dishonorable; as the Bread of the Sacrament,
after the Sacrament is done, is not lawful to be cast unto unreasonable
creatures, because it reflects dishonor upon the religious service which we
were before doing; so, dirty water is not to be put into the Communion Cup, not
that the Cup is holy, but because it is a reflection of disgrace upon that holy
service wherein that Cup is made use of; and that Cup is not to be made use of
to drunkenness. But in all this bear me witness that I say, all this is but a
civil reverence, and so due to any place where there is any honorable
Convention, as in the Parliamenthouse, or Presence Chamber, or the like. Having
yielded this.

2. I must come now to deny what must not be granted; and I likewise deny four
things.

1. It is not now in the times of the Gospel in any man's power to set apart a
place for Religious duties, so as that it should be unlawful upon a due
occasion to use it for civil employments, or that it should be always unlawful
to alienate to other uses, besides those uses that are Divine; the Bread and
Wine sanctified by Gods own institution by the Minister, after the public use
and administration of them in the Ordinance, are not only holy but they may be
eaten in a civil use and way as our ordinary and common food: The Synagogues
among the Jews were as holy as our Churches, they were for holy duties, as
Prayer, Preaching and the like, and dedicated to Gods Worship, and yet you must
know there are civil employments used in those places after the Religious
Worship was done; and therefore in Matthew. 23. 34. says our Savior, some of
them you shall scourge in your Synagogues. Hence we use to keep Courts and
Consistories in Churches amongst us, and some of them none of the best, and and
we use here among us in this City constantly in our Churches, (and I doubt not
but it is lawful) for an Alderman in his Ward to meet about secular business,
as to choose Common-Council-men, or the like. But where there has been a
dedication of a place to Gods worship, it is only God that can make it so holy,
as that it should be sinful to employ it to other uses, and if the Governors
of the Church upon due occasion and reason shall substitute other places more
fit then the former for Divine Worship, then the former places may return to
their former proper uses; but it is not so in things consecrated by God: If the
Font, Table, or Pulpit wax old, they may be laid aside and looked upon as
common things, and may be used for other employments; and suppose the Surplisse
be a lawful garment in Gods worship, (which yet I am persuaded none of you
believe) doubtless it is not to be burned when it is old and past wearing, and
the ashes put into a pot or some such like thing, and be buried under the
Altar, but it may be used as other linen may. And so the common Utensils, as
the Cup and the like, when they are come to be old, they may be used to other
employments without fear of sin. And therefore it is an excellent speech of
one, says he, so to Consecrate moveable or immovable goods, as that it should
be a sin for the Church to use them in any secular employments, it is an
execrable and abominable Superstition: God has not consecrated any thing in
the Gospel so, as that it is a sin to use it otherwise. It was a sin in them to
make use of the Cups in the Temple in any secular way, but it is not so for us:
the reason is, because those things were set apart by Gods own Institution: but
there can be nothing so consecrated by men, as that it may not be made use of
in secular things without sin.

2. A second thing I deny is, That no place now in the time of the Gospel has
such an holiness either from the Institution or Use, as to sanctify or make
more acceptable or effectual the services therein performed: This is not in the
time of the Gospel: God is present at places of Religious performances, not
with respect unto the Place, but the performance by him instituted and
enjoined; and therefore he does not say, Where two or three are met together I
will be in the midst of that place, but among them. God will be present in the
place for the Duties sake, not among them for the Places sake, but the Duties
sake in the place, to bless the Ordinance for his own Institutions sake*
Prayers and other Duties in the Ceremonial Law were regarded for the places
sake, but now we must abhor this piece of Judaism! For a man to set a place
apart by Consecration, that this place makes the duty any thing the more
excellent or acceptable to God, this is to make the Traditions of men equal to
the Institution of God. The Temple sanctified the duty, but not the Synagogue,
and the Altar did sanctify the gift, and the person, and service, because it
was by Gods Institution, and so the Temple and Altar did add efficacy and worth
to the work; but for men to consecrate the Church, it is to make the
appointment of men equal with the Institution of God. Our Churches and
Meeting-places are not holy (if they be holy at all) without relation to the
duties performed, but our duties are holy without relation to the Church or the
place. None but God can consecrate a place to be an effectual means of worship:
The Jews worshipped God by the Temple, but we worship God in the Church; as the
place does afford a natural convenience for our meeting together; the place
then has no influence at all upon our duties, and if any of you should think
so, you err exceedingly: It is but only a Physical Act of duty, or a natural
Adjunct of duty, which is but at most helpful to the bodies convenience.

3. The third thing I deny is this, That there is no place so holy as to
exclude another place from being as holy in a way of proper sanctity and
holiness, which we have been now opening. God now makes not one place properly
more holy then another; there is not now properly any religious difference of
places. We have not now the Precept of God to sanctify and separate one place
from another, to prefer one place before another; we have not now the
miraculous presence of God, his appearing as at the bush. God has not given us
under the Gospel those Symbols of his standing presence and residency, as by
the Ark, and Mercy-Seat, and Altar of old he gave unto his people. And as for
his Ordinances, if they make a place holy in regard of performance of duty to
God there, and his spiritual presence in that place, then my Parlour, Chamber,
or Closet are holy where I use to pray, and where God does afford his assisting
blessing and comforting presence: So that if you make the spiritual presence of
God to make a thing holy, in regard of Gods spiritual presence going along with
those services, then your Houses are holy, and the Field is holy where you walk
when you meditate, and praying by the River side makes it holy; Humane
consecration makes no place truly holy. If the spiriturl presence of Christ
makes one place more holy then another, then the Communion Table and Font are
more holy then another place in the Temple. And so when Gods presence has been
enjoyed at the Font, that is more holy then the Communion Table, and so when
the presence of God has been enjoyed at the Communion Table, that is more holy
then the Font, and so you must bring in Iudaisme. If the presence of God makes
a thing holy; a new Communion Table upon which the Sacrament was never
administered* cannot be so holy as the old Table. Nay, by this the mouths of the
Communicants are holy, having eaten the Bread and drank the Wine which was
dedicated to an holy use, and so it will be finful for you to eat any other
food. I conclude all with this, That the difference and holiness of religious
places in the times of the Gospel, is not given but taken away by the Gospel. 1 Timothy 2. 8. I will therefore that men pray every where, lifting up holy hands
without wrath and doubting. You may pray, and that with as much acceptableness
to God in one place as in another. John 4. 21. Christ says, The time comes
when you shall neither in this Mounta^n, nor yet at Jerusalem, worship the
Father: That is, Gods worship and service shall not he confined and limited to
those places, as if others were not as good and holy as they. 1 Cor. 1. 2. To
them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be Saints, with all that in
every place call upon the name of Jesus Christ our Lord, both theirs and ours.
One place for the calling upon Christ is as good as another, and therefore,
Where two or three are gathered together, I will be in the midst of them. And
this is foretold in Zeph. 2. 11. and in Mal. 1. 11. So that this is the sum of
all, Gods institution makes the Sabbath holy: And the Bread and the Wine set
apart by Gods own Institution, after the duty, may be used in secular uses. But
lastly, to name no more, no place is so sanctified by God, as that after the
ceasing of that presence of God, any holiness should belong unto it; as now,
when the signs of Gods presence ceased and was gone, the holiness of that place
was gone, and then it was lawful for Moses to put on his shoes. And so when
Gods presence ceased in the Ark, the Altar, and Mercy-seat, the places became
no other then secular and civil. And now for us to go about (as the Papists do)
a Pilgrimage to Jerusalem, as if that place had any more holiness then others,
is a foolish and abominable thing: How many bloody Battles have been fought, to
the disgrace, as well as loss of Christianity, for the re-gaining of the
Holy Land.

Nay let me add, those places where the presence of God has been formerly,
when it has been taken away and those places have been used to Idolatry, they
are the worse, and the more unholy; for this is turning the House of God into
vanity.

The conclusion of all is this: whatever places are in holy duties, out of them
they loose and leave all their ^oliness, and therefore I say, it is boldness
for us to go about to tie Gods presence to a place where God has ^ever tied
it, I cannot but wonder how it is possible for (...) of reason and learning to
be so blind, as to hold* (...) the Lords day (which was set apart by God for
the Sabbath, as you may see in the fourth Commandment, and afterward by Christ
and his Apostles which does amount to no less then an Institution) is not holy
after the Service or Sermon is ended, but then you may go to play at Football,
and Cudgels, and Drinking, and what not, and yet that they should say, that the
place of performing religious duties in, is so holy after religious
performances, as that you cannot come into it without bowing the knee, and
putting off the hat, and bowing to the Altar and Communion Table, and the like;
this I cannot apprehend how it should be, and I wish any of you that are of
this mind would in private give me your reasons for it, why it should be so.

Now having explained the point, and given you a resolution of the question, in
these prrticulars, give me leave to wind up all which some Uses.

First, We infer the great difference that is between sanctity of places under
the Old Testament, and sanctity and holiness of places under the New Testament:
they under the Old Testament had the immediate presence of God, the standing
Symbols and visible signs of his presence, so long as these lasted: which was
set apart by Gods special Commandment, and so they were holy, though they were
not employed in a way of worship, but you cannot say so now, our places for
performance of holy duties have no such holiness, places now differ from places
then.

Secondly, By way of inference, I note the great goodness of God to give us
such a sweet and gracious indulgent dispensation in the time of the Gospel
under the New Testament, as that he does not tie us to Ceremonies or places, he
does not bind us as he did the Jews, to go three times in the year to the
furthermost part of the Nation to worship: No my Brethren, no Land, (...)
ground is now unholy, as famous old Dr. Raynolds said, every place is now a
Judea, no Coast but is a Judea, every house is a Jerusalem, every Congregation
is now a Zion: see here the goodness of God in indulging of us so far as to
take any service done by us in a solemn and real manner, as if it had been done
in those places which were formerly appointed for it to be done in.

Thirdly, I infer hence, there are several persons to be reproved.

1 We find hereby that all the holiness of relics of Saints does fall to the
ground: and we see the folly of those that make Pilgrimages unto Saints and
Relics as the Papists do: there was a time (say they) when such a Saints
relics were laid up in such a place, and these are more holy then other
places: so that this you see falls to the ground in it self: I might tell you
concerning their lying about their Relics, as one aid, that there were as
many Relics as would fill an hundred Carts: but supposing so, all that would
not make the place the more holy.

2. Hence the Superstition of those is to be reproved, which put holiness in
places of burial* and make it more holy to be buried in one place then in
another: it is more holy (say they) to be buried in the Church then in the
Churchyard, and more holy under the Communion Table then any other part of the
Church.

3. This reproves them which cannot pray any where but in the Temple, and they
that use private prayer in Churches: If you have houses and rooms at home, what
is the reason that if Paul's* or any other Church, stand open, you must run in
thither, and drop down behind a Pillar to say your Prayers?

4. This reproves them that have reverence toward any place more then another,
as if they did deserve more holiness in one part then in another, as bowing to
the Altar or Communion Table, or the like.

5. It reproves those that have reverence for situation of these places, they
must stand East and West, and why not North and South? all these things fall
off like fig leaves; if what I have said be true, that there is no holiness in
places, and this I have made known to you not only as my judgment, but as my
duty.

Now for Exhortation, I shall desire you to take notice of four things, and I
have done, and shall leave you to God, and commit you to the word of his grace.
If this be so, that there is no holiness in places, then first of all be the
more encouraged to serve God in your families, in those places where God has
set you, where God is as well pleased with your service as in public places*
serve God upon your knees with devotion, humility and reverence. And therefore,
though I am against Superstition, and Popish practices, and those wicked cursed
traps of Innovations, that the men of the world have disturbed the Church of
God with: yet I am against putting on your hats in Prayer, and sitting in
Prayer. Those that are for holiness of places, do not, with Abraham, in every
place they come build God an Altar. But let us in every closet and room build
God an Altar; let no morning nor evening go without a prayer in thy family,
pray often, and pray continually, let your houses be as so many Churches, as
you read in Romans 16. 5. Likewise greet the Church that is in their house: and
in the second verse of Philemon's Epistle, To the Church that is in thy house;
there the houses of the Saints are called Churches. This will bring a blessing
upon your families: And if you be not willing to have that curse denounced
against you, (in Ier. 10. 25. Pour out thy fury upon the Heathen that know thee
not, and upon the families that call not upon thy name) then neglect not family
prayers; be much in prayer, and pray with frequency and encouragement, because
God binds you to no place.

The second Exhortation is this, Labor to promote personal holiness, as well
as family devotion: I am against local holiness: As one said (that I heard once
when I was a youth) Happy are those garments that can carry away any of the
dust of the Temple; but they think not that many of their garments are unclean
in wallowing in the mire of sin. But I say, do you labor to promote holiness
in your lives, in your hearts and conversations: The holy Ghost says, Unless
you be pure in heart, you shall not see God. And therefore put away sin, for if
you regard iniquity, God will not hear your prayers: It is not your ducking, or
bowing, or cringing, never so much or your going with your hat off through the
Church, that will make God hear your prayers; these will but dishonor you,
because you live not accordingly.

5. Love the holiness of the living members, be not so much in love with the
holiness of wood and timber, bricks and stones; but wheresoever you see the
Image of Christ, be in love with that soul; wherever the presence of God
shines, and wherever thou see one that gives up himself to God in holy
duties, do thou say, Oh! my soul, delight to come into the company of these
men. The righteous is more excellent then his neighbor. If there be a heaven
upon earth, I tell you it is in the company of godly men. I remember a famous
man has this expression, says he, When I was in the company of the Saints and
people of God, I was as a living coal; but when I was separated from them, and
was among the wicked, swearers and drunkards, me-thoughts there was a spiritual
coldness and frozenness went over my soul. Though the people of God are best
company in heaven, yet they are very good company here on earth: And
Christians should stir up one another, and be provoking one another to love and
good works; and where ever you have grace, be sure to impart it. Endeavor to
love the holiness of Saints, and be willing to impart your experiences to
others, for this is your duty. Do not make a Monopoly of holiness, but carry
company with you to Heaven.

Lastly, to name no more, labor to preserve the holiness of Gods true
Institutions, those things which are of a divine consecration. What is humane
consecration without divine institution? The Sabbath day is of divine
institution, labor to keep it holy; this is a holy day indeed, and this labor
to keep your families from profaning of; but for other holy days and holy
things, they are much alike for holiness: The Lords day is a holy day indeed,
and for shame do not let your children gad abroad on this day. Truly, I do
verily believe, that though here be a great company of people in the
Congregation, yet they are but a handful in comparison of what are drinking in
Alehouses, and whoring, and walking in the field, that one can hardly get home
to their house for the crowd of people that are going thither. For shame let
not this be told in Gath, nor published in Askelon. What! shall we stand up for
the holiness of places, and yet oppose the holiness of the Lords day, which God
has enjoined and instituted? Oh! that the Magistrates of London; O^! that
Englands King; Oh! that Englands Parliament would do something for the
reformation of this to oppose wickedness and profaneness, which will otherwise
bring upon us the judgment of Sodom and Gomorrah, and make us guilty and
worthy of a thousand punishments. And labor by prayer in your families to
overcome that flood of profaneness, which you cannot by your strength prevent.
And then for the Sacraments of Christ, Baptism and the Lords S^pper, these are
Ordinances of Gods appointment, they are holy, and therefore should not be
given to those that are unholy; and yet those who are so much for the holiness
of places, do not care who come to the Sacrament, if they have but a nose on
their face, they shall come and partake of the Ordinances, let them be what
they will; this is to prefer man's institution before Gods institution. And then
for the Lords Message and Word, that is a holy thing, and therefore love his
Messengers: the Messengers of God* delivering his Message with fear and
reverence, you are to hear them with the same fear and reverence, and
resolution to be holy, as if Christ were present. And for the Word of God, it
is not enough for you to have a choice Sentence written upon the walls of your
Churches, but let Gods Law be written in your hearts and consciences, and
practiced in your lives, that all the world may see you live as men dedicated
to the true God, in all the duties of his ways and obedience. Many of these
things might have been enlarged. What I have given you with the right hand, I
pray you, Christians, do not take with the left, for if you do; you will make
your selves guilty of a double sin.

First, Because you do not obey the truth you hear. And secondly, For putting a
wrong construction upon it.
But I have better hopes of you, my Beloved Hearers, and hope that the Lord
will be better unto your souls then his Ministers, Word, or any thing else can
be. God bless you and his Ordinances, and discover his mind and will at this
time to you.

Mr. Jenkins's Prayer after Sermon.
O Lord our God thou art never weary of doing us good, if we either consider
the mercies thou give to us, or the miseries that thou keep from us, that
yet we have another opportunity of drawing nigh to thee; we beseech thee, O
Lord, let not our mis-interpreting of such opportunities as these are, cause
thee to take them from us, or thy self from them; if thou do Lord, we cannot
but justify thee, and abase our selves, and lie low before thee because we
have sinned against thee; O Lord we bless thee, that we are yet alive to bless
thee, that yet we have not sinned our bodies into a cold grave, nor our souls
into a scorching Hell: thou give us our beings, if thou withdraw thy self, we
cease to be, and shall return to our first nothingness, from whence we came:
the living, the living they praise thee; as if we know our own hearts, we
desire to do at this time. Praised be God for Jesus Christ, that he died and
rose again, and is now a pleading at thy right hand for poor sinners. Praised
be God that he is offered to us, for his sake, O God pardon all our sins: let
our lusts die, that would not let the Lord of life live; let not any one of
them live one quiet moment in these hearts of ours; let us give up our selves,
and all that we are or can do to the purpose of thy praise: we beseech thee
prepare us for a blessed eternity, that we may not be ashamed before thee, nor
ashamed of thee nor thy ways, in the midst of a crooked, perverse, unclean,
idolatrous generation: Dear Father, we most humbly pray thee prepare us for
communion with thy self; assist us in the ensuing duties of this day, let all
the work be done by thee, let all the praise redound unto thee: prepare us by
hearing, for prayer, by both, for practice, by all, for glory; Lord set up thy
truth, ruin Babylon, build up Sion, delight yet to dwell in the midst of us;
and do us good, though we are a sinful, backsliding, God-provoking Nation:
May thou not say of us as of old, what could thou have done more for us
then thou have done? yet how ill have we requited thee for all thy benefits.
Pour down the richest showers of thy choicest blessings, upon the head and
heart of our Dread Soverain Charles the Second, by thy especial grace of
England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, King, as follows in his Royal Title,
enrich his noble Soul with all the graces of thy most holy Spirit, the Lord
make him as holy, as high, that he may as much exceed in goodness as in
greatness: O Lord, give him a Spirit of Wisdom to know how to go in and out
before this great people, and be able to discern between friends and
flatterers: O that he may be a true friend to thy friends, and a real enemy to
thy enemies; the Lord make him the most glorious Instrument for promotion of
the power of godliness that ever swayed the Scepter in these Lands, that under
him we may live a peaceable and holy life in all godliness and honesty. O Lord,
bless him in his Royal Consort Queen Katharine* the Illustrious James Duke of
York; the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, the God of all
grace give them graces suitable to that high and honorable employment thou
have entrusted them with* do thou rule our Rulers, and teach our Senators
wisdom; any that are in authority over us, give them to improve their power for
thee: bless the Nurseries of learning, Cambridge and Oxford; Dear Father,
bless all thy faithful Ministers, thou that art the Lord of the Harvest, send
forth Laborers, and keep out loyterers, preserve those that are, that they may
be faithful to thee, and to those over whom thou have made them Overseers, that
they may neither be ashamed of thee, nor thy ways, truths, worship, however
styled and disowned by men. O remember thy ancient people the Jews, call in the
fullness of the Gentiles, that we may be all one Sheepfold under thee the great
Shepherd of Souls. In mercy look down upon this great City, bless the Governor
and Government thereof, that thy Sabbath may be more strictly observed, that
piety may be more encouraged, and profanes^ discouraged in the midst of us.
Bless this great Congregation, let them be all taught of God, and more truly
find that thou were speaking to the heart, when that a poor worm was speaking
to the ear; Bless them in their basket and their store, but especially in their
souls, let them grow heavenward; every one that has spread a Bill before us,
do thou read them over, and be a present help according to their several wants
and necessities. O God pardon all our sins, bottle our tears, rebuke the
Tempter, reform our lives, and save our souls; that by all these enjoyments, we
may be the more fitted for an immediate un-interrupted enjoyment of thy self in
glory, whereas there shall be no more tears in our eyes, neither shall there be
any more sin in our souls; these and whetever else thou in thy wisdom sees
necessary and good for us, we most humbly beg in the Name and for the sake of
our dear and blessed Redeemer Jesus Christ the righteous, for whom we bless
thee; to him together with thy self, and God the Holy and ever blessed Spirit
the Comforter, we desire to be enabled to render as we acknowledge to be most
due, all honor, praise, power, might, Majesty and dominion from us and all
thine now and for evermore,

Amen.
Dr. Manton's Prayer at Covent Garden.
OH Lord God, all that we can do, is-nothing of our selves, we can do nothing,
oh let us have the gracious assistance of thy Spirit at this time, let thy love
constrain us, say unto us, thou art our salvation. Do not say, that we shall
fill up the measure of our iniquities, and there shall be no hope for us. Oh
Lord, we are ashamed that we have waited so long in thine Ordinances, and have
got no more profit to our poor souls: but we have given up our heart to the
pleasures and vanities of this world, that are but for a season: even those
that thou have drawn out after thee, do not walk worthy of thee, answerable to
that blessed hope of future happiness, in the midst of a crooked and perverse
generation. Jesus Christ is to many of us become a stumbling block, and a rock
of offense, while our hearts are carried out after the world with such strong
affections. Oh when shall we carry our selves so, as those that profess
themselves to be seekers of a better life? we come into thy presence now for
strength, do thou manifest thy self to us, thou have promised to pour out thy
Spirit upon all flesh, oh let it be unto us according to thy promise.

Oh Lord, our hearts naturally are averse to thee, so that of our selves we
shall never be able to do any thing that may be well pleasing to thee; but do
thou regulate us by thy blessed Spirit, that we may observe thy Statutes, and
do them, and that thy Commands may not be grievous to us, that it may not be
burdensome to us to do the work of God; O Lord, when shall our hearts be made
sound in thy Statutes? we wait upon thee in the use of thine Ordinances, that
we may have a new supply from thee, that at length we may come to see that thou
art at work with us to save our souls; O help us to be followers of them, who
with faith and patience do follow thee, and to do nothing unbecoming our holy
call; suffer us not to swerve from thy Commandments, but let us have a constant
and earnest desire after thee.

Let the choicest of thy mercies come down upon our Sovereign CHARLES, King of
England, Scotland, France and Ireland, let his heart be guided by thee, and let
him always set thee before his eyes, that under the shadow of his Government,
we may have peace in all godliness and honesty. Blese him in his Relations, in
his Councels; teach our Senators wisdom; bewith all thy faithful Magistrates
and Ministers, let them be a terror to evil doers, and an encouragement to them
that do well. Be with us in the way of thy worship, we are here met together to
hear and handle thy holy word, oh do thou command it to light upon all our
hearts, let it come in the evidence and demonstration of thy Spirit; and all
for Christ his sake, for whom we bless thee, to him, with thee and thy holy
Spirit, be praise and glory for evermore.

Dr. Manton's Farewell Sermon.
Heb. 12. 1. Therefore seeing we are compassed about with so great a Cloud of
Witnesses, let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which does so easily
beset us, and let us run with patience the Race that is set before us.
IN the former Chapter you have a Spiritual Chronicle, or a Catalogue of the
Lord's Worthies, and all the emi^ent effects of their Faith, and now the
Apostle comes to make use of this History that he had produced through ^o many
successions of Ages, of all the holy men of God ^at excelled in Faith:
Wherefore seeing we are compassed about with so great a Cloud of Witnesses, etc.

The Text is wholly Hortatory. In it observe:

1. The premises or principle the Apostle works upon, seeing we are
compassed, etc. 2. The practical Inferences which are deduced from ^ence, and
they are two.
1. One concerning the privative part of our duty, ^et us lay aside every
weight, etc. There is something external and without, like to clog us in our
way to Heaven- ^very weight; and something within that will hinder and ^ouble
us within; therefore he says, and the sin which ^h so easily beset us. 2. Here
is the positive part, Let us run with patience (...) Race that is set before
us. There Is motion [ Run] the manner [ with patience] the stage or way [ the
Race that is set before us.]
My purpose is to give you some brief thoughts upon this useful and practical
inference of the Apostle, from the Histories of the faithful before recorded.
Therefore I will sum up the whole Text in this point.

Doct. The people of God that have such a multitude of examples of holy men and
women set before them, should prepare themselves to run the spiritual race with
more patience and cheerfulness.

There are two things in this Doctrine; the Encouragement and the Duty. I shall
open both with respect to the circumstances of the Text.

First, the Encouragement, A multitude of examples, or as in the Text, Seeing
we are compassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses: Mark, here are
witnesses, a great cloud of witnesses, and these compassing us round about.

First, here are witnesses; by that term we are to understand those worthy
Saints mentioned and reckoned up in the former Chapter, Abel, Enoch, Noah,
Abraham, Moses, etc. all the Saints of God that have had experience of the
goodness of his providence to them, and the fulfilling of his promises; they
are all called Witnesses; Why? because they depose a Testimony for God, and
speak to future generations to be constant, as they did, that they might
receive the like reward. This witness was partly in their faith, and partly in
the fruit of their faith.

1. They witnessed by their Faith ( John 3. 33.) He that has received his
testimony, has set to his seal that God is true. A man that has soundly
digested the promises, that expresses his faith by cheerfulness and patience
under all difficulties, troubles, delays, and those sundry trials that he
meets with, he gives it under hand and seal, proclaims it to the world that he
has to do with the true God. And,

2. They witnessed in the fruits of their faith, as they give us an instance of
Gods fidelity toward them that faithfully adhere to, and firmly believe in his
prom^, so it is said (Heb. 6. 12.) Be not sloathfull, but followers of them who
through faith and patience inherit the promise: Let faith but set patience a
work, do but hold out a little while with God, and you may learn by the example
of all those holy men we shall inherit the promises; they shall be made good to
a tittle, and not one thing fail of all that the Lord has spoken; as these
holy men were exercised and tossed to and fro, but it succeeded well with them
at the last. Oh! then let us hearken to the deposition of these worthy
witnesses that are recorded in the Scripture, and with such an invincible
resolution as theirs was, let us hold on our course toward true happiness: If
we do not, they that are now propounded as witnesses to us, will at the day of
judgment be produced as witnesses against us. And pray also let us remember
that we are to continue and keep afoot that Testimony to succeeding
generations; for not only the Prophets and holy men of God, were witnesses,
but all Gods people also are his witnesses; ( Isa. 43. 10.) by their faith,
patience, diligence, constancy, and a cheerfulness under afflictions, they are
to give it under hand and seal to the world, that God is a true and faithful
God. But now, if we either by our sinful walking, or by our drooping
discouragements, discredit Christ and his profession, then we are witnesses
against him; we deny that Religion which we would seem to profess; and cry up (
Tit. 1. 16.) They profess they know God, but in works they deny him: and the
more dangerous, because deeds are more deliberate then words, and so a greater
evidence of what we think in our hearts. If we by drooping discouragements and
sinful walking discredit Religion, we deny it, and do in effect put the lie
upon Christ. Therefore let us remember they were witnesses, and so must we.

2 By a figurative speech they are called a cloud, [hav^ a cloud of witnesses]
why so? I might trouble you with many conceits Interpreters have had of this
word cloud; say some, because of the raisedness of their spirits, because
clouds fly aloft: Clouds for the fruitfulness of their doctrine, as clouds send
down fruitful showers upon the earth; and clouds, because they cool and cover
us from the heat: so some would gloss for our comfort: others with more
judgment say, a cloud with allusion to the pillar of cloud which conducted the
Israelites to Canaan; yet neither does this come up fully to the scope of the
Apostle; for the Apostle speaks not of a cloud that goes before us, but of a
cloud that compasses us round about, and therefore a cloudy; the reason why
it is called so, is the number and multitude of those witnesses, as a cloud is
made up of a multitude of vapors gathered together, and condensed into one
body; and so the expression is often used, ( Ezekiel. 38. 9.) thou shall be like a
cloud to cover the land, etc. noting the increase of the people when God would
restore them, the multitude of converts: and so in profane Authors, Livie has
such an expression, an army of men is called a cloud; but this is enough to
show the intent of this expression, that there are a multitude, a very great
number: though the godly comparatively, and with respect to the wicked are a
few, yet considered in themselves they are a great number; for if the Martyrs,
and those glorious instances of heroic faith, and that under the Old
Testament, when God's interest was more confined to one people, if there were
such a Church then, of so great a number; what will the whole Church of the Old
and New Testament be when we shall meet together in Heaven? We are often
discouraged with the paucity of Professors, and are apt to think our selves to
be left alone, 1 Kin. 19. 10. But let us remember there is a Cloud of
Witnesses; we are not solitary now, and certainly we shall not want company
when we come to Heaven, To the innumerable company of, etc.

Again, it meets with an ordinary and strong temptation which Satan suggests to
the hearts of the godly, that they are singular, and matchless in their
afflictions, that none of the people of God have ever undergone such
difficulties as they are exposed unto; and this makes them question their
Father's affections, and put themselves out of the number of his children. I
but all these things are accomplished in the Saints of God before you; here is
a Cloud of Witnesses that have been exercised and tried to purpose, (1 Pet. 5.
9.) They are troubled with a busy Devil, a naughty World, a corrupt heart, all
have had their trial from God's correcting hand; The same afflictions are
accomplished in your Brethren that are in the world. So that we have many
fellows; our lot is no harder then the Saints of God that have gone before us,
for there is a Cloud of Witnesses.

3. Observe the Apostle calls it a Cloud; compasses us round about; i. e. We
have instances for every trial, Temptation, duty that we are put upon: Here we
have examples of those that have fulfilled the Commands of Christ on this side
with an undaunted courage; and the examples of those that have borne the Cross
of Christ with an invincible patience: Here we have examples of those that have
conquered right hand Temptations, that have despised the delights of the World,
and there of those that have conquered left hand Temptations, that have not
been broken and affrighted with the terrors of the World, all the Saints of God
have trodden that way, the same paths wherein we are to walk after them; we
cannot look this way or that way, but we have instances of Faith, confidence in
God, and patience, We are compassed about, etc. In short, here lies the
encouragement that Christians should propound to themselves.

1. That there are examples; Christians of later times have more to answer for
their Infidelity, than those of former ages; they that first believed the
promises, believed without such a cloud of witnesses, or multitude of examples;
many have gone before us that have broken the Ice, and that found good success
from their own experience; they have commended God to us as a true and
faithful God, and will not you go on? When Jonathan and his Armor bearer
climbed up the rocks of the Philistines, then the people were encouraged to go
up after; So here are some that are gone before you, and it has succeeded well
with them.

2. These examples are many; not one or two that might be supposed to be
singularly assisted, and to have eminent Prerogatives above the rest of their
Brethren, but many in every age, a whole cloud of them.

3. There are examples of many rare and excellent men, the best that ever lived
under Heaven. Take (my Brethren) the Prophets for an example, etc. Jam. 5. 10.

4. They are propounded to us, not for their words only, and for their
profession, but for their deeds, for their bitter sufferings; and they
abundantly manifest to us, that there is nothing impossible in our duty, or any
thing so difficult but may be overcome through Christ's strength enabling us:
They all had the same nature we have; they were of the like passions with us,
flesh and blood as we are, of the same relations and concernments; and then on
the other side, we have the same Cause with them, the same recompense of reward
to encourage us, the same God and Savior to recompense us, he suffered for us
as well as for them; therefore we should follow in their steps, and hold fast
our confidence to the end, for they have showed us, that poverty, reproaches,
death it self, and all those things that would look harsh, and with a ghastly
aspect upon the eyes of the World, are no such evils but that a Believer may
rejoice in them, and triumph over them. I say, they have showed the
blandishments of the World have not such a charm, but they may be renounced
without any loss of considerable joy and contentment; and that the duties of
Christianity are not so hard, but that a little waiting upon God will bring in
Grace enough to perform them: Therefore says the Apostle, Seeing we have a
Cloud of Witnesses, let us lay aside, etc. And so I come to the encouragement,
to the

Second thing, and that is the duty here pressed. 1. Here is the privative. 2.
The positive part of our duty: Here is mortification and vivification;
Mortification, Let us lay aside, etc. Vivification, Let us run with patience,
etc. In both the branches he alludes to terms proper to Races: In a Race you
know men strip themselves of their Clothes, and whatever is burdensome and
heavy, that they may be the more light of foot; and so the Apostle bids us lay
aside every weight; and they did withal diet themselves, that they might have
no clog from within, 1 Cor. 9 25. Every man that striveth for the mastery, is
temperate in all things etc. They took care that they did not clog and
indispose themselves for the race they were to run; but they verily run only
for a corruptible Crown; we for a Crown that is incorruptible and glorious; so
according to this double practice of Racers, we are to cast aside every weight
from without, etc. So here is a double object, laying aside every weight, and of
sin; There Is onus externum, the weight without, that presses us down, and
hinders our speed; and then there is impedimentum internum, there is sin, that
which weakens within: By reason of the former, we make little speed; by reason
of the latter we are often interrupted, and therefore we must do as they, that
they might be swift and expedite, lay aside every weight, and be more temperate
in all things. Herein a Runner in a Race differs from a Traveller; a Traveller
strengthens himself for his Journey as well as he can, his clothes on,
sometimes carries a great burden with him; but a Runner of a Race makes
himself as light as he can. But to come more particularly to the words.

First, Lay aside every weight: By weight is meant those things that burden the
soul, and make our Heavenly Progress more tedious and cumbersome; and by weight
is meant (I think) the delights and cares of the world, the multitude of
secular business, all our earthly contentments and affairs, so far as they are
a burden to us, hinder us in our way to Heaven; these must all be put off, Lu.
21. 3, 4. says Christ, Take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts
be overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of this life, etc.
The heart that is deprest cannot be so free for God, and the Offices of our
Heavenly Calling, when we give way to surfeiting, drunkenness, cares of this
World.

1. The heart may be overcharged with the delights of the World; Surfeiting and
Drunkenness must not be taken in the gross notion; you must not think of
spewing, reeling, vomiting, as if to avoid these were a full compliance with
Christ's direction; the heart may be overcharged when the stomach is not; there
is a dry drunkenness, and a more refined surfeiting, and that is when the heart
grows heavy, unfit for prayer, relishes not the things of the spirit; when the
delights of the flesh clog the wheel, abate that vigor and cheerfulness that we
should show forth in the Worship of God, and holy actions, when the delights^
the flesh withdraw us from that watchfulness and diligence that is necessary in
taking care for our souls, then the heart is overcharged: Voluptuous living is
a great sin, it (...) the seeds of piety so soon as planted in the heart, so
that they can bring nothing to perfection; it brings a brawn and a deadness
upon the Conscience and affections, there is nothing that hardens the heart so
much, as the softness of carnal pleasure, Iud. 19. sensual, having not the
Spirit. Sensuality quenches our natural bravery and briskness of spirit that
becomes a man; much more does it hinder the sublime operations of the Spirit of
God. Well then, remember Christians, you are not only Travelers by the way;
but Runners in a Race: If we were to speak to you only under the notion of
Travelers in a way, this were enough to wean you from the delights of the
flesh. 1 Pet. 2. 11. As strangers and Pilgrims abstain from fleshly lusts which
war against the soul. The more you indulge these fleshly lusts, the more you
hearten and strengthen the great enemy of your souls, and starve the better
part; but you are as Runners in a Race; by this Metaphor the duty is more bound
upon you, much more should you beat down the body, and keep it in subjection;
the Apostle has a notable word, 1 Cor. 9. 27. I keep under my body, and bring
it in subjection, etc. I beat down my body; you must either keep under
pleasures, or pleasures will keep you under; for a man is soon brought under
the power, dominion and tyranny of evil customs, and some brutish pleasure, by
indulging the lusts of the flesh, 1 Cor. 6. 12. Be but a little addicted to any
one thing, and you are brought under the power of it. The flesh waxes wanton
and imperious and slavery grows upon you by degrees, The more you conquer
carnal affections, the more they increase upon you; and therefore you must hold
the reins hard, exercise a powerful restraint. Solomon in his Penitentials
gives us an account of his own (...), and how fearfnlly he was corrupted this
way, Eccl. (...). 20. Whatsoever mine eyes desired, I kept not from (...); I
withheld not my heart from any joy, etc. (...) was that which brought him to
such a lawless excess, and at length to fall off from God. When we give Nature
the full swing, and use pleasure with too free a license, the heart is
insensibly corrupted, and the necessities of life are turned into Diseases; and
all that you do, it is but in compliance with your lusts; your eating and
drinking is but a meat offering and drink offering to lusts and carnal
appetite, I remember Solomon says (Prove. 29. 21.) He that delicately brings
up his servant from a Child, shall have him become his Son at length, i. e.
Allow a servant too much liberty, and he will no more know his condition, but
grow contemptuous, bold and troublesome; so it is here: We are all the worse
for license, natural desires, unless they feel fetters and prudent restraints,
grow unruly and excessive; And therefore it is good to abate the liberty of the
flesh, that the body may be a Servant and not a Master; when you deny your
selves in nothing, but satisfy every vain Appetite, a custom grows upon the
soul, and intemperance proves a Trade and an habituated distemper, so that you
cannot when you would, upon prudent and pious respects, refrain and command
your desires: And therefore it is good sometimes to thwart and vex the flesh, as
David poured out the water of Bethlem that he longed for, 2 Samuel 23. 17. not to
deny our selves in what we affect and covet; lust grows into a wanton, and bold
and imperious; and so prescribes upon us, and we are brought under the power of
these things.

2. The business and cares of this World: For these immoderately followed, and
not in obedience to God, are a sore burden, and makes the soul heavy, and
allows no time and strength for God and his Service, and those happy
opportunities of private communion with him; When we are encumbered with much
service, we neglect that one thing necessary, Luke 10. 42. and therefore
Christians must take heed that the lean Kine do not devour the fat; that Sarah
be not thrown out of doors in stead of Hagar; that Religion be not thrust to
the Walls, which should be our prime and chief business, while every business
has its time and course. The Scriptures knowing the pronenesse of our hearts
to temporal things, deals with us as we do with a crooked stick, we bend it so
much the other way, and therefore sometimes they forbid necessary labor, John
6. 28. Labor not for the meat which perishes, etc. the meaning is, not
chiefly; but it bends the stick another way, Set not your affections on things
on the Earth: A man must have some kind of affection to his Work here below;
but we had need to be bent the other way: We may gather this from this Precept,
It Is better to incroach upon the world, then the world should encroach upon
godliness. In short, Things are a burden and clog to us, according as our
delight and scope is: If the pomp and increase of the World be our end and
scope, then Religion will be looked upon as a burden: that will be a weight,
and all duties of godliness as a melancholy interruption, as they, ( Amos 2.
8. When will the Sabbath be over? The exercise of godliness will be a
troublesome thing, and we shall go about the Work of Religion as if we went
about it not: But, on the other side, if Heaven and Heavenly things be our
scope, then the World is a burden, and then we shall use it in the way, but not
abusing, as taking up our rest here, 1 Cor. 7. 31, 32. Man has a body and a
soul, and he does provide for both, but for one in subordination; the soul is
the chief, and therefore we must not so look after the interests and
concernments of the bodily life, as to forget the interests of the soul, or to
neglect them. Many will not so grossly Idolize present things, so as to renounce
things to come: I, but they so often follow the things of the world, that they
neglect their eternal concernments. The happiness of a people lies in
communion with God; and therefore that must be looked after; we must take heed
that the cares of the world have not such a hand and power over us, as either
to divert us from, or unfit us for these higher and nobler pursuits, the
enjoyment of God in Christ. This is the first thing the Apostle speaks to these
spiritual Ra^ers, to lay aside every weight, i. e. the delights of the flesh,
and the cares of the world.

Secondly, The next thing to be laid aside is sin, which does so easily beset
us. As we must guard against things without, so we must mortify our corrupt
inclinations within, or else it will soon make us weary of our heavenly Race,
or faint in it. Sin you know is twofold, Original and Actual; Actual sin is not
meant primarily, for that is not peccatum agens, sin that easily besets us, but
peccatum transiens, the sin that passes from us; and Original sin is that which
is emphatically called sin, Romans 7. 8. Now this original corruption may be
considered as merely native, or as acquired and improved into evil customs and
habits; for according to men's tempers and constitutions, as they are severally
disposed, so by the corruption of nature they are inclined to one sin more then
another; as the channel is cut, so corrupt nature finds a vent and issue; in
every man there is some predominant sin; and in every regenerate person some
relics of that sin, from whence is the greatest danger of his soul; thus David
speaks of his iniquity, Psalm 18. 23. Well then, this is that sin that does
easily beset us: Original sin improved into some tyranny or evil custom, which
does increase and prevail upon us more and more; Now this is said [ easily to
beset us] for three reasons: Partly because it has a great power and restraint
over us, and implies the whole man; the members of the body, the faculties of
the soul; so great an interest has it acquired in our affections, it does
easily beset us, it has great power and command over us. Partly, because it
sticks so close that we cannot by our own strength lay it aside. Ier. 13. 23.
Can the Ethtopian change his skin, or the Leopard his spots, etc? A man can as
^oon change his skin, as lay aside his customs, that are so deeply engraven as
the blackness of an Ethiopian, or the spots of the Leopard. And partly, because
it mingles it self with all our motions and actions, Romans 7. 21 etc. It easily
besets us, it is present with us, it impels us, and solicites us, and draws us
to sin further and further, and make us negligent in what is Gods: we cannot do
or speak any thing, but it will infest us in all our duties of piety, charity,
justice; on every side it is interposing, vexing, thwarting the motions of the
Spirit, and so abates our strength, vigor, and agility, and retards our course
toward heaven and glory; therefore lay aside, as every weight, so every sin,
etc.

Quest. Now what is it to [ lay aside] or how can we lay aside, since sin
sticks so close to us, and is engraven in our natures?

Ans. Certainly something may be done by us; for this is every where pressed as
our duty, Ephesians. 4. 4. 22. Put off the old man; and 1 Pet. 2. 11. we may put it
off more and more, though we cannot lay it aside. Then we are said to lay aside
the sin that so easily besets us, when we prevent and break the dominion of it,
that it shall not reign over us, Romans 6 12. Let not sin reign, etc. Though it
dwells in us, lives in us, and works in us, yet it should not overcome us, and
bring us into bondage, and so it will not be imputed to our condemnation; and
at length, when the soul shall be separated from the body, we shall be wholly
free from it.

Quest. I, but what must we do that we may so repress it? (the question
returns) that we may break the domonion of it?

Ans. I answer, this is the work of the Spirit of God; but we must know, the
Spirit of God does work the work of mortification two ways: By Regeneration,
and after Regeneration; By Regeneration, and so he does immediately without any
cooperation of ours, mortify the deeds of sin, gives sin its death-wound:
That which is left is as a thing mortified, it is broken; the Scripture often
speaks of this first work of Regeneration, Romans 6. 6. Col. 2. 11. First, when
we are planted into Christ, then we put off the body of sin; and though it does
not presently dye, yet it is weakened, that it cannot reign, though it be not
destroyed.

2. After Regeneration the Spirit does more and more destroy sin, the relics
of sin, this crucified body of sin, till it dies wholly away; this he does in
us, but not without us, Romans 8. 13. Through the Spirit mortify the deeds of
the body: Not the Spirit without us, nor we without the Spirit, but ye through
the Spirit, What is then required of us?

1. Seriously purpose not to sin, and promise to God to yield him unfeigned
obedience. Especially should we make this promise in the use of those solemn
Rights, by which the Covenant between God and us is confirmed. Take up a solemn
purpose not to grieve the Spirit, nor to break his Law, Psalm. 119. 106. I have
sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous Judgments: This
purpose of heart is the root of all good actions: therefore in the confidence
of Gods help, in the sense of thy own weakness, Psalm 119. 32. we cannot lay
Wagers upon our own strength, yet it is our duty to engage our hearts to God:
To sin against the light of our own Conscience, and illumination of the Spirit
and the chastening and instruction of our own reins, that aggravates our sin;
but to sin against, and besides our fixed purpose of not sinning, that lightens
sin, for then it is a sin of weakness and infirmity, not of wilfulness and
malice; and then we can say as Paul, Romans 7. 19. when the heart is fixedly bent
toward God, The evil which I would not that do I. Two ways may we be said to
sin against purpose, either when we are overborn besides our purpose, our
purpose still remains to please God: As when the water breaks over the bank,
the bank remaining; in such a case the fault is not in the bank, but in the
violence of the flood. Or secondly, when we break off our purpose, or consent
to do evil; as when we cut through the bank, the water may easily make through.
There is a great deal of difference between sin dwelling in us, and sin
entertained by us, between sin remaining, and sin reserved; and when you have a
firm purpose against all sin, there is sin remaining; but it is not reserved,
but it is not kept and allowed.

2. Watch over thy self with a holy self-suspition, because thou have sin
within thee that does easily beset thee; therefore consider thy ways, Psalm.
119. 59. Guard thy senses, Job 31. 1. but above all, keep thy heart, Prove. 4.
23. Conscience must stand Porter at the door, and examine what comes in, and
what goes out; watch over the stratagems of Satan, and seducing motions of thy
own heart.

3. Resist and oppose strongly against the first risings of the flesh, and the
tickling and pleasing motions of sin that does easily beset us, when it does
entice us away from God, or do any thing that is unseemly and contrary unto the
duties of our heavenly calling. Oh! remember we are not debtors to the flesh,
Romans 8. 20. Thou art tied to the Lord by all obligations and indulgence:
therefore break the force of sin by a serious resistance; check it, and let thy
soul rise up in indignation against it, my business is not to pleasure the
flesh, but to please the Lord.

4. Bewail the involuntary lapses and falls with penitential tears, as Peter
went out and wept bitterly, Mat. 26. 57. Godly sorrow is of great use for
laying aside of sin, as salt potions kill worms; when children are troubled
with worms we give them salt potions; so these bitter penitential tears are the
means God has appointed to mortify sin; that is the reason the Apostle says,
2 Cor. 7. 10. Godly sorrow works repentance to salvation, not to be repented
of: It Is not only a part of repentance, but works persevering durable
resolutions, a walking closely with God; it is a means God has blessed to this
end and purpose.

5. Recover from thy falls, renew thy combat; as Israel, when they were
overcome in battle, they would try it again and again, Judges 20. 28. Take heed
of ceasing for the present; for though thy enemy seems to prevail, though the
flesh seems to prevail against the Spirit in the battle, yet thou shall have
the best of it in the war; by the power of grace thou shall have the victory.

Thus I have gone over the privative part of our duty, Let us lay aside every
weight, and the sin that does so easily beset us: I should have come to the
positive, Let us run with patience the race that is set before us; there is the
duty, Let us run the Race that is set before us; and there is the manner of the
duty, Let us run with patience. I should have shown you, That a Christian-life
is like a Race from Earth to Heaven, in a way of holiness, and exercise of
Grace. This Race it continues as long as we continue in the world, from our
nativity to our death; after death the strife is ended. Now in this Race we
must run, and so run, that we may obtain the Crown, 1 Cor. 9. 24. Running is a
motion, and a speedy motion; there is no lying, sitting, or standing, but still
there must be running: We must make a further progress in the way to Heaven,
Forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things
which are before. Phil. 3. 1. 3.

The Runner was not to enquire how much of the way already was past, but to
strain himself to overcome what was yet behind: And so should we consider what
sins are yet to be mortified; what duties yet untouched, almost untouched; what
hard conflicts are yet to be undergone, and still to hold on our way without
twining aside, or halting because of difficulties, discouragements,
stumbling blocks. And there are fellows and copartners with us that run this
Race, with whom we may strive, in a holy emulation, who should go forwardest,
who should be most forward in the course of pleasing God: Oh Christians! there
are many contentions amongst us, but when shall we have this holy contention?
Heb. 10. 24. In a Race there is the Agonotheta, the Judge of the sports; so
here God observes all; no matter what the standers by say, the Judge of the
sports must decide who must have the Crown, 1 Cor. 14. 3, 4. And then, at the
end of the Race there is the Crown, 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. I have fought a good fight,
I have finished my course, I have kept the faith, henceforth there is laid up
for me a Crown of righteousness, etc. In a race there are spectators, so there
are here, God, Angels, and Men, 1 Cor. 4. 9. We are a spectacle to the world,
to Angels, and to men, etc.

Thus for the similitude of our Race in our way to Heaven. Now wherein it
differs.

This is a Race, not undertaken out of wantonness, but out of necessity: God
has called us to this course; and if we run not in this Race, we are undone
for ever. And in other Races, but one had the Crown; here all are crowned, 2 Timothy 4. 8. though they be not so eminent as the Apostle; here all are crowned
that run in the manner God has required; Henceforth is laid up for me a Crown
of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge, shall give me at that
day, and not to me only, but to them that love his appearing.

2. For the manner [ with patience] Let us run with patience. Patience is
necessary.

1. Partly because of the length of the Race, and the distance between us and
the promised Reward: Our Race cannot be ended but after some degrees of time;
long waiting is troublesome to the flesh, and therefore we have need of
patience. 2. Because we meet with many impediments, troubles and temptations by
the way; there are spiritual adversaries with whom we must fight; for we go on,
we not only run, but fight, therefore run with patience, etc. 3. Because the
spectators will be ready to discourage us; We are set forth, not only as a
spectacle to God and Angels, but to the world, and they will be ready to
deride, scorn and oppose us for o^r zeal to God, and our forwardness in the
ways of God, to discourage us by bitter mockings, etc. therefore let us run
with patience the Race that is set before us.
Mr Lye's Prayer July 20. 1662. at Allhallows Lombard Street.
O Lord, our great God, thou can do all things, for thou do dispose and
govern all the ways, and works, and words of thy Creatures to thine own
praise; We thy poor Creatures, the workmanship of thy hands, the price and
purchase of thy Sons blood, do desire this morning to fall down and humble our
selves at the throne of thy grace; we desire to lift up an eye of faith to
thee, that thou may dart an eye of love to us: since thou have commanded us
to come unto thee, O bless us now we come. Let it not be in vain for any of us,
from the highest to the lowest, from the richest to the poorest, that we have
sought t^y face this morning. Blessed Father, pour down a spirit of Prayer, a
spirit of Preaching, a spirit of rejoicing, a spirit of practicing in the midst
of us, let us not only be enabled to know what to do, but to do what we know.
Thou that did cure the eyes of the blind with clay and spittle, oh heal that
natural dimness that is in the best of us: thy rod in the hand of Moses brought
water out of the rock; oh do thou strike upon these rocky hearts, that our
adamantine hearts being softened, may gush out into rivers of tears. O drown
our sins in the red Sea of our Saviors blood; help us to sinite upon our
thigh, and to ask our selves what we have been, and what we have done, and
humble us under the omission of any commanded duty, and the commission of any
forbidden sin, sins of thoughts, words, and deed, sins against the law, against
the Gospel, of youth, manhood, and old age: sins before, under, and since
conversion: sins against prayers, vows, promises, covenants and oaths. O Lord,
if thou did prefer thy bill against us, we could not stand; if we were
weighed in the balance of the sanctuary we should be sound too light. But holy
Father, remember not against us our former sin, ^t rather have mercy upon us
according to thy loving kindness; cross and blot out our iniquitres, blot them
out so fully and wholly, that it may be to us as to Judah in the promise, that
the sins of Judah should be sought for and not found.

Oh bathe our souls in that fountain that was set open for Judah and Jerusalem;
though our sins have been as scarlet, let them be as white as snow; though they
be red like crimson, let them be like wool.

We have read, that a flood of sin brought down a deluge of water, that they
covered the tops of the mountains. O let thy deluge of mercy cover the tops of
the mountains of our sins.

It is the glory of a God to pardon great sins; we desire to turn unto thee
with our whole hearts; do thou subdue our iniquities, let us be not only
cleansed, but let us have the efficacy of the Spirit of Christ to wish us from
the guilt of sin, because we boast we are not under the law, but under grace,

Be gracious to our Sovereign Lord Charles, King of England, Scotland, France,
and Ireland, it is thy promise, that Kings shall be nursing fathers to thy
children; grant that under the shadow of his Majesty thy people may be
protected, that we may live a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and
honesty; oh let thy people possess the land, from Dan to Bersheba; oh give us
Scripture-Magistrates, and Gospel Ministers as long as the Sun and Moon endures.

Let thy Word be sanctified to us, let it not be only as water to get out our
spots, but as a refiners fire to purge our dross, and take away our tin.

And Holy Father, where thou have begun a good work, do thou go on, and bring
it to perfection; let not the light that is in us, be like the glimmering light
of the evening, but as the light of the morning, that shines more and more to
the day. Let our best wine be kept till the last; let the end of our lives be
the end of sinning. Thou have cast our lot in the midst of temptations of all
sorts; thou have brought many of us through the red Sea, but yet we are in the
wilderness with Zeba and Z^lmunna and those that dwell at Tire, the children of
Ammon, Moab, and mount Seir, and all the forces that Hell can make against us;
oh put upon us all the whole armor of God. Now in these days of error, gird
us with the girdle of truth; oh now in these days of falsily give us a ^etmet
of hope.

Now the devil darts at us, give us the shield of faith: oh give us the sword
of the Spirit, of the Word of God, that it may enable us to confute the gain
sayings of foolish men.

Oh help us to pray with all manner of prayer, constantly, servently,
faithfully, feelingly, that we may stand and not fall, and that not in our
strength, but in Gods.

To this end be with us upon this thine own day; our Manna falls every day, and
is doubled upon the Lords day; oh let us be as thy servant John, in the spirit
upon thine own day; let God by his spirit come into our spirits,
understandings, consciences, wills, memories, and affections, that all our
conversations without, and affections within, may be obedient to thy word.

Enable thy servant to deliver thy word faithfully; God forbid thy servant
should stand upon so sandy a foundation as the wisdom of man, one Iota of thy
word has more wisdom in it, then all men and Angels have.

Good Father, give thy people a hearing ear, it is too much they have played by
the light of thy candle, and slighted thy Manna so long: oh now therefore to
day give us to hear, and know; and believe, and do the things that concern our
everlasting peace; hear us for Christ his sake, to whom with thy blessed self,
and Spirit, be glory now and for ever.

Mr. Lye's Forenoon Sermon.
Phil. 4. 1. Therefore my Brethren, dearly beloved and longed for, my joy and
crown, so stand fast in the Lord, my dearly beloved.
MY Beloved, I do very well remember, that upon the four and twentieth day of
this instant month 1651. I was then under the sentence of Banishment; and that
very day did I preach my farewell Sermon to my people from whom I was banished,
because I would not swear against my King, having sworn to maintain his just
Power, Honor and Greatness; and now behold a second trial: Then I could not
forswear my self, the God of Heaven keep me that I never may. I am apt to think
I could do any thing for this loving Congregation, only I cannot sin. But
since, beloved, there is a sentance gone out against us, that we that cannot
subscribe, must not subsist; this is the last day that is prefixed to us to
preach; I shall now speak to you (God assisting me) if my passion will give me
leave, just as if I would speak if I were immediately to die, therefore hearken
my Brethren, dearly beloved and longed for, my Joy and Crown, so stand fast in
the Lord, my dearly beloved. Paul was now a Prisoner at Rome for the Gospel of
Christ, it was his second imprisonment; and he was not far from being offered
up a sacrifice for the Gospel he had preached. This Gospel the Philippians had
heard him preach; and the godly Philippians having heard of his imprisonment,
they sent from Philippi to Rome to visit him, and to supply his wants; a
gracious temper, which, I hope the eternal God has given the Saints in London,
and for which, if for any thing, God has a blessing in store for them. Paul is
not so much concerned in his own bands, as in the Philippians Estate.
Epaphroditus tells him, that there were Heresies and false Doctrines got in
amongst them, but yet the Philippians stood fast; and herein Paul rejoices,
writes this Epistle, bids them go on, stand fast, keep their ground, and to be
sure not to give an inch, but to stand fast, knowing that at a long run their
labor should not be in vain in the Lord.

A most melting Compellation, and a most serious Exhor^. 1. A melting
Compellation, My Brethren, dearly beloved, etc. 2. A serious Exhortation, and
in it 1. the matter of the duty, stand, and stand it out, and stand fast. 2.
The manner,
1. So, stand so as you have stood, stand fast: 2. In the Lord, stand so, and
stand in the Lord, in the Lords strength, and in the Lords Cause; to stand in
your own strength, would be the ready way to fall, and to stand in your own
cause, for your own fancy, would be the ready way to expose your selves to all
manner of temptations: Therefore my Brethren, dearly beloved in the Lord,
stand, and so stand fast in the Lord, my dearly beloved.

In the next place, by way of observation from the words; and if there be any
wicked catchers here, let them know, that I shall speak no more then I shall
draw from, and is the mind of my Text; I would not give occasion to be a
greater sufferer then I am like to be. But for the words.

First, For the melting Compellation, My Brethren, my dearly beloved. Paul was
an Apostle, and an high Officer in the Church of God, and he writ unto the
Philippians, to all the Philippians, to the poorest of them, and see how he
bespeaks himself unto them, my Brethren: From hence take this observation, That
the highest Officers in the Church of Christ, though they are indeed by office
Rulers over them, yet by relation they are no more then brethren to the meanest
Saint. Here we have no such Rabbis to whom we must swear, because they say we
must swear it. Paul calls them Brethren, and so writes to them, Col. 1. 2. and
James, a Scriptural-Officer, one of the highest Apostles Christ ever made,
says, Hearken my beloved Brethren, Iam. 2. 5. so Peter an Apostle of Christ,
Wherefore the rather Brethren; and John the beloved Disciple, Brethren, I write
no new commandment, etc. 1 John (...) 7. Well then.

3. If this be so that the highest officer in the Church of Christ, such as
Christ approves of, are but brethren to the meanest Saint: then certainly they
are but brethren to their fellow-Officers: If no more relation to the toe in
the body, then no more to the eyes. If there be any of a light spirit will bear
rule, that love to have the pre-eminence, I would desire them to read two
Scriptures; the first is Luke 22. 26. the second Mat. 20. 26, 27. does Christ
say, Whosoever will be chief among you, let him be one that will domineer over
your estates, over your persons, over your consciences, does not Christ say so?
no, but whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your Minister, -- let him
be your servant. Even as the Son of Man came not to be ministered unto, but to
minister, and to give his life a ransom for many. You have this also, Luke 22.
25. And he said unto them, the Kings of the Gentiles exercise Lordship over
them, i. e. over their slaves, over their vassals, but ye shall not be so, but
he that is greatest among you, let him be as the younger, and he that is chief,
as he that does serve. Sure if Paul be but a brother to Philip, then he is no
more to Timothy.

2. If the highest Officers in the Church of Christ be but brethren to the
meanest Saint, then it is not for those brethren to Lord it over their
fellow-brethren, Lord it over Gods heritage: Remember, it is Gods Heritage. I
hope your consciences will bear me witness, that I have labored as much as in
me lies, to be a helper of your joy, not to Lord it over your faith, 2 Cor. 1.
24 to press or cause you in believe this or that because I believe it: if this
be allowed then may I turn Papist tomorrow. Says Christ to him that would have
had him speak to his brother to divide the inheritance with him, Man, who made
me a Judge over (...), Luke 12. 14. So say I, Man who made thee a Tyrant, a
Lord over thy fellow-brethren, 1 Pet. 5. 3. Neither as be^ Lords over Gods
heritage, etc.

3. If the highest Officers in the Church of Christ be but Brethren, and no
more, then there should be no discord between those brethren, Behold how good
and pleasont it is for brethren to dwell together in (...). And truly I may
comfortably speak that, and it is one of the greatest comsorts I have in the
world. I hope we have lived together in love, blessed be God: Let us not fall
out, says Abrahim the elder, to Let his younger Cousin, for we are brethren.
Beloved, the discords between Pastor and people have made the best music in
the ears of the Jesuits.

4. Are Pastors, nay the highest Officers that Jesus Christ has, and does own
in his Church, but Brethren? Oh! then let those brethren, if they will appear
before the Bar of their Father in Heaven with comfort, take care of offending
the souls of their Brethren; for at the hand of every Brother God will require
the soul of his Brother; Ezekiel, 33. 6. His blood will I require at the Watchmans
hand. We that are called by some the dogs of the flock, what shall we prove
dumb dogs? What a comfort will it be to my dying brethren this day, if they can
but say, Lord, we are clear from the blood of our Brethren? The Officers of
Christ should never behave themselves so, that they should give their people
occasion to say, We are brethren to Dragons. But Ier. 9. 4. Take ye heed every
one of his neighbor, etc. I would commend one Scripture to all my Brethren in
the Ministry, 1 Cor. 8. 13. A Scripture that I would have writ in letters of
gold on the lintel-posts of all Ministers doors: Wherefore if meat make my
brother to offend, I will eat no flesh while the world stands, left I make my
brother to offend. Rather then to endanger his soul, I Will away with all these
toys and gew-gaws.

5 From the terms of dearest affection, dearly beloved, longed for, etc. Take
this observation, that, It becomes the highest Ministers, much more the lowest,
to bear a most tender, vehement, ardent, strong melting affection, toward that
st^ck or people that God has committed to their change. Thus Paul to the
Philippians in the Text, My Brethen, dearly beloved, etc. You shall find Paul
in all his Epistles in a thawing frame to his people, melting in love unto
them: The Corinthi^ns were so in his heart, no^ only to live with them, but if
God called him, to die for them, so abundantly did he love them, 2 Cor. 12. 15.
That he would very gladly spend and be spent for them, carried them in his
heart, and longed after them all. As for the Thessalonians 1 Thessalonians 2. 8. He, as
a Nurse, tendreth and nourishes them as children, and is so affectionately
desirous of them, that he is willing to impart them, not only the Gospel, but
his own soul, because they were dear to him. Then,

1. Is this so, ought the Pastors so to love their people? Give me leave to
bespeak you in the words of Job (in respect of those hundreds of Ministers that
are to be plucked from their people:) Have pity upon me, have pity upon me,
oh^ye my friends, for the hand of God has touched me, Job 19. 21. What will
nothing serve but plucking out our very eyes? our very heart, (being so much
the objects of the Peoples love.) How sad is it for the Father to be plucked
from the Child, the Shepherd from the Flock, the Nurse from the Child, this
is a Lamentation, and ought to be for a Lamentation: That there must be a
parting between David and (...), who loved one another as their own Souls, this
cuts them unto their very heart. And this I may say with respect to my self, I
bless God, I cannot say, as she of her Husband, A bloody Husband have thou
been unto me, but a loving Congregation have you been unto me. I know none of
you have desired my destruction, nor to taint my name; never did I hear three
in this Congregation speak of pressing any thing against me, that was contrary
to my conscience: nor can I say, that there are four in this Parish that did
ever deny to pay me my legal dues, blessed be God for such a people, you have
not encroached upon my conscience, as I hope I have not upon yours. Pastors
must love their people, do not blame them if their hearts be almost broken,
when they are to part with such a people.

2. Must the Pastor love his people? then the people must love their Pastor.
It Is true, it lies in the power of man to separate the Pastor and people, but
not to separate their hearts; I hope there will never be a separation of love,
but that will still continue: if we do not see one another, yet we may love one
another and pray for one another; I hope a husband does not cease from loving
his wife because she is absent from him. But oh! for my Brethren, hundreds of
them think that you are undone, though you cannot see as far as other men, you
may live in love, and keep your consciences quiet.

3. Must Pastors love their People? then you see from hence, what should be the
grand object of the Pastors affection, i. e. the people; not what the people
have; this is great inquiry, what is the benefice worth? What Is the preferment?
Do they pay well, etc. Whereas we should not seek so much the Fleece as the
Flock, we should not take oversight of a Congregation for love of their pay,
but of their souls; nor, it is an excellent good living, as one said I have
heard of, Let me have their Tithes, and let their souls go to the Devil; but as
the Apostle, I seek not yours, but you, 2 Cor. 12. 14. And I hope there be many
hundreds can say, it has been the peoples souls they have more loved and
affected, than any thing what the people had.

4. Once more; We must love them, and love them tenderly, Why, and yet leave
them? Yes my beloved, We are so to love our people, as to venture any thing for
them but our own damnation. I come not here to throw firebrands. I bless God I
have a most tender affection for all my Brethren in the Ministry; and though I
am not satisfied my self, yet I condemn no man, I believe there be many of them
do as conscienciously subscribe, as deny to subscribe. I protest in the fear of
God I cannot subscribe; perhaps it is because I have not that light as others
have; for he that doubts (says the Apostle) is damned: My beloved, I hope you
would not have us sin against God and our Consciences. It is not my living that
I desire, but my office to serve my Lord and Master, but if we should (to keep
communion with you) lose our communion with God; this is the ready way to have
all our labor and pains lost; but as David said (and oh that I could speak it
with as good hopes as David) Zadok, carry back the Ark of God, if I shall find
favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me again, and show me both it and
his habitation: but if he thus say, I have no delight in thee, behold here am
I, let him do to me as seems good unto him, 2 Samuel 15. 24. Brethren, I could
do very much for the love I bear to you but I dare not sin? I know they will
tell you, this is pride and peevishness in us, and that we have preached against
it, and are tender of our reputation, and we would fain all be Bishops, and
forty things more: but the Lord be witness between them and us in this.
Beloved, I prefer my wife and children before a blast of air of peoples talk: I
am very sensible what it is to be reduced to a morsel of bread: Let the God of
heaven and earth do what he will with me, if I could have subscribed with a
good conscience, I would, I would do any thing to keep my self in the work of
God, but to sin against my God, I dare not do it.

3. My joy and Crown, therefore my dearly beloved and longed for, my joy and
Crown, my present joy and future Crown: my joy which I value more then a Crown,
my principal joy. Hence observe this Doctrine, that, The fixed, standing,
flourishing growth of Saints in Gospel-practice and Gospel-obedience, is, or
ought to be matter of transcendent joy to their Pastors. It was so to the
Apostle Paul; Paul heard how they stood: though there was a plague amongst
them, yet they were not infected; and though he was in the Gaol ready to be
beheaded, yet this was his joy and Crown, that his people did stand, and I
hope, my Brethren, it will be our joy and Crown to he^r of your standing and
growth in Gospel*knowledge, and Gospel-profession. And

1. If this be so, as John said, I rejoiced greatly that I found of thy
Children walking in the truth: It should be the prayers and endeavors of all
Pastors really to love the souls of their people, and to pray for them: that
when they cannot look after the souls of their Children, yet that good Nurses
may be looked out for them. What a joy was it that Moses Mother was made his
Nurse? and who can tell, it may be thought, not out of any merit of ours, yet
of their own clemency, our Governors may give us to be Nurses over our own
Children: but if I cannot nurse my Child my self, I will wish it well, and as
good a Nurse as I can: far be it, that those that are to succeed should not
prosper: Lord, it shall be the prayere of thy Servant, that those that are to
succeed may have a double and treble portion of thy Spirit, that he may be both
painful and faithful, etc.

2. If the peoples growth in grace and knowledge be matter of joy to a faithful
Pastor? then what do you think of those that hinder their thriving. I shall
give you two Scriptures, John 12. 19. The Pharisees therefore said among
themselves, (they durst not speak publicly; but who was it against? why, it
was against Christ) perceive ye how ye prevail nothing, behold the world is
gone after him. But we will order him for that, we will be sure to lesson his
Congregation; if we cannot do that, we will shut the doors against him; see
Matthew. 23. 13. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, for ye shut up
the Kingdom of Heaven against men: What! shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against
men? What the Pharisees! that pretended they had the Keys of Heaven, and to be
the Guides? I, that is it. because there is nor room enough in Heaven for us
and them too? No, says Christ, there is no such matter; For ye neither go in
your selves, neither suffer ye them that are entering to go in. I dare not tell
you at this time what it is to shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against men, you
may better imagine it t^en I can speak it; but this did the Pharisees they
would not go in themselves, nor suffer them that were (...) to go in. I
remember, when I was a Child, we h^d ^uch (...) (...), that would one Lordsday
preach up (...) (...) (...) next Lord's Day would preach against the (...) (...)
(...).

And now, my (...), I am come in the next place to speak to ^he (...) (...)
stand fast; and because I see a Hurricane a (...) ^eep your ground, stand fast,
and live in the Lord here, that you may live with him hereafter.

Mr. Lye's Afternoon Sermon.
Phil. 4. 1. Therefore my Brethren, dearly beloved and longed for, my joy and
crown, so stand fast in the Lord, my dearly beloved.
FRom this Scripture you have had these 3. Doctrines: 1. That the highest
officers of the Church of Christ, though they are Rulers of them, yet they are
but brethren to the meanest Saint. 2. That it becomes a true Scriptural
Minister of Christ, to have a most veh^ment, ardent, strong, melting, tender
affection to that Flock or People which the Providence of God has committed to
his charge. 3. That the fixed, standing, flourishing, and thriving of that
Flock in the profession and practice of Gospel-knowledge and obedience, is
matter of transcendent joy and triumph to such a godly Pastor. The fourth,
which is that I would now prosecute, is this, That it is the grand and
indispensible duty of all sincere Saints, in the most black and shaking
seasons, to stand fast, fixed and steadfast in the Lord.

This is the grand thing St. Paul had to say to his Philippians when he was
ready to have his head cut off, for so it was, he was beheaded for the
testimony of Jesus: this is all he had to say when in Jayle, when in bonds, and
that under Heathen Romans; you are now my Joy, you are now my Crown, oh! do but
stand, and my joy, which is but two notes above Gamut, will get to Ela. Oh! do
but stand, and my Crown's studded with Diamonds: We live if you stand, though
we die when you stand. It is the great and indispensible duty, etc. Whether
these are black and shaking seasons, I have nothing to say, but I am wholly now
upon your duty, beloved; and for God's sake let the words of a Civilly dying
Minister prevail with you. There is a kind of a Maxim among some, that in case
a person dye seemingly, and revive again, that the last words that was heard of
that person when in a rational temper, are the only things that that person
will remember when brought to life again. It is most probable beloved, whatever
others may think, but in my opinion (God may work wonders) neither you nor I
shall ever see the faces of, or have a word more to speak to one another till
the day of Judgment. Therefore I beseech you hear me, as those that would and
may live with me to eternity. Mark your duty; I have spoken something
concerning the Pastors duty in the morning; now for the Peoples: It is the
indispensible duty of all sincere Saints, to stand fast, etc. I confess, I have
a love for the whole Auditory, I have a Mess for them; but my Benjamin's Mess
is for those I once called my own people; you are my Benjamins, I wish I had a
greater than a fifth for you. This Proposition I shall

1. Prove, and then 2. Improve.
In the worst of times, in the most shaking seasons, and if I do not greatly
mistake, there is an hour of temptation threatened by God, now beginning to be
inflicted; if ever you would stand, stand now, and for your comfort, let me but
hint, that a Christian may stand comfortably, when he falls sadly; that is, he
may stand by God when he falls by man. I knew that a great many years ago.

First then, it is your duty to stand. There be Scriptures more then enough to
prove this to be your duty, Col. 4. 12 Stand perfect and complete in all the
will of God Ph. 1. 27 Only let your conversation be as becomes the Gospel of
Christ, that whether I come and see you, alas poor Paul! thou come and see
them! thou wast beheaded before thou could come and see them; but ( or else
be absent, I may hear of your affair^, that ye may stand fast in one spirit,
with one m^nd, striving together (not to pluck out one another throats, no
more of that; but striving together, not against one another, but) for the
faith of the Gospel. So 1 Cor. 15. 58. Therefore my Brethren, be Steadfast,
unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch is you know
that your labor is not in vain in the Lord. It Is our duty to stand. But.

Secondly, Wherein must we stand steadfast? I have no new Doctrine to preach
now, I shall but mind you of what I have formerly spoken when you would not
believe. I confess I do not begin to be of a new judgment now; and should I be
continued in the Ministry, (a mercy I can hardly hope for) I should be of the
same judgment, and preach this doctrine, Stand fast.

God will certainly bring the people of God in England to his own terms, or
else ^are them well for ever. What Is that we should be steadfast in? I would
advise to a steadfastness.

1. Of Judgment. 2. To steadfastness of Resolution. 3. To a steadfastness of
Faith. 4. To a steadfastness of Conscience.
So stand fast in the Lord in your Judgment, in your Resolution, in your
Faith, in your Conscience.

1. I would advise to a steadfastness of Judgment. Strange Doctrines are the
greatest fetters that do assault a sound judgment; they are like waves, if
they do split, they will shake the Ship to purpose: therefore your way is, to
cast anchor well, to stand firm on the rock of truth, I had almost said all in
a word, Protestant truth; though the market may rise somewhat high, yet stand
firmly there while strange Doctrines like so many impetuous Waves, are beating
upon you, break themselves in pieces they may, but if you stand, can never hurt
you, I am not now to begin to warn you against P^pery, not that I have the
least reflection on any thing in the world, but on the Scriptures. I am apt to
think the wound of the beast must be healed: however, do not you spread a
plaster for the Beast to heal his wound: Be no more children tossed to and
fro, carried about with every wind of Doctrine, with every wind, or windy
Doctrine, by the slight of men, and cunning craftiness, that can cog the Die,
notable Gamesters there are in the World, but you must stand steady in
judgment, you must be firm to your principles: I would have you Stars, not
Meteors, for Meteors are carried about with every blast of Wind. I hope better
things of you; I shall pray God would make you steadfast in Judgment: 1. Be
sure to get good principles; and secondly, Be sure to stand in those good
principles that you have got. And though I cannot say but some Tares are sown
among this Parish, ye^ I bless the Lord for the generality, I hope I may say, I
have an Orthodox Ministry.

2. It Is not enough to stand i^ judgment, but we must be steadfast to our
(...); 1 (...) 15. 58. Be steadfast* immovable, such as stand firm on some
Basis and foundation, that does not totter and stagger: if they find you
staggering, to be sure the next moment they look upon you as falling. Be as
they say of one or both of the Poles of the Heavens, though all the world
turns, the Poles are immovable. If I mistake not, you may see a great turn in
the World; and behold at this day, the greatest turn that ever was in England;
but yet you must not move, you must not stir, be true to your Resolutions, be
just to your first love, go on in the Lords Work, let nothing take you off. If
I have preached any false Doctrine among you, witness against me at the day of
judgment; but if the things I have preached be true, stand to the truths, if
you do not witness against my Doctrine (mine it is not) but rather witness for
it, remember, if you leave it, that very Doctrine will witness against you at
the day of Judgment. Oh! that excellent Hero, Queen Hester, thus and thus I
will do, and if I perish, I perish. You cannot imagine against how many
thousand temptations a stadfast resolution will guard you.

3. There Is a steadfastnesse of Faith too, when we so believe as that we do not
waver, or do not hesitate. Will you give me leave to propose to you (my dear
Friends, though my Congregation I cannot call you) that question which our
Savior did unto the Jews. (whom he hated, though I love you) The Baptism of
John, whence was it? from heaven, or of men. The doctrines you have heard, have
they been from Heaven or from men? Answer me, if from men abhor them; man is a
false creature, man would make merchandise of your faith and souls, but if from
Heaven, why then should you not believe them? I bless the Lord, my conscience
bears me witness, I never did so far propose a doctrine to you, I would have
you believe without Scripture. If the doctrines have been from God believe
them, if not, abhor them, and any of those that shall dare to bring a doctrine,
but dare not bring the authority of the Scripture to warrant them. You may not
be like those in Iam. 1. 6. that mavereth like a wave of the sea driven with
the wind and tossed. The most godly man may stumble in his way, i. e. tread
awry, but a wavering minded man is never settled concerning his way. Blessed be
God I am not now (on this day that looks as like my dying day as can be in the
world) to begin to fix upon a Religion, to fix upon my way, I know my way, If
God will but keep (...) steps, and guide me in that way. If God be (...) (I
appeal to your consciences) worship him; (...) (...) God, worship him; do not
stand disputing and doubting, do not, say shall I? shall I? if the ways you
have found be the ways of God, follow them; God has but one way to heaven,
there is but one truth; if Baal be God follow Baal, do not stand wavering; do
not consult with flesh and blood; it is an infinite mercy that God will give
any of us to leave Relations, Estates, Congregations, any thing for Christ:
it is an infinite mercy we do not split upon a rock. Be sure to be either for
God or Baal: a godly man many time, halts in his way, but never halts between
two opinions.

4. Steadfastness of Conscience. Indeed the genius of my ministry has lain
this way: and here I could easily launch out, but I must be short. I would
speak a word in season to those that are weak, it becomes you to be steadfast
in conscience; then have a God decreeing, a Christ redeeming, a spirit
quickening, a gospel promising, a heaven prepared, a God infinitely more ready
to save him, then he can possibly be desirous to be saved by him. Be steadfast
in conscience against the guilt, the filth of sin, against the temptations of
Satan, etc. Let us draw near, with full assurance of faith; you can never
believe Gods love so much, as Gods love does engage you to believe, etc. I
might add.

5. You must be steadfast in conversation: it is not the Running well, but the
Running out; it is not the sighing but the conquering that gives you title to
the Reward: for you to give a great deal of milk, and to throw it down all at
length with your foot, may argue you to have a good dug, but a bad foot. Never
give those be^sts of Babylon occasion to say, that a man may be a child of God
in the morning, and a child of the devil at night; that we contradict that
Doctrine by our conversation, that we assert in our profession.

But why must we be steadfast?

Alas* why; would you have me marshal up all the (...) (...) me count the
stars, or number the sands on (...) (...) (...). There is no^ an attribute in
God, not a precept, (...), or (...) in the word, not an ordinance* (...) a
(...); there is nothing in God, or (...) the (...), (...), or ourselves, but
all would give a con^ribution of (...) to prove the Saints (...) (...) (...) I
must but h^nt at a few things.

First, I would argue from Jesus Christ. Believers you love Christ, and
therefore you love the honor of Christ, now the honor of Christ is highly
engaged in your stedfastness. We never cast a deeper blot on the honor of
Christ, then when we grow unstedfast: I need not tell you so, the Jesuits,
those me^k Papists will tell you so, those that delight in nothing more then in
the milk of the Virgin Mary, and in the blood of Saints: they have enough: if
you be unsteady. 1. You dishonor Christ in his sufferings: Pray tell me
Believers, why did Christ swear blood? why did he dye? why did he undergo what
the wrath of Devils could inflict, but for this end, to make you steady, to
give you the conquest of all spiritual Enemies, and to make you stand in that
conquest triumphing. Thus I remember as Ioshuah. Jos. 10. 24. Come, put your
feet upon the necks of these kings, and they came near, and put their feet upon
the necks of them. So, Christ has died, that you might live, that you might
stand; and what dishonor to the eternal Savior of the world, to a dying
Sav^ur, to see a flying Christian. 'Twas never heard of, that soldiers should
^lye before a conquered enemy, whose legs were cut off, whose arms were broken,
whose sword taken from them. 2. It Is a dishonor to the spirit of Christ: The
same spirit that was with Christ in all his Agonies, this very spirit he has
given to believers that he might bring them through with some victory;
therefore, when we stand not, it is a high dishonor to Christ's Spirit. 3. It Is
a dishonor to Christ's truth: (...) (...) (...) (...) what a dishonor does it
bring ^o the Truth* (...) but thought of some late experiments of poor (...)
that I h^ve he^rd of, carried about in triumph, look here is the man, here is the
man that has done this, that, and t^other thing, and now look here is his -- I
cannot excuse Noah from his drunkenness, yet me thinks it is the part of a Cham
to show his fathers nakedness. I remember that one has told me, ('it is a great
Truth) That Religion never s^ffers greater wounds, then by the hands of her
professed friends; Oh? what advantage have the wicked Papists taken against us
by the falls of English Professors, both in principles and practice. 4. 'I is a
very great dishonor to Christ's allsufficiency. Tell me man, is thy Christ able
to protect thee against all evil? and is he able to supply thee with all good?
or is he not? if he be not, then deny him, and whatever thou have said
concerning him, if he be, then stand close to him, in the mount he will be seen.

2ly. I would argue from Saints, the infinite advantage that at a long run (I
do not say presently) will redound to those that are steady in judgment, in
resolution; in faith, in conscience, in practice, so far as all these are
conformable to the word of God, and no further. The greatest advantage appears
upon these four grounds.

1. Whatever thou think, a steady condition is the safest condition. 2. The
fullest condition. 3. The strongest condition, 4. The freest condition.
Oh! that I could beat this into my heart, as well as ^tis in my head. The
safest condition in the midst of dangers; the fullest condition in the mids^ of
wants; the strongest condition in the midst of assauts, and the freest
condition in the midst of straights. I profess in the presence of God, I have
felt these things, and knew them to be true many years ago.

1. It is the safest condition: never do the Saints take hurt, but by
declining, moving from their center: while at their center the Devil cannot
touch them; departing thence, is like the poor Bird from her nest, every one
has a fling at them. Remember this, let but a man once leave his Scriptural
station, and what temptation is he able to stand against: it is just like a man
thrown down from the top of an house, no stopping till he come to the bottom. 1 John 5. 18. He that is begotten of God keeps himself, and the wicked one
touches him not.

2. It is the fullest condition. Oh! my Brethren, Saints living steadfastly on
their foundation, are continually supplied by God, as the fountain does
continually issue out it self into the streams. I know it is best living upon a
single God. How many thousands be there yet living in England, that can tell
you, they never enjoyed more of God, then when they enjoyed least of the
Creature. Some have professed to me their prison was to them as a palace, that
were troubled more with these things then ever you were, and the God of heaven
grant you never may.

3. It Is the strongest condition. A man that stands steadfast, is like a man on
a Rock, the waters come, they may dash themselves in pieces, but never shall be
able to dash him in pieces, he is fixed on a Rock, and therefore stands. A man
that stands steady to his Scriptural principles, is like Sanpson with his Locks
about him, let all the Philistines come, what cares he, he is able to conquer
them all.

4. It Is the freeest condition. A man that deserts his principles, is a slave
to every condition, afraid of every humor, of every Aspine leaf in the world,
thinks all those are informers that converse with him, is afraid of some
promooter or other. But he that stands fast, where the Spirit of God is, there
is liberty and freedom; such a man in chains, as Paul at Rome, is in a far
freer condition then others not in that restraint. Well then, it is rational
that you stand, but it may be your l^st and interest can hardly swallow these
things: if we stand we shall not fall; nay if you do not stand, be sure you
shall fall at last. The next thing I would do is to apply this truth.

Is it the most important duty of all sincere professors, in the most shaking
seasons, to stand steadfast in the Lord? then

First, by way of Lamentation, and that

1. Over our own souls. 2. Over hundreds of Congregatio^s.
Lord, must, do we say hundreds, nay thousands of Congregations that are this
day, though they do not accompany us in person, yet mingling tears with us, and
especially as I hear, on the West of England.

1. Over our own hearts. We must stand; that is our duty: oh! how should it
cause us to lie low, by reason of the instability of our hearts, and their
cursed declining from the true foundation every day. Alas, Beloved, this is
that that God complains of, they are a generation whose spirit is not steadfast
with God; and therefore we have very much reason to complain of it: oh! that
this sin might be forgiven: oh, what an unsettled people have we been! to day we
have been apt to cry Hosanna, Hosanna to the Son of David, to morrow our note
is changed, crucify him, crucify him, give us Barabbas* to day the Lord is
God, to morrow Baal; any thing is God, provided we may keep our Estates. Oh
Lord! what w^lt thou do with such a people as this? certainly it is a
lamentation, and* ought ^o be a lamentation. Believe it Beloved, I can now
count seven years, if not something more, wherein I have most clearly expected
the days I now see: no way, but the severest ways to be taken with such a
false people as we have been. Judge in your own thoughts, whether we have been
true to God or Man, to Saints or Sinners, to the Churches of God at home, or
abroad: whether or no this be not matter of lamentation.

2. With respect to our Congregations. ('it is not against the Law yet to call
them our Congregations.) This I confess, I can rather weep then speak to, I
cannot speak, my heart is too big for my head here. Lord, is it the duty of
people, of Saints, to stand, to be steadfast? how then should we mourn over
those poor souls, that because their pillars are taken away, must needs for
ought we know fall, unless thou do support them? What, Lord, do thou
complain of a flock of sheep that are scattered? oh! there is no wonder in it,
their Shepherd is gone. Do you look on it as a strange thing, to see a poor
Ship to be tossed here and there in the Sea, when their Pilot is destroyed? why
Mother, is it a strange thing for your Children to fall and knock their Arms,
Legs, their Brains out? why their Mother is taken from them oh poor people!
good God provide for this Congregation, I, and this City, that (let defacing,
abominable wretches say what they will) is certainly one of the best Cities God
has in the world, and therefore they hate it so desperately because God loves
it, and because they hate that God that loves it. I bless God, I can speak of
my own people, they are not a mad pestiserous people, for the most of them. How
many thousands have their hearts at their mouths now at this time before God
in England: alas, alas, that we should ever have our Seers carried away from
us! but what think you, when poor people shall be exposed to greater
temptations, to an Ulcer in the very Kidneys, to a Plague in the very Heart, or
Head: you now fear it, but when you feel it, what then?

2. By way of Exhortation: Beloved, I remember good Jacob, when he was come
into Egypt, and ready to die, calls his children together, and before he dies
blesses his children. I cannot say you are my children, but I can truly say in
the strength of God, You are dearer to me then the children of my own bowels: I
remember what poor Esau said, Have thou but one blessing, my Father? Bless me,
even me also, oh my Father. Oh! beloved, I have a few blessings for you, I have
a few words of Exhortation for you: and for Gods sake take them as if they
dropped from my lips when dying; it is very probable we shall never meet more
while the day of Judgment, what ever others think, I am utterly against all
irregular ways. I (...) (...) bless the Lord) never had a hand in any change
of Government in all my life: I am for prayers, ears, quietness, submission,
and meekness, and let God do his work, and thi^ will be the best done when he
does it. Therefore be exhorted to stand f^st in the Lord: My own people, hear
me now, though you should never hear me more; be exhorted to stand fast in the
Lord; you are not a Schismatical, Heretical people, I do not know the lesst
person among you enclining to Pope^y: Therefore be exhorted, as ye have been a
people that have waited upon the Ordinances of God, that have not persecuted
your poor, Minister: that have made it your design and business to live
lovingly, quietly and as it becomes Christians, (I am confident a Minister may
live as comfortably among you, as among any people in England.) So be ye
steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the Work of the Lord, for as much as
you know that your lahour shall not be in vain in the Lord. Here I had
prepared, I confess, several arguments to have moved you to this stedfastness.

1. I could have told you, that with drawing of any one of you back, you will
meet with great temptations which will very much unfit you for Heaven. If any
man or woman draw back, my soul (says God) shall have no pleasure in him: I
could have urged you with examples from the Heathens; Alexander being in India
bid them tell him the greatest rarity in their Country: Sir, go tell them, say
they, when you come to Greece, there are many here that cannot be forced by the
prowess of Alexander, to change their minds. I know there are some here that
cannot be easily persuaded to change their Religion. Says Lactantius, our very
women torment their tormentors. I would never desire a more able disputant,
than a woman against a Monk.

2. I could tell you of those enjoyments God has put on you, our miseries have
been great, but our mercies have been greater: I could tell you of six
troubles, and of seven; of six wherein God has stood by, and of seven wherein
he has not forsaken, and the truth is, he cannot forsake his people; he may
forsake them as for comfort, he will never forsake them as for support: let him
lay on a burden, he will be sure to strengthen the back.

3. I hope it is not dangerous if I tell you you are engaged to God: there are
vows upon you, Baptismal vows, to say no more, you have sworn to God, you have
lifted up your hands: you are those that have undertaken that you would be true
to God to your lives end: if these vows have been any way strengthened, Oh!
remember Zedekiahs case, Ezr. 17. 18. 19. Seeing he despised the oath by
beeaking the covenant (when lo he had given his hand) and has done all these
things, he shall not escape: therefore thus says the Lord God, as I live,
surely mine oath that he has despised, and my covenant that h^ has broken,
even it will I recompense upon his own head. Remember it, you may play fast and
loose with man, you must not think ever to carry it away by playing fast and
loose with God.

4. If you should not stand, you loose all you have wrought; all your prayers,
tears, professions, practices, sufferings are all gone if you give out at last,
etc.

5. While you stand by God, God has promised to stand with you: and the truth
is, if I have but one God, it is no great matter for all the tyles in worms.
There be a 1000 devils, but all those devils are in one chain, and the end of
that chain is in the hand of one God: oh! God will show himself strong, 2 Cor.
1. 69. For the eyes of the Lord run too and fro^through the whole earth, to
show himself strong in the behalf of them whose heart is perfect toward him.

Quest. But what shall I do to stand?

Ans. 1. If ever you would stand, if ever you would be firm standing Christians
indeed, take heed you be not light and proud Christians: a feather will never
stand against a whirlwind, Error and Profaneness are most apt to breed in
proud hearts. The Proud and Blasphemers are put together, (2 Timothy 3. 2.) Be but
humble Christians, that is the way to be standing steady Christians: if ever you
would be steady in your stations, you must be low in your own eyes: do not you
go and judge. And now, we shall have another kind of Religion come up, as we
have had it a great while; such a man cannot be an honest man, alas, he is a
Presbyterian, he is an Independent, he is an Anabaptist, etc. Now, all our great
business will be, such a man cannot be a good, an honest man, for he does not
conform; on the other side, he cannot be an honest man, for he does conform:
These are poor things: I bless God, I lay not the stress of my Salvation upon
these: it is true, I cannot in conscience conform, but I do not lay the stress of
salvation on it as I did not lay the stress of my salvation on my being a
Presbyterian; I confess I am so, and have been; it has been my unhappiness to
be always on the sinking side; yet I lay not the stress of my salvation upon
it. It Is my conscience, but it may be I have not so much light as another man;
and I profess in the presence of God, could I conform without sin to my own
(...), I would; if I should do any thing against my conscience, I should sin,
and break my peace, and conscience, and all, and never see good day: do not
then spend the strength of your zeal for your religion in censuring others.
That man that is most busy in censuring others, is always least employed in
examining himself. Remember good John Bradford, he would not censure Bonner nor
Gardener, but says he, they called I. Bradford, the hypocritical I. Bradford,
etc. I do not speak this, as though I can, or did in conscience approve of
those things for which I must suffer, that I cannot approve of them, but to
take off people from those things that are so far from the foundation. Look you
but to the main things, and look but into your own hearts, examine them, and
then you need not be much persuaded to look about to others.

2. You must take heed you be not loose Christians: will you remember one thing
from me (the God of Heaven grant you never live to see it verified) A loose
Protestant is one of the fittest persons in the world to make a strict Papist.
Tell not me of his Protestantisme, being a drunkard, it is because his King o^
Country are Protestants where they live. There is no Religion in a loose
liver, if ungodliness be in the heart, it is no difficult thing for error to
get into the head. A loose heart can best comply with loose principles, see if
they will not be of any Religion in the world that is uppermost; let the Turk^
prevail, they would soon be of his Religion.

3. Take heed of being worldly Christians: oh! this is the David that has
^lain his ten thousands. A worldly heart will be bought and sold upon every
turn to serve the Devils turn. Come to a worldly heart, and but promise him
thirty pieces of silver he will betray his Savior. The temptations of the
world are great upon us at this time, you that are husbands and parents know
it; the world is a (...) temptation, but if we be overcome by the world, and
the world not overcome by us, we shall never be able to overcome any one
temptation that is offered to us. Therefore that is an admirable support. In the
world you shall have tribulation, but be of good cheer, I have overcome the
world: I have overcome the world for you, and likewise I have overcome the
world in you. Oh Lord, if thou will but overcome the love and the fear of the
world, if thou will but arm us against the smiles of the world, then come what
will, we shall stand steadfast.

4. Take heed you be not hypoeritical Christians, i* e. take heed you do not
receive the truth, and only receive the truth, and not receive the truth in the
love of that truth, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10. You have received truth, but have you
received the truth in the love of that truth which you have received; want of
this is that damnable occasion to Popery; And with all deceivableness of
unrighteousness in them that perish because they received not the love of the
truth, that they might be saved; and for this cause God shall send them strong
delusions, that they shall believe a lie, that they all might be damned, who
believed not the truth. It Is just with God they should fall into errors, whose
hearts did never love real truths. Better never receive the truth, then to
receive it, and not in the love of it.

Take heed of being venturous, and God tempting Christians: what is that? when
do I tempt God? I tempt God when I do run into a Pesthouse, and say, God will
preserve me from the Plague. Take heed of running upon temptations to sin,
whether it be in principles or in practice. I could tell you of two spiritual
Pest-houses in England if I had time, for principles one, and for practices
another, I do not say that I mean Play Houses on the one hand, or Mass-houses
on the other hand: Certainly Bret^ren, I read of Julian that wicked bloody
Apostate, that he sunk into that his Apostasy first, by going to hear Libanius
preach, mistake me not, I am not against your hearing the Ministers of Christ,
for a man may be a true Minister, though he be a bad man; all the world can
never answer the instance of Judas, who was a true Minister, though a bad man;
while I plead for the truth of his Ministry, I do not spread a skirt over the
wickedness of his life. The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses Chair, hear
them. But that which I mainly aim at, is this, do not you go, and run, and
venture your selves upon temptations: you have heard of superstitious or
Idolatrous worship, you have a months mind to see this, and what if so be when
you are found in Satan's way, Satan should lay his ^aw on you, and claim to you,
what do you there in Satan's ground. Would you be found when you come to die in
a Playhouse, or in such a place where the true God is Id^latrously worshipped?
It Is a great truth, if you would not be found in the Devils power, do not be
found in the Devils pound. Brethren, we must know, Satan is b^sie enough to
tempt us, we need not go to tempt him: Eve lost all that she had by hearing one
Sermon, but 'twas from the Devil. Therefore, if you would not have your pockets
picked, do not trade amongst Cheaters: 1 Timothy 6. 3, 5. If any man ^each
otherwise, etc. (then that ye have received, and we preached) from such
withdraw thy self; that is a good, honest, laudable separation, from such
withdraw thy self.

6. Where God does not find a mouth to speak, do not you find an ear to hear,
nor an heart to believe. [pray mind it, this I am sure is of concernment] This
is one of the grand points in my Card or Compass, on which I hope I shall
venture all If any man come with a Doctrine not according to the word of God,
let him carry it whither he will, what have I to do with it? Either you come
from God, or no, If you do, show me his word, and I Will believe it? if not, open
your pack where you please, etc. where God does not find a mouth to speak,
where you have not a precept, promise, threatening or example in the word of
God, let them talk their hearts out, it is nothing to me, to my Religion, to my
salvation.

Object. But what ground have you for this?

Ans. Jesuit. I will tell you my ground: this is my great hold I have against
Popery. Could they convince me of this, that I must believe with an implicit
faith, because they say it, I think it would not be long before I turned Papist.

Quest. But why must I not believe it with an implicit faith?

Ans. Look you into those three great Scriptures, Mat. 15. 2. Why do thy
disciples transgress the traditions of the Elders? The Jews come and tell
Christ he was not a true Son of the Church of the Jews, he was disobedient to
the Church of the Jews; why? thou have Disciples that walk not as they ought;
what do they do? they commit an unpardonable sin, They transgress the
Traditions of the Elders, they break one of the greatest Commandments. What Is
that tradition? They wash not their hands when they eat bread: This was the
great sin, and they charge it on him, eat with unwashen hands: why? why bring
you in this tradition? what have you to say for it? what is that to the purpose?
prove Jesus Christ that there is any thing in the Word of God that is against
(...)? But, prove you out of the Word of God where they are bound to wash
before they eat? If you will give out your imposition, make out your
institution; and let me tell you, you talk of tradition, but first you set up
an Altar God never thought of, and secondly, you pull down Gods Altar: Why do
you also transgress the Commandment of God by your tradition? For God
commanded, saying, Honor thy Father and Mother; and he that curses Father or
Mother, let him dye the death: But ye say, Whosoever shall say to his Father or
Mother, It is a gift by whatsoever thou might be profited by me, and honor
not his Father and Mother, he shall be free; thus have ye made the Commandment
of God of none effect by your Traditions: Ye Hypocrites, you are told of it
long ago; well did Esaias prophecy of you, saying, This people draws nigh
unto me with their mouth, and honors me with their lips, but their heart is
far from me. They draw near, wash their hands, wash their cups, and have filthy
souls! They honor me with their lips, etc. But though their principles, their
heart is bad, their worship is good, is it not? No, In vain they do worship me,
teaching for doctrines the commandments of men. So then, my Brethren, remember,
all those that teach for doctrines the precepts of men, in vain do they worship
God; Here Is an innocent command, You must wash before you eat; if you do not
wash, you do transgress the traditions of the Elders; but let you starve Father
and Mother, if you give but to the Church, to a Nunnery, Friery, etc. it is all
one; so that all those that will for doctrines teach the traditions of men,
will render the commandments of God of none effect; in vain do they worship me.
Look therefore, wherever God does not find a tongue to speak, do not you find
an ear to hear, nor an heart to believe. Christians, if you expect Christ's
benediction, always call aloud for Christ's Institution; so Col. 2. 18, 19. one
of the greatest steps you have against Popery, Let no man beguile you of your
reward in a voluntary h^mility, and worshipping of Angels, intruding into those
things which he has not seen, vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind, etc Deuteronomy.
12. 32. What thing soever I command you, observe to do it, thou shall not add
thereto, nor ^minish from it. There are no Wens in the body of Gods Precepts,
therefore none of them to be cut off. You must not deal with Gods Ordinances,
as that Tyrant Proc^st^ did with men if they were too long for his Bed, he
would cut them shorter; if too short, he would pull their limbs out of joint to
make them longer Never think your selves in Conscience bound to lend an ear to
that which God does not find a mouth to speak.

7. Would you stand fast, beware of shaking doctrines: what are those? there
are a great many of such doctrines that are shakings; give me leave to instance
in three or four. 1. As you love your souls, beware of all doctrines that tend
to, and preach up licentiousness, looseness, and profaneness. Should any tell
you, you may lawfully violate and profane the Sabbath, do not believe it; the
doctrine of the Gospel is a doctrine of godliness; it teaches us to deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in
this present world; therefore if you find any doctrine at any time that should
have the least tendency to encourage you in any sin, know, it is a doctrine
against the Gospel.

2. Wherever you find any doctrine that shall tend to the lifting up of man's
free will, and debasing of Gods free grace, know, it is a wicked doctrine, and
against the genius of the Gospel. Perhaps the Papists will tell you, we are
aliv^; Paul tells you, we are dead. They say that we can do any thing many
things that we talk to the World we cannot do; they say, that we can save our
selves, and those with Christ if we will; whereas the Apostle tells you, 1 Cor.
1. 14. The natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they
are foolishness unto him, neither can be know them* because they are
spiritually discerned. It may be they will tell you, a natural man may love God
with his heart, really as so, and savingly; whereas the Apostle tells you. Romans
8. 7. The carnal mind is enmity against God, for it is not subject unto the Law
of God, neither indeed can be. Remember it, in all those Doctrines wherein we
do agree with those whom we call Pelagians, and their brood the Arminians, so
far we agree with the Jesuits, and the worst of Papists.

3. As you would avoid Hell, avoid all those Doctrines that would lift up
self-righteousness, and debase the righteousness of Christ. I fear I shall
never be in that capacity that I would, to stand you in stead in this
particular. I confess I am against forty things in Popery, but my whole soul is
here engaged: if that Doctrine be a truth, I never expect salvation by God:
either I must be saved by Christ alone, or else I must not be saved by Christ
at all: though Christ will never save me without sanctification, yet Christ
never intended my sanctification should merit his salvation. Be as holy as you
can, as if there were no Gospel to save; yet when you are as holy as you can,
you must believe in Christ, as if there were no Law at all to condemn you. Come
and tell me of the Merit of Saints, etc. I will believe that truth, when I
believe the Whore of Babylon to be Christ's Spouse. See Phil. 3. 9. 2 Cor. 5. 21.

8. Would you stand? you must be praying Christians. I confess when most of my
strings are broken, there is yet one holds, there is a spirit of prayer
(remember Atheis^) among the Saints of God, I can pray yet: and I had rather
stand against the Canons of the wicked, than against the prayers of the
righteous. Oh! pray that you enter not into temptation; or, if we enter into
temptation, Lord, let not the temptation enter into us. Pray, If possible, let
this Cup pass from me; but, if not, let it not poison me, but let me be
bettered by it, and in due time deliver me from it. I believe it would be a
great temptation to you, if it should be said to you, you shall trade with no
man any more, etc. you have enjoyed these and these comforts, bid them (...)
for ever, you shall have no more to do with them, this would be a temptation.
Temptations and trials are great, and certainly where they are so, prayer
should be strong. There Is no relief to be expected on earth, all our relief is
to be expected from God, and that is to be obtained by prayer. Pray, that God
would be pleased above all things in the world to make you sincere; would you
be steadfast in your profession, you must be sincere in your practice: To him
that has shall be given, that is a comfort; to him that has but truth of
grace, to him shall be given growth of grace.

9. Would you be steady Christians, then make it your great work to attend the
Ordinances that God has prescribed to make you steady Christians: You were
told of this many years ago concerning attending the Ordinances of God.

Quest. Pray what are those?

Ans. 1. There are secret Ordinances. It may be thou can not be so much in
the Pulpit as thou would: Oh! be more in thy Closet: it may be thou shall not
have so many opportunities to hear so many Lectures, be more conscientious in
thy meditations in secret; it may be thou shall not have that freedom with God
in public, be more earnest with God in private.

2. Mind your Families more then ever; you have your Children and Servants call
aloud upon you. How many grave faces do I see at this time, that can tell me,
Sir, I remember some twenty or thirty years ago, you could not pass the
streets, but here was one Family repeating the Word of God* another singing the
praises of God, another praying to God, another conferring concerning the
things of God; at that time we had not so many foolish absurd excursions into
streets and fields as now. O for the Lords sake begin to take them up now: Let
the Amorite, Perizite and Iebusite do what they will; but oh! for you and your
children, and your servants, do you serve the Lord; up again with those godly
Exercises; when we cannot hear a Sermon, then read a Sermon; if we cannot hear
a Sermon well preached, our godly Parents would engage us to read Sermons well
penned; if nothing new, let the word be repeated and meditated, call to mind
what you have heard; oh! reduce your selves to your Christian frame: let the
debauched Athiests know, they have something among you that is to be feared,
that is your prayers; let them know, that though you have not those
opportunities you have had, yet you will improve those you have. And you
Masters of this Parish, for Gods sake keep in your servants on this day more
then ever; you are to be accountable for their souls, and they will give you a
thousand thanks when they come to age, especially at the day of Judgment* Oh
then, blessed be God I had such a Master, blessed be God I had such a Mistress,
blessed be God I had such Parents.

Quest. But then for public Ordinances, what would you have us do?

Ans. 1. Wherever Christ does find a tongue to speak, I am bound to find an ear
to hear, and an heart to believe. I would not be mistaken; I bless the Lord I
am not turned out of my Ministry for being a Schismatic. I know Schism is a
sin, nor know I any of my Brethren that are so, do not mistake us, therefore do
not go and tell the Jesuits we are Schismatics, for we are none; but this I
would advise, (I speak as though I were dying) do whatsoever lies in your
power, to hear such whom you think to be godly; beg of God, be earnest with
him, that he would give Pastors after his own heart, and whom God has sent;
not such as may daub with untempered mortar, and not such as may prophecy lies
in the Name of the Lord; not such as may be clouds without water, but such as
may be guides of the blind, burning and shining lights, faithful Stewards. What
shall you do! what did you do twenty or thirty years ago? What did the good old
Puritans do? they were not Schismatics. But as much as lies in you possible,
hear them, whom in your conscience you judge God does hear: Oh! then expect the
Word of God should come to your hearts when you have ground to believe that it
comes from your Pastors heart: I must confess I intend to do the fame, when put
into the same condition with you. I acknowledge I am bound in conscience to
hear the Word of God, but I must take care whom I hear; hear those by whom God
speaks; I hope God will grant several such.

Take but this advice more, and I have no more to say, Whatever abuse you find
either in Pastor or people, or wherever you find it, do not you go, as your
old use has been, to rail, calumniate, back-bite, and speak behind their
backs; this is wicked and ungodly, but do every one according as God prescribes
us that are members of any visible Church; what is that? if I know any thing
against my brother, do not go and make a sputter and noise, and back-bite, but
take the rule of Christ, If thy brother shall trespass against thee, go and
tell him of his fault between him and thee alone; if he shall hear thee, thou
have gained thy brother; but if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one
or two more; and if he neglect to hear them, tell it to the Church, and leave
the blood at their door; thou have freed thine own soul. I hope by Gods grace I
shall do so.

Thus I have spoken something from this Scripture: I cannot speak what I
desire; for besides the exhausting of my spirits, there is something to be done
after, viz. a Funeral Sermon. I shall say no more but only this, The God of
Heaven be pleased to make you mind these plain things; I can truly say this, I
have not spoken one word (that I remember) which I would not have said to you
if I had been just a dying, and been going to God as soon as gone out of the
Pulpit; and the God of peace ^e with you; only mind that one thing, When God
does not find a tongue to speak, do not you find an ear to hear, nor an heart
to believe.

Mr. Collin's Farewell Sermon.
Jude. v. 3. Contend earnestly for the faith, etc.
THese words contain two parts: 1. A Duty exhorted to. 2. The manner of the
management of that Duty.

The Duty exhorted to, is, to retain the faith delivered to the Saints: The
manner of its management is, that we should earnestly contend to keep it.

I opened the terms, What Is meant by faith?

It is not so much the grace of faith, but the doctrine of faith; not special
faith, whereby we apprehend special mercy upon a promise made to the Elect, but
the Fides quae creditur, the whole substance of the doctrine of Christ as to
things that are to be believed, and duties that are to be practiced.

But why is it said, The faith that was once delivered? (that is) invariably,
irrevocably, once for all? Delivered, respects the privilege the Saints of God
had in the faith that God had left: it is the faith of the Gospel, committed as
a Treasure: And the Church is called a Candlestick, not only to hold out the
light, but to hold the light: whence the Church is called the pillar, or the
ground of truth: not that they are to make Doctrines, but to hold forth the
Doctrines of Christ even as Tables and Pillars, upon which Proclamations are
hung and held forth to be made public: so is the Church of Christ, it is that
in which the Truths of the Lord Jesus are kept, and will be kept from one age
to another.

But what is the import of the word [ Earnestly contend?] It is a word used
only once in the new Testament in the Composition: The word in the root is
frequently used, and imports a struggling with might and mair, as those that use
to run at games. It is used for Jesus Christ in his sufferings, He was in an
Agony; the same word from whence this word is compounded. The Apostle would
imply such a contention, such a struggling to keep the faith of the Gospel, as
one word in the English is not able to express it, and Interpreters very much
differ what is the import: the best center in this, that we should so contend
for the faith, as men that would contend to keep their very lives.

The Proposition is this, That it is the duty of the Saints of God to maintain
an earnest contention, to struggle for, and to keep the faith that was
betrusted with them. Wherein this Contention does cons^st.

1. It is not a carnal contention; the weapons of our warfare are not carnal,
but spiritual; the Saints are not called to contend for the faith with carnal
weapons, with carnal power and force: ( not by might and power, but by the
Spirit of God) force, and power, and a fleshly arm, prisons, pillories, and
chains, and taking away of men's comforts and estates upon the account of the
faith of the Gospel, has been the usual way of Errors defending it self:
Prayers and Tears are the Churches weapons.

2. It Is not a contention of uncharitableness: This contention allows no
murdering either of the bodies or souls of men: Christians are so to contend
against error and sinful practice, as to love their persons, and pity those
they contend with. There are some opinions, that there is no way to show a holy
way of zeal against, nor be able to destroy them, but by a holy separating from
the persons: there were such to whom it was not lawful to say, God speed, or
receive them into their houses: but yet this is in order to the saving the
soul: Saving some, plucking them as brands out of the fire.

But positively, this holy contention it consists in these four things.

1. In managing the Sword of the Spirit, the Word of God, against error and
sinful practices, to be able to confute them mightily, as Apollos did, out of
the Scriptures, showing the Jews that Jesus is the Christ. 2. By Prayer: for
to pray down sinful opinions and practices. That we mean when we pray, Thy
Kingdom come, that the Gospel may run on and be glorified: that these nights
of darkness may be dispelled: that Truth may shine to the perfect day. 3. By
holy practicing against them: by holding forth the Word of life in your
conversation: by striving together by a mutual provocation for the faith of the
Gospel in respect of holy walking. 4. By being able to suffer for them*
The Reasons of the Point I gave you.

I shall now sum up all in a word of Exhortation, to press every one that
bears the name of a Saint, to take up this Exhortation of the Apostle,
Earnestly to contend for the faith that was once delivered ^o the Saints The
sum of all is, to beg that you would be vali^nt for the truth of Christ; that
whatever has been delivered to you consonant to the truth, agreeable to the
says delivered to us, that you would struggle might and main by all Christian
courage, by argument, practice, prayer, by suffering, rather then let go those
Truths that God has taught you by his faithful Ministers: that Christ that
has been preached to you. those Scriptures you have in your hands: those
Doctrines you have learned by experience, by prayer, by searching the Word:
those ways of worship God has taught you: those patterns of his house, and
outgoings, and returnings there that he has taught you: be exhorted to hold
them fast, and not to let them go: ( Contend earnestly for the faith, etc.)

It is to be lamented, that there is so sad a spirit of indifferency among
Christians, as we find at this day. Many do so carry it, as if there were
nothing in the Gospel of Christ that were worthy the owning by practicing, or
worthy the owning by suffering. This lukewarm indifferent temper has done the
Church of God a great deal of mischief formerly; and if admitted now, will do
you as much mischief again. It has been one of the sins which the Lord at this
day is judging and punishing his poor people for, that our zeal has been so
hot against one another for mere circumstances, and so cold when we are like to
lose the substance: that our contentions rise so high in matters hardly of any
moment, and our spirits work so low when they are to gain the great things for
which Christ suffered, and which he delivered to us. It is my work therefore to
beg you, that you would put on a holy resolution, that there may be no
contention among us (for we are Brethren) but only that contention, who may
most retain, and evidently witness the Faith that is delivered to us: It is
the trust God has committed, and he does expect and look ^ow we will manage it
with courage and confidence, to keep the faith of the Gospel. There are very
great oppositions against you, and there ought to be great resolutions of
Christians to maintain themselves against such oppositions. It is a very sad
thing that Christians should see the Faith and the ways of the Gospel of God,
as it were taken from them at any time, and they have not one word to speak,
nor any thing at all for to venture in suffering for the ways and truths of
Jesus Christ: Moses had such a holy zeal, that when Aaron was an example to the
people to lead them to Idolatry, he contended with him earnestly to his face.
The zeal of Gods servants is so small now, that though Balaam be about the
work, we have not a word to speak; Though the false* prophets of Antichrist be
about the business, yet no Christian has courage to speak. The holy Apostle
Paul, when Peter walked with an uneven foot, and began to Iudaise, he tells us
he did resist him to his face: shall Paul resist Simon-Peter, and shall not the
Saints of God resist Simon-Magus? shall they resist Hymenaeus and Philetus* and
shall we not contend with Alexander the Coppersmith? it is but suitable to what
God expects; and the Exhortation here given us, That we should maintain it with
might and main, as that which is our Treasure, which we will not let go, the
Faith once delivered to the Saints.

To put you upon this, I might encourage you with several things: all the
Reasons mentioned as are so many Motives to this holy spiritual contention:
Shall I tell you of three words further?

1. The mercy of Gods delivering the Truth to you, should engage you to this
holy contention: it is such a mercy as is a non-such mercy, Psalm 147. the two
last Verses, He that has given his Judgments to Jacob, and his Statutes to
Israel: He has not dealt s^ with every Nation. How many of the greatest part
of those that we call Christians, in the world, are put like Sampson to grind
among the Philistims? Superstition, Popery, Idolatry, Will Worship, such things
as Jesus Christ never delivered to his Saints, having both their eyes out; the
Scripture*light that should have showed them the truth taken from them; and
their Consciences that should teach them, carried in the pocket of some base
Priest, that dare not think any other then what he will tell them. How many are
there, even of the very reformed of the world, who only get upon some broken
plank of Ship-wrackt truth, whereby they swim to the Lord Jesus! But God does
not deal thus with us: you have had the whole Counsel of God revealed to you, a
glorious light set up in the Nation for a hundred of years past, which has
been like the light of seven days: for these twenty years past the running to
and fro of men has increast knowledge: you have learned the truth from Gods
faithful Ministers: you have received it with much affliction, with many
temptations: it has cost Jesus Christ dear to send it, it has cost you dear
to receive it, and will you let it go? Your sin above all others will be most
provoking to the Lord Jesus.

2. I might tell you that it is a time, wherein many let go the faith; and
methinks the Lord Jesus does by his poor unworthy messenger speak to this great
Congregation, as sometime he did to his Apostles, Will ye also go away? There
are many that have been forward and eminent professors of the faith delivered
to the Saints, that have made shipwreck of faith and good conscience; will you
split upon the same rock? God has kept the truth for you, and kept you in the
truth hitherto, and is coming to see whether you will leave it, and keep it or
no. We have been sucking at the breasts of the Ordinances, and dandled upon the
Knees of providence, and gone on in a smooth way of profession; but what will
you do now when you must come possibly to suffer persecution for it? to keep
the faith, you may lose your Liberty, Life, Estate. And there is a great deal of
hazard upon this account, because it has pleased God so to dispose it, as that
those that should be your guides into truth, the Lord is removing them into
corners. Possibly while they have been with you, you have kept the faith; but
what will you do when they are gone? While Moses was with the people, they
cleaved to the Lord; when once he was gone into the Mount, they fell to their
Idolatry, and worshipped a Calf. While Paul was at Ephesus, the flock was kept
pure, but (says he) I know after my departure, grievous Wolves shall break in,
not sparing the flock, etc. So while you have heard of God, who sends voices
and warnings to scare away the Wolves and Foxes from you, possibly you may keep
the faith; but what will you do when God removes them?

3. God has ever had in all ages of his Church, a word of his Patience to be
kept to try his Saints, and therefore it does concern you for to be valiant for
the truth. In all the series of Gods dispensations with his Church, there has
been something or other of the faith of Christ, that has cost them resisting
to blood, to sacrifice their lives, to lay down all that they have for it by
suffering: Now even as they, so we; if not in the same thing, yet in the same
faith: we have still some word or other of Gods patience to keep; therefore we
need to have on the Armor of Light; you must wrestle with the fiery Trial,
for there is some Jewel that Jesus Christ puts upon you to wear, that
Persecutours, Persecutions, (...), Heretics will scratch at, which you must
hold out with lo^s of life to keep; and this must be till the latter part of
the rage and reign of Antichrist is out; and even as you keep that, so will God
keep you, Rev. 3. 10. As you honor the word of Gods patience, so God will
honor you; As you are faithful to him, so will he give you the Crown, and no
otherwise: Hence therefore it concerns us all to be armed with a holy
confidence and resolution, as to this spiritual warfare, in contending for the
faith delivered to us.

But the great thing I shall speak to, is, Wherein may Christians be helped in
this holy struggling and conten^ion?

I shall only mention five or six things, some to fit you for it, others to
help you in the management of it: I shall name them mixtly, and not distinct.

Rule 1.
First, bring all Doctrines that are offered you to believe, and all Practices
that are put upon you to practice, to the Scriptures* the word of God: try them
there whether they be to be retained, or to be rejected: You will have this
double advantage by it: 1. To discover what is right and what is wrong. 2. To
have on the best part of your Armor, whereby to contend against it.

1. To discover what is right, and what is wrong; for the Scripture alone is
the Touchstone of Doctrines, and the Trial of Spirits: The Scripture does
discover it self, and does discover all things that are contrary to it: when
you are bidden to try all things, it is not by practicing all things, as some
poor giddy-headed Christians of late days have done, who have made the
practicing every opinion to be their trying of it, till they have run
themselves into all opinions; but it is by the Scripture you are first to try,
and then to practice; who are like the Noble Bereans, that were more noble then
those of Thessalonica, because they searched the Scripture. To bring the Truths
that have or shall be taught you, or the Doctrines that shall be imposed upon
you, to the word of God; to see whether they be according to the Truth, or no:
for false Doctrines, and false Worship, of all things they hate the Scripture
most: they are like fal^e coin, or false Jewels, which go best in the night:
false coin will not endure the Touchstone, nor false Jewels the day: no more
will false Doctrines the Scripture, therefore it will be a great way to
discover them.

2. It will be a great way to vanquish them, Ephesians. 6. Above all take the sword
of the Spirit; the word of God is the sword of the Spirit, by which we slay
Heretical Doctrines, and by which we are to slay sinful practices: All those
stones that the David's of God have flung at the Geliah's of Error, they have
been taken out of the brook of the Scriptures: therefore reduce all Doctrines
offered you to believe, all worships that are taught you to practice, to the
word of God.

1. All Doctrines that are taught you to believe, reduce them thither; there is
no profession of faith to be built, but the stones must be fetched from that
mountain: If you believe divine truths, but not because the Scripture propounds
them, your faith is but humane: If you believe any thing the Scripture does not
speak, your faith is Diabolical: the word of God and your faith must run
parallel: All that is written, you must believe, and you must believe nothing
but what is written: This was the Rule of the Old Testament: Isa. 8. 20. To the
Law and to the Testimony; to the Law (that is) to Moses: and to the Testimony
(that is) to the Prophets: if they speak not according to these, there is no
light in them. When any thing was offered to Christ by way of enquiry, his
common answer was, How read thou? Luke 10. 26. How is it written? When the
holy Apostle Paul would redress the abuse of the Lords Supper, he does not
carry the Corinthians to these and these Fathers, to this and that use and
custom, but brings that, how it was delivered from the Lord: he reduces them
to the institution. What I have received from the Lord, that I have delivered
to you, The word of God is perfect, in respect of Doctrine, and in respect of
worship. So that whatsoever is offered you to believe, you must try it by the
perfect rule; for it is given by Divine institution to make the man of God
perfect and wise to Salvation: it is such a Canon about Doctrines to be
received, as nothing must be added nor taken from it: Rev. 22. Therefore it is
called a Testament; Now no man dares add to another man's last Will and
Testament: who shall dare to add a faith to the Faith of Gods Elect, to that
which Christ has delivered? I will give you this as a certain observation,
that there never was any thing of false Doctrine brought into the Church, or
any thing of false worship imposed upon the Church, but either it was by
neglecting the Scripture, or by introducing something above the Scripture.

2. Bring hither all practice of worship, as well as Doctrines to be believed:
try the ways and forms of Christ's house, by the word of Christ: he shows us
the patterns thereof, the outgoings and returnings thereof: he was faithful in
all his House, even as Moses was who did not leave a pin of the Tabernacle, but
did appoint it. There is nothing decent and comely in the Church, which is so
much pleaded for, but what comes in by Christ's institution. Whatever you
worship without a warrant from the word of God, or by whatever means you
worship without a warrant from the word of God, you worship you know not what,
Ioh. 4. 2). it is Will Worship: and by the same Rule you receive one
Will Worship, you may receive twenty: it is vain worship, it will never reach
the end of your Communion with God: (for he is a Spirit, and seeks such
worshippers) it will never bring you to the enjoyment of God: therefore in
point of worship, bring it to the word of God, and as to faith and worship say,
Hitherto my faith and my worship shall thou go, and no further. This rule
rightly improved, it will dis-intangle you from the hooks, and take you off
from the baits of those cunning Fowlers (for to such the Apostle does compare
them in the New Testament) who seek to betray souls from the simplicity of
Gospel-faith. Never any did invent false doctrine, but to put up them, they put
down the Scripture, and they put out the eyes of Christians to make them bend
to it: before they use other means to compel them, their great work is to
darken the light of the truth, and in the room of the Scripture to be your
rule, they set up other Rules: which, because there are three mavelous
Popular, I desire to mention them in opposition to this Rule I have given you.

There Is a threefold Rule men would set up to deceive poor souls: The name of
a Church: Ancient Customs: The Generality of those where they live.

1. The specious Name of a Church, to make that a rule to Doctrine and to
worship. It was the plea of the Popish party in the Marion days, What? will
you not believe the Church? has not the Church power to make Institutions and
Canons about this, and that, and the other? will you not believe the Church?
will you go out from the true Church? Thus do men that go about to deceive;
nothing like it as to the catching and deluding many poor souls, by making the
Church their rule. It was the way of of the Popish party of old, and if
Antichrist ever has power again over the Church of Christ in that measure and
degree it has had, you must expect it again: therefore let me caution you
against it. Can we enquire who this Church was? It was only the decree of the
proud Church, Antichrist of old, and the Antichristian Clergy, who (as you may
read in their Stories) would Lord it over the Faith of Gods heritage. I must
tell you, the name, and custom, and way of the Churches of Christ, is a
reverend holy thing, even of that that is a true Church: It Is a weighty
Argument, when the Apostle says, We have no such Custom, nor the Churches of
Christ: And therefore I do fully close with him that said, No sober man will go
against Reason: No Christian against the Scripture: and no peaceable minded man
against the Church: But then the Church must shine by a Divine Scripture Light:
If that be a rule it must be ruled by the Scripture; the Churches power is not
Authoritative, as to give Laws against the Laws of Christ; it is only
Ministerial: we do believe the Scripture for it self, and not because of the
Church; we receive the Scripture by the Church: Hence therefore when we set up
the name of a Church, let us see whether that Church walks in the way of
Christ, whether she be his Spouse or no, whether she does act according to his
Institutions, whether they bring his light, yea or no; then submit: for it is
not what a Church practices, but what they are warranted to practice: not what
they hold for a truth, but what they are warranted to hold as the word of
truth: The word was written afte the Church; but as it is the word of God, its
before it. This therefore will break the snare if you be set upon by the
specious name of the Church; look that the Church has warrant from Scripture
Institution, and then submit to Church Institution.

A second Rule I observe men would set up to betray poor souls from the faith
once delivered to them, is Ancient Custom: (Our Fathers worshipped in this
Mountain) when they would hold forth that which the Scripture is short in, they
will send us to such and such Customs, of so many hundred years standing. It
is to be bewailed that the date, the standing of false Doctrines and false
Worships is so ancient; for though at first they were but Invocations, yet to
succeeding Generations they become old: And it is a very great truth, that That
is the most ancient, is the most true, and therefore there lies a great snare
in this. Therefore when Antiquity is pretended, if you find not their hoary
heads in the way of Righteousness, there is little reason for you to reverence
them, or comply with them; no more then there was reason so suddenly to be
taken with the Gibeonites moldy bread, and clouted shoes: When matters of
Antiquity are pretended, say as Ignatius, Jesus Christus est mea Antiquitas,
Jesus Christ is my Antiquity; so say, Truth is my Antiquity: for though an
opinion have been practiced a thousand years, yet men may have the word of
truth in their hearts that is ancienter then all.

A third Rule that men would set up, is, The general course of the world, or
place, the generality of those where they live: This was that the Popish Party
did often mention to the Witnesses of Jesus Christ; what? will you be wiser
then others? cannot you do as others do? must you be singular? And this is a
taking rule for to make you conformable to those things possibly the word of
God will not warrant, if you bring not this custom to the word of God: it is
not what the most do, but what we may do: it is not what is the practice of all
in general, but what ought to be the singular care, and strict holiness of
Christians in particular, that the word of God will allow: Christians are not
to be conformable to the present world, Romans 12. 1. The word will tell you it
is no more safe to follow a multitude to do evil, then it will be sweeter to be
in Hell with a great company: The word will let you know the secrets of the
Lord are with a very few, and those them that fear him: as for the whole world,
it lies in wickedness: The word will tell you, The ways of Jesus Christ, and
the profession of Jesus Christ, is commonly called a Sect; it is every where
spoken against, and men hate it every where: Therefore set up this Rule in your
hearts, in your houses, in your meditations, in your practice.

Rule 2.
Be very well rooted and established in the faith that has been delivered to
you. I observe it is one of the great reasons why Christians so easily let go
the profession they have made, is, because they were never well built upon it,
nor established in it. There are many Christians that through their own itching
ears, heaping up Teachers to themselves, have never been rooted or established
in the truth; the Lord pity them and keep them this day: Many Christians that
have attended to establishing means, yet never seriously considered, nor laid
things to their heart, but are like those the Apostle speaks of, Heb. 5. 12.
that had need to learn the first Oracles of God. How many among us profess with
the highest, but have little ground for their faith? only (with the Jews) the
Traditions of the Elders, the custom of the place, Education, and because such
a party of men say so, because no body denies it, because Ministers commonly
preached it; but to take any solid and serious ground, they are yet to seek.
It Is not wi^h the things of God as with other Arts, as Logic, Rhetoric,
Astronomy; in these Arts the principle is presupposed to be proved; no man goes
about to prove there is Reason, that there is Number, that there are Heavenly
bodies, because sense and experience shows it: But it is quite otherwise in the
things of God: for you are not only to run away with the notion, that there is
a God, that this God is one, and that these are his word and his works; but you
are to know this by experience* because the knowledge of these things comes in
by infusion, by faith, by a belief that God is: For by Faith we believe the
worlds were made by the word of God, Heb. 11. 2, 3. It is that therefore I
would press you to, that you would labor for an established spirit: Do not
only hear the things of God, but see them; the first will but blind you, or at
best leave you at great uncertainties; the last will settle you. What was the
reason of the holy Apostles zeal when they were under the greatest threatenings
of the High Priests; and were forbid to speak in the name of Christ, and to
speak of Justification by faith, and the Resurrection of Christ from the dead,
and forgiveness of sins by him? (things that are furthest remote from sense and
reason) the Apostle will tell you, Act. 4. 20. We cannot but speak the things
we have seen and heard. Hence it is that poor silly women, that in respect of
their Imbecility and Infirmity of sex, the terrors of the fire and faggot,
might have been such to have brought them to Apostasy, yet they confounded the
great Doctors and Rabbis when they were brought before them; they were able to
burn, though they could not dispute, they beheld things that were invisible. It
is an excellent thing not to take up the word upon notion, upon opinion, but to
have an established heart through grace. I shall direct you in two words.

1. Get the Lord by Prayer to teach you every truth what Jesus Christ teaches
once, is everlastingly taught; no word is abiding but what the Lord Jesus
teaches himself. Look as it is with Satan, when he comes to seduce men from the
truth, he will present such a fine notion without, and commonly he darts in
some dazzling light within, so that you never knew a Heretic take up a false
opinion, but it was with a mavelous deal of sweetness and comfort: so when
the Lord Christ teaches by his Spirit, he comes with that light, that
sweetness, savor, and relish of truth, as will be impossible for you to let it
go: Hence when Christ would confute the Pharisees, that had the witness of his
^ather in his works, he says, Ioh. 5. 37. Ye have neither ^ard his voice at
any time, nor seen his shape: It Is an excellent thing to see the shape, and
hear the voice of God.

2. Be well rooted upon Christ, or else you will never be established in any
truth of Christ: If you miss the Lord Jesus by the grace of Faith, you will
never hold fast the doctrine of Faith: you are built upon the doctrine of the
Apostles, (not their persons) upon which the Lord Jesus is the cornerstone: he
that does not know Jesus Christ himself, will certainly lose his faith: What is
the reason the stony ground in time of persecution fell away? why they had not
root, they were not planted upon the Lord Jesus.

Rule 3.
Thirdly, those truths that God has taught you, and those ways of worship God
has committed to you, love them as your lives, love them above your lives, for
no man will ever contend to hold them, if he do not love them; things of low
price and esteem are presently let go; he that loves the Word above his life,
will let life go rather then the Word: if you receive not the Word out of love,
every Impostor and false Prophet, every fear and terror of men will rob you of
it: Hide the word in thy heart, says Solomon, love the truth dearly. It was a
great speech of Calvin, Never did any one apostatize from the truths of Jesus
Christ, but it was because he did not love the truth: And I add this, That
never did any apostatize from the ways and truth of Jesus Christ, but it was
because they did not receive them in love, or else they have lost their love,
for there is a decay of affection, as well as having no affection: if you love
them, what will you not suffer for them? (but more of that by and by.)

Rule 4.
Fourthly, Guard all the truths of God, and those ways of God that have been
taught you; guard them strongly, especially truths that are most material and
fundamental: for leading truths are like Captains of Armies, if they be routed,
the whole rout follows them. There is great opposition that will be made
against your faith. The whole power of darkness, of Antichrist, of his seducing
spirits, likely and probably enough, will overspread the whole face of
Christianity once more, that she must sit as a Lady, before she be desolate and
forsaken for ever. The Apostle bids you beware of Dogs, beware of the
Concision, beware of evil-workers, guard your selves against them, guard the
truths you have learned by Argument, by Scripture, by Reason, that you may have
wherewithal to confute them by the word of truth mightily, out of the
Scripture, as the Apostles did.

Three things you are to guard against.

1. Your own deceitfulness, especially in a rash and sudden forsaking of those
ways that have been taught, and the profession you have taken up; for
Christians would never be so mad to Apostatize, were they but seriously
deliberate about the weight of them, Gal. 1. 6. O foolish Galathians, who has
bewitched you that you should not obey the truth? etc. I marvel what ailed you,
that you are so soon turned away to another Gospel: One would have thought they
might have spoken with Paul first, and sent to him, and reasoned the case with
him: There Is a mavelous bewitching in false Doctrines, and false Worship, to
take men presently, who are not watchful over themselves. It is in disputations
and practicing truth, as it is in contentions: if you make a Judgment before
you hear both parties speak, you judge unrighteously: if you forsake the ways
and truths of Jesus Christ, before you hear what can be said for them, you do
unrighteously.

2. Guard them against the lusts of your own hearts. The great work of a
Christian is contention; it is not so much against Antichrist; those that are
without him, as that that is within him. If all Heretical Doctrines and ways
were rooted out of the world, not only the being, but the memory, the heart is
bad enough in one day to set them all on foot again; therefore guard the truth:
Men of corrupt minds will presently grow Reprobate, as to the faith, 1 Timothy 3.
6. Such Doctrines and Worships as shall suit with our lusts, as shall suit with
exalting it self, and laying Christ low, as shall suit with an easy way to
Heaven, when the Scripture says, straight is the Gate; as shall suit with
self-preservation: So I might secure my Estate, my Liberty: I would suspect
such Doctrines as these, before I take them up for the ways of Christ.

3. Guard the truth against false teachers, such as shall come among you in
sheeps-cloathing, yet are Wolves in heart; men that creep in at unawares among
you, to subver^ souls: I will not here describe them, you know them well enough
by their fruits: only this let me tell you in opposition to those; though you
cannot come at the public Ministry, or those God has set over you, yet make
conscience for to take fences, to take defenses from them, as you may by their
counsel, prayer, help and assistance, for to guard you against false teachers.
When the Church of Christ is in the Wilderness, you will find this is that the
holy Ghost advises them to, Gant. 1. 8. You are to guard your selves by
communion one with another; as to go forth by the footsteps of the flock, so
also you are to go and feed your Kids besides the shepherds tents; for though
it is not the work that God calls for, to pin your faith upon their sleeves, yet
it is your duty to enquire of the Lord by them; for he is the messenger of the
Lord to you.

Rule 5.
Arm your selves with Resolutions to suffer for the faith of the Gospel, and
for the ways of Jesus Christ; as you should love the truth above your lives,
so labor to be made willing for to part with life, estate, liberty, any thing
for to keep the ways of Jesus Christ. It is not the honor of the Gospel of
Christ, to hear Christians to break out into murmurings, passions, discontent,
contentions that are carnal and sinful: your work is humbly, meekly, and
patiently to lie under the hand of God, and under the hand of man too, that
becomes Christians: suffering is that that will restore the glory of Religion,
that will keep the truth delivered to you, that will honor the cause of Christ
best of all: follow the example of blessed Paul; his expression is worthy of
consideration, 2 Timothy 2. 9. he gives a charge of Keeping and propagating one of
the most glorious truths, ( that Jesus Christ was risen from the dead) yet a
thing that is farthest off from sense and reason, ( wherein I suffer trouble)
mark, Paul does not say, wherein I make trouble, no, but wherein I suffer
trouble as an evil doer unto bonds, but the word of God is not bound: If this
blessed and glorious Apostle would have had the faith of God bound, and have
contented himself with sinful silence, and not propagated the Gospel, Paul
might have been free; but Paul would not have the word of God bound, therefore
Paul would suffer for it: Shall we go higher a great deal then this? You have
the glorious commendation of the Lord Jesus Christ upon this account, that he
gave a free and full account of the Doctrine of his Father, and of his glorious
person, before Pontius Pilate, a bloody Persecutor: It was not by saying to his
Disciples, Fight, nor by saying, my Kingdom is not of this world, but that he
gave a glorious confession before the face of Pilate of the righteousness of
his truth, Doctrine, Gospel, and of his person. Fear to ensnare the freedom of
the truth with your own liberty; do not ensnare it to your own lusts, nor to
the will of any man! O that we could study, and improve these Scriptures more!
it would make us fear God more, and man less; this is that that would make us
say as holy David, Ps. 119. 161. Princes have persecuted me without a cause,
but my heart stands in awe of thy words: for he that has the most fear fear
on you, and upon you, you will be more afraid to fall into his hands. It is a
childish thing for a Christian, to tread down the belief of any Doctrine, or
practice any worship for fear of man, who has no more power to hurt us, then
we give him our selves by our fear; Fear not him that can but kill the body,
etc. It was the way of Gods people formerly, that they came to divide between
duty commanded by God and commanded by man, you may read in all the days of
Antichrists persecution, from the beginning they came to divide in matter of
obedience to God and his truth, and worship and obedience to man. Christians,
nothing but a suffering spirit will help you to this, for there is no other way
of Obedience in this case to authority, but to suffer under it meekly;
Patiently, as lambs: This made the three children to divide between the command
of God: What says Nebuchadnezzer? Every knee that bows not, shall be cast into
the Furnace: very well, as for that matter say they, O King, we are not
careful to answer thee; for we will not bow down, etc. What, will they not
Obey him? yet they will obey him by suffering, as becomes Christians, as is the
example of Christ (as if they should say) Truly we are terrified with hell too:
We are terrified by the threats of the great King: and we are likewise
terrified by the threats of the great God: he is able to deliver us out of your
torments: you are not able to deliver us from his torments: so in the case of
Daniel: Arm your selves with this Resolution of suffering and lying down
patiently and meekly under those things that you cannot do, so that God may be
honored by your holy resolution upon this Account: for truly you never do
contend successfully for the faith of the Gospel, till you contend by
suffering, for it is said, They overcame by the blood of the lamb: you never
make Religion your business till the world see you can let such great things
go, as life, estate, liberty, to keep it: Then wisdom is justified of her
children: You never glorify the truths of God so much by practice, or writing,
as by suffering for them. Those glorious truths against Popish justification,
mixing of works with faith; Transubstantiation, Purgatory, Idol-worship,
against all those things that were superadded contrary to Gods justification,
there is such a glory upon the truths that it is hard for the Popish power ever
to darken them again, because we see them written in the honorable and blessed
scars of the witnesses, and burnings of those glorious Martyrs. If you would
take one another by the hand when God takes away our faithful guides, and say,
Brethren, Sisters, Friends, come let us hold together, there is no way in the
world to hold on together like suffering for the Gospel really would get more
advantage by the holy, humble sufferings of one gracious Saint, merely for the
word of righteousness, then by ten thousand Arguments used against Heretics,
and false worship. Compare Phil. 1. 12, 13, 14. with the 27, 28, and 29.
verses, How is Paul's bonds a furtherance of the Gospel? Paul no doubt was
called an evil doer, one that sowed Heresy, and was hated every where, (says
he) Many of the Brethren of the Lord waxed confident by my bands, and were much
more bold to speak the word without fear. Here Is the great encouragement: and
then he comes to give you a precept, and that is in the 27. verse, and he speaks
it as one that was leaving of them, Only let your Conversation be as becomes
the Gospel of Christ, that you may stand fast in one spirit, with one mind,
striving together for the faith of the Gospel, and in nothing terrified by your
Adversaries; for unto you it is given, not only to believe, but also to
suffer, etc. It is given to you as a duty, given to you as a privilege. O that
you would confirm one another, and in slippery times hold up one another by the
hand; do it in going after Gods call, and in this way, suffering for those
truths you cannot otherwise hold and maintain. Truly Christians, you had need
be armed with Resolution; for the world is always counting the things Gods
people have suffered, for very little, and they count it prudence not to meddle
therein. Those men that have easy, soft terms to comply, that they have a
latitude to do any thing, I believe some Christians are of that opinion* that
they would even think the Saints of God were ill advised, to venture their all
upon those truths they see others died and suffered for.

It Is a sad thing, many Christians study to draw out the lines of obedience as
far as the honesty of the times will give them leave, but no farther: that they
would go on with the Lord Jesus to the High Priests h^ll, and there deny him:
or that would be willing to do anything for Christ, but are willing to suffer
nothing for Christ: you very little honor Jesus Christ in this, and you will
very little honor your selves at the last. It is upon this account that
Christians if they see even against plain conviction of Conscience, and the
word, that there are super-instituted things broke in, as in Conscience they
cannot submit to, yet they can comply, why? they may be used lawfully, though
not superstitiously: But says the Apostle Paul, Do I yet strive to please men?
Gal. 1. 6. Am I then the Servant of Christ? You cannot be the Servants of
Christ, if you strive to please men: Woe be to you that please men, and
displease God: He that would be my Disciple, let him deny himself, and take up
his Cross, etc. (What Is that?) deny Wife, Children, Learning, Relations,
Comforts, he must be willing to go out of all: Those duties the Lord Jesus
Christ is most glorified in, they are either those your slothful hearts are
most unwilling to do; or that our fearful hearts are most unwilling to suffer
for: Therefore arm your selves with resolutions to suffer.

I intended to have taken up four Appearances and coverings that Saints usually
take up for to hide themselves, as under a covert, to beat down the Gospel
warrants and commands, to suffer for the Faith delivered.

1. The notion that a Christian has of indifferency of things, that they are
but toys and trifles, that they may be done or not done. It is not my work to
tell you what is indifferent, or name any thing in particular. As I remember,
in the Book of Martyrs the usual argument was, Why cannot you worship the Idol?
why cannot you bow down as well as others? it is a small matter: cannot you show
your outward reverence, and keep your heart to your self? Indeed if there were
any thing that is indifferent, a Christian has a mavelous latitude in point
of Doctrine, in point of Worship: I would caution you therefore. The term of
indifferent, I suppose it is devised as a pillar to rest the conscience on,
which otherwise would startle, and look with a broad face upon them: Things
that come under this notion, had need well to be weighed and considered: If
they tell you plainly they came out of Rome, and had the plague of Popery upon
them, they ^ame from Hell, were hatched there, and the curse of God is upon
them; no body would entertain them. They must pretend they came from the
Church, from the Apostles, descended from the Scriptures; and hence they are
entertained with that freedom and willingness, as that most Christians take no
notice, but fall down under them; and so the very power and life of Religion
and holy practice is eaten out. The Devil has three ways whereby he makes men
seek after him. 1. Commonly he does cover holiness with other names* 2ly. He
persuades that sins are but little. 3ly. That they may repent hereafter. The
first is suitable to my purpose, That virtue or grace is covered with other
names: therefore if a man be holy, he is called precise; if zealous, he is said
to be rash; and if it be really a sin, it shall come under the name of
indifferency, a toy, a trifle, and things of that nature: therefore you had
need be cautious; for it is no matter what name the sin is, what title it goes
under, as what it is really. As to things of Doctrine and Worship, I know there
is no medium; every man must give an account to the Lord of what he does,
therefore I do not tell you what is indifferent, and what not; but search the
Scripture, take heed what you receive for indifferent.

The second thing Christians will say, is, I hope without danger I may comply
with them, considering I bear them as my burdens. This is very like the Young
man in the Gospel; he came to Christ, and would have him come up to his terms;
and when Christ told him, Yet he lacked one thing, Go sell all, etc. he went
away sorrowful: So, many Christians they would follow Christ, but they cannot,
because there is not such security in it, but they will go away sorrowful: Thou
Hypocrite, art ^hou willing to forsake all for Christ, yet cannot leave life,
liberty, and some of these small things? Will you wound the name of Christ, and
pretend to be sorrowful for it? I conclude, thy pretense shall not excuse thee;
for so was Pilate loath to crucify Christ; and as a means and expedient, he
calls for water and washes his hands, saying, I am innocent from the blood of
this just man: But do you think God excused Pilate? no more will he you:
Whatever is brought to you, is either forbidden, or commanded by God: If
forbidden by God, why do you meddle with it? If commanded of the Lord, why are
you burdened with it? why do you it heavily? for the Lord loves one that is
cheerful in his service: neither man nor God is pleased with such.

A third thing it is which satisfies many, That they may follow in some things
the opinions of wise men, holy men, and good men; That they may do as they do.
I shall say but these two words. First, Many men are reputed good, wise, and
honest, that are not so. A man may be accounted an honest man, that yet may be
covetous: he may be accounted a very good man, yet be really corrupt in heart,
and in his lusts; therefore it is good to try men: I dare not trust mine own
heart, (unless God give strength of grace, and assistance every moment) least I
should betray the truth of Christ upon some advantage: when the Devil would set
abroach an evil opinion or practice, it is his common way to tun it up in some
clean Vessel, men of civil honesty and goodness. You read the old Prophet drew
the young one in, though expressly forbidden by God himself: When you do not
fear a young Christian, it may be the example of an old Minister shall draw
you; therefore it is good to mind who you follow. Secondly, Grant they are all
good and real, they are men fearing God, (as there are some) yet God will not
let his people know all his mind. There are some that would, but cannot know
all his mind and will; the Lord is free and voluntary, he reveals things
necessary to salvation; but for other things he withholds. But what is your
rule? Call no man Master: you are to follow no man further then he follows
Christ: And indeed for a man to follow the example of others, wherein they sin
and do not know it, it is just like the case of holy Noah (who was a gracious
man) and knew not the strength of the Grape) he was drunk with his own
Vineyard: But what is the fruit of it? His son Cham saw his nakedness and
discovered it: If good and holy men taste of the intoxicated Wine that is too
strong for them, and know it not, will you sip after them? unless you will
discover your nakedness, and proclaim it from generation to generation, and
make your selves Chams, not sons of the Prophet: Therefore I know not what
warrant you have to follow such examples.

The fourth thing is this; Christians usually they do no good by standing out.

Answ. Whether we get, or do good or no we are to do our duty. The Lord will
honor you for suffering for the truth, 2 These. 1. 3, 4, 5. And by suffering
you shall confirm the Saints, and bear testimony, you shall witness against all
false doctrines, and false Worship, before the whole world. By your humility
and patience, when you suffer not as evil doers, but as those that suffer for
the word of Righteousness, the word of Truth, for holding fast the Lord Jesus
and his Faith, that is more precious then Heaven and Earth, then any created
thing: this will make your name as a sweet savor to all generations; when
those that apostatize, persecute and oppose Jesus Christ, their memories shall
be left as a curse to the people of God.

Mr. Calamy's Sermon at Mr. Ashes Funeral.
Esaias 57. 1. The righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart, and
merciful men are taken away, none considering, that the righteous are taken
away from the evil to come.
WE are here met this Evening to perform the last Office of Love for an eminent
and ancient Servant of Jesus Christ, and excellent Minister of the Gospel, Mr.
Simeon Ash, one who has formerly performed this office for many other
Ministers, and now we are met to perform this office for him; and it is not
long before others will meet to perform the same office for us, so frail, so
brittle, and so uncertain is the life of man.

Now the Text that I have chosen, is suitable for this occasion; for this
Reverend Minister was first a righteous man; he was righteous in an Evangelical
sense, he was one that was justified and sanctified. Secondly; He was a
merciful man both in an active and passive sense; he was one that showed mercy
to the distressed Members of Jesus Christ, and he was one to whom God showed
mercy; this righteous and merciful man is now perished as to his outward
condition, not as to his everlasting condition; but as to his outward bodily
condition he is perished, and he is taken away: The word in the Hebrew is very
emphatical; Merciful men, Colliguntur, are gatheted; it is the same word that
is used concerning Josiah, 2 King, 22. 10* Thou shall be gathered to thy
fathers, and go to thy grave in peace, and shall not see the evil that I will
bring upon this Nation. This godly and righteous man is now gathered as ripe
Corn in the Barn of Heaven he is taken away from the evil that is to come, from
the beholding that evil that is coming upon the sinful World he is taken away
in mercy, that he may not be troubled with the troubles that are coming upon
many; he is taken away from the evil to come.

And thus you see how suitable the Text is to the occasion; there is only one
particular that I desire may prove unsuitable; for the righteous and merciful
man, in the Text, perishes, and no man considers, nor lays it to heart* These
words are verba Commentantis and objurgantis; the words of the Prophet
bemoaning the spiritual security of the people of Israel, chiding and reproving
them for their spiritual Lethargy. Now I desire that this part may not prove
suitable, but that all of you may lay to heart the death of this ancient,
merciful, righteous man

The observations from the words are these six.

First, That the righteous man must perish as well as the unrighteous.
Secondly, That the perishing of a righteous man is nothing but his gathering to
God, Christ, and the blessed company of Saints and Angels. Thirdly, That a
righteous man as long as he lives is the preservative of a Nation, and the
supporter of a Kingdom, the Chariots and horsemen of a Nation. Fourthly, The
death of a righteous man is a warningpiece from heaven, a Beacon set on fire to
give notice of evi^ approaching. Fifthly, That God does on purpose take away
righteous men, that they may not see the evil that is coming on a Nation.
Sixthly, That it is a great and common sin not to consider and lay to heart the
death of a righteous man.
First, It is a common sin, and therefore it is set down in the greatest
latitude; the righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart; that is, very
few: and merciful men are taken away, no man considering; that is, very few.

Secondly, It is a great sin, and therefore the Prophet Jeremy in the former
Chapter calls to all the Beasts of the Field to devour, that is, all the
Enemies of the Church to destroy the Children of Israel, because they drank
strong drink, filling themselves with merriment, and promised themselves happy
days, but did not consider that the righteous were taken away from the evil to
come.

I shall begin with the first, That the righteous perish as well as the
unrighteous.

How is it that the righteous perish? not in their soul, they cannot perish so;
nay, the truth is, they cannot perish properly in their bodies; for the bodies
of the Saints never totally and finally perish; for the very dust of the Saints
in the grave is precious in Gods sight, and they are asleep in Jesus, and by
the power of Jesus Christ they shall be raised again glorious bodies: Nothing
perishes of a righteous man by death totally and finally but sin, and
therefore the meaning of the word is, as Musculus and Justin Martyr observe
perit, perishes, that is, not according to the truth of the thing, but
according to the opinion of the world; and the proper language of this
expression is this, The righteous perish, that is, the righteous must die and
go down to the house of rottenness as well as others, and that upon a fourfold
account.

First, Because the righteous are included within the Statute of death as well
as the unrighteous; statutum est, Heb. 9. 27. It is appointed for all men once
to die, the righteous as well as the unrighteous. Indeed it is true, Jesus
Christ has taken away the hurt of death, but not death it self; Jesus Christ
has disarmed death, made death like the Viper that fastened upon Paul's hand,
but did not hurt him; he has made it like the brazen Serpent that has no
sting, but a healing power in it; Christ has sanctified death, conquered and
sweetened death; at present we are all under the statute of death, but at last
this enemy shall be destroyed, 2 Cor. 15. latter end.

Secondly, The righteous consist of perishing principles as well as the
unrighteous; the righteous are earthly vessels, made of dust, their foundation
is in the dust; their lives are a vapor as well as the lives of the
unrighteous.

Thirdly, The righteous must die as well as others, because they have a body of
sin that they carry about with them; for there is no man so wise, that lives
and sins not, Eccl. 7. 20. Wherefore there is that which deserves death in a
righteous man.

Lastly, and especially, The righteous must perish upon a peculiar account; For
if we had hope only in this life (says the Apostle) we are of all men most
miserable; and therefore they must perish to keep them from perishing; they
must say as Themistocles, Periissem nisi periissem; they must die, that they
may rest from their labor, for hera is not our rest, Mich. 2. 10. there
remains a rest for the people of God; there is no rest in this world; the
word [ quiet] wants the plural number.

Secondly, The righteous must die, that they may have their reward, their Crown
of glory that God has laid up for them; they must first fight the good fight,
and finish their course, and then they shall receive a Crown of glory.

Thirdly, They must die, that they may be free from sin; for they shall never
put off the body of sin, till they put off the body of flesh.

Fourthly, They must die, that mortality may be swallowed up of life, that
corruption may put on incorruption.

Fifthly, They must die, that they may be perfect in grace.

Lastly, They must die, that they may see God face to ^ce, and be for ever with
the Lord, which they cannot do till they die* therefore blessed be God that the
righteous must perish. If a man should bring news to a righteous man, That he
should always live on earth, always be young, rich, and healthful, it would
be unwelcome News; for while we are in the body we are absent from the Lord,
and subject to sin; and therefore when Peter asked Christ what should be done
with John, Christ ^ells him, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that
to ^ee? from henceforth there went a report abroad that John should not die,
John 21. 32. Now the Apostle himself was much displeased with this report, and
looked upon (...) as a geeat affliction that he should not die, and therefore
^e himself confutes it, But yet Jesus (said he) said not that he should not
die; as if he had said, God forbid that ^ should not die.

Before I come to the application of this Point, give me leave to speak
something to the second Point, and ^o I shall apply them both together.

The second Doctrine is this, That the perishing of a righteous man, is nothing
but a gathering of him to God, Christ, and the blessed Society of Saints and
Angels in Heaven.

This is contained in the second expression, merciful men are taken away; the
word in the Hebrew is Colliguntur, they are gathered, it is exegetical of the
former; ^hey did not perish, but they are gathered to God and Christ; there is
a great deal of excellency, and a Maga^ine of sweetness in this expression,
They are gathered: It ^mplies two things,

First, That the righteous are in a scattered condition while they are in this
world, and that three ways.

First, They are scattered among the wicked and ungodly of the world, as Sheep
among Wolves, as Limbs among Lions, rent and torn in pieces, forced to wander
up and down in Sheepskins, and Goat Skins.

Secondly, The righteous are scattered in the world one from another, and that
two ways: 1. They are scattered by their different habitations; for the godly
are forced to separate one from another, as Lot from Abraham. 2. They are
scattered one from another by the cruel persecution of wicked men; and
therefore you read Acts 8. that at that time when there was a persecution
against the Church at Jerusalem, that they were all scattered abroad.

Thirdly, The godly are scattered in this life from the glorious presence of
God in Heaven; indeed they are never scattered from the gracious presence of
God, but sometimes they are scattered from the comforting presence of God, and
as long as we live in this world we shall be scattered from the glorious
presence of God; for while we are in the body, we are absent from the Lord.

Secondly, This implies a bringing of Gods people out of this scattered
condition; it is a gathering of the righteous out of this world into another,
from a sinful persecuted world into a sinlesse glorious world, from diversity
of dwelling on earth, to dwell altogother in one heaven* it is a gathering them
out of the reach of men and devils: a gathering them not only to the gracious,
but to the glorious presence of God and Christ, and to the souls of just men
made perfect, and to the general assembly of the firstborn, and to the City of
the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, where they shall live together, never
to be scattered again. To understand this the better, let me offer three things
to you, showing you that the godly are gathered to God three ways: In this
life, at death, and at the day of judgment.

First, The righteous are gathered to God in this life, and that is at their
first conversion; for by nature we are all Aliens and strangers to God,
scattered from any union or communion with God; not only scattered from the
glorious, but from the gracious presence of God. God made man at first to enjoy
communion with himself; but Adam lost this by his sin, and now we are all Cains
and Vagabonds, scattered from the love of God, and from union and communion
with God; but when God converts any of the Elect, he gathers them home to
himself; for conversion is nothing but Gods gathering them to himself in the
second Adam, that were scattered from him in the first Adam; the first Adam was
a root of scattering, a root of separation from God; but the second Adam was a
root of union and conjunction. Christ is the head, and all the Elect are all
gathered together in him, Ephesians. 1. 10. that he might gather together in one
all things in Christ; so that conversion is nothing but a gathering of the
Elect of God to Christ by faith, and a gathering to one another by love and
charity.

Secondly, Gods people are gathered at death; here they are gathered to Christ
by grace, but at death they are gathered to Christ in glory; here they are
gathered to God by hope, but at death by fruition; here Christ is gathered to
us, he comes down and dwells with us, but at death we shall be gathered to him,
we shall go up, and ^e joined with him. There is a great deal of difference
between esse cum Christo, and esse in Christo; esse cum Christo, to be one with
Christ is a Christians great security; but esse in Christo, to be one in
Christ, it is a Christians great felicity: In this life we are gathered to God
by ^aith, but at death by vision.

Lastly, We shall be gathered to God at the day of Judgment, it is called the
day of the gathering of the Saints together; a day when all the Saints that
are, have been, or shall be, shall all be gathered together. 2 These. 2. 1. I
beseech you brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our
gathering together unto him at the great day: At the day of judgment we shall
all be gathered together, and shall be all taken up to Heaven, I mean all the
Righteous, and be ever with the Lord: And so much for the opening of the
Doctrine.

But here it may be objected, Are not the unrighteous gathered by death as well
as the righteous?

I answer, it is true, the unrighteous are scattered in this life, and gathered
by death as well as the righteous, but with a great deal of difference.

First, The wicked are scattered in this life, but they are scattered from God;
but the godly are scattered for God, and for a good Conscience many times, as
they at Jerusalem were scattered. The godly are scattered from the glorious
presence of God in Heaven, but the wicked are scattered from the gracious
presence of God on earth. Again, the scattering of the wicked is a curse to
them, and it is threatened as a curse, Levit. 26. 32. I will scatter you among
the heathen, and draw out my sword after you: And wherever the wicked come, in
what part soever of the world the wicked are scattered, they bring the curse of
God with them, and they bring the Judgments of God on Towns or Cities where
they are, as Plague, Famine, and Sword, and all miseries. But the godly when
they are scattered, they are scattered as a blessing, into what Country or
Town soever they come, they come as a blessing, they come like a ship laden
with Corn, to a Town ready to perish with Famine* they come as a blessing four
ways.

First, By their Prayers, to pray down a blessing on the place where they come.

Secondly, They come as a blessing by their holy life and conversation; that is
a Loadstone to draw others to holiness.

Thirdly, They come as a blessing by their holy advice and counsel that they
give to the place where they come.

Nay fourthly, their very presence is a blessing: as long as Lot was in Sodom,
Sodom could not be destroyed: so long as Paul was in the Ship, the three
hundred could not be drowned. So that the godly come as a blessing wherever
they are scattered, but the wicked are as chafe scattered by the wind, and
they are scattered as the dust of the earth. You know when the dust is
scattered it gets into men's eyes, and blinds them, and falls upon their
clothes, and sullies and defiles them; so the wicked wherever they are
scattered, they defile the place where they are scattered. The godly are as
Planets, that wander and move from one part of Heaven to another, carrying
light to the world.

Secondly, As the wicked are scattered while they live, so when they die they
are gathered; it is true. But how? Not to God, and Christ, and his Angels, but
they are gathered to the Devil and his Angels, and to damned spirits; not as
bundles of Wheat into the Barn of Heaven, but as bundles of Tares to be burned
for ever in everlasting fire.

Now, if the righteous perish as well as others, and if their perishing be
nothing but a gathering to God and Christ: Then

First, Learn hence the preciousness of every righteous man; the great God will
not gather things of no value: great men do not use to gather chafe and straw;
and therefore when God says of Josiah, I will gather thee to thy fathers, it
was a sign he was a precious Pearl, worth the gathering, and of a high value
and account in the sight of God; and so is every true Child of God*s right
dear and precious are they in the sight of God, both living and dying; they are
bought with a great price, not with gold and silver, and other corruptible
things, but they are bought with the precious blood of the Son of God: They are
as precious to God as the apple of his eye; so precious, that he has given
Christ for them, and to them; so precious, that he called them his Jewels, his
peculiar treasure, his Iedidiahs, and therefore God will not suffer them to
perish, but gather them to himself before the evil day come, as the Husbandman
gathers in the Corn before the beasts go out into the field.

Secondly, Learn here what reason we have to be comforted in the death of a
righteous man or woman* because their death is not a perishing, but a gathering
to God, and Christ, and the society of Saints and Angels. The death of a
righteous man is no more, then if a Merchant that has abundance of Jewels in a
far Country, he should send for them home. Why death to a righteous man is
nothing but Gods sending for his Jewels home. Such a phrase there is in Mal. 3.
17. In the day that I make up my Jewels they shall be mine. In this life they
are imperfect Jewels; they are like Gold in the oar mingled with a great deal
of dross, and death is nothing but a perfecting of these Jewels; death is
nothing more; and God does nothing by death, but, as a Gold-finder, gather up
all his ends of gold and silver: It is nothing but just as if a Father should
send for his Son home that had been a long while absent from him to his own
house; it is a carrying us to our Fathers house: And therefore let us be
comforted when our righteous Friends die; though their death be matter of
sorrow to us, in regard of the loss that we sustain by their death; and
because their death is a warning-piece of evil to come; yet in regard of them
we have no cause to mourn. I speak this to those that are related to the
righteous when they die: Did you ever see a Husbandman that mourned for the
carrying of corn into the Barn? or a Jeweller mourn for making up of his
Jewels? Let us mourn rather that we are left scattered among the wicked of the
earth, and from the glorious presence of God and Christ: and let us mourn for
those that are scattered from Christ, and from grace; and for those, that
whilst they live are scattered, and when they die are gathered to the Devil
and his Angels. Let us not mourn for those that die in Christ, but let us mourn
for those that live out of Christ; let us not mourn over the body that the soul
has left, but let us mourn over the soul that God has left.

The third Use is of Consolation to all the people of God, in reference to evil
times that are coming upon us, or to the evil of times. Whatever befalls a Child
of God in this life, though he be scattered by wicked men from England into
foreign Countries, though be wander up and down in Deserts and Wildernesses,
though he be scattered from house to prison, yet there will be a gathering time
shortly, there will a time come when all the Saints shall be gathered to
Christ, and to one another, never to part any more. The death of Gods people is
not a perishing, but a gathering; comfort your selves therefore with these
words against the fear of death, look upon death as a gathering, as a gathering
to Christ: You are here as Daniel in the Lions Den, as Jeremiah in the Dungeon;
yet there will come a gathering; and if you dye in a good cause, you shall not
perish, but be gathered to Christ, to his Saints and Angels.

But you will say, If I were sure when I die, that I should be gathered to
Christ, to live for ever with him, this would be matter of great consolation to
me; but you told me, the wicked are gathered by death as well as the godly; how
shall I know whether (when I come to dye) I shall be gathered to the Devil and
his Angels, or to Christ and his Angels? How shall I know whether I shall be
gathered at death as a bundle of tares to be burned in Hell, or as a bundle of
Wheat to be carried up into the Barn of Heaven?

I answer, you may know it by four things.

First, If you are righteous, then you shall be gathered to Christ at death;
for the righteous shall go into everlasting life: Heaven is entailed upon
righteous men; by righteousness I mean the imputed righteousness, and the
imparted righteousness of Jesus Christ: I wave the explication of them, because
time will not give leave. Know you not (says the Apostle) that no unrighteous
man shall inherit the Kingdom of God? Damnation is entailed upon unrighteous
men.

Secondly, If you are merciful; the merciful man shall be gathered to Christ:
If you are one that is full of bowels of compassion to the distressed Members
of Jesus Christ, for Christ has said it, Blessed are the merciful, for they
shall obtainmercy. Now if you are hard-hearted, covetous, worldly-minded,
remember that Text, He shall have judgment without mercy, that shows no mercy.

Thirdly, He that is gathered to the second Adam by faith in this World, shall
certainly be gathered unto Christ by vision in the other World; Christ Jesus
will save all his Members; and you must know, that Faith is a transplanting
Grace; it is not only a heart-purifying, but a World overcoming Grace, it takes
a man out of the old Adam, and puts him into the new Adam, it takes a man out
of the root of scattering, and puts him into the root of union and conjunction:
wherefore you that are now joined to Christ by faith here, shall be joined to
Christ in glory hereafter: But now you that are Vagabonds, Cains and Aliens
from the life of God, and from the life of Grace: You that are wooden members,
wooden legs in Christ's body, that have no real conjunction with Christ, you
shall not be gathered to him in glory.

Lastly, If you are gathered here to the Saints by love, then you shall be
gathered to the Saints in Heaven, and to the everlasting enjoyment of God with
them to all Eternity. Consider this; Every man shall be gathered (when he dies)
to those whom he delights, and chooses to keep company with while he lives in
the world: if you are gathered to the wicked in love and affection here, you
shall be gathered to them at death in Hell and destruction; for it is pity
companions should be parted: Wheat must to Wheat, and Tares to Tares; for Wheat
and Tares shall not be bound together at the last day.

The last Use is of Exhortation: If the righteous must perish, and if their
death be nothing but a gathering, then take this threefold Exhortation.

First, Let us labor to make the best use we can of our godly friends and
Ministers before they are gathered, let us do as Elisha did; he was told that
his Master Elijah was to be taken up to Heaven, and therefore he would never
leave him till he had got the spirit of Elijah doubled upon him: If Elisha had
not thought that Elijah would have been taken up that day, he would never have
followed him so punctually and inseparably as he did. O beloved, did you
believe that text, Zach. 1. 5. of which we have often had experience, Your
Fathers where are they? and the Prophets, do they live for ever? Indeed if they
did live for ever, we might get good from them when we please, because we are
sure never to lose them; but they live not for ever, but must perish, and be
taken up to Heaven: And therefore whilst we have them, let us make what use we
can of them, before they be taken away from us. It is a great fault among the
people of God, that they make no more use of their godly Friends und Ministers.
I have known many that have godly Relations that have died, that it has been
the greatest burden on their Consciences, that they got no more good by those
godly Relations while they lived. Many of us deal with our Ministers as we do
with a strange sight that is to be seen near our doors, we are not much; we are
not much solicitous when we see it; but a stranger that comes from a far
Country, is curious and very careful presently to see it. So do we in this
City especially; I have had experience of it by being here many years,
strangers that come out of the Country, many times get that good by a Minister,
that his own people do not, because they think their Minister is continually
with them: But a stranger knows he is there but for a day, and he hears so,
that he carries Christ home with him, and a great deal of consolation also.
Beloved, this is a great fault; I beseech you remember, the righteous must be
gathered; let us therefore do with them as we do with Books that are borrowed;
if a man borro us a Book, he knows he must keep it but for a day or two, and
therefore he will be sure to read it over; whereas if the Book be a man's own,
he lays it aside, because he knows he can read it at any time. Remember, your
Ministers are but lent you, they are not your own, and you know not but God may
take your Elijahs from you this night: Therefore make what use you can of them,
while you have them.

2dly. Must the righteous be taken away? Then let the righteous make conscience
of doing what good they can before they are taken away. Beloved; if it were
possible for the godly to grieve in Heaven, this would be their greatest
sorrow, that they have done God no more service here upon Earth. Be wise for
God, O ye righteous; do as old men do that have rich places and offices; they
labor to buy the reversion of their places for their Children; so must you to
whom God has given great gifts and graces, labor to propagate your gifts and
graces, that there may be no loss by your death. Observe the c^re of S. Paul
the aged in his exhortations to Timothy, 2 Timothy 4. 5, 6. Watch thou in all
things, endure afflictions, do the work of an Evangelist, make full proof of
thy Ministry; why so? for I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my
departure is at hand; and therefore work thou, see that thou endure affliction,
preach the Gospel as becomes a Minister of the Gospel, that there may be no
loss by my departure, so in 2 Timothy 2. 2. The things that thou have heard of me
among many Witnesses, the same commit thou to saithful men, that shall be able
to teach others also. Has God committed any thing to you? a treasure of
Learning or Grace; commit it to young Ministers, that they may commit it to
others, that so there may be a succession of gifts and graces. Do as Physicians
do, that labor to communicate their skill to their children and to others; so
should we, that so there may be a succession of godly ones, that godliness may
be entailed upon us and our Relations.

Thirdly and lastly, Let us all labor to be such, that when we dye, when we
come to be gathered, we may be gathered to Christ and his Angels, and not to
the Devil and his Angels. And for that purpose, let us labor to be merciful
and righteous, and let us be gathered to Christ by faith, and to one another by
love and dear affection, and then we shall be gathered at the great day to
Christ, and the blessed company of Saints and Angels.

There are four observations yet behind, but I must wave them at this time.

I have now another Sermon to preach, and I cannot without injury to you that
are alive, and without wrong to the memory of my dearly beloved Brother, but
speak something of him at whose Funeral we are met this evening, not so much
for his commendation, he needs it not, but for our imitation; it is pity,
great pity something should not be said, that this Reverend Minister, though
dead, may yet preach this night; and I have so much to say of him, that I know
not where to begin; and when I have begun, I hardly know how to make an end. I
must confess, the little time allotted me for the providing for this solemn
Work, and the necessary avocations in this little time, have hindered me from
informing my self about his breeding and manner of education at Emanuel
College under Mr. Stooker, and his excellent carriage and converse with Mr.
Hildersam, Mr. Dod, Mr. Ball, Mr. Langley, and other Ministers famous in their
generations; and the many pressures and hardships that he suffered in those
parts and times, for the keeping of his Conscience pure from that which he
counted sin, and therefore I must draw a vail over that part of his life, and
confine my discourse only to the time since his coming to live with us in
London, which is about the space of twenty two, or three and twenty years; all
which time, I have had the happiness to be intimately acquainted with him,
insomuch as that I can freely and clearly profess, and that with a sad heart,
that I, and many others, have lost a real, wise, and godly friend, brother, and
fellow laborer in the Lord j the Church has lost an eminent member, and
choice pillar: and this City has lost an ancient, faithful, and painful
minister, who by his prayers and holy life, did seek to keep off the Judgments
of God from falling upon us; and the less sensible the City is of this loss,
the greater is the loss. I fear we may too truly repeat the words in the Text,
The righteous perishes, and no man lays it to-heart; and merciful men are
taken away, none considering that the righteous are taken away from the evil to
come. I have read of Philo the Jew, and by chance met with the same in the life
of S. Ambrose, that when they came to any City or Town, and heard of the death
of any godly man, though never so poor, they would both of them mourn
exceedingly, because of the great loss that place had by the death of that
godly man, and because it was a warning-piece from God of evil approaching. But
we have had many godly men, and godly ministers, taken away of late, and yet I
fear me, but few lay it to heart; and therefore as I said, the loss is the
greater to this City, because it is so little sensible of it. It is a great
loss also to his relations; his wife has lost a dear and loving husband, his
sister a dear brother, his parish and congregation a faithful pastor.

The ministerial excellencies of many ministers were collected and concentred
in one Simeon Ash; he was a Bezaleel in Gods tabernacle, a master builder, an
old disciple, a Polycarp, a Christian of long standing in the school of Christ,
a burning and a shining light, one whom many ministers and other good
Christians called father, insomuch that it was a common proverb in this City,
father Ash; and I believe, many experimentally lament over him, as the King did
over the Prophet Elisha; My father, my father, the chariots of Israel and the
horsemen thereof! For he lived desired, and died lamented; not only in the
City, but I believe in very many places in the Country where he was known. But
more particularly, there were twelve excellencies that I observed in this
Reverend Minister, and my dear brother, that were as twelve Jewels or precious
pearls in that crown with which God had crowned him: I shall name them for your
imitation and benefit, he needs them not, for he is above our Eulogy.

The first and chief Jewel that did beautify and adorn this our brother, was
his sincerity and uprightness of heart, which indeed is not a single grace, but
the soul of all grace, and the interlineary that must run through all grace:
for what is faith if it be not unfeigned? what will love to God profit you if
it be not without dissimulation? what is repentance worth if it be not in
truth? as the body without the soul is a rotten carcass, so is all grace
without sincerity; this is the soul of all grace, this is the girdle of truth.
Sincerity is that which girts all our spiritual armor together, and makes them
useful; what advantage is it to have the breast plate of righteousness, the
shield of faith, the helmet of hope, if they be but painted things? it is the
girdle of sincerity that makes all the other parts of our armor useful. Now
this excellent grace of sincerity was eminent in this our dear brother; he was
a true Nathanael, in whom there was no guile; I mean, no allowed hypocrisy;
and this was that which carried him throuoh the pangs of death with a great
deal of comfort; for he was able to say with Hezekiah, Remember, O Lord, how I
have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart. He could say with
Paul, This is my rejoicing, the testimony of my conscience, that in simplicity
and godly sincerity, I have had my conversation in the world.

Secondly, another Jewel was his humility; this is a grace that he was clothed
withal, and it is a rare grace; for God dwells with the humble; he resists the
proud, but he gives grace to the humble. This reverend Minister was low in his
own eyes, and therefore very high in Gods eyes; he had a mean esteem of
himself, and therefore he was in high esteem with God. He was as Jacob said of
himself, less then the least of Gods mercies, and therefore he was made
partaker of the best of Gods mercies. He was like an ear of corn full of fruit,
bowing down in thankfulness to God.

Thirdly, another Jewel was the fruitfulness of his discourse, for it may be
said of him, as it was of Christ, he went about doing good; wherever he went he
scattered his goodness; this all that knew him, know to be true. He was full of
good discourse wherever he came. When I was with him in his sickness, he took
occasion to complain much, and not without just cause (God grant his complaint
may make impression upon our hearts) he complained that it was a great fault
among Ministers, that when they met together, they discoursed no more of
Christ, of Heaven, and of the concernments of the other world; and professed,
that if God should restore him, he would be more careful in his discourse, and
more fruitful then ever yet he had been.

Fourthly, another Jewel that beautified this righteous man, was his
mercifulness: He was a merciful man, which he manifested, not only in his
charity to the Members of Jesus Christ, but in his frequent visiting of sick
persons, and persons that needed his spiritual Physic. I know not any Minister
in the City more careful in visiting the sick, then he was.

Fifthly, another Jewel was his prudence and spiritual wisdom; he was not only
a pious and godly, but a wise and prudent Minister, that had zeal for God, but
knew how to mingle his zeal with discretion; discretion indeed without zeal is
nothing but carnal policy; but zeal without discretion is nothing but frantic
fury; discretion without zeal will quickly eat out the heart of religion, and
eat religion out of the heart. Zeal without discretion is not a coal from the
Altar, but a coal kindled by the wild fire of passion, that is able to set a
Nation on fire; but this Reverend Minister had zeal sweetly tempered with
discretion.

Sixthly, another Jewel was his patience; God (...) pleased to exercise him
with long and great afflictions by reason of the Gout, that did often,
especially of late years affix him to his bed, and afflict him with great pain;
but God was pleased to put his everlasting Arms underneath him, supporting him
under all his pains, and giving him a great measure of patience, insomuch that
in patience he did possess his soul, and patience had its perfect work in him.

The seventh Jewel was his high valuation of Jesus Christ; a written copy for
us to follow; and for you his people also. Being with him in his last
sickness, he exhorted me and other Ministers to preach much of Jesus Christ,
and to speak to him of Jesus Christ; and he said, When I consider my best
duties, I sink, I die, I despair; but when I think of Christ, I have enough, he
is all and in all. I think these were his very words. I desire (said he) to
know nothing but Jesus Christ, and him crucified: I account all things dung and
dross that I may be found in Christ. To this effect he spoke in the morning
before the evening in which he died, speaking much of Jesus Christ.

Eighthly, another Jewel was his diligence in preaching the Gospel in season
and out of season; in the time of his health he was a painful, laborious
Preacher; one that did not preach to tickle the ear, to wound the heart; not to
please, but to profit; not seeking the applause of the people, but the
salvation of their souls: This all know to be true.

Ninthly, another Jewel that did beautify and adorn this Reverend Minister,
was his excellent gift in prayer, and herein he was very eminent, and did
exceed many, nay I may say most of his brethren: As Apollos was mighty in the
Scriptures, so was he (as you all know) mighty in prayer; he was a Jacob, very
skilful in wrestling with God, like Moses he often stood in the gap, and at
^ost Fasts in the time of his health, he was the Mini^r that was chosen to
conclude with prayer; and this ^rightens the loss that we sustain by the death
of this godly Minister, because we have lost the benefit of his prayers, which
is an invaluable loss; for though I doubt not but he prays in heaven for the
Church in general, yet I believe he prays not for any in particular, as not
knowing what our condition is, For Abraham knows us not, for the Saints in
heaven know not what is done upon earth. The loss therefore is the greater,
because we have lost not only a preaching, but a praying Minister: And give me
leave to add, that this excellency in this Minister, is sufficient to prove, 1.
That there is a gift of prayer, which some against all reason do deny. 2. That
conceived prayers when uttered by one that has the gift of prayer, are not
vain To^tologies, or empty repetitions, and a rate of nonsense; as some
unjustly charge men with; but they are the breathings of Gods spirit, that
pierce not only into the ears and hearts of the hearers, but into the ears and
heart of God himself.

Tenthly, the next Jewel was, he had great acquaintance and communion with God;
for he was of a long standing in the School of Christ, and a good proficient in
that School. Much acquaintance he had with God, he was often in the Mount with
God, and came down with his face shining, though he in his modesty did not see
it; and when he came to die, he was able to say as Dr. Preston did when he lay
a dying, I shall change my place, but not my company.

Eleventhly, another Jewel was his comfortable passage out of this world, dying
with a great deal of calmnesse and serenity upon his Conscience; The morning
before he died, I heard him say these words, It is one thing to speak of
Christ, and of Heaven, and another thing to feel the consolations of Christ and
of Heaven as I do, clapping his hand on his breast. Another time I heard him
say, The comforts of a holy life are real, soul-supporting, and that he felt
the reallity of those comforts, and that by him we might know it was not in
vain to serve God. And I cannot forget his speech the morning before he died, I
am a little strained, but I care no more for my life, then I do for this
fillip: That which was said of old Simeon, Luke 2. may be said of this Reverend
Minister, Mr. Simeon Ash, who was a Simeon, a just and devout man, an old
Servant of. Jesus Christ, one that waited for the consolation of Israel; one
that dyed, though not with Christ in his bodily Arms, yet with Christ in the
Arms of his Faith: and when he died, could say as it is there, Now Lord,
let thou thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation.

Lastly, another Jewel was his constancy and perseverance; he was not a Reed
shaken with every wind, but as firm as a Rock, an immovable Pillar in Gods
House: he was unchangeable in changeable times; in Religion he was a house
built on a Rock, not on the sand: and as he lived, so he dyed holily, even as
the ancient Patriarks that dyed in the Faith, and endured faithfully unto the
death.

Now this excellent Minister of Christ thus beautified with these Jewels, is
now perished as to his outward man, gathered to God to Christ, and the blessed
company of Saints and Angels. The application that I shall make of this
Discourse is this,

1. To us Ministers. 2. To you of this Parish and Congregation.
First to us Ministers. God has of late years taken to himself many famous
men: Seven of the Lecturers of Cornhill are dead, Mr. Buroughs, Dr. Bolton,
Mr. Sedg^wick, Mr. Whitaker, Mr. Cranford, Mr. Vines, and now Mr. Ash. I might
name many other excellent Ministers that are dead, as Dr. Gouge, Mr. Walker,
Mr. Gataker, Mr. Marshal, Mr. Robinson, and lately Mr. Cook, with many more:
Now all these are warning-pieces from heaven of judgments approaching; For the
righteous perish, and no man lays it to heart; and merciful men are taken away,
none considering that the righteous are taken away from the evil to come. Thus
Methuselah dyed a year before the Flood: now Methuselah in Hebrew signifies a
Messenger of death. Thus Austin dyed a little before Hippo was taken; and
Pareus a little before Hiddleburge was taken, and Luther a little before the
Wars in Germany began The death of the godly is like the separating of the
Israelites from the tents of Corah and his company, like the taking of Lot out
of Sodom. When the Israelites departed from Corah and his company, the earth
swallowed them up: and when Lot departed out of Sodom, God rained down fire,
and brimstone upon them. Let the thoughts of these things cause us to provide
our Arks, to get our Zoar's. Let it teach young Samuels to rise up in the room
of old Elyes; young Elisha's in the room of old Elijahs: and young Timothies in
the room of Paul the aged; that there may be a succession of Gospel Ministers
to hold forth the Word of life to this Nation. And let us labor to be
inheritors of of these twelve Excellencies, that beautified this our reverend
Brother.

Secondly, Let me speak a few words to you of this Parish, the Auditors of this
worthy Minister. There is scarce one man of a hundred that understands the tie
and obligation that is betwixt a Minister and his people. O the love and
affection that ought to be betwixt them! Paul ^ells the Galatians, that they
could a plucked out their eyes for him if need were. Chrysostom tells us, that
when Mile^ was taken away by death from his people, their hearts sunk with
sorrow; and such love had they to him, that they called all their children by
his name, and got his picture engraven on their rings. And I have read of
Chrysostom, that when he was banished from his people, there was not a corner
in the City, but was full of people weeping and lamenting. The loss of a godly
Minister is a public loss, therefore there ought to be public mourning; it
is a soullosse, and therefore, methinks, every one of you should weep and
mourn; you have lost your common father; you of this congregation have lost
your spiritual father, your spiritual shepherd; you have lost your eyes, your
guide; and indeed it is you that are his flock that must commend your Minister,
by practicing that which he preached: said the Apostle, 2 Cor. 3. 1. Do we
again begin to commend our selves, or need we, as some others, Epistles of
commendation to you, or letters of commendation from you? Ye are our Epistles
written in our hearts, known and read of all men. As if the Apostle should say,
do we need letters of commendation? is it necessary that we should spend time
in commending our ministry; you are out letters of commendation, your holiness
and piety commends a Minister above all other things. As when a man comes into
an Orchard or Vineyard, said Chrysostom, and sees every thing skilfully
handled, and neatly ^fimmed, he need not spend time in commending the
Vine-dresser, or Carpenter, the work it self commends them. So ought it to be
among you: when we preach the Funeral Sermons of Ministers, we must look into
his Parish or Congregation, and see what letters of commendation there are;
whether the proficiency of the Auditors commend their Ministers. I grant, it is
not always true, God does not always give success to a godly Minister, but
the worst is yours; I had almost said the curse is yours, but I will speak
modestly, the worst is yours. Tell me how many of you are able to say, I bless
God that ever such a Minister was sent among us; blessed be God that ever we
heard him preach; what seal of his ministry is there here among you? he was in
another, and another place in this City, and it may be here are people from all
places that have been his Auditors; what seal of his ministry is there now to
be found among you? how many souls has he plucked out of the snares of the
devil? how many of you have gone away weeping from a Sermon, knocking your
breasts and pricked at the hearts for sin, crying out, Men and Brethren, what
shall we do to be saved? your tears and mourning for sin, these are the
Auditors that commend your Ministers. Go home now, and think with your selves,
what can I remember of all the Sermons that I have heard from Mr. Ash! and give
me leave to tell you, woe be to you, if as your Minister be dead, so all the
Sermons that he made die with him: For as Abel being dead yet speaks, so
shall the Sermons of this worthy Minister, at the great day speak for you, or
against you, for they are spiritual talents that God has betrusted you with,
and you must be accountable, both he and you shall appear before the Tribunal
of God; your Minister shall be examined how he can free himself from the guilt
of soul-blood, and you shall be examined, what fruit you have brought forth,
answerable to the means that you have enjoyed; and if it appear that you have
been unprofitable and unfruitful hearers, Christ will say, Cast the
unprofitable servant into utter darkness. But I hope better things of you, and
things that accompany salvation. Whatever was good in this reverend Minister,
let it live in you; and though he be dead, yet let not his Sermons that he
preached die with you, but let them be in you, that at the great day, when he
and you appear before God, he may be able say, Here am I, and the Children that
thou have given me.

Dr. Horton's Sermon at Mr. Nalton's Funeral. Rich Treasure in Earthen Vessels,
etc.
2 Cor 4. 7. But we have this Treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency
of the power may be of God, and not of us.
THere is nothing so excellent or complete in this world, but has its
diminishment and qualifications, and something that does disparage it, and
abates of the excellency thereof; not the things of this world only, but
spiritual things in some sort, as to enjoy them, and partake of them in this
life, have their inconveniences and disparagement annexed, and are mingled with
something that abates of their worth: an instance of which we have here in this
present Scripture, which the Apostle Paul signifies to us concerning the
enjoyment of the Ministry of the Gospel of Christ. He had in the verse before
the Text, told us the great privilege that both Ministers and others had in
having the glorious Gospel: viz. The light of the knowledge of the glory of God
in the face of Jesus Christ, shining into our hearts, the consideration of
which is of great encouragement to us: yet adds this as a qualification of it,
viz. But we have this treasure in earthen vessels, etc. That which does
qualify it, is, That this excellent treasure has its conveyances through weak
and mean persons, men of frailty and mortality. In the words there are two main
parts. I. The Dispensation it self. II. The Account of it.


I. The Dispensation it self, This Treasure we have in earthen Vessels, etc.
II. The account of it, That the excellency of the power may be of God, and not
of us.

I shall begin with the first, the Dispensation it self, which has two
branches. 1. The Depositum, the thing laid up. 2. The Repository in which this
Treasure is laid up.



First, The Depositum, or thing laid up, which is a Treasure; and what is this
Treasure, but the Gospel of Jesus Christ? The Gospel is a Treasure according to
a twofold consideration:

In respect of the 1. Matter of it. 2. Ministry of it.


Both make up a treasure. The Matter of it, the things of the Gospel are rich
things, and the conveyances of it; the Ministerial gifts and ability, by which
the Gospel is administered, do make up the Treasure: It Is a treasure in both
respects.

2. In respect of the matter of it: therefore it is we read of the Riches of
Christ, of the Riches of the Gospel. The Scripture makes mention of three
things wherein the Gospel is agreeable to a treasure.

2. A Treasure is a thing of dignity and worth, it is not a company of pebbles
(though many) that will make up a Treasure: a Treasure consists of things of
worth and dignity: and thus is the Gospel: in it are contained excellent and
admirable truths, the Mysteries of salvation by Christ: the doctrine of the
Gospel brings glad tidings of peace and reconciliation with God in Christ:
there we have the gifts and graces of God, there we have glory and immortality,
etc. and those things in the Gospel Gospel are administered to us: there is no
science in the world brings such treasure as this.

2. The Gospel is a treasure for variety, abundance, and plurality. It Is not
one thing of worth, but many that makes up a treasure: if few, yet much worth
must be comprehended in them; so in the Gospel we have the manifold wisdom of
God, the rich Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge. The Gospel, though it be but
one for substance, yet it is many for improvements; it is a chain of many links,
one says, but diverse articles of it; so it is a treasure in that respect.

3. It Is a treasure for its closeness; we do not open a treasure to every one,
but it is kept close, The Gospel is a secret mystery, hidden not revealed to
every one: it is not discovered to carnal worldly men, though it may be
revealed to them in the outward proposition, yet not in the spirituality of it.
But where shall wisdom be found? and where is the place of understanding?
says I^b chapter 28. v. 12. The peace of the Gospel is a treasure hid in the
field, not found by every one.

2. The Gospel is a treasure in respect of the Ministry of it; so the Apostle
hints, it is not only light, but a shining light, which has shining into our
hearts to give the light of the knowledge of the Glory of God, etc. It Is a
treasure in this respect, viz. in the discovery and shining of it, the
conveyances, the several gifts and graces of the Ministry, by which the Gospel
is conveyed to us, makes up a treasure, and as the Ministry is a treasure, so
the opportunities and advantages thereof are. Thus the Gospel and the Ministry
thereof is precious, and ought to be esteemed and made use of by us. We should
highly account of the Gospel, and put a high value on it, for it is a treasure;
yea, it is a treasure in the want of other treasures, they are rich that are
made partakers of it: Silver and gold have I none, (says St. Peter to the
Cripple) but such as I have I give it thee: this is the privilege of
Ministers; though it may be, poor in respect of themselves, yet are rich to
others. These excellent riches are committed to us, and accordingly we must not
only make use of them our selves, but make them known to others; the Gospel is
a treasure not for us to keep, but to discover, reveal and manifest to others:
to give the light of the glory of God, etc. This is the work of the Ministry,
We have indeed this treasure, but not for our selves only but for others: so we
are to keep it, to preserve and maintain it, but so as to be diligent to impart
what is committed to us for the edification of others: Every Scribe instructed
in the Kingdom of Heaven as a good house-holder, brings forth things new and
old.

The Gospel is a treasure, therefore we ought to carry our selves answerable to
it: As

1. We must labor for it, be diligent in the search of it, dig for it as for
hidden treasur^s. Lift up thy voice for understanding, etc. Prove., 2. 2, 3, 4.
Dig for it: you know there is a great deal of pains taken, and labor used to
get worldly treasure. Wh^t would not men venture for it? they will go over Sea
and Land, go through fire and water, expose themselves to all dangers for
earthly treasure, make unto themselves Friends of the Mammon of
unrighteousness, pass away a great deal of time, and take a great deal of care
for it.

2. Esteem this treasure, this heavenly wisdom, this Evangelical knowledge,
even the Gospel of Christ: labor to understand it, and have the efficacy of it
wroug^ it upon your hearts.

3. Rejoice in it; how do men rejoice in earthly treasure: so should we, as the
Merchant in the Gospel when he had found the Pearl of Price, rejoiced
exceedingly; so we ought, as being made partakers thereof. I rejoiced at thy
word, even as one that had found great spo^ls. (says David) so should we
rejoice always in this treasure. It Is said of those that sat under John
Baptists Ministry, that they rejoiced but for a while, and that is the
condition and misery of many. The City of Samaria when they had received the
Gospel, it is said they had great joy, Act. 8. 9.

4. Be careful to keep and preserve it, for it is a treasure, and therefore we
must treasure it up in our hearts; and the rather because it will keep us. It
keeps (as Chrysostom sath) the house where it is; (...) treasures cannot
secure themselves, but if we keep this treasure it will secure us. Discretion
shall preserve thee, and understanding shall keep thee, Prove. 21. 11. thus you
see the excellency of this spiritual wisdom. So much for the first thing
considerable in the first branch, viz. the Depositum, the treasure.

The second thing considerable is, the Repository, i. e. Earthen Vessels, or
Vessels of Earth, earthen Pitchers: these are the Repository, but we have this
treasure in earthen Vessels, etc. Earth is a word of diminution, and
disparagement, and that in three regards; 1. In regard of its meanness and
baseness. 2. In regard of its fullness and pollution. 3. In regard of its
frailty and transitoriness.


It Is passing away in all respects; these earthen vessels in the Text, is to be
understood, the Apostles and Ministers of Jesus Christ, in regard of their
outward man are so called, and are so according to this threefold notion.

I. In regard of their meanness; their outside is mean, either for person, or
sometimes for estate of body, and outward deportment. This was the condition
(you know) of the first Ministers of Christ, mean and ordinary persons
outwardly God made use of. Nay our Master, our blessed Lord and Savior was
mean (...) regard of his humane birth, and reckoned of by most men according to
his birth and parentage. So it is with the servants of Christ, they are in
their persons generally base, mean, low, and accordingly rendered despicable to
the eyes of the World.

II. In regard of foulness and pollution; Ministers are called earthen Vessels,
they have many weaknesses, they are men subject to the like passions as others.
It Is true the Ministers of Christ have greater advantages then others, in
regard of their education, knowledge, gifts, and employments, being more free
from those defilements and snares that others are entangled in: yet through the
remainders of the flesh in them, they have many infirmities: so Satan watches
them more then others, lays more snares for them in regard of their parts and
employments; so that they are more subject to his temptations then others.
Satan has a desire to sift them (as the Apostle Peter) as* wheat, because he
knows they will draw many after them: so that they must needs be subject to
many weaknesses and infirmities. Sometimes God makes use of the worst sort of
men, even the most vicious and malicious; first he changes them, and then
makes use of them as instruments of glory. The Apostle Paul was a Vessel of
Election to carry the name of Christ unto the Gentiles: yet in times past a
great persecutor. So it pleases God to make use of such, that the excellency
of the power may be of God, etc.

III. Ministers are called Earthen Vessels in regard of the frailty and
mortality of their persons, and earthen Vessels are soon cracked and broken.
Ministers are subject to many infirmities of body: This Heavenly light of the
Gospel shines often through Lanthorns of glass, which are soon broken.
Ministers have weak and frail bodies; Timothy had his bodily infirmities, and
Trophimus was left sick at Miletum, 1 Timothy 4. 20. and Epaphroditus was sick
nigh unto death, Phil. 2. 27. and Paul had need of Luke the Physician, probably
in regard of his weakness* Thus the servants of God are subject to many
infirmities. Besides the reason in the Text, there are other reasons why God
will have it so.

1. That they may be more compassionate, and more sensible of the weaknesses of
others; for likeness of condition breeds sympathy in affection.

Men are apt to pity those in the like condition with themselves; so our Lord
took our nature upon him, that he might pity us* he took flesh and blood upon
him, he was tempted in all things like unto us, but without sin, that so he
might succor those that are tempted. So his servants many of them are much
tempted, which may breed in them a sympathy of affection to others that are in
such a condition.

2. God will have it so, that Ministers may have the more experience of the
truths they preach to others concerning an afflicted condition; those that have
had no sickness or other affliction, cannot preach from experience of such
truths that concern such a condition; they cannot preach so feelingly and
savoury as others; when they have been under affliction, they will know what
affliction is, both in the nature of it, and the comforts of it, and Gods
gracious assistance therein, and so they may speak comfortably, and be enabled
to comfort others, as the Apostle Paul speaks.

3. God is pleased so to order it, sometimes for their humiliation, to keep
them low, that so they may not be lifted up by reason of extraordinary
manifestations and impartments, thus St. Paul had given him a thorn in the
flesh, that Mess^nger of Satan to buffet him, lest he should be exalted above
measure, 2 Cor. 12. 7. A thorn was given him, etc. ('it is twice repeated, both
in the beginning and end of the verse) that so this thorn in the flesh might
keep out pride in the heart, that so they may have a more low, meek, and humble
frame of spirit, and thereby fitted and prepared for greater services. And

4: That they may be also more conformable to those they have to deal with.
Israel desires Moses to speak to them (and not God) why? because he was like
unto them, and would therefore compassionate them; from whom they therefore
desired to receive the commands of God. Thus it pleases God to deal with his
servants, that as they may pity those they have to deal with, so likewise to
draw the affections of their people unto them, to make them more loving, and
the more to attend on their Ministry, seeing they are so fleeting, and going
away; it pleased God that Epaphroditus should be sick even to death, to endear
the Philippians more to him, chap. 2. 25, 28. that their love and tenderness
may be drawn forth the more by the discovery of his frailty, Let us improve
this.

Use 1. First, as to Ministers, see how the condition is with us in our
Calling, We are Earthen Vessels, taken out of dust. We should often consider
our frailty, to make us more humble, more meek, and more compassionate to
others, more diligent in doing good, that we may make amends for our frailty
and natural weaknesses that are upon us: We must not think much of it, it being
no more then in former times* it was the condition of the Apostles themselves,
they were Earthen Vessels, they had such weakn^sses, men subject to the like
passions as we.

Use 2. Secondly, As for the people, this may improve in all the notions and
considerations of an Earthen Vessel.

First, In regard of the meanness; you must not esteem the Gospel according to
the vessel, according to the disparagement of the Vessel a Vessel of dishonor
in respect of its matter, may be a Vessel of honor in regard of the Gold that
is in it; those Members of the body that are weak, and in themselves less
honorable, we afford a great deal of honor upon them, in decking and
clothing them. So the Ministers Work and Employment, and the Doctrines they
bring, are excellent and of great use; when all is done, we have that we serve
for: according to the employment we are put to, we are honorable, though
outwardly mean. Wicked and base men are called fil^i terrae, they are sons of
the earth, Job 30. 8. Children of fools, yea children of base men; they are
viler then the earth, i. e. Men of no account (as one says) the earth groans
under such ingracious persons, but gracious persons are Vessels of honor; as
it was said of the Giants of old, so it may be said of these, They are men of
Renown, and so we should esteem of them. Worldly men look at the outside, and
so esteem of them; so was Christ dealt with, Is not this the Carpenters Son? So
those Teachers in Corinth, endeavored to render St. Paul his presence weak,
and his speech contemptible, 2 Cor. 10. 11. that so they might make his
Ministry contemptible also. But this glorious Treasure is in Earthen Vessels;
You know (says St. Paul) Gal. 4 13. that through infirmity of the flesh I
preached the Gospel unto you at first. This was their commendation, v. 14. But
my temptation which was in my flesh, you despised not, nor rejected, but
received me as an Angel of God, even as Jesus Christ.

All his weaknesses, and whatever was matter of discouragement, they did not
despise, but honorably entertained him even as Christ himself. So it was the
commendation of the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13. that they received not the
word as the word of man, but (as it is in truth) the word of God, looking to
the mighty God to make it effectual: so should all others do upon this
consideration.

2. Seeing Ministers are earthen Vessels in tegard of moral infirmities which
adhere to them: in respct of their corruptions and weaknesses judge of them as
men: but esteem of what is righteous in them; though they have great advantages
against sin, and be very careful against sin, yet notwithstanding they are not
totally exempted and freed from sin; as they are Ministers, so they are men.

3. In regard that Ministers are earthen Vessels in respect of their frailty.
Seeing then they are so ^rail and transitory, therefore accordingly you should
make use of them, deal kindly and affectionately with them, in that they are
quickly broken. What is sooner broken then a Glass, or an earthen vessel?
Ministers are quickly taken away, and therefore you should be tender of them
while you have them. Where are all the Fathers. Do the Prophets live for ever,
the word of the Lord indeed endures for ever, but the Preacher of it does not;
the Gospel is eternal, but the Dispenser is mortal: the Calling is lasting but
the Minister is transitory: and therefore you should carry your selves with all
tenderness and respect to them: take heed of grieving their spirits, seeing
they are so soon broken. Endeavor also to improve by them, and to get as much
good as you can by them. It is a great argument to work while it is day,
because the night comes when no man can work: whilst God affords means and
opportunities, make use of them, we are but passengers; therefore this is a
great ground for you to endeavor to get all the good you can by your
Ministers, seeing they are frail.

Lastly, By way of improvement: Take notice of the ways of God, as different
from man; God pnts excellent treasure into Earthen Vessels: we keep treasure in
strong holds, in the strongest Repositories. Gods ways are not as our ways, he
goes another way then we do; he makes use of the poorest, meanest, and most
frail creatures sometimes; he lays aside many times men of greater abilities,
parts, and quality, and makes use of weaker to do this great Work. Chrysostom
makes and expostulation, If it be excellent t^easure, why in earthen Vessels?
Therefore it is a Vessel of Earth, because an excellent Treasure. Thus Gods
ways are unsearchable. This is the improvement.

Now besides this interpretation given of it, there is another that will not be
impertinent. Some understand by Earthen Vessels, the expressions, words, and
phrases of the Ministry, through which the doctrines and truths of the Gospel
ate conveyed; this is agreeable to what went before: Some false Teachers in
Corinth pleased themselves with eloquent and enticing words of worldly wisdom,
and so endeavored to render Paul's preaching despicable, in regard of the
plainness of it; therefore (says the Apostle) we have this treasure in
earthen vessels, i. e. familiar conveyances, that so we may easily understand
it.

Thus I have explained this Earthen Vessel, and so have done with the first
considerable part, viz. the dispensation it self, This Treasure we have in
Earthen Vessels: and come now to the second, viz.

II. The account of this Dispensation, That the excellency of the power may be
of God, and not of us. Which words may be considered two ways. 1. Either
absolutely, as lying in themselves. Or, 2. Connexively, to the words before
going.


1. Take them absolutely as they lie in themselves, and two things are
exhibited. 1. The excellency of the Gospel and Ministry it self, called Power.
2. The Author and Original of it, laid down two ways, positively, of God; and
negatively, not of (...).


1. The excellency of the Gospel and Ministry thereof, called Power: There is a
great deal of power and efficacy in the Gospel, it is in its nature powerful
and efficacious; so the ministry of it, Romans 1. 16. I am not ashamed of the
Gospel of Christ, for it is the power of God unto salvation to every one that
believes. See 1 Cor. 2. 4. Paul's preaching was in the demonstration of the
Spirit, and of Power, etc. It Is called the Arm of Gods Power, the sword of the
Spirit, Ephesians. 6. 17. It Is quick and powerful, and sharper then any two-edged
sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of the soul and spirit, etc. Heb.
4. 12. and many other places. We may conceive it to be so according to the
various effects and consequences of it, viz. as to 1. Conviction. 2.
Conversion. 3. Consolation.


1. It Is powerful in regard of conviction, it is a word of conviction; and one
part of the Work of the Ministry is (by the Spirits cooperation) to convince
the World of sin, to open men's eyes to show them the vileness of their ways,
to discover such courses to be sinful: the Conscience is awakened by the Spirit
in the Ministry of the Word, herein it is powerful and efficacacious. There are
diverse instances in Scripture, how powerful the Word has been in point of
conviction: in Foelix, the Apostle Paul preached to him of righteousness and
judgment to come, etc. He trembles: The Judge on the Bench trembles at the
word delivered by the Prisoner at the Bar: So powerful is the ministry of the
Word, as to discover our sinfulness. So the Disciples going to Emaus, their
hearts burnt within them when our Savior opened to them the Prophets, etc. So
it was with St. Peter's Auditors, Acts 2. they were pricked in the heart when
they heard this: he did preach to them in the power and demonstration of the
Spirit, and plainly discovered that sin that they were more especially guilty
of, and when they heard that, they were pricked in the heart, etc.

2. It is a word of Conversion also; Conviction is one thing, and Conversion is
another. Sometimes men may be convinced, but yet have no change wrought in
them; therefore conversion is another work, it is a turning men from darkness
to light, from the power of Satan to God, etc. to receive an inheritance among
them that are sanctified. Herein is the Word powerful, viz. in regeneration, I
have begotten you (by the Word) to a lively hope, etc. of his own will has he
begotten you etc.

4. It is a word of comfort and consolation, it is a powerful word, and able to
comfort the heart: and the Ministry is very effectual herein (when set on by
the Spirit) to quiet, satisfy, and pacify the consciences of men, which
declares the remission of sin, and whosoevers sins are forgiven, must needs be
comforted. Indeed it is not in the power of men to forgive sins; yet they can
speak a word of comfort in season, by the administration of the promises (the
Spirit of God going along with them) and then they are not only declarative,
but operative. Where (I say) it pleases God to bless and sanctify the Word,
it is effectual for quieting of the mind, for pacifying of the conscience, and
settling of the troubled soul. Thus you see how powerful the ministry is; and
seeing it is so, this should teach us how to behave our selves under it; it is
powerful in it self, and powerful in its dispensation, and has none of that
weakness (mentioned before) of the dispenser of it, I was with you (says St.
Paul) in much weakness, and in fear, and in trembling, 1 Cor. 2. 3, 4. and my
speech -- was in demonstration of the Spirit, and of power. These may seem to
be contradictory; but it is answered, the Word is powerful in the demonstration
of the Spirit, though delivered by one of humane weakness, as before is
declared. This spiritual power we should look at, and labor after; which power
does not consist in matter of elocution, the enticing words of man's wisdom,
nor in matter of voice, which indeed is a good thing, and suitable to the nature
of the Matter! a quick and powerful delivery is of great efficacy, and power,
for the setting home of truths. Yet this does not make a powerful Ministry;
for a whisper in the ear may cause a thunderbolt in the conscience; the power
lies first in the nature of the matter; the matter consists in the nature and
condition of mankind, the certainty of Judgment the necessity of Christ, the
covenant of Grace, and the Graces and privileges thereof, etc. These carry a
great deal of power and efficacy with them, when they are carefully and
frequently dispensed, and Gods spirit going along with them, so they become
powerful; for the Ministry consists not in empty notions and speculations that
will only tickle the fancy, but never reach the conscience. Moral discourses,
though they be of great use, yet if we rest in them, they leave us as they
found us. Evangelical truths (which are manifold) are to be delivered in the
Ministry. Now as the matter of the Ministry must be powerful, so the
expressions must be powerful; there should be sutablenesse of expression to
the matter, h. e. with gravity, sobriety, and affection, etc. Strong lines make
but weak preaching, and take away the efficacy: but delivering truths in the
demonstration of the spirit and in power, that is most effectual: when we speak
feelingly and from our hearts, it comes then (through the blessing of the Lord
with it) with power. This is then to learn us of the Ministry, viz. 1. Use.

Let us be careful that the matter of our Ministry be powerful, so that the
handling and dispensing thereof be powerful, that so it may come home to the
conscience; thus we should deal with all: the words of the wise are as good,
and as nails, fastened by the Masters of Assemblies, etc. Eccle. 12. 11. So our
words should have a force and power in them. This as the Apostle says, is
mighty and powerful to the beating down of strong holds, etc.

Use 2. Secondly in reference to hearers; seeing the Ministry is powerful, you
must then submit your selves to the power of it. Many people are Sermon-proof,
and think to stand it out against the power of the Word; but if it comes in
power to the conscience, they will not be able to resist it; as it is said of
them in the Gospel, they were not able to resist the spirit by which he spoke (
viz. Steven) And for those that desire the conversion of others, what course
should be taken by them for that end? but by good counsel, instruction, prayer,
and good example, to endeavor to convince them, and more especially to bring
them to the Word and administrations thereof, which God has sanctified for
this end.

So much for the excellency of the Gospel, viz. The excellency of the power,
etc. I come to the second.

2. The Author of it. 1. Positively, it is of God. And 2. Negatively, it is not
of us.

First, Positively, it is of God, and that in all the considerations of it, in
the full extent of it, it is of God. So the ministerial gifts, the performances
of it, and the success of it, are all from God.

First, Ministerial gifts are from God; it is lie that makes us able Ministers
of the New Testament; there are (says the Apostle Paul) diversity of gifts: to
one is given the Word of wisdom, to another the Word of knowledge by the same
spirit, etc. 1 Cor. 12. 4, 5, 6. It is God that bestows every good gift.

Secondly, The performance also is from God; his grace concurs and assists
therein: the habit and the act are both from him; God gives gifts to men, and
he enables them to dispense them. Ministerial employments are not only for
general, but particular applications, and so need not only general, but
particular assistances; That I might be enabled (says St. Paul) to fulfill the
work, etc. the Lord stood by me and strengthened me, that my preaching might be
fully accomplished.

It is God that makes the work powerful, efficacious and successful: Alas! when
we have used our best endeavors, all the success is from him, he must make it
effectual; it is said, our Savior went about doing good, for God was with him,
enclineing him to the work, and assisting him therein: So he is with all his
servants: their gifts, employments, and success thereof, are all of God, not
of us.

Object. But it may be objected, Is all from God, and nothing from us? Are we
not said to concur with him? and is not then the power partly ours?

Ans. I answer, No: it is of God, and not of us: we are indeed subjects of the
Ministry, the Recipients thereof, persons employed in the Work, and therefore
are said to be workers together with God, 2 Cor. 6. 1. but the power and
efficacy thereof is from God alone: Paul and Apollo are but Ministers, it is God
that gives the blessing; it is not of us in two respects. 1. It Is not merited
by us, it is not of our deserving, nor of our procuring; 1. It Is not of our
deserving; the best and most accomplished do not merit it: I receive a mercy
(says Paul) to be faithful: he accounted it a mercy to be employed, and to be
faithful therein. 2. It Is not of our procuring, we do not obtain it by our own
power, as Peter said in the recovery of the lame man, It is not by any power
and holiness of ours, that this man is restored, etc. And so it is not our
gifts and industry only, that will make our Ministry powerful; and therefore
in this Work let us be looking up to God, and desire him to assist us, as Moses
said, If thou go not, O Lord, up with us, wherefore should we go hence? so
say I, if the presence of God be not with us, what can we do?

And further, when we do partake of any measure of ability, see where we must
determine it: Not unto us Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name be all the
glory: We must not sacrifice to our own net, nor give the honor to our own
industry, but wholly give the praise to God, because the excellency is of God.

2. But in the second place, if you look upon the words reflexively, or as
having their connection to the words going before, and so they will agree and
hold together, and thus you may read them: Therefore is this Treasure in
earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power may be acknowledged to of
God, and not of us: If it were in Angels, or had we never so strong bodies, yet
the excellency of the power of God would not be so clearly seen, as it is now,
being laid up in poor, frail Vessels: Here Is the power of God, here is the
luster and glory of God most manifested; for so much the more apparently it
will be seen to be from God, by so much the weaker the instrument is, that is
employed by God: therefore if any thing does act beyond it is own power, it must
have some foraigne powers for the producing such and such acts; therefore when
we see any greater matter done by poor, frail and contemptible Persons of
earthen Vessels, this does plainly show the excellency of the power to be of
God, and not of Men, therefore look from man to God, it is God that does these
things; we should overlook earthen vessels; we should (I say) overlook men
that are these earthen vessels, and look to God that makes the Ministry
powerful in such conveyances as these.

Furthermore, It may satisfy us of the Ministry, in that we are vessels, viz.
men of frailty, etc. we are apt to be discouraged, and to think hardly that we
are followed with so many weaknesses, that we have a hard matter, that when we
have taken such pains in the work of the Ministry, we should be thus rewarded;
but this should satisfy us, the more weakness in us, the greater honor will
come to Christ: This Treasure we have in earthen Vessels, that the excellency
of the power may be of God, and not of us. The weaker the Vessel, the more
honor will redound to Christ.

Furthermore, This may take of the servants of Christ from unwillingnesse unto
those works and performances which God calls them unto, by reason of their
weakness: Thus it is when God calls to any work or employment, the servants of
God are apt to plead their own inability; Moses says he is not eloquent;
Jeremiah says he is a child; Jonah says he is a man of unclean lips. Thus we
have their delays, their excuses, whereby they endeavor to discharge
themselves from that Work that God calls them unto, by their own weakness, etc.
but God refuses such excuses; for who makes the blind to see, the dumb to
speak, but God? It is he that touches Isaiah's Lips, it is he that said to
Jeremiah, Do not say thou art a Child, for I have sent thee, etc. This I say
then is a consideration may encourage Ministers in their Work, that the weaker
they are, the honor and glory will redound to Christ; far he said unto me
(says the Apostle) My Grace is sufficient for thee, for my strength it made
perfect in weakness: Not that it is encouragement or argument for any to take
upon them the great work of the Ministry, without sufficient qualifications and
abilities: But where there is not that degree of ability as is desired, where
there is a true sensibleness of their weakness, this may be an encouragement to
them, that God delights to show his power in them, that by so much the more
they are weak, so much honor he will gain. For a conclusion, it comes to
this, viz. That we lay no stresse upon any outward things.

There is no stresse or happiness in these outward things; those that seem to
be of some concernment, as strength of body, and other outward qualifications
that are of remark; yet consider, they are fading and transitory; this should
teach us in the enjoyments of outward things, a great deal of humility: Though
we are Vessels of Gold in regard of the treasure and improvement, yet in regard
of our selves we are Vessels of Earth, and so should be in respect of humility.
Let us look upon all these things as given to us of God even for this very end,
That we may be more serviceable to him and his people.

So I have done with the two general parts of the words, and so with the whole
verse, viz. We have this Treasure in earthen Vessels, that the excellency of
the power may be of God, and not of us.

Do we begin again to commend our selves? (says the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 3.
1.) or need we Epistles of commendation to you? ye are our Epistle in our
hearts, etc. But this is applicable to the present sad occasion now before us.

This Reverend and blessed man of God, Mr. James Nalton, was a person of great
Note and ^enency among us, one well known in this City, and in this place,
where he spent his labor and pains many years. I could give large accounts and
testimonies of him (if need were) from my own knowledge of him, having been
acquainted with him many years. He was not only a Minister, but the Son of a
Minister, his birth and education suiting together. He looked upon it not only
as an honor, but as an engagement to be careful to walk in those steps set
before him, and to continue the work of the Ministry begun by his Religious
Father. Certainly the Children of godly and holy Parents cannot come off so
cheap in their carriages as others; they have greater accounts to make, as
having greater examples set before them, greater advantages of prayer,
exhortation, etc. and so greater engagements; this was thought on, and observed
by him. And as he was the Son of a Minister, so when he came to years and was
fitted, he took upon him the Ministry: as he was one of great abilities, so
accordingly he discharged them faithfully and conscienciously. He was a
spiritual, powerful, conscientious Preacher, he preached by his Life; for (as
Erasmus says) we should not only love to speak truths, but we should digest
truths on our own hearts before we commend them to others, and so they will be
the more effectual. He was a man of a very meek, sweet, and humble spirit; a
man of great humility and of great meekness in the midst of great abilities,
which was a great Ornament in him; a man full of tenderness and condescension
to others; a man of a very yiedling and melting fram of spirit, soon dissolved
into tears. It was the saying of one, that a good man is full of Tears: so this
good man was full of Tears, not affected, but very real, and hearty, drawn from
the fulness of his Spirit, as the Apostle Paul says, he served the Lord in
much humility and many tears. This was remarkable, that in these times our
Reverend Brother was full of tears in delivering his Doctrine, which was
suitable to the age we live in, being full of sin and calamity; there is much
need of a bewailing spirit to bewail the iniquities and miseries of the times;
they that cannot bewail themselves, need the tears of others. He was a man of
great integrity, and single-heartednesse; in his exhortations he had much of
the simplicity of Christ, as the Apostle Paul speaks. In reference to the
Ministry, he had no worldly and base affections, he had no carnal designs
therein; but his chief design was to bring souls home to Christ, that was his
chief business. As the Apostle says of himself, may also be said of him, that
in simplicity and godly sincerity, he had his conversation in the world, not
walking in craftiness, nor handling the word of God deceitfully, but by the
manifestation of the truth* commending himself to every man's conscience in the
sight of God, 2 Cor. 4. 2. He was a man that had ability to speak a word in
season, he was very compassionate to a wounded spirit, he himself having been
much afflicted. He was a man much in communion with God, and had much
acquaintance with God, and was careful in improvement therein: he was a Jacob
in wrestling with God, a Moses that stood in the Gap, an Elijah that prayed
earnestly: the whole Land was the better for such a Person, being much with
God; he made many addresses to him, and had much holy familiarity with him. And
as in his public performances he was very faithful and beneficial, so in his
family and private he was very fruitful and serious. In a word (not to multiply
much in this kind, you need it less in this Auditory, but only by way of
grateful memorial) there was much of God and Christ in him, and he was a great
example to his fellow servants; there was much of his Treasure (spoken of in
the Text) in this earthen Vessel; as in the matter of it, he was one of a
Gospel spirit; and in the conveyances of it, he had great abilities for the
work of the Ministry, and discharged it with a great deal of success. As he
had this Treasure in an Earthen Vessel, so his Vessel, his frail body was no
disparagement to him, but the advancement of the Treasure, in setting forth the
power to be of God; his outward man was much weak and worn away, but his inward
man was upheld by the grace of God. His first work in the Ministry was in that
place where my self have relation to; he was an assistant to my predecessor
(being then past labor) Mr. Richard Couder, and performed the work so well,
that he was exceedingly beloved of Mr. Couder, and well beloved of the Parish,
and other places. He left a good impression behind, and I found good effects by
the foundation there laid. The Apostle Paul indeed desired not to work there
where another had laid the foundation, but I thought it a great advantage that
the foundation was laid by such a Master Builder. He was called into the
Country to Rugby in Warwickshire, there he continued very fruitful, and did
much good. For some occasion he removed and returned into the City, and came
into this place, where he continued about 18. or 19. years, discharged the work
of the Lord carefully. I need not say much of his carriage in this place, I
appeal to your own Consciences. I may say of this servant of Christ, as the
Apostle Paul said of himself, 1 These. 2. 10, 11. Ye are his witnesses, and God
also, how holily, and justly, and unblameable he behaved himself among you, as
you know how he exhorted, and comforted, and charged every one of you (as a
Father does his Children) that ye would walk worthy of God, who has called you
unto his kingdom and glory. Therefore there lies an engagement upon you to
walk answerable to the truths he delivered, and to follow his steps,
considering the end of his conversation, I shut up all in the words of the
Apostle Paul to the Phillippians, Chapter 4. 9. Those things which ye have both
learned, and received, and heard, and seen in him, Do: and the God of peace
shall be with you.

Mr. Nalton's Prayer, July 20. 1662. at Foster-lane.
ETernal, most Mighty, and most glorious Lord God. Thou a^t God alone, and
besides thee there is no Savior or Helper; our strength stands in thy Name,
who have made both Heaven and Earth: of our selves we are able to do nothing
that is pleasing in thy sight: we can pollute thy name, but we cannot honor thy
name: we can run away from thee, but we cannot run unto thee, unless thou do
powerfully draw us by thy Spirit: we can grieve thy spirit, but we cannot
grieve for grieving of thy spirit.

Oh let thy strength be manifested in our weakness, look upon us with the
favor thou bear to thy Children. Enter not into judgment with thy
servants, for we cannot answer thee one of a thousand, not one thought of a
thousand thoughts, not one word of a thousand words.

Most of our actions have been reproveable, and the best of our services have
been improfitable: our omissions, commissions, and presumptions have been
multiplied intolerably. Oh* how often have we taken thy name in vain, while we
have been confessing our sins? how often have we run from confessing our sins,
to the committing of sin? and from committing sins, to the confessing sin
again? as if we had but mocked thy sacred Majesty: though we know thy favor is
better then life, we have parted with it upon easy terms. Oh! the pride and
stubbornness that is in our hearts; All the mercie^ thou have bestowed upon
us, have not melted us into tears for our unkindnesse; and all those blows
that have fallen upon our backs, have not beat folly out of our hearts: we have
been unprofitable all our days, some have done thee more service in one year
then we in all our time; we have forgotten thee in the day of prosperity, and
sung a ^ullaby to our own souls: oh that we could speak these things with
broken and bleeding hearts: but as in the time of our ignorance, we could sin
without reluctance, so now we can sin without repentance: oh that thou would
sm^te the rock, that there may flow out tears.

We can do nothing by way of expiation, if we could weep out our eyes, nothing
but the blood of Christ can take away our guilt; O that there might be a spring
of that blood upon our souls at the time: Oh that that blood may at this time
bring a report of love, and a message of mercy to us.

Do we beg any more then thou have promised? oh have not thou accepted of that
satisfaction that Christ has made in his own person? if we had suffered the
torments of hell, it could not have made that satisfaction that Christ has
made: give us the witness of the spirit and thy love, and we will say we have
enough; give us hearts of flesh, crush the head of the serpent in our souls. O
Lord Christ, thou came into the world to destroy the works of the Devil in
our hearts, and to build up the Kingdom of the Spirit in us: oh when shall we
see the old man decay in us, and the old man to live more and more.

Oh, be wisdom to guide us, and righteousness to cleanse us from guilt and
redemption to deliver us from the wages of sin: let us be nothing in our
selves, that we may be all in thee our Savior: oh honor us so far, that we
may honor thee. We pray thee strengthen our weak faith, quiet our consciences,
we would not live a day longer, then that we may honor thee; tread Satan under
our feet, sit us for our places and employments, let not our conditions be so
low, but that our hearts may be lower: we are p^sting to death, oh let sin dye
before we die: let us know our names are written in the book of life, before
thou take away our life.

Look upon thy Servant our dread Sovereign, CHARLES, of Great Britain, France,
and Ireland, King: oh enrich his Royal heart with all those saving Graces of
thy Spirit, in order to a wise and happy Government of these Kingdoms. Look
upon his Royal Consort, his Royal Relations, the Lords of his Privy Council,
and make them blessing to this Nation. Oh sanctify thy good word, oh give thy
gracious assistance to us, both in speaking and hearing: let us hear it as that
word by which we must be judged, that we may be convinced by it, and say it is
the power of God to salvation to every soul of us. Let our meeting ^e for the
better to all of us, that we may be built up in the most holy Faith: and let us
know we have not sought thy face in vain, for Jesus Christ his sake our dear
Savior, for whom we bless thy Majesty, to whom with thee and the Spirit, be
praise for ever,

Amen
Dr. Anesleye's Prayer at Giles-Cripplegate.
HOly and great God of Heaven and earth, such is the condes^nsion of thy grace,
that thou art pleased to manifest thy special presence to thy poor Creatures,
though thou hate sin with a perfect hatred, yet thou love sinners with an
infinite love, though thou art of purer eyes then to behold iniquity, yet thou
art pleased to manifest thy love to sinners that approach to thy service, O
Lord, when shall we admire enough thy grace and love, how thou art pleased to
communicate thy self to a poor man. Dear Father raise and fix our hearts, help
us ^o mind the business that we come about and ^o deal very faithfully with our
own souls, in the matters of eternal moment, O that we could pray, so that our
prayers through grace might be returned upon us with a blessing, O that we
could wait upon thee to hear thy Word as the Oracles of God, let us hear what
Christ will discover to us for our spiritual benefit: Lord grant that our
Souls may know what it is to be in the Spirit upon the Lords day, dear Father,
thou can deal with such hearts as ours, for the curing of them we pray thee
to do i^; we must needs acknowledge, had not thou laid help upon one that is
mighty, that is able to save to the uttermost, we must have perished to all
eternity, for we do not know any upon the earth more vile then our selves. The
very aggravations of our sins, do render us monstrously abominable, the means
of grace we have afforded us, the stirring of thy Spirit in us, the patience
and goodness of God toward us makes it a wonder that our hearts do remain so
blockish But dear Lord, we do find by experience, that our immortal souls are
much debased, all the faculties of our Souls are out of tune, our
understandings are so dark our conceptions of God are so low, our consciences
are so benumbed that the stirrings of them are scarce discerned or perceived,
our affections are spentupon the creature, that we cannot gather them up again,
our wills are perverse, our memories are apt to retain the dros^, and let out
all that is good, we pray thee for Christ's sake make an experiment upon our
Souls, what thou can do, what sinners Christ can save, what corruptions the
Spirit of God can subdue in our souls, teach all our hearts, do not stand
behind the wall, and look through the ^attice, do so much as may leave us
without excuse, but good Lord put in thy hand in at the whole of the Door, and
let thy fingers drop honey upon the handle of the Lord. And, oh set open these
everlasting Doors, that the King of Glory may enter in, subdue us entirely to
thy self, do not ask our wills whether we ^e willing or no? but make us
willing: do not ask us what we would have, but give us what thou know is
good for us. Dear Lord we pray thee deliver us from sin, according to thy
batred of it: and pour out thy grace upon us, according to thy love of grace,
that our Souls may be refreshed, that we may find thy thoughts are above ours,
as high as Heaven is above the Earth. Dear Father, it is thy promise, that
those that wait upon thee, shall renew their strengths: we have no might; the
Devil b^ffles us, our own hearts are treacherous to us; the world int^ces us
to sin against God: Oh! deliver us from all these Enemies, and especially from
the plagues of our hearts, that we may perfect holiness in the fear of God;
give us Spiritual blessings, whatsoever thou give us or whatsoever thou
denyest us: thou know thou artrather willing to give us Spiritual
blessings, then any other mercies, and we want spiritual mercies most, oh give
us spiritual mercies, that we may say, This is the way of God in his Sanctuary.
Where Grace is not wrought work it? where it is begun increase it. Dear Father
convince those that are yet not convinced: make thy Word a quickening word, an
ingraf^ed word, to the saving of our souls, help us to hear, as for our lives,
and as those that long after God, Hear Prayers for the King, bless him in his
Royal Relations, and grant under him we may live a quiet life in all Godliness
and honesty. Bless the Magistrates, and help them to remember, that causes one
day must be heard over again, help thy Ministers to keep close to thee in ways
that are well pleasing. Be with us at this time, Lord assist the meanest of thy
Servants, let our souls now find, that thou do magnify thy Word above all
thy Name: do us good, rec^ive us, quicken us, that we may live in Heaven upon
Earth, that we may know what it is to be filled with the fullness of God, and
know the height, breadth, depth, and length of thy love, that passes
knowledge.

Communicate thy self to us, as thou usest to do to thy people; let us feel
thy presence, let us not think of any thing, but the business we are about, let
us with singleness of he^t, set our selves to mind the concernments of our
immortal souls: And all we beg for Christ his sake who has taught us thus to
pray,

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc. Mr. Cradockt's Prayer, at Saint
Sepulchers, August 10. 1662.
MOst glorious, and most gracious Lord God. who art God, and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who have put thine own name and stamp upon this day, will thou be
pleased to appear now and prepare and dispose ^r unprepared, and indisposed
souls, for holy observation of this thine own holy day: will the Lord vouchsafe
us the incomes of his spirit, and influences of his grace* whereby we may be
unabled to offer up spiritual sacrifices, which may be acceptable to Jesus
Christ. Lord, thou requ^rest praying hearts, but thou have not commanded us to
use Prayer-books, and if thou will give us the spirit of Prayer, we shall not
need them. Lord give us praying hearts at this time, let us find by experience
that thy Sub^ath is a day of souls opportunity, that thine Ordinances are full
of marrow, that thou have not said unto thy children, the seed of Jacob seek my
face in vain.

We acknowledge we are unworthy to lift up our eyes to Heaven, we have cause
enough to cry out, God be merciful to us sinners, undeserving, ill-deserving
men and women, we acknowledge our natures are blots of all wickednesses, we are
by nature enemies to thy Majesty, heirs of death, children of darkness, slaves
to sin; captives to lust, dead to sins and trespasses, how are our
understandings darkened and our hearts hardened: what are our hearts but a
storehouse of ^licious thoughts? a brothel-house of adultery? a Palace of
pride? we are by nature wholly flesh, totally opposite to the holy Laws of thy
Majesty, and were it not for thy renewing or restra^ning grace we should break
forth into as vile abominations as the vilest of men. Our lives have been a
continual piece of rebellion against God, who did make us, and do feed and
cloth us; all thy paths have been paths of mercy to us, but we have requited
thee evil for thy good, and hatred for thy love: O foolish men and women that
we have bin, we acknowledge our Gospel sins are of a deep eye; thou have not
bin a wilderness or a Land of darkness to us, we have been exalted to Heaven
in the means of salvation, but oh how short do we come of knowledge to the
time and means we have enjoyed, and our obedience comes short of our
knowledge: we have not walked up to that light which thou have given us.

We desire to lay our selves low before thee, oh do thou open our eyes, and
presentus to our selves, show us the vilenes^e of our lives: Blessed be thy
name, that thou have laid help up^ (...) that is mighty, to save all that come
to thy Majesty by him? and thou have promised all that believe on him shall not
perish but have everlasting life. Oh help us to receive him in all his offices
in our hearts, help us to give him the keys of our hearts, and help us to live
and die to him that dyed for us, and let our souls be united to thee by him,
that his death may be ours, and his life ours, and his intercession ours: Oh
let our unity to Christ be demonstrated to us by our communion with him, and
conformity to him in grace and holiness.

And we pray thee, dearest Lord, pardon our sins in the Court of Heaven, and in
the Court of our own consciences, besprinkle our consciences in the blood of
Christ, and say to all before thee at this time that desire to fear thee more,
and serve thee better: Sons and Daughters be of good cheer, your sins are
forgiven you.

And do not only justify us but sanctify us, purge our consciences from dead
works, inform our understandings, conform our wills to thine holy will, let
our hearts and lives be conformed to the Image of thy Son, that beholding
thereof, we may be changed from glory to glory, and let us have more knowledge
of thy will, that we may do thy will, and suffer thy will with more patience,
and be filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are to the glory of God.
Let us not be empty Vines that bring forth fruit to themselves, but let us
bring forth fruit to God whereby thou may be glorified, Oh plant that great
grace of selfe-denyal in our souls, and let us take the Cross of Jesus Christ
and follow him wheresoever he goes.

Remember all thine, extend thy favor to those thou have cast on Beds of
sickness, and let there be a saving change wrought in them before that change
by death shall come. And that are drawing nigh their time of Travel, let the
arms of the All-sufficient God be under them, and be better to them th^s their
Faith or our Prayer. And look graciously upon poor Children, entitle them to an
inheritance that fades not away, make them a blessing in themselves, and a
blessing to their Parents. And those that desire the conversion of Relations
that walk in ways of per^ition, do not let them find peace in any way against
thy Majesty, and let them know that sin will be bitter in the latter end.

Look upon us that are before thee at this time, before we go hence, and shall
be here no more, make thy face to shine upon us, let our coming together be for
the better and not for the worse to any of us, Let thy poor Servant be able to
deliver thy message plainly and powerfully, and give thy people hearing ears
and obedient hearts, and let us rejoice that we did wait upon thee in thy
worship this day and all for Christ his sake, in whose Name and words we call
upon thee. Our Father, etc.

FINIS:

