A Practical Discourse CONCERNING VOWS: WITH A Special Reference to BAPTISM AND
THE LORD's SUPPER.

By EDMUND CALAMY.

LONDON: Printed by Geo. Larkin Jun. and are to be Sold by John Lawrence, at
the Angel in the Poultrey. 1697.

To THOSE Who are under the PASTORAL CARE Of the Reverend Mr. DANIEL WILLIAMS.
Hoxton, May 24. 1697. My Dear Friends,
WHAT I here put into your Hands, is your Own already. To you was the Substance
of the ensuing Discourse Delivered from the Pulpit; and 'twas your Request that
put me upon Preparing it for the Press. I am glad to understand that I did not
wholly lose my Labor, while I so many Sacrament Days successively entertained
you on this Subject: And am not without hope that what you have found
Beneficial, may be Profitable to some others also. I expect to pass under a
variety of Censures, but so the great End of my Ministry be but furthered, I
can easily overlook them.

IT has been my Earnest Endeavor ever since I have been with you, to promote
Serious, Practical, Christianity, among you, without attempting to draw you to,
or fix you in, any Particular Sect, Party, or Interest whatever. I heartily
rejoice to find a Catholic Spirit prevail so much among you, the general want
whereof, all who are truly concerned for the Honor of Religion, find so much
cause to lament.

I HIGHLY Esteem and Honor you, on the Account of your Inviolable Respect, and
firm Adherence to your Reverend Pastor, in the midst of all those Storms the
great Enemy of Souls has raised against him, in order to the diminishing his
Usefulness: Your Steadiness in so violent a Tempest as he not long since past
through, which plainly had its Rise from beneath, was God's great Mercy, the
Devil's Disappointment, your Pastors Support, and your Glory.

I HEARTILY thank you for all the Testimonies of Respect and Kindness, I have
received from you, since I have been spending my pains amongst you. I bless the
Lord that he has made any use of me, to promote your Knowledge, Faith, of
Holiness: And I desire he may have all the Glory of any Good wherein I may have
been Instrumental.

I BESEECH you, my Dear Friends, to go on more and more to adorn your Christian
Profession: Let your Tempers and Lives show to whom you belong: This will be
the way to honor God, to strengthen the Hands, and cheer the Hearts of your
Ministers, and you will reap the Fruit in due time. Go on to shun Extremes, and
you will avoid the Dangers that attend them. Place as little of your Religion as
is possible in Separation. Be always ready to receive Light in Divine Things;
and never think your selves past Improvements. Love all that love God and
Goodness, how much soever they differ from you. As far as you are able, speak
Well of those who speak Ill of you; and return not Railing for Railing: But do
what in you lies to live Peaceably with all Men. Beware of more Serpentine
Subtilty than a Dove-like Innocence can temper. Be strictly Just in all your
Dealings; Circumspect in your Walk, Temperate in all things; and let your
Moderation be known unto all Men; For the Lord is at hand. Let it be your
Endeavor to get well surnish'd Minds, warm Hearts, Governable Spirits, tender
Consciences, and heavenly Affections, and your Stability and Fruitfulness will
be signal.

OFTEN Reflect on the Strength and Sacredness of the Divine VOWS you are under,
which the Ensuing Treatise is designed to help you rightly to Understand and
Improve: And take care to live Faithfully up to them, if you have any Regard to
the Favor of God, the Honor of Christ, your own Present Peace, or Future
Happiness.

AND now, Brethren, I commend you to God, and the Word of his Grace: I leave
the Success of my Endeavors to Him who led me into these Meditations; And make
it my Request to you, That when you are most Serious and Fervent at the Throne
of Grace, you would not be Unmindful of

Your Affectionate Soul-Servant, Edm. Calamy.

THE Reader is desired before he proceeds to the Perusal of the ensuing
Treatise, to correct the following Errata with his Pen. Page 9. lin. 12. blot
out more an, and read, no intimation. P. 13. last line, for a put the Sense. P.
147. l. 5. in without dele out. P. 149. l. 2. between in and Service add his.
P. 165. l. 22. change to into so. P. 198. l. 2. change curbs into rubs. P. 213.
l. 27. for decreases r. increases. P. 216. l. 24, 25. put God into the place of
stop, and stop into the place of God.

There are some few other literal Mistakes and Faults in Pointing, which must
be charged on the haste of the Press; which need not be particularly mentioned,
because the Sense and Connection sufficiently corrects them.

THE CONTENTS.
THE Introduction. Page 1. CHAP. I. Certain Preliminary Observations concerning
the Nature and Kinds of Divine Vows. p. 4. CHAP. II. Of the General Vow whereby
all that we are and have, is sincerely devoted to God as our Absolute Owner and
Proprietor. p. 14. CHAP. III. Of Sacramental Vows. p. 20. CHAP. IV. Of the
Baptismal Vow. The sum of it in Form, as made by Persons Baptized when Adult.
p. 36. CHAP. V. Of the Baptismal Vow as to those Baptized in Infancy. An
Account of the different concern of Parents and Children in it; and a distinct
Address to each concerning the Duty resulting from it. p. 48. CHAP. VI. Certain
Useful Observations about the Consequence of Keeping or Breaking the Baptismal
Vow: And of the Recognition of it, as necessary to a Regular Admission to the
Lords Table. p. 73. CHAP. VII. Of the Lords Supper. That it is a Faederal
Ordinance, implying a Covenant Transaction between God and Us; and supposing a
Renewal of Solemn Vows to be the Lords. p. 94. CHAP. VIII. Of an express
Renewal of our Christian Vows every time we go to the Holy Communion: And
Directions about the right management of it. p. 190. CHAP. IX. Of the Nature,
Sacredness, and Strength of the Obligation which lies on all those to lead an
Holy Life, who often Repeat Sacramental Vows. p. 137. CHAP. X. Of the dreadful
Case which all those are in, who heap vows upon vows; without any serious sense
of their force, and without any real hearty endeavors to answer and pay them.
p. 151. CHAP. XI. Of the great Happiness of all those who are Serious in Making
and Renewing their Sacramental Vows, and sincere in Keeping them. p. 174. CHAP.
XII. Of the difficulty of living up to our Sacred Vows, with that exactness
that we ought: With the Solution of some common cases relating thereto. p. 192.
CHAP. XIII. Directions that may help us to live more Correspondently to our
many Solemn Sacramental vows. p. 214. CHAP. XIV. Sundry Serious Considerations,
to enforce the sense of our vows upon us, and engage us to pay them. p. 233.
CHAP. XV. The Temper and Carriage of a Soul that is rightly sensible of the
Force and Sacredness of Sacramental vows, briefly Exemplif^d p. 254. CHAP. XVI.
Of Particular vows. How they must be limited that they may be warrant able; and
how far and in what cases they may be dispensed with. p. 273. CHAP. XVII. Of
vows made in a time of Sic^ness, Distress, or Danger; and the sense of them
that should be afterward retained. p. 290.
A Practical Discourse CONCERNING VOWS.
PSALM LVI. 12. Thy Vows are upon me, O God.

The INTRODUCTION.
WHOEVER is conversant in David's Psalms, will find him frequently making Vows,
and careful in paying them. When these words dropped from him, he was just
delivered out of a pressing danger among the Philistines, with whom he took
Shelter from the Rage of King Saul, who unweariedly pursued him; but he soon
found, that the remembrance of his past Atchievments to their damage was still
so fresh amongst them, and they so exasperated thereupon, that his Life was in
constant Danger. In his Distress he flies to God his wonted Refuge, and sends
up earnest Addresses to him, Vowing if he would open a way for his Deliverance
out of these new Straits, he would show his grateful sense of so Signal a
Mercy, by the Exactness and Accuracy of his Future Obedience. God hears and
Succors him, and works out an Escape for him; and he thereupon gratefully
looks back, endeavors to renew the sense of his former Obligation to his great
Delive^er, and to stir up himself to suitable Returns, and so cries out, Thy
Vows are upon me, O God. i. e. I Resolve (O Lord) not to forget what was
transacted while I was under my Fears. Thou have heard my Cries, and I own my
self firmly bound by my Vows. I was serious and in earnest when I made them,
and I will endeavor to show that I was so, by my care to perfo^m them. Thy
Vows O God; made indeed on my part, but justly to be exacted on Thine: Are upon
me; They do in reality hold me fast, and I desire not to be released: I am
sensible I deserve to be Stigmatized for a Perfidious Wretch if I ever forget
them.

THIS Temper of David's, with reference to the Vows he made on this occasion,
should be ours with reference to all the Sacred Vows we any way come under. All
Christians, as such, are necessarily under Vows to the Blessed God; and
particular Circumstances may make it expedient for us to come under Special
Engagements to Him. But wherever they are such as that they may justly be
denominated Vows of God; i. e. are such as his word will warrant; we should
make Holy David, as speaking in this Text, our Pattern, and set our selves to
imitate him, in seriously owning their binding Force, and endeavoring to
answer and pay them. And on this account was this passage of Holy Writ, singled
out as the Foundation of the ensuing Discourse, wherein the Elucidation of
those Sacred Vows, whereby Men are bound to God, is the thing mainly intended.

CHAP. I.
Certain Preliminary Observations, concerning the NATURE and KINDS of Divine
Vows.

THOSE who will be at the pains to look into Casuistical Writers, Let him who
is disposed consult Aquin Sum. 2d 2d Qu. 88. Filliucius tr. 26. C. 1. Sanches
l. 4. Moral. C. 1. Navar. C. 12. Azor. 1. p. l. 11. C. 13. etc.
will meet with a great many Nice Observations, and Curious Distinctions, under
the Head of Vows, the recital whereof would tend more to puzzle than edify, and
therefore I shall forbear transcribing them. I shall only, in order to the
opening my way to what I intend, make the following Remarks, not affecting a
Philosophical Accuracy, but aiming at the guarding against Pernicious Mistakes,
and the avoiding Confusion.

1. IT IS to God only that Vows are to be made. David sufficiently intimates it,
in saying, Thy Vows O God; and again, Vow and pay unto the Lord your God. Ps.
76. 11.
i. e. and to none else, which is plainly implied. Vowing is a part of
Religious Worship. The making a Vow to any one, is an ascribing Divine Honor
to him. It is a sort of Invocation, whereby we beg his help; and sometimes it
carries in it, an imprecation of Punishment, from him to whom it is made on the
maker of it, if he wilfully breaks it. It includes also a Reposing of Trust and
Confidence; and it many times supposes an Omniscience in him to whom it is
addressed, it being made by mere In ward Thought, without any outward intimation
or expression. On all which Accounts, the making Vows to Saints, which is so
common in the Roman Church, is an unwarrantable Practice. It Is an advancing
them beyond their due pitch; and comes too near an equalling them with the Most
High.

2. THAT is properly a Vow with reference to God, which is a promise among Men.
When we have to do with Men like our selves, we promise to do this or that; and
Equity and Veracity oblige us to be true to our Word. But a Vow which relates
to God, carries in it a greater Solemnity, and has a greater Force; by reason
of his Supereminence with whom we are therein concerned; our Dependence on him,
and his Power over us* he being able immediately to punish the least slight or
neglect, which tends much to strike an Awe. A Vow therefore, Is a Sacred
Promise to God, whereby we bind our selves to him. It leaves no room for the
alteration of our minds upon further thoughts and searches (as common Purposes
and Resolutions do) unless flatt Sinfulness or apparent Prejudice be discerned.
And if it has an Imprecation attending it, it is the self-same thing with an
Oath, whereby God is Invocated both as a Witness and a Revenger.

3. A Vow can never make that our Duty, that was Antecedently in it self
Unlawful. Such a Vow is plainly Wicked, and therefore cannot oblige. Vows are
designed to be Incentives to Piety, but can never be allowed to be Bands of
Iniquity. A Wicked Vow is to be Lamented and Repented of, and not Performed.
For a Man would thereby oblige himself to what God had before absolutely
prohibited; to allow which, were to put it in our power to enervate any, even
the most Essential Precepts of the Divine Law. They are Unhappy who fall into
this Snare. For there is hazard in breaking such a Vow, although 'twould be a sin
to keep it. There would be danger lest Persons breaking such a Vow, should
diminish the force of Divine Bonds upon them, where they are really Obligatory.
But to keep it, would to be sure be a direct thwarting the Divine Authority.
Humble and Penitent Addresses to Heaven, may prevent the former; but the
latter, if persisted in when discovered, is inexcusable; whence its easily
discernable which over-ballances. However such a Person, one that Vows things
contrary to the Divine Law, either Natural or Positive; cannot to be sure with
David, look up and say, Thy Vows O God are upon me: For they are his own Vows,
not Gods. He cannot own, approve, or allow, but detests and abhors them.

4. A Vow may make that our Duty that was before Indifferent: By Indifferent, I
mean such a thing as is in it self Law full, but the Manner, Measure, Time,
Degree, and other circumstances whereof are left to our Discretion, which being
made the subject of a Vow, becomes plain Duty: To make a Vow about such a
thing, is Arbitrary; but to keep it when made, Necessary: For such Vows bind
out Consciences, and the keeping of them cannot be neglected without Sin: For
instance; I reckon it indifferent (i. e. left to the discretion of an honest
Heart) how often we shall keep private Religious Fasts: But if I make a Vow
that I Will keep one every Month, or once every Quarter; it ceases to be
Indifferent to me, and becomes my plain Duty; from which nothing but Necessity
can afford a Dispensation. It was Indifferent for Ananias to have sold or held
his Possession: But when once by a Solemn Vow he had devoted it unto God, the
keeping back any part of the Price in his own hands, was no less than
Sacrilege. Some I know are too strait laced to assent to this Position; but
they would find themselves hard put to it, to assign any just Reason, why a Man may
not bind himself in Sacred as well as in Civil Matters, where the Divine Law
lays no Curb or Restraint. As for the Limitations that should attend Vows of
this kind, they may be seen in the Sixteenth Chapter of this Discourse.

5. A Solemn Vow, may and does super-add a Force to the Obligation we might
before be under to any thing as an unquestionable Duty: This the Romanists
generally deny; and Bellarmine particularly warmly opposes it: Bellarm.
Disputat. de Controversiis Tom 2. Lib. 2. Cap 19.
It is their common Doctrine, That a thing due and necessary, cannot be the
matter of a proper Vow to God: But it must always be something Indifferent and
Arbitrary: But herein they are needlessly litigious: For was Jacobs Vow about a
thing Indifferent, when he Vowed The Lord should be his God? Genesis 28. 21.
Was it not his Duty to own and honor God before he made that Vow? How then
can their Doctrine hold? And why may not we be several ways bound and obliged
to the same thing? A double is stronger than a single Cord; and a double
Obligation more strongly binds. A Vow is no more an intimation, that the matter
of it was not before a Duty, but when it was so, implies a sense of it, and is
designed to be a spur to it. When I Vow any thing that is Commanded, besides my
Obligation to that which is the subject of my Vow, and the matter of my Duty, I
am also under another Divine Obligation to keeep my Vow: And I who was before
obliged by God, do by my Vow oblige my self; and therefore a greater Penalty
will be my due, if I now offend, than before: Which is so consonant both to
Reason and Scripture, that it cannot be contested by any who love not to strive
about Words.

6. DIVINE Vows are of several sorts, and so are capable of different
Consideration; they may be much diversified by the different consideration,
either of him to whom they are made, or of Us who come under them, or of their
matter, or of the Circumstances that attend them.

1. As for the Blessed God, to whom Vows are made, they may refer to him under
several Notions: Either, First, As our Absolute Owner and Ruler and Chief
Benefactor. Or, Secondly, As our Gracious Redeemer and Savior from that
Universal Ruin, that was the deserved fruit and effect of Man's Revolt and
Apostasy. Or, Thirdly, As either desired to be, or actually being, our Temporal
Deliverer and Preserver. Or, Fourthly, As the great Searcher of Hearts,
Inspector of our Actions, and Universal Judge of the World. Which Notions of
him to whom our Vows are addressed are so very different, that according as
either of them is principally regarded, they must needs much alter them, in
their Nature, Intent, Purport, and Consequences.

2. As for us, who come under Vows to God, we may be considered, either as
Rational Creatures, or as Christians, which makes a considerable difference:
For though no Vows can become us under the latter, that are any way inconsistent
with the former Notion; yet do those whereto the former obliges, fall far short
of what the latter engages to: Nay further, as Christians, we may in this case
be considered in our several different Relations, Capacities, Stations, and
Circumstances, which may create no small difference in the Vows that
respectively suit them: Nay we may be considered either as Acting for our
selves, or as being bound by what is done by others: Which makes it necessary
for us to allow of a Distinction between Personal and Parental Vows; the Vows
of Parents having in some cases as real a binding force on their Children, as
those wherein they actually engage themselves. As will appear in the Process of
this Discourse.

3. THE Matter of our Vows may be different. Not to multiply Distinctions; that
about which we go to make a Vow may be either Necessary or Arbitrary. We may
either be obliged to it before, or left to our Liberty; which Liberty of ours
we for our own Security, and that we may be at a fixed point, set Limits and
Restraints to; which in many cases may be expedient, lest we err, either by
excess on the one hand, or neglect on the other. Again, Vows of either kind,
may be either Positive, or Negative.; according as we bind our selves either to
the doing, or forbearance of any thing.

4. THE Circumstances that may attend our Vows, may be very different, by which
they may be much diversified: 'Twould be to little purpose to mention the many
Divisions into which they might be sorted on that Account. Among others, they
may make them either Absolute or Conditional; Private or Solemn; Stated or
Occasional; Temporary or Perpetual; the difference whereof I need not explain:
But there is one Division arising hence, which is into Virtual and Explicit,
that needs a Remark. For a Vow may be impli'd where it is not positively
expressed; it may be intimated by attendant Actions, where it is not expressly
specified. It was so heretofore in Circumcision. That Rite, contained in it a
Virtual Vow of keeping the whole Mosaic Law; and it may be so in other cases.
But generally Speaking the more express and particular we are in matters of
this Nature, the clearer is our procedure, and the less danger is there of
Mistakes or Failures, and the greater is the Awe that is likely to be thereby
impressed.

BUT waving the many sortments into which Divine Vows may be ranked: It Is my
design in the ensuing Discourse; First, Lightly to touch on the General Vow,
whereby we devote our Selves and our All to the Great God, as our Absolute
Owner and Proprietor, which all Rational Creatures, as such, are obliged to do:
And then to proceed to the Consideration of the Sacramental Vows of Christians
(which I principally had in my Eye in this Undertaking) whereby they are
engaged to an Hearty, Constant Devotedness to God the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost; which Vows, with their attendant Solemnities, I shall distinctly
open, and endeavor to enforce; doing my utmost to help my Readers, rightly to
understand them, and to engage them faithfully to pay them. Whereto I shall
subjoyn some brief Remarks on Particular Vows; showing how they must be limited
that they may be Warrantable; and in what cases they may be dispensed with. To
which an Account of Sickbed Vows, or such as are made in the time of Distress,
together with a Sense of them that should be afterward retained, being added;
I think I shall have taken in all that is most Needful and Useful, wherewith
this Subject of Vows could furnish me.

CHAP. II.
Of the General Vow, whereby all that we are and have, is sincerely Devoted to
God, as our Absolute Owner and Proprietor.

AMONG the several sorts of Vows, whereby we are capable of binding our selves
to the Blessed God; that which first offers it self to our consideration, is a
General or Universal One; whereby we, with a Sincere and Hearty Affection,
Consecrate to him ourselves, and all that we are and have: Humbly Submitting
all to his Will, and freely leaving it to him, to do with us, and all that is
ours, as he sees good. Whereon I make the ensuing Observations.

1. A VOW of this sort all Rational Creatures are obliged to make. The Great
God is our Maker, and constant Maintainer; the Owner and Donour of all we enjoy
any delight or comfort in, or have any help and succor from, and therefore
has an indisputable right to do what he pleases with all. He retains the
Propriety even where he gives us the fullest Possession and freest Use; and
certainly may do what he will with his own: The Acknowledgement of this his
Right, is our unquestionable Duty: Which Acknowledgment can no way be so well
made as by a Vow of this Nature. The Duty of Prayer indeed eyes God under the
Notion of our Absolute Proprietor, and carries in it an Acknowledgment of this
Right of his; but not with that Engagement of a Return of suitable Duty that is
implied in such a Vow; which Engagement, is that which a due sense of Gods
Right most naturally calls for, and necessarily demands. Would I here give my
self scope (which my designed brevity allows not) I could cite sundry Passages
out of Heathen Writers Many pas sages to this purpose are obvious in Epictetu,
and Arrian, and Simplicius his Comments on him; in Seneca and Antoninus, and
Maximn* Tyrius, and sundry others of the same stamp.
looking this way, that might convince Multitudes of Christians of a Shameful
Neglect.

2. THIS Vow must be made Absolutely. We must not pretend to add any Limits,
Clogs, or Conditions. But whatever comes, whatever we want, or however we in
any respect are dealt withal, we must engage to Acquiesce in the Will of God;
we must heartily give up ourSelves and our all to him, without any
Restrictions. This Vow indeed when made by Jacob, seems to have a limitation
annexed to it; for we are told, That Jacob Vowed a Vow, saying, if God will be
with me, and will keep me in this way that I Genesis 28. 20. 21.
go, and will give me bread to Eat, and Raiment to put on, so that I come again
to my Fathers house in Peace: then shall the Lord be my God. Then will I take
him for my Portion, and give up my self and my all to him. Some may be apt to
take this restrainedly; as if Jacob meant, that unless God did so and so by
him, he would not stand engaged: But it is no such matter, he makes no such
terms: For it may be observed, That God, in the 15th verse of this Chapter, had
made Jacob a Promise of that of which he in this Vow of his intimates his
desire: Being therefore assured God would deal so Mercifully with him, he
engages himself anew, to that to which he was before obliged, from the
consideration of this his designed and assured Kindness. And though we read it IF
God will be with me, and keep me, etc. yet we might as well turn it, SEEING God
will be with me and do so and so to me; I am therefore the more obliged to give
up my self to him, which Obligation, I Will carefully endeavor to Answer. So
that there remains not the least shadow of a Limitation or Condition in Jacobs
Vow; nor should there in any Vows of ours of the same Nature.

3. THIS Vow is seldom heartily made by any, till some Awakening Providence
produces a lively Convictiof their entire Dependence on the Almighty. I say,
seldom, not never; by reason there are Extraordinary Persons and Cases; but I
am satisfied they are not often to be met with. We hear not of Jacobs making
such a Vow while he was at home, in his Fathers House, and in his Mothers Arms;
while he lived there free from Cares and Fears; but when he was forced to fly
to save his Life, and put to shift for himself in the wide World, he then
seriously reflects upon his absolute Dependence on God, and the need he stood
in of his Protection and Care, which put him upon making the Vow before
mentioned: And I verily believe, There are few that seriously and in earnest
make the like Vow, that are not by some Trouble, Distress, or Difficulty,
convinced of the Necessity of it: Which is a sad instance of the prevailing
disingenuity of Humane Nature.

4. When such a Vow is once Seriously made, it must needs much influence the
after Life. It may be made from the Teeth outward, and produce no considerable
Effects: But where this Affair is managed with any degree of that Seriousness
that suits a matter of such Importance; it cannot but command the stated Temper
and Carriage. Those that were in earnest when they made such a Vow, must
necessarily be Contented and Patient, Submissive and Resigned to the will of
God; without giving way to Fretting, Murmuring, or Repining; Careful to employ
all for God which they have Devoted to him; and often mindful of their future
Account. Allowance must indeed be made for that mixture of Corruption, and
those Weaknesses, Failures and Defects, that are observable in the best: But
thus it must be with them in a prevailing degree.

5. A Due sense of such a Vow, lays a Foundation for a Solid Peace, in all
estates and conditions of Life. What can disturb those that thus Stay
themselves on God; and are bent and determined to acquiesce in his Pleasure?
They have put themselves in his hands, and so are out of the reach of many of
those things that are most apt to Ruffle and Shatter us. They lie at Anchor and
are Safe, in the midst of the greatest Storms and Tempests. They have a Refuge
at hand in the Greatest Troubles, whither they may fly and be Secure. While
they can keep their hold of him to whom they have Devoted themselves and their
all, they need never be at a loss; they can have no just occasion for
Tormenting Anxiety, or Sinking Fears.

6thly and Lastly, THIS Vow may and should be repeated, upon certain Occasions,
in order to our Excitation, Confirmation and Support. Suppose we meet with any
Uncommon Troubles; are Exercised with variety of Trials successively; are under
a complicated Affliction, that has been Long and Burdensome; or in any other
cases that need not be Specified, when we find our Faith weakened; our Patience
almost tired, and our Hope sinking (which has been the case of many of Gods
Dearest and most Faithful Servants) we should do well to renew this Vow, and
that with all the Seriousness and Solemnity we are able; which would be as
likely a means as any to Excite our Languishing Vigor, Confirm our Faith,
Support our Hope, and help us to that Comfort, which none can have such just
grounds to expect, as those who are the Faithful Devoted Ones, of the Lord most
High.

CHAP. III.
Of Sacramental VOWS.

VOWS of all sorts are Sacred and Awful Things, but none so Tremenduous, as
those which are attended with Sacramental Solemnities; in which, both Gods
Promises, and Man's Purposes, are by sensible signs and external actions,
Represented, Ratified and Established: We had need therefore take care rightly
to understand them, because our Lives are to be constantly Governed by them.

THE Christian Vow (i. e. The Vow which our Holy Profession, as such, engages
us in) is of all others the most Weighty and Important, the most Sacred and
Inviolable: It Is that wherein all, both Young and Old, that name the Name of
Christ, are most nearly concerned; no less a matter than the Life or Death of
their Immortal Souls, depending on the faithful keeping, or perfidious breaking
of it: Which consideration, should methinks, command a Serious Regard to what
is laid down in order to its Explication, from all that are not utterly Stupid
and Senseless.

THAT I may be as Clear and Distinct as I can, I Will First, Consider Sacramental
Vows more generally; and then, Secondly, Consider the Christian Vow, as made in
each of the Instituted Sacraments, more particularly.

WHAT is most needful, in order to the opening the general nature of
Sacramental Vows, is comprehended in the following Propositions.

1. VOWS have ever been an Essentlal part of Covenant Transactions between God
and Man. It has pleased the Great God, whose Right to Command us is Absolute
and Uncontrollable, so far to Condescend, as to Treat with Man in a Covenant
Way: That is to say, He does not merely exert his Authority in Commanding, but
has pitched on a way of Mutual Agreement. His Language to us might have been of
this Nature; Do this and that, and whatever I think fit to enjoin, upon pain of
my utmost Displeasure; Do it, or I Will severely punish you; Do it, or I Will come
forth in an Hostile manner, and Fight against you till I have quite Consumed
you; Do what I require, or expect the Severest Treatment that is possible from
an Angry God; and so he might have exacted Duty of us, upon a Terrible Penalty
Threatened, without any Promise annexed. But he delights not in acting upon mere
Prerogative; and has therefore tempered his Authority and Sovereignty with
great Sweetness and Beneficence; still treating with us upon Gracious Terms. Do
you (says he to us) thus and thus; and such and such shall be my Carriage; be
you careful of your Duty, and I Will afford you my Favor; and give you this and
that, and the other mark of it. Behold, says God to us, I am ready to Bless
you: But as ever you expect I should do it, I expect you should do what I
command you. This is a Covenant Form of Dealing; in which there are supposed to
be Blessings Promised on Gods part, and Duties required on ours; which Duties
are pre-requir'd to the actual Enjoyment of the Blessings promised. When a
Covenant therefore is entered into between God and Man, as there is a
Stipulation on Gods part of the Blessings promised; so is there supposed to be
a Vow on Man's part, of the Duty required: And this Vowing is an Essential part
of every such Covenant. It Is the end of every Covenant to bring us nearer to
God; it is in order to it that he makes us such Promises: Now a Serious and
Sincere Vow on our part, is the Band. It Is that properly that binds us to God;
and consequently engages him to make good his general Promises to us in
Particular.

WE may observe therefore a Vow in all Covenants between God and Man. Thus we
find God entering into Covenant with Abraham. Genesis 17. I will make my Covenant
between me and thee, says God to him. verse 2. The particular Promises of this
Covenant on Gods part, you have verse 6, 7, 8. I will make thee exceeding
fruitful, and I will esta lish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy Seed
after thee, in their Generations, for an Everlasting Covenant, to be a God unto
thee, and to thy Seed after thee: And I will give unto thee, and to thy Seed
after thee, the Land of Canaan. This was it, that God engaged to: Now there
must further be something required by God to be engaged to on Abraham's part,
or else 'twould be a mere Promise, and not a Covenant. What that was, we see
verse 10. This is my Covenant which ye shall keep between me and you, and thy
Seed after thee, every Man-Child among you shall be Circumcised. This God makes
Abrams Duty, as ever he expected he should make good his Word and fulfill his
Promises. This therefore Abraham in entering into Covenant with God, Solemnly
Vowed; and he kept his Vow; for that very day he Circumcised all the Males in
his Family; and he left it as as his Command to his Posterity in all Successive
Generations, to Circumcise their Children when they were Eight Days old; which
they punctually obeyed. So also afterward, when God entered into a National
Covenant with the wholeBody of the Israelites, as he did at Mount Sinai: He,
First, Lays before them their duty with reference to Morals, Exodus 20. And as
to Judicial and Ceremonial Matters: Chap. 21, 22. and part of the 23. And so
gives them a full and particular account of what he expected from them: And
then he proceeds to tell them, what he would do for them; and makes them a
great many Promises of Peculiar Kindness; from verse 23, of Chap. 23, to the
end. He engages, if they would be Obedient, to guide them in their Way, to
drive out their Enemies before them, to bring them safe into the Land promised
to their Fathers, and there Preserve and Bless them. This being done, the
actual Covenanting follows. Chap. 24. 7, 8. Consisting of a Solemn Vow on the
part of all the People, and a confirming Rite on Moses's part, as Gods
Representative. And he took (says the Text) the Book of the Covenant (i. e. the
Law forementioned, the matter of of the Covenant they were entering into) and
read in the Audience of the People: And they said, All that the Lord has said
will we do, and be Obedient. Here we see all the People, as one Man, expressly
Vowing Obedience to the whole Law. And then (it follows) Moses took the Blood
and Sprinkled it on the People, and said, Behold the Blood of the Covenant,
which the Lord has made with you, concerning all these words. They having
first by a Solemn Vow, bound themselves to God, and to Obedience to him, Moses
by Gods command, uses the External Sign of Sprinkling Blood, to show that God
looked on his Promises as binding upon him.

Now under the New Testament, there are two Foederal Transactions between God
and us. Instituted as Ordinances in the Christian Church, to which we commonly
give the Name of Sacraments; in both which, we may observe the same Procedure.
Both are on Gods part seals of the Blessings of the Covenant of Grace; and on
Man's part Engagements to all the Duties of that Covenant. As Gods part lies in
Promises, and their Ratifications and Assuring Pledges; so does Man's in Vows,
and their Confirming Rites. God engages to be our God, and to carry it to us
like a God: We Vow to be his People, and to carry it to him like his People.
God engages to make good his Promises not only in the general, but to those
Persons in Particular, who seriously enter into Covenant with him: Man is
thereby bound and engaged to all Prescribed Duty, not only in general and in
common with others, but Particularly and by Name.

2. The Christian Vow, in both the Sacraments of the New Testament, has a
particular Relation to God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, according
to their distinct Agency in the great Work of our Redemption and Salvation.
Each Person in the Sacred Trinity, has an hand in Saving Man: The work of each
is distinct; and therefore the Duty to each is distinct; and consequently the
Christian Vow, must besides what is owing to the Great God in common, contain
an Engagement to the special Duties owing to each Person.

TO the Father we find in Scripture, the Honor is peculiarly Ascribed, of
being the Contriver of the Method of our Salvation. 'Twas He whose Love to us
was such, as to move him to send his Son to Redeem us, and his Spirit to
Sanctify us. 'Twas He that sent his Son in our Nature, to Dye a Sacrifice, and
make Expiation for Sin; and it is He that sends his Spirit to apply and convey
the Benefits Merited by the Oblation of that Sacrifice. 'Twas the Father that
Invested Christ the Mediator with his Authority and Power: It Is on the Father
(as maintaining the Rights of the whole Deity) Man's Apostasy is Represented as
peculiarly Reflecting: And it is He who through his Son, offers to be Reconciled
to a Rebellious World. He is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; and in and
through him, Ready to be our Father. It Is back again to him that Christ Died to
bring us; He is therefore to be regarded as our Ultimate End.

ACCORDINGLY; that part of the Christian Vow, which relates to God the Father,
is this: Admiring his Matehless Wisdom, and Adoring his Unfathomable Love, to
give up our selves to him anew, with hearty Sorrow that ever we should have
Revolted from him: To take him for our Father through Christ, engaging to carry
it like Children to him; with a Child-like Love to him, Reverential Fear and
Worship of him, Delight, Trust, and Confidence in him, Hearty D^dence on him,
and Obedience to ^im: to make his Glory our utmost Aim, and expect our Final
Happiness in him alone.

AS for the Son, He is represented as the Worker out of our Redemption: 'Twas
he who Purchased our Pardon, and paid the price of our Peace. He is the Fathers
Prime Messenger to this Lower World; the Great Prophet of the Church; sent on
purpose to Reveal Gods Mind and Will to Men, and instruct them in the way to
Heaven. He was constituted the Great High Priest, to make Atonement, Satisfy
Offended Justice, and Salve the Injured Rights of the Divine Government; to
Expiate Sin, by Offering an Acceptable Sacrifice, and to Interceed with the
Blood of it within the Veil, in the Holy of Holies, in the Heavenly Tabernacle.
Him has God set as his King on Zion; and to him is every knee to Bow, and him
are all to Honor, even as they do the Father: For he has put all Power in
Heaven and Earth into his Hands: It Is on his Shoulders the Divine Government
lies; and to him it belongs to give Laws to his Church. He was a walking
Mirror of Divinity in this Lower World, being Emanuel, God with us; a complete
Pattern of the Perfection of Holiness. He is the Captain of our Salvation; the
Skilful Physician of Souls; the Light of the World; the way to the Father, and
the Lord of Life: And he will come again at last, to raise us from Death, and
Judge the World, and Justify his Saints, and bring them to Eternal Glory, and
cast the Wicked into utter Misery.

AND accordingly that part of the Christians Sacramental Vows that relates to
God the Son, is this: Admiring his Amazing Condescension and Matchless Love, in
taking our Nature upon him, with its many Infirmities, and therein doing,
undergoing, and Suffering so much for our sakes; to Consecrate our selves to
him; firmly Resolving (with Divine Assistance) that we will not live unto our
selves, but to him who Died for us, and Rose again. It Is an hearty taking him
for our Savior; closing in with all the parts of his Saving Office. An
engagement readily to hearken to his Voice, by whom God who in times past,
spoke to the Fathers by the Prophets, has in these last days spoken to us. To
Credit all his Reports; and Trust in all his Promises; to depend solely on his
Atonement for Pardon and Divine Acceptance, Justification and Life; to use him
upon all occasions as our Advocate, who sits in our Nature at the Right hand of
the Throne of the Majesty on high. It is a swearing Fealty to him as our
Sovereign; engaging to yield Submission to his Authority and Governing Power;
to stand in awe of all his Threatenings, and sincerely obey all his Commands: To
Immitate his Example; and endeavor to copy out in ours, the Excellencies and
Perfections of his Temper and of his Life: To follow him as our Captain whither
soever he shall lead us: To Fight under his Banner against all his Enemies; and
to bear all his Discipline: To use him as our Physician, Trusting in his Skill,
following all his Prescriptions, and cheerfully taking all his Saving
Medicines, how bitter and distastful soever to Flesh and Blood: To wait in
expectation of his return in Glory; and live in the comfortable hope of his
coming to Judgment, and owning us before his Father and all his Holy Angels;
and taking us to himself, to be for ever with him beholding his Glory.

AS for the Holy Ghost, his work is to supply our Saviors Place here on Earth;
to be the Guide and the Inmate, the Helper and Asistant, the Comforter and
Support of all the Faithful: To apply all the Benefits that our Lord has
Purchased. 'Twas he that Inspired all the Penmen of Holy Writ; and 'twas under
his peculiar conduct that they committed the Sacred Records to Writing, for the
use of the Church in all Ages: 'Twas he that gave such convincing Evidence of
the Truth of Christianity at first, by Innumerable, Open and Uncontrollable
Miracles, in order to the first Introducing it into the World, and the
confirming the Faith of it in all after times; and it is he that has been
giving his Testimony to the Truth thereof in all succeeding Ages, even down to
this very day, in producing the Saving Effects thereof on Men's Hearts,
notwithstanding so much, such united and such vigorous Opposition. It Is his
office to Illuminate, convince of Sin, Righteousness and Judgment; to Quicken,
Strengthen, Comfort, Succor, Guard, and Enliven, and Seal unto the day of
Redemption* He is the Author of all saving Light and Grace; and the first
spring of every good Work; the Beginner, Maintainer, and Encreaser of the
Spiritual Life, and Issuer of it in that that will be Eternal.

AND accordingly that part of a Christians Sacramental Vows that relates to God
the Holy Ghost, is a serious engagement to use him as our Saviors Deputy in
all the parts of his Office; to take the Holy Scriptures as of his Inspiration,
as the rule of our Faith and Life; and to adhere to that Religion, the Truth
whereof he has so many ways attested: Earnestly to implore his help and
assistance; and carefully to use it when given: to keep our Minds open to his
Light; to yield to his Convictions, and comply with his Motions; to hearken to
his Voice and follow his Conduct; to wait humbly for him in all ways of Divine
Appointment; to depend upon his Aids; to receive his Comforts; and by Strength
derived from him, to be continually walking in the way of Holiness toward
Everlasting Happiness. Thus are each of the Persons in the Trinity distinctly
concerned in our Sacramental Vows.

3. OUR Sacramental Vows summarily comprehend the whole of our Religion. A
great Noise and Stir there has been in the World about Fundamentals; fierce
and earnest have been the Disputes among the Learned about the number and
nature of them; and various have been the ways pitched on to determine what
points are absolutely Necessary, and what not: But when all is done, the
Christian Covenant, which in Baptism is Initiated, and afterward at the Lords
Table renewed, confirmed and ratified; would, if rightly considered, give us
the clearest Notions of the great Essentials of our Holy Religion. All the
great Principles of our Faith, are comprehended under the distinct Agency of
God the Father, Son and Spirit, in bringing about our Salvation and Happiness,
to which our Sacramental Vows have a direct Reference, as appears from the
former head: And as for the Practical part of our Religion, no Essential of
that can be wanting in them, since they take in the whole compass of our Duty.
The whole Moral Law, which always was, is and will be the Rule of Duty, is
reducible to two Heads: The Love of God and our Neighbor. As for the Love of
God, that is to be expressed by a serious Acknowledgement of him, and renouncing
all that would rival it with him; an hearty zeal for his Worship, and his Name;
and a punctual Sanctifying of that Portion of time he has consecrated for
himself. And if we heartily Love our Neighbors, we shall be ready to do to
them, as we would have them in like Circumstances do to us; to give all the
respect to any that is due to their place; and to be tender of the Life,
Chastity, Goods and Name, of all we have to do with; and never envy their
Prosperity: To all which our Sacramental Vows are Solemn Engagements: And so
are they also to all those Duties, which our Blessed Savior, has in the
Gospel peculiarly enforct; as Self-denial, Mortification, the taking up of our
Cross; giving and forgiving Charity; Relieving the Poor, Succouring the
Distressed, and helping the Necessitous; forgiving Injuries without
Retalliating, or giving way to Revenge; Unity and Peace and the like. Would we
therefore have a complete and full, a distinct and clear and comprehensive Idea
of our whole Religion; would we take it in at one view, that we may the better
discern its Excellency, Order and Beauty, and be the more Enamoured with it,
let us turn our eyes to the Christian Covenant, to our Sacramental Vows, and
there we may have it.

4. THE Obligation and Binding Force of Sacramental Vows, is Perpetual and can
never cease. The Acts themselves may be quickly performed, and soon over: But
their Obligation will last as long as our lives. Some sorts of Vows may cease
to be binding; when the reason of them ceases, or a greater Duty would be
hindered, or a greater danger Incurred, or the like: But none of these things
can happen as to those our Vows that are attended with Sacramental Solemnities.
Perseverance and Constancy in our Duty to the last, is one part of the matter
of those Vows: For we do therein engage, not only that we'll be Faithful and
Dutiful and Obedient in the general, but that we'll persist and hold on in our
Duty, whatsoever it costs us, and whatever troubles or difficulties we meet
withal: That by the strength of God we will not flinch nor give way; that if we
fail, we'll be Sorry and Repent, and Divine Grace assisting us, to our work
again; and so doing hold out to the last; till in fighting the good fight of
Faith, we have finished our course, and so come to lay hold on Eternal Life.

CHAP. IV.
Of the BAPTISMAL VOW. The Sum of it in Form, as made by Persons Baptized when
ADULT.

BAPTISM was Instituted by our Blessed Lord as a Sacred Rite, whereby Persons
were to be first Initiated into the Christian Covenant: And be it sooner or
later Administered, it carries in it an Obligation to all the duties of that
Covenant, on which its Blessings, are suspended. In Baptism there is always
either expressed or implied a Vow of hearty compliance with all the demands of
our Holy Religion; without which supposed, the pouring on of Water, in the name
of the Father, Son and Spirit, by the Minister as Gods Representative, would be
utterly Unavailable either to seal or convey those Inestimable Gospel Blessings
of Pardon and Peace, Adoption, and a Right to Life. But this Vow must be
differently considered by all that would avoid Confusion, according to the
Different state of the Subjects of Baptism; which are either Persons Adult,
that are come to years of Understanding, and so are capable of transacting
Personally for themselves; or the Children of Christian Parents in their Infant
State. The case of the former is the subject of this; and that of the latter,
of the following Chapter.

ADULT Persons before they are Baptized, ought seriously to consider, what
Christianity will oblige them to, and to reckon their costs before hand, that
they may come under so Solemn an Engagement as Baptism carries in it,
understandingly, deliberately, and with full consent of Heart, that there may
be no danger of after drawing back.

THE Vow which they in their Baptism actually, and voluntarily, make and come
under, is of this Tenor, and may be drawn up in Form thus:

I Believe in an Eternal Infinitely Glorious God, who made Heaven and Earth:
and in Jesus Christ his only Son, who Redeemed Mankind from Misery and Wrath:
And in the Ever Blessed Spirit, the Fountain of all Grace and Peace.

TO this God the Father, Son and Spirit, I willingly, freely, and cheerfully
consecrate my self. For I am sensible God is my Owner and Proprietor; to him
therefore I make an Absolute Resignation of my self, and all that is or ever
shall be mine as his own; engaging to use my self, and all that I have as his,
and contentedly to rest in all his Disposals. And it being my Rectitude and
Happinefs to Obey and Please Him, I Will labor to bring both my Soul and Body
into the most Absolute Subjection to him, and to make it my Delight and
Business sincerely and exactly to Obey Him. I Will Love Him with my whole Heart
and Soul, and Mind and Might; and quiet my self in his Love and Faithfulness,
whatever shall befall me in the World. I Will lead a Life of Thankfulness to him
for his Innumerable Benefits, and endeavor to Glorify him with the estimation
of my Mind, the Praises of my Mouth, and the Holiness of my Life and
Conversation.

WITH Humble Thankfulness I Adore my Dearest Savior for his Redeeming Love;
and on his Merits I Will bottom all my hopes of Pardon, Justification and Eternal
Life: I am heartily grieved for all my Sins, and sensible they would undo me
without his help and interposition; to him therefore I fly as my City of
Refuge; Him I resolve constantly to use as the means of my Souls access to God,
acceptance with him, and help and comfort from him; and I Will entertain no
thoughts of coming to the Father but by him. And he being the great Prophet and
Teacher of his Church, I Will humbly wait as a Scholar in his School, to learn of
him by his Spirit, Word, and Ministers, the further knowledge of God and of the
things that tend to my Salvation; and this with an honest, willing, and
teacheable Mind; in Faith, Diligence, Obedience, Patience and Peace. I now
swear ^ealty to him as my Lord and King; and Vow sincere Obedience to all his
Holy Laws and Commandments. I Will Imitate him as my Pattern; and write after the
Copy that he has set me, both as to my Temper and my Life. I Will use him as the
Great Physician of Souls, and take all his saving Medicines, how unpleasing and
distastful soever. I Will follow him as the Captain of my Salvation,
whithersoever he shall lead me; and spend my days in a Vigilant, Resolute, and
Constant War, against the Flesh, the World, and the Devil.

FOR I renounce the Flesh that is Naturally pleased with Sin, and impatient of
Necessary Confinements; I renounce Self as my end: I also renounce the World,
which is so apt to administer Food and Fuel to my Lusts; I renounce all that in
it wherewith the Carnal part is gratified; as Matters of Pleasure, Profit, or
Honor; not regarding them as means to my Happiness: I renounce the Devil and
all subjection to him; it is Christ the Lord of Life to whom I Will look, it is his
Subject I resolve to be.

I Will Humbly, Earnestly, Daily, Implore the help and assistance of the Blessed
Spirit of Grace; that he may reside in me, and be the Life of my Soul; and by
the help of God, I wont Resist or Quench him, but thankfully Obey him. The
Scriptures by him Inspired, I take for the Rule of my Faith and Life, and
engage to keep close to: And Christianity, to the Truth whereof he so many ways
has set his Seal, is the Religion I Will profess, thereto I Will adhere, and
therein alone expect Salvation. On the assistance of this Blessed Spirit alone,
shall be all my dependence in the Christian Life; and his Conduct I Will follow
through all Difficulties and Temptations, in the way of Holiness toward
Everlasting Happiness.

FOR it shall be my constant endeavor to adorn the Doctrine of God my Savior
in all things, by living Soberly, Righteously, and Godlily in this present
World. I Will do my Gracious God all the service, and others all the good I can,
in works of Piety, Justice, and Charity, with Prudence, Fidelity, Industry,
Zeal and Delight; like one that knows it is God that intrusts me with all my
Talents, of the Improvement whereof I must give a strict Account. I Will be
careful to render unto all their dues; Tribute to whom Tribute is due; Custom
to whom Custom, Fear to whom Fear, and Honor to whom Honor; and to owe no Man
any thing but Love: And that is a Debt which I Will be continually paying by all
suitable expressions of Affection and Tenderness to all I have to do with;
especially those to whom Nature or Providence has peculiarly linked me. I Will
Love all that have the same Nature with my self; but more especially who are
Children with me of the same Heavenly Father; Members of the same Body, and
Heirs of the same Inheritance: And in general I Will make this my Rule, to do to
others as I would my self be done unto. I Will carefully put a way from me all
Wrath, Anger, and Clamor, and beware of all Violent Passion. I Will keep at the
greatest distance from any sort of Lewdness or Wantonness; I Will hate and abhor
all Lying and Slandering, Backbiting and Detracting; and by the Grace of God
never suffer my self to envy my Neighbors Prosperity, or Rejoice in his
Adversity: But I will be Pitiful and Courteous, Tenderhearted and
Compassionate; I Will Relieve the Necessitous, Feed the Hungry, Cloth the Naked,
Entertain Strangers, and visit the Sick and the Imprisoned, as I have ability
and opportunity, which are things my Blessed Lord has testified are very
acceptable and pleasing to him. I Will faithfully endeavor to fill up all my
places and Relations with suitable prescribed Duty; and to employ all my Trusts
for God. I Will be orderly in in his Church, and therein submit to all his
Discipline, and endeavor to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace.
I Will maintain no Grudges against any; but when injured, will be ready to
forgive, as God (I hope) for Christ's sake will forgive me. I Will take up my
Cross whenever called to it, and rather forsake all things than desert my God
and Savior.

And since my Weakness is such, as that let me do my best, I shall often
stumble and fall; whenever I do so, I Will renew my Repentance, and Divine Grace
enabling me, return again to my Obedience.

AND since it has pleased my Dearest Savior to Institute a standing Memorial
in his Church, of his Death and Passion, to be Solemnized by all who pretend to
be his Followers; I do therefore Solemnly Vow and Promise, with an Humble
Penitent and Believing Heart, to come unto his Table when I am invited and
called: And to join in that Sacred Solemnity, that I may thereby testify my
Union with the Church, my Charity for all, and my Thankfulness to Christ; And
will never forget his Unspeakable Love to my poor Soul, manifested in his
Sacrifice of Everlasting Virtue; and will hope according to the Integrity of my
Heart, that though my Failings be many, yet he will increase my Graces and
Heavenly Comforts upon my waiting upon him therein.

AND in the keeping of this my Vow, and acting agreeably thereunto, I Resolve,
by the Assistance of that Grace which God has promised, to Persevere and hold
on to the end of my days; Living in the constant expectation of Death,
Judgment, and Eternity, and my Lords Return.

THIS is the Nature and Purport of that Vow or Engagement which Christianity
obliges all its Adult Votaries freely to come under: And this is the substance
of all our Religion.

I Appeal to all (that will take the pains to read and review it) Whether this
Vow thus drawn up, contains any thing unreasonable? Whether there is not the
highest Reason running through it? Whether any Branch of it is liable to any just
Exceptions? Whether those who refuse to come under it, or being under it, to
obey it, are not Enemies to themselves, as well as to God? Whether it contains
any thing impossible to a willing Mind? And whether it would not be happy for
the World, and reflect a great Luster upon Religion, if it were faithfully and
punctually kept by all that are under it?

HERE I desire it may be Observed.

1. THAT it was much more usual for Persons first to come under this Vow in
Baptism in an Adult State, in the Primitive Church than in after times. For
when Christianity first made its entrance, it found the World in possession of
sundry Religions; in which those of that Age were bred up, and in the practice
whereof they persisted, till they were better informed by Gospel Light; which
spreading and diffusing it self far and wide, insinuating it self into Men's
minds, and carrying its own convictive evidence along with it, which was backed
by the Miraculous Power then resident in the Church, brought in Proselites in
abundance, from Judaism and Gentilism, in all its Forms to Christianity in a
full age; till which time therefore they were incapable of being Baptized, and
coming under the Vow foregoing: But when Christianity having justled out its
Rival Religions came to be fixed and settled, Parents generally thought it their
Duty to get their Childrens Names inscribed in the Christian Roll from their
Infancy, and to enter them into a Sacred Bond to be the Lords in Baptism, and
actually did so: So that afterward none remained to be Baptized when Adult,
but either those whose Parents neglected to devote them to the Lord by that
Sacred Rite, in their Infant state; or those who were themselves Proselyted to
Christianity after they came to Maturity; which after the three or four first
Ages of the Church were all along comparatively few.

2. THAT the more publicly this Vow is made by those who are Baptized when
Adult, it is so much the better. In the Primitive Church 'twas generally in the
face of a Christian Assembly that this Affair was transacted and though it cannot
be justly pretended that its validity at all depends upon the publickness of
it, yet is it unquestionable that its ends will be thereby the better answered:
It makes it much more Solemn; there will be the more Witnesses, who may be
afterward Monitors if there be occasion; and the greater Force will it
probably have, and the greater is the Awe that is likely to be thereby impressed.

3. THAT this Vow is by no means to be confined to the Adult: But even those
who are Baptized when Infants, areas much concerned in it. For (1.) their
Infant Dedication to God in Covenant, obliges them to stand to and keep this
Vow as much as if'twere Personally made in their first Consecration. And (2.)
Their Infant Baptism obliges them actually to make a Vow of this Nature when
they come to Age, and so are capable of Personal Covenanting for themselves.
Which matters will receive no small light from the following Chapter.

CHAP. V.
Of the Baptismal Vow, as to those Baptized in Infancy. An Account of the
distinct concern of Parents and Children in it; and a distinct Address to each
concerning the Duty thence resulting.

THOUGH the case of Persons Baptized when Adult be more clear, yet is that of
those Baptized in Infancy much more common in the days we live in; and so it
has been in the Church now for several Ages. Though the Obligation of the former
by the Baptismal Vow be more immediate, and therefore more obvious and sensibly
discernable, yet is that of the latter, as fully and sufficiently evident, if
rightly stated.

I design not to run out into Disputes; and shall therefore take that for
granted which so many Eminent Persons of all Professions have so Laboriously
and Clearly Proved, viz. That it is the Duty of all Christian Parents to enter
their Children, while Infants, into the Visible Church, and the Christian
Covenant, by Baptism, and so from the first to bring them under the Vow fore.
going. I lay that down here as a Postulatum; and take it to be but a reasonable
one: And supposing it evident, shall set my self to show what Apprehensious we
are to form of the Engagement which such Baptized Infants come under, and of
the manner of their coming under it. And here I think it undeniable, That as
it is in the Parents right, that Infants are admitted to Baptism, so it is by
their engagement, that they are brought under the Vow, which that Solemnity
carrys in it. That we may be clear in this matter therefore, it is needful
distinctly to consider,

1. THE part and work of Parents in Devoting their Children to God, and
bringing them under the Baptismal Vow.

2. THE concern of Children in what upon that occasion is done by their Parents
for them, and on their hehalf. And

3. THE Parents Power to bring them, and the Childrens Capacity of being
brought, under such an Obligation as the Baptismal Vow.

1. AS for the part and work of Parents in Devoting their Children to God, and
bringing them under the Baptismal Vow; that is comprised under the following
Particulars.

1. THEY disclaim all Right to their Children that is inconsistent with Gods
Absolute Propriety; and Resign them as a part of themselves, entirely to his
Management and Disposal. From him they received them, and to him they return
them, begging his acceptance of them for his own.

2. THEY bring them to God for his Blessing; and hold them up before him, with
earnest desires that these little parts of themselves, may be not only under
his Providential Care, but under the entail of his Covenant Love. As they
embrace that Covenant which the Gospel offers for themselves, so is it also
their earnest request, that their Children may partake of the Inestimable
Blessings of it; in order whereto, they bring them to receive the Instituted
Seal of the Covenant; that so that Promise (of Pardon, Favor, Grace, and
Mercy) which is to their Children as well as them; may actually reach Acts 2.
39.
them.

3. THEY consent for their Children, to all Gods claims and demands; and bind
them (if they live) to all the Duties of the Covenant, as ever they expect or
desire they should share in the Blessings of it. That their Children shall
eventually live in Gods Fear, and walk in his ways, and carry it as his Devoted
Servants, is not in the power of the best of Parents to promise; that can only
be brought about by the aid of Divine Grace, which is not at their dispose: But
having a natural power and right to judge for them, and act for them, till they
become capable of judging and acting for themselves; they consent on their
behalf to the Justness and Equity of the Covenant's demands, and engage for
them to a compliance therewith; and so bring them under a Vow of the same
nature with that before recited, with reference to the Adult, its Personality
only excepted.

4. THESE Children being born in Christ's Family, to which their Parents
belong, they bring them to his Authorized Representative, that they may be
Enrolled in the list of his Servants, and receive his Badge, and put on his
Livery, in order to their sharing in all the blessed Privileges of his
Domestics. It was ordained in the Levitical Law, That if any one had Children
during his Servitude, they should be his Masters; for they Exodus 21. 4
were Born in his Family. So all the Children of Christians may be said to be
born in Christ's Family, and to be a part of his peculiar Propriety; which
Propriety of his is owned in their Infant Dedication: For Parents in that
Solemnity, acknowledge our Blessed Redeemer to be the Rightful Lord and Master
both of them and theirs, to the Rules and Orders of whose Family they bind both
themselves and their Children to keep close: And he on the other side is
Graciously pleased to testify his acceptance of theirs as well as them, by
certain Solemn Rites, he has appointed to be used by his Ministers.

5. Christian Parents do as it were enter a Protest against the fruit of their
own Bowels, and Solemnly lay them under the Curse of God, if they live to cast
off his Yoke, and lay aside his Fear, and revolt from his Covenant. I believe
this is but rarely so much as the matter of an actual thought of a Parent upon
such an occasion: But it is the language of the Solemnity it self. A Vow cannot
be made without a Penalty, either supposed or expressed: And all Sacramental
Vows, in their own nature carry Imprecations in them. The Baptismal Vow made
personally by any one has this Imprecation implied in it, if not expressly
intimated; The Lord do so to me and more also, if I ^erfidiously break it; the
Lord shut me for ever out of the number of the Blessed, and verify all his
Threatenings in my Exemplary Punishment, if I wickedly revolt from him: So also
when Parents come to devote a little one of theirs to God in Baptism, such is
the nature of their Transaction on its behalf, that they do as 'twere say, The
Lord renounce thee my Child, if ever thou live to renounce this Vow I am
entering thee under to be his; the Curse of God be upon thee if thou breakest
his Bonds, and irreclaimably persistest in Rebellion against him.

6. PARENTS Solemnly Vow and Promise to do all that in them lies, as their
Children grow up, to make them sensible of their engagement and obligation to
be the Lords; to whom they were so early Consecrated and Devoted. They oblige
themselves, if they and their Children live, to Instruct them in the great
Principles of Religion; to help them to understand what their Baptism obliges
them to; and to engage them to live answerably to that Sacred Vow they then
entered them under; and to bring them understandingly, seriously and personally
to renew it themselves; that so its binding and obliging force may be the
stronger upon them, and the entail of Covenant Blessings, may be the more
firmly secured to them.

THIS in short is Parents work in the Baptismal Consecration of their little
Ones: Whence it appears, That they in that Solemnity, not only bring their
Children under a Sacred Vow, but also come under one themselves.

YOU may take the Sum of their Vow in Form briefly thus:

BEHOLD (O Lord) we who have devoted our selves, and all that we are and have
to thee, do according to thine injunction and expectation, particularly now
Consecrate a little one of ours, to thee from whom we have received it. We own
it to be more thine than ours by Right; and we desire that thy Right may take
place. It was born in thy Family; we therefore bring it to be enrolled in the
List of thy Servants; and to receive thy Badge, and put on thy Livery, in order
to its sharing in all the Blessed Privileges of thy Domestics. We have handed
it into a Miserable World; and been instrumental to convey a a corrupt nature
to it; but thou alone by giving it thy Grace can make it Happy. We present it
to thee for thy Blessing. We now enter it into thy Covenant; the Blessings
whereof thou have in thy word been Graciously pleased to declare do descend
from Believers to their Infant Seed. We offer it to receive the outward Seal,
and beg that thou would convey and assure, the great things thereby betoken'd
and intimated: We humbly lay hold of thy Covenant for our selves and this
little one; on whose behalf we freely consent to all thy claims and demands:
Hoping that if it shall please thee to to remove it out of this sinful and
troublesome World, before it shall become capable of Transacting with thee
Personally for it self, thou will take it to thy self, and make it happy in thy
self; and firmly binding and engaging it if thou shall please to spare its
life, to live in thy Fear, and walk in thy Ways, and sincerely keep all thy
Holy Commandments, as ever we desire or expect it should share in the
Invaluable Blessings which thou have promised to thy Servants. And if (which we
humbly beseech thee Mercifully to prevent) it should live perfidiously to break
thy Bonds, and wickedly to Revolt from thee, and persist so doing, without
being reclaimed, we can desire no other, than that it may be treated as an
Insolent contemner of thy Covenant,, and a perfidious Revolter from it: To
prevent which nevertheless, we Solemnly Promise, as in thine especial presence,
to do all that lies in our power; by Wholesome Instructions, and Serious
Admonitions, Parental Counsels, Seasonable Reproofs, and Suitable Corrections,
as we can discern occasion: Which endeavors of ours we humbly and earnestly
beseech thee to accompany with thy Heavenly Blessing; that they may be
Effectual.

Let Us now consider the concern of Children, in this Transaction of their
Parents on their behalf; of which you may take an Account in the following
Particulars.

1. THEY are hereby bound to lead a life of Holy Devotedness to God the Father,
Son, and Spirit. To this they henceforth stand bound, not only by that
DivineLaw that requires it of them, but also by their Parents Engagement and
Stipulation; which in matters of plain Duty to be sure is binding, whatever it
may be in things that are indifferent. We find Samuel under the Law, thought
himself obliged by his Mothers Vow, and therefore gives himself freely to serve
the Lord in his Tabernacle, according to the dedication she had made of him:
Yea, Iepthath's Daughter complies with her Fathers Vow, though (as most think) it
was to be offered up in Sacrifice: My Father (says she) if thou have opened
thy mouth to the Lord, do Judge. 11. 36.
to me according to that which has proceeded out of thy Mouth. How much more
then must those Children who were in Infancy entered into the Christian
Covenant by their Parents, be obliged to stand to it, when it engages them to
nothing but what was of it self antecedently their Duty. It Is a part of the
Honor Nature has made due to Parents from their Children, that they own
themselves bound by their engagements for them; and interest in this case falls
in with Duty; the advantages of a compliance with their Parental Dedication
being very great; and the mischiefs of a Refusal evident and notorious. Withal
they are bound to conform to the Rules of that Family in which they were born,
and to the Master whereof their Parents brought them to pay so early an Homage:
And to continue in the service of that Lord whose Badge they so soon received;
till they can find a better; and if they stay till then without all question
they will never quit him. The Obligation Infants by virtue of their Baptism come
under to an Holy Devotedness, is of a mixed Nature: It Is partly Natural and
partly Positive. It Is Natural, so far as it is an effect of the Parental power
duly exercised: It Is Positive so far as there is any force in the Rites then
used, which are of Divine Institution: and the case was in this respect the
same as to Circumcision of old. St. Paul observes, That every man that is
Circumcised is a debtor to do the whole Law: Circumcision obliged all that Gal.
5. 3.
received it to a subjection to the whole Mosaic Law; and that although it was
administered to all of Jewish Extraction in their Infancy, and on their Parents
Account, and at their desire; they were bound by it without staying for their
consent: So also are all Baptized Persons, though Infants, bound to asubjection
to the whole Gospel. And the denial hereof by any so Baptized, is a spitting in
their Parents face; nay a pouring contempt on God's Sacred Institutions.

2. THEY are bound to own their Baptismal Obligation, as soon as capable. If
they are bound to stand to it, there is certainly all the reason in the World
they should own they do so. They are bound to own it in Duty to their Parents;
who by giving them up to God, more effectully consulted their Happiness and
Welfare than they could have done any other way: They are bound also to do it
in Gratitude to God, for so Inestimable a Privilege, as is so early an
admission into his Family, and coming under his Covenant. It Is necessary they
should do it in order to the securing the entail of Covenant Blessings; to
which their own personal taking upon them that Vow which they first came under
in Baptism is necessary. For they are no longer to be considered as part of
their Parents, than till they arrive at a Capacity of acting for themselves; at
which time God expects both that they should own their Baptismal Dedication to
have been a signal Mercy, declare their readiness to stand to the Vow they were
then entered under, and personally make it for themselves, and in their own
Names, as ever they expect to reap the Blessed Benefits that depend thereon.
And though this Vow was really binding when it was merely Parental, yet is it
more firmly binding when it thus becomes Personal. And those must look upon the
power of Parents over Children to be very small, that question whether they may
rightfully exert their Authority in bringing their Children under a Bond to do
that when they come to Age, which is their unquestionable Duty then to do,
whether there be such a Prior Engagement or not: But however we may hence
observe another notion of the Baptismal Vow that is proper enough, viz. That it
is that Vow which we by virtue of Infant Baptism are obliged to make explicitly
when we come to Age; in which case the Form drawn up in the foregoing Chapter
is as suitable, as it is with reference to those who are not Baptized till they
are Adult.

3. THOSE who stand not to their Infant Baptismal Obligation when they grow up;
are liable to be treated as obstinate contemners of the Divine Favor; as
Sacrilegious Alienators of what was peculiarly devoted; and as perjured
Violators of Gods Covenant. Their case is not the same with that of the rest of
the World, who remain Undedicated, and Unconsecrated to God: But as their
Advantages would be great if they were Faithful, so will their Miseries be
great if they are false to the Vow they came under in their Baptism. That very
Bond that should have kept them close to God, will consign them over to the
more aggravated Woes, when put in suit against them. For though Parents were the
main Agents, yet are they mainly concerned and bound, and on them therefore
will the Penalty annexed take place.

4. THE Minister that Baptized them, their Parents that Devoted them, and as
many as were Spectators of their Infant Consecration; are so many Witnesses for
God against them, if in their after Life they break Gods bands in sunder, and
cast away his cords from them. They are Witnesses (I say) for God against them,
and as such will be ready to appear at the last day. Ministers will then be
ready to say, Lord here are such and such that we Baptized in thy Name, and
introduced into the visible Church, in the method which thou Institutedst, and
thine Apostles practiced: But before we did so, we thought we bound them fast
unto thee; we exacted of their Parents, on their behalf, a Renunciation of the
Flesh, the World, and the Devil, and a free consent to all thy claims and
demands; that they were engaged to this, we are Witnesses: If they have broken
therefore the Vow they then came under, and persisted so doing, we can testify
they are perfidious Traitors and Faithless Rebels, and deserve the Severest
Treatment. Pious Parents will also be ready to say; Behold O Lord we gave these
Children of ours to thee, from whom we received them, in thy Service we Listed
them, and under thy Bonds we brought them with the Instituted Solemnity, even
in their very Infancy: and we did all that in us lay to bring them under as
strong and firm engagements as was possible; and often did we as they grew up,
endeavor to make them sensible how much they were obliged to live to thee to
whom they were Devoted; their Blood therefore be upon themselves: If they have
wickedly and obstinately Revolted from thee, their Ruin will lie at their own
doors, whereof we are Witnesses. All others also who were present at the
Solemnity of their Baptism, will be ready to bear Witness, that they came early
under Gods Gracious Covenant, and were entered in a Bond to be faithful in all
the Duties of it; which if they have wickedly neglected, and lived to
themselves instead of living to God, they can attest they have broken a Divine
Vow that was upon them, which implies an highly aggravated Guilt. And Oh! How
sad a thing will it be, for Persons to have Ministers, Parents, and Christian
Friends, Rising up in Judgment against them at last, for their Revolting from
that God to whom they in their Infancy were Consecrated, and breaking those
Bands that should have fastened them to him?

BUT after all, because there are some to be met with, that Question Parents
power to bring their Children while Infants, under such an Obligation as that
of the Baptismal Vow, and make their Incapacity Personally to consent a Grand
Objection against this Practice. I shall now,

5thly. A little distinctly consider the Power of Parents to bring them, and
the Childrens Capacity of being brought under such an Obligation as the
Baptismal Vow.

1. AS for the Parental Power, its the greatest that Nature gives. The Interest
of Parents in their Children is great; and such also must their Power over them
needs consequently be. Children have no use of their Understandings to
deliberate, or wills to choose; they have no Power to act: Nature invests
Parents therefore with a right of Deliberating, Choosing, and Acting for them,
during their own Incapacity. Children are the product even of their own Bowels,
and therefore it may be well supposed they will do their best for them: And they
can never make their Parents a return for what they have received from them;
can never pay them the Debt that is naturally owing them, and therefore may
well be supposed ready to hearken to them, and comply with them in any thing
that is reasonable. Nature puts Parents in the place of God to Children. During
their Infant State, they have as great a power of Command over them, even as
over their own Hands or Feet, or any other Members of their Body; where
provided they keep within the limits and inclinations of Nature; i. e. Love and
Cherish, and are tender of them, they cannot overdo. All Civil Laws have allowed
great scope to the Parental Power, because its presumed 'twould be used for
their Childrens Good. In no Countries has it been so straightened by any
particular Laws, as that Parents have not had a free liberty of disposing of
their Children, and entering into Contracts for them, which shall be binding
upon them, and of laying Charges and Commands on them, which shall be
Obligatory: We have a known instance of this latter sort in the case of the
Rechabites, who were char'd by Ionadab their Fore-father, that none of them,
their Wives, I^r. 35. (...)*
their Sons, or their Daughters, should Drink any Wine; that they should
neither Build House, nor Sow Seed, nor Plant Vineyard, nor have any; but all
their days dwell in Tents: Which charge they punctually Obeyed: And there is a
Solemn Blessing given them by God, for this their Obedience. And can it verse.
19.
be supposed, Parents should have great Power over their Children, in Natural
Matters, and Civil Affairs, and none in Religious Concerns? God takes care of
the Infant Seed of Pious Parents, has made great Promises, and extends his
Covenant to them, and offers to entail the Blessings of it on them; And have
Parents no Power to give up their Children to him, and enter them into his
Covenant, and bind them to the Duties of it? Children are bound to stand to any
Engagements their Parents come under for them, unless in any thing Sinful and
of dangerous consequence? And can they safely reject the force of the Vow they
bring them under in Baptism to be the Lords; and plead that it was a stretch of
the Parental Power? Why if Parents have power to choose a Physician for their
Bodies, an Instructor for their Minds, a Master for their Calling, etc. What
should hinder their Power from exte^ing to the choosing of God for the Portion
of their Souls, and binding them to discharge the Duties owing to him? It may
perhaps be pleaded, That Parents would not want Power in the case, were but
their Children capable of such an obligation in their Infant State; but they
are unmeet subjects for the exercise of such a Power, and therefore it is
Insignificant. Lets therefore,

2. A little consider Childrens Capacity of coming under such a Bond as the
Baptismal Vow; i. e. their Passive, not their Active Capacity, which is not
pretended or pleaded for: And here I desire it may be considered,

1. That they are capable of being bound in Civils: Why not in Spirituals? To
Man: Why not to God? An Infant may have an Estate made over and secured to him
by Law; he is capable of becoming a Tennant, and being obliged to pay a certain
Rent and Homage when he comes to Age; and in the mean time of having Provisions
from the Estate he has a Title to: In such a case none will deny but a Parent
or even a Guardian may act for him, and that so as that he shall stand Engaged:
If so, Why is he not as capable of being obliged by a Sacred Vow, whereby his
Parents would bind him to God, in order to the securing the Everlasting
Inheritance, which He, by Gospel-grant, has settled on all his Children. Let it
therefore here be observed, That whatever is pleaded, in proof of the
Incapacity of Infants, to come under a Vow to God in Baptism, by virtue of
their Parents transacting on their behalf, proves them equally incapable of
coming under any obligation whatsoever, till they are able to transact for
themselves: Which is contrary to the sense of all the Wise and Prudent that
have lived in all Ages of the World.

2. LET it be further observed, That Infants (even while such) are capable of
sharing in the Blessings of Gods Covenant: And if so, Why not of coming under
an Obligation to the Duties of it? They are capable of sharing in the Merits of
Christ's Blood, and the Influences of his Spirit, and other marks of Divine
Favor; and of being treated by God as his Children; and that by their Parents
means, whose Covenant Interest is Available for their Good in their Infant
State: Why may they not then by their means also, come under an Engagement and
Obligation to carry it as becomes the Members of Gods Family as soon as they
become capable? But these things deserve a more accurate handling, than I can
(at least at present) pretend to give them.

FOR a close of this Chapter, I shall Annex a brief Admonition both to
Christian Parents that have brought their Children under the Baptismal Vow in
their Infant State: And to their Children, that so early came under an
Obligation, to be the Lords, and to live to him, with reference to Duty
consequent thereupon.

AS for you that have Devoted your Children to God in Baptism, remember (I
beseech you) and take care to breed them up for him, to whom you have
Consecrated them; expecting to be called to an account about your carriage
toward them, and management of them another day. Take care to season their
tender minds well: Instruct them diligently in the knowledge of God, and of
their Duty to him; and in the Nature and Import of that Divine Vow you brought
them under: Show them what will be the Benefits of keeping it, the danger of
breaking it, and the Duties they are obliged to by it; and do what you can to
bring them to take it upon themselves, and renew their Covenant with God in
their own Persons, as soon as they are capable. Preserve them as much as may be
from the Infections of an Evil Age: Set them Good Examples your selves, and get
them among as many other lively Patterns of Serious Godliness as you can; That
you may thereby provoke them to Imitation: Inure them to Holy Exerercises from
their Youth up: Possess them with as great a Reverence of the Holy Scriptures
as you can: Narrowly watch their Tongues from the first that they begin to use
them; and do what in you lies, betimes to learn them to govern their Appetites:
Teach them the worth of Time; and spur them on to make a diligent Improvement
of it: Encourage them when they do well; and Reprove and Correct them when they
do amiss. Whatever Neglects or Miscarriages you overlook or pass by, be sure
you allow them in nothing that in Sinful: This will be the way for you to have
Peace and Comfort, whatever be the Consequences.

Remember how many ways you are obliged hereto; how solemnly you have promised
it; how certainly God expects it; and how severely he will punish the neglect of
it. How sad a thing will it be, to have the Blood of your Childrens Souls lying
atyour door on the account of your Carelessness in this matter, where your
utmost Diligence was required? Should they hereafter prove Crosses and
Heartbreaking Afflictions, through their Undutifulness; What a Sad Aggravation
will it be of your Trouble, to think that all this has arisen from your want
of Care in their Education? How will they cry out upon you hereafter, if ever
they come to be Sensible and Awakened, for your Unnatural Cruelty; who though you
might be tender enough of them, and kind enough to them in other respects, yet
minded not their Souls, took not any suitable care to Breed them up for him to
whom you Devoted them? Nay, How will they in another World, if they finally
persist in Wickedness, exclaim against you who were the Instruments of
conveying their Being to them, as their Soul Murderers, and the first Occasions
of their endless Ruin, by your neglect to take that care of them which you
engaged to when you Baptized them? I beseech you therefore, if you have any
regard to God, any desire to see True Religion, Serious Piety and Godliness
flourish; if you have any Love to the fruit of your own Bowels; and any regard
to your own Peace now or hereafter; that you would make Conscience of this
matter: Pay the Vow you made, when you Devoted your Children to God in Baptism.

AND as for you who through Gods great Goodness and your Parents Care, had the
happy Privilege of an Early Baptism: Oh be not so foolish as to ^avil your
selves out of the Benefit of it. Your Parents brought you under Vows to God; Oh
desire not to be released. Had there been a considerable Temporal Estate of
some Hundreds a year, settled on your Family before you were Born, upon some
certain easy Conditions to be performed not only by your Parents, but by you
after them; to the performance whereof, they should have obliged not only
themselves, but you their Children: Would you not in such a case, where the
Profit on the one hand, and Hazard on the other, is so sensible and apparent;
own the binding force of their Obligation upon your selves in order to your
keeping the Inheritance? And will you be more unjust to God, than you would to
Man? Will you own your Parents power to engage you for a Trifle, and not in
order to an Everlasting Crown? But however if you think your Parents did you
wrong, and that you are hardly dealt with, you may be out of Covenant when you
will: But at the same time be it known to you, if you disown it, you forfeit
the Benefits of it; if you renounce your Vow, you cast off God, and reject his
Favor, and must never expect an Admission into the Kingdom of Heaven.

BUT if you have any concern for your Souls, any sense of the Wretchedness of
your Natural State, and of the desireableness of the favor of God through a
Christ, you cannot but prize your early Dedication to God, as an Invaluable
Mercy: Oh Prize it, Improve it, Heartily Bless God for it; and stand to the Vow
you then came under; and let it be the business of your Lives to Discharge and
Pay it. Don't pretend its Hard and Strict: For there is nothing in it but what is
Necessary: Ben't impatient of its Confinements, for they are all for your Good.
Think often and Seriously of the Unsuitableness of your Carriage and Behavior
to the Vow that is upon you; and that with Sorrow and Lamentation: Think what
would become of you should God take your Forfeitures of the Blessings of his
Covenant: And if you have any regard to God, any Love to your own Souls, any
desire to be happy here or hereafter, lay aside all Excuses, and without delay,
Freely and Solemnly own and acknowledge this Vow of God that is upon you, and
set your selves with all your might to Live answerably to it.

CHAP VI.
Certain Useful Observations about the Consequence of KEEPING or BREAKING the
Baptismal Vow: And of the RECOGNITION of it as Necessary to a Regular Admission
to the Lords Table.

FROM the Baptismal Vow, I should now pass to the Consideration of the Solemn
Stated Renewal of it at the Lords Table, whereto our Holy Religion straightly
obliges us: But that some Intermediate Observations offer themselves, which may
be of no small use, which I shall therefore first lay down: You may take them
in the following order.

1. OBSERVE that by the Serious Keeping and Adhering to the Baptismal Vow, all
Church Privileges, and Special Covenant Blessings are effectually secured.
'Twas before hinted, That in all Transactions by way of Covenant, as there are
two parties at least supposed to be concerned, so is there something supposed
to be agreed to by each of these Parties. In all Covenants between God and Man,
God engages to something on one side, and Man on the other; and a Faithful bent
of Heart on Man's part, is pre-requir'd to Gods actual fulfilling his
Engagements Gods part in all such Covenants lies in Promises, and Man's in Vows,
which have the place of a Band between God and us: Let Man keep true to his
Vows, and God will ever be sure to fulfill his Promises. In the Baptismal
Covenant, God promises and ensures much, and we engage to much: But let us but
take care to be true to our Vow, and we need not fear but he will most
punctually stand to his Word and Engagement. Now the Promises Ratified on Gods
part in the Baptismal Contract are of two sorts; which I may call Common and
Special: The Former relate to External Helps, Assistances, and Furtherances, as
to Serious Piety and Godliness; which though they are not actually Saving, may
yet very much promote Salvation. The Latter relate to real Marks of Divine
Favor, and Peculiar Love, to be communicated in order to Actual Salvation. The
Former refer to things that are indeed vast Advantages in themselves; though alas
too often neglected and misimprov'd: The Latter to things vastly Higher, and
which intimate a State incapable of missing of Final Happiness and Bliss. Under
the Former are contained all Church Privileges accompanying a visible Relation
to God: As an Admission to the Lords Table, there to receive Divine Nutriment
in the company of his Children; the common operations of the Spirit, in Holy
Motions and Serious Convictions; the Pastoral Care of those whom God has set
over them, and ordered to watch for their Souls; the hearty Prayers and
Fraternal Admonitions of the Faithful, with whom they are joined in Communion;
and the like. Under the Latter are comprehended, Forgiveness of Sins;
Acceptance both of Persons and Services; Sanctification; the constant Guidance
and Help of the Spirit, effectually to further progress in the Divine Life;
together with all other Blessings suiting a State of Adoption.

THESE are the things whereto God in Baptism as't were sets his Seal, upon the
requisite Vows preceding: And by our keeping this Vow, we (as I may say)
secure to our selves the Actual Performance of the several Promises made and
ratified. As to Church Privileges, we by our standing and acting agreeably to
our Baptismal Engagement, have an undoubted right to them, which none can
warrantably call in Question: And whatever further is required as necessary, in
order to our enjoying them, is an Humane Invention. For Baptism being an
Admission into the Visible Church, it follows, That none can warrantably deny
any of the Privileges thereof to any so admitted, unless it can be made
appear, That they don't heartily stand to that Vow of God they then came under,
by the open disagreeableness of their Lives thereto. And then as to those which
are more peculiarly Covenant Blessings; as Pardon, and Peace, and the
Sanctifying, Guiding, and Comforting Influences of the Spirit; these unless the
whole tenor of the Covenant of Grace be directly 'thwarted, cannot be denied
to those who faithfully keep this Vow: For it includes a Serious Repentance,
and an hearty Faith; besides which the Gospel requires nothing further, in
order to Persons entering upon a Pardoned and Justified State, through the Merits
of our Dear Redeemer; and then upon Justification by Faith, follows Peace with
God. Further, Romans 5. 1. Joh. 3. 5.
They being Born of Water and of the Spirit, are become the Temple of God, and
have the Spirit of God dwelling in them: 1 Cor 3. 16.
And where this Blessed Spirit dwells, nothing necessary to Salvation can
possibly be wanting.

BUT it is observable, That there is this Remarkable difference in the case,
between Church Privileges, and Special Covenant Blessings; That where the
Baptismal Vow is not openly contradicted by the Life, and but Professedly
adhered to, there is a right unto the former; by reason that it is not in the
power of Man to judge of Hearts: But it must be Faithfully and Sincerely kept,
and most heartily adhered to, in order to the reaching of the latter, wherein
it is with God immediately that we are concerned, who is not by any Artifices of
ours to be imposed upon. Would you then at once effectually secure all the
Benefits both of Visible and Real Christianity, do but sincerely adhere to the
Vow of God you came under in Baptism, and act Correspondently, and the work is
done.

2. OBSERVE, That by wilful and allowed Breaches of this Vow of God, both
Church Privileges, and Special Covenant Blessings are directly forfeited: The
Benefits of Covenant Keeping on the one hand are not greater, than are the
mischiefs of Covenant Breaking on the other. The breaking Gods Bands in sunder
and casting away his Cords (which is the Psalm. 2. 3.
common practice of Lawless Souls) is an actual forfeiture of the several
Blessings that accompany either a Visible or Real Relation to God. For what
signifies an Infant Dedication by Parents to the Most High God, though ever so
Serious? What signifies the Vow they then came under, though ever so Solemn? To
them who when they grow up, disown the Bond, Disclaim Subjection, and give
themselves up to the Conduct of their own Hearts Lusts; Living without God in
the World, forgetting their Dear Redeemers Love, and Rebelling against the
Blessed Spirit of Grace, than which hardly any thing's more common? What, I
say, can it avail to such Persons? How can they pretend to lay any claim to
Church Privileges, when advanced in Years, who by their disorderly Lives
openly renounce the Vow, on which their Admission to Infant Church Membership
was founded? How can they have any share in the Special Blessings of the
Covenant Promised on Gods part, who are so far from doing what was engaged to
on their part, that they do the quite contrary? Live to themselves instead of
of living to God; follow the vain guise and fashion of this World, instead of
obeying their Lord Redeemer; and walk after the flesh instead of following the
Conduct and Yielding to the motions of the Divine Spirit? Persons whose case
this is, show that they belong to the World; out of which the Church is
supposed to be gathered: It cannot therefore own them; for it must disclaim
those whose Conversations savor wholly of this World. It plainly appears that
such Persons are Children of Wrath, and not the Children of God, and therefore
have nothing to do with those marks of Favor that belong to such. So that the
interest in either the Common or Special Blessings of the Covenant is hereby
forfeited. Although it must be owned possible for a right to the former to
remain, even when the latter are effectually lost. But to prevent Mistakes, I
desire it may be here observed.

1. That though there is so vast a difference many times between the Infant Adult
state of Persons Baptized, That duringtheir Infancy they were in a state of
favor with God, on the account of their Believing Parents, as a part of whom
they were then considered; and with the requisite Solemnity were admitted into
Gods Visible Family here on Earth; and yet when they come to grow up, and stand
on their own Legs, they are rejected, on the account of their Impenitence and
Infidelity, and the Ungodliness of their Lives: Though there is (I say) many
times as great a difference as this comes to, manifestly discernable in this
case; vet is not God in the least chargeable with Changing, but it is we that
Change and make the difference. The Gifts and Calling of God (says the Apostle)
Romans 11 29.
are without Repentance. He Repented not of the kindness he engaged to show the
Israelites for their Fathers sakes: 'I was they who by breaking the Covenant in
which they were bound to him, forct him to punish their Disobedience: So God
Repents not of the kindness he in the Ordinance of Baptisin engages to show to
the Children of Believing Parents, He is willing to make every thing good to a
tittle, that he then engaged to: But the Persons I am speaking of, who openly
break with him, and renounce his kindness in the face of the World, by living
in the wilful violation of their Solemn Vow, make it inconsistent with his
Honor to own them for his; by their Rebellion against him, so long as they
persist in it, they incapacitate him to deal with them as with faithful
Subjects, which they are not. But it is more proper to say, That such Persons
throw themselves out of Gods Family, than that they are thrown out of it.
Observe further,

2. THAT though a willful and allowed Breach of the Baptismal Vow, Lived in, does
directly forfeit the Blessings engaged to on Gods part; yet does it not
irrecoverably forfeit them. For be it known to all, so Gracious is God, that he
is backward to take advantages against us. He is not willing that any should
perish, but that all should come to Repentance. 2 Pet. 39.
How open and notorious soever have been our Breaches of our Baptismal Vow,
there is still room for Repentance: Upon our serious Profession whereof, the
door stands open in order to our Readmission to all forfeited Church
Privileges; and our Gracious God is ready again to receive and embrace us; our
Abused Savior to Interceed for us, and the Affronted Spirit to Assist and Help
us; all the Blessings we have forfeited, may be Recovered and Restored upon our
Repentance and Reformation, our Renewing our Vow, and after keeping it
sincerely. But yet a Forfeiture there certainly does ensue upon willful and
allowed Breaches of it; both of Church Priviledges, and Special Covenant
Blessings: Which all those would do well seriously to consider of, who have
received the Christian Badge, call themselves Christians, and hope to be dealt
withal as such, and yet lead Unchristian and Ungodly Lives.

3. IT may be observed, that the after Exercises of Religion, which build on
Baptism as their Foundation, have this for their great design, to engage and
help us to keep the Vow of God we then came under, or to restore us, and renew
the force of it upon us, when we have broke it. It is the great design of
Catechization to ground us well in the great Principles of our Faith, and Rules
of Practice, that we may distinctly know what we are to Believe and Do. It is
the great design of the Preaching of the Word (which the Spirit is wont to
accompany with his Efficacy to those who seriously and faithfully attend upon
it) to for those things (a National knowledge whereof will be of no avail) home
upon our Hearts; to warn us of our Danger when running on in Sin; to Rouz us
from our Sloth, and Carnal Security; to Re-call us from our Wanderings; to Press
us with the most Urgent Arguments and Motives to be heartily his, who alone can
make us Happy; and to live to him to whom we are Devoted; and to Encourage,
Further and Help us, in the way of Well-Doing, if our Hearts are truly set
Heavenward. It is the great design of Public Prayers, by our joint Entreaties
in the Assemblies of Gods People, to Supplicate for Grace, and the
Supernatural Aids of the Divine Spirit, to render our Tempers and Lives
agreeable to our Christian Profession: And of our Public Praises, by
Celebrating the Divine Perfections of our Great Creator, Redeemer, and constant
Benefactor, with one common Ardour, especially his Kindness, Grace and
Goodness; to engage our hearts to him, and stir up our selves for shame, to
some suitable Returns of Holy Obedience. It is the great design of the Lords
Supper, and its frequent Repetition, to keep our Hearts under the most lively
sense that is possible of Redeeming Love, and to give us an opportunity of
Renewing our Baptismal Vow with great Solemnity, over the Memorials of that
Sacrifice that is of Everlasting Virtue; of which more in the Sequel. And it is
the design of all Church Censures (wherever they are kept up agreeably to the
end of their Institution) to curb open Sin and Vice, to prevent Scandals and
Blemishes to Religion, to recover Offenders, and to promote Sincere Piety and
Holiness; to keep from Transgressing, and stimulate to the Obeying of the Laws
of Christ, to which we have in our Christian Vow all sworn Subjection. All
Christian Ordinances, Duties, and Exercises, some how or other relate to this
Vow; and are designed either to Instruct us in the Latitude Compass and Extent
of it, or to stir us up to keep it, or to help us to perform it; either to keep
us from breaking it, or to convince us of our Breaches, and deter us from
persisting; either to help us to repeat it with a renewed Ardour not having
wickedly broke it; or to help us to renew it after Repentance for having broken
it; to bind our Souls more and more closely to God by it; and either to draw or
drive us to act like those that have a Sacred Vow of God upon us.

4. A Fourth Observation I have to make is this; That a Recognition of the
Baptismal Vow is necessary in Persons admission to the Lords Table. Nothing can
be more plain, Than that Baptized Persons, as such, are not therefore to be
admitted to the Lords Supper: For some renounce the Faith which they were
Baptized into; some that were Solemnly Devoted to God in Infancy, have no Fear
of him before their Eyes, when they come to Maturity; and instead of spending
their Lives in his Service, to which they were bound, they give themselves to
commit all manner of Iniquity with greediness: Would to God there were not
multitudes of such Persons among us! Others that yet are not by far so bad as
the former, never think seriously of the Obligation which they were laid under
by their Baptismal Consecration, never study how to answer it. It Is as plain as
the Sun, that such Persons are unfit for such an Ordinance as the Lords Supper;
for they are incapable of reaching the ends of its Institution. Since therefore
none but Baptized Persons may approach the Lords Table, but all Baptized
Persons may not; the Question is, Where the discrimina tion of some from others
of them, proper to this case lies? And what it is that is necessary as a
pre-requisite Qualification? I answer; the difference lies here, That some
stand to their Baptismal Engagement, and others don't; and the qualification
pre-requir'd, is an owning of it. For if Persons don't own the Vow they once
came under, it is to no purpose to think of Repeating it again.

NOW the owning of this Vow is pre-requir'd to Persons Right Receiving of the
Lords Supper, in a double respect: either with Reference to God, or the Church.

1. WITH Reference to God; and so the Hearty owning the Obligation of this Vow
is necessary; without which we cannot approve our selves to him, or so transact
with him as to reap those Benefits which he designs for us by that Ordinance
whereto we are supposed to pretend. Our Hearts must be really Consecrated, and
our Lives Devoted to him, according to the tenor of our Engagement in Baptism,
before we can justly pretend anew to strike Covenant with him who searches
Hearts, and tries Reins, as we are to do at his Table.

2. OUR owning our Baptismal Vow is also requisite with reference to the
Church, to our admission to the Lords Table: We must make a Credible Profession
of adhering to it; of which kind is every such Profession, as is not
contradicted by an Unsuitable Life and Conversation. This Credible Profession,
of an Adherance to the Baptismal Vow is necessary* that it may appear there is
a difference between those that are admitted to Church Communion, and those
that are debarred it: and for the same reason it would be well if it were
Public: It would be very becoming and Advantageous did Persons every where
before they first Communicated, freely profess their Sincerity and Constancy in
their Baptismal Covenant or Vow, and openly declare themselves in the face of a
Christian Congregation, Enemies to the Devil, the World, and the Flesh: And
this is the most considerable part of that which has been wont to be called
Confirmation: A thing much practiced and insisted on in the Primitive Church,
though of later times much neglected, and by some quite laid aside as useless;
the more's the pity.

IT much Rejoices me therefore (and I cannot forbear mentioning it on this
Occasion) to know and hear of several, even of the Dissenting Congregations in
the Nation, wherein this Practice is still kept up: Among whom it is usual, for
the Pastors after their private Transactions with those who are to be Admitted
to the Lords Table, either on some day in the preceding Week, or just before
the Administration of the Holy Communion, Publicly to demand of them; whether
they don't stand to their Baptismal Vow, and take it on themselves? Whether
they don't cordially give up themselves to God the Father, Son, and Spirit,
according to the tenor of it? And whether they don't engage to walk agreeably
to all the Laws of the Gospel? Or to that purpose. Which is really a thing of
great weight and moment; and I could wish 'twere more universally minded. This
(as I was saying) is the most considerable part of that which the Ancients used
to call Confirmation. And such a Declaration as this, made by Persons in the
face of a Christian Congregation, is really an Act of Confirmation; for they do
thereby further ratify and establish the Contract which is between God and
them; and by confessing it to be valid and good, and openly owning that the Vow
of God is upon them bind themselves still faster to him whose they were before.
Some may perhaps think this to be more ado then needs, by reason the very
coming to the Lords Table with antecedent Preparation, and siting down there
among the Faithful, who are bound to God by Covenant, is a Tacit or Virtual
owning of the Baptismal Vow: And at most, they may apprehend that the doing
this in private, before the Pastor of the Church, might be sufficient. To whom
I can without any difficulty grant, that what I aim at, is indeed virtually
implied in such a case, and that the private performance of it may suffice to
render Persons worthy Communicants: But yet it follows not, but that the
Public Transacting of this matter may be much more Eligible. Many Instances
may be produced, where very near as much depends on the manner of doing a
thing, as on the thing it self; and this I take to be one. For I pray observe;
Persons, upon their first coming to the Lords Table, pass out of the state of
Infant, into that of Adult Members of the Church: The faster therefore they are
bound to GOD, the more likely will they be to credit Religion; of which the
generality of the World are apt to pass a Judgment from the Demeanor and
Conversations of such Persons: Now the more publicly such a Profession is
made, the more likely it is to influence them; since they will have so many as
Witnesses against them, ready to admonish them upon occasion of their open
Engagement; which cannot but strike an awe. And, but that it would be too great
a Digression, I could make it appear that the Scripture favors such a public
Recognition of the Baptismal Vow; and it is agreeable to the Practice of the
Church in several Successive Ages. True it is, in process of time the Romanists
in a shameful manner abused it; but that is no just Reason for our slighting or
rejecting it, who may have it pure and free from their Abuses. However, this I
think is plain and clear, That a Recognition of the Baptismal Vow, is necessary
to Persons Regular Admission to the Lords Table. I add further,

5. THAT the more Solemn this Recognition of the Baptismal Vow is, it is so much
the better; where I mean not Ceremonicus, by Solemn; as if this matter would be
ever the better, the more Ceremonious it was: No, that is far from my
Intention: The Papists indeed have made it a Sacrament, and turned it all into
Ceremony; for they use Oil in the Administering it, and Balsam, and sign with
the Sign of the Cross, etc. But of these things we can safely say, They were
not from the beginning; for the time when they first began to be used in the
Church, can be marked out: But my meaning in the word Solemn, is this; that the
more Seriously and Gravely it is managed, on the part of the Persons coming to
Confirmation, and the more Authoritatively on the part of the Minister, as
Christ's Officer, the more likely is it to Answer its End. The Established
Church of England has taken care enough in this latter point, as to the
Authoritativeness of this Transaction; but it is the Desire and Wish of all
sober Observers, even among themselves, it were generally managed with more
Gravity and Seriousness, that so it might be kept from degenerating into an
empty Formality.

AND here it may be inquired, Whether or no it be fitting, requisite, or
allowable, that Imposition of Hands, joined with serious Prayers to God for the
strengthening and confirming Grace of his Spirit, for those who come to own
their Baptismal Vow openly in the face of a Christian Congregation; and an
Authoritative Benediction on the part of the Minister, as God's Officer, should
be used on this occasion? Whereto I answer, That thereis a general Unanimity
among those who have been most diligent in searching into Eclesiastical
Antiquity, in reporting this as the current Practice of the Primitive Church;
and that not only while Miraculous Gifts continued, but afterward: That it is
Convenient, and warrantable by Scripture, as well as Antiquity, was the Opinion
of our first Reformers here in England, and the most celebrated Divines we have
had among us ever since. This was also the Judgment of the Learned Grotius, who
was perhaps one of the Greatest Men these parts of the World ever produced:
Nay, the same was the Sentiment of the famous Calvin; who founded Confirmation
by Imposition of Hands, on Heb. VI. 2. where we find Laying on of Hands in the
Rank of Fundamentals, in the fourth place; after Repentance, Faith, and
Baptism; and before the Resurrection and Eternal Judgment. On which Passage of
Scripture, Calvin has this Note; That this one Place sufficiently manifests,
that the Ceremony of Laying on of Hands, on those who past out of the Infant,
into the Adult state of Believers, upon their open Prosessing the Christian
Faith, had its Rise from the Apostles: And therefore he declares, That though the
Romanists had superstitiously abused it, yet he was altogether against laying
it aside, but for keeping the Institution pure. The same was Beza's Judgment.
Herein also Gerrard agrees, with diverse of the most famous Lutheran Divines.
And finally, That Eminent Servant of God, Mr. Richard Baxter, (than whom this
Nation never afforded one more earnestly intent on the promoting Practical
Godliness, or true Christian Discipline) has wrote a Treatise on purpose for
the Revival of this Antiquated Practice; which is Entitled, Confirmation and
Restoration, the necessary means of Reformation and Reconciliation; whereto I
refer those that would desire full Satisfaction in this matter.

HOWEVER, I shall take this Opportunity of warning All, to take heed of
imagining that every thing is to be quite laid aside, that has been abused to
Superstition: That Is a very fond Conceit; and some that have unwarily imbibed
it, little observed whither it would lead, if pursued with Rigor. Suppose a
Man superstitiously abuses the Scripture, (which I am satisfied is no
impossible thing) am I therefore obliged to lay it aside as useless? What an
unhappy case were I in, if another Man's Superstition might rob me of that
which would be so Useful to me! Any one almost in such a Case would be ready to
say, What an Argument is another Abuse, against my right Use of that
Invaluable Book, which God has left as a Legacy to his Church? In like manner
how weak an Argument is it, for Persons to s^y, The Papists have abused
Confirmation; or they have abused Absolution to Superstition; therefore we must
lay it quite aside? What, I pray, hinders us from using that rightly, which
they have abused? We need not throw away the Wheat, that we may get rid of the
Chaff; for the Fan will suffice to separate and scatter that, and leave the
Wheat remaining.

CHAP. VII.
Of the LORDS SUPPER. That it is a Faederal Ordinance, implying a
Covenant-Transaction between God and us; and supposing a Renewal of Solemn Vows
to be the Lords.

HAving sufficiently opened the Christian Vow that we first come under in
Baptism, and shown what sense of it is to be afterward retained, and how it is
to be recognized; I now proceed to treat of the Renewal of it at the Lord's
Table; whereby the Ends of our Baptismal Consecration are further answered, and
the blessed Benefits thereof are more firmly secured to us. For be it known to
all, That it is not enough to come under this Vow, either when Infants or
Adult, and solemnly to own afterward that we are under it, but we are often to
renew it with great Solemnity over the sacred Memorials of our dearest Savior,
who gave his Life a Ransom for us, and Seas'd with his Blood that Covenant of
Grace and Peace that is between God and us. Our Vow in Baptism does indeed bind
us fast to God, and our after owning its Obligation on us, does tend to
increase its force: But yet God thinks fit to require and take new Security of
us; and orders us to come to his Table, that we may there strengthen our
Obligations; and not only own again and again that we are his by Right, but be
enforced by the Awful and Affecting Considerations there presented to us, to
New Resolutions and Engagements, and Solemn Vows, to lead a Life of Holy
Devotedness: And in requiring this of us, He very much consults our Benefit.
That I may handle this matter to the best Advantage, I will,

1. MAKE it appear that the Lords Supper is a Faederal Ordinance, that it
naturally implies a Covenant Transaction between God and us, and therefore
supposes renewed Vows on our part: Vows (as has been before observed) being
ever an Essential Part of such Transactions.

2. SHOW that the more expressly the Christian Vow is Renewed by us every time
we come to the Lords Table, the more effectually and plentifully we are like to
reap the Benefits of that Ordinance.

3. GIVE some Directions for the right Management of the Renewal of our Vows at
such a time; and endeavor to give some help as to the reducing th^s matter to
Practice. The first of these Particulars is the Subject of this Chapter; the
other Two, of the next.

THE Lords Supper is in its own Nature a Faederal Ordinance, which implies a
Covenant Transaction between God and us, and supposes a Renewal of our Vaws to
be the Lords. This is that which I am now to make out; to which Undertaking I
am the more inclined, because I doubt there are Multitudes that sit down, time
after time, at the Lords Table, who don't sufficiently consider this matter:
They look on that sacred Festival as an Ordinance instituted to keep up the
Remembrance of Christ, and what he has Done and Suffered for the Recovery of a
lost World; and therefore when they come to it, they endeavor to think
affectionately of his Incarnation, Passion, and Crucifixion; and thus far
indeed it is well: But while they stop here, and go no further, they leave out a
main thing; which lies in that Covenant-Transaction between their God and
Savior and them, which is thereby designed: Withal, there are many others, who
indeed look on themselves as obliged to renew their Covenant, and repeat their
Solemn Vows, every time they come to this Ordinance, who yet know not why they
are obliged to it then, more than at another time; know not on what to bottom
this apprehension of theirs, which they have received from others, and taken
for granted, without any Examination of its Grounds. I shall therefore from the
following Considerations make it appear, That that of a Renewed Covenanting, is
one Notion of this Ordinance, necessary to be taken in by those who would
rightly conceive of it; and that it is not without Cause that Persons are
ordinarily pressed hereto.

1. FIRST therefore consider the Mutual Action in this Ordinance, of Giving and
Taking, between God and us, and you will see plain Evidence in the Nature of the
Thing, of a Covenant-Transaction. Giving and Taking are the first obvious
Actions in this Solemnity: Giving is God's part, and Taking ours. God gives us
Bread and Wine by his deputed Officer; we receive them from the Minister, as
from his Representative. Now pray consider a little, what it is that is given
and taken at that time: It Is plain simple Bread and Wine, you will say; and it is
true, no more falls under the view of Sense: But what is it that is thereby
signified? Is it not a bruised, nay, a broken Christ, giving his Soul an
Offering for Sin, and shedding his Blood to make Atonement? It Is Christ with
all his Benefits that there is given to the Believing Soul. As certainly as
Bread and Wine is put into the Devout Communicant's Hands, so certainly is he
invested in all Gospel-Priviledges; so certainly has he made over and conveyed
to him, all Gospel-Benefits. God Gives Himself, his Son, his Spirit, his Grace,
his Favor, and all that can be reasonably desired, or truly wanted, to the
Believing Soul: This is on one side. On the other side, the Believer Takes;
Takes with his Hands the distributed Bread and Wine; and receives with all his
Heart what is thereby Figured and Represented. He receives an offered Christ in
his Arms, and into his Heart; in short, God actually makes over, makes a
Delivery, as 'twere, of all that he promises in the Covenant of Grace; on his
part: We by Taking then what he Gives, do naturally engage to all that in that
Covenant he has made our Duty: Which is the more evident from hence, in that a
firm Disposition, and Bent of Heart, to the performance of all such Duty, is
pre-requir'd to the actual Conveyance of those Benefits.

FURTHER, We may observe how Customary it has been, and is amongst Men, by
Giving and Taking of the smallest things, to Ratify Compacts of the greatest
Consequence: A Man may among us give away all he has by the Delivery of a
Flaggon: Which Custom considered, may answer the Objection, which the appearing
Meanness of the things Given and Taken at the Lords Supper, compared with the
great things thereby represented and made over, might give occasion to: The
giving and taking but of Sixpence to strike up a Contract, does lay as fast
hold of a Man, as Ten Thousand Pounds in Hand: Much more then does this Solemn
Giving and Taking of Bread and Wine, which Christ has made a part of his
Religion, and whereby he is so closely represented, bind us as fast to him, as
if we should repeat every word that he has said, and profess our hearty
Consent unto it.

OBSERVE further, under what Notion Christ is given at that Ordinance, to every
truly hungering and thirsting Soul: Behold, says God there, to all such
Persons, Here Is a Christ for you, to be taken by you, as your Prophet, Priest,
and King: Whereto the prepared Soul, naturally replies, Lord, I Am ready to take
Him as thou offerest him to me: I Am for a whole Christ, in all the parts of his
Saving Office: I Will take him for my Prophet, and credit him in all things; for
my Priest, and in him I Will put all my trust; and for my King, to whom thy Grace
inabling me, I Will yield a sincere persev ring Obedience: Which is plainly a
renewed Covenant, a short Summary of the Christian Vow.

2. CONSIDER also the Actions of Eating and Drinking, and you will see further
Evidence of a Covenant-Trans^ction. At the holy Supper we come to eat and drink
with the blessed God. He is indeed invisible to us, but has deputed one in
each Christian Assembly to Represent Him, and in his Name and stead to
Entertain those who come to him as his Guests. He spreads a Table, and provides
us Food, that Eating and Drinking we may receive Nourishment for our Spiritual
Life, and Supports for our Spiritual Warfare. Now Eating and Drinking, and
Feasting together, we may observe in Scripture-History were the usual
Appendages of Compacts or Covenants, as we may see Genesis XXVI. 30. and Genesis
XXXI. 44, 46. where we find Isaac and Abimelech, Jacob and Laban, concluding
their Compacts with a Feast; the like is evident in many other places: The
Eating and Drinking together of those that were at variance, implies an
antecedent Agreement; for it is a Token of Friendly Familiarity, not wont to be
afforded to Enemies: A^imelech hated Isaac, and would not have eaten and drank
with him, but upon supposition they were agreed: Nor would Laban have done the
like with Jacob, whom he pursued with a Design of Destruction, but upon the
same supposition. It is an Axiom in the Civil Law, That if any one does but
drink to one against whom he has an Accusation of Slander, or other Verbal
Injury, he loses his Action, because he is supposed to be Reconciled to him.
The Hebrew Word that signifies a Covenant, or any Faederal Communion between
Parties, is derived from another word that signifies to Eat, because it was the
constant Custom of the Hebrews, and other Oriental Nations, to Establish
Covenants by Eating and Drinking together.

NOW by Nature there is a great variance between God and us, on the account of
our Hereditary Apostasy: Sin as it sets us against God, so does it set him
against us. Where Sin therefore Reigns and bears sway, it is plain there is a
great Unfitness for Eating and Drinking with God at his Table. That is a
Solemnity that supposes a Persons Peace first to be made with God through
Christ; otherwise he is not likely to be a welcome Guest. But even where a
Persons Peace is actually made, there are frequent Falls, for which there must
be a Renewed Repentance; and God's admitting us from time to time to feast with
him at his Table, notwithstanding our manifold Failings and Defects, is a
sufficient Argument of his Readiness to pass them by, and anew to be
Reconciled: Whenever therefore we come to eat and drink with him, we are to
Renew our Self-Dedication. There Is none, not even the best, but what between
one Sacrament and another, do enough to forfeit all their Interest in the
Divine Favor, were God severe to mark Iniquity. Eating and Drinking therefore
with God, after such Renewed Offenses, supposes us anew to make our Peace with
him, to devote our selves to him a fresh, as ever we would keep his Favor; for
which we at no time have such an Advantage as at his Table: Which will be
further evident from,

3. A THIRD Consideration, which is taken from that which we feast upon at the
Lord's Table; viz The Memorials of the great Christian Sacrifice. The most
general and proper Notion of the Lords* Supper, and to which all that relates
to it may very aptly be referred, is this, That it is a solemn Feast upon the
Memorials of that Sacrifice of Infinite Virtue, that was offered by our Savior
upon the Crofs for Sin: Which Notion is too This is excellently Opened and
Explained by the Learned Dr. Cudworth
large to be here distinctly handled; and therefore I shall meddle with no more
of it than what concerns my present purpose. It is easy to observe how
commonly Covenants between God and Man, were attended with Sacrifices: Thus it
was in Noah's case; 'twas the Genesis chap. 8. and 9. Genesis 15.
same in Abram's case; so also Sacrifices accompanied the Covenant God entered
into with the Israelites all in a Body; Exodus 24. 5, 8.
and by such Sacrifices offered, the Covenants made were confirmed.

IT may be further observed, That Sacrifices were founded upon a Covenant. The
Covenant God entered into with the Jews, required them to offer up the several
Sacrifices prescribed in the Law; which had they not been founded on a Divine
Covenant, would have been no way likely to have been accepted. But suppose the
Covenant once settled that required them, and Sacrifices appear to have been
Faederal Rites, they were Memorials of the Covenant between God and the People;
Memorials to God, puthim in mind of his Promises; and Memorials to the People,
putting them in mind of, engaging aed quickening them to their Duty. Each
Sacrifice offered, implied a Covenant Transaction, between God and him that
made the Oblation: Which points to the true meaning of that passage, which some
have esteemed so difficult. Gather my saints together that have made a Covenant
with me by sacrifice. Psalm. 50. 5
For Sacrifices were appointed to be signs and seals of the Covenant between
God and his People. Whereto our Blessed Lord seems to allude, when at the
Institution of the Supper, he says, This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood:
Which is, qu. d. Covenants were of old Ratified by Sacrifices; the Blood of the
Sinner being originally required by the Law, but the offering being of the
Blood of another Creature: But I pour out my own Blood for you, and behold I
now I give it to you. It is therefore a New Covenant, because not sealed with
the Blood of Victims, but my Own Blood. Which is also intimated by the Apostle,
when he says, Not by the Blood of Goats and Calves, but by his Own Blood, He
entered Heb. 9. 12. 15.
into the Holy Place; and for this Cause he is the Mediator of the New
Testament.

IT may be further observed, That as Sacrifices were heretofore Seals of the
Covenant, so was eating of the Sacrifices a proper Appendix of most of their
Oblations. They had four sorts of Sacrifices in use among them. Burnt
Offerings, Sin Offerings, Trespass Offerings, and Peace Offerings. Burnt
Offerings were wholly offered up to God, and consumed on the Altar; neither
Priests nor People having therein any part or portion. In Sin Offerings and
Trespass Offerings God had a part consumed on his Altar, and the Priests a part
to eat of; who eat of them as the Peoples Proxies, they being Mediators with
God for them, who by bringing an Oblation for a Sin or Trespass, were supposed
to be sensible of a Defilement. But of their Peace Offerings, as God had a
part, and the Priests a part, so had they themselves also who brought them a
part, of which they might eat, together with their Friends, Feasting and
Rejoicing before the Lord. We have in the Old Testament diverse instances of
Persons feasting before the Lord, on these Sacrifices, that were called Peace
Offerings. Thus we find Moses and Aaron, and all the Elders of Israel Offering
Exodus 18. 12.
Sacrifices, and Feasting upon them before God when they had done. So also at
the general Covenant before mentioned, many Sacrifices being offered, we find
They eat and drank and saw the Lord, and Exodus 24.
upon the Nobles of the Children of Israel he laid not his hand. And again we
find Elkanah making an yearly Journey to the 1 Samuel 1.
Holy City, to Offer Sacrifices, and Feast upon them with his Family before the
Lord; and many other passages are there of the same nature, which its needless
to mention.

IT may be further observed, That the thus eating of Gods Sacrifices was a
Faederal Rite, between God and those that offered them. For God designing to
have a peculiar Residence among the Jews, resolved to Live, as 'twere in Regal
State among them. And therefore the Temple was his Palace; the Priests and
Levites his Guard and Attendance; His House had its several Apartments for
several Offices; and Furniture suited thereunto; on the Altar was his Fire,
which was never to go out; and the Sacrifices offered were his Provision: Not
that he could really eat the Flesh of Bulls, and drink the Blood of Goats; as
he upbraids those who were apt to rest in Psalm. 50. 16.
Externals: But he by these things, and their Allusive Significations, served
sundry wise and great ends and purposes. Now Sacrifices then passing under the
Notion of Gods Provision, it was a mark of great favor to be admitted to
partake of them: And Sacrifices being seals of the Covenant, the Feasting upon
the Remainders of them, was a further engagement to the Offerers of them, to
stand to their part of the Covenant with God, of whom by their being admitted
to feast with him, they had reason to hope they were accepted.

LET not any think all this a Digression; for besides that such Thoughts and
Reflections as these may be of use, by helping us to understand these matters,
without some light in which (and in others of the like nature) we must
necessarily be in the dark, when we are reading the greatest part of the Old
Testament; besides this I say, they are all to my present purpose, because of
the resemblance these things carry in them, to those that I am now upon. For as
Sacred Covenants were heretofore attended with Sacrifices, so the Covenant
between God and us; that Covenant on which all our hopes are founded is
attended with and confirmed by the Sacrifice of our Savior, which at his Table
we Commemorate. As their Sacrifices were Faederal Rites, and Signs and Seals of
the Covenant between God and the People, so is our Solemn Commemoration of the
Sacrifice once offered for us on the Cross, a Faederal Rite; and this Sacred
Institution a sign and seal of the Covenant between God and us, founded in the
Blood of our Dearest Savior: And as they were then to make a Covenant with God
by Sacrifice; so are we now to strike Covenant with him over the Memorials of
our great Gospel Sacrifice. Further, as the Jewish Feasts were upon the Flesh
of the Sacrifices they offered to God; so is our Holy Supper a Feast, upon the
Sacrifice which Christ once offered for us: And as their Feasts upon their
Sacrifices were Faederal Rites and Bands of Faederal Communion between God and
them; so the Lords Supper which is also a Feast upon a Sacrifice, must needs be
a Faederal Feast between God and us, where by Eating and Drinking at his own
Table, and partaking of his Meat, we are taken into a Sacred Covenant and
Inviolable League of Friendship with him: As God by those Sacrifices and the
Feasts upon them did Ratify his Covenant with those who did partake of them, in
as much as they did in a manner Eat and Drink with him; so does he confirm his
Covenant with us, by the Sacred Symbols at his Table, of which he allows us to
partake: And as the People by Feasting on those Sacrifices with God, did Ratify
and Confirm the Covenant on their part; so do we by feasting on this sacrifice
ratify and confirm the Covenant between God and us. Finally; as the Jews joined
themselves to God, by Feasting in his House, on his Sacrifices; so we join our
selves to Christ, by Feasting in the place of his Worship, at his Table, upon
the Memorials of his Body and Blood: And our Obligations to stick to him,
follow and obey him, do as much exceed all other ties, in their Sacredness
Strength and Virtue, as the Sacrifice of Christ excels that of a Beast, or the
Eating and Drinking his Body and Blood, is beyond all participation of the meat
of the ancient Altars. There being therefore in the Lords Supper, so plain a
Representation of a Sacrifice, which ever had a relation to a Covenant; and it
being a feasting upon the Memorials of this Sacrifice, which feasting was ever
a faederal Rite, must needs be a faederal Ordinance. Add hereto.

4. THE Consideration of the Adjuration which naturally seems to be implied in
this Ordinance. Our Lord is at his Table Represented in our view as a Sacrifice
for Sin, enduring the utmost Torments, Miseries and Dolours for our sakes; all
which have a loud voice to us. He seems as it were at his Table to adjure every
one, by his Agonies and Conflicts, by his Blood and Wounds, by his Cross and
Passion, by all that he underwent for their sakes, to Love him and be faithful
to him; to hate and fly from Sin; and Renounce the Devil and all his works,
lest they as much as in them lies, undo what he has been doing, Crucify him
afresh, and renew his Pain: Those therefore who after this, lay their hands on
the Memorials of the Broken, Bleeding Body of Christ, do as it were call Heaven
and Earth to witness, That they will ever Live to Him who Died fot them, and
rather Dye than renounce his Service. Now the very Heathens reckoned that a Vow
or Oath, made when Persons laid their hands on the warm Entrails of a Beast,
(which was upon occasion customary with them) was the Solemnest Oath that could
be made: How much more Solemn then, should we esteem Vows made, when we lay our
hands on the Memorials of the Sacred Body of Christ?

5thly and Lastly, IT has been the sense of all Christians down from the first
Ages to the present day, That the Lords Supper is a Faederal Ordinance; which
is a consideration of no small weight in a matter of this Nature. Among many
Evidences that might be given hereof, I shall mention but two. The Old
Primitive Christians did so Sacredly and Solemnly bind themselves by Vows at
the Lords Supper to their God and Savior, that the Heathens were ready to
suspect them of dangerous Plots and Conspiracies; from which charge while Pliny
the younger, a Learned Heathen, does heartily endeavor to acquit them, he at
the same time gives us an account of some of the Vows they every time Renewed
at this Ordinance. They Assemble themselves (says he in a Letter to Trajan the
Emperor, still extant) C. Plin. Epist. Lib. 10. Ep. 97.
before day break, and sing an Hymn to Christ as if he were God; and then bind
themselves with a Sacrament or Oath, not to do Mischief to any, that they will
not Rob or Steal, or Commit Adultery, nor falsify their Words, nor deny their
Trust; and the like; and then after they have eaten together (says he) they
depart to their own homes. But though his account is made up of Negatives, we may
be well satisfied they added Positive Vows to them. My other Evidence is taken
from the name of Sacrament, which they gave to this Ordinance jointly with that
of Baptism. The word Sacrament is no where to be found in Scripture, but is
plainly of Humane Original; and it was used very early in the Church, to
express and signify those two Ordinances of Baptism and the Lords Supper; and
in process of time 'twas also applied to other things. Now the word Sacrament
properly signifies an Oath. It was originally the Military Oath, which the
Soldiers took when they swore Fealty to their Emperors. When therefore we find
this term of Sacrament, applied by Christians in the first Ages, to the Lords
Supper, and used all along ever since whereby to express it, it implies that
they have all been sensible that it was a Faederal Ordinance; since the word
they have made use of for it intimates, that we in that Ordinance come under an
Oath to Christ, much like the oath of Fealty which the Soldiers took to their
Emperors: And indeed if we would acquit our selves rightly, we must every time
we come to the Lords Table Vow and Engage, That we'll continue Christ's Faithful
Servants and Subjects, and Soldiers, and never do any thing against his Crown
and Dignity as long as we live.

Lets then a little Reflect and make a pause: Lets think how strange an
instance it is of Condescension in the great Majesty of Heaven, That He should
vouchsafe to hold any Faederal Communion with such as we are: With us Sinners,
who have so much Provoked him, as to deserve to be utterly abandoned by him:
With us Sinners of the Gentiles, who were once without God and without Christ,
and strangers to the Covenant of Promise: That God should suffer us to lay hold
of his Covenant, That he should admit us to feast with him upon the signs and
seals of it; admit us to such an instance of Familiarity, and advance us to
such an Honor, which is at the same time so much ^or our Benefit, Comfort and
Security. Oh Bless the Lord and Magnify his Name: Exalt him highly and show
forth his Praise: Who disdains not to regard us, though Low and Mean, and Vile,
and Despicable; nay, who treats us poor Mortals, time after time, as if we were
a sort of Angels, admitting us to Feast and to Rejoice with him, in our
Commemoration of his Love, and Renovation of his Covenant. Lets think withal,
and that Seriously, of his great kindness to us in multiplying Ties and Bonds
upon us, that so he may the more effectually engage us to himself. Our God is
sensible of the slipperyness of our Hearts, and therefore he is for binding us
as fast as may be. He has so ordered matters, as that we are to be Consecrated
and come under a Vow to him, as soon almost, as we begin to be; this Vow we are
with great Solemnity to own and renew, as soon as we become capable of
Transacting for our selves; and afterward we are required frequently to give
new security of our Fidelity, over the Consecrated Elements at the Supper of
our Lord: And the design of all is only this, the more effectually to engage us
to that which is our unquestionable Duty, wherewith our interest is closely
connected. In obliging us time after time, to renew our Bonds, God has
consulted our good, designing thereby to further our security of reaching those
Inestimable Benefits which he has designed for us: We should therefore be so
far from thinking much of them, that we should prize our Bonds; we should look
upon our selves as so much the more Honored, by how much the more they are
multiplied upon us.

CHAP. VIII.
Of an EXPRESS RENEWAL of our Christian Vows, every time we come to the Holy
Communion: And DIRECTIONS about the right Management of it.

IT now follows, that in the second place, I show how the Express Renewal of
the Christian Vow, every time we come to the Supper of our Lord, will help us
the more effectually to reap the Benefits of that Holy Ordinance: Which comes
in very properly by way of Motive, to that which I doubt is too commonly
neglected by many Christians; viz. Expressly Renewed Covenanting at every
Sacrament. What I have to propound under this Head, will (I say) properly come
in by way of Motive: For if I can make it appear, That this is the way for our
reaching the Benefits designed for us by this Sacred Institution of our
Religion; I think there are none, who are not their own enemies, but must
readily fall in with it, and set themselves to put it in practice. It is indeed
certain and undeniable, That Persons growth in Grace, and Advancement in the
Divine Life, may be promoted by their Devout Partaking of the Holy Supper;
while yet either through Ignorance, or Forgetfulness, or Unskilfulnefs how to
manage themselves at that Sacred Solemnity, they may neglect the Express
Renewing their Vows to be the Lords: But if it be evident that this Ordinance
would do them more good, and be attended with much greater Advantage to the
same Persons, did they positively and expressly every time, make an act of
surrender of themselves to him who gave himself for them; and anew engage to
live to him who died for them; it will follow that they must be enemies to
themselves if they continue Negligent: Now this will be made appear from these
three considerations; viz. That our slipery Hearts will be more fixed and awed;
our Faith and Hope be more eonfirm'd and strengthened; and our Comfort more
increased by this means, than could be otherwise supposable.

1. THE Express Renewing our Vows every time we come to the Lords Table will
much fix and awe our slippery Hearts. None, that are not great great strangers
at home, can be ignorant how apt our Hearts are to turn aside like a deceitful
bow, and to lose the sense of those things which ought continually to influence
and govern us, especially if removed from us by any distance of time; how
easily the continually surrounding objects of sense, deface those Impressions
which are at any time made on our minds by higher things; and how difficult
it is to keep sensible from prevailing over Spiritual Engagements. Alas the
Sensual Carnal part is so powerful in the best, and our Hearts are so apt to
fall in with it, and the Temptations we meet with to draw off our Hearts from
God are so numerous, and we so prone to yield unto them, that we can hardly tie
our selves fast enough, or sufficiently multiply obligations on our selves to
an Holy, a Christian, and a Divine Life. If the sense of often repeated
engagements is apt to wear off (and who sees not that it too too often does so
even in the best?) How unlikely is it that a single act of Consecrating our
selves to our God and Savior, or the same repeated only now and then, after
large and considerable intervals, should retain a constant governing power over
us? But the frequency and expresness of our Renewed Vows (if we take but care
to apply our selves to them with any degree of that Seriousness that suits such
a Solemnity) will much promote their influence upon us: For it will keep us
under a standing sense of our Obligation; it will fortify us against
Temptations; it will be a constant Fence, and Spur, and Monitor, to us. For if
I have the least degree of Grace, and resolve not in the most daring and
provoking manner possible to trifle with God and my own Conscience; Can I who
month after month, while I am feasting on the Memorials of Redeeming Love,
Renew my Self-Dedication to the Most High; can I (I say) presently forget that
I am another and not my own? Can I or any one, so easily forget this, as if it
were but once or twice in an whole Lives space that solemn Vows were made? And
does not their Expresness as well as their Frequency add to their force? For
this implies not only a Recollection that we are the Lords, but a Serious
Resolution taken up in his Presence, and formed over the most awful Emblems of
his Greatness, and Majesty and Purity* and the most Endearing Pledges of his
Goodness, Grace, and Love; that we will be his for the future, more than ever
we were before. If we are Serious in such frequently Repeated Engagements, we
cannot but be made more Watchful, more Considerate and Provident, more
Diligent, and more Settled Christians, both in our Tempers and Lives, than we
should otherwise be. Consciences work will be made more easy: For we shall
have but a little way at any time to look back, to that which of any thing that
can be thought of will be the most likely, to curb the fury of Lust, and abate
the violence of Temptation, and quicken us to our Duty, and cause Repentance
and Rising again after our Sins and Falls. Now this is one one of the Blessed
Benefits designed for us by the Institution of the Sacrament of the Supper; no
other way more likely to be gained than by this Practice of Expressly Renewing
the Christian Vow, every time we join therein.

2. THIS Practice will help to strenthen our Faith and Hope. There Is no Grace
that is more employed at the Sacrament, by Devout Communicants, than Faith. Its
work is to view Christ through the Elements whereby he is Represented, to receive
him when offered, and to return our all back to him again; though not by way of
Requital, or out of any hope of Desert, yet out of a sense of Duty, and as a
Token uf the highest Gratitude. A further Office of the same Grace, is, To
behold the Fathers Mind and Heart, in that Amazing Mirror of his Love that
there is set before us; and to behold the Divine Spirit in all his Sanctifying
Gifts and Graces, pourd forth on all truly Covenanting Believers, as the Fruit
of Christ's Purchase; and to yield up the Soul to be transformed into the same
Image, by the same Spirit.

NO where has Faith such an Advantage for this Work, as at the Holy Communion;
and never is this Advantage so well improved there, as when our Vows are
seriously and expressly Renewed: For thereby do we show that the Discoveries
that are made by Faith at that Ordinance, do truly Affect us, and rightly Work
upon us; thereby is our Faith approved of the right stamp; and thereby is it
made a Governing Principle of our Tempers and Lives. Withal, it is observable
how express God is at his Table, as to all the several Marks of his Favor and
Love, which he makes over to us, and bestows on us. These are received by
Faith; certainly therefore it becomes us to be as express in our Returns to
him: And hereby will our Faith be strengthened, by reason of the Correspondence
of our Carriage in this respect toward God, to his dealing with us; and also
by reason of that Riveted Sense of Faith's Transactions at this Ordinance, that
will be hereby occasioned.

OUR Hope also will hereby be strengthened. Our Hope of the Acceptance of what
we do; and of Assistance in what we need: Our Hope of Grace here, and Glory
hereafter. The more express (if serious) any one is, in giving himself up to
God at his Table every time he comes there, the more Reason has he to hope
that God Accepts him, who never Rejects a Self-Resigning Soul; the more Reason
to hope for all the blessed Fruits of the Sacrifice and Death of Christ, to
whom he consecrates himself; the more Reason to hope for all needed Guidance
and Assistance, from the blessed Spirit of Grace, under whose Conduct he freely
puts himself; the more reason to hope for all he can need either in this World,
or another, since he so entirely commits himself to, and reposes his Trust in
him, that is a suitable Portion. for him in either. Further,

3. WHICH follows upon the former; This Practice will increase our comfort,
which it is one great Design of the Sacrament to promote. It Is indeed much to
our comfort, to be treated at so Noble and costly a Feast, as God prepares for
us, when he spreads his Table before us; it is comfortable to see what is there
to be beheld, to Receive what is Offered, and to stand and take so delightful a
Prospect, as we have there Opportunity for: But the serious express Renewal of
our Vows to be the Lords, and Solemn Engagement to live like Persons devoted to
him, is as great a Spring of spiritual Comfort, as any in all that Ordinance.
For this, according to the Gospel-Constitution, lays a just Foundation for a
Claim of all Gospel-Blessings, by virtue of the Promises made through the Blood
we there Commemorate. The Holy Communion implies an Investiture in Pardon and
Peace, Reconciliation, Adoption, and a Right to Eternal Life, to all truly
Devout Participants; to all who heartily devote themselves to their Lord
Redeemer: Renewed Vows therefore confirm our Title to all both present and
future Blessings; and consequently lay a firm Foundation for the highest
Comfort. For what can be more comfortable, than for me, upon a Review of what
past in that Ordinance, to find that I am Entitled to all those peculiar Marks
of Divine Favor, which God in that Ordinance makes over to his Children; of
which nothing can give greater Assurance, than our Repeated Devoting our
Selves, with all the Seriousness and Solemnity we are able, to be his Servants
and Subjects to our Lives End. All which things taken together, are methinks
abundantly sufficient to recommend this Practice.

IT yet remains, That I give some Directions about this matter, and show how we
should manage the Renewal of our Vows to be the Lords, at the Return of every
Sacrament. Which having been Excellently done already, by so many, I shall be
but brief in it. However, these Eight following Directions I can dare to
recommend to any serious Christians.

Direct. I. BEFORE you go to Renew your Vows to be the Lords, Recollect your
past Breaches, especially those since your last Solemn Engagement. Look not on
this as an indifferent or inconsiderable matter, but as a thing needful, in
order to your Dedicating your selves anew to God, with any Advantage. Take a
convenient Opportunity for Rering from the World; and when alone, set your
selves down seriously to consider what strong Ties and Bonds you are already
under, to be the Lords, and how little you Answer them. Review your Lives; rip
up your Miscarriages; canvass all the Secrets of your Hearts; endeavor to know
the worst: For since God knows all, it is every way best that you should do so
too, that so what is amiss, may be rectified, and his deserved Displeasure
averted. Consider your prevailing Temper, and stated Tenor, and recollect your
Demeanor upon particular Occasions, when you may find Reason to conclude the
Eye of God was most upon you. Think how you have carried it to the blessed God;
how you have behaved your selves toward your Redeemer; and what has past
between you and the holy Spirit. Think how you have managed your selves in
Secret, in your Families; and in your several Relations; in your Callings and
Business, and in your Retirements: How you have carried it toward your Selves,
and to Others. Observe what Corruptions you have most indulged; what
Temptations you have given way to; what Neglects you have fallen into; and what
positive Guilt you have contracted. When Time will allow it, the running as far
back in our Lives, as our Memories will help us to do, will be very Proper and
Useful: And this should be done with more than ordinary Carefulness, at Persons
first Approach to the Lords Table: But when our Confinements are strait, the
Recollecting what has past since the last Sacrament, may suffice; in which the
more strict we are, the better. Our Eyes should particularly be on our
Dalilahs, whereby our Affections are most entangled; and it should be a
particuly Subject of Enquiry, What Breaches of our last Vows they have drawn us
into. In General; Let Us lay our Rule before us, and compare our Selves and our
Carriage with it, and that will soon discover our Defects. I need not tell a
serious and considerate Person the Benefit of this Practice.

Direct. II. HUMBLE your selves seriously before God, for all past Breaches
with Him, whether known or unknown, before you offer to come under New Vows to
Him. The more pains we take, according to the foregoing Direction, in searching
and viewing our selves, the more reason shall we find to cry out with the
Psalmist, Who can unstand Psalm. 19. 12.
his Errors? Cleanse thou me from secret Faults: For we have all some secret
Faults that we overlook. Therefore I say be humbled for all past Breaches,
known and unknown: Throw your selves at God's Feet, and own your Forfeitures of
his Favor, and Desert of his Displeasure. Abase your selves out of a fense of
your Vileness, that while you were engaged and pretended to live to God, and
your Redeemer, you should have lived so much to your selves, so much to this
present World, and so much according to the Dictates of your Lusts: And be
peculiarly humbled for any particular Failures, that may have had peculiarly
aggravating Circumstances attending them. Think not of being Accepted upon the
Making of New Vows, while you are Chargeable with manifest Breaches of your Old
Ones, that are Unrepented of. This Humiliation and Self-Abasement, with Sorrow
and Shame for past Breaches, is necessary by way of Preparation, in order to
our Acceptable Consecrating our selves to God afresh.

Direct. III. Take heed of the Extremes of Levity, and overgreat Scrupulosity,
when you come to Renew your Vows at the Lords Table. Take heed of Levity; as if
it were a common; ordinary and customary thing, you were setting your selves
about, when you went to give up your selves to God anew; this were the way to
pull down a Curse upon your Heads, instead of a Blessing: Beware therefore of
rushing upon such sacred Work, with a common and unhallowed Heart; with an
Heart full of the World; with a Heart prevailingly addicted to any Lust. And on
the other hand also, Beware of too great Scrupulosity, in running matters too
high; as if unindulg'd Infirmities, and the want of Assurance, were Bars to
Acceptance; or as if Perfection was necessary to the obtaining the Blessings of
a Devoted State. This were to pull thy self backward, instead of advancing
forward in the Divine Life. Levity in this case, is the effect either of
habitual Profaneness (than which, nothing is more dreadful) or of great
Negligence in Preparatory Work, or of gross Ignorance of the Nature, Design,
Import and Solemnity, of Repeated, as well as Initial, Self-Dedication.
Overgreat Scrupulosity in this case, is sometimes the effect of a very
timorous Natural Temper, heightened by a Bodily Indisposition, which makes
Persons the Objects of Compassion: At other times it arises from a Mistake
about the Method of God's Dealing with us under the New-Covenant-Dispensation;
from a Misunderstanding of the Terms of the Gospel; and too hard, sour, and
severe thoughts of the blessed God, unwarily imbibed; which Errors of theirs,
if they value their own Peace or Welfare, are carefully to be corrected. Though
the former is generally the much more dangerous Extreme of the two; yet is the
latter very troublesome, by reason that it will fill the Soul with such Fears,
as will exceedingly damp and discompose it, and unfit it for such Work as is
the free, solemn, cheerful Consecrating and Devoting it self to God. Both
therefore are as much as in us lies, to be watched against.

Direct. IV. WHENEVER we go to Renew our Vows to God, we should carefully mind
with whom we are to Transact; who we are, that Transact with Him; and for what
purposes we do so.

1. WE should remember with Whom we Transact; and to Whom our Vow is to be
Renewed; and that is, to God the Father, Son, and Spirit: God the Father, from
whom we have Apostatized, who yet is the Fountain of Blessedness, in whom only
we can be Happy: God the Son, who is the only way to the Father, our Mediator,
Priest, Patron, Advocate, and Helper: The Holy Spirit, who must be the Actual
Conveyor and Introducer of all that Light, and Life, and Love, that shall
capacitate us to enjoy the Father through the Son, either in this, or a better
Life. It Is with the great God we in this Affair have to do; it is to Him whose
Majesty, Glory, Power, Greatness, and Goodness, are Inconceivable and
Inexplicable, that we are every time we come to the Communion anew to give up
our selves: It Is with all that are called God, we in this Affair are to
Transact. This one thought well impressed upon us, would suffice to command the
utmost Awe, Reverence, Seriousness and Devotion, whenever we set our selves to
this matter.

2. WE should also remember who we are, that are to Renew Vows to be the Lords.
Particularly we should remember, that we are Creatures laden with Guilt, which
we can never expiare, and owing an Obedience that we can never fully pay: (1.)
We should well remember that we are Creatures laden with guilt which we can
never expiate; and therefore for whom God out of mere pity has provided a
Sacrifice, which at his Table he sets before us; over the Memorials whereof,
whenever we come to receive them, we are to devote our selves afresh to the
Lord. We should therefore every time, as guilty condemned Criminals, promise
Obedience for the future, with the deepest sense of our unworthiness of that
Mercy, that must be our only Plea for our Selves, through the Merits of
Another. (2.) We should also remember that we are Creatures, that owe an
Obedience that we can never fully pay. That though we vow and vow never so often,
we cannot pay the least part of what we vow, unless as acted and influenced by
him to whom our Vows are made: And that when we have done our best toward the
paying our Vows, and answering our innumerable Obligations, there will be much
wanting. And when we have done all we can, we are but unprofitable Servants;
God is not in reallity a whit the better, for all the Service we can do him.
The thought of this well impressed, will keep us from pretending to any thing
in our own strength; it will lead us to a constant dependence on Superior
Aids; it will prompt us, whenever we renew our Vows, to fly to the Holy Spirit,
for Assistance and Help, to answer and keep them; and 'twill prevent our
Boasting, if any time by his Influence we have been kept in any measure sincere
and faithful. Both these Considerations taken from our selves, will tend to
make us deeply humble, out of a sense of our Vileness, Weakness, and
Helplesness, whenever we go to give up our selves to God afresh.

3. WE should also remember for what Ends and Purposes we are every time we
come to the Lords Table, anew to vow to be the Lords; and they in short are
these two, the more firmly to secure to our selves his Favor, and the more
effectually to bind and quicken our selves to our Duty. These are the Ends we
ought to have in our Eye in this matter; and the serious Consideration of them,
will help to make us in earnest, at the time of Renewing our Vows, and cause us
often to think of them afterward.

Direct. V. OF the whole Sacramental Solemnity, select that as the properest
Instant, for thee to give thy self up to Christ, when thou art receiving him
and all his Benefits into thy hands, as I may say, and into thy heart. It may
without all question be done acceptably enough at other Instants, during the
Administration of this Ordinance: But the Reception of the Elements seems to be
the most advantageous season. At every Sacrament therefore, when thou take
the Bread and Wine, as sensible Representations of Christ and his Benefits; as
visible Pledges of the Love of God through Christ to thy Soul; do thou give up
thy self afresh to God through Christ, to live continually in his Love and Fear,
and in strict Obedience to his Laws, till thou shall be taken to Glory. When
the Minister, as Christ's Messenger, puts the Consecrated Elements into thy
hands, then do thou after a thankful Adoration of the Divine Clemency and
Bounty, expressing it self by such inexpressible Gifts as are thereby
represented; then, I say, do thou, from the bottom of thy Heart, cry out, I
willingly accept of thine offered Covenant, O Lord; my Soul does gladly take
thee for my God and Father, for my Savior and my Sanctifier: And here I give
up my self to thee, as thy Own, thy Subject and thy Child, to be sanctified and
saved by thee; to be beloved by thee; and to be happy in loving thee to all
Eternity. O seal up this Covenant by thy Spirit, which thou sealest to me in
thy Sacrament, that without Reserve, I may be entirely and for ever thine.

Direct. VI. EVERY time thou at the Sacrament Renewest thy Vows to be the
Lords, take care particularly to vow the Death of that Corruption that sticks
closest to thee; whereby God is most dishonored, and thy Comfort and Welfare
most endangered: Give it up freely to be sacrificed for him, who gave himself a
Sacrifice for thee. Thy Darling Corruption is thy nearest, thy closest, and one
of thy most dangerous Enemies; Vow therefore to maintain a constant Combat
against it; that though thou can have little hope of quite eradicating it, yet
Divine Grace assisting thee, thou will not yield and give way to it, thou will
not be overpowered by it. Take care expressly to vow an opposition to that
which by its prevalence would make all thy Vows ineffectual,

Direct. VII. THOU should at every Sacrament, not only vow to be the Lords in
general, but to be his in all Conditions. Give up thy self time after time, to
be disposed of by him, in all respects, as he shall see good. Take this
particularly into thy Vows at the Lords Table, That thou will Acquiesce in all
the Disposals of Providence, and be contented in every state whereinto God sees
it fit to bring thee. Disclaim being the Carver of thy own Lot. By thy Renewed
Vows willingly resign all that belongs to thee to Divine Management and
Conduct, and resolve that thou will cleave to God, whatever it cost thee; that
though he slay thee, yet thou will trust in him; that thou will follow him when
he frowns, as well as when he smiles; that thou will bear his Rebukes as the
Chastisements of a Father, designed for thy good; that thou will look on every
thing as best, whatever he allots thee; in a word, that thou will entirely
resolve thy will into his. The doing this at every Sacrament seriously, would
prevent us a great deal of Trouble; it would be a Spring of Peace and Comfort
to us, what ever were our Condition, whatever should befall us.

Direct. VIII. TAKE care that the deepest Thankfulness be a constant
Concomitant of all thy Renewed Vows: No greater occasion for Thankfulness than
this: That we have any ground at all for hope of being accepted, upon our
Devoting our selves to God through Christ: Tho past Vows have been broken, we may
be again accepted upon Renewing them; That we have Hearts and Inclinations to
Renew them; that we have any ground to hope for strength from Heaven, to enable
us to keep them when we have Renewed them; that we have so advantageous a
Season for Renewing them, as the Sacrament brings with it; all minister cause
of Thankfulness. Let Us therefore with an holy Exultation of Soul, with that
Cheerfulness and Joy that are the Natural Indications of a Thankful Heart, give
up our selves to God from time to time; that it may appear we don't look upon
it as a piece of Slavery or Drudgery, but as our greatest Happiness.

THESE few Directions well followed, would make Sacraments otherguess things
than they ordinarily are, and would help us to a much more sensible increase of
Grace and strength by them, than we are wont to receive.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Nature, Sacredness, and Strength of the Obligation that lies on all
those to lead an HOLY LIFE, who often repeat Sacramental Vows.

NOTHING's more obvious to be observed, Than that Persons may in many cases be
several ways obliged to the same thing. Those who are under no Sacramental Vows
at all, do yet stand bound to the same thing, to which they oblige those that
are under them: viz. To Love and Serve the Lord all their days, with all their
Heart, and with all their Might; to Live continually in his Fear; and Walk in
all Holy Obedience to his Laws: All Rational Creatures, as such, are plainly
obliged hereto, without any such Vows Antecedent as those before explained, or
with part of them only. Suppose Persons therefore to remain Unbaptiz'd (which
yet methinks none that are come to the use of their Reason, who have any value
for their Souls, should be content to remain) and so not to have come under the
Christian Vow at all with any of the prescribed Solemnities; or suppose them to
have taken the Christian Vow initially upon them in Infant Baptism, without a
Solemn Recognition of it when at Age; and without ever coming to the Lords
Table to Renew and Repeat it; (which is the much to be lamented case of many
who pass for Christians in the days we live in) notwithstanding the defects in
either case, the Persons concerned are yet highly obliged to be the Lords, and
to live to him: Withal Vows made on a Sick Bed, or in any hour of Distress and
Danger, give a Superadded enforcement to the same Obligation: But there is a
peculiar Sacredness and Strength, and binding force in those Vows that are
managed in the Order before described; and which particularly are frequently
repeated at the Lords Table. For,

1. THE Obligation Persons are hereby laid under, has all the marks of Freedom
and Voluntariness; which is to be understood of their Confirming, and Renewed,
and not of their Initial Vows: Persons hereby freely oblige themseves to that
whereto God had before obliged them. They own the validity of the Obligation
they were under to God, antecedently to any consent or act of theirs, by owning
the Justice, Equity and Reasonableness of his Claims, and consenting to yield
to them: And so that which both was and is the matter of their Duty, appears to
be the matter of their Choice; for of their own accord, they bind themselves to
a Faithful Performance. Now this is a great Additional Obligation, because it
is a Self Obligation. I am bound to be the Lords, before I Vow it, and whether
I Vow it or not; but if I Vow it I am doubly bound: For God has bound me, and
I bind my self: And the oftener I Vow it, the more firmly do I bind my self; and
the greater appearance is there of a Plenary full Consent. So that I have not
only the Authority of God, but the authority of my own Resolved Mind, to awe me
to a faithful discharge of my Duty: And though a Command of Gods is a sufficient
Obligation, yet does my own engagement give a Super-added force thereto; by
reason of the power God has given us over our selves: So that by Vowing we
will be the Lords, and his only, and his for Ever, which is our own free
voluntary act, we utterly renounce all indifference in the matter, and quite
put it out of our power (as I may say) ever to refuse any instance of Duty and
Obedience, without an open contradicting our selves, as well as going contrary
to our God. Now if our own free Promises, Oaths, and Engagements have not an
Obliging and a Binding force upon us, we may bid adieu to all Civil Society and
Religion at once. How can it be supposed we should mind or be governed by any
Obligations we are laid under by another, be he never so much above us; if we
are not Influenced by those Obligations under which we voluntarily lay our
selves? If another Authority can firmly bind us, certainly our own free
Engagements may strongly oblige us: If God may bind us to what he pleases by
his Command; certainly we bind our selves firmly by our own voluntary Vows.

THIS Consideration does indeed as well suit those Vows that are made on a
Sickbed, or in an hour of Distress, as those that are first formed and renewed
at a Sacrament: (and it would be well if any Persons who have such Vows lying
on them unperform'd, would duly weigh it) But yet the Repetition of Sacramental
Vows, by those who statedly frequent the Holy Communion, gives it a peculiar
force in our case. I add,

2. THAT Persons don't hastily and on a sudden rush on, and are not ever they
are aware drawn into the Obligation they are by these Sacramental Vows laid
under, but there is abundant time and scope for, and all the marks of
Deliberation, which much adds to its force. There is in this case no
Circumvention or Surprise; no force or craft is used, to draw persons to oblige
themselves to that, of which they should have any occasion to repent, upon the
withdrawment of the Inducement; which in any case much weakens an Obligation:
But Persons proceed deliberately in binding themselves to be the Lords. It Is
true when they are first consecrated to God in their Infant State, there is no
room, no Capacity for Deliberation: But in all after acts, in their Recognition
of the Christian Vow at years of Maturity, and all its renewals and
repetitions, though there is a vast difference in the degree of deliberation used
by several Persons, yet is there a sufficient degree of it, to give it a strong
binding force, ever necessarily presupposed

THOU were not its true, capable of deliberating on the matter, when thou were
first bound to be the Lords in thy Swaddling Clothes: But had thou not
abundant time and scope for serious deliberation after thou grewst up? Nay, Did
not thy after desiring to come to the Lords Table, imply that thou had
seriously considered the matter, and were come to a full determination to stand
to thy Baptismal Vow, and live answerably to it? For why else should thou
desire to be admitted to the Communion, there to renew thy Engagement, and
repeat thy Vow? Nay, Did thou not at lest pretend to him by whom thou were
admitted to the Lords Table, that thou had fully deliberated on the matter,
and were come to a fixed settled Resolution, to stand to the engagement thou
came under in Baptism? Were thou not told that this was absolutely necessary
in order to thy admission to, right acquitting thy self in, and reaping any
benefit by that Ordinance? Were thou not therefore seriously called on,
sedately and soberly to weigh matters in thy Retirement, as thou would not by
thy Profaneness and egregious Trifling with God in his most Sacred
Institutions, pull down ruin on thine own Head? Were thou not warned rather to
keep away, and forbear proceeding any further, in Polluting Holy Things, if it
were not thy formed purpose, (Divine Grace enabling thee) to lead a Christian
Life, under a Christian Name and Profession?

Was not an owning of thy Baptismal Vow, whereby thou first were bound to thy
Lord Redeemer, and an express Promise to keep and live up to it, exacted of
thee and given by thee, before thou were admitted a guest at the Lords Table,
there to feast on the Memorials of his Love? And what O Man, O Woman! Could
thou do this without deliberation? Without thinking what thou did, what thou
were about, and what all these things meant? If thou did not use all the
Deliberation which thou ought to have done in a matter of so great a
Consequence and Importance, it is thy own fault, thou can blame none but thy
self: But it appears, thou thought thou had deliberated long enough for a
just determination, by thy proceeding and coming to join with Devout
Communicants at the Lords Table, after such Warnings, Admonitions, and
Intimations: Thou must certainly have had some thoughts about the matter,
otherwise thou would have had no reason at all to have preferred coming to
the Sacrament, before staying away from it: Why did thou not then, I pray,
throw off thy Masters Livery once for all, if thou thought his Service a
slavery? Why did thou not lay aside the Christian Name, if thou did not
seriously intend a Christian Life? Why did thou go to make new Vows, unless
thou resolvedst to live answerably to them? Why do thou now continue to heap
Bonds upon Bonds, and Vows upon Vows, if thou art really unwilling of that to
which thou Engagest thy self? I pray observe it; There Is a great deal of
Deliberateness in thine Engagements to lead an Holy and a Pious Life: There was
so at first, when thou Professedst thine adherence to the Baptismal Covenant;
and there is so at every Sacrament, where thy Covenant is supposed to be
renewed. By thy very coming time after time to the Communion, thou professest
thy self not to be weary of thy Master, nor his Service; not to be ashamed
either of his work or his wages; but that thou art Resolved whatever befalls
thee, thou will adhere to him, and faithfully follow him: And is there not
plainly all the marks of Deliberateness in an act that is thus persisted in for
a course of years together, and often Repeated? But what signifies all this, if
thou Vowest, and Breakest; Engagest and Falsifiest thy Word, as soon as thou
have done? What signifies its Deliberateness, were it an hundred times as great
as it is, if thou art not to be prevailed on to keep thy Vow? But however; what
I aim at is plain; any Promise or Engagement of weight and moment, by how much
the more deliberate it is, so much the more Binding and Obliging is it:
Deliberation being a guard against our being deceived or imposed on; against
our being surpised or ensuar'd: And a security that we are well satisfied in
what we do: That our grounds are firm and our way safe: Now no Promise or
Engagement that can be mentioned is more deliberate, than is the Vow which
those who frequent the Holy Communion are often Repeating: None therefore can
be more binding and obliging than that. I add further,

3. THAT no actions can have greater Solemnities attending them than those Vows
have, we often come under to be the Lords; and to Live to him. Although there
has been very great variation discernable in the Solemn Rites that have
attended Faederal Transactions, according to the different Inclinations of
several People and Nations; yet have they all agreed in their design and
tendency; which is to increase their awfulness, and bind the parties concerned
the more effectually to the performance of what they engage to; waving other
instances that might be produced; let us a little consider the Solemnity that
attends our Christian Covenanting. In Baptism Parents give up their Children to
God as his: God by his Ministers, who are his Representatives, accepts them: He
orders them to pour Water on them, in token of his readiness to pour on them
his Grace and Favor. The poor Infants are washed, to betoken their need of
Divine Grace to purge away their Defilements; and this Water is also the
Representative of Blood; the Blood of Atonement: Which Blood will be upon them
in order to their Acceptance, if when they come to years, they live to him to
whom they were Devoted; but 'twill be upon them to their confusion, if they
revolt and rebel; lead dissolute, carnal, wicked and ungodly Lives. In the
Lords Supper, the visible Memorials of a Crucified Christ, a Christ Crucified
for Sin, are set before all the Communicants, and distributed amongst them.
There is a Beholding, and a Receiving, and a Feasting, and an admission to the
utmost Familiarity and nearest Communion, which our embodied Spirits are at
present capable of, with our Glorified and Exalted Savior. And what can awe
us, if not the sight of the Blood of our Dearest Savior, which was shed to
Expiate Sin? But we not only see it, but we drink it; intimating our firm
Resolution to Revenge it on our Sins, which were the cause of its Effusion. We
swear over our Lords Body and Blood, that we will be true to him; as ever we
hope for any Interest in his Death and Sufferings, we engage to be subject to
him; we Vow with his Blood in our hands, with his Blood in our mouths, that we
will be true to him to the death, who shed his Blood for us; and that we will
be the death of those Sins and Lusts, by indulging which we should Crucify him
afresh. Withal we do this not under a covert, or in a corner, but openly,
before Men and Angels; we do it in the face of the Church, which much adds to
its Solemnity; by reason that so many Spectators as are present at our Vows and
Engagements; so many Witnesses should we have of our horrid Perfidiousness,
should we falsify and break them. The very Solemnity of these our Vows and
Engagements, adds to their awe, and increases their Sacredness and Force. And
then further,

4. Direful Imprecations attend and accompany our Repeated Vows; which much
adds to their awfulness; Direful Imprecations (I say) if we should not be
faithful and true to our Engagements. When we from time to time Solemnly
Profess our selves to be Christ's Disciples at his Holy Supper; and promise to
live in Obedience to the Laws he has given us, and the Pattern he has set us,
in hope of the Blessings he has purchased for us, and is at his Table ready to
make over to us; we call for all the Curses of God upon our Heads, if we don't
take care to pay our Vows. It was a Custom in old times, which we find often
mentioned and hinted at in Holy Writ, To hew a Beast in pieces, and divide the
pieces into 2 parts, and then walk between them; the Language whereof was this:
That the Parties concerned wished they might have the like treatment, if they
were not Faithful and True. So while we, at the Communion are striking Covenant
with God, over the mangled and broken Body of our Dearest Lord, we wish as
'twere for the like treatment, if we are not faithful in Service, and true to
his Honor and Interest. The Natural Language of such a Rite, according to the
Jewish manner of Imprecating at the time of their making Compacts, is this, God
do so to us and more also, if we forget, or perfidiously break our Vows. When
we take the Blood of our Lord into our Hands, we do as 'twere wish it may be
upon our Heads, if we live not to him who died for us: This is the natural
language of Actions, though it ben't expressed in words. The chief Priests and
Seribes, that were the Murderers of our Savior, cried out, His Blood be upon
us, when Pilate, convinced of his Innocence, would have Released him, and all
succeeding Ages have cried out against them for their horrid Impiety and
Audaciousness: But they and their Progeny have felt the fruit of that Curse
they brought on themselves, with a witness, to this day: And so will they also
sooner or later do, who from time to time join in a Sacred Action, that has
such an imprecation attending it, or implied in it; to which by their wilful
and allowed Breaches of their Vows, they openly expose themselves over and
over. Withal the Communicants at a Sacrament do all profess to believe the
whole Gospel, and to submit themselves to it: Now the Threatenings of Christ are
a part of his Gospel, which therefore they choose to fall under if they don't
obey his Commands. if they lead Ungodly and Unchristian Lives, they consign
themselves over to Eternal Death, and bind themselves to endure the Torments of
Hell Fire. What besotted Creatures then must they be, who live in the wilful
and allowed Breach of many and often repeated Vows to be the Lords, and to live
like Devoted ones, as securely as if all were well? Whose case is the subject
of the Chapter next ensuing.

From these four considerations taken conjunctly, which so fully lay opon the
Sacredness and Strength of our Christian Vows; viz. Their Voluntariness,
Deliberateness, Solemnity, and Attending, Imprecations, I might, I think,
warrantably draw this Conclusion: That no Ties can bind those fast to God; no
Bonds can be strong enough for such Persons, as can cvade the force of such
Vows as these. But this will more properly come to be considered in another
place.

CHAP. X.
Of the dreadful case which all those are in, who heap Vows upon Vows, without
any serious sense of their force, and without any real hearty endeavors to
answer and pay them.

MANY there are (alas too too many!) who were Solemnly Dedicated to God by
Baptism in their Infancy; who owned the Obligation of their Baptismal Vow, when
they came to Age, and afterward went to renew it at the Lords Table, where
they have again and again repeated it, engaging to Live Soberly Righteously and
Godlily, in imitation of their Redeemers Example, under his strict Discipline,
agreeable to his Laws, and under the conduct of his Spirit, and so are bound by
many and strong Sacred Ties; and yet all this while they have no serious
suitable sense of their Force. They heap Vows upon Vows to be the Lords,
without ever heartily and in earnest endeavoring to answer and pay them; nay
the stated course and tenor of their Lives is oppoposite and contrary to them.
So far are they from the Psalmists temper and practice, who seriously and
solemnly looking up to God, Heartily owns that his Vows are upon him, that they
wilfully break all Bonds, and snap the strongest ties asunder, that they may
have scope for their Lusts, and without control live as they list. The
Unhappiness of such Persons case deserves to be considered.

THE Apostle speaks of some that are Hearers of the Word and not Doers; Jam. 1.
23. 24.
whom he likens to Men beholding their natural face in a glass,; who behold
themselves, and go their way, and straitway forget what manner of men they
were. They Will give the word of God (whereby both their Tempers and Lives ought
to be Regulated) the Hearing, but never mind it afterward. I doubt such
Hearers are very numerous amongst us at this day; otherwise we should certainly
see otherguess effects of so many Serious Awakening and Useful Sermons as are
time after time delivered in the Public Assemblies. And I as little doubt that
there are many, who go Sacrament after Sacrament reaking in their Lusts, to
renew their Engagements to be the Lords, over the Sacred Emblems of his Body
and Blood, and then and there make fair Promises, of denying Ungodliness and
Worldly Lusts, of living as becomes the Gospel, and leading mortified, holy,
heavenly Lives; who go their way, and are no sooner come into the World again,
but they presently forget what they have seen, and what they have done, and
what sort of Bonds they are under; what manner of Persons they ought to be, and
what they have engaged they would be.

I would willingly give such Persons, who upon serious Reflection, and
searching their own Consciences, find themselves herein too justly chargeable,
matter for their sober thoughts to work upon; that so, if it be possible they
may be awakened out of their secure and dangerous Estate.

I know very well, that there are some in the World, who while their thoughts
and Opinions of others run very low, have so high Conceit of themselves, and
those of their own way, as to take all for real Saints that are in Communion
with them: And therefore they continually speak of them, and to them, and in
all respects deal with them, as if they were wholly such, and free from all
mixtures; on which account, they cannot bear being dealt with on the
Supposition which I now take for my Foundation: All that I shall say, is, I
wish their Actions would show them to be, such as they take it for granted that
they are. But when all is done, let Persons pretend to what Purity they will
above their Neighbors, and let there be never such care taken, while the
Church is on Earth, there will be Tares among the Wheat; the Gold will have a
mixture of Dross; there will be some of the Devil's Servants wearing Christ's
Livery; there will be some that make so splendid a Profession, that none can
justly debar them from Eating and Drinking in our Lord's Presence, and at his
Table; whom yet He at the last Day will publicly disown, and cause to depart
from him, as Workers of Iniquity, and wilful Violaters of the Vows they came
under to him, as appears from Luke XIII. 26, 27. But though such Persons may and
often do creep into the purest Communions, without any ground at all for a
Charge of Negligence on the part of those to whose Inspection God has
subjected these matters; (by reason it is not in their power to know Men's
Hearts) and though they may continue Church Members, and in reputation too, for
Piety, through their deceitful Wiles and Artifices, while they keep their Viees
out of the reach of Public Observation; yet so long as they live in wilful and
allowed Breaches of their Christian, their Sacramental Vows, and persist in
violating the sacred Engagements they time after time Renew at the Lords Table,
their Case is inconceivably dreadful: Which must needs appear, if the
Aggravated Guilt which they contract, and the Proportionable Danger they incur,
be but duly Considered: Both which I Will a little open and unfold.

1. LET us consider the Aggravated Guilt which those Persons contract, who are
under many Vows to God, but mind them not; who professedly give up themselves
to their Savior, Month after Month, at his Table, and engage to live like his.
Disciples and Followers, but falsify their Professions, and break their
Engagements, by the Carelessness, Irregularities, Wickedness, and allowed
Disorders of their Lives. The following Particulars will give a sufficient view
of such Persons Guilt.

1. THEY stand chargeable with the utmost height of Profaneness: It Is an
abominable thing to see to how high a contempt of all that is Sacred, some that
are the professed Enemies of Religion, arrive; but in reality, it is not
comparable to that of those who pretend to be its Votaries and great Admirers,
who yet live oppositely to the Rules and Laws of it. All Profaneness is very
provoking to the blessed God, by reason of the unworthy and dishonorable
Reflections it casts upon him; but none so much as that which is covered with
glozing Hypocrisy: Which being the case here, carries the Profaneness of the
Person concerned, to the highest pitch. For,

1. Heaven and Earth, God, Angels and Men, are often called to witness to that
Transaction, which is of it self of the greatest importance, but is by such
Persons hartlesly managed, and little minded: They pretend frequently to come
in the Fervours of Devotion to Commemorate their Dying Lord; to recollect their
Obligations to him, and feast on the Tokens of his never-to-beforgotten Love;
to own themselves Redeemed by him, from Misery and Ruin; and to give up
themselves to him as his purchased ones: They pretend through him to strike
Covenant with their offended God and Father that is in Heaven, having the
Memorials of that Sacrifice that alone has Virtue to procure them Acceptance,
in their View, in their Hands, and in their Mouths. They pretend to lay their
Hands upon their Hearts, and their Faces in the Dust, humbling themselves for
past Offenses; Renouncing, for the future, all, even their most beloved Lusts;
and Vowing and Swearing in the nearest presence of the Majesty of Heaven, to
which they are capable of being admitted, a dutiful Affection, faithful
Obedience, and holy Devotedness: And the more to Awe themselves, they call in
all above them, and round about them, to bear witness to this their Act and
Deed, whereby they solemnly bind themselves to all that their holy Religion
obliges them to: And all this is done but from the Teeth outward (as I may
say) and very superficially; their God and Savior have not their Hearts, but
their Lusts bear sway; they remain the same Men they were; and by their Lives
show that all this was mere Trifling; they never in reality cordially meant,
what they with such a Train of Solemnities bound themselves to; and are as
careless about the Performance, as if none were privy to their Engagements: And
this not in a single Instance, but a stated Course. What Profaneness can be
greater! On such Persons the most sacred things, its plain, can strike no Awe!
For they in reality Ridicule, what in the nature of the thing calls for the
greatest Seriousness; and that even whilst in appearance they are as much in
earnest, as they are capable of being in any thing. If the Sin of Nadab and
Abihu was great, who offered strange Fire at the Altar of God, how great must
their Guilt then be, who thus profane the holiest of Gods Institutions!

2. THE highest Contempt is hereby poured on the Precious Blood of Christ,
which is pretendedly highly prized and valued. Those who are Communicants at
the Lords Table, profess a mighty value for that precious Blood of his, whereby
we are Redeemed. They, even by their Appearance there, profess themselves under
a full Conviction, that that was the Blood whereby they were purchased, Act.
20. 28
that that is the Blood whereby they must be justified; that that is the Blood
that Romans 5. 9. Heb. 9. 14. 1 John 1. 7
must purge their Consciences, and cleanse them from all Sin; in a word, That
that Blood is the only thing that can plead with God, and procure from Him any
Mercy for them. By their frequent solemn partaking of the Memorial of it in the
Sacramental Cup, they pretend to be sensible that nothing's so dear to them,
nothing's so much esteemed by them; and therefore they magnify its Virtue, and
extol its Worth; on that they pretend to place their whole Dependence; and on
the Covenant thereby sealed to ground all their hopes: The partaking of the
virtue of it, is that of which they profess themselves most earnestly desirous;
in the contemplating the blessed effects thereof they pretend to take the most
ravishing delight; and the effusion of it, they swear to revenge upon their
Lusts, which were the occasions of it. This is the Language of the Celebration
of the Ordinance of the Supper; this in part is the common purport of his
Discourse, Profession, and Petitions, who is the Administrator; wherein all
that are present seem to fall in; and it also is the distinct Language of the
several Communicants: And all this while the Persons I am pointing at, count
this Sacred Blood an unholy thing, Heb. 10. 2^
they do in reality (whatever they may pretend) no more value it, ascribe no
more virtue to it, see no more excellency in it, than in common Blood; they in
their Hearts slight and neglect it, as a mean, trivial, insignificant,
worthless thing; and this plainly appears by the Affronts they in the course of
their Lives put on him, whose Blood it is; by their allowance of themselves in
those Sins, from which it was designed to redeem them; by their wilful Breaches
of those Vows, the keeping whereof is the the only way to secure them an
Interest in it; and their careless forfeiting the blessed Benefits of it,
without any considerable Remorse and Concern. Now by their frequent trifling
with the Blood of so sacred a Person as our Dear Redeemer, in swearing over it
to him that shed it, (and that on their Account) that they will be his, and his
alone; and depend on the virtue of his Atonement, in the way he has
prescribed; to which Vow and Profession, their After-Life too plainly gives the
Lie; hereby they pour the highest Contempt upon it, and so are guilty of the
most egregious and daring Profaneness. But

2. Such Persons are also chargeable with the basest Persidiousness: for they
profess the strictest Amity with the blessed God, while yet they cherish Enmity
against him, and carry it in an hostile manner toward him. Feasting with any
one, was ever esteemed a Token of Friendship; and to cover Enmity under the
Symbol of Amity, was ever esteemed basely Perfidious, and nothing is wont to be
more heinously resented. Now the Communicants, time after time, at the sacred
Supper, feast before God; nay, they feast with him at his own Table; and
thereby profess themselves to have laid aside all Enmity against him, who shows
himself so ready to be Reconciled to them: And as the blessed God by the
Pledges of his Love which he gives at his Table, firmly assures of his Favor,
so does the Communicant by receiving these Pledges, solemnly engage a Return of
Duty: And yet in the mean time there is an hostile Heart, covered over with a
Friendly Vail, which abundantly appears in the After-Life. 'Twas reckoned a
great Aggravation of Achitophel's Crime, by David, that when he pretended to be
his familiar Friend, and ate Psalm. 41. 9.
of his Bread, he yet listed up his Heel against Joh. 13. 18.
him. The same was reckoned a great Aggravation of Judas his Crime by our
Savior; and the same is also a great Agravation of these Persons Guilt: They
pretend, by their frequent feasting with God, to be at Peace with him, and
Renew their Engagements to banish all things offensive to him from their
Tempers and Lives, as far as they are able, every time they come to his sable:
But their Backsare no sooner turned, but they carry on Hostility against him
afresh, as if he were their open Enemy: Than which, nothing can be more
horridly base.

3. NO Crimes carry in them greater Audaciousness than those of these Persons;
which highly aggravates them: For,

1. THEY in the most wretched manner that is conceivable, attempt to impose on
the blessed God. Every Sin indeed, of whatever kind it be, does imply an
Attempt to impose upon the Heart-searching God; a deep and riveted sense of
whose Omniscience, Universal Inspection, and Omnipresence, would be sufficient
at any time to deter from it, how great soever were the Temptation to it. But
none are chargeable therewith in so egregious a manner, as these Persons; who
think to put him off with a mock Consecration of themselves to him, which has
nothing of reality at the bottom of it; who think to put him off with that
which would not satisfy the meaneft and weakest of their fellow Creatures;
viz. often-repeated Promises without Performance; and fancy they shall please
him by mocking him in the most contemptuous manner; and imagine they may undo
all past faults by a new Vow, which yet they take no more care to keep, than
they did those which went before it: And think to obtrude themselves upon him
for his Servants, by virtue of their frequent Promises of Fidelity to him, in
order to the receiving of his Wages, while yet they spend their Lives in doing
the Devil's Work. This is a sort of Audaciousness, that is much aggravated, and
very provoking.

2. They virtually bid him defiance, and call upon him to do his worst, for
that they fear him not. They would not dare, I suppose, to express any thing
like this in words; but their Actions speak it. For when they, Month after
Month, call God to witness, that it is the firm Resolution of their Souls to be
his, and to live to him; and then go their way, and still persist living to
themselves and to their Lusts, they do interpretatively tell him, that they
value not his Threatenings any more than they do their own Promises, and that
they are not afraid of the utmost severity he can use toward them; which
certainly is as great Audaciousness as Mortals can be guilty of; and no small
Aggravation of their Sin. Further,

4. NO Ingratitude is comparable to that of these Persons. For,

1. THEY crucify their Savior afresh, and that every time they come to
commemorate him at his Table: They crucify him afresh, and put him to open
shame; they murder the Lord of Life as 'twere anew, and make his Wounds bleed
afresh. And is this a suitable Return for such Love as his was? Can any thing
be more ungrateful? Was it not enough, O ye hardened Wretches, that our dear
Lord should once so far condescend, as to come down from Heaven, suffer, bleed,
and die, in order to your Salvation? Must he be always suffering from you, who
once suffered for you? Did he not suffer enough from Friends and from Enemies,
from the chief Priests the Scribes, the Pharisees, the Soldiers, and the
common People, when he was here on Earth; that you cannot let him rest now he
is in Heaven, but must be renewing his Sufferings by profaning his
Institutions, and doing what in you lies to make all his Sufferings
ineffectual, by your persisting in those Sins, to save you from which he died;
and to leave and forsake which, he engages you, every time you appear before
him at his Table? Is this all the Return you will make him for his unspeakable
Kindness to you? Can all he has done and suffered for you, no more influence
you, than this comes to? No such Ingratitude can possibly be instanced in, as
this bespeaks.

2. THEY contemptuously undervalue that Covenant that was the effect of
Infinite Wisdom, Amazing Pity, Strange Goodness, and Rich Grace; the Blessings
whereof were purchased at a vast Expense, which also shows their monstrous
Ingratitude: This Covenant they undervalue; for they wilfully neglect
performing the Conditions, on which the Benefits promised in it are to be
bestowed, and by which performed, they may be secured; and that although they
time after time vow and promise a Performance of them; by their Negligence and
Carelessness, wherein they show that they value not the Covenant, nor the
Inestimable Blessings of it in reality a rush; and so return Contempt for all
the Love, Pity, Pain, Cost and Charge of their God and Savior in order to the
putting them into a capacity of Salvation, which was a Blessing fallen Angels
never enjoyed; this is horridly ungrateful, and therefore very provoking. Great
therefore certainly must their Guilt be, who are chargeable with such horrid
Profaneness, such base Persidiousness, such tremendous Audaciousness, and
detestable Ingratitude.

TO all which, I shall add one Consideration more, which possibly may affect
some, much more than any abstracted Arguings: Which is this, That the Sin of
the Persons before described, is greater than that of Peter, who denied Christ,
and in some respects greater even than that of Judas who betrayed Christ, or of
the Jews that crucified him: And if so, certainly it must be horridly enormous.

1. THEIR Sin is greater than that of Peter who denied Christ. For Peter's Sin
was in a particular Act; the Sin of these Persons in a stated Course. Peter was
acted by the Power of a Temptation which accosted him on a sudden; these
Persons cannot make any such pretense for a partial Excuse. Peter's Sin, though
great, was yet such as was consistent with Sincerity, which can by no means be
said of the Sin of those, who run a round of making and breaking Sacramental
Vows, whereby they plainly show they have no fear of God before their Eyes, no
true love to their Savior in their Hearts. Peter had no sooner sinned, but he
went out and wept bitterly: These Persons persist in their Impiety, and are as
impenetrable as a Rock.

2. THEIR Sin is in some respects greater even than the Sin of Judas, who
betrayed Christ. I doubt not but Judas thought that our Lord (who had so many
ways shown his Power in his view) would escape, although he should deliver him
into his Enemies hands: But it is mere riveted Malignity against Christ, by
which these Persons are acted; which will not admit even of any such weak Plea as
that, even for a partial Excuse. Judas his Sin, though unspeakably heinous, was
yet a single Fact: But the Sin of these Persons is repeated over and over.
Judas his Perfidiousness was great in betraying his Master: But I know not
whether their Perfidiousness be not to the full as great, if not greater, who
time after time vow Fidelity to him with all possible Solemnity, and yet break
their Vow immediately, and continue so doing. Judas endeavored to undo what he
had done, when he came to bethink himself: These Persons may undo what they
have done, so far as a thing once done, is capable of being undone, viz. by
serious Repentnce; but refuse, and persist. Judas considered of his guilt, till
it over matched him; which intimated some sorrow for what he had done: These
Persons go on without any sorrow at all, as if all were well, and there were
nothing amiss.

3. THEIR guilt is in some respect greater than that of the Jews who crucified
Christ, for they persecuted Christ in his state of Humiliation: These Persons
Affront, Despise, and Abuse him, and after a sort Crucify him, even in his
estate of Exaltation. They, when they Crucified him, knew not what they did;
but these persons knew that 'twas Sin that brought Christ from Heaven to Earth;
Sin that occasioned all his sorrow; Sin that nailed him to the Cross; and
buried him in his Grave; and that was ever hated by him as the worst of all his
Enemies, and yet they will persist in it in defiance of him, notwithstanding
their frequent Vows against it. They did what they did against Christ out of
zeal for their Law, to which they looked on him as an Enemy: These Persons can
pretend nothing but Love to their Lusts. They were instigated by others: These
Persons can lay the blame on none but themselves: They break their Vows and
they will do so, because whatever they pretend, they cannot bear to have Christ
to Reign over them. These things seriously weighed, must needs make the guilt
of wilful allowed breakers of Repeated Sacramental Vows, appear to be very
great and enormous. But further:

2. Let Us also consider the Danger which such persons incur, which is
proportioned to their guilt. Their Danger must needs be great: For,

1. THE course they take has a natural tendency to Harden their Hearts, and
Sear their Consciences, and make them impenetrable by any thing that might do
them good. That Persons Heart that is not softened by the blood of Christ often
Viewed, Commemorated, and Drunk at the Sacrament, must needs grow more
obstinate and unmalleable. Christ will depart from that Soul that can by
nothing be fastened to him; God will withdraw his Grace, where no Ties are
strong enough to hold: And if Christ depart, and the Spirit forsake, What can
follow but Coldness, Hardness, and Stupidity!

2. THEY are the Devils sure Prey, and have no guard against his utmost Malice.
They fall to the Devils share on course who deal thus triflingly with God, and
thus contemn and abuse their Savior. If our Vows will not hold us fast to our
Redeemer, our Lusts will hold us fast to the Devil; and every Sacrament we come
to, he will get greater power over us; and be still gaining a fuller and fuller
possession of us.

3. EVERY time such Persons come to the Lords Table, They eat and drink
damnation, or judgment, to themselves. i. e. 1 Cor. 11. 29.
(as is plain by the Apostles discourse there) they expose themselves to a
variety of Temporal Judgments, by their egregious trifling with the Blessed
God, and profaning so Sacred an Institution: They are in danger of feeling the
bitter fruits of this their horrid Sin, either in their Mind, or Body or
Estate. For this cause (says the Apostle) many are sick and weakly among you,
and many Sleep. Those that persist in breaking their Vows, and yet come time
after time to the Lords Table, may ever they are aware pull down Judgments on
themselves. And I don't much doubt, but the Sickness, Weakness, Melancholy,
Losses in the World, Crosses in Friends, Disappointments in Designs, and
unhappy Disasters which give so much trouble, nay the untimely ends, that some
Persons come to, are the effects of this their Sin.

4. THEIR danger must needs be great, for that they have the Abused Blood of
Christ crying to Heaven for vengeance on them. And if they are miserable who
have not the Blood of Christ to plead for them, how dreadful must their case
needs be, who have the Blood of Christ pleading against them; which to be sure
is their case, who so much abuse, despise, and profane it, and pour such
contempt upon it.

5thly and Lastly, THESE Persons lay themselves open to the heaviest
condemnation in another Would. Their own Sacramental Vows and Engagements will
rise up in Judgment against them, and sink them the deeper in Everlasting
Misery. The utmost threatenings of God are directly Levelled against such; and
will without Repentance in a little time overtake them to their utter Ruin. In
the Epistle to the Hebrews, we find the Apostle twice arguing strongly with a
comparative, If, which may also be aptly used in this case. If (says he) the
word spoken by Angels was steadfast, and Heb. 2. 2, 3.
every transgression and disobedience received a just recompense of reward; How
shall we Heb. 10, 28, 29.
escape if we neglect so great Salvation? And if he that despised Moses' s Law,
died without Mercy under 2 or 3 witnesses, of how much sorer punishment shall
he be thought worthy who has trodden under foot the Son of God, etc. In like
manner may we strongly argue by way of Comparison in our case: Thus; If they
were severely punished who broke the Mosaic Covenant, of how much sorer
punishment will they be worthy that wilfully violate the Covenant of the
Everlasting Gospel? If they were formerly severely punished who broke a Legal
Vow, about a Ceremonial Rite; What punishment may not they expect who break
their Repeated Vows, about things of infinitely greater Importance? If Covenant
Breakers amongst Men are to be severely punished; how much more those that break
their Vows to the Blessed God? If Achan deserved to be stoned for robbing God
of a little Devoted Wealth; What Judgments may they not fear, who
Sacrilegiously Alienate their Devoted Selves? If Nadab and Abibu's Profaneness
in offering strange fire, brought down fire from Heaven upon them that consumed
them; What may not they expect, whose Profaneness is risen to such an hight? If
Ioab's perfidiousness to Abner, in covering so base a design against him under
a friendly Vail, deserved such a Curse as it met with; What Curses will not
fall on their heads, who deal thus perfidiously with God? If Uzzah's
Audaciousness in but touching the Ark of God without just occasion, brought
upon him present Death; What that God can inflict will not their Audaciousness
expose them unto, who do as 'twere dare him to do his worst? If the Israelites
ingratitude in forgetting and abusing the wonderful Goodness of God to them,
and making such unsuitable Returns for it, was so severely punished as we find
it was; What Punishment can be great enough for those whose Ingratitude is
incomperably greater.

AND now methinks it is high time, for any, who have read thus far, to look
inward; and I would beg of them, that they would do so.

WHOEVER you are, if you are under Vows to God, spend a few thoughts by way of
enquiry, Whether the before described be not your case? If upon enquiry your
Hearts smite you, your Consciences tell you, you are guilty; certainly it cannot
but amaze you: You cannot surely think this a state and course to be rested in!
Be deeply Humbled out of a sense of your great Sin, and Folly; and be awakened
out of a sense of your Danger, which is so very great. Persist no longer in a
breach of thy Sacred Vows, lest a successive train of Temporal Judgments follow
thee; and those be accompanied with Spiritual Judgments too; and both issue in
Eternal ones, which are infinitely greater. Do but lay these things to Heart,
and endeavor by repeated Reflections to drive them home, and methinks they
cannot but move you. And if you come but to be deeply sensible, let me tell you,
Your case is not Hopeless: Your Sin, though great, is not Unpardonable: Pray
therefore earnestly that your great guilt may be forgiven you; and change your
course lest you Perish without Remedy.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Great Happiness of all those who are Serious in Making and Renewing
their Sacramental Vows, and Sincere in Keeping them.

THOSE who trifle in, and wilfully break their Sacramental Vows, are not more
Miserable, than those who seriously make them, and faithfully (though
imperfectly) keep them are happy. I shall therefore now endeavor to give as
distinct a view of the ones Happiness, as I have done of the others Misery: But
that neither the former Chapter nor this, may be wrested to serve different
Purposes, than they were designed for, it seems needful, that I premise this
Caution: That as in the Chapter foregoing I aimed at those, and those only, who
live in such Breaches of their Sacred Vows as are inconsistent with Sincerity;
so what I have now to subjoyn is safely applicable to all who can approve their
own Hearts sincere. It Is not indeed possible for any Mortal Man, to assign such
certain Universal Marks of Distinction, between such Breaches with God as are
consistent with Sincerity, and such as are not so as will hold. So great is the
variety of particular Circumstances, here falling under Consideration, as makes
this a matter incapable of a general Determination. And for my part, I must
declare, that were I able positively to certify Persons, what guilt they might
contract, how far and how often they might break their Solemn Vows, and yet
retain their Integrity, I should not dare to do it, for fear it should be
abused. But yet it is certain there are many sorts of Breaches, which may make
Persons sincerity justly questionable and all wilful ones do so, more or less;
and the more gross and habitual they are, the oftener they are repeated, and the
more numerous and strong those Bonds are which Persons break, the more dubious
do they make it: And on the other hand it is as certain that the most upright
have considerable frailties, after their utmost care and pains, and
watchfulness; they will be continually offending in many things. Who can
pretend to steer exactly in such a strait? it is God alone can guide: When we
have done our utmost, he alone can keep from daugerous mistakes and abuses. Let
it suffice therefore to intimate, That I would have all those who find
themselves chargeable with frequent wilful Breaches of their Sacramental Vows,
give Conscience free leave to judge, whether they are not in the dismal state
before described: And on the other side, I would have all those who find in the
main that sin grows weaker in them; and Grace stronger; that they particularly
get ground of their own Iniquity; more abhor it; strive more against it; and
are more grieved at any discerned vergencies toward it; to satisfy themselves
as to their own safety. Such as they, cannot but be sincere in their
Sacramental Engagements; and therefore are unspeakably happy.

I shall not go to heap up a Variety of Arguments, to prove the Happiness of such
Persons; (which were indeed all one as to go about to prove that there is a
reality in Religion) but I shall only briefly show wherein it lies, in order to
the Allurement and Excitation of such as are yet Strangers to it; and the
Encouragement of those to whom it belongs, and their Comfort and Joy.

NOW we may take a View of the Happiness of those who seriously come under
Sacramental Vows to God, and faithfully keep them, in the following Particulars.

1. THEY are drawn the nearer, and bound the faster to God, by every approach
to him in the Ordinance of the Supper. They come to his Table, and sit down
under his Shadow with great delight, Cant. 2. 3, 4.
and find his Fruit to be sweet to their Taste; and his Banner over them to be
Love. Whenever they come thither with prepared Hearts, their dear Lord
refreshes them with his Love, replenisheth them with his Grace, encourages
them in his Ways, and ravishes them with the sweetness of his Entertainment: He
puts forth his Hand to lift them up nearer Heaven, and gives them a glympse of
that which is to be their future Possession; a taste of what is to be their
everlasting Entertainment: He warms their Hearts afresh, till he makes them
burn and glow; and then their All is alas too little to offer up in Flames of
Love, to him that has so many ways endeared himself to them, to him that has
so much power over them: A separation from him is what they can now less bear
the thoughts of than ever. They give up themselves therefore to him anew,
resolving they will never forsake him; and by such renewed Vows and
Engagements, the Bond that fastens them to him is strengthened, and the awe of
Sacred Things, which is so apt to wear off from the best is renewed, and
further riveted. Their Lord on his part as 'twere embraces them in his Arms, in
token that the Bond is mutual, and as a Pledge that the Union between them
shall be inseparable; and he sends them in fresh supplys of Grace for their
assistance and support. I am sensible how great unevenness there is in the
best; which may produce Spiritual Distempers, Decays, and Declensions, whereby
those sensible Incomes and reviving Influences, that might otherwise be
obtained in this Ordinance, may be very much abated: But something or other of
this kind, more or less, has been experienced at some such seasons by sincere
Souls, which by those who know how to value things aright, cannot but be
esteemed far beyond any sensible Comfort or Refreshment.

2. IT is no mean part of the Happiness of such, that they take the most
effectual method to secure their Peace, and make it solid, stable, and lasting;
they take the right course to maintain both Peace with God, and Peace of
Conscience.

1. THOSE who are serious in making, and sincere in keeping Sacramental Vows,
take an effectual course to maintain Peace with God. He cannot slight or reject
a sincere, self-resigning Soul. He cannot but with Tenderness, Love, and Pity,
behold a Soul that seriously endeavors to keep close to him; he cannot break
with that Soul that he sees carefully shuns breaking with him: And though none
use the utmost care they might; though there are none (in our present lapsed
State) but if they did would often halt and falter; yet shall none of their
Breaches which are consistent with Sincerity, disanul or cancel that Treaty of
Peace, between God and them, of which Christ is the powerful Mediator, or
hinder their partaking of its blessed Effects. To this Treaty God sets his Seal
at every Sacrament. The Devout Communicant at every such Solemnity thankfully
accepts and joyfully embraces the Overtures of it; and renews Vows of an holy
Course of Life. The sincere keeping these Vows secures God's Approbation and
Special Favor. It Is Sin that is the only cause of separation between God and
us; and no Sin more than the Violation of Solemn Vows; where this therefore is
guarded against, by a steady course of faithful Obedience, there remains no
cause for any considerable breach between God and us. For as for daily
Infirmitys where the Heart is upright, and the Course of the Life holy in the
main, God has promised he will not remember them, he will on the Account of
Christ's Intercession easily overlook and pass them by, and maintain Peace with
us, upon a general Repentance of them, and Humiliation for them. Now what Man
is so happy as he that has Peace with the Blessed God? And who can be so
likely to reach this Happiness, as he that is rightly sensible of, and that in
the main lives up to those Vows of his that he is under? It Is true all Peace
with God is the effect of Christ's Death, the Merit of his Blood, and the Fruit
of his Purchase, and wherever it is bestowed it is his Gift who is the Prince of
Peace: But we may be well assured he will bestow it on none who carry on
Hostility against his Father, which is the case of all habitually wilful and
allowed Breakers of Sacramental Vows; we may be satisfied he will deny it to none
that are steadfast in his Covenant, and who earnestly study and faithfully
endeavor to answer the Demands of it, which is the case of those I am speaking
of: On them he will freely bestow it; to them he will take care to continue it, and
the Blessed Consequences of it; so that nothing shall intervene considerably to
interrupt it.

2. THEY also take the most effectual course to maintain Peace of Conscience:
For what is Peace of Conscience, but an inward quiet and composure, arising
from a well-grounded sense and hope, that things are as they should be between
God and us. Whatever therefore has any tendency to promote or maintain our
Peace with God, does naturally tend to make and keep us at Peace with our
selves; by preventing or allaying those disquieting Fears that naturally arise
from an apprehension of the Divine Displeasure. That these Persons therefore
take the best course to secure Peace within, is a genuine Consequence of the
foregoing Consideration. There Is no better ground for Peace of Conscience in
the World than they enjoy, who devoutly renew their Vows to be the Lord's time
after time at his Table, and live correspondently to them. Though they have a
Body of Sin and Death sticking fast to them, under which they groan, and from
which they never expect to be fully freed, so long as they are surrounded with
a Vail of Flesh, and till Mortality comes to be swallowed up of Life; yet may
they sensibly discern that things in the main are well with them, by their
Hearts approved Integrity. It could not methinks but be a great comfort to
Peter who had so shamefully denied his Master, to find himself able to make so
solemn an Appeal to him as that; Lord, thou know all things, thou know
that I Love thee: Joh. 21. 17.
So must it needs be a great quieting to serious Persons, to find themselves
able, in His Most Sacred Presence, who is the Searcher of Hearts,
notwithstanding their sense of their own Infirmities, which nothing can make
them lose, to stand to it that they will be the Lord's, and his alone; and to
resolve and vow that nothing shall ever be discovered to them to be his Will,
how difficult soever it be, but his Grace enabling them, they will do it; and
then afterward to find that notwithstanding their many Frailtys, the scope of
their Lives answers the Resolution of their Hearts; their Vows in the main are
kept, and not faithlesly broken. Peace may for some time be suspended, but it
cannot long be a Stranger to such Persons: And I think I need not intimate how
happy this bespeaks them. Further,

3. SUCH Persons are out of the danger of many Temptations that others meet
with; and are fortified against those whereby they are most likely to be
assaulted, which is no small Happiness. What a safeguard had Joseph against a
strong Temptation wherewith he was assaulted, although 'twas both insinuating;
because of its suitableness to his Carnal Inclination, the means of privacy in
it, and prospect of advancement upon his Compliance with it; and at the same
time shaking; because of the Disgrace which through his Mistresses Malice would
attend his refusal; what a safeguard (I say) had he, by this one thought
strongly impressed upon him? How can I do this wickedness and sin against God? So
what a safeguard are frequently Genesis 39. (...)
repeated Vows, seriously made, and strongly impressed, against most Temptations?
Let such Persons be tempted to Sin, and they have this soon occurs to them, How
can I run into this and break my Vows to my God and Savior? Whenever the Devil
does any thing to entice them to himself, the sense of their solemn Engagements
strongly impressed, will put them upon lifting up their Hearts in a strain much
like that of my Text; Thy Vows are upon me, O God. This in many cases is such a
Preservative, that where the Devil finds the sense thereof strong, he wont so
much as assault. But suppose him by some or other of his subtle Artifices to
have insinuated himself, and to have got any footing; he is no sooner
discovered than resisted by those who retain a fixed sense of the Vows of God
they are under; and he cannot long be resisted by any, but he will be put to
flight: For that is a standing Truth; Resist the Devil, and ^e will flee from
you. If those (...) 4. 7.
then are happy that have a Preservative from the hurt of Temptation, (and who
can question it) they are very happy that have a riveted sense of the
Sacredness of^eir Sacramental Vows, and that set themselves to square their
Lives by them: For none have a better, a more general, a more effectual and
safe Preservative than they.

4. THEY have many excellent Promises upon record, which they upon just grounds
may apply to themselves, and take comfort from, and live upon. I Will mention two
or three. All the Paths of Psalm. 25. 10
the Lord are Mercy and Truth unto such as keep his Covenant and his
Testimonies. The Mercy of the Lord is from everlasting Psalm. 103. 17, 18.
to everlasting upon them that fear him; to such as keep his Covenant, and to
those that remember his Commandments to do them. Who can express the Comfort
which such Persons may derive from such Promises as these? As also from all
those that are made to the Upright; and in general to the Doers of God's
Commandments. Come to the New Testament Promises and you will find few but what
such Persons may justly apply to themselves. All the Blessings of the Covenant
of Grace are promised to them, and they may safely depend upon them. There Is
one Promise of which so much notice is not taken as it deserves, which might
methinks dwell in the thoughts of such. He that has my Commmandments and
keeps them, he it is that loves Joh. 14. 21.
me, and he that loves me, shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him,
and will manifest my self to him. Such an one has Christ's Commandments, not
only in his hand, but in his heart; and he keeps them, i. e. Faithfully obeys
them; and thereby shows the sincerity of his Love to his dear Savior; both the
Father and Son therefore shall love him; and Christ will manifest himself to
them: i. e. He will open and unfold to such those Gospel Mysteries whereto
others notwithstanding all their light are real strangers; He will impart a
full knowledge of himself to them, and fill them with his Spirit; which is a
Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation. He will manifest the Secrets of Divine Wisdom,
and the traces of Eternal Love to them, so far as their present capacities will
bear; and in the future Life, he will lay himself and all those Treasures of
Wisdom and Knowledge that lie hid in him, open to their view, that they may for
ever entertain themselves with their Contemplation, and Enrich themselves by a
constant Derivation. Such Promises as these that may be so comfortably applied
by sincere Covenant Keepers with God unto themselves, make their state and
condition Exceeding Happy.

5. THEY are provided with what may help to support them, under any Crosses,
Troubles or Afflictions they may be Exercised with. Come what will they are
safe. They may stand their ground without giving way, they need not be
terrified or dismayed: And Oh what a Happiness is this! Who knows what Personal
or Domestiek Troubles they may meet withe'er they Dye? And how Terribly and
Violently they may be Assaulted as strong as they apprehend their mountain to
stand? Who can foresee what Public Calamaties a wait us, wherein all
particular Persons must unavoidably be sharers? now for Perfons to be able in
whatever troubles they meet with, to say with the Church, All this is come upon
us, yet Psalm. 44. 17, 18.
have we not forgotten thee; neither have we dealt falsely in thy Covenant: Our
Heart is not turned back, neither have our steps declined from thy way: For
Persons then to be able to look back on their Sacramental Transactions, and
Remember the Seriousness and Devotion wherewith they often have Renewed their
Vows to the Lord at his Table; and to look back on their Lives and find a
general, stated correspondency thereto, would be a spring of greater
Refreshment to them than is well conceivable by them who have not had some
experience of it. Let Us suppose a Person to meet with great Distress in his
Mind, in his Body, in his Estate or any other way; if seriously looking
upwards, he can be able to say with David, I have kept the way of the Lord,
Psalm. 18. 20.
I have not wickedly departed from my God; it must needs be a great Comfort and
Support to him. Incredible is the Consolation which such Persons lay in against
trying Times they may be called to pass through in the course of their Lives;
Great the Supports wherewith they are provided against the time when they shall
be under the assaults of Death the King of Terrors: To be able then to look
back on seriously renewed and faithfully performed Sacramental Vows, will make
those Pangs easy at which Nature trembles; 'twill make their Passage into
another World safe and comfortable: Who then can express their Happiness? And
then,

6thly and Lastly, THEY take the most Effectual Course to secure themselves
from falling away. That of the Perseverance of the Saints is a very comfortable
Doctrine; and rightly understood is so far from an evil and vicious
tendendency, as some imagine, that it tends every way to make us better. Now
the satisfying* Assurance of a true Christians Perseverance, is built on these
three grounds: The Favor and Love of God to him; the Sufficiency of the Divine
Assistance; and the Conscience of his own Integrity. That these Persons take
the best course to secure the Favor and Love of God, has before been made
appear. What can hinder those who often seriously* Faederally transact with God
and are steadfast in his Covenant, from hoping for every thing from him, which
beloved Children may expect from a tender and kind Father? As for the
Sufficiency of Divine Grace, they have no reason to question it: And that they
shall have it imparted to them in the measures and degrees wherein they need
it, is the purport of many promises, which they upon just ground may apply to
themselves. And then as for the Conscience of their own Integrity, on which the
Personal Comfort of the two foregoing grounds depends, none are so likely to
get and keep it as those who often with great Solemnity renew the acts of their
Self-Dedication to the Blessed God, repeat their Vows of all prescribed Duty,
and in the main in their whole course demean themselves suitably. What can
shake such persons hopes of Perseverance? Their frequent slips and failings
need not: For though they are to be lamented and bewailed, yet do they not
forfeit those aids of Grace whereby they may be enabled to hold out; yet do
they not cut of the entail of Divine Favor, whereby this perseverance is
secured. It is unquestionable that many may go far in Religion, and yet fall
off at last, and come to nothing; they may begin well and hold on for a time,
and for want of holding out lose the Crown, that the Gospel propounds as a
Reward to the Faithful. But that which I assert is this; That those who are
serious in the frequent repeating, and afterward faithful in keeping their
Sacramental Vows, may on this very Consideration, bottom a comfortable and well
grounded hope of their own Perseverance; that they shall not be in the number
of them that fall away. I am far from thinking that any are so far out of all
danger as to have any reason to grow secure; and if they do grow secure and
careless; it is a plain evidence to me, that they are not yet out of Danger: But
yet I doubt not but there are such things, as that those who do them shall
never fall: And thus much I think may be plainly learnt from 2 Pet. 1. 10. And
of this number I take this course to be, of serious Repeating and faithful
paying Sacramental Vows. For it argues the Heart to be established with Grace;
it seems to imply an incapacity of forsaking their Savior whose Love has
taken so fast hold of them, and bound them so firmly to himself; it argues an
incapacity of being guilty of such crying Provocations as those must be whereby
the Blessed Spirit should be quenched, or God obliged to desert them; it argues
Persons to be arrived at so fixed an habit of Goodness, as cannot be lost and
eradicated. Needs then must it argue unspeakable Happiness in their state who
have arrived to it. Who ought therefore certainly to be filled with
Thankfulness, and transported with Joy; and will be inexcusable, if their Souls
don't Magnify the Lord, if their Spirit don't Rejoice in God their Savior.

CHAP. XII.
Of the difficulty of Living up to our Sacramental Vows, with that Exactness
that we ought. With the Solution of some common Cases relating thereto.

NOTHING's more easy to be observed, Than that many are the imperfections
which attend those who are most faithful in paying their Sacramental Vows:
Hardly any thing creates some Persons so much perplexity as this: And those
must be great strangers to Religious matters, who know not that it is very
difficult to walk evenly with God, closely to follow Christ, to live under the
conduct of the Divine Spirit, to live by Faith, to lead such Holy, Heavenly,
Circumspect and Mortified Lives, as Christianity obliges to, and as we in our
often Repeated Sacred Vows engage to do. A distinct handling of this matter may
be of common which I shall therefore endeavor in this method.

1. I WILL enquire how it comes about that the keeping our Sacramental Vows with
any Exactness, should be so very difficult as it is found to be.

2. I WILL lay down some general Considerations, to prevent Peoples apprehending
it to be a more difficult matter, than it really is.

3. I WILL solve two or three Particular Cases, which commonly occur with
reference to this matter.

1. THEN let us a little enquire how it comes about that the Keeping our
Sacramental Vows with any exactness, is so very difficult as it is found to be;
which is a needful enquiry to prevent mistakes. Our ascribing the difficulty in
this case to a false cause, might lead us into many Errors, To prevent which, I
shall lay down three Observations by way of Negation; and as many by way of
Affirmation.

By way of Negation let it be observed That the difficulty of keeping our
Sacramental Vows, arises not,

1. FROM any rigorous demands of our Holy Religion. We Vow time after time at
the Lords Table Obedience to the whole will of God, so far as he is pleased to
make it known to us: When we have done, we find it indeed very difficult to do
as we have engaged; but this difficulty arises not from any over rigorousness
in any part of Gods Revealed Will; it arises not from any unnecessary over
harsh, or needlessly severe and strict commands, which among others we have
vowed Obedience to; No, we have not to do with an hard Master: Though he had a
right to have prescribed us whatever he thought good, yet has he tempered his
Prerogative with great Wisdom and Love, and suited his Prescriptions every way
to our greatest Good and best Advantage: So that which way soever we cast our
Eyes, we can find no part of the Duty we have vowed to our God and Savior, but
what is most highly reasonable; but what did we without prejudice or
partiallity study and mind our own truest interest, we should readily comply
and fall in with. The difficulty therefore in the case would be unjustly
ascribed to any thing in the nature of the Duties which are the matter of our
Vows. Nor,

2. IS this difficulty to be ascribed to any natural Incapacity on our parts to
comply with the demands of our Holy Religion. We cannot say but that were we
duly serious, observant, vigorous, resolute, diligent, and watchful, we might
pay the Vows that we make and often repeat to God; we cannot say but that if we
used that intentness and appliplication which such a matter deserves, and calls
for at our hands, we might live continually like those who are consecrated and
devoted to our God and Savior; making his Glory our end, his Law our Rule, and
his Pattern our Copy, which is the summary of of our Vows. We cannot truly say,
That any of the Commands whereto we have vowed Obedience, repuire any thing of
us whereof we are utterly incapable, any thing that is impossible to us, would
we set our selves to it with that Seriousness and Earnestness, that becomes
those who are under such strong Bonds, such Sacred and Solemn Engagements.
Neither,

3. Can we justly ascribe this Difficulty to any backwardness in God to give us
needed Aids. We cannot truly say that therefore we do fall so short in paying
our Vows, because God is wanting to us in those Supernatural Assistances,
without which such poor weak Creatures as we, are able to do nothing to
purpose. We should be very injurious to God, should we pretend that he was
wanting to his Word and Promise of sending us in help by his Blessed Spirit,
which he declares himself so ready to bestow on them that ask it of him. No
alas, it is not therefore difficult for us to be so Holy and Heavenly, and
Patient and Mortified, as we time after time vow we will be, because God is
sparing in the Communications of his Grace, on which all our hopes of success
must needs be founded; for he is ever free and open handed, he is never wanting
to us, but it is we that are wanting to our selves.

BY way of Assirmation therefore on the other hand, Let it be observed, that
the difficulty of Keeping and Living up to our Sacramental Vows, arises from a
triple Cause conjunctly.

1. FROM the great Slipperiness and Deceitfulness of our Hearts: Which is such
as that many times when they seem well fixed and firmly bent, they shall on a
sudden turn a side like a deceitful Bow. Good Impressions that seemed strong,
shall soon be lost and worn off by contrary impressions, for want of a due
guard which few take care to keep up. Would but our Hearts keep in an even
tenor, could we retain that warm sense of the things of God which we sometimes
feel; could we maintain the same Holy Resolution we sometimes find excited in a
Sacrament; the difficulty we are so apt to complain of would soon vanish; we
should find the paying of our Vows an easy thing: But herein our slipery
Hearts deceive us: For let us be never so warm to day, we shall it may be be
cold to morrow. We feel our Hearts so often change, that there is no knowing how
to reckon upon them, and where to find them; and it requires great Application
to keep them in any fixedness of Temper. Now this being no easy matter,
renders the paying our Sacramental Vows so difficult.

2. THE prevalence of Inward Corruption is another grand cause of this
difficulty. Our Inward Corruption is like tinder; 'twill catch fire upon every
spark. And it is so riveted that there is no total laying it aside but together
with our Bodies. It is like an impure Fountain continually casting forth mire
and dirt, in order to the checking the pure motions of the Spirit of Grace.
It Is very strong and powerful in most: 'Twill be continually striving against
the force of those Divine Considerations whereby our minds should be governed,
and kept in awe; and pulling of us back when we are with any seriousness
attempting to answer our Christian Obligations and Engagements. Could we quell
and master this contrary principle in us, we should find it an easy thing to
live up to our Sacred Vows: But this is a painful and laborious task, of which
we are apt to be very soon weary, and therefore is it that we find that so
difficult a matter.

3. THE many bewitching Temptations we are constantly beset with are great
Occasions of this difficulty. We have a subtle Devil to deal with, who will lay
all the curbs in our way that possibly he can; who so surrounds us on all hands
with snares, that we can hardly take an inadvertent step without falling into
some or other of them. Let us but set our selves in earnest to live up to our
Engagements, and he will start a thousand discouragements to clog and damp us:
He Will interpose with a variety of occasions that shall seem to be necessary, on
purpose to take off our intention and divert our thoughts, till we by degrees
grow cold: He Will make our Callings, our Relations, our Successes, our
Disappointments, our Comforts, or our Crosses, or any thing that comes in the
way, his engines to hinder us: He Will call in our flesh to his assistance, to
the voice whereof it is difficult not to listen. He Will entice us by charming
Insinuations; or affright us by Terrors; and select that method of dealing with
us that we are least able to resist, and leave nothing unattempted that lies in
his power to hinder us from that Holy, Christian, Exemplary Life, which is the
matter of our Sacramental Vows: No wonder therefore that it is so difficult.
Nay, I believe most Christians may generally observe, That when they have
thought themselves most serious at a Sacrament, when their hearts have seemed
most earnest and resolute in repeating their Solemn Vows to God and their
Savior there; then is the Devil more than ordinarily busy in his onsets and
attacks; then is he starting unthought of diversions to cool and damp them;
then shall he with unusual earnestness follow them with Temptations; till he
finds their Spirits cool, their Resolutions flag, and they return to their
wonted Remisness. And having given this short account of the rise of the
difficulty of living up to our Vows with any exactness; I proceed,

2. TO lay down some general Considerations to prevent our apprehending this to
be a more difficult matter than it really is. It Is indeed difficult to keep and
pay our Christian Vows; but still not so difficult as some are apt to imagine
it: which these four Considerations among many that might be alleged, do
sufficiently evince.

1. Perfect sinless Obedience is not the matter of our Sacramental Vows, is not
necessary in order to our Acceptance: It is indeed to be thirsted and aspired
after, but we may despair of reaching it, till we come to be reckoned among the
Spirits of Just Men made Perfect: We are to be ever reaching toward it, but to
vow that we will reach it, is needlessly to hamper our selves, by binding our
selves to an utter impossibility. We are at every Sacrament to vow against all
Sin, i e. against a willing loving Entertainment of any Sin whatever: And this
Vow is sincerely kept by all who hate and strive against all Sin, and forbear
every wilful Sin, and are humbled under the sense of all their Remaining
Imperfections, being far more desirous to be rid of them, than to retain them.
Our vows to Christ at his Table against Sin, are much of the same nature with
the Promise we may make to a Physician, that we'll be careful of our Health:
Such a Promise to a Physician don't at all intimate that we'll never be sick
more; no more do our Vows to Christ that we will never sin more; but such a
Promise to a Physician would imply, that we would not wilfully bring Diseases
on our selves, but would use the means that are appointed to preserve and
increase our Health; and that whatever Sickness cleaves to us should be our
Trouble, and we would desire and earnestly endeavor to be freed from it. So
our Vows at the Lords Table bind us carefully to regard the health of our
Souls; to look upon Sin as a Spiritual Sickness, and therefore never to fall in
Love with it, but to do our best toward its utter Removal. Even those
infirmities the best are liable to, are not to be cherisht and pleaded for, any
more than we would plead for a little of the Headache, or any bodily pain. We
should not by our good will be guilty so much as of a vain thought, or an Idle
Word, or at all cherish the least motion to any Sin; but yet God does not
require of us positively that we will never sin more; nor are we to look on our
selves as perfidious breakers of Sacramental Vows, because we find sundry
imperfections cleave to us, so long as we from our Hearts abhor them; and do
ordinarily overcome temptations to more gross and wilful Sins. That which we
are properly to vow at every Sacrament with reference to Sin is this; that we
will not live and allow our selves in it; and that we'll keep up a constant
struggle and combat against it. The Gospel finds us Sinners, and supposes us
such in its first grand Address to us, which is the Offer of a Savior: And
though it works a great Change where it is heartily entertained, yet does it not
make us quite cease to be Sinners: It makes us indeed cease to be obstinate,
resolute, hardened, habitually wilful, impenitent Sinners; but although it works
Repentance and Faith, and all other saving Grace in us, yet does it not root
out all the Remains of Sin out of us: And where Sin remains it will show it
self at times. To suppose it necessary in order to our Salvation, that we
should be free from sin, were to make it not only difficult, but impossible. We
must take heed of this mistake therefore, least we needlessly trouble our
selves, by fancying this matter more difficult than it is.

2. We Vow nothing at all at the Sacrament in our own strength. So weak and
impotent are we in Spirituals, that if we had no higher strength than our own
to depend on, we could not safely come under the least engagement; for we might
easily foresee we should certainly fall short. In our own Strength we could not
safely vow or promise the performance of the least duty, or an avoidance of the
least sin; much less a firm adherence to God, in a course of holy Universal
Obedience, which is the purport of our Sacramental Engagements. To suppose it
necessary for us of our selves without superior Aids to keep our Sacramental
Vows, is another way of representing our doing so, not only difficult but
impossible; and therefore carefully to be avoided.

3. He to whom Vows are made on our part, engages on his part to supply us with
all needed strength. Christ has ^c has'd the Aids of the Spirit for all his
hearty Followers: And whoever come to the Lord's Table with an earnest desire
of Grace to be there given them from Christ, to enable them to fulfill the
Promises, and pay the Vows they there renew, they may very confidently expect
strength and and assistance from him. Were it not for this, which is the
purport of diverse Promises in the Covenant of Grace, there were no hope for us:
We might vow and vow as long as we would, all would signify nothing. How
difficult soever therefore we find it to live up to Sacramental Vows, in this
may we take comfort, That the Grace of Christ is sufficient for us, and his
Strength is made perfect in Weakness: And though without 2 Cor. 12. 9.
him we can do nothing. Yet through his Joh. 15. 5. Phil. 4. 13.
Strength we may do all things. i. e. We may do all things required in an
acceptable manner: We may do all that we at his Table vow we will do, so as to
be accepted. Though therefore through the great Disorders of our Spirits, the many
Temptations whereto we are on all hands incident, and our own weakness it be
exceeding difficult, to live up to our Sacramental Vows, yet Strength and Aids
from Heaven, which those that keep in the way of their Duty may comfortably
expect and hope for, will not only render it possible; but by degrees abate the
Difficulty, and make it easy.

4. THE Gospel Covenant leaves room for Repentance of our frequent Breaches,
and manifold Defects and Infirmitys. Our Sacramental Vows suppose not that we
should live without slips and stumbles: (Unspeakably wretched were our case,
should they presently cast us out of the Divine Favor;) but they oblige us
upon discerning our Falls to rise again by true Repentance, and to have
recourse anew to the Blood of Christ for Mercy, and to his Spirit for fresh
strength; resolving to take more heed to our Ways for time to come: And thus
doing we need not fear being accepted.

SOME indeed are by this Consideration so encouraged in presumption, that they
run a round of sinning and repenting, repenting and sinning; giving themselves
scope, and then thinking that a slight asking God pardon when they have done
will be sufficient: But by this course they wretchedly mock God, and
egregiously deceive and endanger their own Souls. But although it be liable to be
thus abused, and actually is so by many presumptuous daring Sinners, it yet
remains a truth; and a very comfortable truth it is to sincere Souls, for whom
God has by this means provided great relief. Let us vow against Sin never so
seriously and solemnly; let us endeavor to live up to such Vows never so
diligently, never so carefully, we yet after all shall find the Scripture true,
which declares, That there is no Man that sins not. And in many 1 Kings 8.
46. Jam. 3. 2. 1 John 1. 8.
things we offend all. And if we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and
the Truth is not in us. But here is our Comfort, If we confess our Sins, i. e.
truly repent of them, God is faithful and just to forgive us our Sins, verse. 9.
and to cleanse us from all Unrighteousness.

From these four Considerations taken together, I draw this plain, single,
useful Inference: That though our experience of the difficulty of living up to
our Sacramental Vows, be a proper Call to Humiliation, yet is not a just
occasion for sinking discouragement. A Call to Humiliation indeed it is, to
find that we in any measure fail of our Duty to God, of whose Benignity, Love
and Grace we have had so great experience: That when we have done our best, our
Returns to our dear Savior for his Redeeming Love, whereby he bought us to
himself with an invaluable Price, fall so short, and are so defective: That
such solemn Ties and Bonds as we are continually renewing, repeating, and
further strengthening are so little able to hold our slippery Hearts fast to our
God and Savior: That after all our serious Vows and Promises Sin should be so
powerful in us, Temptations so prevalent with us, and the great Motives and
Incentives wherewith our Holy Religion presents us, should have so little
influence upon us: But yet all this is not a just occasion for sinking
Discouragement. For though we are very imperfect, yet may we still be acceptably
faithful: Though we have abundant experience of our own weakness, yet is Christ
ready to strengthen us; though we often stumble and fall, yet may we be accepted
upon our Repentance. What Christ therefore once said upon a particular occasion
to poor fearful doubting Thomas, say I in his Name to all fearful, doubting,
but sincere Souls, Be not faithless but believing.

I now proceed to the solving two or three particular Cases that commonly occur
with reference to this matter: Under which I Will add some special Considerations
suiting each Case, to the general ones before laid down, that may be applied to
all. The first of these Cases is of one who never was at the Lord's Table, who
by this difficulty of answering the Engagements he should there come under is
kept and affrighted thence. The second of one that has often been there, but is
afraid again and again to renew Vows there, which he knows he can so difficulty
keep. The third of one that often goes there, and often renews his Vows, but is
discouraged by his frequent Breaches. The forementioned Difficulty lies at the
bottom in each of these Cases.

The first Case.
Therefore may a Person say, Do I forbear coming to the Lord's Table, because I
am there to come under Vows, which I know before hand I shall not keep? Withal I
know my Sins, after such a Solemnity, will be much aggravated, and my Guilt be
the greater; it seems to me therefore better to forbear and stay away, than to
run my self on such a Precipice. If I come to the Lord's Table, I am to Vow
against all Sin; but this Vow I dare not make, because I am satisfied I should
not keep it.

I Answer: 1. We are to vow nothing at a Sacrament but what we are antecedently
obliged to; nothing but what is absolutely necessary in order to our Happiness.
We make nothing our Duty by our Sacramental Vows, that was not so before; but
only bind our selves to that to which we are sensible we were before obliged.
We bind our selves to no unnecessarys; but only engage to adhere to that God in
whose Favor lies our Life; we renounce sin, which alone is enough to make us
miserable; we vow Holiness of Life, which is the only way to Happiness. To say
therefore we know before hand that we should not keep the Vows we should make
at a Sacrament, is to consign our selves over to certain Misery; for unless we
do that which Sacramental Vows import, we are unavoidably undone for ever.

2. IF thou do not seriously intend to keep thy Sacramental Vows, I own thou
had better not make them. If thou in thy Heart really dislikest the Holy Laws
and Government of Christ, take not an Oath, make not solemn Vows in a mockery
that thou will be subject to him, which thou before intendest not to keep.
Beware how thou playest with Edge Tools. These are serious things; wherefore
either be serious and sincere in thy meddling with them, or keep at a distance.
But then withal take notice, that by thy forbearing on this Account to come to
the Lord's Table, thou renouncest all the Benefits of Christ's Mediation and
Purchase.

3. There Is no difficulty in any part of the Vows we come under at a Sacrament,
but what is superable by a diligent, serious, painful Christian, aided with
Divine Strength. We run upon Mistakes if we imagine there is any other ground
for fear that we should not be able to keep the Vow we at the Lord's Table
should come under, but our own Carelessness and Sloth, Negligence, Carnality,
and sinful Self-Indulgence: These given way to, will make not only our keeping
any Vows we might come under to God, but our Salvation also, not only difficult
but impossible. The Vow we are at the Lord's Table supposed to come under,
carrys no other difficulty in it, than what by the help of Grace, in the use of
vigorous Endeavors, we might get over. Take it therefore which way we will,
the Plea of this Case is unaccountable. If we are in earnest for Christ, it is
foolish to let such a fear as this keep us from his Table: If we are not so,
it is vain to plead this fear as a reason for staying away; when in reality it is
our love of Sin, and unwillingness to come under the Government of Christ, is
the true Cause of our backwardness to come thither. Which all those who live in
the neglect of the Lord's Supper, would do well to consider.

The second Case.
I, says another, have often been at the Lords Table, and there come under Vows
to God; but have so often broke them, and find it so difficult to keep them,
that I cannot tell how to think it my Duty again to renew them: For how can it
be my Duty to run a Round of Vowing and Breaking, which I find by Experience
will be my Case.

I Answer:

1. IT may be thou think them Breaches of Sacramental Vows, that are not so:
If thou keep up but a sincere Resolution to do what in thee lies to please
God, and take care not to run wilfully into those Actions which thou know
are contrary to his Will; how numerous soever thy Infirmities be, thou art not
chargeable, as a perfidious Breaker of thy Vows.

2. IT may be thou forgettest the part that Repentance must bear, in every true
Christians Life: Thou think, it may be, to make work for Repentance, is to
make thy Case next kin to Desperate: Whenas we are all making work for it
daily, and cannot in the state we are in do otherwise: To be continually
Renewing our Repentance, is our constant Duty; and to be accepted upon our
R^pentance, is a great Mercy.

3. TO forbear Renewing thy Vows, because thou have fallen, is to give the
Devil a great Advantage against thee. For by keeping thee from it, he keeps
thee from that which would the most of any thing (if seriously managed) help
thee to rise, and resist him with a Renewed Vigor.

4. SIN fallen into, can never make the Obligation to Duty cease. God obliges
thee to come frequently to his Table, and there renew thy Engagements to be
his, and his alone. Whatever thy Sins be, this remains thy Duty. As for thy
Sins, thou oughtst with grief and sorrow of Heart to lament and bewail them,
and seriously to repent of them: But plain Duty is not to be neglected. To
neglect Duty because we have sinned, is to add Sin to Sin, and to neglect this
Duty especially, is to refuse the use of that means which is most likely to
help us to strength against Sin.

5thly and lastly, Consider, That to forbear Renewing our Vows, because of the
difficulty of keeping them, argues either an Impatience of Christ's Yoke, and
Tiredness with his Bonds, as too close and strait, and therefore not to be
born; or a distrust of his Promise of affording help and strength to enable us
to live up to them to such a degree as that we shall be accepted. And either of
these are plainly very dishonorable to Christ, and therefore are wholly to be
watched against.

The Third Cas^.
We, say some, are so sensible of our Duty, that we continue vowing time after
time, at the Lora's Table; but still to our sorrow, we find we break our Vows;
nay, we know not how to keep them; we are therefore much disheartened: To
forbear Renewing our Vows we are afraid; and yet keep them we find we cannot:
And between the one and the other we are in great Perplexity. What Is to be done
in this great strait?

I Answer hereto, I can only put this Question, close to the Consciences of the
Complainants, Whether they are known wilful Sins, or common Infirmities, that
are the Root of their Trouble? If they find themselves chargeable with the
former, their only way to Comfort, Peace, or Safety, is to avoid them: They
must take great Care, least by living in the neglect of the Holy Communion,
they give the Devil Advantage against them; and if they come to it at its
stated Returns, they must take heed least by a wilful breaking of the Bonds
they renew there, they pull down a Curse on themselves, instead of a Blessing.
But if they are common Infirmities that disturb them, I would suggest these
following things to their Consideration.

1. TO have an humble sense of our own Insufficiency and Weakness, kept upon
our Spirits, is a great Advantage. It will preserve us from that
Self-confidence and Security which betrays to many a Temptation; and 'twill put
us upon seeking earnestly for strength from Heaven, of which it discovers to us
so great need: And therefore it is a great Mercy, and ought not to be esteemed
at all a Burden or Grievance.

2. TO be enabled to persist in our Duty, notwithstanding Discouragements, is
also a great Mercy. It argues a firm bent of Heart for God, and a fixed
Resolution of Adherence to him, whatever befalls us: which is very pleasing to
God, and should also be very comfortable to us; and therefore we should be
thankful for it.

3. WE should take heed of Imagining that Unavoidable Infirmities, Common
Inadvertencies, or any such Slips as are consistent with Sincerity, cast us out
of the Divine Favor. This were to entertain unbecoming Thoughts of God, to
disparage Christ's Mediation, to mistake the the tenor of the Gospel, and
gratify our grand Enemy the Devil.

4. WHILE we keep on in the Course of our Duty, in an humble Dependence on
Christ, we may comfortably hope our strength may increase; and proportionably
as that decreases, shall we find the difficulty of that Holiness of Life we vow
to him at his Table, abate and wear off.

5. OUR frequent Slips and Falls, should cause us to redouble our Watchfulness;
and to keep the stricter Guard on our selves; which would be, as 'twere, to
fight against the Devil with his own Weapons.

6. and Lastly, TAKE this for thy comfort, If thou art but brought to such a
frame as this; to be truly grieved that Sin and Satan should have so much
Interest in thee; and do heartily desire that God would cast them forth; and
take possession of thee for himself, thou art in a good way to a Deliverance.
If God sees thee laboring under the Burden of thy Corruptions, which after all
thy Vows, and thy utmost care against them, do still too often prevail over
thee; if he sees thee tugging with thy backward Heart, to bring it to him, he
will soon afford thee help. Do but hold on, and persevere, and thou will find,
according to Philip. II. 12. that in time God will work in thee to do, as well
as to will, of his own good pleasure.

CHAP. XIII.
DIRECTIONS that may help us to live more Correspendently to our many Solemn
Sacramental Vows.

WHERE a thing appears difficult, help is generally acceptable: I shall
therefore do what I can to afford it, in the Case of Living up to our many
sacred Vows. The foregoing Chapter will from most be apt to draw forth this
further Enquiry; How may we come to live correspondently to our many solemn
Ties? What course must we take, that the sense of our Christian Vows may not
wear off? What should we particularly do, after we have Renewed our Vows to our
God and Savior at his Table, in order to the fastening of our Hearts, and
engaging our selves effectually to answer and pay them? For whose satisfaction,
I lay down the following Directions and Cautions.

1. BEWARE of Imagining that so weighty an Action as that of Renewed Vowing and
Covenanting, terminates in it self; and that all is done, when the Ordinance of
the Supper is over. Take not a Sacrament for a Charm, that is to work
Magically; and to make you better by an unperceivable sort of a Physical
Operation; for that were to turn it into an Useless and Unprofitable Ceremony.
Don't think that your joining in it, although you were, it may be, in a serious
frame, during its Celebration, is enough for you: But reckon upon it, that God
minds your Carriage as much after wards as at that instant, if not more: For
the great design of that Ordinance is to be an Engagement to, and help for
Holiness of Life. God was there attempting to bind you fast to himself and his
Son; and you professed and pretended to bind your selves: What can show that you
in this were sincere and hearty, but your future holy and exact walking?
Whereby only you can rightly Answer the end of this Institution. To sit down
then contented, with the bare promising, over the sacred Symbols at the holy
Supper, that we will be the Lords, as thinking that we thereby sufficiently
acquit our selves; would be all one, as if in a matter of vast consequence
between Man and Man, and on which much depends, we should satisfy our selves
with signing a Contract, and thereby obliging our selves under large Penalties;
thinking our selves thereupon presently discharged, without taking any care to
fulfill Articles: Alas! who would care a rush for such a Contract, if he knew
the engaged Party would look no further? So how can God at all regard those
Vows of ours, that stop even in the making; and that Sacramental Seriousness
that ends with the Ordinance. If we rest in the Work done, and think that
enough, it is no wonder at all, if any good impressions made, are as the Morning
Cloud, and as the Early Dew, which quickly passes away.

2. ENDEAVOR by after serious and warm Meditation, to rivet and strengthen
your renewed Resolutions Vows and Promises. Think seriously with whom you have
been transacting, and what you have been doing.

Take pains with your own Hearts in your Retirements, to drive things home.
Endeavor to fix the impressions you were under when you had the emblems of
your Crucified Lord before your Eyes, so firmly on your Hearts, as that nothing
may be able to deface them. Think how odious sin in general then appeared to
you; how loathsome your own iniquities seemed to be, when you anew resolved
against them: And how necessary, aimiable and lovely a Christ appeared to you,
when you anew Consecrated your selves to his Service; and how firmly then you
seemed bent against your Lusts, and for your Savior: How Resolute to shake of
every weight, especially the sin that most easily besets you, and to run with
Patience and Perseverance the Holy Race that is set before you. Think how you
blamed and condemned your selves for your past sin and folly; and how ashamed
you were to reflect on your own vileness; and with what seeming warmth and
vigor you Vowed, through the Assistance of Divine Grace, to lead an Holy and a
Pious Life. Say each one to your selves, Behold O my Soul, I have entered into
a new League of Friendship with God; a League Firm and Strong, and Solemn and
Perpetual; I must not, I cannot, I dare not, I will not draw back. I am come
under new Bonds to my God and Savior; Bonds that will never be cancelled;
Bonds that can never be discharged; and therefore I Will endeavor to be always
paying the Debt I owe. My Savior has made himself and all his Benefits over
to me, in an Everlasting Covenant; what could I then do less then return my
self back to him? Was not this Reasonable, Just, and Fit? His I ought to be,
his I have engaged to be, and his I will be. Drive things thus home to a
peremptory Conclusion, and you will find the Benefit of it. This will be a
satis-fying Evidence to you, that your Vows were not the effect of a mere
Passionate Transport, which is flitting and transient and soon worn off; but of
a firm bent of Heart which is vastly better. Think then seriously of what has
past between God and you, and leave not off ruminating on the matter, till you
are brought to a fixed point; Resolving to stand to what you have done: Till
you can cry out with David, Psalm. 119. 106. I have sworn and I will perform it,
to keep thy Righteous Judgments. Some time in the Evening, after we have been
at the Communion, spent with this design, might be very useful: We should then
find this work easier than afterward. And as bad as we are, we are not so
chilly, but if we were at all serious, we should find some sense of what we
have been about remaining on our Hearts, which would be an advantage to us in
our setting our selves seriously to drive things home. If we did the like the
next morning after; nay if we did something of the same kind every day almost
(though it should be but short) 'twould turn to a good account, and we should
have no cause to repent our pains.

3. OFTEN recollect and think on the Mischiefs, you your selves have found by
your so frequent Breaches of your past Solemn Vows. How sadly your peace has
been thereby interrupted, your Consciences wounded, your Graces weakened, your
Enemies gratified, the Holy Spirit grieved, and your motions Heavenward
retarded. Have you not found and tasted it to be a bitter thing to play fast
and loose with God; to falsify your Engagements, and break his Bonds? whence is
it that he frowns upon you, and withdraws his presence and his aids in any
measure from you? Whence is it that you go on so heavily, still mourning and
complaining, that you are backward unto Duties, cold and lifeless in them, and
little if at all the better for them? Whence is it that the Devil has gained
so much influence upon you, and gotten so great an Advantage against you, and
so easily catches you by his wiles and snares, which you formerly so carefully
avoided? Whence is it that that little Good, that little Grace that is in you
is so withering pining and languishing? Whence is it that you who once were
cheerful in Religion, having comfortable hope through Grace of your good Estate,
are now so despondent and drooping, and so full of Doubts and Fears? Is not all
this chargeable upon your frequent and sad Breaches of your Sacramental Vows?
Think of it then seriously; Recollect all the sad Consequences that have thence
ensued, as exactly and faithfully as you can; and then think how by the like
breaches of fresh Vows, you expose your selves to the like breaches for time to
come, and that in a higher degree than before; and this certainly if any thing
will help to quicken you to Care, Constancy and Fidellity, in living up to your
Renewed Engagements.

4. THINK also often with your selves, how happy you might have been had you
been but faithful to your Sacramental Vows and Promises. To what a confirmed
State might you by this time have been advanced? To how flourishing a pitch of
Grace might you have arrived? How much Honor might you have brought to God?
How much Good might you have done in the World? What Peace Delight and Pleasure
might you have found in the ways of God? How free and undisturbed might your
Communion with him have been? And how well established might you have been by
this time against all Assaults, had you but honestly paid the Vows you have
often made and repeated to your God and Savior? Little do you know what your
false heartedness has lost you. Little are you aware of what your Carelessness
and Unfaithfulness to your God has deprived you. Think of it seriously after
every Sacrament. Reason the case with thy self. What O my Soul have I not lost
enough already! Has not my Treachery and Sacrilege and Falseness been
detrimental enough to me already! Shall I still go on to break my Vows, and rob
my God, and damage my self, and take a course that will deprive me of that
Peace and Pleasure, and Sweetness, and much of the Profit too, which Religion
is capable of affording me? Such thoughts as these pursued home after every
Sacrament, could not but be helpful to stir and quicken, rouz and warm us, and
keep us close to him, to whom we are a new Devoted.

5. RUN not too hastily into the World after the Renewal of your Solemn Vows.
Too hasty changes are easily observed to be pernicious to the Body; and they
are full as hurtful to the Soul. For a Man that has been in violent motion,
whereby he is well heated, to wash in cold Water, would be the way for him to
chill his spirits, and bring upon himself a deadning damp: So for them who have
been well warmed with Spiritual Matters; have been seriously renewing their
Covenant with God; to rush immediately and carelessly into Worldly Affairs, is
the way to have their Hearts presently grow Cold, and Chill, and Dead. It Is
true we are obliged to mind our Callings; and God has appointed us six days
for that purpose, having reserved a Seventh for himself; on which we ordinarily
receive the Communion; and in which, if we have any true Concern for our Souls,
we shall be careful, as he requires us, to banish all Worldly Thoughts and
Affairs out of our Minds and Hearts: But that of which I would have you be
careful, is that you rush not into the world after a Sacrament, without taking
a Preservative along with you. You cannot, if you consult past Experience, be
insensible how apt the World is to withdraw you from God, and deaden you to
Duty, and hinder you in the minding of those matters that are of infinitely
greater importance: To many a Breach of Sacramental Vows, has your over great
eagerness in the pursuit thereof it may be betrayed you. Think therefore after
you have anew given your selves up to God, before you engage in your Temporal
Affairs, that you are obliged to pursue and value and use the World like
persons that are Devoted to the Most High God; that you cannot serve him and
Mammon together. That the Friendship of the World is enmity Mat. 6. 24.
with God. That the fashion of this world Jam. 4. 4. 1 Cor. 7. 31.
passes away. But that he to whom you are Consecrated has much more valuable
Treasures, and a more enduring substance in reserve for his faithful Servants.
Some such Thoughts as these a little pursued, will help to season your Minds,
and antidote you against the Infection, of which, in the midst of Worldly
Affairs, you are in constant danger. They will be helpful in the midst of all
the cares and concerns of which you are subordinately mindful, to keep your
Hearts free for him, whose Servants you have vowed to be.

6. EXPECT that the Devil will quickly endeavor to cause you to undo what you
have done at a Sacrament, to hamper and embarrass you, to deaden and damp your
Hearts, and cut the Sinews of holy Diligence; and therefore prepare for his
Assaults. Think not that he will let you alone, and suffer you without
molestation, to pay your Vows; don't imagine he will give way, and yield, and
suffer God's Right quietly to take place: Think not that any Resolutions of
yours, though ever so serious, firm and strong, will carry you out of his reach:
But rather expect the more heartily you renounced him, the more he will rage
against you: The more vigorously you resolved to oppose him, the more
strenuously he will set himself to baffle you. He Will start a thousand things in
your way, to divert you; if that wont do, he will terrify and scare you,
discourage and dishearten you; if that will not do, he will stir you up Oppostion
that you little thought of, and press you with difficulties from all Quarters.
This is what you should beforehand expect and reckon upon; that so you may be
duly provided, and not surpised. There are many honest Souls, that if they can
but find themselves any thing serious and warm in Renewing their Sacramental
Vows, if they find any holy Fervours excited on that Occasion, are apt to think
that now they are safe: The Devils wonted Method will not do with them, they are
so well fixed that he cannot hurt them, and thereupon they grow secure: And by
this means he, before they are aware, gains upon them; they lose their ground,
and he is too hard for them. Let Us therefore beware of him; since we are not
ignorant of his Devices. Let us ever expect the most vigorous Assaults of our
Spiritual Adversary, when we have been most serious at a Sacrament, in Renewing
our Vows of Fidelity, Vigor and Diligence, in our Holy Warfare: And let us
prepare our selves to resist at first, which would do much toward the
strengthening of our own footing, and the securing the Payment of our Vows: But
if we let him gain the least Advantage, we shall find it very difficult to
recover it again.

7. OFTEN pray over your own Vows, and seriously and fervently look upwards,
for those Aids and Succors, without which there is no ground for us to hope to
pay them. We read of our Blessed Savior, That in the Days of his Heb. 5. 7.
Flesh, he offered up Prayers and Supplications with strong Crying and Tears.
In this, we should be like him, if ever we would be to our trust, as he was.
The most praying Christian is ordinarily likely to be the most improving,
thriving, diligent Christian. You made not your Vows in your own strength; but
to him to whom your Vows were made, must you be beholden for strength to keep
them. The first time therefore you retire after the Renewing them at a
Sacrament, bend your Knees to the Father of Mercies, and God of all Grace, and
earnestly beg of him Wisdom and Strength to fulfill your Engagements. Nay, be
not more frequent in begging of him your daily Bread, than in sending up this
request, That he would not lead you into Temptation; i. e. that he would not
suffer you to be overcome by it. Beg earnestly of him, that he would lead your
Hearts into his Love, and constantly keep you under the governing Influences
thereof; and so order your steps, as that you may faithfully keep his
Commandments. Beg of him that he would rouz you, when slumbring; spur you, when
loitering; reduce you, when wandering; uphold you, when sinking; cheer you,
when drooping; and so guide, assist, and succor you, as that in the midst of
all the Infirmities and Imperfections whereto you are liable, and and with
which you will be always chargeable, you yet may be able to approve your selves
to him as sincerely faithful. Prayer must be always the great Engine of our
help and strength. If we are beset, and find our selves unable to withstand the
vigor wherewith we are attaqu'd, we should take Wing upwards, and beg Grace to
help in the time of our need. If we are mastered, we should look upwards for
strength, whereby we may be recovered, and brought to our selves again. Prayer
will be needful and useful, from first to last. Where Sacramental Vows are not
attended with fervent Prayers, it is not at all to be wondered at, if they are
soon broken. For it is an Argument of too much dependence on our own strength,
which in reality is but weakness; and too little dependence on him without whom
we can do nothing. It Is a Mercy, in such a Case, for God to suffer us to fall,
that we may be the more fully convinced how helpless we are without him. If
therefore we would ever come in any measure to answer and pay our Sacramental
Vows, we should follow them with serious and earnest Prayers: And yet we must
not rest there neither, but we must follow our Prayers with our Endeavors. And
therefore,

8. KEEP up a strict Watchfulness over your selves in all things; we should set
a Watch over our Eyes, Ears, Tongues, Appetites, Hearts and Hands, that they
betray us not into a Miscarriage. And there especially should we be most
careful, and make our guard the strongest, where we have formerly tripped most
frequently. If we are not very careful afterward, we shall show that our Vows
were not made in earnest. We must Watch, as well as Pray, that we enter not
into Temptation. We should observe the first stirrings of Corruption, and
endeavor to quell them; and labor to curb Sin in its first beginnings, before
it have gone too far, and gained too much upon us. We should maintain a
constant Jealousy of our own treacherous Hearts. We should watch against even
the appearance of Evil; and never intermit our guard, as we would not have our
Hearts hardened through the Deceitfulness of Sin, and as we would not Heb. 3.
13.
lose the sense of our Sacred Engagements, which is better kept from the first,
by the constant maintaining some degrees of an holy warmth within, than it is
afterward recovered, when it has been lost, and the Heart has been dampt,
and chilled, and cooled.

9. OFTEN call your selves to an Account what Influence the Vows of God have
upon you; how well you answer and pay them. Let not things run on, time after
time, without Examining; which is the highway to danger, and loss, and
disorders of all kinds: But often pause, and bethink your selves how matters
stand. Go out upon the Enquiry, Whether or no you retain any suitable sense of
your Solemn Engagements; whether your Hearts and Lives are under the force of
them, yea, or not? Keep Court in your own Breasts, and bring your selves to the
Test, that you may see how well you have kept or lost your ground. A Tradesman
many times hardly knows how it stands with him, as to his Estate, till he comes
to cast up his Accounts: No more can you without Self-Examination, so well
judge how your Vows have been kept or broken. Were it frequent, provided it
were serious, 'twould be very beneficial; for it would help to keep Conscience
tender, by causing it to smite us upon the least omission or transgression; it
would help to keep our Minds in awe, and be a Curb to that Levity whereinto we
are so very prone to slide; it would be a sort of an Anticipation of the future
Day of Account, when all things shall be strictly examined and inquired into;
and be a constant Spur to Watchfulness and Care. Let us often therefore in our
Retirements, seriously and strictly examine our Hearts and our Ways, if we
would live up to the Vows of God that we are under: And when we have done what
we can of this kind, let us beg of God to supply our Defects; and make use of
the pious strain of David, Search me, O God, and try me, and see if there be
any wicked way in me, and lead me Ps. 139. 23, 24.
in the way everlasting.

10thly and Lastly, WHENEVER you find your selves sliding or already sliden
into Deadness and Remisness, earnestly plead the cause of God with your own
Hearts, and do what you can to chide them out of their perfidious Inclination.
Urge Sacramental Transactions upon your Hearts, to quicken your Faith and Love
and Obedience. God has given us (that is our Mental Powers) a considerable
Authority over our selves; which if ever, is certainly to be used in this Case.
In nothing would Self Excitation and Self Objugation be more beneficial than in
this matter. Reason the case therefore soberly and yet Authoritatively with
your selves, whenever you find the sense of Sacramental Vows diminishing,
abating, or wearing off: Argue with your selves at some such rate as this. Is
this like a Christian? Is this the way to show the Resentments I have of my
Redeemers amazing Love? Is this the way to grow and thrive in Grace and Piety?
Or is it not rather the way to decline and go backward? Is this the way to
secure the Divine favor? Or is it not rather the way to incur Gods
Displeasure? Shall I not by this means dishonor God, lose my own Peace, and
deaden others? Shall I not bafflle my own Hopes, and blur my Evidences, and
grieve the Spirit, and wretchedly indispose my self for Renewed Engagements, to
which I am frequently called, by my Deadness, Carelessness and Sloth? What ails
thee then O my Soul? Why art thou so stupid and senseless? Why so Base, Unworthy
and False? What can ever hold thee fast to thy God and Savior, if not such
bonds as thou ar^ under? What can engage thee to thy Duty, if not such Solemn
Vows and Promises as thou have often made? How ungovernable do thou show thy
self, that such Sacred Transactions as are managed at every Sacrament, do no
more affect and awe thee? For shame stir up thy self. If ever thou were really
Serious and in Earnest, now show it: If thou have any thing of sincerity in
thee make it appear by thy care to pay thy Vows.

THIS is a sort of work we find Holy David frequently engaged in. He once found
himself very despondent: But how does he chide himself? Why art thou cast Psalm.
42*
down O my Soul? And why art thou disquieted within me? verse. 5. and he is at it
again verse. 11. He endeavored to reason himself out of his discomposure and
disorder, and the like he did at other times: So should we in this case; Why
art thou so Treacherous O my Soul? And why so false to thy God and Savior? May
he not justly resent it? And may thou not reasonably expect to smart for it?
And such sort of Reasonings as these we should dilligently pursue, and not give
over till our Hearts are warmed. If we would often try it, we should find
nothing more effectual than this, to keep our Hearts under a serious sense of
Sacramental Vows.

BUT after all, when we have taken the greatest Care, and used our utmost
diligence, we shall find the Apostles observation true, That in many things we
offend all. We shall find Sin will stick so close, as that we cannot shake it
off in our present infirm and crazy state. When we fall into Sin therefore
let us not lie in it, but let us speedily rise again by Repentance, and renew
our Resolutions of Obedience; begging both Strength and Succors from on high.
And let us from the sense of our manifold present imperfections, be moved
earnestly to long for that time and state, when we shall need no Ties and
Bonds, no Vows and Promises, to fasten us to our God, and engage us to our
Duty: But we shall be inseparably united to him, and admitted to the Blissful
Fruition of his immediate presence, and have no more failures and breaches, no
more sins and falls to trouble and disturb us, but shall be advanced to
unalterable Perfection, receiving to all Eternity additional increases,
proportionably as our growing Capacities can bear them.

AND the good Lord grant that we may so faithfully pay the Vows which we are
now ever and anon repeating, as that we may at present receive all the
Blessings he has promised to sincere Souls, and be accepted, owned, and
approved by him at the great day of Account at last.

CHAP. XIV.
Sundry Serious Considerations, to enforce the sense of our Vows upon us, and
engage us to pay them.

BEING thus far engaged, I would not methinks desist without leaving some
Impressions on the Hearts of my Readers, the good ffects whereof may be
discernable; I shall therefore do my utmost by arguing with them, and pressing
them with the most strong and urgent Considerations I could think of, to engage
them to live up to their Sacred Vows, and to do it with greater Care and
Industry, with greater Zeal and Fervency than ever heretofore. And here I have
two sorts of Persons to deal with.

1. THOSE who have no care at all in earnest about this matter.

2. SUCH as are seriously thoughtful about it, and do set themselves to keep
and pay their Vows, but often fall short, which is their Grief and Trouble.
These are Cases vastly different; and the Persons concerned are to be very
differently dealt with. To distinguish between the one sort and the other is
out of my Power; but 'twill be no difficult matter for any Persons who will
employ their Consciences in a diligent and impartial Search and Examination, to
find out to which Class they belong.

AS for you then who have the Vows of God indeed upon you, but you mind them
not; who repeat them time after time, but are as far from setting your selves
to pay them as ever; I mean not in Perfection, but in any measure of Sincerity;
who run on in a careless, carnal, wicked Course and State, without any
considerable effectual Stop or Check, notwithstanding all your Sacramental
Promises and Engagements; I would make the following Demands of you, which I
would desire you closely to pursue when alone, begging of God that he would
bless the Thoughts which they will lead you to, and make them effectual to
rouse and awaken you.

1. WHAT would you think of any that should go to deal with you, as you deal
with the Blessed God? Suppose any Persons that had offended and injured you,
should come time after time, and with a seeming Concern and Sorrow for what is
past earnestly desire to be at Peace with you, and with all possible Solemnity
promise to lay aside all Enmity against you, and engage to be your hearty
Friends; to study your Interest; to respect and honor you, to gratify and
please you, and in all respects make your Concerns their own: and never
afterward mind what they have said or done, but the more securely pursue their
wonted Enmity under the Covert of a pretended Friendship? Or suppose any with
whom you had been at variance, should come to Articles of Agreement with you,
to which all possible external Marks of an hearty Consent should be given;
which Articles for further Security should be once and again, as often as was
desired, publicly ratified by being signed and sealed before sufficient
Witnesses; and yet they continue to act as when at open Variance, without any
regard to such Articles and Agreements: Or suppose a Servant of yours that had
been dishonest, careless, and slothful, pretending to beg pardon for what is
past, should again and again promise by all that is sacred to be diligent,
honest and faithful, but never mind such Promises after they were made, but
remain as bad if not worse than ever: What Thoughts would you have of Persons
by whom you should be thus dealt with? Could you have any regard to them? Would
you care to have any more to do with them? Could you mind any thing that came
from them? Could you have any Patience with them? I believe not: And yet this
is the rate of your dealing with the Blessed God. Consider what you would think of
such Persons as these, and that will help you to judge what the Great God may
think of such as you.

2. WHAT can you suppose could ever bind you to God, or effectually engage you
to your Duty, if such Vows, and Ties, and Bonds as you are under will not do it?
You cannot certainly but have some Sense that the Blessed God must be the
Author of your Happiness, if ever you reach it; and that in his Favor lies
your Life; and that without his Help you are lost and ruined. Your very Coming
to the Lord's Table speaks this, if it speaks any thing. Why come you there if
this be not the Sense of your Souls? If it be, why don't you take the Course
whereto you are bound by so many seemingly solemn Vows and Promises, whereby
alone you can get and keep his Favor? If the intrinsic Excellency of the
several Duties of Religion, the Pleasure that attends Obedience, and the
Rewards that would follow upon it, have no attractive Influence upon you; if
the Fear of what your Disobedience would have consequent upon it, would not
suffice to move you; if the happy or doleful Issue of an holy or a wicked Life
respectively, which you may evidently discern in many Examples that are
frequently before your Eyes, were not effectual with you; yet methinks your own
voluntary, solemn, frequently repeated Vows, Oaths, and Promises, might prevail
for a religious Life. If it be not the best Course you can take, why do you vow
you will lead it? If it be, why then are you so much worse than your Word?
Methinks if ever you are serious, it should be at a Sacrament: If any thing
could hold you fast, it should be your own Engagements. In civil Affairs, where
an Oath has lost its awe, there is no hold; there is no Band of Society with
such Persons: so what hold can God have of us, what Band of Society can there
be between him and us, if Vows have no Force; if we make them and break them,
without Care or Concern? Where Perjury prevails, common Honesty's banished: and
where Sacramental Vows are not minded but slighted, and allowedly and
unconcernedly broken, Religion dies; it can have no Force; it cannot come to any
thing.

3. CAN you imagine your frequent repeating your Vows, at all diminishes your
sin or lessens your guilt? Or rather does it not woefully add to, and enhance
it? Would it at all extenuate a Rebels crime, for him to be ever now and then
throwing himself at his Princes feet, promising to give undoubted evidences of
an unblemisht Loyalty for time to come; who no sooner departed than he renewed
and still persisted in his Rebellion? Would any one think it lessned the faults
of a Child, to come to his Parents, and own them, and beg Pardon, and that
again and again, promising amendment; and yet after all continue irreclaimable,
and wilfully persist in his Disobedience? If not, as in both cases it is evident
it would not, How can you then persuade your selves, That Renewed Sacramental
Vows, (...) the allowed wickedness of your Lives the less heinous? That
Repeated Engagements to be the Lords, make your wilful breaches of them the
less dangerous? No; so far is that from being true, that both guilt and danger
is thereby increased: Had you not better make no Vows at all, than wilfully and
allowedly break them? In the former case, you would but be chargeable with a
Neglect; but the latter implies the most audacious Contempt. It Is true a
neglect may be so circumstantiated as to be contemptuous; and so may become
near upon (if not to the full) as heinous as a Profanation. We may therefore
take this as a general Rule; that a fear of Profanation will never excuse a
contemptuous Neglect; nor will a fear of Neglect in the least excuse a
Profanation. Say not therefore that it is your Duty to come to the Lord's Table,
and so think at all to excuse your selves that way, by pleading that you
discharge your Duty: For tho it be the Duty of all who profess to be Christians
to come to the Lord's Table, and there seriously make Vows of an Holy and a
Christian Life; yet do those very Vows aggravate the Guilt of those Persons who
mind them not afterward; and on whom they have no Force to disingage them from
the Wickedness renounced, and engage them to the Holiness promised: as in the
forementioned case, tho it be the Duty of a Rebel to submit to his Prince, and
promise Obedience; yet if after pretending to do so he persists in Rebellion,
his Crime is doubled.

4. DOES not God, think you, take notice of your wretched trifling with him?
Men are easily imposed on; a shadow of Devotion may pass with them for the
reality: They may reckon slight Vows serious; and through unacquaintedness with
Persons state, may charitably esteem such things as in reality are gross and
wilful, and allowed Breaches, proceeding from an unchanged Heart, to be such
Slips as are consistent with Sincerity: But is the great God also, think you,
thus to be deceived? Can the Searcher of Hearts be ignorant with how little
seriousness you make your Sacramental Vows, and how little you mind them
afterward? Can you ever think to hide from him, who is privy to all your Ways,
the Deceitfulness of your Dealing with him? And do you think he can observe you
running a Round of careless making, and wilful breaking of seemingly Solemn
Vows and Promises, and not resent it? Because you, it may be, forget how often
you renew your Vows at the Lords Table, and how often you wickedly break them,
do you think the great God does the like? No, no, assure your selves, he
remembers, notes and records; and he will make even your own Consciences another
Day, to serve as Memorials both to himself and you: For your Conviction and
Condemnation; and for his Justification, and your own inexpressible Terror.

5. WHAT Treatment can you expect from Him, with whom you deal so perfidiously?
Do you think he will easily overlook, or slightly animadvert on such Despisers
and Contemners of all that is Sacred, as you, that run on in a course of wilful
breaking Sacramental Vows and Promises, show your selves to be? Does not your
aggravated Guilt cry aloud for Vengeance? And what can be too severe for you?
May you not justly expect, that a Train of Temporal Judgments should follow
you? On what account, I pray, was it, that the Apostle tells the Corinthians,
That many were sick and weak among them, and many slept? Was it not because
they came to the Lord's Table, and did not discern the Lord's Body? And if the
truly Upright and Sincere, may through their Irreverence and Unpreparedness,
expose themselves to such Temporal Judgments as those (as the Apostle there
seems to intimate) how much more does your far greater guilt, which shows it
self in an habitual Profanation of the most sacred of Divine Institutions, and
allowed Breaches of the most solemn Sacramental Promises, expose you to the
same and greater Judgments, even in this Life? And how justly may they be
followed with an Eternal Vengeance? And how certainly will they be so, without
a speedy and sorrowful Repentance? Let me then further ask you,

6. DO you never think of a Day of Reckoning that is coming? Have you not
sometimes in your Retirements some pre-apprehensions of a sad Account that you
have to give to God another Day? Does Conscience never read you your Doom,
summoning you, as 'twere, before hand, to the Bar of God? Do you never think of
the Day that is near, and not far off, when all things will be narrowly scanned;
the Books opened; and among other things your Sacramental Bonds put in suit
against you? I believe you could hardly be so stupid in your worldly Concerns,
but that if you knew you owed ten times as much as you could pay, and were in
constant danger of being fallen upon by your Creditors, and arrested, and
perpetually imprisoned; you would be in constant fear; you would be so taken up with
the thoughts of your unhappy state, and what is coming upon you, that you would be
able to mind nothing: And what? Do the Affairs of time, in your esteem, so much
exceed those of Eternity, that you, that would be so much concerned in the
former Case, can remain unmoved, when you know that you are perfect Bankrupts
in Spirituals, and in constant danger of being arrested by God, for ten
thousand Talents, no one of which you can ever be able either to pay, or to get
discounted? Can you be unconcerned, when you know, that within a little time
you must be summoned to the Bar of a Righteous God, where your very Sacramental
Bonds put in suit against you, would utterly confound and over-whelm you, were
all other Debts overlooked and forgiven? Whence is it that in this case you
are so undisturbed? Do but set your selves down, and sedately reckon up your
Sacramental Bonds, and see what they amount to: O what a vast sum comes up!
Does it not then deserve many serious thoughts how this sum shall be
discharged? And what, will you never begin? Will you go on to add Bond upon
Bond, and heap Vows upon Vows, and never in earnest begin to pay? I beseech you
remember and consider, that all the Sacraments you have profaned, and all the
Vows you have made at them, which you afterward wilfully, habitually, and
wickedly broke, will rise up in Judgment against you at last, and eternally
condemn you. Let me then further ask you.

7. WHAT can you plead in your own Excuse? That you run on wilfully breaking
Sacramental Vows; that is your Charge. Produce your Pleas, and you will see as
weak a Creature as I can show you their Insufficiency. It may be you will plead
your pronenefs to sin; Alas! that is your fault, but no Excuse: It Is what you
have cherished and delighted in; therefore to be sure it diminishes not your
guilt. It may be you will plead the force of Temptation; but how can that excuse
you, who don't watch, and pray, and strive against it? It may be you will plead
that the Best have Frailties; and live not up to their Sacramental Vows, as
they should: But what Excuse can this help such as you to, who han't a dram of
sincerity? Which appears, in that you have used no serious thoughtfulness,
diligence, pains or care at all in this matter; which are known Evidences of
the Sincerity of the Upright? It may be you will plead a want of sufficient
Grace; and so endeavor to throw the blame on God: But that is a vain Attempt;
he never expects to reap where he has not sown, or gather where he has not
strawn; but will be satisfied with that which bears proportion to what he
gives. And can you pretend that you have rightly used the Grace that has been
afforded you? And might you not have had more, had that but been duly improved?
The Case will therefore allow of no Excuse: the Guilt of such Persons can by no
Considerations be either extenuated or diminished.

I now proceed to the other sort of Persons that are to be dealt with, viz.
such as are indeed thoughtful about their Sacramental Vows, and do sincerely
set themselves to answer and pay them, who yet do often fail and faulter, which
is the Matter of their Grief and Trouble. I would not willingly do any thing to
the needless sadning of any upright Soul, and should therefore be sorry that
any such should receive Disturbance from any thing mentioned under the former
Heads, which are calculated for those of another stamp; and need not give those
who are sincere, tho imperfect, any Molestation: I have other Considerations to
suggest to such which have their weight, but are of another nature. I have the
following Questions to put to them, which I would beg of them seriously and
impartially to weigh.

1. MIGHT not any, even the best of you, take much more care to live up to your
Sacramental Vows than you do? You cannot be more free to plead, than I to own,
that all your Care could not keep you from all Sin: For when all is done,
there is no Man that lives and sins not. But might you not do much more
toward the avoiding of Sin; might you not avoid much more Sin than you
ordinarily do? I appeal to your Consciences about this Matter. Should not the
Sense of the Deceitfulness of your Hearts, your many former Falls and Smarts
for them, and Sufferings by them; and of the too great Strength of the fleshly
part in you, keep you more in awe, and make you more careful? and might you not
be much more diligent, and watchful, and circumspect, and provident, and
serious, than you are? Don't you find a great and very remarkable Difference in
your selves, in your Tempers and your Lives, when your Guard is strict, your
Eyes about you, your Prayers frequent, close and servent, and your Intercourse
with Heaven uninterrupted; from what you are when your Guard is intermitted,
your Spirits are clogged, your Prayers are heavy; and the Reins are out of your
Hands? Whence comes the Difference that is so discernible even among real
Christians, who all are sincere? How even, uniform, steady, vigorous, holy, and
heavenly shall some be over others? To the Eye there is not a greater
Difference between some Saints and some Sinners, than there is between some
Saints and others; nor indeed so great. Whence comes this? What can it be
imputed to, but the different degrees of Resolution, Watchfulness, Care,
Caution, Diligence, and Painfulness, that several Persons reach to. It would be
no objection against this; for any to say, That all this difference is owing to
the Grace of God, and that alone, which is imparted by God to every man
severally as he will: For its freely granted; and these things mentioned that
are instrumental in this difference, are only so many parts of that, Grace of
God which receives different names according to the diversity of objects about
which it is employed: So many parts (I say) of that Grace which God is pleased
freely to impart: But let it withal be noted, that it is not merely Arbitrarily
that it is imparted, but by Rule; by that most wise and equitable Rule, That to
every one that has shall be Mat. 25. 29.
given, and he shall have abundance. Every one that has; i. e. has improved
former Vouchsafements. How comes it then that you let so many out strip you? If
you look about you you will find this and that, and the other Person, that walks
more closely with God, and lives more up to their Sacramental Engagements than
you do. You are always almost stumbling; they, compared with you, go on as
'twere evenly: Were you as Humble, Watchful, Diligent, and Industrious as they,
you might keep pace with them: And might you not be so if you would? What I
pray hinders you? It may be you will say, you cannot be so of your selves: True,
but the God you serve, will be as free to you as to them, if you carry it to
him as they do. And as for them who so much out strip you, they might be yet
much better than they are, they might walk much more closely with God, better
pay their Vows, and live yet more agreeably to their Christian Engagements than
they do: If this were not possible then must they be supposed to be arrived at
Perfection, which for any to pretend to in this Life, is the height of Folly.
But I suppose there are none really think but that they might be better and do
better, and live better, and answer their Sacramental Vows better, if they were
more careful. And should not this thought shame you? To think, that you who
have given your selves up to God, and so firmly resolved for God, and so
frequently declare you stand to your Resolution, should for want of care, so
often, and so shamefully fail in your Duty, and break your Vows at the rate you
do? Let me ask you,

2. WHAT are those things which divert you from that care and application,
which a matter of so vast importance as this is, plainly requires? Are they
things of greater weight and moment, and that more nearly concern you? Are they
things your concern about which will turn to better account than your care in
this matter? Surely no: Generally they are the affairs of the World, matters of
Profit or Interest, Common Civil Affairs; they might and should be minded in
their place, but need not justle out things of much greater weight. But what
comfort can you ever expect in any thing, the pursuit of which hindered your
carefulness to keep your Sacramental Vows? How can you expect a Blessing on
those Affairs of yours, by which you are diverted from what ought to be your
principal care; viz. The Living up to your Christian Vows? If you will weigh
things in an even balance, you will soon see which side preponderates. And will
you be so foolish as by things comparatively inconsiderable, to be diverted
from, and deadned in, that which you have often vowed and engaged should be the
business of your Lives, and which well deserves to be so? Again,

3. Is not God more dishonored by your failures and neglects, than any others
whatsoever? Does not your Relation to God, and interest in him, make your
Breaches the more Provoking? You are His Covenant People; His Children; His
Domestics; you belong to his Family; He treats you as Friends and Intimates if
you after all through Carelessness do break your Vows, and deal Treacherously may
he not justly highly Resent it? Is not Gods Honor much in your hands? Will not
your Failures and Neglects though they are such as are consistent with Sincerity;
your falling so sadly short of your Sacramental Vows in many cases occasion
disparaging Reflections upon Religion, deaden others, encourage them in their
Remissness, and cause the World to say, that after all there is little real
difference between the Godly and the Wicked? And if you have any concern for
the Divine Honor must not this needs affect you.

4. May not God altho'he eventually and finally pardon and forgive you, yet at
present justly frown upon you, to punish you for your Carelessness and Folly?
May he not justly cause you to walk mournfully and heavily, who often walk so
carelessly and remisly? Must be nibling at the bait till you are caught with the
hook; and are for ventring as far as you may with any safety, till you run too
far to make a safe retreat? May he not justly suffer the Devil to take the
advantage against you which you give him by your Breaches of your Sacramental
Vows? And hide his face from you to convince you of the disingenuity of your
dealings with him; and show you how he is displeased therewith? What if he makes
you smart by those very Corruptions, your indulging which, occasioned your
Renewed Breaches? Must you not blame your selves, and justify him? Again,

5. MAY not your frequent Breaches of your Sacramental Engagements, much blur
the evidences of your sincerity? time was it may be, when upon a serious
examination of your Heart and survey of your Life, you found comfortable ground
to hope that you were a Child of God, had a special interest in him, and were
well fixed for Heaven; but now make the same enquiry, and alas you find the
matter dubious: Your ground of hope is exceedingly diminisht; you know not
whether that which appears like Grace in you be true and genuine, or not; and
therefore are full of Fears: Upon what can you charge this difference? Is not
your Carelessness and Remissness in keeping and living up to your Sacramental
Vows, as likely and probable a Cause of it as any thing whatsoever? May not
that which betrays the great Prevalence of Corruption in you, often make your
Integrity dubious? And will you not then endeavor to take up? Will you persist
in a Course, which continued, may make your Uprightness, and the Truth of your
Grace, and Sincerity of your Piety, a thing always questionable; and so
perpetually fill you with Doubts and Fears. Again,

6. ARE not the Eyes of him to whom your Vows are made always upon you? Does
not he search and try you, eye and view you? and will you be careless and
remiss even while he looks on? Does not he see your Warmth and Seriousness at a
Sacrament? and does not he afterward see how soon you grow cold, and dead, and
dull again; returning to former Remissness? and how little you are influenced
by renewed and repeated Vows? and shall not the Thought of his Inspection awe
and affect you? Again,

7. WILL NOT your Experience teach you? Have you not felt the good Effects of Care
and Watchfulness after a Sacrament, that you might answer and pay the Vows you
renewed there; and the sad Effects of Negligence and Remissness, many and many
a time heretofore? and will you never learn to keep close to God? Have you not
smarted for past Faults, and will you run into the same again? Will you leave
the same Gaps open by which Dullness and Formality formerly crept in upon you?
Will you let the same Temptations draw you into Sin, and the same Corruptions
prevail upon you, and the same Toys and Trifles divert you from your Duty as
heretofore? What would this be but to do that in Spirituals, which you would
blame as unaccountable and amazing Folly in common and civil Affairs? And then,

8. and Lastly; WHEN do you expect to arrive at a confirmed State? How can you
think to grow in Grace, and to thrive and improve in the Ways of God, if you
are not more careful and faithful in keeping and paying Sacramental Vows? Can
you be satisfied with the lowest degree of Grace that is saving, and that is
capable of helping you to Heaven? If so, that alone might justly make the Truth
of your Grace questionable: but if you desire to improve in Grace, and that to
such a degree as that you may have an abundant Entrance ministered to you into
God's Heavenly Kingdom, as it is natural for all those who have the Truth of
Grace to do; methinks you should not be your own Hindrance by your Carelessness,
about your Sacramental Vows; which the more faithfully you keep, the more may
you hope to do so; and the less careful you are about them, the less Hope is
there in the case.

CHAP. XV.
The Temper and Carriage of a Soul that is rightly sensible of the Force and
Sacredness of Sacramental Vows, briefly EXEMPLIFIED.

HAving thus far endeavored to open, illustrate, and enforce Sacramental Vows;
and done what in me lies to help my Readers to understand them rightly, and to
engage them to repeat them seriously, and keep them saithfully, I shall close
with a brief but distinct View of the Temper and Carriage which was the Scope
of this present Endeavor. I Will draw a Model, and that as exactly and
faithfully as I am able in a short Compass, from whence all may discern what
they should be, and how they should carry it, in order to the approving
themselves sincere, and reaping the Benefit of their frequent Sacramental
Federal Transactions. In doing which I Will avoid running things to such an
height as ordinary Persons are incapable of arriving at, or as few attain to;
which might prove a Discouragement instead of an Assistance: and shall instance
in the common pitch of upright and sincere Souls, that are rightly sensible of
the Vows of God which they are under.

SUCH Persons may be considered in several Instants: and I shall select those
that are most remarkable; and in each show the Temper, and Posture, and
Resentments of a sincere Soul; how its Pulse beats; what are its usual
Affections and Motions, and most natural Stirrings.

SUCH a Soul may be considered either as preparing it self for the renewing
sacred Vows; or in the Act of renewing them; or after it is finished, and the
Bonds are renewed: and so, either as immediately retiring; or in the after
Life. A sincere Soul immediately after the renewing Sacramental Vows may be
considered either as recollecting what is past, or as praying for Grace and
Strength; or as charging it self to be faithful: And then again in the
After-Life, it may be considered either as first setting out; or as meeting
with Temptations and Struggling with them; or as stumbling and falling, and so
expostulating and chiding; or as rising again by Repentance and renewing its
Resolutions; or as bemoaning its Unhappiness by reason of its Imperfections; or
as longing for that State where it shall ever keep close to its God and
Savior, without any Failures and Breaches. Many more Periods or Postures might
be mentioned and considered, but these are the most signal and the most common:
and they who can as I go along from point to point find their Temper and
Carriage correspondent to the Model proposed; they who arrive but at the pitch
here exemplified, need not question their Sincerity, or doubt of Divine
Acceptance.

1. THEN, let us begin with viewing a sincere Soul, preparing it self for the
renewing sacred Vows to be the Lord's at the Holy Communion: and we shall find
it seasonably retiring from the World, and disingaging it self from sensual
Intanglements, that it may be free without Clog and Encumbrance, for
transacting with its God and Savior about Matters of the vastest Consequence
and Importance; studiously ridding it self of worldly Thoughts and Cares that
would fasten it down to this Earth, when it ought with the greatest Ardour to
be aspiring Heavenward. Follow it into its Retirements and you will find it
mighty busy in examining and enquiring into its past Carriage and present
State; narrowly searching all the Corners of the Heart, and bringing the
Actions of the Life to the Scrutiny, that no considerable Failures, Neglects,
or Disorders, may be unobserved. It attempts not to cover or extenuate
discovered Faults or Breaches, but aggravates them to the height in order to
the greater Self-abasement. It falls therefore to grieving, blushing, and
self-condemning; it throws it self at God's Feet, owning an entire Forfeiture
of all Covenant Blessings, by its Negligence, Carnality, Sloth and Folly; and
breathes out its penitent Remorse in unaffected strains of Devotion: After
which it stirs up it self to transact anew with God, with the utmost
Seriousness; endeavoring to renew its Sense of his just Right and manifold
Claims. It chears it self by the Consideration of the known and experienced
Clemency and Pity of the God with whom it has to do; and fires it self by
devout Meditations on its Redeemer's matchless Love, and earnestly begs to feel
more and more the constraining Power of it. It takes all possible care to get
its Wedding Garment on, that so it may become a welcome Guest at the sacred
Festival on that Peace Offering, which is the only Cement between it and its
God. It sets it self to burnish up its Graces, that they may all be in
readiness to act their part. It pants, it thirsts, it longs for Christ; it
endeavors to enlarge its Desires; and to open wide the everlasting Doors, that
the King of Glory may come in, and have a free Admission, and a fuller
Possession, and a more absolute Dominion than ever; and strives with all its
Might to excite in it self such a Sense of the Justness of its dear Savior's
Authority, as may make the Bonds it renews to him more strong, fixed and
lasting; more powerful and prevalent than ever.

2. Let Us view such a Soul in the Act of renewing Sacred Vows; and we shall see
it humbling it self under a Sense of its great Treachery and Baseness,
Fickleness and Inconstancy; ashamed to look upwards on the account of its
Defilements and Disorders, heartily owning it self unworthy such an Honor as
the being admitted into the Divine Service, admiring at God's great Benignity,
that after all that is past there is room for Acceptance, and ground for Hope,
adoring its Redeemer's unspeakable Condescension, and endeavoring to lose its
self in the Wonders of his Love; recollecting all those Divine Excellencies
which shone forth in the Course of his Life, throughout all his Sufferings, and
at the Hour of his Death; and wistfully viewing him from first to last as an
exact Mirror of Divinity, peculiarly fixing on his Death, when his Body was
broken, and his Blood poured forth; being pierced with grief at the remembrance
of those Sins which helped to pierce his sacred Body; and full of Astonishment,
that it should be apt to have such light thoughts of that which was so full of
Malignity, that it needed his precious Blood to make Atonement. It views the
appointed Emblems, but it looks beyond them, and with sorrow considers the
share it had in that doleful Tragedy which is thereby pointted at. It
concernedly reflects on the need it stands in of a share, in the Benefit of
that Sacrifice which they represent; it rejoices in its own Capacity of being
interested in it; it takes the sacred Emblems, when offered, with a mixture of
Joy and Sorrow, Fear and Love; and embraces a crucified Savior in the Arms of
Faith, yielding up the Heart to him, as a part of the Victory and Conquest of
his Love; resigning up it self, and its all, entirely to his Disposal,
Management, and Government; not as a free Gift, but as his just Right, which to
withold from him, would be the highest Sacrilege; and as an Offering
infinitely beneath the desert of his Matchless Obligations. It contentedly
quits all other things whatever, as but Dung and Dross without a Christ; being
perfectly ashamed to think that any Creature should be his Rival. It declares
it self satisfied with him as a Portion; by reason that in him, and with him,
it will have all that is needful; and cares not what it wants, nor how it
fares, nor what it parts with, so it may but share in his Merits, and his
Spirit, his Grace, and his Glory. It not only throws it self into its Savior's
Arms for an instant, but with a design to abide there; detesting whatever tends
to withdraw it from him, with whom it is so enamored. It renounces Sin,
Satan, and the World, as his known Enemies; fetching strength from his Cross,
to resist and oppose them. It disclaims Self, as an Usurping Tyrant, renouncing
it so far as it is opposite, and firmly resolving to subject it, so far as it is
capable, to his Scepter and Government. In humble Dependence on his promised
Aids, it takes a New Oath of Fealty to him; it engages to a through
Discipleship; solemnly swearing over his sacred Emblems, heartily to be subject
to him, to study to resemble him, to carry it as one of his Followers, to stick
to his Interest, to fight against his Enemies, to follow his Conduct, to submit
to his Discipline, to be content with his Allotments, and patiently to wait for
his Rewards. It embraces that Covenant which his Death so firmly ratified;
stands amazed at the inestimable Blessings made over in it; and firmly engages
strenuously to apply it self to answer the Demands of it. And out of a sense of
its own weakness, which time past has but too much discovered, it sends up the
most Pathetical Supplications to its once crucified, but now glorified
Redeemer, for fixing, stablishing, confirming, preserving, persevering Grace,
and constant Supplies of it; that so the sense of such Obligations as he has
laid upon it, and such Bonds as it is voluntarily entered into to him, may by
nothing ever be defaced or worn out: In hope whereof it triumphs and rejoices;
magnifying, adoring, blessing and praising all the three Persons in the sacred
Trinity, the Father, the Son, and the holy Spirit, on the Account of their
distinct Concern and Agency, in the Redeeming and Saving of lost Sinners.

3. Let Us view the same Soul immediately after the Renewal of such Sacramental
Vows, and we shall find its first Work to be the Recollecting what past in the
foregoing Transaction. How did I burn and glow (says such a Soul) when I found
my self under the Direct Beams of my Savior's Love at his Table! And what
shall I do to retain my Warreth? Or, How little was I affected, suitably to
such a Solemnity! And what can fire my frozen Heart? Such a Soul cannot rest in
the Work done; or think all is at an end, when the solemnity's over. It cannot
forbear either commending or chiding it self, according as the posture and
carriage has been; it cannot forbear endeavoring to drive things home. Follow
it close, and you will find it upon the first convenient Opportunity running all
over again in its thoughts, and endeavoring to rivet good Impressions, and fix
pious Resolutions, and establish and confirm holy Purposes, and back Renewed
Vows with strong enforcing Considerations; and doing what it can to engage it
self to answer it is Engagements and Obligations to its God and Savior. Shall I
go and undo what I have been doing, by a lazy Indifferency, a negligent and
careless course of Life? Shall I forget whose I am, and who I am to serve, and
what are my Engagements, and to whom and how I am bound? Will not my Guilt be
much increased, my dear Savior more offended, the blessed Spirit more grieved,
and my Heart more deaden'd than ever, if I return again to Folly? Was not what
I did in Renewing my Vows the Effect of Consideration? Is not every thing that
I have vowed antecedently my Duty? Has not every part of my Duty Benefit
attending it? Is not He with whom I have been Transacting able to assist me?
And has he not given me his Promise in his Word, and sealed it at his Table?
He will never change or draw back: Why then should I? No, I have vowed and I Will
stand to it; Christ is mine, and I Will be his: Him I Will love; Him I Will serve,
and follow. He shall have my Heart and my Life. And alas! That little All I am
able to give him, is not the thousandth part of what I owe Him. These, and such
as these, are the Retired Thoughts and Reasonings of a sincere Soul, presently
after Renewing Sacramental Vows.

4. THE former Exercise is no sooner over, but if you will persist in your suit,
you will find the same Soul wrestling with God in Prayer, and sending its most
earnest Petitions and Supplications upwards, for Grace and Strength to pay the
Vows Renewed. I have vowed indeed (O Lord) (says such a Soul to God) that I Will
be thine; I have anew Consecrated my self to my Blessed Redeemer, and I desire
not to draw back: But I have of my self no strength to perform; all my
sufficiency is of thee: Lord, keep a sense of my Renewed Engagements ever fresh
and warm upon my heart. Thou know' st my Weakness and my Treachery: I beseech
thee to aid me constantly by thy powerful Spirit, that how numerous soever my
Infirmities and Imperfections be, I may in no case wickedly depart from thee. O
that I who have been viewing a crucified Jesus, and engaged to be his constant
follower, might be crucified unto the World, and have that crucified unto me. O
that I, who have been commemorating my de Lords Dying for Sin, may by virtue
derived from his Death, be enabled to die unto Sin daily: That I, who have
vowed to live to him in a course of holy Obedience, may have the Grace to be
faithful; that so he may own me at last for his, before his Father and all his
holy Angels. These are much like the strains of a sincere Soul, after Renewed
Vows at the holy Communion: But as for the Spirit that breathes in them at such
a time; the Fervor and Ardour wherewith they are vented, (which is that that
is most considerable) it is out of my reach to describe it.

5. ONE can hardly suppose a Soul thus affected, to have long given over
sending its Supplications upwards, before it will be apt to lay a strict Charge
on its self, suitably to these premises. I have little reason (will such a Soul
be apt to say to its self) to fear the want of aid from on high; little reason
to call my Dear Saviors readiness, to help me into question; it is my self I
have most cause to suspect, and my own Carelessness and Treachery that I have
most cause to fear. I charge you therefore (says Conscience) in the name of
God, to take care lest you break your Vows, and frustrate your Prayers, by your
Negligence, Sloth and Remissness. Often therefore think to whom you are
devoted; whose badge you wear; how observant an Eye is always upon you; how
strict an account of your Carriage you must one day give to him to whom you
have professed to give up your selves. Consider how much Religion will be
disparaged and discredited; if you, that are under the strongest Ties that it
is capable of bringing you under, to an unspotted Holiness of Life, have no
discernable difference in your Carriage from the rest of the World, that
pretend to no such strictness as you do. Think what advantage you give the
Devil against your selves by your heedlessness, rashness and folly. Think what
grief and sorrow you have pretended, your past breaches, and trifling so much
with God occasioned you; and now take care, and stand on your guard. Where you
are weakest, there let your Watch be the closest, and your Guard the strongest.
Be not a stranger at home; but often call thy self to an Account; and whenever
you do so, think what the matchless Love of your Redeemer requires at your
hands, and how little you answer its Demands. Of this nature is Conscience's
Charge; which if seriously, solemnly, and authoritatively given, cannot but
strike an Awe.

AND being come thus far, let us now take the other part of the Prospect, and
consider the After Life: The after state and carriage of one thus seriously
renewing Sacramental Vows, and thus endeavoring to rivet the sense of them. We
may view such a Person in six several Instants or Periods.

1. AS setting out and first attempting to answer Renewed Vows and Engagements.
To begin well is in many cases a great matter; though in others it signifies
little because of the difficulty of persisting: However in this case it argues
the sense of Sacramental Transactions to be very small and weak, if Persons set
not out well; of this therefore those who are sincere, will be generally
Careful. They Will look before them anew, and round about them; and consider
their work and their way; their Friends and their Enemies; their Encouragements
and their Difficulties; their Helps and their Hindrances; their Dangers, and
their Remedies and Preservatives; and will endeavor to fortify themselves, and
make provision accordingly. Such a Soul as has been before described, will
therefore at first setting out summon all its powers to act their parts in the
payment of its Vows; to stand on their guard for fear of a surprise: Will
revive in it self the sense of its own weakness to prevent Security; will again
call in aid from Heaven; will be jealous of every thing that is grateful to
Flesh and Sense; will take heed of running to the utmost bounds of what is
lawful, whence its so easy to to step into excess; will watch against first
motions to Sin, and endeavor presently to eject them with abhorrence; will
often consider his Character, and what becomes it; will prepare for opposition,
and expect to be various ways assaulted; will endeavor to keep himself open to
the Spirits Influences, and to follow his Conduct; will set himselfto discharge
his duty in every different Relation and Capacity wherein he may be considered;
will peculiarly guard against his own Iniquity, whereby he is most likely to be
betrayed and baffled; and endeavor to arm himself with an Holy Resolution and
Undauntedness, without which nothing is to be done to purpose in the Christian
Life.

2. THE next posture wherein you will find him, will be assaulted by a variety of
Temptations, with which he is struggling and grappling. He has scarce begun in
earnest to set himself to Answer his Vows, before the Devil attempts to divert,
discourage, or hamper, him. The World presently steps in; its Affairs are apt
to hurry him, its cares to fill him; and its disappointments to perplex him.
The Flesh that rebels and is impatient of such close confinement as is laid
upon it; and tumultuously rejects the yoke of Christ, as too severe and
galling. The Man's Dalilah displays it self in all its charms again before him,
to entice his Affections; it discovers where his Strength lies, which is in his
Union with his God, and by its wiles endeavors to rob him of it. A variety of
Examples of those who call themselves Christians present themselves, who allow
themselves in a greater Latitude than their Religion can warrant: Who being
Dead, and Cold and Careless, Remiss and Formal, their Conversation is
Infectious, and apt to cast a chilling damp. Thus is the Man on all hands
beset; both within and without. He cannot be safe a minute if he intermits his
guard. He must be continually struggling; and that particularly with himself and
his own heart, which will be apt to be deadned, when so many ways assaulted.
For a while therefore (which is sometimes longer sometimes shorter) he however
mostly keeps his ground: He spurs his backward Heart, and by frequent plying
keeps it warm: And by often interspersed Ejaculatory Addresses Heaven-wards,
obtains many a kind list from thence. He maintains his Resolution, Re^ists
Temptations, keeps his heart for God; and though with great difficulty, and much
imperfection, he yet faithfully pays his Vows: But,

3. KEEP your Eye still fixed upon him, and in a little time you will be likely to
find him in another posture; you will see him stumbling and falling through
Temptations prevailing. Being so many ways assaulted, and somewhere or other
unguarded, Sin creeps in upon him; the World entangles him, or the Flesh
prevails over him; he breaks his Vows; he is again ensnared; his Redeemer is
dishonored, his Conscience is wounded, his Peace is interrupted; he in part
loses his hold; he is clogged and hampered; and the vivacity of his Spirit much
abated. There Is a great deal of difference in the temptations that prevail on
such; in the degree of their prevalence, and the time of their continuance;
which makes a great difference in the state of a Soul in such a case: But this
is not to be sure, a state for such an one to continue in; he is uneasy under
it; he often blames, and chides, and expostulates with himself; and looks
upwards for help: And therefore you will not find him in this case long; but in a
little time you may,

4. OBSERVE him rising again by Repentance, and Renewing his Resolutions of a
Conscientious Fidelity. His Merciful Savior pities him; and though he falls, yet
raises him with his hand, and sets him on his Legs again, for which he thinks
he can never be duly thankful: And then as the Apostle Paul observes in a
particular Case, with reference to his Corinthians; What Carefuless it wrought
in him; yea, what Indignation; yea, what fear; yea, what vehement Desire; yea,
what Zeal; 2 Cor. 7. 11.
yea, what Revenge! Although he fell into the mire, yet he wallow'd not in it, he
took no delight in it: And being recovered, he doubles his Diligence,
Watchfulness, and Care. With a Renewed Vigor he resolves to pay his Vows; the
force whereof he owns, and his Breaches whereof he laments with unfeigned
Sorrow. He repeats his Addresses to Heaven for fresh strength, which being
afforded, he sets himself to his Duty, without satisfying himself with any
Delays or Excuses.

5. ANOTHER Posture wherein you will often find him, is bemoaning his
unhappiness, by reason of his manifold imperfections. O wretched Man that I am,
who shall deliver me from this body of death? Is his frequent complaint. Often
will his Soul be sending forth its sorrowful moans in secret, on the account of
his sickleness and instability; his Hearts deceitfulness and treachery; the
power of Sin, and pravity of his Flesh; and the weakness of his Grace, and his
great proneness to be led aside from his God and Savior; notwithstanding the
many strong Bonds he is under, and the many powerful Motives and quickening
Considerations he has to engage him to keep close to him. Oh who has so dead,
and cold, and dull, and listless, and slipery an heart as I, will he often say?
Certainly I am more senseless than any Man! Sure God has few such careless
Servants that are in any measure true to him: Christ has few such followers,
that are at all sincere: Sure it is not with others as it is with me! Oh the
Levity and Blindness of my Mind! The Hardness and Stupidity of my Heart! The
Carnallity of my Affections! The Unevenness of my Temper! The many
Irregularities of my Life! So many Vows not strong enough to hold me fast to my
Savior, and engage me to my Duty! O Unhappy Creature! to be so changeable, so
unmanageable, so inconstant, so in love with vanity, so little enamourd with
thy Savior, so soon to forget what he has done for thee and to thee! which
naturally leads

6. and lastly, TO a longing for that state where he will ever keep close to
God, without any Failures or Breaches; which is another Posture wherein you will
often find him. O (will he often say) that I had but the Wings of a Dove, that
I might fly into the Celestial Regions, and be at rest. This that I now
inhabit is, at best, a Region of Sorrow and Darkness, Sin and Misery. Now I
often break with my Savior, and lose the sight of him, and f^ll into sin,
notwithstanding all my Resolutions against it. My pr^sent Vows I find at best
too weak to hold me so close as I would be to my dearest Savior: But had I
once laid aside my Fleshly Vail, then I hope I should have another-guess sight
of him than I can now attain unto: Which sight would kindle another sort of a
Love to Him, than any thing now can raise me to: Then I should see him as he
is; continually behold his Glory; be overpowered with his Love, and
perpetually enjoy him, without any danger of stumbles or falls, without any
mixtures of frowns, and without being ever parted from him. Lord, let me stay
no longer in this distant imperfect state, than I may serve the Purposes of thy
Glory; smile on me, and assist me, in all my present Conflicts; and when they
are finished, take me unto thy self, into thy most desirable Everlasting
Embraces.

AND now I Will leave it to any to judge, whether the state and temper before
described (Falls and Breaches only being bated, to which nevertheless the Best
are incident) and the Spirit that runs through the several Periods and Postures
mentioned, be not very desirable, very fitting, very lovely, very becoming,
very pleasing to God, and comfortable to Persons themselves; and therefore
earnestly to be prayed and labored for, and aspired after.

CHAP. XVI.
Of PARTICULAR VOWS. How they must be limited that they may be warrantable: And
how far, and in what Cases they may be dispensed with.

HAving thus largely handled and improved the Sacred Vows which both the
Sacraments of our Holy Religion naturally carry in them, (which was the main
Intent and Aim of this Discourse) I shall now subjoin a brief Account of Vows
made on Particular Occasions, and especially in an Hour of Distress, Trouble,
or Danger; and make those Remarks on them, that may be most helpful to a plain,
serious Christian, to enable him to discern his Duty, and put it in practice.

Particular Vows are those, whereby we seriously engage our selves to God,
either to give or withhold, to do or forbear, any thing mentioned, for ends
either directly specified, or plain to be understood. Concerning which, we may
observe;

1. That the Mosaic Law allowed them, and gave special Directions about them.
The Mosaical Economy had indeed something peculiar in it with reference to
Vows; there was a Vow in use under it, that was in a special manner of Divine
Ordination: That is, God himself appointed the Manner and Rites of it, leaving
it free to any who were so inclined and disposed, to bind themselves to it,
without any sorce; and that was the Vow of the Nazarites: Which Vow of
Nazaritism, was properly a Vow of Humiliation, that a Man would chastize
himself, and deny himself in. his ordinary delight of Liberty and Neatness; the
Particular Rules and Laws of which Vow, may be seen at large, Numb. 6. And some
of the Rules of it are easily intelligible; but others of them are very
difficultly accounted for by us, as to their design: But besides this peculiar
Institution, it was at that time lawful for either Men, or Women, (that were in
their own Power, and not under Control) by a Vow upon any particular Occasion,
to consecrate to God what part of their Goods, or Possessions, or any thing
wherein they had a Propriety, that they thought meet: Concerning which sort of
Vows, we have this Law upon Record; When thou shall Vow a Vow unto De^t. 23.
21, etc.
the Lord thy God, thou shall not slack to pay it: for the Lord thy God will
surely require it of thee: and it would be sin in thee. But if thou shall
forbear to Vow, it shall be no sin in thee: That which is gone out of thy Lips,
thou shall keep and perform; even a fr^e-will-Offering, according as thou have
vowed unto the Lord thy God, which thou have promised with thy Mouth. Which Law
is the more carefully to be observed, because it is of standing Obligation, and
reaches even to See the L^arned Seldom, de Iure Na^rae and G^tium ^xia Discip^m
H^rorum lib. 7. c, 2.
us.

ACCORDINGLY 'twas usual among the Israelites by Vow to consecrate Victims out
of their Flocks for Sacrifices to God, or other Gifts out of any part of their
Poffessions, for his Service in his Tabernacle or Temple. For we may observe,
that though God allowed the Israelites to dedicate what they pleased to Him by
Vow, in token of the devout Disposition of their Minds; yet did he, as a
Testimony of his Self-sufficiency, and to show that he needed nothing, appoint,
that what was thus vowed and consecrated, should either be sacrificed, or else
be set a part for the Use of his Priests and Ministers, or the necessary
Occasions of his House. Of things thus vowed, and devoted, some were allowed to
be redeemed with a Price, and others not: Of which we have a particular
Account, Levit. 27. 27, etc. which being a thing wherein we are little
concerned, I shall pass it over. But who ever is conversant in the History of
the Old Testament, may observe sundry Instances of Vows made by Pious Persons
upon Particular Occasions, which they afterward punctually kept; as to which,
they had no reason to question the Divine Approbation. But,

2. NEITHER does the Gospel any where disallow of such Vows, nor can they
(generally speaking) be made appear to be any way inconsistent with
Christianity. It Is as lawful now as ever, for Persons to devote one or more of
their Children to the Sacred Ministry, or any part of their Estate or
Possession to the use of the Poor, or the support of the Gospel, and that by a
Vow: Or by the same Sacred Bond to oblige themselves to an abstaining from what
they find prejudicial, or to the doing of what they discern may, all things
considered, tend to their furtherance in Piety and Holiness. Some I know there
are, who apprehend Vows to have been altogether peculiar to the Jewish
Dispensation; but without any just Grounds. Were it so, they could certainly be
able to make it appear either from Scripture or Reason; but they can do
neither. Nothing out of Scripture can be alleged to prove it any ways unlawful
for us under the Gospel, even in particular Cases, to bind our slippery Hearts;
or fix the Proportion and Circumstances to our selves of a Duty which God has
required in general, without determining either; to awe or to stint and limit
our selves by means of a Vow; provided due Seriousness, Care, and Caution be
not wanting. And as for Reason, I think that clearly determines, that vows that
were heretofore lawful on moral Grounds (which are perpetual rnd unalterable)
can never become unlawful. What, I pray, should make it unlawful for a serious
Christian to vow something in token of Thankfulness for something received; or
to vow a return of more than usual Duty, upon the receipt of an unusual Favor;
which was plainly lawful to a Member of the Commonwealth of Israel? Whatever
made it lawful for the one, makes it so also for the other. With those Vows
that were formerly in use, that were purely Ceremonial, it is freely owned we
have now nothing to do. But Vows that are Moral in their Matter, Manner, and
Ends, can never become simply unlawful. Withal, the Benefit of such Vows, if
well managed, may be now as great as ever: They may be as effectual to make
Persons more steady, circumspect, and wary; and more vigorous in striving again
Sin; and to quicken, spurr, and engage to Duty; under the Gospel, as ever they
were under the Law: They must therefore certainly be as lawful and warrantable
now, as then. Which has also been the common Sentiment of Christians all
along, down to the Days wherein we live. Observe farther,

3. THAT such sort of Vows are Religious Matters; for Persons thereby tie
themselves in a Bond to God. They are too Sacred to be used in common Affairs.
In ordinary Concerns, or any Matters of Civil Prudence, Resolutions may
suffice; between which, and Vows strictly taken, there is a great difference A
Man may resolve wisely, justly, and warrantably, such and such things
concerning his Estate, and Affairs in the World; whereas it may be no way
fitting to turn such Resolutions into Vows. A Man may resolve that he will never
be bound for another, or that he will spend but so much, weekly, monthly, or
yearly on such an Occasion; but for any one to bind himself to any such things
by Vows, wherein God is called to Witness, and the Soul laid under a Curse, is
the height of Imprudence, and altogether unwarrantable. We find not in
Scripture any Vow of a good Man, but it was aimed at a Religious End, and in
tendency to the Service of God, and not to any worldly Interest or Respect. To
make use of them in common Matters, makes them ludicrous, and tends to take
away their Awe where they are justly, fitly, and properly made use of. Farther,

4. SUCH Particular Vows may be made conditionally. Although the general Vow,
(whereof Chap. 2.) whereby we give up our selves and our All to God, must be
Absolute; yet Vows made upon Particular Occasions, often have been, and may be
Conditional. Of this nature was Hanah's Vow, if God would but look on her
Affliction, and give her a Man-child, she vowed she would in an especial manner
return him to the Donor, and there should no Razor come upon his Head; but he
should be a Nazarite. By which vow of hers, she was no ways bound, unless it
pleased God to give her a Man-child; and such a Condition as that, is at any
time lawful, because the thing vowed cannot be performed, but upon the
supposition of that as antecedent. Such also was Iephthah's Vow; if God brought
him back safe, he would offer what first met him out of his House as a
Burnt-Offering; though that Vow of his was on sundry Accounts unwarrantable.
That Vow of all Israel also, which we meet with Numb. 21. 2. was Conditional.
They vowed, That if God would deliver the Canaanites into their hands, they
would utterly destroy their Cities. And many other Instances there are in
Scripture. And I am fully satisfied, that, generally speaking, our Ground would
be more safe, our Procedure more clear, and we should be much the less hampered
and perplexed by means of any after-change in our State and Circumstances, that
might happen to us, would we affix and specify the Conditions on which we make
our Vows on Particular Occasions.

5. THERE are four several Ends to which such particular and special Vows have
been, and may be directed: two of which Ends relate to time past, and the other
two to that which is to come. Those Vows relate to time past, whereby we intend
either to express our Gratitude to God for Benefits received, or in order to
the averting his Displeasure, inflict a Punishment on our selves, as 'twere,
for Offenses committed. We may call the former the Exercises of Thanksgiving,
and the latter of Repentance: Of the former sort we have an instance in Jacob,
in the forecited 28th of Genesis, at the latter end: where to the general Vow
before insisted on, of taking the Lord for his God, etc. he adds this special
one; That if God would bring him back safe from his Banishment, into the Land
promised to his Fathers, he would consecrate the tenth part of all his
Substance to his immediate Service; and this to show his grateful Resentment of
the kind Protection and Conduct of the Divine Providence. Of the like kind were
the Peace Offerings, or Thank-Offerings, vowed in ancient times by Pious Kings
and Generals when engaged in a just War, if they got the victory, or were
succored in extremity. And thus is that Text in particular that was singled
out for the foundation of this Discourse to be understood; and in general all
those places in the Book of Psalms that speak of Vows: And such Vows may be,
and often are used by many pious Person- in our times: if God will give them
success in such or such an Enterprise or Design; if he will thus and thus
prosper them in their Business; if he will extricate them out of this
Perplexity, and avert that Calamity, they will erect such a Monument of their
Thankfulness, and bind themselves to this or that, whereto they were not
straightly before obliged: Which practice is very laudable, provided Persons are
careful and exact in paying what they have vowed. I Will exemplify the second
sort of vows, which I said may be called Exercises of Repentance by a familiar
instance: Suppose a Man's Appetite have drawn him into a snare, he may, to
mortify it, and to punish himself for an Act or Acts of Intemperance whereinto
he has been betrayed, for a time renounce all sorts of Dainties, and forbear
those things which are most pleasing and grateful, and make use of a vow too,
that the Bond may be the stronger. Not that all in such a case are obliged to
this course; but this they may do who find reason to conclude such a Vow would
be beneficial. Such a Vow is lawful, and yet free. Vows that relate to time to
come, tend partly to make us more cautious, and partly to quicken and spurr us
to the performance of our Duty. Of the former sort this may be an instance;
suppose a Man finds a Diversion in it self innocent, stirs his Passions,
ruffles his Mind, and so insensibly draws him into Sin; it may be useful for
such an one, by the interposition of a Vow, to deny himself for a time that
Diversion, although it be in it self innocent, that he may learn the better
afterward to bridle his Passions, and stand upon his guard: And withal suppose
a Man finds upon Reflection, that he has let a great deal of time slip through*
his hands, of which he is able to give no account, and so has lost it he knows
not how: Why may he not by a Vow rouse up himself, shake off his Sloth, and
firmly bind himself to make a better Improvement for the future? which may be
taken for an Instance of the last sort of Vows; the proper Use whereof is to
drive on the backward lingering Soul to do its Duty, breaking through
Difficulties and Delays, that by strengthening our Bonds, and setting the Danger
before our Eyes, we may be excited to escape it. But if we would go upon sure
Grounds, approve our selves to God, and leave no room for Regret, Trouble, and
Repentance, we must in all our particular vows use these following Cautions,
and keep within the ensuing Limitations.

1. WE must take care to vow nothing but what we know and are assured is
agreeable to the Will of God. The Design of vowing is to please God; but if we
vow any thing displeasing to him we provoke him. Our vowing it wont make it
lawful if it was not before so; for no Vows of ours can dissolve the Obligation
laid upon us by the Law of God. Strange was that Vow whereof we read, Acts 23.
12. whereby above 40 Persons bound themselves under a Curse, that they would
neither eat nor drink till they had killed Paul. And often indeed has Persons
Wickedness carried them out that way, viz. to make Vows that are directly even
against the Law of Nature; and often also has God severely animadverted on
such Persons. It Is a common but true Relation that is to be met with in several
Practical Writers of a parcel of Pot Companions, who made a Vow that they would
not stir till they had drunk out a Barrel of Drink, which while they were about
with great Mirth and Jollity, one of the Company sunk down dead in the place,
and never stirred more. It Is very dangerous in any case, to make a thing that
is sinful the matter of a Vow; and yet of this the Jewish Doctors were in many
Instances grossly guilty: Particularly they allowed Persons directly to thwart
and cross the 5th Commandment, by vowing that they would not of themselves or
by others, afford their Brethren, Sisters, Kindsfolks, Neighbors, no nor even
their Parents themselves, any Maintenance or Support, or any thing whence they
might receive any Fruit, Profit, Benefit or Advantage: And this they covered
under the specious Title of a Vow, when in reality 'twas rather a most
abominable Curse. Of which sort of Vows we are to understand, Mat. 15. 5. It is
a Gift, by whatsoever thou might be profited by me.

BUT neither are things doubtful fit Matter for a Vow: To make a Vow in a
dubious case, is as it were to run blindfold upon a Precipice. We must never
venture therefore to make vows, till we are sure the Matter of them are not
things forbidden.

2. WE should take heed of vowing any thing above our own Strength. We should
measure the Gifts and Grace God has bestowed upon us, before we pretend to vow
any thing, left we shoot beyond the Mark, and hamper instead of benefiting our
selves. Thus for instance, a Vow of Celibacy is unwarrantable, because there
are few can safely bear it: and who can say he is in the Number of those few?
Or if he is at present, that he shall always continue so? How knows any one he
shall have Strength to keep such a Vow, when he has made it? To vow any thing
above our Strength, is one proper Notion of tempting God.

3. WE should take heed of vowing any thing rashly, and hand over head. Vows
are things to be managed with great Dread and Tenderness. Whatever we vow, we
should do it maturely, left we leave room for Repentance: The Case of Iepthah
and Herod, and sundry others, lets us know what Snares Persons may bring
themselves into, by rushing rashly into such Engagements. Iepthah vowed that
whatever met him first out of his House, when he returned from his Victory,
should be offered up in Sacrifice: To punish him for his Rashness, Providence
so ordered it, that his Daughter was the Person; and therefore he presently
repented. This was also Readiness Fault, who vowed the Death of any of his
Followers, that should stay to taste any of the Honey that lay in his way;
whereby he exceedingly prejudiced himself, by reason that the want of this
Refreshment disabled his Army from pursuing the Enemy. Of this sort also was
the Vow of the eleven Tribes, that they would none of them give any Wives to
the Men of the Tribe of Benjamin; which we meet with Judge. 21. But we find when
they came soberly to reflect on the Consequence of what they had done, viz.
that a Tribe was hereby likely to be cut off from Israel, they presently
repented. And indeed we may generally observe that Repentance and Sorrow are
the genuine Products of rash Vows, we should beware therefore of making a Vow
in a Passion; which being once moved, blinds Reason and Judgment, and hinders
the weighing things in a just Balance. A calm Spirit and deliberate Judgment
is most likely to make Vows that will give no Cause for Repentance.

4. WE should take heed of making too many particular Vows, by means whereof we
may easily run into Superstition. This was the great Fault of the Times next
preceding the Reformation in these Parts of the World: All Religion almost was
generally run into Vows about Abstinence from certain Meats, Fasting-days,
Pilgrimages, and visits to the Shrines of Saints, bodily Mortifications, and a
thousand Monkish Inventions: which is also one great Fault of the Romanists to
this day; who by their particular Vows eat out all real Religion. But we should
beware of framing a Law and Religion to our selves by our voluntary Vows, which
God never made us by his Authority: They are not to make us new Duties and
Religions, but to further us in the Obedience of that which our Lord has
imposed on us.

5. IT would be Wisdom in us to take care that our particular Vows be for the
most part temporary. For that Vow which for a time might be tolerable, and
really beneficial, may in time grow intolerable, and wretchedly perplex us. We
should take heed of binding our selves for Futurity, to all that may possibly
be our Duty at present; by reason that a Change of Things and Circumstances may
work a Change in our Duty. We should therefore take care that what we vow be
not only consistent with our Duty at present, but that we bind our selves to it
by our Vow no longer than it shall remain consistent with our Duty.

6. IF we are under Government, we should not without our Governor's Consent
vow to do any thing which we might not lawfully do without their Consent, in
case we had not vowed it: For that were for Persons actually at present to
disobey those to whom they ought to be subject; and to bind themselves to
disobey them for the future. In the thirtieth of Numbers God has plainly
determined this Matter as to Women that are in subjection either to their
Fathers or Husbands; their Vows are not binding unless they are ratified by
those to whom they are in Subjection; and therefore they should not vow without
their Consent. And we may naturally draw a Parallel as to the cases of others
also that are proportionably in a state of Subjection. But in case it be a
thing that we may or must do, although our Governors should forbid it, then may
we vow it although they should be averse to it.

THESE Limitations and Cautions we must mind and observe, if we desire to make
use of David's Words with reference to them; Thy Vows are upon me O God. For of
all particular Vows these only he allows; it is none but such as these that he
approvs.

AND if we'll put all together, we may without much Difficulty discern what is
to be said to the three Monastic Vows, so much celebrated among the Papists,
viz. the Vow of Continence, Poverty, and blind Obedience. None of them are any
where commanded of God; nor are they lawful or allowable; for things that are
not in our Power, nor depend at all on our Will's Determination, are the
Subject of them; and they are repugnant to Christian Liberty, and the common
Calling of all Christians. Continence in their Sense, (viz. a total Abstinence
from the Female Sex) without Burning, is not in some Men's Power, nor does it
depend on the Pleasure of the Will, but is the singular Gift of God. A blind
Obedience to a mortal Man is contrary to Christian Liberty. And to live by
begging, and on others Labors, without doing any thing, is contrary to the
common Calling of all; to whom this is given as a general Rule; that he who
labors not, should not eat. But those who would see the Unlawfulness of these
sort of Vows displayed, must consult our Protestant Writers in their
Controversies with the Romanists. Particularly Peter Martyr in his Defense
against Smith; and in his Loci Communes, Class. 3. c. 6. Calvin in his
Institutions, lib. 4. cap. 13. Musculus in his Loci Communes, de Votis.
Chemnitius in his Examen Concilii Tridentini, Part 3. Riv (...) in his Summa
Controuersiarum, Tract. 2. Quaest. 22, and 51. Chamier in his Pansirat. Cathol.
Tom. 3. lib. 20. These. Salmuriens. Part 3. page, 705, 716, etc.


AFTER all it is an easy thing to observe how wretchedly some Persons are
hampered and perplexed about the binding and obliging Force of their particular
Vows; for whose sake I shall close this Chapter with some brief Touches on this
Question.

HOW far and in what cases such Vows may be dispensed with?

PLAIN it is that Vows, well, lawfully, and deliberately made about a thing
that is in our Power, are not to be carelessly, nor would they be impunely
violated: This were to break our Faith with God, which is a great Impiety. But
it is sufficiently evident such Vows are not to be paid.

1. WHICH are made about a wicked and unjust thing. Such Vows are in their own
Nature null, and to attempt to pay them is an aggravated Crime. Herod therefore
needed not for his Oath or Vows sake have done what his Conscience told him was
flatly unlawful, as he did in taking away John Baptist's Life, whom he knew to
be a just Man, and to have done nothing deserving of Death. Sorrow for his
wicked vow or Oath had been vastly preferable to the Performance of it. In any
such cases the Conscience of him who makes the vow, as soon as he discerns it
to be unjust suffices to deliver him from the Obligation of it, which is
properly none at all.

2. NEITHER are such Vows to be paid as are made about a thing which is not in
our power; for they were not lawfully made: nor is any thing necessary to loose
us from them, besides a discerning that the thing vowed was not in our power,
or that he who vowed it was not at liberty to do so: for such vows are really
null. The Vower in such a case should indeed be grieved at his Rashness and
Inconsiderateness, repent of it, and beg Pardon of God; but he needs not the
Help of any Superior to loosen his Conscience before God.

3. MUCH less are those vows to be paid, which cannot possibly be punctually
discharged, or not without a Man's incurring great and inevitable Danger, or
running the risk of ruining himself or his Family For such vows are against
Christian Charity. God will have Mercy and not Sacrifice; and is more delighted
with Piety and Charity, than detrimental and dangerous Oblations, whereby a Man
should hazard the Ruin of his Health, his Estate, or his Family. If a Person by
vow consecrates to God any Land or Money, or any part of his Estate, for the
use of the Poor or his Church, and can be without it, without apparent and
considerable Detriment, he is undoubtedly bound to pay his Vow, and would
otherwise be unfaithful and a perjured Person: But if he cannot do it without
considerable Damage and Mischief, that Rule of the Apostle which we meet with,
2 Cor. 8. 13. must take place; where says he, I mean not that others be he
eased, and you burdened.

IF a Man has vowed that he would for all his Life abstain from Wine or Flesh, and
by Experience finds that he cannot do so without prejudicing his Health, or
endangering his Life, it is much better for him to break his Vow, than run so
great a Hazard: tho in the mean time he ought to repent of his rash Vow, and
seriously lament the Necessity of breaking it before God, who if he sees him
humble and penitent, will be ready to pardon and forgive his inconsiderate
Rashness; for he will have Mercy and not Sacrifice. We may further observe,

4. THAT a Change of Things and Circumstances may cause the binding Force of
Vows to cease: Not every Change, (for then Vows would signify nothing) but a
Change in any thing wherein the Essence of them was concerned. As in the Matter
of them; as suppose I vow to give such a Sum yearly to the Poor, but have met
with so many Crosses, that I have not so much left to give; I am not obliged:
Or in the End of them; As suppose a Parent before it is born, vows to give up
his Child if a Male, to the Service of God in the Work of the Ministry; if it
afterward evidently appear that he is better capable of promoting the Divine
Honor in another Post or Employment, the Vow binds not: for if the End of a
Vow cease, the Obligation cease together with it: Or in the State of the
Persons that made the Vows on which the Capacity of paying them depends; tho he
that is the culpable Cause of that Change of State and Circumstances that
incapacitates him to pay his Vows, is justly chargeable with the violation of
them.

BUT those who are desirous to see these Matters fully handled, I would refer
to the Learned Sanderson's Praelectiones de Iuramento; and Mr. Baxter's
Directory, Part 3. Chap. 5.

CHAP. XVII.
Of Vows made in a time of Sickness, Distress, or Danger, and the sense of them
that should be afterward retained.

OF all the Vows that are and may be made upon particular Occasions, none more
deserve to be considered, than those made upon a sick Bed, or in an hour of
Trouble and Danger; for the forgetting and breaking which, many have much to
answer; and the retaining a due sense whereof, many, even of the best of
Persons, find to be exceeding difficult: I Will therefore spend this Chapter in
doing these three things; and therewith close this Treatise.

1. I WILL lay down some Observations concerning the making Vows in a time of
Trouble and Distress. 2. I WILL propound some Motives to induce those that make
them, to a serious remembrance and faithful payment of them. 3. I WILL lay down
some few Directions that may be helpful to keep up a lively sense of them upon
our Minds.
THE Observations I make, are these following.

1. THAT God expects that Persons when they are rebuked for Sin, when they are
in distress, and under his afflicting Hand, should, out of a sense of past
Miscarriages, make Vows of Amendment. This is many times God's aim and intent
in sending Trouble and Afflictions; he expects Persons should then look back,
and think of their ways, that they may turn their feet unto his Testimonies:
That they should humble themselves under his mighty Hand, acknowledge their
past Sins, be abas'd for them, and promise to leave them: That they should
recollect the Duties they have neglected, with sorrow own their past Faults,
and seriously engage to amend. When Affliction produces not some Fruit or other
of this kind, God reckons he has smitten People in vain, and that they receive
no Correction.

2. WE may observe, that it is natural almost to all when in distress, trouble,
and anguish, to make Vows to God of better Obedience. Hardly any thing's more
common than for Persons when they come to feel the weight of God's Hand, and
the smart of his Rebukes, to vow and promise that they will be better, and live
better; more mind God, and their Souls, and another World; and lay the Concerns
of Eternity more to heart: and that especially when they are under
Death-threatning Sickness, and they seem to themselves just to face another
World, and to be upon passing into it: Then Conscience, as drowsy as it might
have been before, is apt to fly in most People's faces, to lay open their
Guilt, and display their Sins in their true Colors, attended with all their
several aggravating Circumstances; then those Faults and Miscarriages that
before were over-lookt or counted small, shall appear to have been very great
and provoking; and little Neglects which in Health and Strength occasioned not,
it may be, a concerned Thought, shall then cast the Soul into Pangs and Agonies
that are scarce conceivable. Then oh might they but be spared, how good would
they be! how exactly would they live! how conscientiously would they discharge
their Duty! what improvement would they make of their Time! how faithful would
they be in the management of their Talents! how diligently and seriously would
they pray, and hear, and meditate, and perform all other holy Duties! and what
pains would they take to get their Evidences for Heaven clear! What Vows and
Promises will most then make of a strictly pious and religious Life; of a
careful shunning all Sin, and vigorous pursuit of universal Holiness! and that
with such a vehemence, that any one almost would think they were really in
earnest. And if we suppose the Affliction to be of a lower nature; as in the
case of severe Pain, or under any considerable Disappointment or Cross that is
dejecting, or in the prospect of Danger approaching, if Conscience be at all
awakened, Persons are generally apt to be very ready to make Vows and
Resolutions against those Sins, which appear to them to have been the occasion
of the Divine Frowns, or to have had any hand in their distress and trouble, or
to be likely to pull down Divine Displeasure upon them. It Is natural to all
almost in trouble to betake themselves to their Prayers; and Prayers at such
times are most usually accompanied with Vows. But,

3. OBSERVE farther, that it is very common for Persons to forget such Vows
afterward; to lose the sense of them, and never pay them. The Sailor mentioned
by Erasmus, who when he was in a dangerous Storm, and in great fear of his
Life, made a Vow to a certain Saint of a Wax-Taper as big as the Main Mast of
the Ship; but when he came to be in safety, thought a Farthing Candle might be
sufficient, gives us a Model of most Men's Tempers: who are much more forward
to make Vows when they are in trouble and danger, than to pay them when they
are out of it. How often shall we see Persons, who by the apprehensions of
Death's near approach to them, were cast into inexpressible Agonies, and
thereupon cried to God, and begged and entreated of him, with all imaginable
earnestness and importunity, that he would spare them a ltttle longer, and try
them once more; which if he would do, they vow and promise their whole future
Lives shall show forth and express their grateful Resentments; for that they
will spend them entirely in his Service, and that at anotherguess rate than
formerly: They Will rip up their past Actions, freely confess their Sins, and
bewail their Follies, and vow by all that is Sacred, that for time to come
they will stand on their guard, watch against Temptation, allow themselves in no
Sin, nor in the neglect of any Duty, but will lead an Holy, Heavenly,
Mortified, Selfdenying Life, in the strict observance of the Rules of our
Religion: who when God has heard their Cries, and gratified them with a
farther time of Trial, and prolongu'd and renewed their Lives unto them, suffer
their Heat in a little time to wear off, slide into their wonted deadness,
carelessness, and lukewarmness, and return to their old Sins, Failures, and
Neglects: in a little time indulge to their old Lusts as freely as before, if
not worse than ever; and are not a whit changed or altered, but the same as
before, as if nothing at all had past between God and them. And if it be so
when there is the apprehension of Death in the case, we may well conceive it is
the same in lower instances; as under the fearful apprehensions of any thing
short of it; under racking Pain, or any sinking Disquietment; in which cases,
and others of the like nature, it is a very common thing for Persons to vow and
promise, a more careful guarding against such or such a Corruption, or such a
Temptation, as they know is most apt to prevail upon them, or a more faithful
discharge of such a Duty as has been before neglected, a more close walking
with God, a more steady trust in Him, and more entire resignation to Him, and
the like: But let but the Danger be over, and the Trouble at an end, and oh how
soon are such Vows forgotten, as if never made! how quickly is the sense of
them lost! We are told, Luke 17. that our Savior cleans'd ten Lepers at once;
and but one of them had any thing like a sense of his Deliverance, or came to
return Thanks to his Great Benefactor: This our Lord seemed to wonder at, and
therefore cries out, Where are the Nine? Here was however one in ten that was
duly affected with the Goodness of God, and made suitable Returns: But I
believe I should keep within compass if I should say, that scarce one in an
hundred of those who come under Vows to God in trouble and distress, take care
with any Faithfulness to pay them afterward. An Eminent Divine (now with God)
who had with with great Faithfulness for a course of many Years exercised his
Ministry in this City, being asked by one, what number of the many he had known
to be in great Agonies in Sickness, and under the apprehensions of Death's
approach, who then professed Repentance of their past wicked Lives, and promised
and vowed a serious and holy Life afterward, to which they had before been
Strangers; what number of such he had known, that in a Judgment of Charity he
could apprehend, were truly changed by their Sickness, and faithful in paying
their Vows when recovered: He answered, That he could not say, that in the
whole course of his Ministry he had met with above Three of that Number. This
is methinks very sad and doleful to consider. I have often in my own Thoughts
been enquiring what should be the cause of this common Failure and Neglect; and
it is, I think, well worth our enquiring after. The best Account I can give of
it in short is this:

It Is because there is commonly much more of Fear than Love, in the Vows made in
Trouble and Distress: Persons under Affliction, if they are not utterly stupid,
are under a sensible Conviction of their strait and close Dependence upon God,
in whose hands they are, and who can do with them as seems good in his sight,
without any check or control: This, attended with a sense of Guilt, is
naturally apt to excite strong Fear, lest he should deal severely; lest he
should utterly take away forfeited Mercies, and punish the abuse of them by
their withdrawment; lest he should deny Succor in Danger, to those who are so
sensible they are far from deserving it; lest he should suffer the Desert of
their Sins to come upon them, and then to be sure woeful must be their Case:
Which Fear, if not duly tempered with Love, and other Graces, will only prompt
to look out for a guard for Self-preservation; and so self, and not God, will
be mainly eyed in the vows made in such a case. If 'twere a true sense of Duty,
a real love to God, that was the Spring of such Vows, they would have a Foundation
in the habitual Temper of the Soul, and so the effects of them would be
visible: the cause would remain, even when the Trouble was over, which excited
the particular Vows made, and therefore the Effect would appear. But when Fear
is the sole Spring of them, and that Fear wears off, as the Trouble and
Distress blows over, we need not wonder that the Vows are forgotten, and the
Effects cease, together with their Cause. And because it is so common a thing
for Persons in their Vows in such a case, to be much more acted by Fear than
Love, therefore is it so much more common for the sense of such vows to be lost
than retained.

Withal, such Vows generally arise more from passionate Transport, than a
deliberate Confent of Heart; which is another cause of their being so often
forgotten and unminded. View a Person in distress and anguish, or under the
apprehension of danger, and you will find the Spirit in a sort of Ferment: Now in
the Body while the Blood is in a fermentation, the animal Spirits are much more
eager and impetuous than at other times; and so it is also in the mind. Trouble
and Danger produces a Ferment, and vehement Commotion; then presently there may
be an eager bent toward that to which there is no habitual Inclination: serious
Thoughts to which the Soul was before perhaps a Stranger, find a place during
this Commotion; and God must be eyed, who before possibly was little minded or
regarded; and so vows may be made of the Duties owing to him, with a seeming
earnestness; but let the Bow be unbent, and it presently returns to its natural
state; so let but this Commotion and Disturbance cease, upon the removal of its
Cause, and God may without any cause of wondering be as much disregarded as
ever. 'Twas in a passionate Transport such Persons made their vows; when they
come to be still and calm, the sense of them vanishes: But let Vows at such a
time be made with a full, deliberate, fixed Consent of Heart, and you will see
the Effects of them will be lasting.

FINALLY; therefore are vows made at such a time so often forgotten and
unminded, because the most in making them aim but at the gaining the Mercy they
need; which being obtained, they see no cause for minding them any farther.
Most seek, as it were, to bribe God to give them the Deliverance, Help, and
Succor they stand in need of, by making vows and Promises to him; by means
whereof they think to engage him to relieve and befriend them. The Great God,
though he sees from the first such Persons Treachery and Baseness, is yet many
times pleased to step in with relief, in order to their farther Trial, and that
their latent Corruption may be discovered, and for other wise Ends: But as for
them, when they are delivered, and out of their danger, and their trouble's
over, they have no farther concern about the matter. And the reason is, because
their End is answered, which is the most that is in any case aimed at. These
are some of the most common Occasions of this general neglect, though they are
far from justifying it. We may farther observe,

4. THAT even truly pious Persons are too apt to forget the Vows they make to
God in their trouble and distress; too prone to lose the sense of them, and let
it wear off: Which need not be thought strange by any that know that the Best
have but weak Graces, a subtle Enemy, and treacherous Hearts, and live in the
midst of Snares and Temptations, whereby they are liable to be withdrawn from
God, and diverted from their Duty. Eventhose who are truly serious in making
Vows of a more close, strict, and uniform Obedience, for time to come, when
under Divine Rebukes; even those who make such Vows out of true Love to God,
and with a full Consent of Heart, and a sincere Aim at the Divine Glory, are
too apt to be tardy and defective: They shall retain the Impressions of them
sometimes for a longer, and otherwhiles for a shorter season; but generally lt
may be observed their Warmth by degrees abates. There is indeed a difference in
this case discernible between those that are upright in the main, and those who
do but trifle with God. The former have defects as well as the latter; but they
are their burden; and the matter of their Sorrow and Lamentation, and not
their contented Choice; they are ready to aggravate them, and seek not to
extenuate their Guilt, that so their Sin may seem the smaller, and they be the
more easily satisfied, as the latter usually do: If they find the sense of
their Vows worn off, they endeavor to renew it; and don't shun the Thoughts of
them, lest they should be reminded of the state they were in that occasioned
them, and so have their Trouble renewed. And in many other respects do these
two sorts of Persons differ; but yet that is no excuse for breaking Divine
Bonds, and loosing the sense of the Divine Vows they are under, of which the
Best should be afraid. I would therefore caution all to beware of playing fast
and loose with God; to beware of vowing and not paying; to beware of losing the
sense of renewed Engagements; to beware of sliding again into Defects that were
lamented and vowed against under Affliction. And that my Caution may be the
more effectual; I Will proceed now,

2. TO propound some Motives that should and ought to induce those who have
made Vows in a time of Trouble and Distress, to a serious remembrance, and
faithful payment of them. And they are these:

1. Consider they are God's Vows that you are under: He remembers and records
them, and will exact them at your hands. It Is not a Mortal like your selves
that is easily eluded, or put off, or imposed on, that you have herein to deal
with; but the Great God who searches Hearts, and whose exact notice nothing can
escape; and who weighs all things in a just Balance. You had need therefore
take care to be punctual and faithful. He cannot be deceived; He will not be
mocked. Your Vows must be another day accounted for. Which is a Thought that
methinks should strike an awe; and powerfully stir up diligence and care.

2. CONSIDER, That those Vows you made to God, when in distress and trouble,
are upon you, whether you mind and pay them, yea or not. Your forgetting, or
not regarding them, does not at all diminish their Force, or cause their
Obligation to cease; but you are still responsible for their neglect. Did they,
if over-lookt and disregarded, lose their binding force, 'twere some excuse;
but it is no such matter. 'Tho' you should never think of them more, yet your
Engagements would be really as strong as ever. You Would continue bound by them,
though you would lose the Benefit of them: you would be the worse for them, because you
were not bettered by them. Think of it therefore; your Vows hold their force,
whether you keep or break them. You cannot loosen the Band, though you may lose
the sense of it.

3. CONSIDER how disingenuous and ungrateful it is, when God has heard our
Supplications, and answered our Requests, and sent us the help implored and
begged, for us to forget and not to mind our Vows. How unsuitable a return
would this be, for his Kindness in succouring and delivering us, and
interposing on our behalf; preventing our Fears, and exceeding our Hopes; and
turning our Sorrow into Joy, and our Heaviness and Sadness, into Mirth and
Gladness! May not God justly expect otherguess Treatment at our hands? May he
not justly resent it in a very high manner, to have have his Kindness thus
slighted? May not God say to us, Was this it that I delivered and spared you
for; that you might have an opportunity of abusing my Goodness by breaking your
vows? No certainly, by no means: When you come therefore into new Straits and
Difficulties, go to whom you will to succor and deliver you, for I Will do it no
more* Which suggests a farther Motive: And therefore,

4. CONSIDER how woeful an Accent 'twill add to any new Troubles whereinto we
may fall, for us then to remember Vows made in former straits, that have been
neglected and unpaid. Think a little, and that seriously, how sadly your
Consciences will be wounded, and your Souls dismayed, when the next Distress
and Trouble comes, if you then find upon Reflection you were unthankful for
your last merciful Deliverance and Preservation, and soon lost any Impressions
it made upon you. How will it then cut you to the Heart to think how falsely,
and treacherously, and deceitfully you dealt with God in breaking your solemn
Vows and Promises! How will this Thought weaken your hold of God! and what a
matter of sinking Discouragement will it be to you! think of it therefore
soberly, and prevent the doubling and trebbling of your own Difficulty in any
further Trials God may have in store for you, by a faithful Payment of your
Vows. And then,

5. CONSIDER further what Ground your Forgetfulness of, and Unfaithfulness to
the Vows you made when in Trouble and Distress, may give you (as Circumstances
may be) to question the Sincerity of your own Hearts. It Is true as I before
hinted, there are certain Failures (and those not inconsiderable ones) in this
Matter, that are consistent with Sincerity of Heart: but it is not an easy
thing in all cases to distinguish them from such Neglects as are Arguments and
Indications of a rotten Heart and trifling Spirit; and how woefully may you
embarrass your selves in this respect? Do but take care to act agreeably to the
Vows and Engagements you came under in the Hour of your Trouble, and you will be
clear and free; you will have a comfortable Evidence of your own Integrity: but
if you are thoughtless and careless, allow your selves to live at the wonted
rate, although you are under new Engagements; and loose the Impressions which the
afflictive Providence you were under, made upon you, and that once and again,
over and over; believe it, you will find the time will come when you will be very
apt to question whether all your Transactions with God, from first to last,
have not been hypocritical; and whether there has been any thing of Reality
and Sincerity at the bottom on your part; and you will find your selves so
woefully embarrass'd, as not to be able to quiet your selves, or receive
Satisfaction from others. As you would not have this to prove your Case, I
beseech you be punctual with God, and faithful to him.

6. CONSIDER also what Advantage you give the Devil by negecting to pay your
Vows. Who would do any thing to rejoice his worst and bitterest Enemy, and put
him in a capacity of doing him an inconceivable Mischief? and yet this is done
by all you that make Vows to God, and forget and neglect them when you have
done. You give an advantage to that subtle Enemy of yours that watches for your
halting, and will make use of the least Slip or Failure you indulge your selves
in, as a means to withdraw you further and further from God, till at length
Conscience is sorely wounded, and Grace sadly weakened; and so unless God be
strangely merciful to you, you may go halting to your Graves. Let but these
things be duly weighed, and you cannot want Inducements to a serious Remembrance
and faithful Payment of any Vows you made in Distress or Trouble.

IT now remains that I add some Directions that may be helpful to keep up a
lively Sense of Vows made upon a sick Bed, or in any time of Fear, Distress or
Danger. To any that are seriously desirous thereof, and would do what in them
lies to engage themselves to pay their Vows to the most High, I would give the
following Advice.

1. OFTEN endeavor to call to your lively Remembrance the State, Condition,
and Frame that you were in, and the Sense you had of things when you made your
Vows to God. Retire from the World ever and anon, and soberly set your selves
down, and recollect what Thoughts and Apprehensions you had in the time of your
Trouble, of God and Christ, of Sin and Holiness, of Heaven and Hell, and of a
calm and peaceable Conscience; what Sense you had of your past Neglects and
Failures and future Duty; what were your Cares, and Fears, and Hopes, and
Comforts; how your Spirits worked; what were Consciences Admonitions, and your
Resentments. Did you not then think an Interest in God and Christ to be worth
more than a thousand Worlds? And would you not if they had been in your power
rather have chosen to have parted with them, than to have gone without it? Did
not Sin then sit heavy upon your Minds, and depress your Spirits? And did you
not heartily wish that you had carefully shunned it, and watched against it?
How mean Thoughts had you of this Earth, and all the Riches, Honors,
Pleasures, and Comforts of it, when you did not know but you were just upon
leaving it? Did you not then think those the happiest of Persons how low soever
their present Circumstances were, that had a Treasure above, and could eye
Heaven as their proper home? and the like: The frequent recollecting of such
Thoughts will help to perpetuate the Impressions they made, and their good
Effects: And because our Memories are commonly weak and treacherous, and not so
faithful as they should be to us in Matters of the greatest moment, it may be a
considerable help to us to make use of Writing; we should find it abundantly
worth our while, and of no small Use to us, would we as soon as we are
delivered out of Affliction and Trouble commit to Writing the State of our
Case, and Frame of our Spirits, when we were under it; what our Thoughts and
Apprehensions were; what supported and relieved us; what Engagements
particularly we made, and upon what Inducements: Our Recourse whereto, whenever
we find our selves apt to grow cold, might help to renew our Sense of our past
vows, and engage us to answer and pay them; and keep our after Lives from being
like the new Editions of some Men's Books, which are always worst: by reason
that besides the old Errata, new ones creep in, and are added to the former.

2. Engage your Friends and Relations who were Witnesses of your Trouble, that
knew your Fears, and were acquainted with your vows then made of a better Life
for time to come, to remind you of your Promises and Engagements, to watch over
you, and tell you of them as there is occasion, and take it kindly of them, and
be thankful to them, whenever they do so. A serious faithful Yokefellow for a
Monitor in such a Case is a vast Advantage, because of the constant Oversight
and Inspection which that Relation gives Opportunity for: but if that be
wanting, it may in part be made up by other serious Christian Friends, whose
Admonitions may be very helpful. And indeed in such a case there are few but
need spurring, need to be put in mind of their Vows and Promises: We may see it
in Jacob's case, who after he had, upon leaving his Father's House, made the
solemn vow that has been before cited out of Genesis 28. and when God had
performed his Desire, and kept him safe, and brought him back again, he yet
lingered a great while before he paid his vow, needed to be reminded, and was
as one asleep, till a Call of God to go up to Bethel awakened him; as we see,
Genesis 35. 1. and then presently we find he remembers what had past between God
and him; and therefore cries to his Household, ver. 3. Let us arise and go up to
Bethel; and I will make there an Altar unto God, who answered me in the day of
my Disiress, and was with me in the way which I went.

3, BE sure to take the first Opportunity of beginning to pay your vows. It Is a
part of Dishonesty not to give to God according to the time in which he has
been merciful and gracious. And we may still observe that one Neglect shall
always make way for another. Men are very apt to adjourn the Payment of their
vows to what they call a more convenient Season, which with those who put it
off from time to time, is never like to come. The longer we put off the paying
of our Debts, the more unwilling and the less able shall we be at last.

4. PRAY often and earnestly to God, to keep up a lively Sense of your renewed
Engagements on your Hearts and Spirits. As your vows were accompanied with
Prayers, so let them be followed by them. Beg of God that he would guard you
from the Temptations of an infectious World, and keep your Hearts from cooling.
And let such Petitions be frequent and serious.

5. Look for a Return of Trouble. Think not because this Affliction is at an
end, and that Trial is over, and the other Burden is removed, that thou art
therefore safe, thy Mountain stands strong, thou shall never be moved: for thou
may have more to go through than thou art aware of. Some Persons need not
look far for a Prospect of fresh Trouble; as teeming Women, and those Persons
that are liable to the racking and tormenting pain of Cholick, Gout or Stone,
and the like. Think not therefore that all is over with thee, but expect new
Trials and Difficulties; live in the expectation of being sick again, and that
to that degree as that thou shall not recover; in the expectation of being
pained afresh, when it may be thou will not so easily find Relief; think in any
case that thy last Pressures, or others of the same kind, as bad, or worse, may
return; and as ever thou expectest God should then be thy Stay and Helper, thy
Shield and Buckler, pay the vows thou made him in thy last Distress. Do but
really look for fresh Exercises and Conflicts, (which thou can never want
reason to do, whilst thou art encompassed with a vail of Flesh) and that will
help to keep up a Sense of your vows under your last. And then,

6. BE duly sensible of the Treachery of your own Hearts. Take heed of
depending on your own Strength. If you once grow secure, you are in constant
Danger of a Surprise. Remember that confident Peter presently fell. Give not
way to any such Thoughts as these, that your Vows were so serious, and your
Resolutions so strong, that it is almost impossible for you ever to lose the
Sense of them. Alas! so far is it from that, that how strong and serious soever
they were, when you come into the midst of Snares and Temptations, you will find
it very difficult to retain any Impressions that shall signify any thing.

Let every one therefore whom God has succored in Distress, and delivered in
an hour of Danger, say with David, I will sing Praise unto thy Name, O Lord,
for ever; that I Psalm. 61. 8.
may daily perform my Vows.

FINIS.

