NEWS FROM SCOTLAND. His MAJESTY'S Manifest touching the PALATINE Cause. And
Act of Parliament concerning the same. Read, voiced and past in the Parliament
of SCOTLAND, the 6. day of SEPTEMBER. 1641. And published by his Majesty's
special Command.

C


First Printed at Edinburgh in Scotland by Robert and James Brysons. And now
Printed at London by T. FAUCET for T. BATES, and are to be sold at his Shop in
the Old Bailey. 1641.

His Majesty's Manifest. CHARLES by the grace of God, King of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. To all to whom this
present Manifest shall come greeting.
TO the end that the Endeavors of our late dear Father King JAMES of blessed
memory, and our proceedings since his Death in the cause of our dear and only
Sister, Brother in law, Nephews, Electors, and Princes Palatine of the Rhyne
may not be forgotten, or pretendedly unknown, wherein we have studied, and
labored nothing more then the Peace of Christendom, and the avoiding the
effusion of innocent blood, by seeking the restitution and reestablishment of
the Electorall house of Palatine in their ancient Rights, Dignities, and
Possessions within the Empire, out of which they have been by violence and
force of Arms, and other undue proceedings expelled and banished, contrary to
the ancient Laws and Constitutions of the Sacred Empire We have thought fit
for the Vindication of our own Honor, to call to mind and to publish to the
world, both a summary Relation of our Actions and endeavors past, and our
present resolutions in the same cause.

IT cannot be unknown to all the Princes and Estates of Europe and more
particularly to those who have had any interest or relation to the public
affairs of Germany, how both Our self, and our Father have, during these
twenty years past, by many and several Embassages, Treaties, and other
negotiations, to our great expense and charges, both with the late Emperor
Ferdinand, the K. of Spain, and other Princes, and Estates of the Empire,
endeavored by all friendly and treatable means to procure the restitution and
reestablishment of Our said dear Sister, Brother in law, and Nephews, in
their ancient Rights and Possessions, as the only and possible way to settle a
good and firm Peace in the Empire, and consequently with all Princes
interested therein, without which it is impossible to expect or hope for a
good, durable, and honest pacification of those troubles which have already
almost rent and consumed, and involved all the Princes of Christendom in a
most bloody and destructive War.

And for a clear demonstration of Our sincere intentions, not only our own
pious inclination, and care of the public peace, has induced Us to omit
diverse occasions whereby we might by such power as God has put into Our
hands, have prevented the violences and oppressions used to our said Sister and
Nephews; But we have been led on, and invited thereunto by diverse promises,
assurances, and reversall Letters, both from the late Emperor, and King of
Spain; and other Usurpers of the Inheritances of the Electorall House
Palatine, that they would at last in contemplation of our Meditations, hearken
and incline to a just and honest Peace by the restitution of the Estates and
Dignities of our dear Sister and Nephews, whereby we have been drawn not
only to pass by our own and the public interest, and to forbear to engage
our Arms in so just a cause, but also have procured by our Fathers and Our
authority, the withdrawing, and disbanding of the Forces of Count Mans^elt out
of the Palatinate, and advanced diverse Truces and cessations of hostility or
defense, only to prepare the way of amiable Composition, according to the
hopes and promises to that end given Us, and particularly have caused the
Surrender and deposition of some places of strength into the hands of the late
Infanta of Spain, upon reciprocal assurance of a final pacification or
restitution.

But what effects all these Our peaceable and Christian endeavors have
produced, and how all Our pious Negotiations have been either delayed or
deluded; thereby and by process of time to root and establish the usurpations
of the House Palatine, and our Patience and Piety thereby abused, is so
manifest by the continual oppression of our said dear Sister and Nephews;
that we are forced to protest that there has been nothing succeeded to our
desires or hopes, but a resolution of despair of ever obtaining by the ways
of Justice, Treaty or Amity, that which has been so often promised to, and
expected of the Lovers of Christian peace.

Notwithstanding we having lately received advice from Our dear Uncle the King
of Denmarck, that at last by his mediation and procurement the present Emperor
and Duke of Bavaria, have condiscended to a treaty to be held at the Diet at
Ratisbone, upon the 6. day of May last past, for the reviewing and resetling of
the controversies of the House Palatine, as a preparation and inducement to a
general peace and Amnistia through the whole Empire; And that he with some of
the Electors of the Empire is accepted as Mediator of the said cause, and has
deceived strong and pregnant assurances of a better inclination and disposition
toward the re-establishment of the Electorall Family in their Rights and
Dignities; And to that end has procured convenient safe conduct from the
Emperor to our Nephew and his Brethren, freely to come in person, or to send
their Deputies to that Diet at the time and place appointed, with all other
clauses requisite for their safeties, going, abiding, or coming from thence,
and there to plead the Justice of their own cause, and that in prosecution
thereof, he has instructed and dispatched his Ambassadors to assist either in
person, or by the Deputies of our Nephews, at the said Treaty of Pacification,
and has desired us herein to comply with him by sending our Ambassadors
qualified and instructed to the same purpose of procuring a good, and settled
peace within the Empire, according to the intimation of the Princes Electors
signified to him by their Letters, thereby desiring us to assist in the present
Assembly at Ratisbone.

To which end our Nephew the Prince Electour Palatine having resolved by our
Counsel and advice to send his Deputies according to the invitation and hopes
intimated of a good issue to be expected by the amiable way of treaty and
composure.

We also have thought fit not to be wanting to so good a design so concurrent
to our own, and the desires of so many Princes, and in some hope of better
fruits then hitherto all our endeavors have produced; Have resolved to make
this our last legal by the way of treaties, and to lend our Ambassadors to
the Emperor, and other Princes in the said Diet assembled: And to that purpose
have given him full power and instructions to contribute all our authority to
the procurement and settlement of a good and blessed peace, by the
reestablishment and restuittion of the possessions and dignities of our said
dear Sstier, Nephews, and Electorall Family, without which no peace can
either be honest or secure. Hereby exhorting and desiring all other Kings,
Princes and States, our Friends Allies, and Co^federates, who shall either be
present at the said Diet, or shall have their Ambassadors, or Deputies there,
that they will be assisting to the Justice of so good a cause, and ^o great a
blessing as the restoring of peace to the almost desolate Estate of Germany.

But because we may have just cause to doubt by many experiences of our former
endeavors tha^ the issue and fruit of this meeting may not be answerable to
our just expectation, but rather that it may produce contrary effects to the
prejudice of the Iusticers Rights of our said Nephews and their Family (which
God forbid) we are hereby forced to protest against all Acts, Sentences,
Conclusions, or determinations whatsoever, which shall or may be had, made, or
declared either in confirmation of the oppressions, and all usurpation past, or
any additions thereunto for the future, as invalid and of no power or effect.

In which case (being contrary to our desires and expectation) we also further
protest and ^^clare that we will not abandon neither our own nor the public
interest, nor the Cause, Rights, and just preten^es of our dear Sister, and
Nephews, and other Princes, and States involved within their oppressions: But
that we will use and employ all such force, and power wherewith God has
enabled us both by our own arms, and the help and assistance of all our
allies and friends, to vindicate our own honor, the public peace and
redress of the injuries, usurpations, and oppressions of our said dearest
Sister and Nephews, and their now illustrious Family.

And hereby as we do profess to use all our endeavors and power to promove a
happy and desired peace, for the consolation of the distressed Empire; so we
do appeal to Almighty God, the Inspector of the hearts of all Princes, and to
the world Spectators of all our just actions, that we will be innocent before
God and the world of all the evils that may ensue, if these our last hopes
shall be delayed or abused.

At Edinburgh the 10.20. of August, 1641.
THe Kings Majesty having seriously recommended this his Manifest to the
consideration of the estates of Parliament of this his Majesty's ancient and
native Kingdom. They after mature deliberation, do unanimously approve the
same; And his Majesty's pious and just resolutions therein expressed: And with
most hearty affections answerable to the nearenesse of their interest in that
Princely Family of the Elector Palatine, declare that in case his Majesty do
not prevail by this present treaty, they will join and concur by their
advice and assistance in a Parliamentary way in the prosecution of his
Majesty's designs for his house and the advantage of his Royal Sister, and
Nephews, who are descended of that Royal Stem, which by the succession of
an hundred and eight Kings, has swayed the Scepter over this Kingdom.

Read, voiced, and past in Parliament the twenty eight day of August, 1641.

The humble Remonstrance of the Estates of Parliament to his sacred Majesty
concerning the Prince Electour Palatine.
MOst gracious Sovereign, we the Estates in Parliament, representing the body
of this your Majesty's ancient and native Kingdom, do in all humility presume
to remonstrate to your sacred Majesty, the true sense and feeling, the whole
Country have had, and do more and more take to heart of the manifold
sufferings, your Majesty's Sister, and her Princely children the Prince
Electour Palatine and his Brethren and Sisters, have endured these many years
bygone in the defrauding and debarring of them from their lawful estate, and
possession, wherein your Majesty's who^e Dominions (but more particularly this
your Majesty's native Kingdom) are so far concerned, that according to their
power and abilities, they are obliged by bonds of duty, Nature, and
Christianity, to use all lawful and ord^nary means for obtaining them to be
restored to their ancient Inheritance and Dignities. The many bygone ^ets and
continual delays, notwithstanding of all the fair dealing used by your
Majesty's late Royal Father, and your Self, gives us more and apprehensive
grounds of fear, that the present Treaty at Ratisbone shall produce no better
effects then the former have done. In consideration whereof, We are forced in
name of the whole Kingdom, humbly to represent how necessary and expedient it
is, that your Majesty will be graciously pleased with advice and consent of Us
the Estates of Parliament, to enact and ordain, That no Leavies, either of
Armies, Regiments, Companies, or Recrewes of Sou^diers, be licen^^at, or
warranted to be sent out of this Kingdom, till a resolute answer return
from the said Diet at Ratisbone concerning the said Prince Elector, at the
least while the first day of April next; To the effect his Highness affairs
and business may be the better furthered and advanced, during which space, all
Leavies and Recrewes of Soldiers, would be discharged to be uplifted, or sent
out of the Kingdom.

The 4. of September. 1641.
Read in the presence of his Majesty, and Estates of Parliament, and hereupon
his Majesty with the advice of the Estates, ordaines an Act to be drawn up,
which was accordingly done. Like as his Majesty does promise, that He will give
order, that no Scots Soldier shall be Shipped or have passage at Barwicke,
Workington, White-Haven, Newcastle, or any other Seaport in England, during
the time aforesaid.

WHereas it has been humbly remonstrated to his Majesty by the Estates of
Parliament; Therefore it is Statute and ordained by our Sovereign Lord with
advice of the said Estates, that there be a restraint of all Leavies and
recrewes of Soldiers to be sent out of this Kingdom, till a resolute answer
from the Diet at Ratisbone, concerning the Prince Electour at least while the
first day of April next. To the effect, the Prince Elector his affairs and
business may be the better furthered and advanced, during the which time our
Sovereign Lord with advice aforesaid, discharges all Leavies and Recrewes of
Soldiers within this Kingdom, to the effect aforesaid: And during that time
inhibits and discharges all Skippers, Saylours, and Masters of Ships to
transport any Soldiers from this Kingdom beyond Seas to any foreign
Kingdom or Country, under the pain of 40. pounds for each Soldier so
transported toties quoties; And ordaines these presents to be intimate to all
his Majesty's Lieges by public Proclamation at the Market Cross of Edinburgh
Peer and Shore of Leeth, And all Seaports of this Kingdom needful, whereby
none may pretend Ignorance. And for the better observation of the promises,
hereby gives warrant express command to all searchers at Seaports to look
carefully and search all Ships before they loose or make sail and to stop, and
impede all the said Soldiers from going out of the Country under the pain of
an hundredth pounds to the searcher in case of negligence in the execution of
the power hereby committed to them. It is always declared that such Officers
who have served abroad, and have now been employed for the Country, and shall
have the General his pass are not comprehended in this present Act, but
express excepted forth thereof.

Read, voiced and past in Parliament the sixth of September, 1641.

FINIS,

