CR

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
BY THE KING.
A Proclamation for the Adjournment of part of Michaelmas Term.
HIs MAJESTY, to His great and unexpressible grief, finding the Rebellion of
the City of London, and the distraction of the whole Kingdom (occasioned
principally by that means) to continue, whereby it will be extremely
inconvenient both for Himself and to all His good Subjects to make their
repair to the Cities of London and Westminster to the Term, to be held at
Westminster in such manner as it was wont for the whole Term, Does by this His
Royal Proclamation Order, Appoint and Declare, That the Court of Chancery, and
all proceedings in that Court of what kinds or sorts soever, The Receipt of the
Exchequer, and of the first Fruits and Tenths, and of the Duchy of Cornwall,
and the whole Court of Exchequer, (except only the Office of Pleas in that
Court) and the Court of Exchequer Chamber, the Court of the Du^chy of
Lancaster, the Court of Wards and Liveries, and the Court of White Hall, or
Court of Requests, shall be held and continued at His City of Oxford in the
County of Oxford, (where His Majesty's residence now is, and for this Winter
season is like to be) for and during the whole Term of St Michaell now next
ensuing. And that all the said Courts not before excepted, and the said
Receipts, shall remain and continue, and be held at the said City of Oxford,
until His Majesty shall otherwise determine thereof and Declare the same.

And His Majesty does farther Declare, That He does resolve that the Courts of
King's Bench, and Common Pleas, and the Pleas between Party and Party in the
Office of Pleas in the said Court of Exchequer, shall upon and from the first
day of the first Return of Michaelmas Term next, commonly called Tres
Michaelis, be adjourned until the fist Return of that Term commonly called
Octabis Martini; and that the said fist Return called Octabis Martini, and the
sixth and last Return called Quindena Martini shall be held at the City of
Westminster in the usual places where formerly they were held, and the residue
of the said first Return of Tres Michaelis. The second Return of the said
Term called Mense Michaelis, the third Return of the said Term, called
Crastino Animarum, and the fourth Return called Crastino Martini, shall be
wholly omitted, and all appearances at any of the said second, third, and
fourth Returns to be at and on the said fist Return called Octabis Martini.

All which His Majesty signifies to all and singular His Officers and
Ministers of the said several Courts and Receipts, and to all other His loving
Subjects of this His Realm, to the intent that they and every of them who
should perform any service there, or shall have any suit or other occasion to
attend in any of the said Courts of Chancery, Exchequer Chamber, Court of
Exchequer (other then in the Office of Pleas there) or the Receipt of the
Exchequer, and First Fruits and Tenths, or Duchy of Cornwall, or in the Court
of the Duchy of Lancaster, Court of Wards and Liveries, and Court of Requests,
may take notice thereof, and give their attendances at the said City of Oxford
as aforesaid, and not elsewhere, and that such of them as have cause or command
to appear in any of the said Courts ot Kings Bench, or Common Pleas, or Court
of Exchequer in the Office of Pleas there, may also take notice thereof, and
give their attendances accordingly, without danger of for forfeitur, penalty,
or contempt to be incurred toward His Majesty, or prejudice to themselves in
that behalf.

And His Majesty's pleasure is, That the Essoynes for the said first Return
Tres Michaelis shall be kept at the usual times in the said Courts of Kings
Bench and Common Pleas, and Writs of adjournment shall be directed to the
Justices of the said two Courts of Kings Bench and Common Pleas and Barons of
the Exchequer respectively, Willing and Commanding all and every His Majesty's
Officers, Ministers, and Subjects to whom it does or shall appertain, to
observe and keep their Assemblies and Appearances, with all their Returns and
Certificates, in His Majesty's said Courts accordingly, and to give their
several and respective attendances, and to do their respective Offices and
Duties in every behalf, as if they were particularly named, and as they will
answer the contrary at their perils.

Given at His Majesty's Court at Oxford, this fifth day of October, in the
Nineteenth year of His Majesty's Reign. God save the King.
Printed at Oxford by LEONARD LICHFIELD Printer to the University.


