A DISCOURSE Concerning the Rise and Antiquity OF Cathedral Worship.

In a Letter to a Friend.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by A. Baldwin in Warwick Lane, 1699.

Mr. M's Argument methinks carrys a great deal in it. Simplicity and Gravity
are the most becoming Ornaments of Divine Worship; to fancy the great God
pleased with Theatrical Pomp, and a noisy Ostentation in paying him public
Homage, were to represent him tinctured with human Vanity and Folly; which
fills Conversation with superficial Ceremonies and complemental Addresses, that
are but mere air and show. But as they are nauseous to Men of sense, so may it
well be concluded that any thing parallel to them, needs must be the like to
the All-wise and Heart-searching God. It Is true in Humane Conversation, Men may
be very complaisant and yet hearty; and in Divine Worship they may be
Ceremonious and Formal, and yet truly Devout and Serious: but Likelihood in
such cases is more considerable than Possibility. Men of Brains and Thought,
although they either through the tincture of Education, may really be fond of a
pompous way of Worship; or for fear of singularity, may customarily fall in
with such Ritual Observances as they don't much admire, are yet sufficiently
guarded against so gross a weakness, as the resting in an outside Homage would
imply: but what will become of the poor Vulgar? They use their Eyes and their
Ears more than their Reason, and understand not the Art of Abstraction; when
therefore they find the Divine Worship so contrived and ordered as to give them
entertainment in their own way, gratifying their senses, and tickling their
Fancies, instead of elevating their Understandings, and warming their Hearts,
they will be strangely apt to rest in the former, and overlook the latter, and so
the great end is lost. He that questions this, seems little to know Mankind.

For my own part, I am far from being a friend to Slovenliness, or an enemy to
Decency: I abhor Irreverence in Divine Worship out of a pretense to
Spirituality; and yet am for guarding against too great a Prevalence of sensual
part, lest it degenerate into mere Form. And therefore cannot but fall in with
that which appeared the common sense of the Company, that it were better for
our Cathedrals to imitate, than be proposed as patterns to our Parish Churches.

That I remember, which the Doctor most harpt upon, in his Encomiums of the
Cathedral way (compared to which he seemed to look upon our Parish Worship as
mere babbling) was Antiquity and Authority. There he had us at every turn, when
he had not an Answer at hand to our Reasons. There he thought he had a safe
Retreat: Thither (according to your desire) I have since pursued him, and can
find no ground for such mighty Boasts. I have made the best search into the
matter that I was able, with that assistance which my poor Library would
afford, and must declare that I can find no footing of the modish Worship of
our Cathedrals in the Christian Church, either in the days of the Apostles, or
for some after-Ages; that if my Authors don't misinform me, (and there call in
who you please to be Judges) it prevailed not till the fourth Century was
drawing to a close, and came not to perfection till Gregory the Great's days:
and was warmly opposed by sundry Persons of great Worth and Eminence for a long
time before, at, and after the times of the Western Reformation. If I can set
this in a just light, I doubt the Doctor must lower his Top-sail, and abate of
his Pretensions, lest his Zeal prove too strong for his Judgment.

His Plea from the Church, when Truth lies at stake, is with me of small
account. I honor the Reformation because bottomed upon a free ventilation of
Truth, to which whosoever attempts to put a stop, undermines our Foundations,
and endangers a relapse into Ignorance and Superstition, from which we ought to
be thankful that we are so happily escaped. I honor our Church, but cannot
think that those befriend her, who would advance her to a practical
Infallibility, admitting of no Alterations and Amendments: and cannot (when I
review times past) forbear esteeming her unhappy in many of her Sons that have
appeared most Dutiful, who have outdone her greatest Enemies; and in her
choicest Patriots, who have proved real Betrayers. For over-doing is undoing,
and therefore I am well satisfied that Archbishop Laud with his Heat and
Bigotry, was a greater Enemy to our Church, than Tho. Cartwright or any of his
Abettors, with all their Admonitions and vehement Invectives. This I think the
Event has verified.

It is easy to be observed, when Men are once fond of a Notion, how busy they
are in searching for something to defend it; how apt to turn all things almost
they meet with into Proofs to serve their purpose. Take for instance, those
whose Ears are filled with the Cathedral Chanting, and whose minds are still
running on its delightful Melody and Harmony; give them the New Testament, and
turn them to those places where mention is made of singing Psalms and Hymns,
and they will presently fancy themselves in the Quire, with their Singing-Boys
about them; and it is ten to one but they can find Organs too, and other Musical
Instruments: they will think they can presently thence confute you, even tho they
can find no fair Medium for an Argument. But this is a Phenomenon that is
easily resolved into a strong prepossest imagination.

Persons may if they please assert, that when our Blessed Savior sang a Hymn
or Psalm after his first Institution of the Holy Communion, Mat. 26. 30.
he divided his Disciples for the greater Advantage, putting six on one side,
and six on the other, giving them their parts to sing Antiphonally, while he
himself was the Praecentor; for my part, I should put them off with a
compassionate Smile, as not thinking the matter would bear an Argument. If they
at the same time pretend that Paul and Silas, who sang Praises unto God in the
Stocks, sang also like Choristers, rebounding their Parts from one to the other,
I Acts 16. 25.
would not bear hard upon them; it is pity methinks they should be envied the
Pleasure of their profound Discoveries. When they urge St. Paul's Authority, I
am not, I must confess, much moved: For tho I know he charges the Ephesians to
speak to themselves, in Psalms and Hymns and spiritual Songs, singing and
making Melody in Ephesians. 5. 19.
their Hearts to the Lord; and the Colossians to teach and admonish one another
in Psalms and Hymns, etc. yet I cannot see but this charge of Col. 3. 16.
his may be fully complied with, without any alternate singing after the manner
of the Quire. Baronius indeed informs us, that the Apostle here prescribes the
Form of Ecclesiastical singing: But I Ad An. 60. Number. 24.
think so important a matter needs better vouchers. Christians speak to
themselves, and admonish one another in Psalms and Hymns sufficiently, by
devout Psalmody in their Church Assemblies and Private Families, while they
thereby warm their own Hearts, and quicken and excite each other by their
common Ardour. But for singing alternately and by turns, I can see nothing of
it without Spectacles, which I am not fond of using for fear they should spoil
my Eyes.

The most plausible Scripture-Allegation they produce is from the Book of the
Revelation; where the Apostle represents the four Beasts that were about the
Throne above, as crying out incessantly, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty,
etc. which they strengthen Rev. 4. 8, etc. Isa. 6. 3.
by a parallel Passage in the Prophet Isaiah, who brings them in as crying so
one to another; to which cry of the Beasts, the 24 Elders give a sort of an
Antiphonal Answer, saying: Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive Glory, and
Honor, and Power, etc. But we must have a better Key to the Prophetic Visions
than has yet bin found, before we can warrantably argue from them in dubious
matters. I cannot find but the Apocalypse is yet a Sealed Book, notwithstanding
the great Labor and Pains of so many scores of Commentators to open and unfold
it: who, as far as I can discern, know better how to overthrow one another
Schemes and Hypotheses, than how to six with any certainty when they have done.
But as to the matter in hand, it is no way needful to labor for an Answer. The
Passage in Isaiah plainly refers to the Ancient Temple-Worship, which cannot be
admitted a Precedent for Christian Practice, till better proof is brought, that
it was designed, and is fit so to be, than is as yet to be met with. And it is
withal generally agreed, that the Images in the Apocalyptic Visions are fetched
from the Law, and not from the Gospel: consequently what in them relates to
Divine Worship, refers to the Jewish and not the Christian Mode of it: which
takes away the force of any Argument that might hence be drawn, with reference
to the practice of the Apostles or their Contemporaties, as to the using any
alternate Singing in their public Assemblies.

But if what is wanting in Scripture Proof, could be made up by Authentic
Primitive Records, I should be silent. For tho I cannot fall in with those who
represent all the Ancients as Giants, and all Moderns as Dwarfs, and confine
Sense, Learning and Piety, to former Times, yet I have a just Veneration for
Antiquity; and cannot particularly for bear having a great regard to the
Sentiments and Practice of the Primitive Christians. But the worst of it is,
many of the Allegations with reference to the matter in hand, out of the early
Ages of the Church, run in so visionary a strain, that it requires more
Credulity than I am master of, to lay any stress upon them: and as for the
rest, they are liable to so many Objections, that I see not how they can amount
to any thing like sufficient Evidence.

I have indeed read, that both the Apostolic College, and a Detachment from
the Celestial Hierarchy, made up the Quire at the Celebration of the Funerals
of the Blessed Virgin, the Mother of our Lord; whose remains with a mournful
Ditty both of Angels and Apostles were deposited in Gethsemane, where the
Angels afterward continued singing for three whole days together: which comes
from no meaner an Author, than the famous John of Damascus; who I find was a
great Patron of Image Worship, and Jann. Damascen. Sermon. 2. de Dorm. Deiparae.
therefore so much in favor with the Blessed Virgin, that when his Hand was
cut off, 'twas through her Intercession miraculously joined to his Body again.
And (tho my Author informs me not, yet) I suppose this might be the hand which
afterward in a way of Gratitude, signalized it self by committing to Writing,
and conveying to Posterity, the foregoing Account of the Funeral Solemnity of
his great Benefactrix. An admirable Story this to support the Quire! what pity
'twas it remained so long unknown! Had it bin published to the World four or
five hundred years sooner, it might have done good Service, and effectually
silenced all Objections against the Cathedral way: but having his kept secret
730 Years, it loses its force, and all that I can say is, Fides sit penes
Authorem. Let him look to the truth of it. The same Author elsewhere very
gravely relates a pleasant Passage concerning the Original of the famous
Ancient Hymn called the Trisagion: The Story is this: In the time of Proclus
the Archbishop, the People De Fide Orthodoxa, Lib. 3. cap. 10.
of Constantinople were making solemn Supplications on the account of some
portentous Signs, which had a threatening Aspect While they were full of Concern
and Horror, a Boy being snatched from amongst them, was taught by the Angels to
sing that celebrated Hymn, which ran thus; (...). i. e. Holy God, Holy and
Strong, Holy and Immortal, Hare mercy upon us. The Boy when returned, related
what he had bin taught by his Celestial Masters, and instructed the Multitude,
who freely sang after him, and so averted the Judgments which threatened them.
But such sort of Narratives are not food for my Understanding, with how
confident an Air soever they are vented; tho for any thing I know there may be
some in the World, to whom such a Passage as this may sufficiently evince the
Jus Divinum of Singing-Boys.

But to be as grave as the matter will allow me, I find it positively asserted,
and that a great many Ages ago, that the Church-Pomp had its first rise from
Heaven: For Ignatius the third Bishop of Antioch Socrat. Eccl. Hist. Lib. 6.
Cap. 8.
in Syria, after the Apostle Peter, who also conversed familiarly with the
Apostles, saw the Blessed Spirits above, upon a certain time, singing Hymns to
the Sacred Trinity alternately; and delivered to his Church that way of
Singing, which he in a Vision had observed the Angels using: which Tradition
was afterward spread to all the Churches. These are the words of as Ancient an
Author as Socrates the Church-Historian. Nicephorus Lib. 13. c. 8.
gives the same account of the Original of Alternate Singing. So also does
George of Alexandria, in the Life of St. Chrysostom, Amalarius, De Eccl. Off.
Lib. 4. Cap. 7.
Walafridus Strabo, De Rebus Eccl. Chapter 25.
and sundry others. The Great Baronius Ad An. 60. N. 24.
joins this Angelick Vision of Ignatius, with that of the Prophet Isaiah
forementioned, and then triumphs in the fullness of his Proof. The learned Dr.
Beveridge Cod. Can. Eccl. Prim. Vind. ac Illust. L. 3. c. 5.. 8.
also makes mention of this Vision, in such a way as makes it plainly appear
that he lays a stress upon it, and looks upon his Cause as concerned in it: and
so did Dr. Hammond In his View of the Directory or Vindication of the Liturgy,
etc.
before him. But Dr. Comber In his Original and Use ^f Liturgies, 80. p. 27.
openly espouses and defends it: I know (says he) some take exceptions at the
Vision of Angels, from whom he is said to learn this Method; but let it be
noted, that this was an Age of Miracles, and that the Holy-Scripture represents
the glorious Seraphims singing in this alternate manner: So that it is not
unlikely that so great a Saint and Martyr might have such a Vision. Do but
observe how fond these Men are of Visions! It Is pity but they should have their
fill of them: Let them turn to the Golden Legend, and they will find a thousand as
pretty Tales as this. But in Answer to Dr. Comber, I reply, it is beyond all
question that Ignatius lived in an Age of Miracles: but that God by miraculous
Visions, after the Apostles decease, settled any thing of public Concern in
the Church, as to which they had given no direction, is too dangerous a Notion
to be admitted among Articles of Faith: the Apostolical Commission was large
and full; they were to fix the Church upon a stable bottom, both as to Doctrine
and Practice; and to provide for the safe propagating Christianity to after
Ages. Had they instituted any Artificial Singing like that of our Cathedrals in
worshipping God, they might have bin safely appealed to about it, their
Commission would have born them out, there needed no Visions to have
established and made way for it: But supposing them to have bin altogether
silent, to go to supply their defects by after Visions, opens a door to great
Extravagancies, and gives scope for the introduction of the weakest Dotages,
should but any have the Confidence to ascribe them to a divine Original.
Ignatius was indeed a great Saint, and famous Martyr; but it does not thence
follow that he must have such a Vision: Many a great Man has had those things
fathered upon him, of which (could he have foreseen them) he would have discovered
his abhorrence. If this Story prove a Fiction, it reflects not upon Ignatius.
Socrates is most bound to answer for it; for he first reports it: and he, if we
have any regard to the Opinion of the great Photius, was not very accurate in
his Notions, and may therefore very well be supposed weakly to Cod. 28.
have taken the matter upon trust from others, without canvassing the truth of
the Fact. Withal, it is observable that he first started the Notion of this
Vision in the year of Christ 440, above 300 years after Ignatius's Death, which
alone makes it very suspicious, and weakens the Credit of it, there being no
mention made of it by any of the Writers who went before him. The Doctor indeed
gently touches upon the silence of Theodoret, (who was the elder
Church-Historian of the two) and endeavors to excuse it; saying it might
proceed from his taking it for granted, and supposing it was generally owned
and known. But what room is there for such a supposition, when the silence is
so general? How often do our antientest Historians relate*things less material,
as generally known as this could be? Why then should so famous a Vision, of
such importance, be overlooked by all of them but Socrates, had they either
heard of it, or thought it worth inserting? Why particularly should Eusebius be
silent, who first collected the scattered Fragments of Church History? His
Diligence was such, that so remarkable a Passage as this could hardly have
escaped him; and such was his readiness to put together, whatsoever he met with
that had any appearance of Antiquity, that had he heard of it he would scarce
have baulkt it. His silence alone (to one that knows the Man) is a sufficient
Argument, that he had no notice of this Vision: if so, how could it be so
generally owned and known as the Doctor supposes?

I Would even advise our Cathedralists therefore to be content to ascribe their
admired Service to a lower Original, and not to soar so high; to let the Angels
alone, and to own it had its rise from this Earth, where it has more Admirers
than I doubt it has in the upper Regions. Here we shall stand upon a level,
and may better see our way. I Will give you a brief view of their most applauded
Humane Authorities, as I find them produced by their most celebrated Writers.

They in the first place mightily boast of the Egyptian Therapeute, whose
Manners and Customs are largely described by Philo, who among a great many
other peculiarities, gives this Account of them: De vita contemplat.
That they had a Quire of two sides, singing alternately; so that when one had
begun to sing, the rest answered him, by repeating the ends of the Verses, in
imitation of those at the Red Sea. Eusebius will needs have these Therapeutae
to have bin Christians, and the Disciples of Hist. Eccles. Lib. 2. cap. 16, 17.
St. Mark, who preached the Gospel among the Egyptians. In them therefore, and
their Practice, both Cardinal Baronius, and the three forementioned Doctors,
Hammond, Beveridge and Comber, think they meet with an early authentic Proof
of the Antiquity of the Cathedral way: The Narrative wherein this occurs, being
written by Philo within 60 Years after the Birth of our Savior. Now I Will
suppose (tho I can as yet see no necessity to grant it) that these People did
make a Christian Profession, yes am I to seek for a Proof that their Practice
was binding; it being an evident revival of Judaism. The utmost this matter on
amount to is this: that there were in Philo's time a numerous party in and
about Alexandria, of the Converts of St. Mark, who mixed Judaism and
Christianity together. This is not my Notion, but Sozomen's the Historian; and
I Will give it you in his words: speaking of Philo's Therapeutae he declares,
that he looks upon him as thereby Soz. Hist. Eccl. Lib. 1. cap. 12.
meaning those in his Days who of Hebrews were become Christians, who yet lived
after the Jewish manner, and observed their Rites. This need not seem strange
to any that know that there was in the Primitive Church, a sort of People
called Nazarenes or Nazarites; who joined Christ and Moses, the Law and Gospel,
Baptism and Circumcision together. We have early intimations of such an
inclination, in St. Luke's Compendium of Church History: and Acts 15. 1, 8.
those who have bin at all conversant with the Accounts given of aftertimes,
cannot but observe how mightily this inclination prevailed among those Hebrews
who embraced the Principles of the Christian Faith, who were very unwilling to
be dissuaded from their old Customs and Observances; of which the pompous way
of their Temple-Worship was none of the least beloved, or least considerable.
Supposing these People Christians of this stamp, (and it is plain by the whole
Series of Philo's Discourse, and Eusebius's after him, which give an Account of
so many instances of plain Judaism retained amongst them, that they could be of
no other) I cannot see how much can be gained by them. For it can no more be
groundedly concluded from their Practice, that the Antiphonal way of Singing
was usual in public Christian Worship in those days, or that the way of the
Ancient Temple was to be retained in Christian Churches; than it can from the
Custom of a few Judaizers be inferred, that Circumcision was to be a standing
Institution even under Christianity, and a discriminating badg as formerly. But
after all, it is very justly questionable, whether or no these People were
Christians even of this sortment. Scaliger asserts, (and brings a great many
Arguments to prove) De Emend. Temp. Lib. 6. Miscel. l. 1. c. 3. Panst. Cath. T.
3. L. 20. c. 22.. 68, 69, 70. etc.
that they were Essenes. Our Countryman Nicolas Fuller is of the same Judgment.
The great Oracle of the French Churches, the learned Chamier, proves the same
largely. And Valesius also (who was of the opposite Communion) tho he does not
think them Essenes, yet in his Notes upon this part of Eusebius, by diverse
Arguments proves that they were not Christians, and the like does Dr. Cave:
whose Judgment, where it thwarts so many Dons of the Church, is with me as
valuable as any Man's. Another In his Life of St. Mark.
ingenious Person of our own Nation also, who takes a great Tho. Bruno his
Dissert. de Therapeut. adv. H. Vales.
deal of pains to confute Valesius, and is very zealous for having them to be
Christians, yet can make no more of them than converted Essenes, owning that
they still retained their old Rites and Customs. If all this weakens not the
force of this Allegation, 'twould to me be very strange: it has not the face
of an Argument left; for either these People were Christians, or mere Jews.
Take which side you will, I am very indifferent; they are unfit Precedents for
our Practice. If they were mere Jews, of the Sect of the Essenes, (as is
asserted by sundry of the Learned) how are we concerned in them? What have we
to do with them? Which way can they satisfy us as to the Practice of the
Christian Church? If they were Christians, they were but Judaizers: who
corrupted our Religion by sundry unlawful and improper mixtures; were bitter
enemies of the Converted Gentiles, and therefore very unfit Persons to be our
Precedents. Their Practice should rather be used as a Caution to us, than urged
as an Example for us to imitate.

Another Testimony I meet with commonly produced by the Idolizers of the
Cathedral way, to prove its Antiquity, is a Passage in an Epistle of the
younger Pliny to the Emperor Trajan, about the Primitive Christians; wherein
(among other things) he C. Plin. Epist. Lib. 10. Ep. 94.
tells him, it was customary with them to meet together on a certain day before
it was light, and sing together an Hymn to Christ as God: which he thus
expresses; Carmenque Christo quasi Deo, dicere secum invicem; the meaning
whereof they will have to be this, that they sang alternately, and by turns,
after the manner of the Quire. But methinks it is a little odd and
unaccountable, that a Heathen should first take notice of this as a common
Custom of the Christians, and that their own Writers for a long time after
should pass it over silently, even when they were giving an Account of what
related to their Worship, and often had so fair an Occasion to mention it. But
waving this, I Will give you an instance of unfair dealing, in that great Patron
of the Quire, the learned Dr. Comber. Of Liturgies, Oct. p. 23.
He urging this Passage of Pliny against his Antagonist, draws an Argument from
the Phrase Carmen Dicere, in proof of the Hymns being in a set form of words,
wherein I verily believe he has the right of his side. To back his Assertion,
he produces the Anthority of the famous old Gerard Vossius; and presently after
thus argues: Since it was sung alternately, it is certain it must be a
prescribed Vossii Comment. in Ep. Plinii de Christianis.
Form; when yet he overlooks what follows but a Leaf or two after in Vossius,
when he is opening the sense of Pliny's secum invicem; which he explains not by
any thing of an alternation (which the Doctor thought fit to take for granted)
but represents this as its meaning; that the Priest did not sing alone, but
others also that joined in Divine Worship, did by Singing stir up and quicken
one another. So easy it is for a Man to take or leave what he apprehends is for
or against him.

But two Considerations, so far as I can perceive, may sufficiently clear this
Passage of Pliny, to such as are willing to receive satisfaction. First, the
signification of the word invicem is not universally the same. I pretend not to
any great accuracy in Criticism; but as far as my insight into the Roman Tongue
will help me to discern, am of Opinion, that the sense of this Particle varies,
according as it stands in Conjunction. For as it sometimes signifies, one after
another, and by course; so does it at other times, again; and in other Cases it
implies no more than either a joint consent in Action, or an accidental
coincidence of Events. Let Laurentius Valla here be consulted, and others of
the like Stamp, if there De Linguae Lat. Elegantia, l. 2. c. 59.
be leisure and inclination. The most that can fairly be made of secum invicem,
in the Passage referred to, is this; that they sang together, and with one
consent. And therefore commend me to Dr. In his Introduction to Vol. 1. of the
Live, of the Primitive Fathers.
Cave, who tho no enemy to the Quire, yet was not for supporting it by a
quibbling Criticism, but fairly renders this Passage thus: they were wont upon
a set solemn Day, to meet together before Sun rise, and to sing among
themselves an Hymn to Christ, as the God whom they worshipped.

A second thing to be noted is this, That the Roman Priests used to sing alone
in their most sacred Solemnities; none bearing a part in the Service but
themselves: the Carmen Saliare (which was the most ancient and celebrated of
any) was wont to be sung by the Priests of Mars in their part colored Coats,
while Rosini Antiq. Romans l. 3. c. 20
they were dancing about the Forum; none joining with them in the Song but
those of the Fraternity. The case was the same in their other Songs of the same
Nature. Because therefore the Roman Priests were the only Singers in their
Sacred Worship, did Pliny think it strange to hear that among the Christians
all bore a part, and all the Assembly with joint Consent and Harmony sang their
Hymn? And yet now alas among Christians (pretending to be of the best Reformed
Church in the World) do we find a body of Men that are grown weary of letting
all God's Worshippers bear a part in his Praise, and are better pleased with
the Heathen Custom, of confining it barely to the Priestly Fraternity, and
their Attendants. And thus the World runs round.

The next Writer that comes in our way, produced in proof of the Antiquity of
the Cathedral Service, by its Patrons and Votaries, is Tertullian; who
flourished about the Year of Christ 190, in whom there occurs this Passage;
What shall she sing to her Husband, ^^tull. ad ^^^orem, L. 2. 6.
or her Husband to her? I could not, I confess, forbear smiling to find Dr.
Comber, when speaking of Tertullian, so gravely asserting that it appears from
him that they then sang Psalms and ^^scourse of ^^turgies, p.
Hymns alternately; and referring in the Margin only to this poor Passage. I am
no great admirer of such sort of Proof; however shall scan it, and see what it
amounts to: The aim of Tertullian, in that second Book to his Wife, was to
admonish her (supposing that she survived him) to take heed of marrying a
Gentile. He urges therefore upon her the Apostle's charge, to marry in the
Lord, which believing Women could not be said to do, who linked themselves with
Heathens. He tells her that those who engaged in such Marriages were to be
debarred the Privilege of Christian Society; for that they could not with any
convenience answer the demands of Christian Discipline, nor forbear exposing
Divine things to contempt; nor avoid either the being infected with some
idolatrous Leaven, or at least being diverted from those Sacred Engagements
that became Christians. Among these he reckons singing the Praises of God,
which is most undoubtedly a necessary Duty, and very advantageous, whether it
be performed in Public or Private. Now says Tertullian, how can a Man and Wife
of such opposite Principles, as are those of Heathens and Christians, which run
as wide as Heaven and Earth, join together in that Divine Employment? Let the
Man set himself to sing, and he will presently vent what the Wife abhors, and
would not join with him in for all the World: Let the Wife on the other side
attempt to sing the Christian Psalms and Hymns, and the Husband will storm,
because he will find contempt poured on the Objects of his Veneration. How can
there be any compliance with the forementioned Charge of St. Paul, of Teaching
and Admonishing one another in Psalms and Hymns, etc. which as it should be
extended to all that are joined in any thing of a Religious Society, so comes
with a special force on such as are joined together in so near a Relation, as
that of Husband and Wife? But alas, so far are they from being capable of any
Harmony in such an Engagement, that any attempts toward it would be likely to
issue in Strife and Variance, and wretched Confusion. This Passage of
Tertullian thus taken, runs smooth and even; is free from Difficulties, and
needs no force, and is very apposite, and much to the purpose. But on the other
side, it must be strained and forced, before it can be pretended to do the
Quire any Service; and after all is not very pertinent. In order to the making
way for any other Gloss, it must be supposed that it is either public or
private Singing between Husband and Wife, that is here intended; and either
supposition has its difficulties. If public Singing be here referred to, and
that in the alternate manner; then must it be supposed that there was a
particular Address of the Husband to the Wife, and Wife to the Husband, during
the Service in Christian Assemblies, which so unsuitable a Conjunction as he was
speaking of would prevent: But this were to assert what could not be proved,
what we have no where any hint of, and that little to the service of the Cause
to be befriended; by reason it would bring in a set of Women-Singers into the
Quire, which would not be much for its Reputation. On the other hand; if it
were private Singing that Tertullian meant, (which seems much the most likely)
then, if their not being able to sing together, or to sing to each other upon
occasion, for Excitation, or Exhilaration, will not satisfy as the sense, but an
Argument must hence be drawn for the public Use of the Cathedral way in those
days, in order to its having any force, it must be supposed that every Man kept
a Quire in his House, to train up his Children and Servants for Choristers for
the Benefit of the Public, and so divided them at the time of Worship into two
opposite sides, himself heading one, and his Wife the other: which is so large
and wild a Supposition, that by virtue of the same Figure, I dare undertake any
where almost to fetch Arguments for Proof, in whatsoever Cause I espouse.

These are the principal Authorities, to prove the Use of the Cathedral way in
the three first Centuries, that are produced by its most sensible Patrons: But
were I concerned with them, I must declare I should be ashamed to claim so
great Antiquity, if I could not better prove my Title. However there are
others, who are no small Friends to the Cause, who run yet lower, and urge the
Apostolical Constitutions; wherein (under the prescribed Order of Divine
Worship) it is required, that after the two Lessons, one should sing David 's
Hymns or Psalms, and the People should fall Apost. Constit. l. 2. c. 57.
in with the extremes or ends of the Verses. And this would be to the purpose
indeed, were those Constitutions Authentic; but that they are so, is yet to be
proved. Du Pin (tho a Romanist) is by evidence of Fact forced to declare the
Author of them an Impostor. For that tho he attempts to pass for Clement, the
Disciple of the Apostles, he yet ascribes to them all in common, and each in
particular, Ou Pin Bibli^th. des Autheurs Ecclesiastiqu. Tom. 1. page 15.
sundry regulations no way agreeing to the Apostles; as concerning Churches
built in the Form of Temples, Liturgies, the Ordination of Deacons, and
Deaconesses; the Benediction of Oil and Water, and the like; which he declares
he is satisfied were unknown in those early days. And afterward he charges them
with being infected with the Arian, ^d. page 31.
and sundry other Errors; gives it as his Judgment that they did not appear
till the 4th Century; and that they were often reformed; changed, and augmented
afterward, according to the different Customs of Times and Countries.
Cottelerius also declares he is far from thinking Cottel. Jud. de Constable. Apost.
them Apostolical; and that he looks upon them as wretchedly interpolated,
since they became first extant. Nay even Dr. Beveridge owns the same: and tho
he discovers a much greater value for Jud. de Canon. Apostol. c. 17.
those supposititious Writings, than any unprejudiced Person could think they
deserve; yet freely declares they are so sadly mangled, that they are quite
different from what they were when they first appeared in the World. But I have
often wondered in my own Mind, why the Doctor thinks L' Arroque unworthy of a
Reply, who in his Remarks Observationes in Annot. Beveregii in Can. S. Apost.
upon him has sufficiently evidenced his antedating them, when he so
vehemently contends for their being extant before the Council of Nice. He that
at this time of the day lays any stress upon these spurious Constitutions is
not to be argued with: the like I say as to Dionysius the Areopagite of the
Hierarchy of the Church, and other such Authors, out of whom Passages of the
like nature are often cited; they are so generally esteemed spurious by all
that have any gust of Antiquity, and are so far from deserving regard, that
they are not worth the mentioning.

And now, Sir, let us consider how far we have advanced. It Is required by all
the Rules of Reasoning, that he that affirms any thing dubious, should give
good Proof of it before he can expect to gain credit to his Assertion. Those
therefore who so positively affirm the Use of the Cathedral way of Worship, in
the three first Centuries, must produce good Evidence; and if their proof be
not cogent, there are good Grounds for a denial. The strongest Evidences that
usually are produced, have bin considered and weighed; and (I think I may
without Vanity say) proved weak and insufficient. Till therefore they either
bring better, or better strengthen and support these, they cannot reasonably
refuse to allow us to withhold our Assent. The Negative is not in any Case
equally capable of Proof with the Affirmative, supposing it true; and yet
sometimes may be attended with strong Probabilities, the force of which is not
easily avoided. And I think I am not destitute of Reason to assert that this is
the case in the present Argument. For tho there is no possibility of
demonstrating that the Cathedral Service was not so Ancient as is pretended, to
those who are unwilling to be convinced; yet are there sundry things that make
it probable, that the Antiquity ascribed to it, is but imaginary and
supposititious. And here I should desire that three things were considered by
those who are open to Light.

First, The State of the Church in the three first Centuries is not to be
forgotten. Christianity was then traduced, contemned, malign'd, and persecuted,
with the utmost Subtilty and Malice, Rage and Violence. The great work of its
Votaries, was to defend its Principles by the strength of their Writings; to
wipe off its Reproach by the Holiness of their Lives; and to bear Testimony to
its Truth and Divinity, by their cheerful Sufferings. The Circumstances of
Christians were in those early days so presling; so great were the hazards they
daily ran, and the fatigues whereto they were exposed, that it is scarce
conceivable they should have inclination, leisure, or opportunity, to introduce
so pompous a Worship as that of our Cathedrals. The privacy of their Meetings
would not allow of any such Magnificence, nor their strait Confinements of such
Art and State. The whole contrivance of that sort of Service shows it to be the
work of Men at ease, and not under the Hatches, as it is well known Christians
generally were before the days of Constantine.

Secondly, The silence of those Primitive Writers who would have bin most
likely to have mentioned it, is not to be overlooked. Justin Martyr, in his
particular Account of the Christian Worship in his time, mentions their
praising God heartily and cheerfully, In Apologia secunda.
but gives not the least intimation of any Pomp or Art in that part of the
Service. Irenaeus, Clemens of Alexandria, and Origin are altogether silent as
to the Cathedral Service. The diligent and industrious Dr. Comber (who takes
all Occasions, jointly with Liturgies, to recommend alternate Singing after the
manner of the Quire, as of equal Antiquity) would hardly have overlooked it,
could he have met with any thing in them to the purpose. Tertullian often
mentions the singing of Psalms in the Lord's Days Solemnities, in the public
Assemblies: but not a Tertul. de Anima cap. 9. and Apolog. c. 2. etcap. 39.
word is produced from him as to the Alternate way, saving the forementioned
Passage of his, which will not much serve the Cause. The like may be said as to
others their Contemporaries. Now what Account can be given of this general
Silence, were the Cathedral Service known in those early Ages? It cannot be said
they concealed it for the same reason as they did many of their Sacred
Mysteries; for it would not hold in this case. What they did keep secret, and
upon reserve, was with a design to heighten Veneration and prevent Contempt;
(tho I must confess that is an Artifice of which I should not be over fond) But
how the concealing this Pompous sort of Service could be conceived likely to
guard against dislike and contempt, I cannot imagine: its airiness, and
gaudiness, and fancifulness, would have bin much more likely to have procured
it Respect and Approbation among both the ceremonious Jews, and superstitious
Gentiles, supposing it had bin generally known and published. Their Ignorance
of it, and utter unacquaintedness with it, will to any one who fairly considers
Circumstances, appear a much more probable Cause of their silence concerning it.

Thirdly, The solemn Dedication of Churches in those Halcyon days, which
attended the Emperor Constantine's embracing the Christian Faith, deserves also
a Remark. To have the Emperor of their side, was a surprising Blessing to the
poor Christians, who had gone through so many Persecutions: they hardly knew
how to contain themselves for Joy, being as it were on a sudden raised from the
Dead. They had now an Opportunity of showing themselves to the World to the
best Advantage, and they were not backward to improve it. Among other
particulars, they dedicated their public Churches in all parts with great
Joyfulness and Festivity; nothing was wanting that could be thought of that
might add to the Pomp and Magnificence of those Solemnities: and had any such
sort of Singing as that of the Quire, bin then ever heard of or used among
Christians, we have a great deal of reason to suppose we should have met with
it upon those Occasions; or that if it was omitted in one place, it would have
bin found in another: whereas there appears not the least footstep of any such
thing to be traced. Eusebius is here very large in his Accounts. In the general
he tells us that all with one Soul, and one Hist. Eccles. lib. 10. cap. 3.
Consent, sang Hymns to God; loudly echoed his Praise in Psalms; heard the
other divinely inspired Writings, and received the Symbols of our Redeemer's
Passion; and that the several Presidents of the Churches made Panegyrical
Orations, with all the Eloquence of Joy whereof they were capable. But he gives
not the least hint of any Antiphonal Singing, in parts, and by turns, with
Musical Symphony, in a Theatrical way. The Oration at the Dedication of the
Church of Cap. 4.
Tire, gives an Account of the Form and Parts of that Edifice (which were very
different from what had before bin usual among Christians) and sundry other
particularities: but makes not the least mention of any thing like our
Cathedral Service, as then in use; for which there was scope sufficient. At the
Dedication of the Church at Jerusalem, there was (by virtue of Constantine's
Letter) Eus. de Vit. Constant. l. 4. c. 43, 44, 45.
a Convention of about sixty Bishops, who were ordered upon this Occasion to
adjourn thither from the City of Tire; where they were met in Council about the
Affair of the great Athanasius. The Ceremonies used upon that occasion were
peculiarly pompous, and a famous Oration was made by Eusebius, which is yet
extant at the close of his Ecclesiastical History: But still there is no mention
of that sort of Service, which has so engrossed the Affections of our
Cathedralists. Finally, The same Author gives us also a large Account Cap. 70,
71.
of the Funerals of this Famous first Christian Emperor, tells us of the
Reception of his Corpse by the Clergy in a body, at the Church of the Apostles;
takes notice of the mournfulness of the Solemnity, their sorrowful Praying on
that Occasion, and the Praises that were universally given to the Deceased; but
is altogether silent as to any such Ceremonies, as are in our Days usual, when
the Relics of Persons of Note and Eminence are deposited in our Cathedrals.
Which Considerations put together, make it highly probable that the Cathedral
Service came not into the Church, till after Constantine left the World; which
was in the 337th Year of Christ.

Matters being thus far cleared, I Will now proceed to give you the best Account
I am able, of the true Rise of that way of Worship, which our Cathedralists so
much extol; and in comparison whereof they reckon the Worship of those who
statedly wait on God like honest Christians in their Parish Churches, to be
poor, mean, and beggarly. I Will omit no material Circumstances I have met with
in the narrow compass of my Reading, which may either seem to make for their
Cause, or help to afford any Light; and make a few Reflections as I go along,
that I may not seem heavy, flat and tedious.

After all the stir that has bin made, the first certain hint that can be
fixed on in Ecclesiastical Antiquity, of Cathedral Chanting, is in the Church
of Antioch, during the Administration of Leontius, who was advanced to that See
A. C. 347. and continued in it till the Year 356. in which interval of time,
Flavianus (who was afterward himself advanced to this See) and Diodorus
(afterward Bishop of Tarsus) divided the Quire into two Parts, and made them
sing the Psalms of David alternately: which Custom (says Theodoret) began
first at Antioch, and thence spread it self to other places; and reached even
to the ends of the World. Leontius the Bishop Theod. Hist. Eccl. Lib. 2. cap.
24.
was an Arian, and subtly undermined the Nicene Faith; of which Flavianus and
Diodorus set up for zealous Defenders. They were both engaged in a Monastic
Life, and in great repute for Piety; and therefore although (as the Historian
observes) they were as yet mere Laymen, and not in Orders, yet they had a great
many Followers; and their way of Antiphonal Singing, which they set up in
separate Assemblies, was generally so taking, that they drew all the People
from Leontius their Bishop, who thereupon desired them to bring their new
fashion Service into the Church. So that this so much admired Service, was
first set on foot in order to the enticing People from the Arians, to please
the Mob, and keep them from running after those by whom they would be seduced. But
for my part I must declare I am rather for leaving those Arts and Shifts to
persons of Sectarian Principles: Let Truth make its own way, I cannot apprehend
it any great Service to it, to gain it Proselytes by any such enticing Methods.
And I very much question, whether those who are attracted merely by the
pompousness of Worship, are like to prove any great Credit to the party they
fall in with. However, thus stands Fact. At Antioch where Persons were first
called Christians, were Christians first taught to turn the Church into a
Stage. There was that way of Singing first introduced, which has turned the
Worship of God into an artificial contrivance; and which, should it universally
prevail, would transform Religion into mere Mechanism. Of this Flavianus was
the great occasion. A Man who stands branded in Ecclesiastic History, for the
breach of a most solemn Oath, whereby Sozom. Hist. Eccl. Lib. 7. cap. 3. c. 11.
(for the preventing a perpetual Schism in the Church of Antioch) he and five
more stood bound, not to covet the Bishopric of that See, and not to accept it
although elected, while Paulinus and Meletius were alive: Notwithstanding which
Oath, he after the Death of Meletius, in opposition to Paulinus, (who yet
survived) readily accepted the Bishopric when 'twas offered him: for which
notorious Perjury, he was deservedly detested by all the Western Bishops. I
know it is pleaded on his behalf, that he herein acted with the Advice and
Approbation of a Synod of the Bishops of the East, who unanimously elected him,
when they were met together in Council at Constantinople. But that only proves
that those who possessed the chief Dignities of the Church, began betimes to act
more out of Interest than a Principle of Conscience, (of which there are alas
but too many instances) but proves not the lawfulness of the Fact. Our
Cathedralists have no great Cause to be proud of their Founder, who in so
scandalous a manner mounted the Episcopal Throne. However, tho he was loose in
his Morals, yet he was very fond of Ceremonials: an unhappy Conjunction! too
often to be met with in every Age! He seems to have reckoned his Anthems a sort
of Magical Charms, proper to appease both God and Man. We meet with a
remarkable instance of his reliance upon their Virtue, when he was sent as a
public Agent to the Emperor Theodosius. The Case was this: The City of Antioch
had by a popular Sedition incurred the Emperor's Displeasure, and was afraid of
the consequences. Whereupon Flavianus was by common Consent, deputed as their
Mediator with him, to pacify Sozom. Hist. Eccl. l. 7. c. 23.
his Anger, and implore their Pardon. He undertakes the Business, and thinking
nothing could be more softning than his beloved Church-Musick, ordered the
usual Service to be sung before the Emperor at his Table, and for once makes a
Quire of the Imperial Dining Room. The Design succeeded, the Emperor took Pity,
he wept most tenderly, and the City was received into Favor. Behold here an
instance of the charming Power of the Cathedral Service! How could the
Antiochians forbear having a mighty Esteem and Reverence for their late
Invention, which they found had such a melting Virtue! How easily were they
persuaded that it was likely to be as moving to God, as they found it had bin
to Man! What wonder then, that this City was so fond of Alternate Singing! No
where do we hear so much of it as there. In the days of the Emperor Julian,
they conveyed the Corpse of St. Babylas the Martyr, from Daphne (where the
Demon could not bear his Neighborhood) and carried it through their Socrat.
Eccl. Hist. l. 3. c. 18. Theod. lib. 3. c. 10.
City in Triumph, singing all the way they went with great Joy, after the
manner of the Quire; the whole Company joining in this response, at every
Period, Confounded be all they that worship Graven Images. The same sort of
Reception they gave also in the Reign of Theodosius, to the Corpse of their
Bishop Meletius, which Soz. Hist. Eccl. l. 7. c. 10.
was deposited near that of St. Babylas. And many other ways did they show
their fondness of it. The prevalence of Antiphonal Singing in such a City as
Antioch, which was the Metropolis of Syria, a place of great resort, and of a
mighty Influence, much furthered its spreading in other Parts.

Between the year of Christ 360, and 370, there was a Council held in the City
of Laodicea, upon what Occasion is not now certainly known. Among other things
'twas then determined, that Council. Laod. Can. 15.
there should be Canonical Singers, and that they should sing out of Written
Books, and that none else should sing in the Church. Who had the framing of
these Canons, and what Bishops met in this Council, I cannot find out; but meet
with this Reason assigned by Baronius, for this particular Canon about Singers:
because (says he) when Baron. ad An. 60. N. 28.
the People and Clergy sang promiscuously, through the unskilfulness of the
Singers it often fell out, that by the disorderly sound of Voices, the diversity
marred that harmonious Singing, which was congruous to the Churches Dignity:
therefore it was prohibited the People in the Church; and ordered that none
should sing, but those unto whom this Work was assigned. Zonaras also intimates
as much, telling us that these Canonical Singers were reckoned a part of the
Clergy. But Balsamon (who in Dr. Cave's Judgment was the best skilled in the
Ecclesiastical Canons, of any that ever Greece produced) tells us in his Hist.
Literaria, Pars 1. p. 687.
Scholia, that before the Laodicean Council, the Laity would many times in
contempt of the Clergy, begin such Hymns and Songs in the Church as were crude
and unusual: to obviate which practice it was ordered in that Canon, that none
should begin to sing but those that were appointed, and whose Office it was:
Not but that the Laity might follow them, and sing with them in the whole
Service, which he declares was not intended to be thereby prohibited. So that
the true meaning of this celebrated Canon is no more than this, that the Clerks
in all the Churches should read the Psalms, out of a Psalm Book; and none else
should presume to begin a Hymn, or set a Tune but they. Whence it appears to me
a better Evidence of the Antiquity of Parish Clerks, than of the extent of the
Cathedral Service, on the behalf whereof it is commonly produced.

But whatever becomes of the Laodicean Canon, great boasts are made of the
Patronage of three most celebrated Names, viz. St. Basil, St. Ambrose, and St.
Chrysostom, who were all fond of the Quire; recommended, spread, and diffused
the new Mode of Service, wheresoever they had an influence, and handed it down
to Posterity with Encomiums. Be it so, must we therefore presently be
frightened out of our Wits? Are they too eminent to have their Sentiments
canvass'd, and their Actions scanned? Is a thing therefore true because they
said it, therefore good and laudable because they did it? For my part I think I
have them in a just Veneration, and yet cannot reach such a pitch of
Complaisance. I cannot be content to part with my own Eyes, for the use of other
Men's, were they ever so eminent, great or good. I find the best have so many
failures, that I cannot satisfy my self to follow any blindfold, for fear they
should lead me into a Ditch. None that are at all versed in Antiquity, can be
ignorant, that toward the latter end of the 4th Century, and the beginning of
the fifth, through the ignorance of some, the negligence of others, the
haughtiness and stiffness of others, and a spreading love of Pomp and
Magnificence, a variety of Corruptions crept into the Church, which in process
of time rose to a far greater height, than could have bin at first imagined by
those who had the greatest hand in introducing them. Witness the undue
admiration of Celibacy, the fondness of Relics and Pilgrimages, the
Invocation of Saints, the setting up Images in Churches, the overgreat
Veneration of the Cross, and Prayers for the Dead; which about this time had
their rise. Why may not the Service of the Quire, which gained so much about
this time, be of this number; when, how honest and laudable soever were the
intentions of its first Patrons and Abettors, it came by degrees to be so
managed, as to render the Divine Worship perfectly ridiculous; and would, if it
universally prevailed, bid fair for the justling real Worship out of the World?
However I cannot pass by the three Persons mentioned without a few Remarks.

As for St. Basil, he had part of his Education at Antioch; he was there made
Deacon by Meletius; was a continual Spectator of the pompous Worship of the
Quire, which was there so much in vogue; he was used to it, and it suited his
Genius, and thereupon he resolved to spread it. At the same time, being himself
a great Ascetick, mighty fond of Retirement, and full of Zeal, he set up for a
Patron of the Monastic Life, for which he was the first who fixed Laws and
Constitutions to be propagated to Posterity: but they must have much worse
thoughts of so great a Man than I can give way to, who imagine he would have
bin fond either of one or the other, could he have foreseen the Damage they would
have done to real Religion in aftertimes. It Is however observable that he was
reckoned an Innovator, and charged as an introducer of Novelties, in setting up
Monachism, and being so fond of the new way of Psalmody, and so industrious in
spreading it: He was even then forced to apologize for himself. And his Apology
(in an Epistle to the Neocaesarean Basilii Ep. 63.
Clergy, still extant) was indeed (like the Man) very warm and vehement. As for
his forming Men into a Monastic Life, he declares he was so far from reckoning
it a fault, that he thought it to be his Glory, and the great Business of his
Life: and he fetches Precedents out of Egypt and Palaestine. And as for the new
way of Psalmody, at which they were offended, he declares 'twas now become a
common practice in the Christian Church; the People rising before day, and
going to Church; where having made their Confessions and Prayers, they
proceeded to the Singing of Psalms, in which Holy Exercise, the Quire being
divided into two Parts, mutually answered one another, the Praecentor
beginning, and the rest following after. And tells them that if this were a
fault, they must blame many pious and good Men in Egypt and Libya, and Thebais;
in Palaestine, Arabia, Phaenicia and Syria, and many other places. They
objected against him, that 'twas not thus in the time of their Bishop Gregory
Thaumaturgus, for whom they had a great Veneration. He answers, that neither
were the Litanies then used known in his time. But that methinks is no
Argument, but that both that sort of Psalmody and the Litanies too, might be
novel Inventions. Withal, he accuses them of not following their admired
Gregory in other things; and therefore charges them with straining at a Gnat,
while they swallowed a Camel, in that they in the mean time made such a noise
about his Psalmody. But how could their being guilty of other faults, make them
incapable of being in the right, in their opposing the Service of the Quire as
a Novelty? Nay rather his inability to produce Evidence of the Antiquity of
that which they opposed as an Innovation, (which appears from his not having
done it) shows that they were herein in the right: and his diverting thence to
other things, looks very like his seeking for a subterfuge. After all, St.
Basil was a great Man; and yet it is well known, that tho he made so strict a
profession of Humility, and had spent so much time in learning Mortification,
he was as little able to bear a Contradiction as his Neighbors.

From him I pass to St. Ambrose, who was on a sudden translated from the Civil
Tribunal to the Episcopal Throne; and who was the first that brought the
Antiphonal way of Singing into the Western Parts, as is expressly asserted by
St. Austin, Isidore Hispalensis, Confess. l. 9. c. 7.
and sundry others. He was a considerable Man in his time, but abundantly more
so on the account of his Gravity, Simplicity, De Eccl. Off. l. 1. c. 7.
and Piety, than his Depth and Solidity: he was too great an admirer of the
Greeks, whom he followed blindfold. It has long since bin observed of him by
St. Jerome, that he often transcribes the Greek Fathers in his Writings; no
wonder therefore if he followed them in Ritual matters. He had particularly a
great Veneration for St. Basil, in imitation of whom he introduced the Service
of the Quire at Milan; of which we have this Account. When he was persecuted by
the Empress Justina, the People watched all Night in the Church; and then he
appointed that Psalms and Hymns should be sung, after the manner of the
Oriental Countries, lest the People should pine away with the tediousness of
Sorrow; and from that time forward the Custom was retained, and spread to all
the Western Parts. But I must be excused if I cannot lay so great a stress on
this honest Father's Judgment and Practice, as some others may do: for a
Visionary Inclination is with me, wherever I meet with it, a great mark of
weakness. Of this we have in him a notorious Instance, in one of the most
remarkable Passages of his Life; which relates to his Ambrosii Lit. 22.
management of the Relics of St. Gervasius, and St. Protasius; of which he
himself gives this Account: Having built a Church in the City of Milan, he was
desired to Consecrate it in the same manner as he had done the Roman Church,
(i. e. another Church that was near the Roman Gate.) He promised it, provided
he found any Relics: and thereupon got some Officers to dig about the Rails
that encompassed the Tombs of St. Felix and St. Nabor the Martyrs. Digging,
they found the Bodies of two proper Persons besprinkled with Blood, which with
great Solemnity were carried and interred in the new-built Church, after having
wrought a great many miraculous Cures. In his two Sermons which he preached
upon this Occasion, (which I Would commend to the perusal of all those who reckon
Things and Sentiments must, if Ancient, be good of course) he tells his
Hearers, that these were the Bodies of St. Gervasius, and Protasius. And tho he
did not think it necessary to acquaint them how he came to know so much, yet
St. Austin (who was at that time at Milan) tells us he had his Intelligence in
a Vision. For my part, I Am Confess. l. 9. c. 7.
clearly for plain ground, for I find Precipices dangerous. Once admit Visions
in the Case of Relics, and I see no reason why they should be refused on the
behalf of Transubstantiation, or any other Dotage. If we have a sure Word of
Prophecy, let us stick to it. Should a Man bring his Visions into the Pulpit in
our times, either in the Court, City, or University, he would at once forfeit
whatever Reputation he was master of. And why we should give a Letter of
License to an Ancient, and deny it to a Modern Preacher, I cannot imagine. In a
word, I honor the Piety of St Ambrose; yet cannot but be loath to admit him a
Precedent, where any thing dubious is under Consideration: for I am satisfied
we have many an honest Country Parson, that is able to see as far as he.

The third admired Patron is the great St. Chrysostom, concerning whom it is to
be observed, that he was born and bred at Antioch, where we have found the
Cathedral Chanting was first introduced. He was made a Deacon there by
Meletius, and afterward a Presbyter by Flavianus (the Founder of the Service)
of whom he is said to have bin a great admirer: So that he imbibed the love of
Antiphonal Singing, almost with his Mother's Milk, and was all along bred up in
the Use of it: and he must be altogether unacquainted with humane Nature, who
knows not the Force and Power of Education. When he was once advanced to the Sea of Constantinople, he soon found occasion to introduce the Antiochian
Custom. Historians relate it thus: The Arians in that City were grown very
insolent: They kept their Conventicles Socrat. l. 6. c. 8.
out of Town, but were wont upon Saturdays and Sundays, Sozom. l. 8. c. 8.
(which were constant times for the Public Assemblies) to come within the
City; and dividing themselves into Companies, they walked about the Public
Portico's, singing as they went along Hymns composed in defense of their own
Principles, one part responding to the other; adding petulant Reflections on
the Catholics. Thus they did the greatest part of the Night, and early the
next Morning they marched through the heart of the City, singing their
Antiphonal Hymns, and so went out to their own Meeting House. St. Chrysostom in
opposition to them, delivered Hymns to some of his People, to be sung in the
Night in the same manner: and that the business might be managed with the
greater Pomp and Solemnity, procured Crosses of Silver to be made at the
Empresses Charge; and ordered that they should have lighted Torches born before
them, and got Briso the Empresses own Eunuch, as Praecentor, to walk before the
Company: which was the occasion of a great Scuffle and Sedition in the City,
that issued in the utter Expulsion of the Arians. But this way of Singing thus
introduced, was (as Sozomen observes) used at Constantinople from that day
forward. Which is to me a plain Argument that it was not introduced there
before; for otherwise he would hardly have taken such particular notice of it.
However, it had not bin long there, before it was managed in so unseemly a
manner, as made the good Man who first brought it in, perfectly ashamed: For
the Singers affected such mimical Gestures, and boisterous Clamors, as turned
the Church into a mere Stage: Whereupon he with great Vehemence, Warmth, and
Gravity reproves them: Telling them that their rude Voices, which gave an
uncertain Chrysostom.
sound, rather became Theaters than the Church of God; Hom. 1. de Verb. Isaiae
1. 5. p. 128.
because they were borrowed from thence, and were unseemly for the Church, in
which all things are to be done with Reverence, because of his tremendous
Presence, who observes the Motion of every one there: yea he declares he
reckons those rude Voices in Singing, for tokens of an uncomposed Mind; which
declare that Men are rather mad, than humbly confessing their Sins to God, and
with a becoming lowliness, begging his Pardon for them. Which was a sort of a
retractation of his former Fact, when he saw the Profaneness to which it gave
occasion; and intimates an abatement of his fondness for the Cathedral Service,
when he found how much Religion, and the Worship of God was like to suffer by
it. We may very well conclude, that the same fervent Piety and Zeal for God,
could he have known the Mischief it occasioned in succeeding Ages, would have
made him as forward to throw it out, as ever he was to bring it in. Upon the
whole, there is no great room for boasting of these three Patrons; for the first
was reputed an Innovator in that very respect, wherein our Cathedralists urge
his Authority: The second in things of this nature, made more use of other Men's
Eyes than his own: and the third in a little time saw cause to repent his
forwardness in that for which they commend him; and in effect retracted it.

Thus I have given you a brief View of the first Rise of Antiphonal Singing, at
Antioch, at Caesarea; and Constantinople in the East; and at Milan in the West:
whence by degrees it was spread to other places. You may perhaps wonder, I have
not in all this time brought it to Rome, where there was from the first Rise of
Christianity, a great fondness of Pomp and Magnificence observable, and a
forwardness to outdo all other Churches. But the truth of it is, I am for
dealing impartially: Rome has enough in all reason to answer for, it need not
be charged falsely. Other Cities were before it in the time of admitting the
Cathedral Service: but when once it was received there, it was quickly so
improved that no time seemed lost, while it remained unknown. If we'll believe
the Pontifical, 'twas Pope Damasus who first ordained that Psalms should be
sung both Day and Night by the Clergy. Conc. T. 1. p. 496.
There is in St. Jerome's Works a Letter of this Pope, wherein he desires him to
send him an Account of the Grecian manner of Singing; and he gives this Reason,
because it was not as yet used amongst them, neither was the Grace of an Hymn
known in their Mouth. Baronius calls the truth of this Epistle into question;
but the Pontifical asserts, and gives Credit to it. In his time therefore, that
is about the Year of Christ 380, Antiphonal Singing was brought in at Rome
also. And there it was so cultivated, that it made mighty advances under the
conduct of several Popes successively; till at length it became as hard a
matter for any one to manage a Part in the Quire, as on the Stage; nay required
more time and pains for a Person to learn to sing the Praises of God in the
Church, than to sing in a Theater.

Should I pretend to give you an Account of the several Emendations,
Augmentations, and gradual Alterations, of the Cathedral Service in the Roman
hands, I should soon expatiate beyond the bounds of a Letter, and therefore
I Will forbear; and only observe that in the time of Gregory the Great, (that is,
about the Year of Christ 620) it was brought to Perfection; and thence-forward
called Cantus Gregorianus, in English the Gregorian Cant. He sent it into our
Nation by his Trusty Emissary Austin the Monk, who found such a stiffness among
the British Clergy, that he was quite at a loss: they were not to be persuaded
to forsake their own Rites of Worship, and receive the Romish Trumpery, and
among others things their new modeled, and much admired Cathedral Service;
whereupon he was the Occasion of the slaughter of twelve Bid Hist. Eccl. l. 2.
c. 2.
hundred of them at once, being resolved they should pay dear for their
unmusical Disposition. One would think this should be but a poor encouragement
to the Survivors, to dance after his Pipe! And that the Remembrance of it
should damp our present Clergy in their most pompous Service, and abate their
fondness of the Quire, which was in this Island founded in so much Blood! Our
old Brittans however for a good while after kept their ground; tho Austin had
got the better of them they would not yield: they would not conform to the
Roman Custom, so much as in the time of celebrating the Paschal Solemnity; much
less would they comply in changing that plain and simple manner of Divine
Worship which prevailed among them, for a Gaudy, Pompous, and Theatrical sort
of Worship, which was all made up of Art and Show. But about the year of Christ
670, Pope Vitalian sent Theodore a Grecian into England, to fill up the Vacant
See of Canterbury; who by his Subtilty and Artifice outwitted the poor
Brittans, to the full satisfaction of those who employed him. He held a Synod
at Hartford, wherein the Easter Controversy was settled to the Pope's Mind, and
the Spelman. Council.
way paved for the introduction of the Cathedral Service with all its Pomp. To
this Pope Vitalian, to whom our Nation is obliged for this Archbishop Theodore,
must we pay our Acknowledgments also for Organs in Divine Worship; of which (if
Platina be to be credited) he was the first introducer. -- Some time after,
when Agatho Platina in vita Vitaliani.
was in the Pontifical Chair, Benedict, who had built a Monastery here in
Britain, went to Rome to be confirmed in the honor of his Abbacy. He was
kindly received, and the Pope sent one John (who was chief Singer at St. Peter's
in Rome, and Abbot of the Monastery Baron. ad An. 679. N. 10.
of St. Martin) back along with him; who introduced into his new built
Monastery, the whole Service that was used at St. Peter's, and taught his
Singers the art of Chanting, in conformity to the Roman Method. This was about
the year of Christ 679; which is the earliest certain date of the Cathedral
Service in this our Land. Our Brittans had for some Ages worshipped God
acceptably enough without it, and might have continued so to do had they never
known it. But Rome had then set up for the Mother Church, and with great zeal
spread an Uniformity of Service among all her reputed Daughters; till in
process of time she had made them all as bad as her self.

But France was not even yet conformable: Pope Hadrian therefore took the
Advantage of the Obligation he had laid on Charles the Great, by making him
Emperor of the West, in order to the engaging him to introduce the Gregorian
Cant into the Gallick Church. About which Baronius gives us this memorable
Passage: In the Year 787, the Emperor kept his Easter with Pope Hadrian Baron.
ad An. 787. N. 106.
at Rome; and in those days of Festivity there arose a great Contention between
the Singers of the French and Roman sort. The French pretended to sing more
gravely and decently; the Romans more melodiously and artificially; and each
mightily undervalu'd the other. The Emperor yielded to the Pope, and made his
own Servants truckle; and thereupon carried back with him Theodore and Benedict
(two expert Roman Singers) to instruct his Countrymen. The Pope also gave him
the Roman Antiphonary, which he promised should be generally used in his
Dominions. And upon his return into France, he placed one of these Artists in
the City of Metz; ordering that the Singers should from all the Cities of
France, repair thither to him to learn his Art of Singing, and playing on the
Organs. And thus you see (in part) how the Cathedral Service spread in these
Western Parts, by means of the Pope of Rome, who had then set up for
Administrator General of the Kingdom of Christ.

I Will forbear troubling you with the various Constitutions of several National
Councils about this sort of Service, lest I trespass upon your Patience: tho if
they were consulted (I find by sundry instances) they would discover a sense
even among the Clergy, as bad as 'twas, of the Corruptions which prevailed in
it. But in lieu of it, I Will give you the Censures of sundry particular Persons
of Note and Eminence all along in the Church.

Dr. Comber in the heat of his Zeal for the Service of the Quire, Of Liturgies,
Oct. p. 88.
positively asserts, that no Christians, before our Dissenters appeared, ever
found any fault with it. As for the Dissenters, I undertake not their
Patronage; tho this I Will venture to say for them, that the most rational and
solid of them (with whom I have had any Converse) lay a greater stress on the
Objections to which our Constitution is liable, than those that may be started
against our Mode of Worship in our Parish Churches. But as for the Worship of
our Cathedrals, there are a great many who never deserted the Communion of the
Church, nor never intended it, who are as much against it as any of the
Dissenters. And, but that I a little know the World, it would have amazed me,
that a Man so conversant with Books as Dr. Comber, should pretend the
Objections against it are of late Date: for alas it has met with opposition
ever since it appeared in the World, and bin objected against in every Age.
I Will mention a few Instances of many.

The Neocaesarean Clergy (abovementioned) excepted against it as a Novelty,
when it was so industriously spread by St. Basil; and that not many Years after
its first appearance.

St. Austin (when his Mind was calm) was much afraid of it. I know indeed there
is a Passage of his often made use of in favor of the Quire; and it cannot be
denied but he once commended it. For speaking of the first Introduction of
Antiphonal Singing at Milan, at which he was present, he thus expresses
himself: How Confess. l. 9. c. 6.
abundantly did I weep before God, to hear those Hymns of thine; being touched
to the very quick by the Voices of thy sweet Church-Song! The Voices flowed
into my Ears, and thy Truth pleasingly distilled into my Heart, which caused
the Affections of my Devotion to overflow, and my Tears to run over; and happy
did I find my self therein. This was his first Apprehension before he had
weighed matters in an even balance. But St. Austin was not ashamed to change
his Judgment; witness his Book of Retractations. He at first mistook the
natural workings of his Passions, through the influence of Music, for the fervent
workings of a vigorous Devotion: (a common mistake I doubt among the
frequenters of Cathedrals!) But when he came to himself, he saw his danger: and
thereupon censured himself severely, Conf. l. 10. c. 33.
for being so tickled with sensual Delight in Divine Worship, and heartily
blessed God for being delivered from that Snare. He withal expressly declares,
that he often wished that the melodious Singing of David's Psalter with so much
art, were removed from his and the Churches Ears: and that he thought the
Method which he had often heard was used by Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria was
the safest; who caused him who read the Psalm to use so little a variation of
the Voice, that he seemed more like to one pronouncing, than singing. And
elsewhere he declares, that the same way of Singing as was used in Alexandria,
prevailed throughout all Africa. St. Austin Ep. 119*
charges it upon himself as a great fault, that he was more moved with the
pompous sort of Singing, than the thing sung; and that he gave more respect to
musical Delights in the Church than was seemly; to which he was very prone; and
which he represents as a great inconvenience of nicely managed artificial
Concord in that part of Divine Worship. I wish those who profess so great a
Reverence for Antiquity, could but see the force of this Objection as coming
from so noted a Father as St. Austin, which they are so apt to slight when
mentioned by one who stands upon a level with them. If I mistake not, he lived
before our English Dissenters appeared.

St. Hierom also (tho Friend enough in all reason to Pomp and Hier. Epist. ad
Rusticum.
Magnificence in Divine Worship, yet) drops a Passage that looks askew at the
Artists of the Quire in his time: Intimating that we are not like Tragaedians,
to anoint our Throat and Mouth with sweet Modulation, that our Theatrical Tunes
and Songs may be heard in the Church; but we are to sing with Reverence.

Isidore Hispalensis (a celebrated Author in the sixth Century) De Ecclesiast.
Off. l. 1. c. 5.
says, that the Singing of the Primitive Christians was next akin to Reading,
the variation of the Voice was so very small; and as for that pompous way of
Singing which had a little before his time bin introduced into the Western
Church, he says 'twas brought in for the sake of those who were Carnal, and not
on their account who were Spiritual: that those who are not reached or affected
by the Words, might be charmed by the sweetness of the Harmony. In my
Apprehension, this is not much in favor of the Quire.

Rabanus Maurus (who was a Disciple of the famous Alcuine) De Institut. Cleric.
l. 2. c. 48.
freely declares himself against Musical Artifice, and Theatrical Singing in
the Worship of God; and only for such as may move compunction, and may be
clearly understood by the Hearers.

Thomas Aquinas (who is universally reputed the solidest of the In 22. q. 91.
a. 2. 4.
Schoolmen) declares against musical Instruments in divine Worship; which
together with the pompous Service of the Quire, he seems to intimate were
Judaical. He says Musical Instruments do more stir up the mind to Delight, than
frame it to a right Disposition. In the Old Testament such sensitive helps were
more needful, and they were figurative of something: but now (he says) he sees
no reason for them.

John Wickleff (that early Detester of the Corruptions which had Catalog. Test.
Ver. l. 18.
overspread the Church) declared against the Ecclesiastical Singing. He was
altogether against the Cathedral Service, and that Ceremonious Worship, which
the Popes of Rome in all Parts so zealously promoted. He mightily contended for
the Abolition of the several Offices, and Canonical Hours, etc.

After him, among others, Erasmus very freely (in his wonted Comment. on 1 Cor.
14. 19.
manner) inveighs against the Cathedral Chanting. There is (says he) a sort a
Music brought into Divine Worship, which hinders People from distinctly
understanding a word almost that is said. Nor have the Singers any leisure to
mind what it is they sing; nor can the Vulgar hear any thing but an empty
sound, which delightfully glides into their Ears. What Notions have they (says
he) of Christ, who think he is pleased with such a Noise? and afterward, We
have brought (says he) a tedious and frolicksom sort of Music into the House
of God, a tumultuous noise of different Voices, such as I think was never heard
in the Theaters, either of Greeks or Romans. For the keeping up of which, whole
flocks of Boys are maintained at great Charges, whose Age is spent in learning
such gibble gabble; while they are taught nothing that is good and useful; a
whole troop of lazy Lubbards are also maintained merely for the same purpose.
At such cost is the Church for a thing that is pestiferous. Whereupon he wishes
it were exactly calculated, how many poor Men might be relieved and maintained
out of the Salaries of these Singers. (A very good wish; I may possibly make an
Essay toward such a Calculation in my next.) He particularly reflects upon the
English for their fondness of this sort of Service. -- So that I find it is not
of late days only, that my Countrymen are degenerated from the old Brittans.

Cornelius Agrippa (who was Counselor to the Emperor Charles De Vanitate
Scientiarum, cap. 17.
the 5th) vehemently also inveighs against the Church Music, and says: That
it is so licentious, that the Divine Offices, Holy Mysteries, and Prayers, are
chanted by a company of wanton Musicians, who are hired with a great sum of
Money, not to the Hearers Understanding, but merely for wanton tickling. The
Church being sill'd with belluine Clamours, while the Boys whine the Descant,
others bellow the Tenor, others bark the Counterpoint, others squeak the
Treble, others grunt the Base; and they make that many sounds may be heard, but
no Words or Sentences (almost) be understood, but the Authority of Judgment is
taken away both from the Ears and Mind.

Zuinglius, (the first Reformer of the Helvetian Church) is very Zuinglii Act.
Disp. 2. p. 106.
warm also upon this Point. It is evident (says he) that the Ecclesiastical
Chanting, and the roaring in our Temples, (which are scarce understood by the
Priests themselves) is a most foolish and vain abuse, and a most pernicious
hindrance to Piety.

I might mention John Calvin also; but that I know his Authority will not go far
with those whose Conviction I would gladly promote.

But Cardinal Cajetan is an Unexceptionable Man; as great an Enemy as he was of
the Reformers, he yet herein agrees with them; declaring, that it may be easily
gathered from 1 Cor. 14. In 1 Cor. 14.
that it is much more eligible and agreeable to the Apostle's Mind, that the
Sacred Offices should be distinctly recited, and intelligibly performed in the
Church, without Musical and Artificial Harmony; than so managed, as that with
the noise of musical Organs, and the Multitude, Clamours and Quavers, and
absurd Repetitions of affected Singers, (which seem as it were devised on
purpose to darken the sense) the Auditors should be so confounded, as that no
one should be able to understand what was sung.

Polidore Virgile also (tho an Italian) writes to the same purpose: De Invent.
rerum, l. 6. c. 2.
Now (says he) the Chanters make a noise in the Church, and nothing is heard
there but a Voice; and others who are present rest satisfied with the consent
of the Cries, no way regarding the meaning of the words. And so it is, that
among the Multitude, all the esteem of Divine Worship seems to rely upon the
Chanters; although generally no sort of Men are lighter or more wicked, [the
Spanish Index Expurgatorius, page 72. ordered
these words to be left out in following Impressions] and in the same place,
speaking of the Quire, (he says) I may say that these are for the most part
brought into our Ceremonies from the old Heathens, who were wont to sacrifice
with Symphony, as Livy witnesses, Lib. 9.

Nay Lindanus Bishop of Ruremond, continues even after the Reformation in the
same Tone; and bitterly complains of the Lindan. Panopliae, l. 5. c. 7.
Musicians and Singers, that have possessed the Church, whose Singing is nothing
else but a Theatrical confusion of Sounds, which rather tends to avert the
minds of Hearers from that that is good, than raise them to God: and declares,
that tho he had often bin present, and was as attentive as well he could be to
what was sung, he yet could hardly understand any thing; the whole Service was
so filled with Repetitions, and a confusion of different Voices and Tones, and
rude Clamours. And thereupon he praises those who expelled this sort of Music
out of their Churches as a profane hindrance of Divine Worship, and a device of
humane Vanity, rather than admitted and continued it, for the gaining the
Applause of the Light and Frothy.

And now, Sir, what think you of Dr. Comber's Assertion, that none objected
against the Cathedral Service, till the Dissenters appeared? I doubt the Doctor
would not willingly have them graced with such Patrons as the Persons mentioned.

I know indeed 'twill be replied, that the forecited Censures were levelled
against the Service of the Quire in the Popish Churches: but till it can be
made appear that it is even in our Protestant Churches free from the things
excepted against, their Objections have an equal force. And really, tho I have
bin abroad, and had Opportunity of seeing the Popish way, yet (bating the
Language) I can discern little difference between their Worship and ours, as
managed in our Cathedrals.

I Will add one Authority more, which with some possibly may outweigh all the
rest; and it is that of the 32 Commissioners, who were in the Reign of H. 8. and
Edw. 6. appointed by Act of Parliament to examine all Canons, Constitutions,
and Ordinances, Provincial and Synodal; and to draw up such Laws
Ecclesiastical, as should be universally observed. The same thing was also
revived in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, but quickly dropped; and (says the
Reverend Bishop Burnet) to the great prejudice of our Church it has slept ever
since. The Persons deputed for this purpose, were Cranmer Archbishop of
Canterbury, Ridley Bishop of London; Ponet Bishop of Winchester, Goodrick
Bishop of Ely, Coverdale Bishop of Exeter, Hooper Bishop of Gloucester, Knight
Bishop of Bath, Scory Bishop of Rochester, Mr. Tailor of Lincoln, Mr. Cox the
King's Almoner, Parker of Cambridg, Latimer, Cook, Peter Martyr, Sir John
Cheke, John a Lasco, Mr. Peter, Mr. Cecyl, Sir Tho. Smith, Mr. Tailor of
Hadleigh, Dr. May, Mr. Traheron, Dr. Lyel, Mr. Skinner, Justice Hales, Justice
Bromley, Goodrick, Gosnal, Stamford, Carel, Lucas, and Brook Recorder of
London. The flower of the English Nation for Sense and Learning, Sacred and
Polite Literature. Tho the Design came not to Maturity, yet may we in their
unfinished Tract, (since published under the Title of Reformatio Legum
Anglicarum) as to the several Points whereof they treat, see the Judgment of a
set of as valuable Men as this Nation could perhaps ever have afforded, for
consulting together about a matter of so great Moment. Now in this Discourse of
theirs, when they come to treat of the Vocal and Instrumental Music used in
the Cathedral Service, De Divinis Officiis. c. 5.
they declare they are for having it quite taken away.

It would almost tempt a Man to wonder with what (...) can pretend to have so
great a Veneration for our first (...) as they do, when yet they so zealously
defend, and are (...) retaining what they thought better abolished and quite
rem(...)

And thus (Sir) I have finished the Authoritative part(...) Argument; wherein I
think I have bid fair for proving (...)tiquity and Authority don't so far
favor our Cathedralists seem to imagine. The reasoning Part remains behind.
(...) but recollect what past at our Conference, what Argument urged, and how
Objections were answered, I should hope(...) many might be convinced. If you will
show this to the honest I and be so kind as to let me know his Censure and
Resentmen^ try what I can do; and at the same time endeavor (...)
Animadversions, and a further clearing of the matter.

Yours, N. ^.


