A SERMON PREACHED AT ALDERMANBERRY-CHURCH, Dec. 28. 1662. In the Fore-noon.

By Mr. Edm. Calamy, Late Pastor of the same Congregation.

OXFORD, Printed in the Year, 1663.

A SERMON PREACHED At Aldermanberry-Church, Dec. 28. 1662.
1 Samuel 4. 13. And when he came, Lo, Ely sat upon a seat by the way side,
waiting; for his heart trembled for the Ark of God.
THat you may the better understand these words, you must know that whatsoever
God threatened against old Ely, in the second and third Chapters, because he did
not restrain his wicked Sons from their lewd Courses, is here Executed in
this Chapter: therefore we read there were four thousand Israelites slain by
the Philistines: And the Elders of Israel met together to consult how to repair
this great loss; they confess it was the Lord that had smitten them: for say
they, Wherefore has the Lord smitten us to day before the Philistines: And they
conclude, the way to repair this their loss, it was, to fetch the Ark of the
Covenant of the Lord from Shiloh, and carry it into the Battle; whereupon they
apoint Hophny and Phinehas to fetch it, whereby they imagined that the presence
of the Ark would save them from ruin, but herein they were miserably mistaken;
for this Judgment befell them not because the Ark was not in the Camp, but
because their sin was in the Camp: The Ark of the Covenant would not preserve
those that had broken Covenant with God: And therefore there was a great
slaughter of the Israelites, and were slain thirty thousand men, and Hophny and
Phinehas were slain, and the Ark it self was taken prisoner. But what was old
Ely doing? He was ninety and eight years old, and was not able to go to the
Battle, but sits upon a seat by the way side near the Battle; and there he
sits, thinking what shall become of the Ark: And lo, Ely sat upon a Seat by
the way side, watching; for his heart trembled for the Ark of God, for fear
lest the Ark should be taken: He was not troubled, what should become of his
two Sons, or what should become of the people of Israel, but what should become
of the Ark of God.

In the words are three parts.

1. Old Elies solicitousness for the Ark. 2. Old Elies heart-trembling for fear
of the Ark. 3. Old Elies preferring the safety of the Ark, before the safety of
his two Sons, Wife and Children.
He sat upon a Seat by the way side watching, for his heart trembled for the
Ark of God.

But what was the Ark of God? why should old Elies heart tremble for fear of
the Ark?

I Answer, This Ark was the holiest of all the things of God; it was so holy,
that it made every place holy where it came, 2 Chronicles. 8. 11. And Solomon
brought up the daughter of Pharaoh, out of the City of David, into the house
that he had built for her: for he said, My wife shall not dwell in the House of
David King of Israel, because the places are holy, whereunto the Ark of the
Lord has come. This Ark was the dwelling place of God, it was the habitation
of God, Psalm. 99. 1. The Lord Reigns, he sits between the Cherubims. Now
these Cherubims were placed over the Ark: it was the speaking place of God; he
met his people there, and there he gave an answer to them: Exodus 25. 21, 22.
And thou shall put the Mercy-seat above upon the Ark, and in the Ark thou shall
put the Testimony that I shall give thee: And there will I meet with thee, and
I will commune with thee from above the Mercyseat, from between the two
Cherubims which are upon the Ark of the Testimony of all things I shall give
thee in commandment unto the children of Israel. This Ark was Gods Footstool,
and all the people of God worship before the Footstool of God, Psalm. 99. 5.
Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship at his footstool, for he is holy. The
Ark, it was the glory and the strength of Israel, Psalm. 78. 61. And he
delivered his strength into captivity, and his glory into his enemies hand; And
it was the terror of the enemies of God: And therefore when the Ark came into
the Battle, the Philistines were afraid, and said, Woe unto us, for God is come
down into the Camp: And indeed this Ark was called Jehovah. Numb. 10. 35. And
it came to pass, when the Ark set forward, that Moses said, Rise up Lord, and
let thine enemies be scattered; And when it rested, he said, Return O Lord unto
the many thousands of Israel. In a word, the Ark was a pledge, and a visible
symptom of Gods gracious presence with his people; as long as the Ark was
saved, they were saved; and when the Ark was with them, Gods presence was with
them; but when the Ark was gone, God was gone; his comforting presence, his
protecting presence, and his preserving presence: And therefore no wonder that
this good old man sat watching here for fear of the Ark. I call him good old
man; many are of opinion that he was not good, because he suffered his Sons to
be so wicked; and indeed his fault was great, but surely he was a good man, and
I have two Reasons to prove it: First, in that he took the punishment of his
iniquity so patiently; It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. And
secondly, he was a good man, as appears by the Text; his solicitousness for the
Ark: He sat trembling for fear of the Ark.

Now this Ark was a Type of three things: First, It was a Type of Jesus Christ;
for God spoke from the Ark: so God speaks to us by Christ.

Secondly, It was a Type of the Church of Christ: for as the Ark was the
preserver of the two Tables of the Law, so the Church of Christ is the
preservative of the Scriptures.

Thirdly, The Ark was a Type of the Ordinances of Christ; for as God did
communicate himself by the Ark, so God by his Ordinances communicates his
Councels, Comforts and Grace unto his people: The Ordinances of Christ, they
are the Oraculum by which he conveys himself unto his people. Thus I have
showed you what the Ark was.

I shall gather two Observations from the words:

1. That when the Ark of God is in danger of being lost, the people of God have
thoughtful heads and trembling hearts. 2. That a true child of God is more
troubled, and more solicitous what shall become of the Ark, then what shall
become of Wife and Children or Estate.
I shall begin with the first.

Doct. That when the Ark of God is in danger of being lost, the people of God
have thoughtful heads and trembling hearts.

Or if I may put this Doctrine into a Gospel dress, take it thus:

That when the Gospel is in danger of losing, when Gospel Ordinances are in
danger of being lost, and Gospel Ministers in danger of losing, that then the
people of God have trembling heads, and careful and solicitous hearts about it.

Mark what I say; I say not, when the Ark is lost; for that was death to old
Ely, that broke his neck; and it cost the life of Ely's daughter in-Law, when
the Ark of God was taken, she took no comfort in her child, though a man-child
she regarded: For the glory is departed from Israel, the Ark of God is taken.

I say not, when the Ark of God is lost; but I say, when it is in danger of
losing: when the Gospel is in danger, the Ministers of the Gospel in danger,
and the Ordinances in danger to be lost, then the people of God have trembling
hearts, and careful heads. When God threatened the Israelites, that he would not
go with them, they were troubled for the loss of Gods presence, and would not
put on their ornaments, Exodus 33. 3, 4. I will not go up in the midst of thee,
for thou art a stiffnecked people, lest I consume thee in the way: And when the
people heard these evil tidings they mourned, and no man did put on his
ornaments; 1 Samuel 7. 2. And it came to pass, while the Ark abode in
Kiriath-jearim, that the time was long, for it was twenty years, and all the
house of Israel lamented after the Lord: That is, after the presence of God,
speaking from the Ark, 2 Samuel 11. 10, 11. David would have had Uriah to have
gone down to his house and made merry: And Uriah said unto David, the Ark, and
Israel, and Judah abide in Tents, and my Lord Joab, and the servants of my Lord
are encamped in open fields; shall I then go into mine house to eat and to
drink, and to lie with my Wife? as thou live, and as thy soul lives, I will
not do this thing, 1 King. 19. 10. And Elijah said, I have been very jealous
for the Lord God of Hosts; for the children of Israel have forsaken thy
Covenant, thrown down thine Altars, and slain thy Prophets with the sword, and
I, even I only am left, and they seek my life to take it away. Thus you see
when the Ark is in danger, the people of God mourn and are sorrowful.

And there be four Reasons, why the people of God are so much troubled when the
Ark of God is in danger.

Reas. 1. Because of the great love they bear to the Ark of God; As God loves
the gates of Sion, more then all the dwellings of Jacob, Psalm. 87. 2. so the
people of God love the Ordinances of God, and the faithful Ministers of Christ,
Psalm. 26. 8. Lord I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place where
thine honor dwells, Psalm. 27. 4. One thing have I desired of the Lord, that
will I seek after, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of
my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to inquire in his Temple. Now
love stirs up the affections; as young Cresus, though he were dumb, yet
seeing his Father like to be killed, cried out, Do not kill my Father: Such is
the love of the Saints of God to the Ark, that they cannot be silent, they
cannot but tremble when they see the Ark in danger; and for Sions sake they
cannot hold their peace; and they cannot be silent until the Lord make the
Righteousness thereof go out like brightness, and the Salvation thereof as a
lamp that burns.

2. The people of God are troubled at this, because of the Interest they have
in the Ark of God: Now interest stirs up affections, as when another man's
house is on fire; as you had a lamentable and sad providence this last week,
and it is not to be forgotten, how suddenly in all our Feastings, may God dash
all our mirth. Now consider, how were they affected that had an interest in
those that were burned; so the people of God have an interest in the Ark, God
is the Haven of a Child of God, the Portion and Inheritance of a Child of God;
and when God begins to forsake them, they cannot but be afflicted and troubled:
The Ordinances of God, are the Jewels of a Christian, and the Treasure of a
Christian; and the loss of them, cannot but trouble them: And Jesus Christ is
the Joy of a Christian, and therefore when Christ is departing, they cannot but
be much afflicted at it.

3. The people of God are much troubled when the Ark is in danger, because of
the mischeifs that comes upon a Nation when the Ark of God is lost: woe be to
that Nation when the Ark is gone. The Heathens had the Image of Apollo, and
they conceived, that as long as that Image was preserved amongst them, they
could never be worsted, but be preserved; and the Romans had a Buckler, upon
which they had a Tradition, that as long as that Buckler was preserved, Rome
could not be taken. But sure I am, that where God is in a Nation, and where the
Gospel is preserved in purity in a Nation, that Nation cannot but stand; but
when God is gone, and the Gospel gone, then comes the misery of a Nation, and
the Tongue of man is not able to express the misery of that Nation where the
Ark of God is taken: Shall I give a hint, and set it out a little, in five
particulars.

1. When the Ark of God is taken, then the ways of Sion mourn, and none come
to the Sollemn Assemblies; It was the complaint of the Church, Lament. 1. 4.
That is matter of sadness. 2. When the Ark of God is taken, then the Ministers
of Christ are driven into Corners, And that is matter of heart-trembling. 3.
When the Ark of God is taken, then the Souls of many are in danger; when the
Gospel is gone, your Souls are in hazard: There is cause of sadness. 4. Then do
the Enemies of God Blaspheme, and are ready to say, Where is your God? then do
the enemies of God Triumph, Psalm. 42. 10. As with a Sword in my Bones mine
enemies reproach me; while they say daily unto me, Where is thy God? 5. Then is
Jesus Christ trampled under foot, and the Ordinances of God defiled and
trampled on; and then Blasphemy and Atheism comes in like an Armed man.
4. The people of God must needs tremble when the Ark is in danger, because of
their accessariness to the losing of the Ark; and this was that which made old
Ely so much troubled, because he knew it was for his sin that God suffered the
Ark to be taken: He knew that his not punishing his two Sons, was one great
cause of that great slaughter the people of Israel met withal, and that made
him tremble. There is no person here in this Congregation, but his heart will
tell him, he has contributed something toward the loss of the Ark. None of us
so holy but our Consciences must accuse us; we have done something that might
cause God to take the Ark from us: And therefore Mr. Bradford that blessed
Martyr, said in his Prayer, Lord it was my unthankfulness for the Gospel, that
brought in Popery in Queen Mary's days; and my unfruitfulness under the
Gospel, that was the cause of the untimely death of King Edward the Sixth; and
those that fled in Queen Mary's days, sadly complained that they were the cause
of Gods taking away the Gospel from England. O Beloved, it is for thy sin and
my sin, that the Ark of God is in danger; and therefore the Lord give us
trembling solicitous hearts, what shall become of the Ark.

I come now to Application.

Use 1. If this be the property of a true child of God, to be solicitous when
the Ark of God is in danger, and to have such a trembling heart for fear of the
Ark, then this is a certain sign there are but few that are the children of God
in truth. O where is the man, and where is the woman, that like old Ely, sits
watching and trembling for fear of the Ark! I suppose you all believe, and have
cause to believe, that my coming here this Morning was not by way of design,
but the mere Providence of God, and therefore what I say should be
premeditated; but this I may say, and it must not be denied, but that the Ark
of God is in danger of being lost; and that will appear by these Reasons.

First, In reference to the many sins in this Nation; for let me tell you,
there is not one sin for which God ever took away the Ark from any people, but
it is to be found in England: Did the Church of Ephesus lose the Candlestick,
because they had lost their first love? And have not we lost our first love to
the Gospel, and to the Ordinances? And did the Church of Laodicea lose the
Candlestick, because of lukewarmness? and are not we lukewarm? Did the people
of Israel, as here in the Text, lose the Ark, because they abhorred the
offerings of God? and do not you do so; are not the sins of Israel amongst us?
the sins of Germany, and the sins of all other Nations about us? And can any
man here before God this day. in this Congregation, that considers the great
unthankfulness of this Nation, and the great profaneness and wickedness of
this Nation, but they may conclude the Ark is in danger, and God may justly
take the Ark from us?

I might tell you of the drunkenness, adultery, covetousness, injustice, and
uncharitableness, etc. that does abound amongst us; and I might tell you of
Sanctuary sins, profanation of Sabbaths and Sacraments, our unthankfulness and
unfruitfulness, and unworthy walking under the Gospel: And you of this place,
God may very well take the Ark even from you; and indeed it was the great
interest I had in you, the which while I live I shall ever own; and that great
affection and respect I had to you, that I would not send you home this day
without a Sermon, and let you go without a blessing. Now can any of you in this
Parish, and this Congregation; can any of you say God may not justly take the
Gosspel from you?

You have had three famous Successors, Doctor Tailor for seven years, and
Doctor Stoughton for seven years, and my Self, I have been with you almost four
and twenty years, and may not God now unchurch you, by suffering you to want a
faithful Minister to go in and out before you? This is one Reason, upon which
account I may safely say the Ark of God is in danger, and Aldermanberry may
truly fear the loss of the Ark.

Secondly, another Reason is, the abundance of Priests and Jesuits that are in
the midst of us, and the preaching of Popery amongst us, and the proneness of
people to run headlong to the garlic and onyons of Egypt again. This is
argument sufficient to make us believe the Ark of God is in danger. And shall I
add, the discontents and divisions in the Nation, as Christ says, A Nation
divided against it self cannot stand; but I leave these things to your
considerations; I do believe there is none here but will confess the Ark of God
is in danger to be lost. But now where are our old Elys, to sit watching and
trembling for fear of the Ark? Where is Phinehas his Wife, that would not be
comforted, because the Ark of God was taken? Where are our Moses's? Our
Elijah's? Our Uriah's? Where are they that lay to heart the dangers of the Ark?
You complain of Taxes, and decay of Trading, of this civil burden, and that
civil burden; but where is the man or the woman that complains of this misery,
the loss of the Ark? Most of you are like Galio, he cared not for these things;
if it had been a civil matter, then he would have meddled with it; but for
Religion, he cared not for that: every man is troubled about meum and tuum,
about civil concernments; but who lays to heart? who regards what shall become
of Religion? There is a strange kind of indifferency and lukewarmness upon most
peoples spirits; so they may have their Trading go on, and their civil burdens
removed, they care not what becomes of the Ark. There is a Text of Scripture, I
shall not spend much time in opening it, but I would have you well consider it,
Hos. 7. 9. Strangers have devoured his strength, and he knows it not; yea,
gray-hairs are here and there upon him, yet he knows not. Shall I say
gray-hairs are upon the Gospel? I come not hither to prophecy; I say not the
Gospel is dying, but I say it has gray-hairs; for you have had the Gospel a
hundred years and above, and therefore it is in its old age; and I dare
challenge any Scholar to show me an example of any Nation that has enjoyed
the Gospel for a hundred years together. Now that gray-hairs is to a hundred
years, is no wonder: Well, gray-hairs are here and there, and yet no man lays
it to heart.

Now shall I spend time to show you what a great sin it is, not to be affected
with the danger that the Ark of God is in; consider but three particulars.

First, it is a sign you do not love the Gospel; if you had any love to it, you
would be troubled more for the danger of the Ark, then for any outward danger
whatsoever.

I read that among the Romans, when any man was accused for his life, all his
relations put on mourning Apparel, and they followed him to his Trial in
mourning, thereby to show their love to the party in danger. Now did you love
the Gospel, the Ministers of the Gospel, and the Ordinances of Christ, you
would all put on mourning, and lament for the Gospel, the Ark of God that is in
danger; and because you do not, it is a sign you have no love to the Gospel.

Secondly, It is a sign you have no interest in the Gospel, for interest will
stir up your affections; it is a sign you are not concerned in the Gospel, for
if you were concerned in it, you would be affected with it, as those that were
interested in those persons that were in that lamentable fire the last week, it
is impossible but they should be affected; and so it is a sign you have no
interest in God and Christ, if your hearts do not tremble for fear of the loss
of the Ark.

But thirdly, There is a curse of God pronounced against all those that do not
lay to heart the Afflictions of Joseph, Amos 6. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Woe be to them
that are at ease in Sion, and trust in the Monntain of Samaria: yea, that put
far away the evil day; that lie upon beds of Ivory, and stretch themselves upon
their couches; that eat the Lambs out of the flock, and the Calves out of the
midst of the stall; that chant to the sound of the Viol, and invent to
themselves instruments of Music; that drink wine in bowls, and anoint
themselves with the chief ointments; but they are not grieved for the
afflictions of Joseph. Woe be unto you that enjoy your fullness of outward
things, and make merry therewith, and never consider the afflictions of Gods
people, and the danger of the Ark.

Use 2. For exhortation, To beseech you all, that God by a providence has so
unexpectedly brought this day to hear me, and there may be a good providence in
it, possibly I may do good herein; I say, let me beseech you all to declare you
are the people of God indeed and in truth, by following the example of old Ely,
to be very solicitous of the Ark of God; and let me exhort you to five
particulars.

First, Let me persuade you to believe, that the Gospel is not intailed upon
England: England has no letters Patents of the Gospel; the Gospel is
removeable: God took away the Ark, and forsook Shilo; and he did not only take
away the Ark, but the Temple also; he unchurched the Jews, he unchurched the
seven Churches of Asia, and we know not how soon he may unchurch us: I know no
warrant we have to think that we shall have the Gospel another hundred years;
God knows how to remove his Candlestick, but not to destroy it; God does often
remove the Church, but does not destroy it; God removed his Church out of the
East, as the Greek Churches were famous Churches, but God removed them, and now
the Turk over-spreads that Country.

Secondly, I would persuade you, that Englands Ark is in danger to be lost;
were it only for the sins of England, those prodigious iniquities amongst us,
and that strange unheard of ingratitude that is in the Land; but I will say no
more of that, because I would speak nothing but what becomes a sober Minister
of the Gospel; but sure it is, That the Ark is in danger to be lost.

Thirdly, I would persuade you, and O that I could raise you up to old Elies
practice; He sat watching, for his heart trembled for fear of the Ark: He had a
thoughtful head, and an aching heart, for the Ark of God that was in danger:
and that I might move you to this, consider what a sad condition we are in if
the Ark be taken; what will your Estate do you good? or what will all your
concernments do you good if the Gospel be gone? wherein does England exceed
other places? there is more wealth in Turkey then in England: And the Heathen
Nations have more of the glory of the world, then any Christian King has: What
is the glory of England? What is the glory of Christianity but the Gospel? if
the Gospel be gone, our glory is gone. Pray remember Elies Daughter in Law, the
wise of Phinehas; she hearkened not though a Man-Child was born, and would
receive no comfort, but called his name Ichabod; for the glory is departed from
Israel, the Ark of God is taken: O when the glory is gone, who would desire to
live! I am loath to tell you the story of Chrysostom, he was but one man, yet
when he was banished Constantinople, the people all petitioned for him, and
said, They could as well lose the Sun out of the Firmament as lose Chrysostom
from among them. O the sad, and lamentable, and woeful condition we are in, if
the Ark of God be taken: O therefore, let us tremble for fear of the Ark.

Fourthly, Let me persuade you not to mourn immoderately, neither be not
discouraged; I would willingly speak something to comfort you before I leave
you, I know not by what strange providence I came here this day, and the Lord
knows when I shall speak to you again; therefore I would not send you home
comfortless: O therefore, mourn not as without hope, for I have four arguments
to persuade me, that the Ark of God will not be lost, though it be in danger of
losing.

First, Because God has done great things already for this Nation; and I argue
like Manoahs wife; surely if God had intended to destroy us, he would not have
done that he has done for us; He that has done so much for us, will not now
forsake us. And therefore, though our hearts tremble, yet let them not sink
within us.

Secondly, I argue from the abundance of praying people that are in this
Nation, There are many that night and day pray unto God, that the Ark may not
be taken; and let me assure you, God did never forsake a praying and reforming
people. When God intends to destroy a Nation, and take away the Ark, he takes
away the Spirit of Prayer: but where God gives the Spirit of Prayer, there God
will continue the Ark. You all know, that if there had been but ten good men in
those five Cities, God would have spared them: We have many hundreds that fear
God in this Nation, that do not give God rest, but night and day pray unto God
for this Land: And who knows but for their sakes, God will spare the Ark?

Thirdly, another ground of comfort is this, That God has hitherto dealt with
England, not by way of Rule, but by way of Prerogative; we have had
un-Churching sins all the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and of King James; and
the godly Ministers have been threatened Ruin, from year to year; but God has
hitherto saved England by way of Prerogative: God has spared us, because he
will spare us; according to that Text, I will be gracious, to whom I will be
gracious. God will not be tied to his own Rule; and who knows but God will
deliver us?

Fourthly, another ground of comfort is, That God is now pouring out his Viols
upon Antichrist, and all this shall end in the ruin of Antichrist: God is
pouring forth his Viols upon the Throne of the Beast, and all these
transactions shall end in the ruin of Antichrist; though some drops of these
Viols may light upon the Reformed Churches, and they may smart for a while, and
God may severely punish them, yet it will be but for a little while, but the
Viols shall be poured out upon Antichrist: God may scourge all the Reformed
Churches before these Viols be poured out, and persecutions may go through them
all, the which I call drops of these Viols; but the Viols are intended for
Antichrist, and shall end in the ruin of Antichrist; and whatsoever becomes
of us, yet our children, and our childrens children shall see the Issue of the
Viols poured out upon the Whore of Babylon; This I speak for your comfort.

Fifthly, I am to exhort you, That you would all of you contribute your utmost
endeavor, to keep the Ark of God from being taken: And here I shall show you,

1. What the Magistrate should do. 2. What the Ministers should do. 3. What the
people should do.
First, What the Magistrate should do, I shall say but little of them, because
I am not now to speak to them; they are to use their Authority for the settling
of the Ark; for the Ark of the Covenant will be like the Ark of Noah, always
floating upon the waters, until the Magistrates settle it. Thus David, 2 Samuel
6. 1, 2. he gathered together all the chosen men of Israel, thirty thousand to
fetch home the Ark: So Solomon, he assembled the Elders of Israel, and the
heads of the Tribes, the Nobles, the chief of the Fathers of the children of
Israel unto Jerusalem, with a great deal of pomp, to bring up the Ark of the
Covenant of the Lord into its place. O that God would encourage our Nobles and
Magistrates, that they might be solicitous to settle the Ark: Magistrates must
not do as the Philistines, they had the Ark, but what did they do with it? they
set it up in the house of Dagon, but Dagon and the Ark could never agree: where
false Religion comes in at one door, the true Religion goes out at the other;
you must not put the Ark and Dagon together.

Secondly, What must the Ministers do to keep the Ark from losing? They must
endeavor after holiness; the Ark will never stand steady, nor prosper upon the
shoulders of Hophny and Phinehas. A wicked, profane, drunken Ministry will
never settle the Ark; it must be the sober, pious, godly Ministers that must do
it: How holy must they be that draw nigh to the God of holiness?

Thirdly, What must the people of God do, that the Ark may not be lost? There
be five things I shall commend you unto, and then commend you to God.

1. You must not Idolize the Ark. 2. You must not undervalue the Ark. 3. You
must not pry into the Ark. 4. You must not meddle with the Ark without a lawful
Call. 5. You must keep the Covenant of the Ark.
First, You must not Idolize the Ark; that was the sin of the people in the
Text; they thought the very presenceof the Ark would excuse them, and keep them
safe, and therefore they carried the Ark into the Camp; though they reformed
not, and repented not, yet they thought the Ark would save them.

So many there be that think the Ark will save them, though never so wicked;
but nothing will secure a Nation but Repentance and Reformation.

Secondly, Do not undervalue the Ark; this was Michals, 2 Samuel 6. 14, 15, 16.
When David danced before the Ark, and Michal mocked him, and despised him in
her heart; but says he, it was before the Lord, and if this be vile, I will be
more vile. Some men begin to say, what need we any Preaching, will not Prayers
serve? Others say, what needs so much Preaching, will not once a day serve? Now
this is to undervalue the Ark: therefore let us say as David, if to preach the
Word, if to fast and pray for the Nation; If this be vile, then I will be more
vile.

Thirdly, We must not pry into the Ark; this was the sin of the men of
Bethshemesh, 1 Samuel 6. 19. They looked into the Ark, and God smote them, and
cut off fifty thousand and threescore men. Be not too curious in searching,
where God has not discovered or revealed: For example, there be great thoughts
of heart, when God will deliver his people, and set his Churches at liberty;
And many men talk much of the year, 1666. that shall be the year wherein
Antichrist shall be destroyed: And there are strange impressions upon the
hearts of many learned men, as to this year; some go to the year, 1669. and
others pitch upon other times; but truly if you will have my judgment, and I
am glad of this opportunity to tell you, This is to pry too much into the Ark:
Remember that Text, Acts 1. 17. It is not for you to know the times or the
seasons, which the Father has put in his own power. And thus to conclude upon
any particular time, if you find you are deceived, it is the way to make you
Atheists, and that afterward you should believe nothing: And those Ministers
do no service, or rather ill service to the Church of God, that conclude of
times and sea sons.

A Popish Author says, That in the year one thousand, there was a general
belief over the Christian world, that the day of Judgment should be that year;
but when they saw it happened not, they fell to their old sinning again, and
were worse then before, and believed nothing. Well, Gods time is the best,
therefore let not us pry too much into the Ark.

Fourthly, You must not meddle with the Ark, unless you have a lawful Call to
meddle with it: This was the sin of Uza, 2 Samuel 6. 6, 7. the Ark was in danger
of falling, and he good man meaning no hurt to keep up the Ark, took hold of
it; but he destroyed himself, and made a breach, and hindered the carrying home
of the Ark.

We had a great disorder heretofore; abundance of well-meaning people usurped
upon the Ministerial Office; they were afraid the Ark was falling, and
therefore they touched the Ark, they laid hold on the Ark; but their touching
the Ark has undone the Ark, and themselves too. O take heed of touching the
Ark.

Fifthly, If ever you would preserve the Ark, then keep the Covenant of the
Ark, keep the Law which the Ark preserves: The Ark was a place wherein the Law
was kept, the two Tables; keep the Law, and God will keep the Ark; but if you
break the Law, you will forfeit the Ark: The Ark was called the Ark of the
Covenant; keep Covenant with God, and God will preserve the Ark; but if you
break the Covenant of the Ark, the Covenant made in Baptism, and that Covenant
often renewed in the Sacrament; if you break Covenant, God will take away the
Ark.

FINIS.

