royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE


BY THE KING.

A Proclamation for preventing the Plundring, Spoiling, or Robbing of any His
Majesty's Subjects, and for restraining of straggling and Idle People from
following the Army, as likewise for supplying His Majesty's Army with necessary
provisons during their March.
WHEREAS by Our gracious Proclamation of the twenty fifth of November last
past, We took notice of the great misery and ruin falling, and likely to fall
upon Our good Subjects (if not timely prevented) by the Plundring, Spoiling and
Robbing of their Houses, and taking from them their Money, Plate,
Housholdstuffe, Horses, Cattle, and other goods, in detestation of which
barbarous, and unlawful proceedings, and in tender commiseration of the
sufferings of Our People, We did then declare, That if any either Officer or
Soldier of Our Army of Horse or Foot should from henceforth, Plunder, Spoil,
or Rob, any of Our People, or take from them any of their Money, Plate,
Housholdstuffe, Horses, or other Cattle, as likewise any Victual, or
Commodities going to, or from Our Markets, upon complaint made thereof, the
Commander, or Officer in Chief of such Quarter where the fact was committed,
was required to proceed against any such Offender, by the Law Martial, without
favor or connivance, and to cause him or them, so offending, to be executed
without mercy (as in and by the same Proclamation more at large appears,)
Notwithstanding which, to the great and heavy grievance and oppression of Our
People, We find that Our Commands therein have not been (as We expected)
straightly observed. And having lately received Information that the greatest
part of these Plunderings and Robberies committed on Our people, especially by
the taking away of Horses and other Cattle in the several Marches and
expeditions of Our Forces, are committed and done by Persons no way listed, or
employed in Our service, or under any Command, and by Volunteers out of other
Troops, not commanded upon present service, following Our Army for Spoil and
Pillage; We do therefore charge and Command all persons whatsoever, but such
as are or shall be licensed by the superior Officers of Our Army, or such of
Our good Subjects as shall offer their service for Our assistance, and be
received into Our Army upon their March, or as shall be of such Forces, as
shall be sent upon any expedition, that they forbear to follow, or attend Our
Army or forces, or to take away any Money, Plate, Goods, Horses or Cattle from
any of Our Subjects whatsoever. And if any shall offend, Spoil, Rob,
Pillage, or Plunder, in the least kind, contrary to this Our Proclamation, or
take any Horse, Money, Plate, or other goods, from any of Our Subjects without
especial warrant of their superior Officer then commanding Our said Army, We
do require and Command all the Officers and Soldiers of Our Army, and all
other Our Officers and loving Subjects, to apprehend him or them so offending
against this Our Proclamation, and to bring them before the Commander in chief
of such Army or Forces, whom We require and authorize forthwith to cause him or
them, so offending, to be hanged without mercy, and to see that restitution be
made to such person, or persons, as received such loss by the taking away any
of their goods or Cattle, in the best manner Our Commander in chief, or such
Officer shall be able to perform; This We require and Command to be fully and
in every part obeyed, that thereby Out good subjects may be freed from misery
and ruin, or the least apprehension thereof, and may without any interruption
proceed in following their several callings and professions, to the welfare
and happiness of Our Kingdom and Our Army, and that the officers thereof may
have the reputation of doing Justice, and giving help and assistance to Our
people. And Our further will and pleasure is, That this Our Proclamation be
publicly read in all Churches and Chappells of this Our Kingdom, and in the
heads of all Our Regiments of Horse, Foot, and Dragooners. And as We have
published this Our Proclamation for the protection of the Goods and Estates of
all Our loving Subjects, so we expect that all such Counties, Hundreds, Towns,
and Villages in, or near which any part of Our Army shall happen to be
Quartered upon their March, shall upon warrants from the superior Officer, or
from the Commissaries of Our Army, furnish and supply Our forces, so passing
through or near them, with all necessary provisions of victuals and other
accommodation both for Horse and Foot, (for which they are to give tickets or
receipts, which We shall carefully pay when God shall enable Us,) that so the
Soldier for want of necessary provisions may not have any pretense to offer
any injury to any of Our good Subjects, whose ease and security shall always
be Our principal care,

Given at Our Court at OXFORD, this Seventeenth day of March, in the Eighteenth
year of Our Reign.
God Save the KING.
Printed at Oxford by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the University. 1642.


