A Funeral Sermon, PREACHED Upon Occasion of the Decease of The Eminently Pious
Mrs. Elizabeth Williams: Late Wife of the Reverend Mr. Daniel Williams. Who
Departed this Life, June the 10 th. School. Aetat. 62.

With some Account of Her Exemplary Character: Taken for the most Part out of
Her own Papers.

By EDMUND CALAMY.

LONDON: Printed for I. Lawrence at the Angel in the Poultry over against the
Compter, School.

To My Much Honored FRIEND, The Reverend Mr. DANIEL WILLIAMS.
Reverend Sir,
IF the PRESENT which I here make You, should occasion any Renewal of Your
Grief, You know where to Charge it. Though I should Hope, a repeated Reflection
on Your Deceased Yoke-fellows Correspondence, both in Temper and Practice, with
the Instances and Patterns proposed for Imitation in the Text, which I (with
Your Approbation) fixed on for the Subject of the Ensuing Discourse, might
administer Consolation and Refreshment.

FOR it cannot but be very comfortable, to have so good Grounds to believe,
that at the same Time when withdrawn from You, She was removed out of a
troublesome World, into that Better Country, which had Her Heart so long
before: Where She has unspeakably better Friends, and better Entertainments,
than this World was ever capable of affording Her; and that without any
mixture, or fear of Change.

IT has pleased GOD (Sir) that in the midst of a great many signal Mercies,
You have met with a Variety of Difficulties and Troubles; some of which have
been attended with very uncomfortable Circumstances. I take this Opportunity to
join with You in heartily Rejoicing, and Blessing Him, who has so wonderfully
supported You under, and so comfortably carried You through all hitherto.
Methinks You had a peculiar Mercy, under the most Furious Assaults of those
envenomed Spirits, who combined together (sometime since) to blast Your
Reputation, (of some of whom it is sufficiently evident, that they aimed at
giving a Wound to the Ministry in General through Your Sides;) in having such a
Domestic Instance of Exemplary Patience in Your Dear Consort: Who though
deeply Affected, and not free from just Resentments of their Inhumanity;
(especially in Charging You with Unkindness to Her, who ever retained a most
thankful Sense of Your endearing Love and Tenderness;) yet carried it all along
with that evenness of Temper, that Christian Composure, and Vndauntedness;
(being fully satisfied from first to last, of the Groundlessness of their
malicious Insinuations) as seemed wonderful to all who knew, and observed Her.
I am persuaded, You then reaped much Comfort and Benefit, as from the serious
Supplications of Your Loving Flock, and many other Christian Friends on Your
behalf, so also from Hers Particularly, which were sent Upwards with a peculiar
Tenderness and Fervor. And Your Loss of Her Prayers, by Her Removal, is with
me (and I doubt not with You much more) of considerable Account.

WOULD the most Angry and Censorious, but take the Pains to peruse, and have
the Patience seriously to consider, those Genuine and Unaffected Breathings of
a gracious Heart, a Gospel Spirit, and truly Christian Temper, which I have
inserted in the Annexed Character of the Deceased, out of Her own Papers; I
could not but Hope, if they had any remaining Tincture of Sober-mindedness,
they would see the Folly of Inveighing against that sort of Ministry, either as
Legal, or Vn-Evangelical, which GOD so blesses, and makes use of, to Form
Christians of such a Make, and Spirit, and Temper: If not, let them go on, and
see what they will get by it in the Issue. And although, while they persist in
this Course, I am well assured they are doing the Devils Work, yet all the Hurt
I wish them is, that they may not in the Event fall short of Her, whose
Character is here faithfully though imperfectly given, and others of the like
Stamp, to whom GOD is pleased so remarkably to bless that sort of Ministry,
which they with so much bitterness Censure and Condemn.

MAY You (Sir,) If it be the Will of GOD, shine the Brighter the more others
study to Eclipse you: May the Devil (who is too subtle to Rage most, where his
Interest is least Assaulted) find You through Divine Assistance, the more
effectually supplanting and undermining his Kingdom, the more Opposition he
raises against You: May You be more and more fixed out of the reach of Envy and
Bitterness, Rage and Malice: May the Exemplariness of Your Life and Carriage
silence all the Calumnies of Your Adversaries: And the Eminent Success of Your
Ministerial Labors, more and more Confirm the Truth of the Doctrine You
deliver: May You still have fresh Supports afforded, suitable to Your Trials
and Exigencies: And long remain an Instance of Public Spiritedness and
Integrity in a wretchedly Selfish Age: May You have an abundant Reward above;
and have Your Memory (when You are gone to Rest,) blessed here Below:

This is the Hearty Prayer, Of

SIR, Your Unworthy Fellow Laborer in the Work of the Gospel. E. CALAMY.

A Funeral SERMON.
HEB. XI. xvi. But now they desire a better Country, that is an Heavenly;
wherefore God is not ashamed to be called their God, for he has prepared for
them a City.
THESE Words may be considered under a double Aspect. Either as particularly
relating to the Old Patriarchs, of whom the Apostle is in this Place
discoursing: Or, As they are equally applicable to any, who tread in their
Steps in Aftertimes: Either as peculiarly meant of the Forefathers of the
Jewish Nation; Or as generally regarding all who are acted by a like Faith with
them; All who are heartily Listed in the Service of the same GOD, and stand in
the same Relation to Him; whose common Spirit and Temper, Honor and Happiness,
is here exemplified and illustrated.

Considered the former of these ways, Three Things in them deserve Observation.

I. The Character given of those Ancient Worthies, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob;
concerning whom it is asserted, That they desired a better Country, that is an
Heavenly. II. A comfortable Inference drawn from that Character; Wherefore GOD
was not ashamed to be called their GOD. III. The Manifestation of the Truth of
that Inference: GOD showed he was not ashamed of that Name, in that he had
prepared for them a City.
These Three things duly weighed and considered, will give a sufficient insight
into the sense of the Words, according to their Primitive and Original
Intention; which once settled, will make way for the Doctrinal Observations
they afford, with their suitable Improvement.

I. Begin we then with considering the Character here given of the Old
Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; of whom it is asserted, That They desired
a better Country, that is an Heavenly.

Abraham upon a Call of GOD, had forsaken his Native Country, his Kindred,
Friends and Paternal Inheritance, which are naturally very dear and valuable,
and taken his Progress toward an unknown Land, which he upon the Divine
Promise, believed would in time, become the Possession of his Posterity: While
there, he had a Son and Grandson born to him, who were Heirs of the Promise;
who Traveled with him from Place to Place, having no fixed abode, or hope of
present Settlement, but following GOD whithersoever he would lead them; living
and dying in this Faith, That he would without fail, make good to a Tittle, All
that he had promised them; especially with reference to their Progeny, and the
Messiah, (who was to spring up amongst them) and their Future Bliss. In the
whole Course of their Lives, they all professed themselves Pilgrims and
Strangers; which (as it is here argued in the Context) intimated, that they
sought a Country, wherein they might be at rest. This Country they sought
for, must be either Earthly or Heavenly: Were it an Earthly One, it must be
either that which they had abandoned; or that in hope of which they had
forsaken the Land of their Nativity: It could not be the former, for they had
no thoughts of returning to it; for which they could not have wanted
Opportunity had they had an Inclination: Neither could it be the latter,
because though they were safely arrived at it, beheld, and traveled through
it, they yet sought not for a Settlement in it: they professed to have here no
continuing City: they desired therefore a better Country, that is an Heavenly.

A Better Country. This is comparative. A Country better than that which they
had forsaken; and better than that in which they sojourned. One better than
that which they had forsaken. For they might well expect they should be no
losers, at long run, by following GOD. How could they imagine he should have
put them upon leaving what was better, for that which was really worse? They
might certainly upon good Grounds hope, that when they had trusted to him to
provide for them, he would not leave them destitute and helpless; would not
leave them worse than he found them; nay, not till he had made their listening
to him, and following of him, in the final issue, abundantly worth their while,
both in their own and others Estimation. Again,

ONE better than that in which they sojourned. For even in the Land of Canaan
they were not at rest. They did not incorporate with those among whom they
sojourned, but kept themselves to themselves, and that by order; and so were
but a poor solitary Family living upon Courtesy: Had they therefore at the
present ever such Ease and Plenty, they knew not how soon they might be
deprived of it; being by some un-foreseen Accident forced to a removal. The
Land was in it self indeed delicious and tempting; styled therefore in Holy
Writ, a Land flowing with Milk and Honey: i. e. abounding with the Necessaries
and comfortable Conveniences of Humane Life; but yet being Strangers in it,
they met with a great many difficulties and un-easinesses, fatigues and
troubles. And had these been much fewer and smaller than they really were, they
must be supposed very ignorant and thoughtless, if they were not sensible that
this Earth was no Place for a perpetual abode; that they were but passing
through it toward the Invisible Regions; And in a little time to be
transplanted hence into another State. Like Persons therefore truly devoted to
the Most High, they looked beyond Earth for an Home, they desired a better
Country; where there should be perfection of Life, and Fullness of Bliss;
freedom from all Evil, and an abundance of all good; and that un-alterably and
for ever: And that the rather, because they knew this was no more than he to
whom they had devoted themselves, and under whose Care they were, could easily
help them to. Canaan was a good Land; but yet it could not satisfy them; they
still craved a better Country: A Country of a better Nature; where they might
have better Entertainments and Enjoyments; and better Society and Converse; all
free from Mixtures and Defects; more suitable to their rational Refined Powers;
liable to no Changes or Alterations, Disturbances or Interruptions; a Country
therefore necessarily of another Kind: That is,

AN Heavenly Country. And indeed desiring a fixed Settlement, how weak must
they have been, had their Thoughts ultimately fixed in any other! Earth being in
its own Nature necessarily mutable; and Heaven only fixed and stable. No other
than an Heavenly Country could suit Heaven-born Souls; and satisfy their
enlarged Cravings; no other could answer their spiritual Aims; no other could
be perfect and without mixtures; safe and of Eternal Continuance. Such a
Country therefore they desired. We may translate it a Supercoelestial One; i.
e. seated above all the visible Heavens; meaning that which is called the Third
Heaven. 2 Cor. 12. 2.


SOME are very earnest in maintaining, that the Ancient Patriarchs neither had
any better Promise, nor higher Thoughts than of a Temporal Felicity. Whereby
they would tempt one almost to think, that they hardly ever took Notice of this
Passage of Sacred Writ, where the direct contrary is clearly intimated, when it
is asserted, that they desired an Heavenly Country. Crellius particularly in
his Comment on the Text, pretends, that the meaning is, a better Country was
designed for them, but not explicitly desired by them. He owns indeed that a
State of Immortality and Glory is here intended; though not as looked for, and
desired by the Patriarchs by Virtue of any Promise: But as what would ensue
according to the Divine Purpose, although they had no ground to believe it.
Which in short, is a direct levelling them with the rest of the World,
notwithstanding that God had thought fit to separate and distinguish them out
of special Favor. For Temporal Blessings were not a sufficient Mark of
Distinction; nor a suitable Foundation for that celebrated Covenant of
Peculiarity. Can it be imagined that God should be called their God, so often,
and in so pompous a manner, above what could be claimed and pretended to by the
rest of the World, and after all it should issue in nothing but his settling on
their Posterity a small Spot of Land, wherein they themselves all their Days
were Strangers, having no certain Habitation? Are these Tempoporal lower Things
to be thought of such account with God? Must not the Ancient Worthies be
supposed grossly carnal in their Aims and Inclinations, if these furnished with
the principal Motives of their Obedience? What sort of Servants must God have
of those, who had only Earthly Things in their Eyes? Whose Hopes and Hearts
were not fixed on Heaven? All their Devotion must necessarily be mean and flat,
and all their Service spiritless and beggarly. How could it be possible, that
such Heroical Obedience, as theirs was in sundry Instances, should arise from
such mean and weak Foundations? Besides, How could this Supposition consist
with the Apostles present Argument? Who if he does not prove that their Faith
wrought in the Desire and Expectation of Heavenly Things, proves nothing at all
to his Purpose: As is evident, if the Context be duly Consulted. But it is to
little Purpose to Argue, where Men having fixed their Hypothesis, which they
will not alter, will resolve all Things they meet with into a consistency with
it. To one that considers things fairly, a Believer not eying Heaven, will
appear a Contradiction; And that of such a Nature, as that the difference of
the Economy Persons are under, will be far from satisfactorily Accounting for
it.

IT IS further observable, that this Heavenly Country was much desired by them.
The Word we so translate, intimates great Earnestness and vehemence in reaching
out after the Thing aimed at. They did not only therefore faintly wish, that
they might be admitted into the Celestial Mansions, when they had finished
their Course on Earth: But their Desire was vigorously active in a way of
endeavor, in Order to their safe Arrival at them. The Grounds of their Desire
of this Heavenly Country were mainly these. They were feelingly sensible of
their want of something higher and more noble, more solid and more durable,
than this Earth was able to afford them; they found just ground for
dissatisfaction, in their present flitting, uncertain, wandering, and imperfect
State: They were at the same Time fully satisfied, that if they could but once
reach Heaven, all their Difficulties and Exercises, all their Perplexity and
Uneasiness would be at an End, and that for ever: And withal, they were not
destitute of Reason to Hope, that that God who had given them so many
Assurances of his Favor, would not herein refuse to gratify them: Which
Grounds were of such a Nature, as that they might well carry their desire to a
considerable height, and make it very vehement, and earnest, and consequently
very influential on their whole Conduct and Behavior. For Desire cannot in any
Case but be enflamed where these three Things concur; a Sense of want; a
certain Prospect of a comfortable Alteration upon its Accomplishment; and a
grounded Hope of that Accomplishment; no one of which could be said to be
wanting in the Case of these Patriarchs.

THUS much briefly of their Character, which though short, carries in it a
plain Description both of their Faith and Conversation.

OF their Faith; In that they nothing doubted but there was a stable, firm,
Heavenly City and Country, built, made and prepared by GOD, for all his
sincere Servants; a Place and State infinitely beyond any that was to be met
with here on Earth; into which they questioned not, but that they in time
should be received, if they persisted in an Holy Course of Obedience to the end
of their Lives.

OF their Conversation; in that their firm Belief of the Excellency of that
Heavenly Country which they had in their Eye, made them earnestly desire it,
and vigorously follow after it; overlook all discouragements and difficulties
they met with in their way to it; contemn all Earthly Glories in comparison of
it; and tend toward it in their whole Course; and that with such earnestness
and assiduity, as sufficiently intimated to all that observed them, that they
looked not on themselves as of this World, but as of another Country; and
reckoned not upon being at home, till they got safe to Heaven.

THIS being well considered will abate our Wonder at the seemingly strange
Inference we find drawn from this their Character; to the Consideration
whereof, I now in the Second Place proceed.

STRANGE but comfortable is the Truth hence inferred, Wherefore (says the
Apostle) GOD is not ashamed to be called their GOD: So well did he approve of
their foresaid Faith and Desire, that he thought fit to give Evidence of his
special respect to them. Their Faith being so firm, and their reliance on the
Divine Promises so steady, as its fruits and effects discovered it; they being
so free in despising these lower things, and so earnest in pursuing higher,
upon the inducements he set before them; he did not disdain them, or think it
any dishonor to him, to own them to be his, and himself to be Theirs. He
thought it no Disgrace to him to vouch a special Relation to them. This is
spoken after the manner of Men. The expression is Negative, the meaning
Positive. It implies a joyful acknowledgment of them, as a Father of a Generous
Son: and a much greater readiness to gratify their reasonable Desires, than
there could be in the tenderest Earthly Parent, toward the most dutiful and
respectful Child conceivable. And here let us Pause a little, and make our
Remarks.

GOD was neither ashamed to be their GOD; nor to be called so.

He was not ashamed to be their GOD. If He had, He would never either have
represented Himself as such, or have suffered Himself to have been so
represented by others. He was their GOD: And that not only in a way of
Propriety, Dominion, and Sovereignty, in which Sense He is the GOD of all Men;
but in a way of special Interest, arising from a Covenant Engagement to them;
whereby He stood bound to take Care of and Provide for them; to Protect and
Bless them; to be their Shield, and exceeding great Reward, Genesis 15. 1.
as He particularly Promised Abraham. Now what an Honor was this! For any of
the degenerate Children of Adam, to be admitted into such a Relation to, to
have such an Interest in, the Infinite Lord of Heaven and Earth! Of whom, and
to whom, and through whom are all Things! And who really is all in all! Well
considered, it will appear amazing.

AGAIN; He was not ashamed to own and call Himself their GOD; which is yet
more. For He might really be their GOD, and yet not be ready to signify, or so
willing to have it* Published that He was so: But alas, having taken them for
his own, and put such an excellent Spirit into them, He thought it no dishonor
to Him to be called by their Name. For thus does He express Himself to Moses.
Exodus 3. 6, 15.
I am the GOD of Abraham, the GOD of Isaac, and the GOD of Jacob. And again;
The Lord GOD of your Fathers, the GOD of Abraham, the GOD of Isaac, the GOD of
Jacob. This is my Name for ever; this is my Memorial to all Generations. Now
what an Honor was this to them, for the great GOD to be named after them! What
were Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, but Men who were Dead, and laid in their
Graves, long before this Speech was addressed to Moses? And what were they while
Living, but poor desolate Strangers, wandering from Place to Place; naturally
infirm; vile through Sin; and every way imperfect; and therefore absolutely
speaking, unworthy of any Favor? What an amazing Thing then is it, that GOD
should as it were be beholden to them for a Name, and borrow a Title from them,
whereby he should be known to others! This is an Honor the Greatness whereof
we cannot reach; and which no Comparisons can help to illustrate.

IT deserves however to be observed, that although these Patriarchs were far
from having any thing to (...) such an Honor, yet were they so qualified, as
that it was not unbecoming GOD to confer such an Honor upon them. Abraham,
Is^^c and Jacob, as unworthy as they were, were yet Persons of a Sincere Faith,
and Heavenly Conversation; as has before been hinted: And had they not been
thus qualified, we may be assured GOD would never have owned them for His. Had
they been prevailingly Terrene and Carnal, like the rest of the World; governed
by the Spirit of it; ingulpht in the common Pollutions, Sensualities and
Impieties, of the Profane and Atheistical Inhabitants of the Land wherein they
Sojourned; He would have been ashamed to have been called their GOD. He would
have reckoned it ignominious and a reproach to Him, to have owned a peculiar
Relation to them. For this would have been to have attempted to distinguish
such as would not be distinguished; and to have made a visible difference by
Favors and Privileges, where there was no visible difference in Temper and
Conversation, that might signify a more excellent Spirit: Which, how much
soever it might be to the gust of a Carnal Mind, could not but appear a Matter
of Shame to an Holy GOD. But they being by His influence wrought up to such a
Temper and Carriage, as has before been briefly signified, 'twas consistent
with His Honor, He was not ashamed to own them for His.

HE is never ashamed of Persons, because Poor and Mean, and of no Account in
the World: But He would and might justly be so, of those who wallow'd in Filth,
and delighted in Impurity. 'Twas otherwise with these Patriarchs. Although they
made no great Figure, yet such was their Spirit, and such their Carriage, that
He thought it not a Diminution to Him, to be styled theirs. It was thought mean
by the Heathen World, and a Matter of Reproach, that He should style Himself
the GOD of Three Poor wandering Pilgrims: But let them Laugh on; He was not
ashamed of His Title, nor did He disuse it till He had famisht their Idols,
which they set up in Opposition to Him, and effectually vindicated Himself from
the Reproach of their Admirers.

NAY, He was not only not ashamed of His Title, but He gloried in it. For He
gave Himself this Name in Confirmation of the Covenant, by which He stood
engaged to these Worthies, whereby he had ample occasion of glorifying the Holy
Properties of his Nature, in the displays of His Grace, Goodness, Truth, and
Power; and various other of His most glorious Perfections, on their behalf. And
the Meaner the Objects, the greater the Glory. Thus GOD was not ashamed to be
called Their GOD.

BUT I know not how to dismiss this Clause, without observing how it confirms
our Savior's Argument against the Sadducees, in Proof both of The Souls
Immortality, and the Bodies Resurrection; to clear which, this very Passage is
Cited out of Exodus, which is here referred to.

THE Sadducees denied both these Grand Articles of FAITH; (as appears from Acts
23. 8.) When therefore they came to our Blessed Lord with a Foolish Question,
he to confront them (as will appear by consulting the Places Cited in the
Margin) urges this Declaration of GOD by Moses, Matt. 22. 31, 32.
of His being the God of Abraham, Luke 20. 38.
Isaac and Jacob. Some have been so petulant, as to call the strength of his
Argument, taken from this Declaration, into Question; but considered with the
light my Text gives it, 'twill, I think, appear sufficiently cogent. For GOD
would really have bin ashamed of making any such Declaration, had not their
Souls bin immortal, and were not their Bodies to rise again.

1. GOD would have bin ashamed to have bin called the God of Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, if their Souls had not bin immortal. For they were all Dead a
considerable time before he made that Declaration to Moses, as before was
hinted. Now GOD, (as Our Savior urged) is not the GOD of the dead, but of the
living. He Would have bin ashamed to have styled himself their GOD after their
Decease, had they thereupon quite lost their Being. For what could his
pretending to that Relation to them have signified, if it could not have kept
them from returning to Nothing? In stiling Himself Theirs, He certainly
intended some peculiar Blessing and Advantage to them above others. This they
could not be said to have had at any time in this World; for they were
continually fatigued and harrass'd, and never at Rest: It Is therefore necessary
they should have it in another; or otherwise this Promise of His being Theirs,
would shamefully have fallen short of what it seemed to import. If (as one well
says) nothing beyond this Life had bin reserved for them, that saying of Old
Jacob toward the end of his Life, Few and ^uil have the days of the years of
my life been, would have bin an Eternal Reflection on the Truth and
Faithfulness of Him, who had so often called Himself The GOD of Jacob: But
supposing Him to make up in the Happiness of another Life, what was wanting in
this; Supposing Him to have fixed their Departed Spirits in Un-Alterable Bliss;
His Promise and Declaration appears to have been made Good to the Full; And He
needed not to be ashamed to be called their GOD. Again,

2. HE would have bin ashamed to have bin called, The GOD of Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, if their Bodies were not to rise again. Which though it be not so clear
and directly evident as the foregoing Proposition; yet is it not destitute of
sufficient Proof. For let it be observed; Our Souls and Bodies are so adapted
to each other, That a separate Soul, though in the midst of Bliss, is in a sort
imperfect, while without its proper Body; after which, notwithstanding the
greatest surrounding Glory that could be imagined, there yet remains an
hankering inclination. Now would it not reflect on the Blessed GOD to make His
Servants happy by halves? To strip them of their Bodies, before they should at
all taste of the Provision he had made for them in the Upper World; and leave
them without all hope of receiving them anew, notwithstanding a Reunion to
them would be a great Addition to their Happiness? Withal, it seems highly
equitable, That the same Body which at the Soul's Command, was often harrass'd,
and bore a great many Fatigues in the Service of GOD, should also share in the
Reward following upon it. Further; Humane Nature, considered as framed entire
by GOD, must necessarily have some End propounded to it; which can be no other
than the Blessedness of the Whole Man: For the End of one Part, cannot be the
End of the Whole: But GOD made the Whole; and takes the Whole under His Special
Care and Patronage when sincerely devoted to Him; and therefore must make the
Whole Happy, unless he be supposed to mock those whose GOD He professes
Himself; Which to imagine, would be a most shameful Reflection upon Him. New
this cannot be without a Resurrection of the Body; which therefore, together
with the Soul's Immortality, results by Consequence, from His profess't
Relation to these Patriarchs as their GOD.

III. IT now remains, That in the Third and last place, I a little consider the
manifestation of the Truth of the foregoing comfortable Inferrence, which
stands thus; GOD showed He was not ashamed to be called their GOD, in that He
had prepared for them a City.

A CITY. This is the same with that better Heavenly Country, of which in the
foregoing part of the Verse they are said to be so desirous. Heaven is expressed
to us in the Sacred Scriptures, by sundry Metaphorical Resemblances. Sometimes
its called a Paradise, 2 Cor. 12. 4.
or Garden, because of its santness and delightfulness. But there being in a
Garden no fixed abode, it is called an House; Joh. 14. 2.
which has convenience for fixing. But an House may be too strait for the
number of Inhabitants, and therefore it is here called a City, and elsewhere in
this Chapter, Verse 10.
and in many other Places. But least any should think of being incommoded for
want of Room and Air, it is here also called a Country. And because a City or
Country may be destitute of the Glory that attends a Court, Luke 12. 32.
it is called a Kingdom. And the Design of these and all other the different
ways of Representation used in this Case, 2 Pet. 1. 11
is to satisfy us that the Place and State prepared by GOD for the Everlasting
Entertainment of His Faithful Servants, has all things in it that can be
really needful or useful, delightful or entertaining, comfortable or desirable,
to Persons advanced to that Degree of Perfection which they shall be raised
unto.

THIS City is prepared. Herein there is an Allusion to the manner of disposing
Colonys into Cities and Towns: Before the actual settling of which, all things
are usually ready prepared for their Habitation and Entertainment. Consonantly
whereto, it is intimated that in this Case, GOD was fully provided with
whatsoever was requisite to the Eternal Rest and Blessedness of these His
Servants; That He had made such Provision for them, as was abundantly
sufficient to answer all the Ends of His being their GOD, or being so called.

BUT wihhal, it is to be observed, That this Preparation necessarily also
includes and supposes, the Interposition of Christ the Mediator, by whom this
City was to be procured and purchased: And also the Influence of the Divine
Spirit, to prepare these Candidates for that perfectly Holy State, in which
much more of the Happiness of Heaven lies, than in the Glorys of the Place:
Which Spirit is supposed to work Faith in them; and by sanctifying them, to
prepare for Possession and Enjoyment.

FOR these Blessed Patriarchs was this City prepared; For them, and not for
others: Not because they merited it, and others not; but because through the
Influence of Divine Grace, they earnestly minded, desired, and sought it;
despised all Earthly Felicity in Comparison of it; and thought nothing too much
to undergo in the way to it. For them was a Blessed Home prepared above, who
never thought themselves at Home while here on Earth. For them who were all
their Days Pilgrims and Strangers here, was Everlasting Rest provided in the
Heavenly State. For how unequal soever the present Dispensations of Providence
may appear, GOD will at long run make a mighty difference, between those who
sincerely Love, and serve Him, and Value His Favor; and such as neglect and
slight Him, and bid Him defiance.

NOW how full an Evidence was GODs thus preparing this City for these
Patriarchs, of his not being ashamed either to be their God, or to be called
so? Hereby He sufficiently discharged the demands of that Declaration, and
carried it as became that Relation. For had He been either weary or ashamed of
them, He Would have cast their Souls into a deep Sleep, whence they should never
have recovered; He Would have let their Bodies have for ever lain rotting in the
Grave without any Hope of Resurrection; He Would never have thought of them more:
He Would have let them sink into their Primitive Nothing; buried them in an
Everlasting Oblivion; and have taken effectual Care, that neither they
themselves should survive to upbraid him with his acting so unsuitably to his
professed Relation to them, in his not having made answerable Provision for them;
nor any others on their Account. But on the other side, having provided such an
Happy Reward, for all their Pains and Labor in his Service, as the Blessedness
of the other World, He fully shows that He is altogether Consistent with
Himself, and punctual to the utmost Tittle to all His Promises; and no way
wanting in any thing which they could reasonably expect that a GOD, nay, even
their GOD, should be unto them, or do for them.

THUS have I as briefly, as well I could, opened and cleared the Primitive
Sense of the Words, according to their Reference to the Ancient Patriarchs: As
to whom they intimate to us in short, That a most excellent Spirit was found in
them, and a suitable Reward was provided for them. But they have an Eye upon Us
also as well as upon Them, and may be of use to all who come after them. For
with good Reason may we upon Reflection conclude, that wherever there is the
same Spirit working, and showing it self, the same Reward in Process or Time
will follow. GOD will no more be ashamed to be called the GOD of any of us, as
meanly as we may possibly be thought off either by our selves or others, than
He was to be called the GOD of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; if we are Heavenly in
our Temper, Bent, and Stated Course, as they appear to have been; and we shall
find in the Event, He has made as ample Provision for our Everlasting
Entertainment as ever He did for theirs.

SUNDRY Doctrinal Observations that would be both Instructive and Affecting,
would so full and copious a Text as this thus opened, afford Foundation for:
But waving others, I Will Select these two, which I Will endeavor succinctly to
open and illustrate.

DOCT. 1.
THAT all Holy Souls look upon themselves but as Pilgrims, and Strangers here
on Earth; and are therefore earnestly desirous of a better Country, that is an
Heavenly.

DOCT. II.
THAT GOD would be ashamed to be called the GOD of such as Renouncing this
World; devote themselves entirely to his Service, and ardently aspire
Heaven-wards in the Course of their present Pilgrimage, if He had not made
abundant Provision for their Happiness in a better State and Life after this.

DOCT. I.
THAT all Holy Souls look on themselves but as Pilgrims and Str^^gers here on
Earth; and are therefore earnestly desirous of a better Country, that is an
Heavenly.

THAT it has actually been thus with many of the most Eminent Saints,
mentioned in the Sacred Scriptures, is undeniable. Says Abraham to the Sons of
Heth, Genesis 23. 4.
I am a Stranger and Sojourner with you. And Jacob speaking to King Pharaoh,
calls the Days of his Life, Genesis 47. 9.
The Days of the Years of his Pilgrimage. They (as has before been observed)
were but Sojourners in that Land whereof they had the Promise; and herein they
did but shadow out and represent the common Condition of good Men in this Life;
who notwithstanding, the firmness of their adherence to GOD, are traveling up
and down in the World for a Time, in great uncertainty; often changing their
Place, and State, and Posture, and Circumstances; as they of Old did in Canaan.
Of which also they have not been insensible: Thus David confesses to GOD; 1 Chronicles. 29. 15.
We are Strangers before Thee, and Sojourrers as were all our Fathers: And he
gives this Reason; Our Days on Earth are as a Shadow, and there is none
abiding. And elsewhere; Psalm. 39. 12.
I am a Stranger with thee, and a Sojourner, as all my Fathers were. And it
has been the like with others also. But that which bore them up in this their
unsettled State, and under all the Evils and Troubles which attended it, was
the Hope and Prospect of a quiet Habitation, and perpetual Rest in a Future
State. Thus we are told concerning Abraham in this very Chapter; Verse. 10.
That he sought a City which had Foundations, whose Builder and Maker was GOD.
And it is intimated, that it was the believing Foresight of that, which made him
easy in the midst of all his Difficulties. And Jacob in an Holy Rapture cries
out; I have waited for thy Salvation, O Lord. Genesis 49. 18.
And Job declares, Job 19. 26, 27.
that though after his Skin, Worms should destroy his Body, yet in his Flesh
should be see GOD: Whom he should see for himself, and not another: Though his
Reins were consumed within him. The thought whereof enabled him to hold out,
under the forest Trials. David also herein Triumphs; that whatever he was
forced first to undergo, GOD would at length show him the Path of Life; Psalm.
16. 11*
and bring him to his own Presence, where there is fullness of Joy; and to his
Right Hand, where are Pleasures for evermore. And at another Time, when he was
much discomposed at the Reflection on his own Afflicted State, compared with
the Prosperity of the Wicked, he soon recovers, at the Thought of the Happy
Issue that awaited all his present Exercises and Conflicts. Psalm. ^7. 15.
As for me (says he) I will behold thy Face in Righteousness: I shall be
satisfied, when I awake with thy likeness. St. Paul also not only in his own
Name, but as personating the Body of Believers, declares; 2 Cor. 5. 2.
We know, that if our Earthly House of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have
a Building of GOD, an House not made with Hands, Eternal in the Heavens. And
that our Light Affliction, 2 Cor. 4. 17.
which is but for a Moment, works for us a far more exceeding and Eternal
weight of Glory.

WHICH Things taken together, give us sufficiently to understand that this
Doctrine is true in Fact, as to many of the most remarkable Servants of GOD,
whom we find mentioned in our Sacred Records: To whose Experiences in a Point
of this Nature, we may well conclude, those of others, who are acted by the
same Spirit, how different soever their particular Circumstances may be, should
be Consonant and Correspondent. But I advance further, and dare be bold to say,
that whosoever truly belong to GOD, they cannot but look upon themselves as
Pilgrims in this Life; and therefore can do no other than earnestly seek an
Home above, where they may be at Rest, and that for ever. And if you will but a
little consider, the Divine Principle that is in them; the Worlds
unsuitableness to them; and the Prospect Faith gives them of Futurities, you will
easily conclude, that thus it must necessarily be with them.

FIRST then, Let us a little consider the Divine Principle which is in all Holy
Souls; and which not only is in them, but acts and governs them. They are made
partakers of a Divine Nature; 2 Pet. 1. 4.
which therefore necessarily prompts to, and issues in a Divine Life; which
lies in two things, among others, a Love of GOD, and Universal Purity; Both
which have a direct tendency to alienate them from this World, and make them
Foreigners in it; and to raise their Hearts toward a better World, and make
them earnest Seekers of it.

1. THE Divine Principle, which is implanted in all Holy Souls, naturally tends
to draw forth their utmost ardour in the Love of GOD, to whom it brings them
wholly to resign and sacrifice themselves; desiring above all things to please
Him, and delighting in nothing so much as in Fellowship and Communion with Him.
It causes them to disdain and undervalue all things below Him, as mean and
unworthy: So that that Strain of the Psalmist, Ps. 73. 25.
Whom have we in Heaven but Thee, and there is none upon Earth we desire besides
Thee! becomes their natural breathing. For He is really their Souls last End
and Rest. Now how can Persons of this Make be fond of this present World, which
is a mere Stage of Vanity and Sin; where, under the utmost Advantages, they are
comparatively distant from Him whom their Souls love: Comparatively, I say,
with what they desire, and hope to be hereafter.

THEY well know that While they are at Home in the Body, they are absent from
the Lord: 2 Cor. 5. 6, 8.
How then can they do any other, than (as the Apostle intimates) be rather
willing to be absent from the Body, and present with the Lord. It Is the nature
of Love to excite vehement desire after the nearest Union that is possible with
its Prime Object, and to make uneasy under Absence and Separation from it.
Now, what is in this Life to be found, and felt, and enjoyed of GOD, is as
nothing, to what our Natures are capable of, and what Grace leads Holy Souls
most earnestly to desire, and what they hereafter hope for: (on the Account
whereof it is that they are at present said to be as it were, absent from him:)
The intenseness therefore of their Love to Him, necessarily leads them to look
upon themselves, as being in this Life abroad, and in a strange Country; and
with vehemence to long for that near Vision, and close and un-interrupted
Enjoyment of Him, which they expect when they shall come to be at Home: And,
when they act like themselves, nothing but a sense of Duty, and desire of
serving the Purposes of His Glory, according to their capacity here on Earth,
can enable them to brook their Absence from Heaven, where their Hearts and
Hopes are fixed.

2. THAT Divine Principle which resides, rules and governs in all Holy Souls,
most naturally and directly influences them to an Universal Purity. They are
framed for Divine and Intellectual Pleasures; which are unspeakably Superior
to what Sense can possibly afford. The Body, whereto they are at present linkt
in its State of Mortality and Corruption, has such a propenseness to be
inveigled by those light and Airy Gratifications which Sensual Objects offer
for their Entertainment, that they are forced to keep up a constant Contest
with it; and to be perpetually striving for the Mastery of it: And when they
have done all they can, they find their success so small, that they have good
reason with the Apostle Paul to cry out of their wretchedness. Romans 7. 24
This makes them necessarily very uneasy; and the more so, because they can
see no reason to hope it will be otherwise while this Life lasts. Well then,
and naturally may they conclude, that this is not a Place for them to be fond
of; or wherein they should desire to settle; that this World is a place where
they must carry it as Strangers, least before they are aware, they are defiled
and debased: They must needs be induced often to long for their Arrival at that
Place and State, where being free from that toil and trouble, which is now
their daily Exercise, they shall meet with Entertainments every way suitable to
their sublime and refined Tempers, and be satiating themselves therewith to all
Eternity. But further,

2. IF we add hereto the Consideration of the Worlds unsuitableness to Holy
Souls, we shall meet with further Evidence of the same thing* Whatever others
think, who judge by the Great, and put all the Additionals of a Freakish Fancy
into the Scale, together with that small Scantling of Reality that is here to
be met with; for their parts they find this World to be a very unsuitable place
for them to make any long stay in; and the longer they live in it, the more do
they find it so: And that because it is so very troublesome, so uncertain, and
changeable, and so ensnaring.

1. THEY find this World to be very troublesome. This Life has a great many
natural inconveniences, which make it uneasy to Thinking-Persons. There is no
Age of it, from first to last; whether Infancy or Childhood, Youth or Manhood,
or Old Age, but has its peculiar Troubles: No State in it, but what has its
special Difficulties. Do Persons live solitarily? they are in danger of being
Mopish. Are they much in Conversation? they will see so much Vanity and Folly,
Ill Humor and Insincerity, as, if they will give way to Thought, cannot but
disturb them. They Will find it hard, with the utmost Caution, to walk
inoffensively; and meet with so many unkindnesses, (and that even it may be,
where they have studied to oblige) as will make them weary of their Lives. Are
they in a poor and low condition? they will find it very hard to rub through the
World with any thing of evenness of Temper, and content of Mind. Are they rich
and wealthy? the Vexation, Care and Fear, and the envy of others, that attends
their Estates, and the disquieting Losses and Disappointments they meet with,
do often more than overballance the Comfort they afford them. Are they in
Health and Strength? yet it is an Hundred to One if they are not afflicted with
Losses, or deprived of their Friends, or crossed in their Interests and Designs,
or have something or other, ever and anon, happening to them, to interrupt
their Repose. Are they sick and crazy, or often in Pain? How little Relish have
they of all all their Comforts! How burdensome are their Lives! Nay, How often
do we find that even those who have all that heart could wish for, that have
all the Materials and Ingredients of a Worldly Felicity at command, yet even in
their suffciency are in streights; and make a shift to create as much trouble
to themselves, by their own listless, querulous, uneasy Tempers, as those who
have the most real and substantial Causes of Discontent?

BUT besides all these, and a great many other Considerations of the like
Nature, that might be suggested, which are common to all, the World is
peculiarly troublesome to Holy Souls. They for the most part, meet with a great
many Hardships, Contempts and Injuries in it; they are often baited at,
molested and teased by the Men of the World, who care not for their Company.
For, as our Blessed Lord has long since observed, because they are not of the
World, Joh. 15. 19
therefore the World hates them; and is often speaking evil of them, and doing
evil to them. They see GOD so much dishonored in it, as grieves them to the
heart; and causes them often with bitterness of Soul to mourn in secret. And
all these troubles, and a Thousand more, that were as easily named as these,
are great hindrances to them, in that whereon their hearts are principally
intent; and often create them much perplexity and uneasiness. How can they then
but be tired with this World, when they have dispatched the great Business they
have to do in it; and comfortably settled their Concerns as to a Future State?
How can they take this for a suitable Place for them to stay in, where they are
like to have little else but a constant succession of Disturbances? How can
they do any other than earnestly long to be in their Father's House, where they
shall meet with no sorrow or trouble more for ever?

2. HOLY Souls find also this World very unsuitable to them, because so
uncertain and changeable. The more they give way to Thought, the more necessary
do they find it to fly higher than the Stage of Sense for a Portion. As for
themselves, they perceive by their Make, they are framed for Eternity, unless
he that made them should annihilate them; of which they can discern no just
Reason to be apprehensive. As for this World they find the Fashion of it is
still passing away; and that in all its Parts, and at all Times it is full of
Uncertainty and Unsettlement. How then can they six upon it? If not better
provided, how certainly may they expect in a little Time to be left quite
destitute? And how can they take up with that, which they are every Moment in
danger of being deprived of? They well know that there is nothing here to be
met withal, let it seem ever so sure, but it may be taken away by a thousand
unforeseen Casualties; and let ever so great a Degree of Earthly Felicity be
attained, they within a while must die, and in that very Day all their
Enjoyments and Hopes as to this World perish. Others indeed know these Things
as well as they, but they mind them not; and you may plainly discover by their
Carriage they hardly ever think of them. But being important Matters, they are
often seriously weighed, and intently ruminated on, by Holy Souls: Who
deliberately thence conclude, that it is in vain to seek for an Happiness here;
that we are only Traveling and Passing through the State we are in; and are
thereby led to fix their Hearts on the upper World, where alone it is that any
Thing Solid, Stable, and Durable, is to be met withal.

3. THIS World is therefore also unsuitable to Holy Souls, because ensnaring.
Often have the best been here led aside from God and their Duty; and drawn into
Sin to their unspeakable Damage. Either unforeseen Temptations have presented
themselves; or they have been careless, and nibbled at the Bait, till they were
caught with the Hook. Through Heedlessness and Privacy, was even a Noah tempted
to Drunkenness and Incest; and unguarded Lust, drew a David into Murder and
Adultery. And who then can be Secure? Snares abound every where, and some that
are taking, will not be wanting; and even those who have given themselves up to
GOD most seriously, and listed themselves in his Service most heartily, are not
out of Danger: For they have Corruption within, and a busy Enemy without, who
watches all Opportunities to entrap them; and he is so subtle and diligent, that
unless they are always watchful, he will be more or less too hard for them. And
if he in any remarkable degree prevails upon and foils them, how will he
triumph! And how will the wicked of the World, who are ever at his beck
rejoice! How busily do they, that they may serve their Master, employ
themselves in endeavoring to draw such aside into some reigning Vices! How
many Artifices will they use for that purpose! And if they prevail, how will
they scoffingly cry out, and say, Even the Godly are as bad as others! And when
they come to recollect their own Slips and Miscarriages (especially if they are
any thing notorious) great is their Concern and Regret; nay sometimes their
bitterness and perplexity is inexpressible. For time to come, it may be, they
then think to be more careful. But Alas! after all, How difficult is it to live
where an infectious Contagion is diffused universally, and not be tainted? How
hard to be daily conversant in a wicked World, and not be dampt and deadned in
the Exercises of the Divine Life? The Generality are not aware of this; but the
more holy any Persons are, the more lively is their sense of it. This causes
them to live as 'twere in daily fear: And they would be quite disheartened, had
they not ground to hope, that such sort of Exercises would not last long; but
that when they had bin tried for a time, if they retained their integrity, GOD
would take them to Himself, and make them Happy in His Favor and Love for
ever. Thus its plain, This Worlds unsuitableness tends to wean Holy Souls from
it, and raise them above it. Again,

3. THE Prospect which Faith gives them of Futurities, tends also to produce
the same Effects, viz. To make them weary of this Earth, and to long for
Heaven. Their Faith grounded upon the Promise of GOD, assures them that He will
be a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him; Heb. 11. 6.
that there remains a Rest for His People; Heb. 4. 9.
That He will give Eternal Life to all those who by Patient continuance in well
doing, Romans 2. 7.
seek for Glory, and Honor, and Immortality; and that there is an Inheritance
incorruptible, 1 Pet. 1. 4.
and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for them; and the
like. These Things are not the Fruit of their Fancy; they are not Persuasions
they have unwarily imbibed, or taken upon Trust from others, without just
Grounds: But their Faith herein is bottomed on the Word of the Eternal GOD. Now
it is in the Nature of Faith, as is even in this Chapter declared, Verse. 1.
to be the Substance of Things hoped for, and the Evidence of Things not seen:
Holy Persons having such a Foundation to build upon, do as verily believe that
if they persevere in the Course they are in, they shall certainly find these
Things made good to them; as though they did actually enjoy them already. They
are as really persuaded of the Truth of these, and the like Declarations, and
give as true an Assent to them, as if they could see the Things they make
mention off, or as if they were intuitively, and demonstratively known to them.
Now their full Satisfaction in the Grounds they go upon, must necessarily
depretiate this World, and advance that to come in their esteem. Were they left
at uncertainties, they would not be so Positive; But having such Security given
them, they cannot but look upon this Earth as a Foreign Country to them; and
fix upon Heaven as their Home.

THUS much of the first Observation: The second follows; viz.

DOCT. II.
THAT GOD would be ashamed to be called the GOD of such, as renouncing this
World, devote themselves entirely to his Service, and ardently aspire
Heaven-wards in the Course of their present Pilgrimage; if He had not made
abundant Provision for their Happiness, in a better State, and Life after this.

AND here I Will endeavor briefly to show these Three Things.

I. WHAT it implies for GOD to be called any Persons GOD*

II. THAT He really is the GOD of those, who renouncing this World, devote
themselves heartily to his Service, and fix on Heaven as their Home and
Portion. And,

III. THAT it would be Matter of Shame to Him, had He not made suitable
Provision for all such Persons in a better State and Life than this.

FIRST then, Let Us take Notice what it implies, for GOD to be called the GOD of
any Persons. He is the GOD of all in a General Sense (as has before been
intimated.) For He made and sustains them, and He alone can make them Happy.
But when such a Phrase is in the Scriptures applied to any peculiarly, It
denotes a special Interest in Him in a Covenant way; a peculiar Propriety in
Him, founded on that Covenant of Grace, the Substance whereof we have thus
delivered to us in short; I will be their GOD, and they shall be My People* It
necessarily therefore denotes a transcendent Love and Affection in GOD to any
Persons, for Him to be styled Theirs. It Is certainly a great Demonstration of
Love, for Him as it were to give Himself to them: And therefore also this
Appropriation must needs imply some very great and extraordinary Happiness.
It Is declared by GOD, That he that overcomes shall inherit all Things; Rev.
21. 7.
but as if this were nothing, notwithstanding all Things are taken in, it is
added; And I will be his GOD, and he shall be my Son. One would have thought
nothing could have been more than all: But however this is added, because all
all things else are as nothing without it. But alas! who can tell what it is,
and what it implies for GOD to be the GOD of any one! Thus much in General is
plain; that it intimates He will Act for such a Persons good as becomes a
Being, infinite in all Manner of Perfections: But come to Particulars, and we
are soon at a loss. That Man that should pretend to unfold it, must be able to
Fathom the boundless Excellencies of the Divine Essence, which are all engaged,
so far as the good of the Party to whom GOD has made Himself over, is
concerned. Whosoever has GOD for his GOD, His Mercy is his to Pardon him; His
Wisdom his to guide him; His Power his to Secure him; His Faithfulness his to
fulfill all his Promises to him; His Love to confer Grace and Glory on him; And
in short, all that is in God is his, so far as his Necessities can require, and
his Capacity can reach. So that this is most evidently the very Top of our
Happiness.

BUT let it be observed withal, that in such a Phrase as this, there is ever
implied a respect to the Attoning Blood of the Mediator; without the
Intervention whereof such degenerate and guilty Creatures as we, could have had
no Hope, should have remained incapable, of any such Interest: But that, has
laid a Foundation for our Advancement to this Amazing Honor and Privilege;
which bespeaks all those who reach to it inconceiveably Happy; by Reason that
it intimates that GOD will do all things for them in a becoming Manner, and
like Himself; all Things which may further their Everlasting Welfare.

2. GOD certainly is thus the GOD of all those, who renouncing this World, do
heartily devote themselves to His Service, and fix on Heaven as their Home and
Portion. He is the GOD of none, if not of such. What is the Language of the
Covenant but this, Heb. 9. 10.
I will be to them a GOD, and they shall be to me a People? Of which I think we
can make nothing, were any willing to be His People, and desirous to be under
His Care, and free to be governed by His Laws, to whom he were backward to be a
GOD, and to Act the Part of a GOD Which is the more evident from hence; in that
there cannot be such a Consent as this* a real willingness hereto, in any Heart
that is not of His Producing. For (whatever any in the Heat of Dispute may have
advanced) it is notoriously evident that none of the fallen Race of Adam would
in this Case move till they were drawn; none could be free and willing to take
GOD for theirs, as He has offered Himself to them in Covenant, whom He had not
made so. They might indeed after a sort, be desirous of the Blessings of the
Covenant: That is to say, they might desire to be pardoned that they might not
be damned; and to be so far under the Divine Protection and Care, as that they
might be saved from Ruin, and the like: But this is all Selfishness; and has
nothing of Love to GOD at the Bottom of it. This there may be, and GOD still
remain estranged; and they after all go without an Interest in him as theirs.
But wherever there is a free Consent in any Heart, to take Him for Owner,
Ruler, and End, according as He has proposed Himself; and a willingness to be
entirely at His Disposal, and under His Government and Management; we may
safely say, there the Divine Spirit has been effectually at Work: For
otherwise, this is a step, had never been taken. Now to suppose Persons wrought
up to this, and GOD to stand back; to suppose them willing, and Him shy; were
to imagine He mocked us in the Proposal of His Covenant, and sported himself
with our Misery, when He made us Overtures about our Recovery.

NOW I Will leave it to any to Judge, how impossible it is for Persons to
renounce this World, and fix on Heaven as their Home and Portion, and Act
correspondently, and this Consent on their Part be wanting. For what is it to
renounce the World, but to disclaim all Interest in it opposite to the Divine
Honor; to be Content with that Portion of it that is of Divine Allotment; to
use it as not abusing it; to be ready to improve what is afforded of it, for
the best Purposes; and to sit loose to it, and be ready to part with what is
most dear and valuable in it, upon a Divine Call? And what is it to fix on
Heaven as an Home and Portion? But to live in the believing Hope and
Expectation of a bettrr State and Life after this; to long for it, and pant
after it; despise all Things that could be offered in Competition with it; to
be earnest and diligent in preparing for it; fetch Supports from it under all
present uneasinesses; and be often delightfully ruminating on those Reports
which GOD in His Word has made concerning it? And both these jointly, do
plainly bespeak an Heavenly Mind and Heart. How can the blessed GOD, then, if
He Act consistently with Himself, do any other, than embrace all such with a
tender Affection; become theirs, and Act like a GOD on their behalf? Now this
He could in no respect be said to do, had He not prepared an an Heaven, that is
a State of exquisite and perfect Bliss, for their Everlasting Entertainment.
Which leads me to the Third and Last Particular, viz.

3. TO show that it would really be a Matter of Shame to the Blessed GOD, had
He not made suitable Provision, for all such Persons as those forementioned, in
a better State and Life than this. None need wonder at the Phrase I use, when I
speak of its being a Matter of Shame to GOD; for it is borrowed from my Text.
And indeed strictly speaking, it would be really shameful and a dismal
Reflection on the great GOD, if He had not such a reserve as Heaven for their
Entertainment, when this frail Life comes to an end. A few Things will
sufficiently clear this.

1. UPON this Supposition He Would have provided no Satisfaction for earnest
desires of His own exciting. He (says the Apostle) that has wrought us for
the self same thing, 2 Cor. 5. 5.
is GOD. His meaning is, it is He who by his Spirit has wrought up Believers to
any Measure of Preparedness for the Blessed and Glorious State above; it is He
that has kindled earnest Desires after it, and excited firm Expectations of
it. Had He not then such a State in Store, had He not an Heaven in reserve, for
the Entertainment of His faithful Ones, at the end of all their present
Conflicts, it would evidently appear He did but Tantalize them in making any
such Motions to them; in stirring up any such Inclinations in them. And would
not this be shameful? Might He not be ashamed to be called their GOD, whom He
lured to Himself, and then imposed upon, by deceitful Appearances, and Shadows,
instead of Substances? But this we may be assured can never be; for He has
prepared for them a City.

2 HE would upon this Supposition have made it their Duty, to intend an and
which could not be reached. For we knowing our Selves capable of subsisting
hereafter, nay of enjoying a much greater Happiness than this present State can
admit off, are hereby laid under an indispensable Obligation of intending that
Happiness as our End. For supposing there should be no Future State of Bliss,
there is however no possibility of being absolutely certain there is none: Nay
the Matter being impartially considered, it will appear abundantly more likely
that there is. Now the very Law of Nature obliges us to pursue the highest Good
whereof we are capable, supposing the Attainment of it be but probable:
Revelation next steps in, and tells us it is certain. If the after all, there
should be no Heaven hereafter, we must not only acknowledge that Capacity
needless; but also must be supposed to be obliged to employ the Principal
Endeavors of our Life, and all our Powers to no Purpose. And what a shameful
Reflection would this be on GOD, for Him to have laid us under an absolute
Necessity, if acting Rationally, of aiming at that which is unattainable! Of
Laboring for that which is not! And constantly tending toward that which has
no other Being than in the Fancy and Imagination! And so we must either live
like Brutes, and be continually exposed to the smart Upbraidings and Reproaches
of our own Minds, without Relief: Or else following our Reason, must
voluntarily befool our selves by Building Castles in the Air, where there is no
possibility of having any Footing. Might He not well be ashamed to be called
the GOD of those whom He held thus fastened in a fatal Circle, whence they
could never get loose! We may therefore conclude, if He Acts like Himself,
there must be an Heaven in Store and Reserve. Again,

3. UPON the Supposition forementioned, None would fare so ill as the Servants
of GOD. Those who were really the best, would fare the worst: For,

1. PIOUS Persons would have no reward for all their Pains. Far be it indeed
from such as we are, to think of meriting any thing at the hands of GOD; I
abhor the thought: and yet I am sure 'twould be no credit to him who has
promised to be a rewarder of them that diligently seek him, to let People serve
him for naught. There Is a great deal of Pain and Misery and Sorrow, which many
Holy Souls voluntarily undergo: Their tender Consciences reproach and smite
them for the smallest Neglect and Transgression; and on that Account, draw
forth many a mournful sigh and groan. The sense of their great weakness makes
them walk in constant Fear. Watchings and Fightings against the Assaults of
Satan are their Daily Exercise. Their Self-Denial is Galling; and their
severity to the Flesh painful. Often are they groaning under their own Body of
Sin and Death; and Rivers of Tears also run down their eyes, at the sight of
the Transgressions of others, whereby their GOD is dishonored: And can all
this come to nothing at last? And there be no difference at long run between
those who underwent so much for the Sake of GOD; and those who lived in an open
Estrangement from Him, and Opposition to Him! Would not this be shameful?

SHOULD any Plead, That Holiness and Virtue is its own reward; I Will freely
grant it in the General: Insomuch that were we certain there were no Life after
this, it were more for our present Interest in the main, to be virtuous than
vicious; unless where there should be apparent hazard of the Loss of Life or
Estate, or of any other insupportable Detriment, which a virtuous course might
have attending it: But yet withal, it is obvious, that there are sundry
Exercises of Virtue that are very difficult and painful; in which the Holiest
Souls are most strict and frequent; which upon that Supposition, would be
needless and fruitless, and therefore better forborne: For such as these there
would be no Reward. Which would cast such a Reflection on the Blessed GOD, as
were never to be wiped off But we may be assured it is otherwise, For He has
prepared for them a City. Nay,

2. UPON the Supposition foregoing, The most Pious would be so far from gaining
by the Service of GOD, that they would plainly loose by it. For it is easy to be
observed, that a great part of their Lives is employed in painful endeavors
after a meetness for Heaven. Their great Aim and Scope is, to purify
themselves as he is pure, to whom they are devoted, and in whom they hope to be
for ever happy. With great earnestness do they strive to improve both
Ordinances and Providence to this purpose. Early and Late are they tugging at
their listless, sluggish, backward Hearts, that they may get them into a more
lively, spiritual Heavenly Frame. And many an Hour do they spend in
endeavoring to mortify a particular Sin, which they find themselves most
prone to, which yet others, it may be, can hardly observe in them. And can all
this at last, prove labour-in-vain? shall they be never the better for all in
the issue? If so, they had done much better to have spent their time, and their
pains, in more agreeable, pleasant, and delightful Exercises, like the rest of
the World. 'Twas better they had denied themselves nothing that their hearts
could crave, which yet had not present visible damage and detriment attending
it; 'twere better they had freely enjoyed themselves, and what came within
their reach, and not have so tired their Spirits, or perplexed their Minds, or
sower'd their Joys, by any such needless Labor and Severity. They lost all
that Pleasure and Ease, and Freedom and Satisfaction which others met with, all
that while that they were Grinding at the Mill, as 'twere, and all to no
purpose. Let none say this is as nothing; For though it be freely granted it
would appear so, upon a certain Prospect of a Future State, which unspeakably
over-ballances; Yet, had we no more to expect than what this Life could afford,
it would be very considerable, and a Stress might be deservedly laid upon it.
For Common Sense would teach us to make the most of our all. It was not without
good Reason therefore, that the Apostle declares, That if in this Life only we
have hope in Christ, 1 Cor. 15. 19.
we are of all Men most miserable. But this cannot be, for he has prepared for
Them a City: And which is more, their future Advancement therein shall be the
higher; the more pains they took in His Service in this Life, and the more they
lost and endured for his Sake. Again,

4. UPON the foregoing Supposition, GOD would either leave His most faithful
Ones without any Thing to support them under their greatest present Troubles,
or He Would support them with a Fallacy. Holy Souls fetch their great Consolations
from Heaven in every State. The Thoughts of that refresh and cheer them when
their Sins and Sorrows make them weary; support them under the greatest
Disappointments; and make them Boast and Triumph in their GOD, in the midst of
all their Afflictions. This Thought often recurs; we are not far from Home, and
then 'twill be better. Were it not for this, their Spirits would often sink,
and their Hearts faint. Nothing else in reality, besides a Prospect of a Future
State of Bliss, can any thing tolerably support them. The Thoughts of the utter
unavoidableness of the Troubles they met with, through the Imposition of a
rigid Fate; or of the common liableness of all Mankind thereto; or of the
likelihood of their ceasing in a little time, upon their passing into a state
of Silence and Darkness, and Everlasting Oblivion, would give little Relief.

IF this then prove a Fallacy, he who pretends to be their GOD, has most
miserably deceived them: And is not that a Matter of Shame? But this need not
be feared, for he has prepared for them a City.

Lastly, WERE there not an Heaven prepared for Holy Souls hereafter, A Special
Relation to GOD would signify just nothing. Those big Phrases, Their GOD, and
our GOD, would in reality, dwindle to mere Noise and Sound. For what could they
be supposed to import that could amount to any thing, if yet the Persons
concerned might be left destitute; if there were no Provision made for their
Eternal Abode. They had even as good have bin without Him, and had no Concern
with Him, any further than was common to all. For they will be left to the Full
as helpless and miserable, as if they had slighted and disregarded Him all
their days, and lived as much at Random as any in the World. So that even GOD
Himself must necessarily be ashamed of any such Empty Title, that has no
significancy in it, or benefit attending it. But there being an Heaven, that is
unspeakably more glorious than we can conceive, He is not ashamed: And we, if
we are his Faithful Servants, may have the Comfort at present, and shall have
the Benefit hereafter.

I should now expatiate beyond all Bounds, should I pretend to be particular in
my Application of the Discourse foregoing; However, I cannot be satisfied,
without making some Improvement.

1. THEN Give me leave to ask you (My Friends) how you stand affected, making
this Text the Touchstone, as it has bin opened to you? Are you of the same
Spirit and Temper with the Ancient Patriarchs? Deceive not your selves; the
Faithful Servants of GOD in all Ages, are of one and the same Make, and acted
by one and the same Spirit. The Period of time, wherein they lived, makes no
essential difference between them. Have you then any of that Faith for which
they were so famous? and does it work the same way, according to our
Circumstances and Divine Calls? Our Advantages with respect to clearness of
Light, and opportunity of distinctly understanding the way of Salvation, are
greater than theirs: But how is it with our Hearts? Do they work toward GOD
and Heaven as theirs did? Do you, Sirs, carry it like Pilgrims and Strangers
here on Earth? Do you desire, and seek, and pant after a better Country, that
is an Heavenly? Give me leave to put it to you (and I pray put it home to your
selves); could you not be contented, would it not be pleasing and delightful to
you, to have the hope and prospect of living here always? I doubt that is the
Case of many: But must assure you wherever it is so, it is a Sign there is not
the least Tincture of Saving Grace. Have you fixed on the Most High GOD for
Yours? Have you chosen Him, and given your selves up to Him, and that heartily
and sincerely? Can you evidence it by your Heavenly-Mindedness? If so, it is
happy for you. But let me tell you, these things deserve to be inquired into,
and that with great Seriousness and Application; for much depends upon them.
Again,

2. LET me desire you to consider what is like to become of those of you who
never yet minded this better, this Heavenly Country, in the whole Course of
your Lives; but have bin buried in the World, and minded Earthly Things, and
nothing else. I doubt this would take in many in this Numerous Assembly. Pray,
Sirs, what is likely to become of such as you in a little time? Where do you
think to go when your Souls shall take their

1. THEN Give me leave to ask you (My Friends) how you stand affected, making
this Text the Touchstone, as it has bin opened to you? Are you of the same
Spirit and Temper with the Ancient Patriarchs? Deceive not your selves; the
Faithful Servants of GOD in all Ages, are of one and the same Make, and acted
by one and the same Spirit. The Period of time, wherein they lived, makes no
essential difference between them. Have you then any of that Faith for which
they were so famous? and does it work the same way, according to our
Circumstances and Divine Calls? Our Advantages with respect to clearness of
Light, and opportunity of distinctly understanding the way of Salvation, are
greater than theirs: But how is it with our Hearts? Do they work toward GOD
and Heaven as theirs did? Do you, Sirs, carry it like Pilgrims and Strangers
here on Earth? Do you desire, and seek, and pant after a better Country, that
is an Heavenly? Give me leave to put it to you (and I pray put it home to your
selves); could you not be contented, would it not be pleasing and delightful to
you, to have the hope and prospect of living here always? I doubt that is the
Case of many: But must assure you wherever it is so, it is a Sign there is not
the least Tincture of Saving Grace. Have you fixed on the Most High GOD for
Yours? Have you chosen Him, and given you selves up to Him, and that heartily
and sincerely? Can you evidence it by your Heavenly-Mindedness? If so, it is
happy for you. But let me tell you, these things deserve to be inquired into,
and that with great Seriousness and Application; for much depends upon them.
Again,

2. LET me desire you to consider what is like to become of those of you who
never yet minded this better, this Heavenly Country, in the whole Course of
your Lives; but have bin buried in the World, and minded Earthly Things, and
nothing else. I doubt this would take in many in this Numerous Assembly. Pray,
Sirs, what is likely to become of such as you in a little time? Where do you
think to go when your Souls shall take their flight, and leave your Bodies
behind? It may be you may hope you should be transplanted into this better
Country: What! and never Mind it before! Think of it a little and you will easily
discern that that is an unreasonable, and will in the Event prove a groundless
Expectation. No, you must desire it; and that not Lazily, but Earnestly; you
must be diligent in using all the Means GOD has directed you to, in order to
the reaching of it; you must get above the World while you are in it; you must
get an Heavenly Mind and Heart; otherwise this will be impossible. And truly
you had need Mind this Matter speedily: For an Heavenly Temper is not likely to
be gotten in an instant. And should you Die without it, what would become of
you? GOD has indeed prepared a City, a glorious City, where his faithful Ones,
shall have Everlasting Rest, and Peace, and Joy: But flatter not your Selves,
this is nothing to you; you have neither Part nor Portion in this Matter. I
beseech you then; look about you, before it be too late. You might come there
as well as others; (for whatever you may weakly imagine, there is no Bar in your
Way, but what is of your own laying:) it is offered to you as well as others;
and GOD is Sincere and Earnest in that offer: Why then should you befool your
Selves? Neglect your own endless Happiness, and throw your Selves into
Perdition?

CONSIDER a little where you must go, if excluded thence. Pray, whither can you
go but to the Land of Gloominess, and thick Darkness; where Weeping and
Wailing, and Gnashing of Teeth, is the perpetual Employment: And there must you
spend an Eternity, in Lamenting your present Folly. As you would not have this
to be your woeful Case, I beg of you this Day; rid your selves of Encumbrances,
Mind Heaven in earnest. Break off your Sins by Repentance. Make your Peace with
GOD. Look out for an Interest in Christ. And think not to make a neglected GOD
and SAVIOR your last Refuge, which I Am sure would be little to your Comfort,
nay would be likely to Issue in your Everlasting Confusion. Again,

3. IF GOD is not ashamed to be called our GOD, then let us take Care, that we
be neither ashamed of Him, nor a shame to Him.

LET us not be ashamed of Him; that is ashamed to own Him. Shall the Men of
this World Glory in their Shame (as they often do) and we be ashamed of our
Glory! How unaccountably strange does that appear! Let them Laugh, Ridicule or
Banter; pray what will they get by it, or we loose? But I am verily persuaded,
would but Pious Persons put on Courage, and Manage it with Prudence, your
Hectoring Swaggerers, who Pride themselves in defying GOD, and pouring Contempt
on whatever belongs to him, would in most Cases, without much Difficulty, be
put out of Countenance. But be that as it will, why should we in any Company,
be ashamed to own to whom we belong? Our Service is honorable; and our Reward
will be great; we have no need therefore to sneak: Let us leave that to those,
who can give no Account of themselves or their Actions; their Work or their
Wages. Again,

LET us also take Care, that we be not a shame to GOD. Lets beware of a carnal,
drossy, earthly Spirit.

Let Us beware of narrowness of Mind and Selfishness: And indeed of any Thing
that might bring a Reproach on Him whom we serve, or the way we walk in. Let Us
remember that the Eyes of GOD, and of the World too are upon us; and that there
is, and may be a General Expectation, to find a difference between us and
others. Let Us have our Conversation in Simplicity, and Godly Sincerity; keep
our Eyes six't upon our Home; and carry our selves so, as that others may be
able to observe, what we aim at, and whither we are tending.

LASTLY; Since GOD has provided a better Life for His People after this; has
prepared for them a City; we may groundedly Cry out, Blessed are the Dead, Rev.
14. 13.
which Die in the Lord. For they are Transplanted into that Country which they
so much desired, and so earnestly sought, and on which their Hearts were so
much set: And feel the Meaning of GOD's being their GOD, in a Degree beyond
what we at our distance are capable of Understanding.

AND this I doubt not is the Case of our lately Deceased Friend, the truly*
Pious Mrs. Elizabeth Williams. Whom I dare to set before you as one of the
Primitive Stamp; one of a like Spirit and Temper with those Worthies whom my
Text speaks off.

TAKE Her before Her late Illness, and She had as many Things to make this
World agreeable to Her, as most can pretend to. She came of an Honorable
Family; had a great many Noble Relations; an Husband to Her Hearts desire; a
Considerable Estate; and a General Respect from all that knew her: And yet all
this was as nothing to Her; She could not bear a thought of fixing, and taking
up her Rest here below; but looked upwards; and professed Her Self a Poor
Pilgrim and Stranger in the World: She sought a better Country; that is an
Heavenly; and that with greater Vigor and Assiduity; with greater Diligence
and Fervor; and with greater Earnestness and Constancy, than, is I am sure,
(to say the least) usual and common.

SHE began to dislodge from this Earth, and look Heaven-wards betimes. She was
brought Home to GOD in Her Younger Years, by Means of a Sermon of one Mr.
Baynes, who was an Eminent Minister in Dublin; and gained many Souls to Christ
in his Day. And setting out for Heaven so soon, She made a much greater Advance
in the Way thither, than could otherwise have been expected. She often
reflected on Her Early Dedication of Her Self to GOD with Comfort and Joy; and
has many Times been heard to say with an Holy Triumph, by those who were
intimate with Her; GOD has been my GOD, even from my Youth. And She ever after
kept as close to him, and gained as much by close walking with Him, as most can
pretend to.

I cannot forbear particularly mentioning some Things con^erning Her, which I
take to be generally Exemplary and Instructive.

SHE was one of great Faith, and signal was Her Trust in GOD: To Him She had
heartily given Her Self, and in Him, who She knew was faithful, She could
Conside. There was a remarkable Instance and Evidence hereof, in Her last
Passage from Ireland to England in the Month of September, 1687. She was then
in a Violent Storm; eminent was the Danger; not only in the Apprehension of the
Passengers, but of the Master, and Seamen; all reckoned themselves as Lost.
Here was a Time of Trial. But She was fearless; and great was Her Composure and
Undauntedness. She cast Her Self on GOD, and was freely ready for His Pleasure.
I have seen this Passage of Providence Recorded by Her own Hand; with this
Remark: That there was at that Time an observable Answer of Prayer, in a sudden
and unexpected Calm immediately following upon their joint Recommendation of
themselves to GOD. And with this short Petition annexed; Lord make me to live
more to thy Glory, that I may not be afraid to Die at any Time.

HER Love to GOD was eminent. She manifestly seemed to all who had any Thing of
Freedom with Her, to value His Favor more than all the World; and to Fear His
Displeasure, more than any Trouble whatever. It seems to be the most inward
Sense of Her Soul She vented, when She put this short Passage under Her Hand;
The Manifestation of GOD to my Soul, is my highest Privilege and Comfort: And
the hidings of His Face, my greatest Loss and Sorrow. She appeared to take
Delight in whatever belonged to GOD. His Word She counted Her chiefest
Treasure, and therewith She converst daily, with great Earnestness and
Pleasure. His Sabbaths She esteemed the sweetest Portion of Her Time. His
Ordinances, were the greatest Comfort of Her Life: And it has been observed by
those who knew Her well, that She would be more Cheerful and Pleasant in Her
walks to the House of GOD, than at any other Time. She had a mighty Honor,
Value, and Love to the Ministry. She did not (as is common with many) Love this
or that Particular Minister extravagantly, and disesteem others: But She
honored the Office, and all without Distinction who were faithful in it: She
loved all, and despised none. She looked upon all equally as GOD's Agents and
Representatives; and as such they were the Objects of Her singular Esteem and
Respect. And in short, whatever any Way belonged to GOD, or had any Thing of
Him in or on it, She discovered an high Value for.

SHE was much taken-up in admiring Thoughts of our Lord Jesus Christ, and His
Work of Redemption: And often venting the Sense of her Soul, in ardent
Breathings after Him. I Will give you a few Passages of this kind out of Her
Papers; in Her own Words.

IN one Place thus: I Am amazed at the Mysteries of Redemption; the Incarnation
of the Son of GOD; the Killing the Prince of Life; the Humiliation of the High
and Lofty One; the Disgrace of the Lord of Glory; the Curse upon Him who is
Blessed for ever: O the Mysteries of Scripture, of Love, of Grace, of
Providence!

IN another Place; Oh that I may know Christ as a Prophet instructing me; a
Priest satisfying for me; and a King ruling spiritually in me.

IN another thus: This Wretched Soul of Mine does Pine away for Strength, and
even Pant for Breath; longing to receive Increase of Life from the Living Stock
Christ Jesus; which must be thy Work, and thine only. Oh work it I humbly pray
Thee, which way thou will; Oh Empty my Self, of my Self, and let all Glory be
given to Thee, and not to any other.

SHE was entirely Dependent for all on the Blessed Spirit of Grace. In one of
Her Papers, She has this remarkable Passage looking that way: There is no
Corruption though more deeply rooted than others, but that in Time, by walking
in the Spirit, bringing it to the Law of Christ, to the Death of Christ, and to
the Love of Christ, and joining Ones own Endeavors to the Spirit of Christ,
one may get an Eminent Victory over it, and see it by Degrees fall down before
us. Lord lend me the powerful Aid of thy Spirit, I humbly beg it.

IN another Place thus: I am troubled with Temptations, but I Trust in Thee: I
Rest on Thee for Life and for Salvation: Oh take me into the Bosom of thy Love
for Christ's sake: I cast my Self into the Arms of Thine Everlasting Strength; I
have no Confidence in my Self nor any other.

BUT in no Grace was She more eminent than in that of Humility. She silently
converst with Her GOD, and that better World, which Her Heart was set upon,
without Noise and Ostentation. She was more fearful of nothing than Spiritual
Pride. Methinks that is an affecting Passage which dropped from Her Pen a Year or
two ago: I must humbly leave it on Record, I never found so much of GOD, I
never drew so near Him, I never experienced the Power of His Word as of Late.

AND yet as Humble as She was, and as diffident of Her Self, She did not think
Her Self excused from becoming Christian Resolutions in Dependence on Divine
Strength. Take some of them, in Her own Words.

I WILL be ruled by thy Revealed Will.

I WILL be disposed of, by thy Pleasure.

I WILL gladly be improved by Thee.

I WILL Rest on Thy Fullness to discharge all my Bonds.

I WILL wait on Thee in all Thine Appointments.

I WILL intend thy Honor in all I do as my chief End.

I WILL be serviceable in my Place, as I can to others.

I WILL be satisfied with Thee, and thy Rich Treasures as my Portion. And

I WILL take thy Word and Sacraments as my Security.

HEREIN will I Hope, and go on till Death.

I am weak; but Christ is strong.

AND I Hope for Supplies from Him.

To which She subscribed Her Name.

GREAT was Her Contentedness, Resignation, Submission to the Will of GOD, and
Heavenly Mindedness. Her Papers abound with pregnant Expressions, and
Indications hereof. In one Place She delivers Her Self thus.

LORD give Me what thou will have Me to do; and then do what thou will to, and
with, Me thy unworthy Servant.

IN another, She has these Two Remarkable Passages.

IF Thou will have Me poor and disgraced, I am Content to be so.

IF Thou will have Me serve Thee in the Condition I am in; I will gladly do so.

IT is enough to Me, that Thou will have it so.

I desire to yield readily, humbly and cheerfully to thy Disposing Providence.

AMEN, Amen, Lord.

HAS GOD made Me Rich, that I might maintain my Pride, my Pomp, and Erutish
Pleasures?

NO; He has rather Lent than fully given Me what I have; and I must give an
Account to Him for all.

ALL we are and have, we have it on this Condition; TO use it, to leave it; TO
lay it out, to lay it down;

UNTO the Honor of our Master, from whose Bounty we received it.

SHE was very Regular in Her Devotions: Much in Prayer; and frequent in
Meditation; and spent more Time in Converse with GOD in Her Closet than most.
I Will Cite a few Passages out of Her Papers, which seem to deliver the very Sense
of Her Soul as to Religious Dutys. In one Place She expresses Her Self thus.

IN Duty I Would not be satisfied, unless Affections be raised so as feelingly,
awfully, believingly, fervently, and sincerely, I pour out my Heart with its
Desires to GOD.

IN another thus; The Soul on the Lip, and the Soul in the Ear, ridd Work in
GOD's Service.

IN another thus; A Soul in League with Sin, dare not come or look to, or think
of GOD; and what must that Man think on in a Duty, who dare not seriously think
of GOD?

SHE was much in Self-Examination: And such as these, were some of the Marks
and Signs whereby She tried Her Self.

1. DO I prize Christ's Righteousness? 2. DO I choose Heaven above all? 3. DO I
hate all Sin? 4. AM I spirited for Duty? 5. DO I relish and prize the Things of
GOD?
SHE framed various Maxims, and Collected Rules for Her Self, both for Her
Temper and Practice; which those who knew Her best, can bear Witness She made
Conscience of minding and following. I Will mention a few of them, as I find She
has set them down for Her Use.

WE should see, that we may be fit and ready for GOD's Service; and that
Religion, and Religious Duties sit fitly on Us.

THE Commandment finds work; the Promise finds Strength.

Religion is an inward, difficult, and serious Business: Oh rather give me the
Saints Heart, than the Angels Tongue.

THE End of Christ's Doctrine, is Practice and Exercise, and not Speculation and
Discourse.

NOBILITY of Birth, Honor, and all outward Delights, are to be denied for
Christ.

A sound-hearted Christian has always a GOD to go to; a Promise to go to; and
former Experiences to go to; besides some Experience of GOD's goodness which he
now enjoys.

BE sure there is somewhat displeasing to GOD, when the Word wants its powerful
Effect.

ITS our Duty to refer all the Circumstances of our Petitions to the Wisdom of
GOD.

WE may be Suitors to GOD, but we must not be His Counselors.

THAT Condition should be chosen by all, which is best for their Souls.

IT is a Blessed Trouble that brings sound and long Peace.

THE Spirits Operations will extort Acknowledgments. And the like.

AND yet notwithstanding all these Instances and Evidences, and a great many
more that might be produced, of the Fervor of Her Piety, and the Vigor of Her
Grace, She (as is usual with the best of Christians) had Her Complaints. She
thus expresses Her Self in one of Her Papers.

OH my dark Understanding! Oh my hard and unbelieving Heart! My Heart is the
worst Part of Me. Coldness and deadness of Heart is my Fault. I desire to
repent, and to be humbled for it.

She had a very tender Conscience; which made Her mourn in Secret, for those
Things which others would have taken little notice off. But withal She had Her
Comforts, Hopes, and Ioys. Her Religion did not lie all in complaining; but in
a Life of Faith, Self-denial, delight in GOD, and Preparation for Heaven. Her
Heart was so set on the Celestial Felicity, that She seemed as it were out of
the World while She was in it; and hardly any converst with Her, but they might
observe She looked upon Her Self as belonging to another Country.

THE Grounds of my longing for Heaven (says She in one of Her Papers) are;
those glorious Enjoyments that are there to be met with; GOD's Presence;
Perfection of Grace; Fullness of Joy; Excellency of Glory; Plenty of best Wealth
and Peace, etc.

SHE made no great Stir or Figure here below; Her aim seemed to be to pass
through the World without much Observation. She was not indeed framed for a
Life of much Action; but was a great Lover of Retiredness; I think I may justly
say to a fault: By Reason that She would in all Probability have more Consulted
Her own Benefit; and have been more useful to others, had She been more in
Conversation. But I pretend not to be giving an Account of one that was without
Imperfections, and Defects. Though withal it is not unworthy Observation; that
She by Her private and retired sort of Life, avoided a great many Snares which
much Conversation has attending it; which also was no small Inducement to it.

THERE is one Thing which in Justice to Her Memory, I cannot forbear mentioning
as the Matter of my own Observation; which has been Noted also by many others.
She was a Pattern of a Loving and Respectful Wife. A more Reverential Respect
for an Husband, joined with a more tender Affection, I must declare I never
saw, nor ever expect to meet with: And more than once has She intimated to me
Her entire well-pleasedness with the disposal of Providence in fixing Her
Condition in the World; assuring me 'twas more to Her Satisfaction and Content,
than if Her Circumstances upon Marriage, had not only equaled but exceeded,
what according to common Course, She from Her Birth and Estate might have had
Reason to have expected.

SHE was not without a Variety of Difficulties and Trials in the Course of Her
Life; and no wonder, since all Things we know come alike to all at present, and
there is no knowing either Love or Hatred by these Things. But She under all,
carried it with a Christian Patience, and Composure; and often had recourse to
Her small, Her Everlasting Home, for Support.

THOUGH She had met with many Troubles, yet none ever came so near Her, as the
loss of Her dearly beloved Sister, The Countess of Mountrath, a few Weeks
since; which did indeed sink Her Spirits, and was too hard for Her. This may
seem somewhat strange after the foregoing Account of Her: But the best have
their Weaknesses. Though there is this to be said in Her Case; She had before
been much indisposed, and was not recovered, when the Tidings of that Stroke
first reached Her: She received the News of it upon a Surprizal, which increased
the Impression it made; and then She pent up Her Grief, and would not give it
vent in the usual way, which was the occasion of its over-setting Her. She was
fearful of dishonouring GOD by immoderate Mourning; and thereupon suffered Her
Grief to boil within: Whereas had She let it run over, it would in all
probability have been much better with Her. So that there was an Holy
Tenderness observable, even in that which occasioned the Distemper, which has
now laid Her in Her Grave.

A little before Her Disorder came upon Her, She expressed Her Self thus one
Morning to Her Husband. I know not what I may meet with, but great Things
passed between GOD and Me this Night. He has with unusual Power assured Me,
and spoken to my Heart; I will never leave Thee nor forsake Thee: And this She
during Her Illness, often repeated. And GOD did indeed remarkably Guard Her; He
kept Her from doubting of Her State; She retained Her Assurance; in Her
greatest disorders She expressed Her desires to Die and be in Heaven; and the
breathings of Her Soul after GOD, even then, were such, as discovered the Pious
bent of Her Heart. Indeed the Power of Grace in Her Soul was convincingly
evidenced in the height of Her Disease.

SHE had not Her great Work then to do: She had indeed been very unfit for it.
But through Mercy, 'twas, I trust, dispatched long before. O take Warning all
you, who leave the principal business of Life to an uncertain hereafter. Little
do you know, but you may be surpised by Death on a sudden; or if not, may be
seized by some such Distemper, as though it may not remove you immediately, may
yet take away all Capacity of making your Peace with GOD, or getting ready for
another World. Take warning, I say; and provide in Time, and improve your
Health, and neglect not GOD, least you are deserted, and abandoned by Him.

THE last Seen of our Dear Deceased Friends Life was dark and gloomy: But the
Clouds are now quite blown over, the Issue was, I doubt not, glorious. GOD was
Her GOD still: He was not ashamed to own Her, nay helped Her to own Him, even
the Day before She died: When She expressed Her Faith and Trust, of Her being
about to be removed out of a Troublesome World into Her Fathers House.

THERE She now is in that better Country; on which Her Heart was so much set:
Let us therefore be Followers of Her thither; and together with Her, of all
that numerous Company, Who through Faith and Patience inherit the Promises.

AND GOD grant that we may.

Amen.
FINIS.
Books Printed for John Lawrence at the Angel in the Poultrey.
Folio.
MR. Pools Annotations, in Two Volumes.

The Works of the Reverend Mr. Stephen Charnock, B. D. in Two Volumes.

The Life of the Reverend Mr. Richard Baxter, with the History of the Times he
lived in, Written by Himself, and Published by Mr. Sylvester.

Quarto.
Mr. Shower's Winter Meditations, or a Sermon concerning Frost, and Snow, and
Winds, etc. and the Wonders of God therein.

-- His Thanksgiving Sermon, April the 16th. 1696.

Mr. Nathaniel Vincents Funeral Sermon, Preached by Mr. N. Tailor.

Mr. Lorimer's Apology for the Ministers, who Subscribed only unto the stating
of the Truths and Errors in Mr. Williams Book, in Answer to Mr. Trail's Letter
to a Minister in the Country.

-- His Remarks on Mr. Goodwin's Discourse of the Gospel, proving that the
Gospel Covenant is a Law of Grace, and Answering the Objections to the Contrary.

An Answer of Mr. Giles Firmin to Mr. Grantham, about Infant Baptism.

Some Remarks upon two Anabaptists Pamphlets. By Giles Firmin.

Mr. Firmin's Review of Richard Davis his Vindication.

A Proposal to perform Music, in Perfect and Mathematical Proportions. By Tho.
Salmon, Rector of Mepsal in Bedfordshire. Approved by both the Mathematick
Professors of the University of Oxford; with large Remarks. By John Wallis, D.
D.

Mr. Stephen's Sermon before the Lord Mayor, and Aldermen of London, at St.
Mary Le Bow, Jan. 30. 1693.

-- His Thanksgiving Sermon, April 16th. 1696.

Mr. Slater's Thanksgiving Sermon, October. 27. 1692.

-- His Sermons at the Funerals of Mr. John Reynolds and Mr. Fincher, Ministers
of the Gospel.

-- His Sermon at the Funeral of Mr. George Day, Minister of the Gospel at
Ratcliff, 1697.

The Jesuits Catechism.

A Sermon Preached at a Public Ordination in a Country Congregation, by Mr. S.
Clark.

Mr. Gibbons Sermon of Justification.

Comfort in Death a Funeral Sermon Preached upon the Death of Mr. Timothy Cruso
late Pastor of a Church in London, who Died November. 26. 1697. by Matthew Mead.

Mr. John Howard's Assize Sermon at Buckingham July 5. 1692.

The Evil of our Days with the Remedy of it. A Sermon Preached at a Visitation
at Rothwel in Northamptonshire, October 12. 1697. by the same Author.

Octavo.
Dr. Burtons Discourses of Purity, Charity, Repentance, and seeking first the
Kingdom of God, Published with a Preface, by Dr. John Tillotson, late
Archbishop of Canterbury.

Remarks on a late Discourse of William Lord-Bishop of Derry, concerning the
Inventions of Men in the Worship of God. Also a Defense of the said Remarks
against his Lordships Admonition. By J. Boyse.

The Works of the Right Honorable Henry, late Lord Delamere, and Earl of
Warrington consisting in Thirty Two Original Manuscripts under his Lordships
own Hand.

Bishop Wilkins Discourses of the Gift of Prayer, and Preaching; the latter
much enlarged by the Bishop of Norwich, and Bishop Williams.

Mr. Samuel Slater's Earnest Call to Family Religion; being the Substance of
Eighteen Sermons.

Mr. Addy's Stenographia: Or the Art of Short Writing completed, in a far more
Compendious way then any yet Extant.

Cambridge Phrases, by A. Robinson.

History of the Conquest of Florida.

Mr. William Scoffin's Help to true Spelling and Reading: Or, A very easy
Method for the Teaching Children, or elder Persons rightly to Spell, and
exactly to read Engglish.

Graaf de succo Pancreatico: Or, a Physical and Anatomical Treatise of the
Nature and Office of the Pancreatick Juice.

A Preservative against Deism: Showing the great Advantage of Revelation above
Reason, in the Two Great Points, Pardon of Sin, and a Future State of
Happiness. With an Appendix in Answer to a Letter of A. W. against Revealed
Religion in the Oracles of Reason, by Mr. Nath. Tailor.

A Practical Discourse concerning Vows: with a special Reference to Baptism and
the Lords Supper, by Mr. Edmund Calamy.

Monro's Institutio Grammaticae.

Dr. Pack's Praxis Catholica: Or, the Countryman's Universal Remedy; wherein is
plainly and briefly laid down, the Nature, Matter and Manner, place and Cure of
most Diseases incident to the Body of men.

English Military Discipline, or, The way and method of exercising Horse and
Foot, according to the practice of this present Time, with a Treatise of all
sorts of Arms, and Engines of War.

Orbis Imperantis Tabellae Geographico Historico Genealogico Chronologicae,
Curiously engraven on Copper Plates.

Clavis Grammatica: Or, the ready way to the Latin Tongue; containing most
plain demonstrations for the regular translating English into Latin.

Mr. Alsop's Faithful Rebuke to a False Report.

-- His Vindication of the Faithful Rebuke, etc.

Mr. Woodhouse's Sermon, Preached to the Society for Reformation of Manners.

Mr. Shower's Sermon on the Death of Mr. Not. Oldfield, who departed this Life,
December. 31. 1696.

-- His Sermon Preached to the Societies for Reformation of Manners, Nov. 15.
1697.

Mr. Hamond's Sermon at Mr. Steel's Funeral.

Mr. Aikin's English Grammar: Or, the English Tongue reduced to Grammatical
Rules, composed for the use of the English Schools.

Mr. John Mason's little Catechism, with little Verse^, and little Sayings for
little Children.

Mr. Addy's Shorthand Bible.

Twelves.
London-Dispensatory, reduced to the practice of the London Physicians: wherein
are contained the Medicines, both Galenical and Chemical, that are now in use:
those out of use omitted; and those in use, and not in the Latin Copy, here
added, By John Peachy, of the College of Physicians in London.

Mr. John Shower's Discourse of Tempting Christ.

-- His Discourse of Family Religion, in 3 Letters.

Mr. Dan. Burgess's Discourse of the Death, Rest, Resurrection and blessed
Portion of the Saints.

-- His ^^an's whole Duty, and God's wonderful Entreaty of him thereunto.

-- H^s Advice to Parents and Children.

Mr G^orge Hamond's, and Mr. Matthew Barker's Discourses of Family Worship.
Written at the Request of the Uni^ed Ministers of London.

Misc^llanea Sacra: Containing Scriptural Meditations, Divi^e Breathings,
Occasional Reflections, and Sacred P(...)

S(...)nas Moor's Mathematical Compendium. The Third Edition.

FINIS.

