A Funeral Sermon, Preached at the Interment of Mr. SAMVEL STEPHENS, For some
time Employed in the Work of the Ministry, in this CITY.

Who departed this Life the Fifth of January, 1693/4. in the Twenty eighth Year
of his Age.

By EDMUND CALAMY.

1 Pet. 1.24. All flesh is as grass; and all the glory of man, as the flower of
grass: the grass withers, and the flower thereof falls away.

Psalm. 103.16. For the wind passes over it, and it is gone; and the place
thereof shall know it no more.

LONDON, Printed for Abraham Chandler, at the Chyrurgeons-Arms, in
Aldersgate Street, MDCXCIV.

TO THE READER.
THou have here an awful Providence to draw forth and exercize thy solemn
Thoughts: A Person Young, Strong, Healthful, and of no ordinary Hopefulness and
Proficiency in what might render him a Light and Blessing to and in his
Generation; but soon cut down by a malignant Fever. I knew him intimately, and
greatly valued him; and, by my free and frequent Conversation with him, I found
him Apprehensive, Inquisitive, Receptive of things in their Evidences,
Attentive to what was said, Calm and Modest, but Pertinent in his Replies; and
prone to consider Seriously of Matters. But yet the Concernedness of his Soul
for Holiness and Heaven, drenched in a Scrupulous Temper, did too exorbitantly
agitate his Imagination, or Fancy; the strength whereof was his bewailed
Unhappiness. For though his Conscience was tender, and his Life blameless, and
his Industry evidently great in the pursuit of Things Eternal; yet was he
rarely (if ever) free from urgent Doubts and Fears: yet not discernible to any,
until related by himself unto some few; and among these, to me; to whom his
Resorts were very frequent, free, and grateful: for his ordinary Conversation
was not morose, but pleasant and profitable; though, through Self-diffidence
and Suspicion, he both kept guard, and much reflected on himself, rather to
Censure, than to Exalt himself in his own Conceit, or to extort
Self-Commendation from Others. He is Dead: Neither was Providence long about
this fatal and awakening Work.

Through Providential Conduct, the Author of this Sermon thus entertained a
great and attentive Auditory, at the Funeral Solemnity of the Deceased. The
Composer of this Sermon (my Dear and Worthy Fellow Laborer in the Gospel) I
could copiously Commend, but will not: He is well known to be more pressed by me,
and others, than forward of himself to make this serious and useful Sermon
public. The First Fruits of an hopeful Harvest are not the worse for being
early, but the better. Young Timothy, when deserving it, was Commended even by
St. Paul, that great Apostle. And Grace, I hope, will keep him safe and humble;
and I beg it may do so. But -- Manum de Tabula -- God's Word and Providence
have their loud Call, and solemn Errand to us all. Oh! Hear, Prepare, Fulfill,
Dispatch, Pray, Wait and Hope! The Judge is at the Door; the End of all Things
is at hand; we little know when, how near, or how. A Fever (such as made this
Spectacle of Mortality) may quickly send us after him, who is lately gone unto
the Grave: And what comes next?

Pardon me, Reader, if I vent my very Heart and Wishes in these borrowed
Strains:

O Deus! aut nullo caleat mihi Pectus ab igne;
Aut solo caleat pectus abigne tui.
Languet ut illa Deo, mihi men's simul aemula languet!
Coelitus ut rapitur! me violenta rapit.
Ut Paveam scelus omne, petam super omnia Coelum;
Da mihi Fraena Timor, Da mihi Calcar Amor.

Luctibus Caetera and Suspiriis. LONDON, Jan. 15. 1693/4. Thine in and for the
Lord, Whilst Matt. Sylvester.

A Funeral Sermon, etc.
A Funeral Solemnity (my Friends) is an awful Thing; apt to dispose the Minds
of those who are in any wise Thoughtful for Serious Impressions: and therefore
affords an Opportunity for pursuing an Exhortation to Piety and Religion, with
good Advantage.

Though Funeral Orations had their Rise from Heathenish Vanity, yet may they
(provided all unjust Commendation of the Dead, and servile Flattery of the
Living, be avoided) be exceeding useful, even among Christians, in helping to
make the Survivers better; there being nothing that more promotes the Amendment
of our Lives, than the serious Consideration and Improvement of the Departure
of Others, who are snatched away by Death, both on our Right Hand and Left,
leaving us behind, who Our Selves also must shortly follow.

We have now before us the Corpse of one, who, a Fortnight ago, might rationally
have hoped to have lived as long as most here present; One that a few Days ago
was Hale and Strong, Healthful and Vigorous, Aimable and Pleasant,
Well-Accomplish'd and Useful: But a mortal Distemper seized him, his Strength
was on a sudden baffled, and all his Plenty of Spirits exhausted; he is crushed
like a Moth, his Serviceableness is at an end; and we are now going to commit
his desented Carcass to the Earth, the grand Principle of its Composition. Who
that will give way to Consideration, but must hereupon be provoked to take up
some such Resolution as this? By the help of God, henceforward, whatever I
neglect, I Will mind my main Concern; I Will do what I have to do in this World
without Delay, since I know not how soon Death may surprise me, and summon me
to Judgment? It Is the engaging us to make and keep such a Resolution as this,
which (humbly imploring Divine Assistance) I at present aim at: And in order
thereto, I have pitched, for the Subject of my Discourse, on that Passage of
Holy Writ which we meet with in

JOHN ix. 4 I must work the works of him that sent me while it is day; the
night comes when no man can work.
WHich are the Words of our Blessed Savior, ordinarily taken as spoken by him
with reference to Himself, discovering his steady Purpose of managing that
great Concern for which he came into the World with the utmost Speed and
Diligence; and more particularly, his Resolvedness to do as many beneficial
Miracles as the short time of his stay here below would allow him. But waving
this Sense, I shall consider them as having a general Aspect; setting before us
all that which is our plain Duty, and should be our resolved Purpose. For which
Acceptance, (besides the Obligation we are under to a Resemblance of our
Blessed Lord, in this, as well as in other Respects,) I think I have sufficient
Ground, in that, according to one of the most valuable Copies Viz. That of
Beza, reserved at Cambridge
of the New Testament this day in the World, this Passage should be thus
rendered, We must work the Works of him that sent us. And indeed, a transient
Animadversion of the Circumstances of this Verse, will suffice to satisfy us,
that it has nothing in it peculiar to our Savior; but that he took a
convenient Occasion to make his Followers sensible how much they were
concerned, according to their different Capacities, to do the Work that God had
set them, in the Time that he had given them, which is short, and very
uncertain, and therefore carefully to be improved; and that he might insinuate
this the better, he brings Himself in for Company.

I shall not go about to try whether or no I could, on a Subject so
circumstantiated as this, give you a learned and florid Discourse; but shall
only endeavor to be a plain Echo of that Providence which is the sad Occasion
of our present Concourse, in laying before you, in distinct Propositions, the
several Truths which these Words contain; of which I shall afterward make a
brief Improvement, both General and Special.

Now the Truths which these Words naturally present to our Thoughts, are such
as these that follow.

I. That we are all sent into this World by God. We must work the Works of him
that sent us. We came not hither of our selves: We came not by Chance: Our
Production's owing to an Agent infinitely Powerful and Wise; who though he did
not immediately create us out of Nothing, yet ordered disposed and actuated
those Natural Causes by whose Concurrence we were formed.

One would wonder how any that have the least spark of Reason, should ever let
it enter into their Thoughts, that so Noble a Being as Man should be the
Workmanship of fortuitous Chance, when we see Men rising up in the World, Age
after Age, in a stated Order. And as for that Term of NATURE, of which some are
so fond, if they mean by it any thing distinct either from the Author, or the
settled Order of Things, they introduce by it a Being of whose Existence they
can give no Evidence. But let our Wits argue as long as they please, we may
securely defy them to give any Account, how it should come about, that when it
was but a little while ago altogether Indifferent whether such Beings should
ever have been, or not, one Generation should now so statedly succeed another;
unless they will own the Agency of the Great Creator of all Things, the free
Efflux of whose superabounding Goodness gave the first Rise to the World.

It Is He that manifestly gives Natural Causes their Virtue, sets them on Work,
bounds their Influence, determines their Effects, and overrules and manages
them in all their Productions. So that, as Things are now disposed, we as much
owe our Beings to God, as we should do, if, by virtue of his Almighty Word, we
should in an instant start out of Nothing. 'Twas He that first shaped us in the
Womb; as we may see, Psalm. 139. 14, 15, 16. 'Twas He that brought us out of our
first strait Confinement, into so large and noble an Habitation as that of this
Visible World, Psalm. 71. 6. It Is on Him that we subsist all the time that we
are here, and therefore we may be assurd He sent us hither.

II. A Second Truth these Words afford, is this; That we have all of us Work to
do here. And need I go to prove this to you? Do we not see all the Creatures,
in their several Ranks, according to their Capacities, at work about us? Do we
not find that we have Active Natures, Noble Powers, Large Capacities, and
Boundless Cravings? And can we then think that we were designed to be Idle?
Should we indeed look into most Men's Lives, we should be apt to think either
that we have nothing at all, or nothing of any Consequence to do in this World.
But let us but look ^ound about us, or into our selves, and we shall soon be
satisfied that such active Natures as ours must have an Employment. A Wise
Being can never produce Powers to no purpose; a Capacity, without setting it a
work: We must have some Work or other to do, or else we should be useless
Impertinencies, and insignificant Ciphers in the Creation of God.

Neither can our Work be at our own Choice; we cannot be free to do what we
please. It naturally belongs to Him that gave us our Powers, to employ them; to
Him that sent us into the World, to allot and cut out proper Work for us in it:
And whenever we pretend to cut out Work for our selves, we arrogate to our
selves the Prerogative of our Maker; who being an infinitely Wise Agent, and
having made us capable of Working, has designed Work for us; and that such
Work as is every way suitable to the Dignity, Excellency and Ability of our
Natures.

Now, it is well worth our serious Consideration, what Work it is God designed
us for. And this is a Thought which the greatest Part of the World seldom, if
ever to any purpose, harbor; and therefore it is no wonder that their Lives are
so disorderly, confused, and unaccountably extravagant and foolish. I doubt not
but there are some Hundreds and Thousands to be found, who never spent one half
Hour, in all their Lives, in deliberate Thoughtfulness about the Work for which
they were made, and sent into the World. For, can any Man, who will allow
himself soberly to weigh Matters, ever think that so Noble a Creature as he
should have no other Work in this World, than to build Houses, and plant
Vineyards; take his Pleasure, and live at his Ease, indulging his Appetites,
gratifying his Senses, and pampering a short-lived Body? to prog for Wealth,
and weary himself in heaping together a few Bags of perishing Dust? to hunt for
Honor and Credit, Esteem and Applause among his Fellow Creatures, together
with whom he himself must shortly pass off this earthly Stage, so as to be
quite forgotten? Can any One, I say, that will give himself leave to think,
imagine this to be Work fit for so Noble a Creature as Man to be sent into this
World for? And yet of how great a Part of Mankind, in all Ages, has this been
the sole Employment! Oh, for God's sake! let us be wiser: Let Us but open our
Eyes a little, and we shall soon discern quite otherguess Work than this for us
to mind. Should I attempt here to be particular, I should soon expatiate beyond
the Bounds of a single Discourse: Let me desire you therefore, in short, to
observe, that the Work which we have to do in this World, is either Common or
Special.

The great Work that is common to us all, is, while we are in this World, to
prepare for another* this Life not being in order to it self, but in order to a
better Life. We are sent into this World to be prepared, qualified, disposed
and fitted for the noble and refined Enjoyments of another State, for which we
are designed; to live a Life of Faith and Patience, that in due time we may be
admitted to a Life of Glory.

And a greater Work this is than we are ordinarily aware of: But herein lies
the main of it: We are to get our Spirits refined, and a New and a Divine
Nature conveyed into us; without which, we can never be capable of a Divine
Life. In order hereto, there is a great deal of Knowledge to be gotten: We must
know the God that made us, and in the Enjoyment of whom our Happiness lies: we
must know our Apostasy from him, with its sad Effects: we must know the Means
of our Recovery, and use them. And here comes in Jesus Christ, whom we must
know and use in all his Offices: We must know what He was by the Father
designed to do for us; what Advantages he has procured us, and on what Terms.
To which Terms we must take care to come up* we must heartily return to God,
through his Son; give up our selves to our Lord Redeemer's Conduct; obey the
Laws that he has given us; use all the subordinate Means that he has
appointed us; believe and trust in the Promises that he has made us; follow
the Example that he has set us; and depend on the Assistance of that Spirit
which he has purchased for us: We must be continually fighting against the
three grand Enemies of our Happiness, the Flesh, the World and the Devil: we
must improve all our Faculties, Talents, Abilities, Mercies, Relations, and
Enjoyments, for God, like Accountable Creatures; and do all the Good we can to
Others. This is the Work that lies upon all our hands: without doing which, we
live in vain; we answer not the Ends of Life.

But besides this General, there is Special Work to which God calls some. And
this is either Ordinary or Extraordinary: and each of them is of several sorts,
which I shall not stay to enumerate: but among them all, there is none more Awful,
Sacred and Tremendious, than the Ministerial Employment; and none lie under a
greater necessity of Diligence, Care and Industry; none stand in need of more
Assistance from Above, than those who are called to, and employed in it. That
is a Work, indeed, in it self, unfit for Humane Hands; and yet it must be
undertaken and done when God calls to it: and his Goodness is wonderfully seen,
in spiriting and fitting any mortal Men, in any tolerable Degree, for it;
assisting them in it, and carrying them through it. But it is but few who have a
genuine Call to such Work as this; nor are all fit to Judge of the Dueness of a
Call to it: But to the former we are all Called, and we must do it; it is
required of every one of us, by God that sent us hither. And so much for the
Second Observable.

III. The Third thing observable, is this; That God gives us a Day in which we
may do our Work. We must work the Works of him that sent us, while it is Day.
Which implies, that we all have a Day to work in. God is not, in any case, like
the Egyptian Taskmasters, who required Bricks without Straw. He Will give us
Time to do the Work he will require at our hands.

The great Difficulty here, is, with reference to those who die in Infancy, or
at any time before they come to Years of Discretion. What Time, may in be
demanded, have such as they to do any Work in? Whereto I reply, That God
expects no Work of any sort, of any, for which he gives not Time and Capacity.

As to the Eternal State of Dying Infants, if that be farther enquired, into,
we can say no more than this, That those of them who sprang from truly Pious
Parents, are reckoned as a Part of their Parents; and therefore their Parents
right acquitting themselves in the Work that God set them, is available for
their Good* But as for those of them whose Parents are Irreligious, who have
not done the Work for which God sent them into the World, the Scriptures give
us no Account; and therefore we may and should be content to be ignorant what
becomes of them.

But as for us (my Friends) we have a Day afforded us; and therefore afforded,
that we may Work in it. In whatsoever sense well take the Day, we have it: we
have Life prolonged, Offers and Seasons of Grace continued, God's Patience
waiting, and his Spirit striving: Some of us have had a long Day of it: We,
blessed be God, have Time, and Health, and Strength; Oh! that we had Hearts to
do our Work!

IV. A Fourth Observation is this; That this Day of ours is but short. We must
Work while it is Day. That implies it will not last long* Which, it is manifest, is
principally meant of the Time of Life, which is but short.

And this is a common Theme of Complaint with some; yet as much Forgotten and
Overlooked by others, as if they did not believe it. How mournfully shall we
hear some complain, that we no sooner pass through helpless Infancy, and
inobservant Childhood, and come; after much Pains and Toil, to get some
tolerable Fitness for Service in the World, but we are presently gone; our Days
at an end? And yet how carelessly and negligently do the most live? just as if
they thought their Day would last always?

But what little Reason is there for the former Complaint, when our Day
suffices for our Work? And how unaccountable is the latter Instance of Folly,
when our Day, if prolonged to the utmost Period, is so exceeding short? If
we'll but look into Scripture, we shall see things brought in as Emblems of it,
that are the most short, brittle and fading, that the whole Creation can
furnish.

Let Us consult the Experience of Mankind, in all Ages, and see if our
Working-time be not short. How easily may a Man, when the Sun Rises in the
Morning, foresee its Setting, when the Light will be succeeded by Darkness,
the Day by Night? As easily may we, while in Health, and Strength, and Vigor,
foresee an approaching Death. How short is our Day, compared with the Days of
Eternity? even infinitely less than a single Moment, compared with the whole
World's Duration. Nay, what is our Day now, to that of those who lived in the
first Ages of the World, but as a short Dream, compared to a long Summer's Day?
This Point were easily illustrated and proved; but it needs neither, so much as
Improvement. And so does,

V. The Fifth Observable, which is this; That our Day is not only Short, but
Uncertain. For thus much that Passage also implies, We must work while it is
Day. Which seems to intimate, that it may, for ought we know, last but a very
little while; it may expire e're we are aware.

And can there be any thing more evident than this? when so many Thousands of
unforeseen Casualties, Disorders or Distempers may put an end to it? Let Us look
abroad into the World, and we shall find some of all Ages daily Dying. Who then
can tell at what Age his Day may end? at what time his Sun may set? I need look
no further for a sensible Conviction of this, than the Corpse before us; the
Looking on which, may (and will, if we consider Circumstances) satisfy us all
that our Day's uncertain. But yet,

VI. In the Sixth and Last place, though that be Uncertain, this is most
Certain, That a Night will, sooner or later, overtake us all, in which no Work
can be done, but we must receive our Wages.

Let our Day be never so bright and clear, some time or other the Shadows of
the Evening will overspread us; our Sun will set, and Night will come; a Night
in which no man can work. After which, nothing more can be done, in order to a
Preparation for Happiness, or an Escape of Misery; in which no more Means can
be used, in order to our Amendment; no more Knowledge can be gotten, that can
do us any Good: after which, no further Opportunity will be afforded us of
repairing to, and making use of Christ; and no further Time of Trial allowed
us. Which is as certain, as it is, Heb.9. 27.
that it is appointed to all men once to die; of which we may be as certain as
we are, that now we live.

The Day's our Working-time; when the Night comes, we must expect to receive
our Wages. Thus we find it was in the Parable of the Laborers, recorded in the
Twentieth Chapter of St. Matthew's Gospel, and thus 'twill be with us.

When God has waited upon us, and given us as long a Day as he thinks fit,
he will then call us to an Account, what Work we have done; how we have behaved
our selves.

If we have done the Work for which God sent us hither, he will Commend and
highly Reward us. If we have not done it, his very Look will strike us through
with Ternour, and he will severely punish us: For he will render to every one
according to their Works. As you may see more at large, if you please to
consult Romans 2. 6, and the following Verses.

And thus much may suffice for the Doctrinal handling of the Words; the
Improvement follows: which might be managed to good purpose several ways: But
that I may keep within bounds, I Will reduce what I would say for general
Improvement to these two Heads.

If these things be so, then certainly it becomes us all, 1. To improve the day
we have to work in to the best advantage. 2. Often to think of, and seriously
to prepare for an approaching night.


1. Then, Let us manage and improve the day we have to work in, to the best
advantage that may be.

I Am satisfied there is scarce any one among us all, but if asked, would say,
that we heartily believed the forementioned Truths: that but who almost looked
into our Lives could believe us when we say so? Should we every one of us set
our selves down seriously to examine what we have done of the work that we were
sent into the world for (to do which would be a great instance of our wisdom),
what a poor account should we bring in! How much of our day have we spent in
doing nothing! how much in that which comes to nothing! Nay, how much have many
of us spent in that which must, so far as it is possible, be undone again* or
else we are eternally miserable! How many of us have lived the half; nay, two
thirds; nay, almost the whole of our day, and are yet to begin our great Work?
To what purpose then, I pray, have we lived all this while! And as for those of
us who have in earnest begun our work, how little of it have we done? how is it
done, as 'twere by halves? How little proportion does our Diligence, and
Industry, and Activity in it, bear to the momentousness and greatness of it, to
the assistances we have, and the uncertainty we are at? And shall we then
refuse to think these things over again in our Secret Retirements? and
endeavor, by consideration, to drive them home into our Souls, till all the
Powers we have, are awakened to the earnest doing of the Work of him that sent
us, while the Day lasts, before the Night over-takes us? Is our working Day so
short, and can we then find any of it to lose? Is it so uncertain, and shall we
dare to delay? Oh, if we have any sober Reason left, if we are not perfectly
mad, besotted, and stupify'd; if we would not in another State fruitlesly
torment our selves for ever, let us improve our working time to the best
advantage.

That we may so do, let us,

1. Begin to work betimes; Which if we could be prevailed upon to do it, would
bring unspeakable advantages with it. Oh, let none of us who think not our
selves too young to live, or too young to die, think our selves too young to do
that work for which we were sent into the world. The sooner we begin to work,
the more ease and peace may we expect in our remaining days, and the more work
may we hope to do. If we'll begin to work in our youthful days, and hold on
working, we may hope by the Divine Blessing to do Three times as much work as
those, who, tho they should live as long as we, yet spend a third part of their
day idly, without any ways answering the Ends of Life: And we might expect an
increase of our Reward hereafter, proportionable to the increase of our work
here. Night may overtake the youngest of us, and therefore we have Reason to go
to work out of hand. And the more advanced any of us are in years, still the
more Reason have we immediately to begin it, if we have not already done it. A
delay in this case is dangerous, and may be our Ruin. O let us therefore be idle
no longer, but work the Work of him that sent us while it is day.

2. Let us carefully avoid all those things that would hinder us in our Work.
The Weakness and Necessities of our Natures, in our present State, occasion a
great many unavoidable Avocations from our great Work. Much of our short day's
cut off by Infancy, when we can do nothing; and Childhood, when we are at most
capable but of just beginning our Work; By the time that must be spent in
eating, and drinking, and sleeping, for the Recruit and support of our Bodies,
and in Recreation that is needful for our Health and Refreshment; and a great
many other things I might mention, which tho subordinate duties, yet are
avocations from that great Work we were made for. We have no need therefore to
be in love with Clogs, Impediments, and Embarrasments, as too too many seem to
be. Let Us rather prudently endeavor to avoid them: if we have any, let us as
much as may be lay them aside: Let Us watch and strive against all the
Encroachments they would make upon that time which ought to be spent in our
great Work, like those that are in earnest for Heaven and another World. And,

3. Thirdly and Lastly, Let us work apace, and do as much Work as ever we can
in so short and uncertain a time as we have to do it in. Our Day hastens, and
so let our Work. Whatever our hand finds to do, let us do it with our might; as
the Wise Man expresses it, Eccles. 9. 10. Were our day as long as Methusalah's,
our work is such that we should have no time to lose. But when it is so short
and uncertain, and we have such great and important Work to do, we had need
double our diligence; and if we'll take this course, we shall have no Reason to
complain of the Shortness of our Lives; for he that does the work of Fifty or
Threescore Years in Seven or Eight and Twenty, is happier than he that lives so
long in the world. Oh, let us earnestly endeavor to make such daily advances,
as that our Work may be at an End as soon as our Day.

2. Let us often think of, and seriously set ourselves to prepare for an
approaching Night. We are all ( my Friends) endued with a Power of Foresight;
Let Us in this case make use of it: Let Us think with our selves, that as surely
as it is now Day with us, 'twill e're long be Night; as surely as we now live
shall we shortly die; and let us endeavor to yield to the Power of such a
Thought. Whenever we are tempted to Delays, to Negligence, Indifference and
Remissness in our Grand Concern; Let Us think how swiftly the Night is hasting
toward us, and how earnestly Death is pursuing after us; and let us act as
those that are in expectation of it. Let Us resolve with holy Job, that we'll
wait all the days of our appointed time, till our change come, Job 14. 14.
Let Us not be so foolish as to hear of others Deaths, without reflecting on our
own: To accompany others to their graves, without thinking that we must shortly
follow them. Let Us Live in the day time as those that have night in their view.
When the laboring Countreyman sees the night approaching, he will put to all his
strength, and vigorously endeavor to finish his undertaken work ere the sun go
down: Let us do so too; and then be our day longer or shorter, our Night will
be comfortable; We may lift up our Heads with joy. But on the contrary how
doleful will our night be if we work not in the day time! How dismal a thing
will it be at the close of our Lives to find just cause for this Reflection,
that we have lived in vain, without doing that for which God sent us hither!
What Horror and Amazement will then seize upon us! What can we then expect will
support or cheer us! What Rage and Despair will possess us! Would we not have
this to be our case? Then let us by doing our work in the Day, prepare for the
Night that is coming. And Oh what account shall we be able to give to the God
that sent us hither, if we mind not the Work for which he sent us? If we can
find time now for every thing else but to mind our main Concern, how shall we
dare to look God in the Face another day? How can we think we stand before his
Bar, to give an account for all our Power and Capacity, Time and Opportunity of
Working; for our Calls, Admonitions and warnings to apply our selves to our
work, for all our allurements and enticements, Helps and assistances to work?
Oh how shall we then stand speechless if now we remain idle! Then be confounded
if now we are negligent! Oh then if we love our selves, if we desire to be
Happy, Let us by doing the work of him that sent us while the day lasts,
prepare for that night which approaches, in which no work can be done, but we
must receive our Wages. And thus much may suffice for general Improvements.

And now that I may follow this present Stroke of Providence, whither it seems
more particularly to direct its Voice, give me leave to address my self to you,
my Brethren, of the Younger Sort, whom God is pleased to call to public Work
in his Vineyard.

One of our small Number's gone. and he none of the inconsiderablest neither.
God set him a Work for a little while, and then called him away; and has not
this a Voice, and that to us particularly? Our Deceased brother, and God by him
seems to cry aloud to all of us, to work the works of him that sent us while
it is day, ere the night overtake us.

The work, my brethren, to which we have set our hands is sacred and awful;
It Is enough, I profess seriously, to make our hearts to ache, and our Knees to
tremble, to set our selves solemnly to think upon it. It Is difficult work:
Difficult in it self, and more peculiarly so, by reason of the circumstances of
the time wherein our Lot is cast. It has ever indeed been difficult to bear up
Gods honor in the world, to vindicate his truths from contempt, to engage men
heartily in his service, and to bring Souls to Heaven: But how are the
difficulties increased upon us, through the desperate malignity of many, the
Lukewarmness and indifference of most; The peevishness and morosness of some,
and the Giddiness and wantonness of others! Alas for us, what shall we do to
promote that Wisdom that is from above, that is pure, and peaceable, and
gentle, and easy to be entreated, Jam. 3. 17.
full of good fruits, without partiality and without Hypocrisy, in the Age we
live in, in which the wisdom of the world so much prevails, and true Religion
is so like to expire? It Is true, Our Reverend Fathers, thanks be to God, do as
yet bear the Brunt of the Day; and God grant they may long do so. But alas, the
Prophets don't live for ever, any more than others; Within a few years they will
all drop off, and the burden will lie on young shoulders: And what shall we
then do? What shall we do to stem that Tide of Atheism and Irreligion, that
has overflown us? What shall we do in opposition to the Skepticism by which we
find so many unravelled and undone? What shall we do to recover the Power of
Godliness, of which our Fathers tell us so much, tho we can see so little, it
being almost lost? What shall we do to root out those Prejudices which have so
long been rivetted in many peoples minds? What shall we do to pacific those
angry Heats, and stop those raging Contentions which have continued so long,
till they have almost eat out the Spirit and Life of Religion? What shall we do
to revive True, Generous, Catholic Christianity? Our Difficulties seem rather
to grow than diminish: And shall we not then, out of a sense of the great
opposition we shall meet with on all sides, take great care to qualify,
dispose and fit our selves for the Great Work that will lie upon us, by
treasuring up of Knowledge daily, laying aside of Prejudices our selves, and
taking up nothing but upon good Grounds, by studying the things that make for
Peace on all hands, by arming our selves with resolution to go through good
report and bad report, to be above Smiles and Frowns; and aboveall, by keeping
up an intimate Acquaintance with that God who gives us a Commission, and who
alone can give us assistance and success? And yet in the mean time the Day we
have to work in is short and uncertain; We know not but our Work may be at an
end as soon almost as we begin; and therefore we have need carefully to improve
all opportunities of Service, and to work apace. It is indeed enough to
surprise us, when we consider all things, to think that God should have raised
up so many of us in so discouraging Times as we have passed through; that he
should have given us any tolerable competency of Fitness for his Service, and
that he should in any measure own us in it. But alas, my Brethren, let us not be
too confident; God can nip budding hop^; he can, if he pleases, just show us to
the World* and then snatch us away again. Let Us take care le^t we by our sins,
provoke him to lay us aside, as Vessels wherein he has no pleasure. Let Us work
therefore for God, without Self-seeking: Let Us take care to recommend Religion
to others by our Lives: Let Us love as Brethren, and studiously strengthen, and
no ways weaken one another hands: Let Us apply our selves diligently to our
Work, and let this Instance of our Mortality quicken us: Let Us often think this
Work of ours will soon be at an end; in which, if we have been faithful, we
shall be amply rewarded; for we shall shine as Stars in God's Right Hand. If we
have been idle, negligent and careless, our punishment will be proportioned to
our sin. Let Us not be so fond as to feed our selves with hopes of a long time
of use and service to come; but in the Day let us foresee our Night: Let Us
seriously bethink our selves that Death will soon seize us, and summon us to
Judgment; Our Souls will take their flight, and leave our Bodies behind; and we
must be beholden to our surviving Friends to do that last Office for us which
we are now going to do for the Relics of our Deceas^d Brother, Mr. SAMVEL
STEPHENS.

Of whom I shall not say much to you, though I could, if I thought it needful. As
for his Family, 'tvvas Noble and Honorable in Heavens Bla^^^ry, it having been
successively employed in the Work of the Ministry ever since the Reformation,
his immediate Father only excepted; Which Gap the Two Brothers would have made
up, if both had lived: But blessed be God that has spared us One Branch of so
Worthy a Stock. As for the Person of the Deceased, he was designed for the
Ministry from his Younger Years; and had as Good Advantages all along, for the
acquiring the needful Accomplishments for it, as this Land would afford to
those under our Discouragements. Which Advantages he so Well Improved, as at
length to become a Workman that needed not to be ashamed. He had a Sense of
Religion instilled into him in his early Days, about the Fourteenth or
Fifteenth Year of his Age; ever since which time he has been observed, by
those that knew him, to have had a very tender Conscience. He was noted for
his frequency in Prayer, even while a Schoolboy, the serious performance of
which Duty argues the Greatest Love to God of any. He had a most awful Sense of
the Ministerial Employment, which those with whom he had any intimacy, will
readily testify. He was very backward to begin to preach, though by his most
Judicious Friends, judged sufficiently qualified, and earnestly pressed: through
his great humility, and unwillingness to rush into such a work. And I could
tell you of a Worthy Divine, to whom he to his dying day, used for the most
part to read his Notes, before he would Venture with Them into the Pulpit. His
Spirit has many a Time been so overawed by a sense of the Sacredness of the
Work he was engaged in, that he has been afraid to persist in it, and almost
persuaded to turn his Thoughts another way. And indeed he was humble and modest
to a Fault. His Natural Temper exposed him somewhat to Melancholy; and one
thing that tended to make his Life uneasy, was his great Scrupulosity, and
fear of offending God in the smallest matters, where others could apprehend no
danger. But in this he was on the safest side, tho the most uncomfortable. But
he had the happiness to be able to conceal his inward Trouble from the
Observation of the World, by a free, pleasant and cheerful Conversation, by
which he avoided discouraging others, of which he was fearful. I look upon him
to have had as much of True Generosity in his Natural Temper, as most I know.
He, from his heart, scorned to do any Thing that was mean, or base, or servile;
and abhorred every Thing that in the least looked like undermining.

He ever retained a most grateful sense of the Kindness of those Worthy
Gentlemen, and others, who were his Friends; and was always ready, to the
utmost of his Capacity, himself, to do any Office of Kindness for any.

Having been for some years employed occasionally in the Preaching Work of the
Ministry, it so pleased God, that a Mortal Distemper seized him, which deprived
the Church of an useful Servant, and us of a Fellow Laborer, that might have
been very helpful. His Distemper with Violence seized his head, the Rage
whereof was Visibly increased by those awful Thoughts of Eternity wherewith he
was possessed. I mention this, the rather, that I may thence take occasion to
warn those who will defer, and put off their great work to a Dying Bed, from
this Instance, and others of the like nature, often to be met with, to see
their folly, and grow wise. For several days before he died, his Distemper
deprived him of the free use of his Reason; and so it happens in many Cases:
who then, in his Wits, would put off the Great Work he was sent into the World
for, to such a Time? And yet this may be the case of any one of us. Our Eternal
State may be irrevocably fixed even before we die, and we absolutely
incapacitated to do any thing in our Soul-Affairs. But I hope and believe our
deceased Brother's Work was not then to do, but was finished before.

After that his Natural Strength (which was very great) had for some days
grappled with a malignant Fever, he was forced to yield, a Rent was made, his
Soul took its flight, and left his Body lifeless, in the Eight and Twentieth
Year of his Age. His Work's soon done, but not too soon for him, who I hope is
happy. We are now going to commit his Body to the Earth, there to lie and rot,
which will shortly also be the Case of every one of us. His Toil, and Warfare,
and Combat, and all painful Work is at an end. He Is taken away from those Evils
which we may live to see. For who knows what is coming upon us? We may, for
ought we know, meet with miseries that we little think of, before we dye: But
blessed be God that we have another Life, of Rest, and Peace, and Joy, in hope,
and that tho we cant know what will befall us here, yet we know this assuredly,
That Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, for they rest from their
labors, and their Works do follow them. Rev 14.13*


FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by Abraham Chandler.
THE Mourners Companion, or Funeral Discourses from several Texts, 8vo. Price
bound 1 s. 6 d.

Death a Deliverance: A Funeral Discourse, to bind up with the Mourners
Companion.

Sacramental Discourses on several Texts, before and after the Lords Supper,
together with a Paraphrase on the Lords Prayer, 12ves. Price bound 1 s. 6 d.

Practical Reflections on the late Earthquakes in Jamaica, Sicily, Malta, etc.
with a particular Historical Account of those, and Diverse other Earthquakes.
Price bound 1 s. 6 d.

The Day of Grace: Or a Discourse concerning the Possibility, and Fear of its
being past before Death: Showing the groundless Doubts, and mistaken
Apprehensions of some, as to their being finally forsaken and left of God; with
the dangerous Symptoms and Approaches of others to such a sad state; in Four
Sermons from Psalm 81. 11, 12.

Serious Reflections on Time and Eternity, with some other Subjects, Moral and
Divine; To which is annexed an Appendix concerning the First Day of the Year;
how observed by the Jews, and may best be employed by a serious Christian.

All Six by Mr. John Shower.


