royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE


BY THE KING.

A Proclamation for the further restraint of Profane Swearing and Cursing, and
the better observing of Prayer and Preaching in His Majesty's Armies, and the
City of Oxford, and in all other part of the Kingdom.
WHEREAS, by Our Proclamation dated the 13th day of June last past, We did
strictly Charge and Command all the respective Officers of Our Army, to cause
all Our Military Orders against Blasphemy, Oaths and other Scandalous Actions
against the Honor and Service of God, to be duly and severely put in
execution; which Our Command, if it had been well observed, and the Laws of
Our Realm touching those offenses duly executed,(as in duty to God and Us they
ought to have been) there had not been that Liberty taken by those of Our Army,
and other persons in the Kingdom, of dishonouring the Sacred Majesty of God,
by horrible Oaths and Execrations to the high provocation of God's wrath
against themselves and this whole Nation; We therefore out of Our tender care
of the honor of God(to whose glory we shall ever devote Our Crown) and in
token of Our hatred and detestation of this monstrous impiety, do by this Our
Proclamation strictly Charge all Commanders and Officers of Our Armies, and of
all Our Garrison Towns, to see that all Our Military Orders for the repressing
of Profane Swearing and Cursing by Soldiers, be duly and severely executed
for the time to come, and Exemplary punishment done upon offenders therein, to
the terror of others, Which that they may know is by Us expected at their
hands, We do hereby require all Commanders and Officers in Our Armies, and
Garrison Towns and all who do or shall attend Us in Our Court, to be virtuous
examples in their own persons to all Soldiers and others, by abstaining from
all such prophanations, as they desire the blessing of God upon Us, upon
themselves, and the whole Land; which if they shall neglect to perform, We do
hereby Declares, That all such persons in Our Court, Armies, or Garrison Towns
as shall appear to Us to be notorious offenders in this kind, We will in some
public way set a Character of disgrace upon them, that they may appear to the
whole world to be offensive both to God and Us. And We do further hereby
strictly charge and Command all Justices of Peace in the several Counties of
this Kingdom, and all Majors, Justices of Peace, Bailiffs, and head-officers
in all Cities and Towns Corporate within the same, that they cause the Statute
made in the 21. year of the Reign of Our late Father of blessed memory, for
the prevention and Reformation of Profane Swearing and Cursing to be put in
due execution, and that the forfeiture of Twelve-pence for every offense
belevied according to that Statute, and particularly in our City of OXFORD,
where Our Court now is, wherein We strictly charge and require the Major, and
Justices of Peace of Our said City (of whom We will require a strict account)
to take especial care of the punishment of all offenders in that kind, and
that children and others, of whom the penalty of Twelve-pence cannot be Levied
or had, be whipped or set three hours in the Stocks, according to the form of
that Statute. And for the future prevention of these and the like offenses so
opposite to the glory of God by planting his true fear in the hearts of all
men, We do lastly charge and Command, That Divine Service and Sermons
(according to the Doctrine and Liturgy of the Church of England Established by
Law)be duly and constantly used in all Our Armies and Garrison Towns, and in
all Churches and Chappells throughout this Realm. All these Our Commands We
require forthwith to be printed, and published at the head of every Regiment of
Our Army, and in all Garrison Towns, and in all parish Churches within this
Our Realm.

Given at Our Court at Oxford, the Eighth of April. 1644.
GOD SAVE THE KING.
Printed at Oxford, by Leonard Lichfield, Printer to the University, 1644.


