C.R.
royal blazon or coat of armsBy the King.
A Proclamation touching the Adjourning of part of Hillary Term.
THE Kings most excellent Majesty being now involved in an unnatural War,
raised against Him by diverse of His own Subjects, and finding no hope of a
present Peace, which He has much desired and endeavored, and being now settled
at His City of Oxford, in His own Person, and His Army attending Him there for
His necessary defense for this Winter season, hoping that, before any new
occasions shall be offered for the effusion of more blood unnaturally spilt, it
will please God who is the God of Peace, to open some way to attain thereunto,
which some by all means endeavor to divert, has amongst other things which
concern the Good and Prosperity of His people, taken into His Princely
consideration, how, and in what place, and in what manner the next ensuing
Hillarie Term with most convenience for Himself, and His own affairs, and for
His good Subjects may be held in a time of so much danger and distraction; and
upon serious weighing of all Circumstances fit to be considered of, His Majesty
has resolved, and by this His Royal Proclamation does Order, Appoint,
Declare, and Publish, That because the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal is the
Supreme Judge of the High Court of Chancery, and he must necessarily attend
His Majesty's Person, that the said Court of Chancery, and all proceedings of
what kinds or sorts soever, shall, and by these presents are, and stand
adjourned to the City of Oxford, where His Majesty's residence now is, and for
that time is likely to be, for the whole Term of Saint Hillary now next
ensuing; and shall begin, and be there held and continued upon, and from the
three and twentieth day of January, now next ensuing, until and upon the
Thirteenth day of February then next following. And because the Commissioners
for His Majesty's Treasury, and the Chancellor of the Exchequer, are likewise
here attending His Person, that the Receipt of His Majesty's Exchequer, and of
the first Fruits, and Tenths payable by all Spiritual Persons, and others,
shall be, and by these presents is, and stand adjourned for and during all the
Term, and time aforesaid, unto the said City of Oxford, and shall be there held
and continued. And because the Court of the Duchy of Lancaster may with more
ease, and convenience to all His Majesty's Officers, and loving Subjects having
occasion to attend the same, be kept in the City of Oxford, then at the City
of Westminster, in these troublesome times, that the said Court of Duchy of
Lancaster shall be, and by these presents is, and stands adjourned for, and
during all the Term and time aforesaid, unto the said City of Oxford, and
shall be there held and continued. And because His Majesty's Court of Wards,
and Liveries is principally intent upon matters of His Revenue, and the same
with much more convenience to His Majesty, and with as little inconveniency to
His Subjects having business therein, may be as well held in Oxford, as in
Westminster, His Majesty does farther also by these Presents, Order, Appoint,
Declare and Publish, That the said Court of Wards, and Liveries shall be, and
by these Presents is, and stands adjourned for, and during all the Term and
time aforesaid from the said City of Westminster, unto the said City of Oxford,
and shall be there held and continued. And because it is most proper that the
Lord Privy-Seale for the time being, and the Masters of Requests to His
Majesty, who are the Council of the Court of Whitehall, or Court of Requests
should attend His Majesty's Person, wheresoever He is, or shall be; and all
Suits depending in that Court, are properly depending before His Majesty, and
the Bills there are exhibited unto His Majesty and to none other, His Majesty
does likewise Order, Appoint, Declare, and Publish that the said Court of
Requests or Court of White Hall shall be, and by these presents is Adjourned
from Westminster aforesaid, unto the said City of Oxford, and for, and during
all the Term and time aforesaid shall there be held and continued. And because
in the time of this miserable distraction the Subjects of this Kingdom, having
Suits in any of the Courts of the King's Bench, Common Pleas, and Exchequer
cannot with such safety, and contentment as His Majesty wish^^ unto them,
attend their Suits, and Causes depending in any of the said three Courts, And
yet that many Causes of smaller moment may be dispatched (...) out the Clients
and Suitors themselves, by their Attourneys, and Solliciters, if but a part of
the said Term may be held and kept in the places where Records of those Courts
now are, and from whence without very much trouble, and charge they cannot be
removed; His Majesty has further resolved, by these presents does publish, and
declare, That He shall, and will by His Writs of Adjournment totally Adjourne
the two first Returns of the said ensu^^^ Term of Saint Hillary, commonly
called Octabis Hillarii, and Quindena Hillarii, until the Return called
Crastino Purificationis, and that the two las(...) turns of the said Term
called Crastino Purificationis, and Octabis Purificationis, shall be held at
Westminster in the usual places where formerly they were ^el^ All which His
Majesty signifies to all, and singular His Officers, Ministers, and loving
Subjects of this His Realm, to the intent that they, and every them who have,
or shall have any Suite, or other occasion to attend any of the said Courts of
Chancery, Receipt of Exchequer, and of First Fruits and Tenth^ Duchy of
Lancaster, Court of Wards, and Liveries, and Court of Requests, may give their
attendance at the said City of Oxford as aforesaid, and not elsewhere, and that
such of them as have, or shall have cause to attend, or who have cause or
Commandment to appear in any of His Majesty's said Courts King's Bench,
Common Pleas, and Exchequer at Westminster, in or at the said Returns of In
Octabis Hillarii, and Quindena Hillarii, or in, or at any day or ti^^ from and
after the said Returns of Octabis Hillarii, and Quindena Hillarii, and before
the said Return of Crastino Purificationis, may tarry at their dwelling or
where their business otherwise shall lie, without resorting to any of the said
Courts for that cause before the said Return of Crastino Purificationis next
coming, and that without danger of forfeiture, penalty, or contempt, to
incur toward His Majesty in that behalf. And nevertheless His Majesty's
pleasure is, that two of His Justices, that is to say, of either Bench one,
shall the first day of the Term of Saint Hillarie, called Octabis Hillarii,
according to the ancient order of the Laws, keep the Essoines of the said
Octabis Hillarii, at which Return of Octabis Hillarii Writs of Adjournment
shall be directed to the said Justices, giving them authority to Adjourne part
of the said Term of Saint Hillarie, that is to say, from Octabis Hillarii,
until the said Return of Crastino Purificationis, as before is said, and the
same Adjournment shall be made in the first day of the said Octabis Hillarii,
commonly called the day of the Essoines. Willing, and Commanding all, and every
of His Majesty's Officers, Ministers, and Subjects, to whom it does, or shall
appertain, to observe, and keep their Assemblies, and Appearances with all
their Returns, and Certificates in His Highness said Courts at Westminster In
Crastino Purificationis next, then, and there to be holden, and kept, and there
to do their Offices, and Duties in every behalf in like manner and form, as
they should or ought to have done if this present Proclamation had not been had
or made, as they will answer the contrary at their Perils.

Given at His Majesty's Court at Oxford, the 27 day of December, in the
Eighteenth year of His Reign.

