C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
BY THE KING.
A Proclamation against the spoiling and loosing of Arm's by the Soldiers of
His Majesty's Army, for the keeping of them fixed, and bringing all Arms
hereafter into His Majesty's Magazines.
WHEREAS We have not received that satisfaction We expected (Notwithstanding
Our many Proclamations and orders made for the Government of Our Army, and
particularly against the loosing, selling away, and spoiling of Our Arms, by
the Common-Souldiers, and for the keeping them fixed) But on the Contrary
finding those abuses and neglects still to Continue, and increase; We are
therefore once more enforced, and do hereby straightly require and Command all
Colonells, LieutenantColonells, Serjeant-Majors, Captains, and other Officers
of Our Army, whom it may concern, forthwith, or within four days after the
publication hereof, to return to Us, Our Council of War, or to the
Serjeant-Major-Generall of Our Army, a true account of the number and quantity
of Arms in each Company and Regiment of Our Army attested by the Colonel,
Lieutenant-Colonell, Serjeant-Major, or Captain of each Company, and if any
Arms, shall hence forward be found unfixt, by the negligence of the Soldier,
the reparation thereof shall be made good out of his or their Entertainments,
and this course We will constantly to be continued and put in practice, the
care and oversight whereof to be committed to the respective Quartermaster of
each Regiment (or some other fit person appointed by the Colonel) whom We
command, once in Fourteen days, to take a view of all the Arms of the
Regiment, and to see Our Commands therein fully obeyed; and for the more speedy
execution thereof, Our will is, that each Colonel make Choice of two able
Gunsmiths to be employed therein, on whom We intend to settle an Allowance
fitting for the same. And to the end the loss of Arms may not be so frequent
(to the prejudice of Our service) as formerly, Our farther pleasure is, that
each Captain upon the return of the Certificate of the number and quantity of
the Arms of his company, stand Charged to Us by Indenture (in the office of
Our Ordinance) for such numbers certified, which Arms are to be made good out
of his Entertainment, if hereafter they shall be wilfully or negligently made
away by His Soldiers. Lastly, Our Will and Command is, That all Arms bought,
or provided by Us, or by any Person for Our Service, as likewise all Arms
borrowed in any Counties hereafter, or taken from the Rebels, or persons
disaffected to Our Service, be first brought into Our Magazines, and from
thence, as We shall direct, be distributed, and given out for Our service. To
Our Pleasure herein declared, We Require full and speedy obedience to be given
by all Officers and Soldiers of Our Army, and that it may be the more fully
put in execution, Our farther Pleasure and Command is, That this be read within
four days after the publication, at the head of every Regiment and Company,
that so all Our Officers and Soldiers, whom it may concern, may take notice
of it, and observe the same, as they and every of them will avoid Our high
displeasure for their neglect, of any the least particular herein mentioned.

Given at Our Court at OXFORD, this Tenth day of March, in the Eighteenth year
of Our Reign.
Printed at Oxford by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer of the University. 1642.


