ARTICLES OF PEACE, Between the Most Serene and Mighty PRINCE CHARLES II.

By the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender
of the Faith, etc.

AND The High and Mighty LORDS, THE States General OF THE UNITED NETHERLANDS;
Concluded at Westminster the 9/19 day of February, 1673/4.

Published by His Majesty's Command.

LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barkor, Printers
to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1673/4.

ARTICLES OF PEACE, Between the Most Serene and Mighty PRINCE CHARLES II.
By the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender
of the Faith, etc. AND The High and Mighty LORDS, THE States General of the
United Netherlands.
I.
IT is Concluded and Agreed, That from this Day there shall be a firm and
inviolable Peace, Union, and Friendship betwixt His Majesty the King of Great
Britain, and the High and Mighty Lords the States General of the United
Provinces, and betwixt all their Subjects, whether within Europe or without, in
all Regions and Places whatsoever.

II.
That this good Union betwixt the abovesaid King and the said States General,
may the sooner take its effect, it is by them Agreed and Concluded, That
immediately upon the Publication of this Treaty of Peace, all Actions of
Hostility shall on both Sides be immediately forbid, and no Commission,
Instruction, or Order, privately or publicly, directly or indirectly, be on
either Side given or countenanced, for the Infesting, Attaquing, Fighting, or
Spoiling of each other, their Dominions or Subjects; but on the contrary, all
peaceable and amicable Comportments enjoined to the Subjects of both Nations.

III.
But in respect the Distances of Places are so different, that the Orders and
Commands of the respective Sovereigns cannot at the same time reach all their
Subjects, it has been thought fit to appoint these following Limits for the
committing any Acts of Hostility or Force upon each other: viz. That after the
expiration of Twelve days next following the Publication of this Treaty, no
Hostility shall be acted from the Soundings to the Naz in Norway; nor after the
term of Six weeks, betwixt the Soundings and Tanger; nor after the term of Ten
weeks, betwixt the said Tanger and the Equator, neither in the Ocean,
Mediterranean, or elsewhere; nor after the Term of Eight months, in any Part
of the World: And whatsoever Actions of Hostility and Force shall be committed
after the expiration of the aforesaid Terms, upon color of whatsoever former
Commission, Letters of Mart, or the like, shall be deemed as Illegal, and the
Actors obliged to make Reparation and Satisfaction, and punished as Violators
of the Public Peace.

IV.
That the aforesaid States General of the United Provinces, in due
acknowledgment on their part of the King of Great Britain's Right to have His
Flag respected in the Seas hereafter mentioned, shall and do Declare and Agree,
That whatever Ships or Vessels belonging to the said United Provinces, whether
Vessels of War or others, or whether single or in Fleets, shall meet in any of
the Seas from Cape Finisterre to the Middle Point of the Land Van Staten in
Norway, with any Ships or Vessels belonging to His Majesty of Great Britain,
whether those Ships be single or in greater number, if they carry His Majesty
of Great Britain's Hag or Jack, the aforesaid Dutch Vessels or Ships shall
strike their Flag and lower their Top-sail in the same manner, and with as much
Respect, as has at any Time, or in any Place been formerly practiced toward
any Ships of His Majesty of Great Britain or His Predecessors, by any Ships of
the States General or their Predecessors.

V.
Whereas the Colony of Surinam, and the Articles made upon the Surrender
thereof, 1667. betwixt William Biam, then Governor thereof for His Majesty of
Great Britain, and Abraham Quirini Commander for the States General, have in
the Execution of them administered much occasion of Dispute, and contributed
much to the late misunderstanding betwixt His Majesty and the said States
General; to remove all grounds of future Mistakes, the said States General do
by these Agree and Covenant with the said King of Great Britain, That not only
the forenamed Articles shall be Executed without any manner of tergiversation
or equivocation; but that likewise it shall be free for His Majesty to Depute
one or more persons thither, to see the Condition of His Subjects there, and to
adjust with them a time for their departure; And that it shall be lawful for
His Majesty to send one, two, or three Ships at one time, and thereon to
embarque and carry away the said Subjects, their Goods and Slaves; And that the
then Governor there for the States General, shall not make or execute any Law,
whereby the buying or selling of Land, paying of Debts, or commutation of
Goods, shall be otherwise qualified to the English, then it has or shall be to
all other Inhabitants of the Colony; but that during their stay, they shall
enjoy the same Laws and Privileges of suing for Debts, and paying their Debts,
making Bargains and Contracts as has been usually practiced amongst the other
Inhabitants; And that whenever His Majesty of Great Britain shall desire of
the States General sufficient and authentic Letters to the Governor of the
said Colony, to suffer the said English to depart, and permit the coming of the
said Ships, the said States General shall within the space of fifteen days
after such demand, deliver unto whomsoever Deputed by His Majesty of Great
Britain for that purpose, full and sufficient Letters and Instructions to their
Governor there, for permitting the arrival of the Ships, as well as the
embarquing of such of His Majesty's Subjects as shall declare themselves
willing to go away, with their Goods and Slaves, to be Transported where His
Majesty shall direct.

VI.
It is Agreed and Concluded, That whatever Country, Island, Town, Haven,
Castle, or Fortress, has been or shall be taken by either Party from the
other, since the beginning of the late unhappy War, whether in Europe, or
elsewhere, and before the expiration of the Times above limited for Hostility,
shall be restored to the former Owner in the same Condition it shall be in at
the time of the publishing this Peace; after which time there shall be no
Plundering of the Inhabitants, or demolishing of the Fortifications, or
carrying away the Artillery and Ammunition belonging to any Fort or Castle, at
the time of its having been taken.

VII.
That the Treaty of Breda made in the year 1667, as all other former Treaties
confirmed by the said Treaty, be renewed and remain in their full force and
vigor, so far forth as they contradict nothing in this present Treaty.

VIII.
That the Marine Treaty made at the Hague between the two Parties in the year
1668, be continued for Nine months after the Publication of this present
Treaty, unless it shall be otherwise agreed on by a subsequent Treaty; and that
in the mean time the Consideration of a new one be referred to the same
Commissioners to whom the Trade in the East Indies is referred in the
subsequent Article.

But if such Commissioners, within Three months after their first meeting shall
not agree upon a new Marine Treaty, then that Matter shall be also referred to
the Arbitration of the most Serene Queen Regent of Spain, in the same manner as
the Regulation of the East India Trade is referred to Her Majesty in the said
Article next following.

IX.
In respect that upon the mutual, free, and undisturbed enjoyment of Trade and
Navigation, not only the Wealth, but the Peace likewise of both Nations is
most highly concerned; there ought nothing to be so much the care of both
Parties, as a just Regulation of Trade, and particularly in the East Indies;
and yet in respect that the weightiness of the matter requires much time to
make firm and durable Articles to the Content and Security of the Subject on
both fides; and on the other side, the bleeding Condition of most part of
Europe, as well as of the two Parties concerned, earnestly demand a speedy
Conclusion of this Treaty, the King of Great Britain is pleased to condescend
to the Desires of the States General, to have the Consideration of the same
referred to an equal number of Commissioners to be nominated by each Party, the
said States General engaging themselves to send those of their nomination to
Treat at London with those to be nominated by His Majesty; and this within the
space of Three months after the publication of this Treaty; The number to be
nominated by each, to consist of six Persons; And in case that after Three
months from the time of their first Assembling, they shall not have the good
success to conclude a Treaty, the Points in difference betwixt them shall be
referred to the Arbitrament of the most Serene Queen Regent of Spain, who shall
nominate Eleven Commissioners; and whatsoever the major part of them shall
determine as to the remaining Differences, shall oblige both Parties; Provided
still, that they deliver their Judgment within the space of Six Months from
the day of their Assembling; which shall likewise be within the space of Three
Months after the said most Serene Queen Regent of Spain has accepted of the
being Umpire.

X.
That whereas the most Serene Queen Regent of Spain has given Assurance to His
Majesty of Great Britain, That the said States General should upon the making
of the Peace, pay unto His said Majesty the King of Great Britain, the Sum of
Eight hundred thousand Patacoons, The said States General do Promise and
Covenant to pay the said 800000 Patacoons in this following manner, viz. A
fourth part as soon as the Ratification of this Treaty shall be mutually
Exhibited, and the rest the three ensuing Years by equal Portions.

XI.
The aforesaid most Serene King of Great Britain, and the said High and Mighty
States Genesis of the United Provinces, shall observe sincerely, and bona fide,
all and singular the Matters Agreed and Concluded in this present Treaty, and
cause the same to be observed by their Subjects and Inhabitants; nor shall they
directly or indirectly violate any of them, or suffer them to be violated by
their Subjects or Inhabitants: And they shall Ratify and Confirm all and every
thing as before Agreed, by Letters Patents Subscribed with their Hands, and
Sealed with their Great Seals, conceived and written in sufficient, valid, and
effectual Form; and shall deliver, or cause the same to be delivered
reciprocally, within Four Weeks after the Date of these Presents, (or sooner if
it may be) bona fide, really, and with Effect.

XII.
Lastly, As Soon as the said Ratifications shall have been duly and mutually
Exhibited and Exchanged, the Peace shall be Proclaimed at the Hague within Four
and twenty hours after the Delivery and Exchange there made of the said
Ratifications.

Done at Westminster the 9/19 day of February 1673/4.
FINIS.

