ARTICLES OF PEACE and COMMERCE Between the most Serene and Mighty PRINCE
CHARLES II.

By the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of
the Faith, etc.

AND The most Illustrious LORDS, the Bashaw, Dey, Aga, and Governors of the
Famous City and Kingdom of ALGIERS in BARBARY: Concluded by Arthur Herbert,
Esquire, Admiral of His Majesty's Fleet in the Mediterranean Seas: On the Tenth
day of April, Old Style, 1682.

Published by His Majesty's Command.

LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill deceased: And by Henry Hills, and
Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1682.

ARTICLES OF PEACE and COMMERCE Between the most Serene and Mighty PRINCE
CHARLES II.
By the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of
the Christian Faith, etc. AND The most Illustrious Lords, the Bashaw, Dey, Aga,
and Governors of the Famous City and Kingdom of Algiers: Concluded by the
Honorable Arthur Herbert, Admiral of His Majesty's Fleet in the Mediterranean
Seas.
Article I.
IN the First place it is Agreed and Concluded, That from this day, and for
ever forwards, there be a true, firm and inviolable Peace between the most
Serene King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Christian
Faith, etc. and the most Illustrious Lords, the Bashaw, Dey, Aga and Governors
of the City and Kingdom of Algiers, and between all the Dominions and Subjects
of either side, and that the Ships or other Vessels, and the Subjects and
People of both sides shall not henceforth do to each other any harm, offense,
or injury either in word or deed, but shall treat one another with all possible
respect and friendship.

II.
That any of the Ships or other Vessels belonging to the said King of Great
Britain, or to any of His Majesty's Subjects, may safely come to the Port of
Algiers, or to any other Port or Place of that Kingdom, there freely to Buy and
Sell, paying the usual Customs of 10 per Cent. as in former times, for such
Goods as they sell, and the Goods they sell not, they shall freely carry on
Board without paying any Duties for the same; And that they shall freely depart
from thence whenever they please, without any stop or hindrance whatsoever.
As to Contraband Merchandises, as Powder, Brimstone, Iron, Planks, and all
sorts of Timber fit for Building of Ships, Ropes, Pitch, Tar, Fusils, and other
Habiliments of War, His said Majesty's Subjects shall pay no Duty for the same
to those of Algiers.

III.
That all Ships and other Vessels, as well those belonging to the said King of
Great Britain, or to any of His Majesty's Subjects, as those belonging to the
Kingdom or People of Algiers, shall freely pass the Seas, and Traffic without
any Search, hindrance or molestation from each other; and that all Persons, or
Passengers of what Country soever, and all Moneys, Goods, Merchandises and
Movables, to whatsoever People or Nation belonging, being on Board of any of
the said Ships or Vessels, shall be wholly free, and shall not be stopped,
taken or plundered, nor receive any harm or damage whatsoever from either party.

IV.
That the Algiers Ships of War or other Vessels meeting with any Merchants
Ships or other Vessels of His said Majesty's Subjects, not being in any of the
Seas appertaining to His Majesty's Dominions, may send on Board One single Boat
with Two Sitters only, besides the ordinary Crew of Rowers, and that no more
shall enter any such Merchant Ship or Vessel without express leave from the
Commander thereof, but the Two Sitters alone, and that upon producing a Pass
under the Hand and Seal of the Lord High Admiral of England and Ireland, or of
the Lord High Admiral of Scotland, for the said Kingdoms respectively, or under
the Hands and Seal of the Commissioners for Executing the Office of Lord High
Admiral of any of the said Kingdoms, that the said Boat shall presently depart,
and the Merchant Ship or Vessel shall proceed freely on her Voyage, and that
although for the space of Fifteen Months next ensuing after the Conclusion of
this Peace, the said Commander of the Merchant Ship or Vessel produce no such
Pass, yet if the major part of the Seamen of the said Ship or Vessel be
Subjects of the said King of Great Britain, the said Boat shall immediately
depart, and the said Merchant Ship or Vessel shall freely proceed on her
Voyage; But that after the said Fifteen Months, all Merchants Ships or Vessels
of His said Majesty's Subjects shall be obliged to produced such a Pass as
aforesaid. And any of the Ships of War or other Vessels of His said Majesty,
meeting with any Ships or other Vessels of Algiers, if the Commander of any
such Algier Ship or Vessel shall produce a Pass Firmed by the Chief Governors
of Algiers, and a Certificate from the English Consul living there, or if they
have no such Pass or Certificate, yet if for the space of Fifteen Months next
ensuing the Conclusion of this Peace, the major part of the Ships Company be
Turks, Moors, or Slaves belonging to Algiers, then the said Algier Ship or
Vessel shall proceed freely; But that after the said Fifteen Months, all
Algiers Ships or Vessels shall be obliged to produce such a Pass and
Certificate as aforesaid.

V.
That no Commander or other Person or any Ship or Vessel of Algiers shall take
out of any Ship or Vessel of His said Majesty's Subjects, any person or persons
whatsoever, to carry them any where to be Examined, or upon any other pretense;
nor shall they use any Torture or Violence to any person of what Nation or
Quality soever, being on Board any Ship or Vessel of His Majesty's Subjects,
upon any pretense whatsoever.

VI.
That no Shipwreck belonging to the said King of Great Britain, or to any of
His Majesty's Subjects, upon any part of the Coast belonging to Algiers, shall
be made or become Prize, and that neither the Goods thereof shall be Seized,
nor the Men made Slaves; but that all the Subjects of Algiers shall do their
best endeavors to save the said Men and their Goods.

VII.
That no Ship, nor any other Vessel of Algiers shall have permission to be
delivered up, or go to Sally, or any other place in Enmity with the said King
of Great Britain, to be made use of as Corsairs or Sea Rovers against His said
Majesty's Subjects.

VIII.
That none of the Ships or other smaller Vessels of Algiers shall remain
Crusing near or in sight of His Majesty's City and Garrison of Tangier, or of
any other His Majesty's Roads, Havens or Ports, Towns and Places, nor any ways
disturb the Peace and Commerce of the same.

IX.
That if any Ship or Vessel of Tunis, Tripoli, or Sally, or of any other Place,
bring any Ships, Vessels, Men or Goods belonging to any of His said Majesty's
Subjects, to Algiers, or to any Port or Place in that Kingdom, the Governors
there shall not permit them to be sold within the Territories of Algiers.

X.
That if any of the Ships of War of the said King of Great Britain do come to
Algiers, or to any other Port or Place of that Kingdom with any Prize, they may
freely Sell it, or otherwise to dispose of it at their own pleasure, without
being molested by any: And that His Majesty's said Ships of War shall not be
obliged to pay Customs in any sort; and that if they shall want Provisions,
Victuals, or any other things, they may freely Buy them at the Rates in the
Market.

XI.
That when any of His said Majesty's Ships of War shall appear before Algiers,
upon notice thereof given by the English Consul, or by the Commander of the
said Ships to the Chief Governors of Algiers, Public Proclamation shall be
immediately made to Secure the Christian Captives; and if after that, any
Christians whatsoever make their escape on Board any of the said Ships of War,
they shall not be required back again, nor shall the said Consul or Commander,
or any other His Majesty's Subjects be obliged to pay any thing for the said
Christians.

XII.
That from and after the time that the Ratification of this Treaty by the King
of Great Britain, shall be delivered to the Chief Governors of Algiers, no
Subjects of His said Majesty shall be Bought or Sold, or made Slaves in any
part of the Kingdom of Algiers, upon any pretense whatsoever. And the said King
of Great Britain shall not be obliged by virtue of this Treaty of Peace to
Redeem any of His Subjects now in Slavery, or who may be made Slaves before the
said Ratification; But it shall depend absolutely upon His Majesty, or the
Friends and Relations of the said Persons in Slavery, without any limitation or
restriction of time, to Redeem such, and so many of them from time to time, as
shall be thought fit, agreeing of as reasonable a Price as may be, with their
Patrons or Masters for their Redemption, without obliging the said Patrons or
Masters against their wills to set any at Liberty, whether they be Slaves
belonging to the Beylicque or Gally, or such as belong to the Bashaw, Dey,
Governor, Aga, or any other persons whatsoever. And all Slaves being His
Majesty's Subjects, shall, when they are Redeemed, enjoy the advantage and
benefit of abatements of the Duty due to the Royal House, and of the other
Charges, by paying such reasonable Sums as any Slaves of other Nations usually
pay when they are Redeemed.

XIII.
That if any Subject of the said King of Great Britain happen to die in
Algiers, or in any part of its Territories, his Goods or Moneys shall not be
Seized by the Governors, Judges, or other Offices of Algiers (who shall
likewise make no enquiry after the same) but the said Goods or Moneys shall be
possessed or received by such person or persons whom the Deceased shall by his
last Will have made his Heir or Heirs, in case they be upon the place where the
Testator deceased. But if the Heirs be not there, then the Executors of the
said Will, lawfully Constituted by the Deceased, shall after having made an
Inventory of all the Goods and Moneys left, take them into their Custody
without any hindrance, and shall take care the same be remitted by some safe
way, to the true and lawful Heirs; and in case any of His said Majesty's
Subjects happen to die not having made any Will, the English Consul shall
possess himself of his Goods and Moneys upon Inventory, for the use of the
Kindred, and Heirs of the Deceased.

XIV.
That no Merchants being His Majesty's Subjects, and residing in, or Trading to
the City and Kingdom of Algiers, shall be obliged to buy any Merchandises
against their Wills; but it shall be free for them to buy such Commodities as
they shall think fit, and no Captain or Commander of any Ship or Vessel
belonging to His said Majesty's Subjects, shall be obliged against his Will, to
Lade any Goods to carry them, or make a Voyage to any Place he shall not have a
mind to go to: And neither the English Consul, nor any other Subject of the
said King, shall be bound to pay the Debts of any other of His Majesty's
Subjects, except that he or they become Sureties for the same by a public act.

XV.
That the Subjects of His said Majesty in Algiers, or its Territories, in
matter of Controversy, shall be liable to no other Jurisdiction but that of
the Dey, or Duan, except they happen to be at difference between themselves, in
which case they shall be liable to no other Determination but that of the
Consul only.

XVI.
That in case any Subject of His said Majesty being in any part of the Kingdom
of Algiers happen to Strike, Wound, or Kill a Turk or a Moor, if he be taken,
he is to be punished in the same manner, and with no greater severity then a
Turk ought to be, being guilty of the same Offense; but if he escape, neither
the said English Consul, nor any other of His said Majesty's Subjects, shall be
in any sort questioned and troubled therefore.

XVII.
That the English Consul now, or at any time hereafter living in Algiers, shall
be there at all times with entire Freedom and Safety of his Person and Estate,
and shall be permitted to choose his own Druggerman and Broker, and freely to
go on Board any Ships in the Road, as often and when he pleases, and to have
the liberty of the Country; And that he shall be allowed a Place to Pray in,
and that no man shall do him any Injury in word or deed.

XVIII.
That not only during the continuance of this Peace and Friendship, but
likewise if any Breach or War happen to be hereafter between the said King of
Great Britain and the Kingdom of Algiers, the said English Consul, and all
other His said Majesty's Subjects Inhabiting in the Kingdom of Algiers, shall
always, and at all times, both of Peace and War, have full and absolute Liberty
to depart and go to their own, or any other Country, upon any Ship or Vessel
of what Nation soever they shall think fit, and to carry with them all their
Estates, Goods, Families and Servants, without any interruption or hindrance.

XIX.
That no Subject of His said Majesty, being a Passenger, and coming or going
with his Baggage, from or to any Port, shall be any way molested or meddled
with, although he be on Board any Ship or Vessel in Enmity with Algiers; And in
like manner no Algerine Passenger being on Board any Ship or Vessel in Enmity
with the said King of Great Britain, shall be any way molested, whether in his
Person, or in his Goods which he may have Laden on Board the said Ship or
Vessel.

XX.
That at all times when any Ship of War of the King of Great Britains, carrying
His said Majesty's Flag at the Main-Top-Mast-head, shall appear before Algiers,
and come to an Anchor in the Road, That immediately after notice thereof given
by His said Majesty's Consul, or Officer, from the Ship unto the Dey and
Government of Algiers, they shall in Honor to His Majesty, cause a Salute of
One and twenty Cannon to be Shot off from the Castles and Forts of the City,
and that the said Ship shall return an Answer by Shooting off the same Number
of Cannon.

XXI.
That presently after the Signing and Sealing of these Articles by the Bashaw,
Dey, Aga, and Governors of Algiers, all Injuries and Damages sustained on
either part, shall be quite taken away, and forgotten, and this Peace shall be
in full force and virtue, and continue for ever. And for all Depredations and
Damages that shall be afterward committed or done by either Side, before
notice can be given of this Peace, full Satisfaction shall immediately be made,
and whatsoever remains in kind, shall be instantly restored.

XXII.
That in case it shall happen hereafter that any thing is done or committed
contrary to this Treaty, whether by the Subjects of the one or the other Party,
the Treaty notwithstanding shall subsist in full force, and such Contraventions
shall not occasion the Breach of this Peace, Friendship, and good
Correspondence, but the Party Injured shall amicably demand immediate
Satisfaction for the said Contraventions before it be lawful to break the
Peace; and if the Fault was committed by any Private Subjects of either Party,
they alone shall be Punished as Breakers of the Peace, and Disturbers of the
Public Quiet. And Our Faith shall be Our Faith, and Our Word Our Word.

Confirmed and Sealed in the presence of Almighty God, the Tenth day of April,
in the Year of our Lord Jesus Christ, One thousand six hundred and eighty two:
And in the Year of the Hegira, One thousand ninety three, and the Eleventh day
of the Moon Abril.

( L. S.) ( L. S.) ( L. S.)

FINIS.

