ARTICLES OF PEACE and COMMERCE Between the most Serene and Mighty PRINCE
CHARLES II.

By the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of
the Faith, etc.

AND The most Illustrious LORDS, Halil Bashaw, Ibraim Dey, Aga, Divan, and
Governors of the Noble City and Kingdom of TRIPOLI in BARBARY;

Concluded by Sir John Narbrough Knight, Admiral of His Majesty's Fleet in the
Mediterranean Seas, On the Fifth day of March, Old Style, 1675/6.

Published by his Majesty's Command.

LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers
to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, 1676.

ARTICLES OF PEACE and COMMERCE Between the most Serene and Mighty PRINCE,
CHARLES II. By the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Christian Faith, etc. The most Illustrious Lords, Halil Bashaw,
Ibraim Dey, Aga, Divan and Governors of the Noble City and Kingdom of Tripoli
in Barbary; Concluded by Sir John Narbrough Knight, Admiral of His Majesty's
Fleet in the Mediterranean Seas.
I. IN the first place it is Agreed and Concluded, That from this day, and for
ever forward, there be a true, firm and inviolable Peace between the most
Serene King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Christian
Faith, etc. and the most Illustrious Lords, the Bashaw, Dey, Aga, Divan and
Governors of the City and Kingdom of Tripoli in Barbary, and between all the
Dominions and Subjects of either side, and that the Ships or other Vessels, and
the Subjects and People of both sides, shall not henceforth do to each other
any harm, offense or injury, either in word or deed, but shall treat one
another with all possible respect and friendship.

II. That any of the Ships or other Vessels belonging to the said King of Great
Britain, or to any of His Majesty's Subjects, may safely come to the Port of
Tripoli, or to any other Port or place of that Kingdom, or Dominions thereunto
belonging, freely to buy and sell, without the least disturbance, paying the
usual Customs as in former times has been paid for such goods as they sell,
and for the goods they sell not, they shall have free liberty to carry on board
their own Ships, without paying any duties for the same, and when they please
they shall freely depart from thence, without any stop, hindrance, or
molestation whatsoever.

III. That all Ships and other Vessels, as well those belonging to the said
King of Great Britain, or to any of His Majesty's Subjects, as also those
belonging to the Kingdom or People of Tripoli, shall freely pass the Seas, and
Traffic where they please, without any search, hindrance, or molestation from
each other; and that all persons or Passengers of what Country soever, and all
moneys, goods, merchandises and movables, to whatsoever people or Nation
belonging, being on board of any the said Ships or Vessels, shall be wholly
free, and shall not be stopped, taken or plundered, nor receive any harm or
damage whatsoever from either party.

IV. That the Tripoli Ships of War, or other Vessels thereunto belonging,
meeting with any Merchant Ships or other Vessels of the King of Great Britains
Subjects, not being in any of the Seas appertaining to His Majesty's Dominions,
may send on board one single boat with but two Sitters, besides the ordinary
Crew of Rowers, and no more but the two Sitters to enter any of the said
Merchant Ships or any other Vessels, without express leave from the Commander
of every such Ship or Vessel, and then upon producing unto them a Pass under
the hand and seal of the Lord High Admiral of England, the said Boat shall
presently depart, and the Merchant Ship or Ships, Vessel or Vessels shall
proceed freely on her or their Voyage: and although the Commander or Commanders
of the said Merchant Ship or Ships, Vessel or Vessels produce no Pass from the
Lord High Admiral of England, yet if the Major part of the said Ships or
Vessels Company be Subjects to the said King of Great Britain, the said Boat
shall presently depart, and the Merchant Ship or Ships, Vessel or Vessels shall
proceed freely on her or their Voyage: and if any of the said Ships, of War, or
other Vessels of His said Majesty meeting with any Ship or Ships, Vessel or
Vessels belonging to Tripoli, if the Commander or Commanders of any such Ship
or Ships Vessel or Vessels, shall produce a Pass firmed by the Chief Governors
of Tripoli, and a Certificate from the English Consul living there; or if they
have no such Pass or Certificate, yet if the Major part of their Ships Company
or Companies, be Turks, Moors, or Slaves belonging to Tripoli, then the said
Tripoli Ship or Ships, Vessel or Vessels shall proceed freely.

V. That no Commander or other person of any Ship or Vessel of Tripoli shall
take out of any Ship or Vessel of His said Majesty's Subjects, any person or
persons whatsoever, to carry them any where to be examined, or upon any other
pretense, nor shall use any torture or violence to any person of what Nation or
Quality soever, being on board any Ship or Vessel of His Majesty's Subjects,
upon any pretense whatsoever.

VI. That no Shipwreck belonging to the said King of Great Britain, or to any
of His Majesty's Subjects, upon any part of the Coast belonging unto Tripoli,
shall be made or become Prize; and that neither the goods thereof shall be
seized, nor the men made Slaves, but that all the Subjects of Tripoli shall do
their best endeavors to save the said Men and their goods.

VII. That no Ship or any other Vessel of Tripoli shall have permission, to be
delivered up, or to go to any other place in enmity with the said King of Great
Britain, to be made use of as Corsairs or Sea Rovers against His said Majesty's
Subjects.

VIII. That none of the Ships or other smaller Vessels of Tripoli shall remain
cruising near His said Majesty's City and Garrison of Tangier, or in sight of
it: nor any other way disturb the Peace and Commerce of that place.

IX. That if any Ship or Vessel of Tunis, Algiers, Tetuan or Sally, or any
other place being in War with the said King of Great Britain, bring any Ships,
Vessels, Men or Goods belonging to any of His said Majesty's Subjects to
Tripoli, or to any Port or place in that Kingdom, the Governor there shall not
permit, them to be sold within the Territories of Tripoli.

X. That if any of the Ships of War of the said King of Great Britain do come
to Tripoli, or to any other Port or place of that Kingdom with any Prize, they
may freely sell it, or otherwise dispose of it at their own pleasure, without
being molested by any; And that His Majesty's said Ships of War shall not be
obliged to pay Customs in any sort; And that if they shall want provisions,
victuals, or any other things, they may freely buy them at the Rates in the
Market.

XI. That when any of His said Majesty's Ships of War shall appear before
Tripoli, upon notice thereof given to the English Consul, or by the Commander
of the said Ships to the chief Governors of Tripoli, public Proclamation shall
be immediately made to secure the Christian Captives; and if after that any
Christians whatsoever make their escape on board any of the said Ships of War,
they shall not be required back again, nor shall the said Consul, or Commander,
or any other His said Majesty's Subjects be obliged to pay any thing for the
said Christians.

XII. That if any Subjects of the said King of Great Britain happen to die in
Tripoli, or its Territories, his goods or moneys shall not be seized by the
Governors or any Minister of Tripoli, but shall all remain with the English
Consul.

XIII. That neither the English Consul nor any other Subject of the said King
of Great Britain shall be bound to pay the debts of any other of His Majesty's
Subjects; except that they become Surety for the same by a public Act.

XIV. That the Subjects of His said Majesty in Tripoli or its Territories, in
matter of controversy, shall be liable to no other Jurisdiction but that of
the Dey or Divan, except they happen to be at difference between themselves; in
which case they shall be liable to no other determination, but that of the
Consul only.

XV. That in case any Subject of His Majesty being in any part of the Kingdom
of Tripoli happen to strike, wound or kill a Turk or a Moor, if he be taken he
is to be punished in the same manner, and with no greater severity then a Turk
ought to be, being guilty of the same offense; but if he escape, neither the
said English Consul, nor any other of His said Majesty's Subjects shall be in
any sort questioned or troubled therefore.

XVI. That the English Consul now or at any time hereafter living in Tripoli,
shall be there at all times with entire freedom and safety of his Person and
Estate; and shall be permitted to choose his own Druggerman and Broker, and
freely to go on board any Ship in the Road, as often and when he pleases: And
to have the liberty of the Country; and that he shall be allowed a place to
pray in; and that no man shall do him any injury in word or deed.

XVII. That not only during the continuance of this Peace and Friendship, but
likewise if any breach or War happen to be hereafter between the said King of
Great Britain and the City and Kingdom of Tripoli, the said Consul, and all
other His said Majesty's Subjects inhabiting in the Kingdom of Tripoli, shall
always, and at all times both of Peace and War have full and absolute liberty
to depart, and go to their own or any other Country upon any Ship or Vessel of
what Nation soever they shall think fit, and to carry with them all their
Estates, Goods, Families and Servants, although born in the Country, without
any interruption or hindrance.

XVIII. That no Subject of His said Majesty, being a Passenger from, or unto
any Port, shall be any way molested or meddled with, although he be on board any
Ship or Vessel in enmity with Tripoli.

XIX. That whereas a War has lately happened between the most Serene King of
Great Britain and the most Illustrious Lords, Halil Bassa Ibraim Dey, Aga,
Divan and Governors of the Noble City and Kingdom of Tripoli in Barbary, by
reason of the injuries done to the King of Great Britain and His Subjects, by
the Government and People of Tripoli, contrary to the Articles of Peace, We
Halil Bassa, Ibraim Dey, Aga, Divan and Governors of the Noble City and
Kingdom of Tripoli in Barbary, do acknowledge the injuries done, and that the
breach of the Peace between His most Excellent Majesty the King of Great
Britain and us of Tripoli, was committed by our Subjects, for which some are
Banished, and some fled from our Justice; and for further satisfaction to His
most Excellent Majesty, for the breach of Articles, we are sorry for the same,
and do by these engage to set at Liberty and deliver unto the Right Hon^urable
Sir John Narbrough Knight, Admiral of His Majesty's Fleet in the Mediterranean
Seas, all English Captives residing in the City and Kingdom of Tripoli and
Dominions thereunto belonging, without paying any ransom for them: And likewise
by setting at liberty and delivering unto the said S^r John Narbrough Knight,
all other persons taken under English Colors, without paying any ransom for
them, and by paying Eighty Thousand Dollars in moneys, goods and Slaves to the
aforesaid Sir John Narbrough Knight. And moreover, We do engage our selves and
Successors, That if any injuries for the future be done contrary to these
Articles by the Government and People of Tripoli, to the King of Great Britain
and His Subjects; if upon demand of satisfaction from the Government and People
of Tripoli, We or they refuse or deny to give satisfaction therefore, so that a
War be occasioned thereby between the King of Great Britain and the Government
and People of Tripoli, We do engage Our selves and Successors to make
restitution for the injuries done; and likewise to make satisfaction to the
King of Great Britain for the full charge and damage of that War.

XX. That no Subject of the King of Great Britain, etc. shall be permitted to
turn Turk or Moor in the City and Kingdom of Tripoli, being induced thereunto
by any surprizal whatsoever, unless he voluntarily appear before the Dey or
Governor with the English Consuls Druggerman three times in twenty four hours
space, and every time declare his resolution to turn Turk or Moor.

XXI. That at all times when any Ship of War of the King of Great Britain, etc.
carrying His said Majesty's Flagg at the Main Topmast head, appear before the
said City of Tripoli, and come to Anchor in the Road; that immediately after
notice thereof given by His said Majesty's Consul, or Officer from the Ship,
unto the Dey and Government of Tripoli, they shall in honor to His Majesty
cause a salute of One and Twenty Cannon to be shot off from the Castles and
Forts of the City, and that the said Ship shall return an answer by shooting
off the same number of Cannon.

XXII. That presently after the signing and sealing of these Articles by us
Halil Bassa, Ibraim Dey, Aga, Divan and Governors of the Noble City and Kingdom
of Tripoli, all injuries and damages sustained on either part shall be quite
taken away and f^rgotten, and this Peace shall be in full force and virtue, and
continue for ever: And for all depredations and damages that shall be hereafter
committed or done by either side, before notice can be given of this Peace,
full satisfaction shall be immediately made, and whatsoever remains in kind
shall be instantly restored.

XXIII. That whenever it shall happen hereafter that any thing is done or
committed by the Ships or Subjects of either side, contrary to any of these
Articles, satisfaction being demanded therefore, shall be made to the full, and
without any manner of delay; and that it shall not be lawful to break this
Peace, until such satisfaction be denied: And our Faith shall be our Faith, and
our Word our Word; and whosoever shall be the cause of the breaking of this
Peace, shall assuredly be punished with present death.

Confirmed and Sealed in the presence of Almighty God the 5th day of March Old
Style, and the Year of Our Lord Jesus Christ 1675/6, being the last day of the
Moon Zelhedga, and the Year of the Hegira 1086. (L. S.) Bashaws Seal. (L. S.)
Deys Seal. (L. S.) Aga's Seal.


FINIS.

