ARTICLES OF PEACE Between The Most Serene and Mighty PRINCE CHARLES II.

By the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender
of the Faith, etc.

And Several Indian Kings and Queens, etc.

Concluded the 29th day of May, 1677.

Published by His Majesty's Command.

LONDON, Printed by John Bill, Christopher Barker, Thomas Newcomb and Henry
Hills, Printers to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty. 1677.

Articles of Peace between the most Mighty Prince, and our Dread Sovereign Lord
CHARLES the Second, by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. And the several Indian Kings and Queens,
etc. Assenters and Subscribers hereunto, made and concluded at the Camp at
Middle Plantation the Twenty ninth day of May 1677. being the day of the most
happy Birth and Restoration of our said Sovereign Lord, and in the Nine and
twentieth Year of His Majesty's Reign, By the Right Honorable Herbert
Jefferies Esquire, Lieutenant-Governour of His Majesty's Colony of Virginia.

Present,

His most Sacred Majesty's Commissioners appointed under the Great Seal of
England for the Affairs of Virginia,

The Honorable Sir John Berry Knight, and The Honorable Francis Morison Esquire;
And The Honorable Council of State of the said Colony.

WHereas His most Sacred Majesty has of His Own Royal Grace and mere Motion
Entrusted to my Care and Endeavors the Renewing, Management and Concluding a
good Peace with the Neighbor Indians: In Order whereunto (with the Advice and
Assistance of the Honorable Sir John Berry Knight, and Francis Morison
Esquire) I have caused to be drawn up these ensuing Articles and Overtures, for
the firm Grounding, and sure Establishment of a good and just Peace with the
said Indians. And that it may be a Secure and Lasting one (Founded upon the
strong Pillars of Reciprocal Justice) by Confirming to them their Just Rights,
and by Redress of their Wrongs and Injuries, That so the great God (who is a
God of Peace, and lover of Justice) may uphold and prosper this our Mutual
League and Amity, It is hereby Concluded, Consented to, and mutually Agreed, as
follows;

Artic. I.
THat the respective Indian Kings and Queens do from henceforth acknowledge to
have their immediate Dependency on, and own all Subjection to the Great King of
England, our now Dread Sovereign, His Heirs and Successors, when they pay their
Tribute to His Majesty's Governor for the time being.

II.
That thereupon the said Indian Kings and Queens and their Subjects, shall hold
their Lands, and have the same Confirmed to them and their Posterity, by Patent
under the Seal of this His Majesty's Colony, without any Fee, Gratuity or
Reward for the same, in such sort, and in as free and firm manner as others His
Majesty's Subjects have and enjoy their Lands and Possessions, paying yearly
for and in lieu of a Quit Rent, or Acknowledgment for the same, only Three
Indian Arrows.

III.
That all Indians who are in Amity with Us, and have not Land sufficient to
Plant upon, be (upon Information) forthwith provided for, and Land laid out and
Confirmed to them as aforesaid, never to be disturbed therein, or taken from
them, so long as they own, keep and maintain their due Obedience and Subjection
to His Majesty, His Governor and Government, and Amity and Friendship toward
the English.

IV.
Whereas by the mutual Discontents, Complaints, Jealousies and Fears of English
and Indians, occasioned by the Violent Intrusions of diverse English into their
Lands, forcing the Indians by way of Revenge, to kill the Cattle and Hogs of
the English, whereby Offense and Injuries being given and done on both sides,
the Peace of this His Majesty's Colony has been much disturbed, and the late
unhappy Rebellion by this means (in a great measure) begun and fomented, which
has Involved this Country into so much Ruin and Misery: For prevention of
which Injuries and evil consequences (as much as possibly we may) for time to
come; It is hereby Concluded and Established, That no English shall Seat or
Plant nearer then Three miles of any Indian Town; and whosoever has made, or
shall make any Incroachment upon their Lands, shall be removed from thence, and
proceeded against as by the former Peace made, when the Honorable Colonel
Francis Morison was Governor, and the Act of Assembly grounded thereupon, is
Provided and Enacted.

V.
That the said Indians be well Secured and Defended in their Persons, Goods and
Properties, against all hurts and injuries of the English; and that upon any
breach or violation, hereof the aggrieved Indians do in the first place repair
and Address themselves to the Governor, acquainting him therewith (without
rashly and suddenly betaking themselves to any Hostile course for Satisfaction)
who will Inflict such Punishment on the wilful Infringers hereof, as the Laws
of England or this Country permit, and as if such hurt or injury had been done
to any Englishman; which is but just and reasonable, they owning themselves to
be under the Allegiance of His most Sacred Majesty.

VI.
That no Indian King or Queen be Imprisoned without a special Warrant from His
Majesty's Governor and Two of the Council, and that no other Indian be
Imprisoned without a Warrant from a Justice of Peace, upon sufficient cause of
Commitment.

VII.
That the said Indians have and enjoy their wonted conveniences of Oystering,
Fishing, and gathering Tuchahoe, Curtenemons, Wild Oats, Rushes, Puckoone, or
any thing else (for their natural support) not useful to the English, upon the
English Dividends; Always provided they first repair to some Public Magistrate
of good Repute, and inform him of their number and business, who shall not
refuse them a Certificate upon this or any other Lawful occasion, so that they
make due return thereof when they come back, and go directly home about their
business, without wearing or carrying any manner of Weapon, or lodging under
any Englishmans Dwelling House one night.

VIII.
That no Foreign Indian be suffered to come to any English Plantation without a
friendly neighbor Indian in his company with such Certificate as aforesaid:
and no Indian King is to refuse to send a safe Conduct with the Foreigner, upon
any Lawful occasion of his coming in, and that no Indian do paint or disguise
themselves when they come in.

IX.
That all Indian Kings and Queens Tributary to the English, having notice of
any March of strange Indians near the English Quarters or Plantations, do
forthwith repair to some one of the next Officers of the Militia, and acquaint
him of their Nation, number, and design, and which way they bend their course.

X.
That if necessary, a convenient Party be presently sent out by the next
Colonel of the Militia, to Aid, Strengthen and join with our friendly Indians
against any Foreign Attempt, Incursion or Depredation upon the Indian Towns.

XI.
That every Indian fit to bear Arms, of the Neighboring Nations in Peace with
us, have such quantity of Powder and Shot allotted him, as the Right Honorable
the Governor shall think sufficient on any occasion, and that such numbers of
them be ready to go out with our Forces upon any March against the Enemy, and
to receive such Pay for their good Services, as shall be thought fit.

XII.
That each Indian King and Queen have equal Power to Govern their own People,
and none to have greater Power then other, Except the Queen of Pamunkey, to
whom several scattered Nations do now again own their ancient Subjection, and
are agreed to come in and Plant themselves under her Power and Government; Who
with her, are also hereby included into this present League and Treaty of
Peace, and are to keep and observe the same toward the said Queen in all
things, as her Subjects, as well as toward the English.

XIII.
That no person whatsoever shall entertain or keep any Neighboring Indian as
Servant, or otherwise, but by License of the Governor, and to be upon
Obligation answerable for all Injuries and Damages by him or them happening to
be done to any English.

XIV.
That no English harbor or entertain any Vagrant or Runaway Indian, but convey
him home by way of Pass, from Justice to Justice to his own Town, under Penalty
of paying so much per day for harboring him, as by the Law for entertaining of
Runaways is recoverable.

XV.
That no Indian (of those in Amity with us) shall serve for any longer time
then English of the like Ages should serve by Act of Assembly, and shall not be
sold as Slaves.

XVI.
That every Indian King and Queen in the Month of March every year, with some
of their Great Men, shall tender their Obedience to the Right Honorable His
Majesty's Governor at the place of his Residence, wherever it shall be, and
then and there pay the accustomed Tribute of Twenty Beaver Skins to the
Governor, and also their Quit-Rent aforesaid, in acknowledgment they hold
their Crowns and Lands of the Great King of England.

XVII.
That due care be had and taken that those Indian Kings and Queens, their Great
Men and Attendants that come on any Public Business to the Right Honorable
the Governor, Council or Assembly, may be accommodated with Provisions and
Houseroom at the Public Charge, and that no English Subject shall abuse,
revile, hurt or wrong them at any time in word or deed.

XVIII.
That upon any Discord or Breach of Peace happening to arise between any of the
Indians in Amity with the English, upon the first appearance and beginning
thereof, and before they enter into any open Acts of Hostility or War one
against another, they shall repair to His Majesty's Governor, by whose Justice
and Wisdom it is concluded such Difference shall be made up and decided, and to
whose final Determination the said Indians shall submit and conform themselves.

XIX.
That for the preventing the frequent mischiefs and mistakes occasioned by
unfaithful and corrupt Interpreters, and for the more safety, satisfaction, and
advantage both of the Indians and English, That there be one of each Nation of
our Neighboring Indians that can already speak, or may become capable of
speaking English, admitted together with those of the English, to be their own
Interpreters.

XX.
That the several Indians concluded in this Peace, do forthwith restore to the
respective English Parents and Owners all such Children, Servants and Horses,
which they have at any time taken from them, and are now remaining with them
the said Indians, or which they can make discovery of.

XXI.
That the Trade with the said Indians be continued, limited, restrained or laid
open, as shall make best for the Peace and Quiet of the Country; upon which
Affair the Governor will consult with the Council and Assembly, and conclude
thereon at their next meeting.

The Sign of the Queen of signature of the Queen of Pamunkey Pamunkey, on
behalf of her self and the several Indians under her Subjection. signature of
the King of the Nottoways The Sign of the King of the Nottoways. The Sign of
Captain John West. initials IW, signature of Captain John West Son to the Queen
of Pamunkey. The Sign of the signature of the Queen of Waonoke Queen of
Waonoke. The Sign of the King signature of the King of the Nancymond of the
Nancymond Indians.
Convenit cum Originali. Test. Tho. Ludwell Secretary.

Memora^^um the 29th day of May, 1677.
THat this Instrument of Peace being Read and Expounded to the several Indian
Kings and Queens then present (at the Court at Middle Plantation) by
Interpreters Sworn truly to perform the same, the said Indian Kings and Queens
Signed and delivered the Articles to the Honorable Governor upon their Knees,
and received that other part, Signed and Delivered on behalf of the Kings
Majesty, in the same posture of kneeling, of their own accords kissing the
Paper as they Transferred it from hand to hand to each other, until every one
had done the like Mark of Reverence to it, in sign of a most free and joyful
acceptance of this Peace concluded with them. At the same time Pericuhtah King
of the Appomatucks being then present, did earnestly desire to be admitted to
the Signing this Peace with the rest; but he being suspected, and Complained of
to have Committed by himself or Subjects, some Murders on His Majesty's
Subjects of England, was not admitted or included into this League at that
time, nor is to partake of the benefit of this Peace, before he shall have
cleared himself of this Guilt imputed to him, and Committed since His Majesty's
Commissioners came into Virginia, as they were credibly informed: Which
Exemption gave the English general satisfaction, to find there was so just
Inquisition made of the Blood of their Slaughtered Brethren.

John Berry, Francis Morison.

LONDON, Printed by John Bill, Christopher Barker, Thomas Newcomb and Henry
Hills, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1677.


