ARTICLES OF ALLIANCE and COMMERCE, Between The most Serene and Potent PRINCE
CHARLES II.

By the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of
the Faith, etc.

AND THE Most Serene and Potent Prince CHRISTIAN V.

By the Grace of God, King of Denmark, Norway, etc. Concluded at Copenhagen,
the 11th. day of July. 1670.

Published by His Majesty's Command.

In the SAVOY, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill, and Christopher Barker,
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1671/2.

Articles of Alliance and Commerce between the Most Serene and Potent Prince,
Charles the Second, By the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France, and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. and the Most Serene and Potent Prince
Christian the Fifth, by the Grace of God, King of Denmak, Norway, etc.
Concluded at Copenhagen, the 11th. day of July. 1670.
I.
THat there be between the two Kings, their Heirs and Successors; As also their
Kingdoms, Principalities, Provinces, Estates, Counties, Islands, Cities,
Subjects and Vassals of what condition, dignity and degree soever, by Land and
Sea, in Rivers, Fresh Waters, and all places whatsoever as well in Europe, as
out of Europe; now and for the time to come, a sincere, true and perfect
friendship, Peace and Confederation; So as that neither party do any wrong,
injury or prejudice to the Kingdoms, Principalities, Provinces, and Estates, or
to the inhabitants and Subjects of the other; nor suffer any to be done by
others, as much as in him is: But rather live as friends together, using each
other, with good will and respect; And promoting upon all occasions the
interests, and advantages of each other, and their subjects, as if they were
their own: And Preventing and hindering with all their power, by their
Assistance, and Advice, any damage, wrong and injury that may be offered them.

II.
Neither of the foresaid Kings and their Heirs shall consent to any thing, that
may be to the prejudice or detriment of his Allie; but if either of the Kings
shall know that any thing is proposed, or is in agitation or contrivance, or
that will be proposed, agitated or contrived which may tend to the detriment of
the other; He shall be obliged to signify the same unto Him without delay, and
in the mean time to hinder and prevent it by all ways possible.

III.
The foresaid Kings for themselves, their Heirs and Successors mutually do
undertake and promise, that they will not aid or furnish the Enemies of either
party, that shall be Aggressors, with any Provisions of War, as Soldiers,
Arms, Engines, Guns, Ships, or other necessaries for the use of War, or suffer
any to be furnished by their Subjects: But if the Subjects of either Prince
shall prseume to act contrary hereunto, then that King, whose Subjects shall
have so done, shall be obliged to proceed against them with the highest
severity, as against seditious persons and breakers of the League.

IV.
It is further Covenanted and Argeed; That if at any time hereafter, Any Prince
or State shall invade, or by any hostile way Attempt upon the Hereditary
Kingdoms, Provinces, Counties, Towns, Islands, Territories, or Dominions of
the King of Denmark which he now possesses, then the King of Great Britain
shall Assist the said King of Denmark in time, with such number of Landforces
and Ships of War, against such Aggressor, as shall suffice to repel the force,
and as the state of the said Kings affairs shall require: And the said King of
Great Britain shall therefore with all his power endeavor to hinder, that by
such invasion or disturbance the King of Denmark be not prejudiced in any wise
in his Kingdoms, Dominions or Rights. And if the said King of Great Britain, or
the said King of Denmark, shall contract or make any League, Alliance or Union
with any other King, Prince, Commonwealth or State, they shall respectively
endeavor to comprehend therein each other and their Dominions, (as much as in
them lies) if they shall desire to be comprehended.

V.
It shall be lawful for the Subjects of both Kings with their Commodities and
Merchandise both by Sea and Land, in time of Peace without license or safe
Conduct General or special to come to the Kingdoms, Provinces, Mart-towns,
Ports and Rivers of each other, and in any place therein to remain and trade,
Paying Usual Customs and Duties; Reserving nevertheless to either Prince his
Superiority, and Regal jurisdiction in his kingdoms, Provinces, Principalities
and Territories respectively.

VI.
It is notwithstanding Covenanted and Concluded, That the Subjects of the King
of Great Britain shall in no wise come to the Prohibited Ports, of which
mention is made in Precedent Treaties, nor Colonies, without the Special
License of the King of Denmark first desired and obtained; unless they shall be
compelled to make thither, and enter therein, by stress of Weather, or pursuit
of Pirates, in which case neither shall it be lawful for them to buy or sell.
As also in like manner the Subjects of the King of Denmark shall not come to
the British Colonies, unless by Special License of the King of Great Britain
first desired and obtained.

VII.
It shall be lawful for the Subjects of the Most Serene King of Denmark to
bring into their own Stores and Warehouses in England, Scotland and Ireland,
and other the Ports of the King of Great Britain in Europe, such Commodities as
now, or hereafter, shall be of the growth and production of the Estates,
Countries and Dominions Subject to the King of Denmark, or of the Manufacture
thereof, and likewise such as come from any part of the River of Elbe.

In like manner shall it be lawful for the Subjects of the King of Great
Britain to import and bring into Denmak, Norway, and all other Ports and
Colonies not prohibited of the King of Denmark, all kinds of Merchandise, which
now or hereafter shall be produced or made in the Kingdoms, Countries and
Estates under the Subjection of the King of Great Britain. But if at any time
hereafter it be permitted to any foreign Nations, to bring all kinds of
Commodities without exception into England, Scotland and Ireland, and other the
Ports belonging to the King of Great Britain, then the same also shall be
lawful for the Subjects of the King of Denmark: Which in like manner shall be
permitted to the Subjects of the King of Great Britain, upon the like occasion,
in the Prohibited Ports and Colonies of the King of Denmark.

VIII.
It is also Covenanted and agreed, that the people and Subjects of the King of
Great Britain, Sailing to any the Hereditary Kingdoms, Countries, or Dominions,
of the King of Denmark, or trading in the same, shall pay no more or greater
Customs, Tribute, toll or other Duties, nor in any other manner, then the
People of the United Provinces of the Lowcountries, and other strangers, (the
Swede only excepted) trading thither, and Paying lesser Customs, do or shall
pay; And in going, returning, and staying, as also in fishing and trading, and
all other things shall enjoy the same Liberties, Immunities, and Privileges,
which the People of any foreign Country in the said Kingdoms, and Dominions of
the King of Denmark, abiding and trading, do or shall enjoy: And so on the
other side the People and Subjects of the King of Denmark, shall have and enjoy
the same Privileges, in the Countries, and Territories, of the King of Great
Britain, to wit, that the People and Subjects of the King of Denmark, Sailing
to any the Kingdoms, Countries, or Dominions of the King of Great Britain, or
trading in the same, shall not pay any more or greater Customs, Tributes, Toll,
or other Duties, nor in any other manner, then the People of the
United-netherlands, or other Strangers trading thither and paying lesser
Customs, do or shall pay: And in going, returning and staying, as also in
fishing, and trading, and all other things shall enjoy the same Liberties,
Immunities and Privileges, which the People of any other Foreign Country, in
the said Kingdoms, and Dominions of the King of Great Britain, abiding and
trading, do or shall enjoy: But so, as that the Power of each King of Making or
Altering Customs, or other Duties, as they shall see occasion, in their
respective Kingdoms, Countries, Dominions, and Ports, remain full and entire;
Provided the foresaid equality be strictly observed on both sides in manner
aforesaid.

IX.
It is also covenanted that when the Subjects of either King have imported
their Commodities into the Dominions of the other, have Paid the usual Customs
for them and undergone their Search, it shall be free and lawful for them, to
bring their said Commodities into their own proper Storehouses, and Cellars, or
into places which they shall think most fit and convenient, and there Store
them; Nor shall any Magistrate or Officer of any the Cities or Ports of either
impose upon them any Cellars or Storehouses without their consent.

X.
The Subjects of either Crown trading upon the Seas, and Sailing by the Coasts
of either Kingdom, shall not be obliged to come into any Port, if their course
were not directed thither; but shall have liberty to pursue their Voyage
without hindrance or detention whithersoever they please. Nor shall they, being
by tempest forced into Port, and there remaining, be obliged to unlade their
Cargo, or to barter or sell any part thereof; But it shall be lawful for them,
to dispose of it as they shall think fit, and to do any other thing, which they
shall judge most for their advantage: Provided nothing be done that may be to
the defrauding of either Prince of his due Rights and Customs.

XI.
It is also agreed, That after any Planks, Masts, and other sorts of Timber,
have been once put on board the Ships of the Subjects or People of the King of
Great Britain, they shall not be liable to any further Search; But all Search,
or scrutiny, shall be made before; And if then, either Oaken or other
prohibited Timber be found, it shall be presently stopped and detained upon the
place before it be put on board the Ships; Nor shall the People of the said
King of Great Britain, or his Subjects, be therefore molested in their Persons
or Estates by Arrest, or other detention whatsoever; But only the Subjects of
the King of Denmark, who shall have presumed to Sell or Alienate any the like
prohibited Timber, shall be punished in due manner. And the People and Subjects
of the King of Great Britain, shall have, possess and enjoy all and singular
the contents, and concessions of this Article, without any Molestation or
Interruption, so long and for all such time as the Subjects or any of the
People of the United Netherlands, shall hold, possess, and enjoy, or might, or
ought to hold, possess, and enjoy the same or like privileges by any Treaty
already made, or to be made, or by any Contract, Agreement or permission.

XII.
It is also Conluded and Agreed, That all Ships belonging to the Subjects of
the King of Great Britain, and Merchants in their passage through the Soundt
under the Most Serene King of Denmark and Norway, etc. shall enjoy after the
same manner the Benefit and Privilege of deferring the Payment of their
Customs until their return, as they held and enjoyed in former years last
preceding the late War; But so nevertheless, that the said Ships and Merchants
bring with them Certificates under the Seal of the Officers of the said King of
Great Britain deputed thereunto, testifying the said Ships to belong to
Subjects of the King of Great Britain; And likewise that before their passage
they give sufficient and good security for paying the same in place convenient
to the Collectors of the Customs of the said King of Denmark, at their return,
or if they shall not return, within three months time at the furthest, if they
do not pay the same at their said first passage.

XIII.
And furthermore it is Agreed, that whatsoever Merchandise, the Subjects of the
King of Great Britain, shall land at Elsignore, and there lay in their
Storehouses, to no other end, then to put on board again entire, and transport
them to other parts, they shall be obliged to pay only the same duties for
such Merchandise, and no more, then is wont to be paid in this case by the
Dutch Nation or any other Strangers: Which shall be reciprocally observed to
the Subjects of the King of Denmark after the same manner in England.

XIV.
Also it is Agreed, that the Ships and Subjects of the King of Great Britain,
shall have their dispatch at Elsignore, as soon as they arrive there without
delay, No Ships of what Nation soever having preference before them in this
behalf: Except the Inhabitants of certain places, who have anciently held a
privilege to that purpose, and still do.

XV.
If any Subject of either Prince shall happen to die in the Dominions, or
Territories of the other, it shall be lawful for him to dispose of his estate,
both money and goods in any manner whatsoever: And if any one die within the
Kingdoms, or Provinces of the other Prince without making any such dispositions
then the Goods by him left, moveable or immovable, of whatever nature or
condition the same shall be, shall be faithfully preserved for the use of the
right Heir, and for satisfaction of such debts as the party deceased was justly
bound to pay: And to that end, so soon as any Subject of either Prince shall
die in the other Princes Dominions, the Consul or Public Minister then
residing there, shall have right to possess the said Moneys and Goods, and
shall make Inventories of the same before some Magistrate of the place; Which
Goods shall afterward remain in his hands, to be answered to the Heirs and
Creditors as aforesaid; But if no such Consul or Public Minister shall be
there, then it shall be lawful for two Merchants of the same Country with the
party deceased to possess the Goods left by him, to preserve them, and in like
manner to answer them to the Heirs and Creditors. Which notwithstanding is to
be so understood, that no Papers, or Books of Accounts are by this Article to
be exposed to the inspection of the said Magistrate, but only the real Goods
and Merchandise of the deceased; And that the said Magistrate within the space
of forty eight hours, after notice given and request made, shall be obliged to
be present, otherwise the said Inventories shall be made without him.

XVI.
It shall be lawful for either of the Confederates and their Subjects or
People to Trade with the Enemies of the other, and to carry to them, or furnish
them with any Merchandises (Prohibited only, which they call Contrabanda,
excepted) without any impediment, unless in Ports and Places besieged by the
other; Which nevertheless if they shall so do; it shall be free for them either
to sell their Goods to the Besiegers, or betake themselves to any other Port or
Place not besieged.

XVII.
It is also Agreed, That it shall be free and lawful for the Subjects of
either Prince, Trading in the Dominions or Ports of the other, there to remain,
and reside for the buying and selling Commodities, without any restriction of
time or limitation to be imposed upon them by any Officers or Magistrates of
the said Dominions or Ports, They Paying the accustomed Duties for all Goods
and Merchandise by them imported, or exported; And further provided that they
trade with none, but such as are Citizens, or Burgers of some City, or Town,
within the Kingdoms of Denmark or Norway, and that only by wholesale, and not
by parcells or retail.

XVIII.
Furthermore, for the better encouragement of Trade and Commerce, and for the
utter avoiding of all Frauds and Disputes that may arise between the Officers
of Ports and Merchants, It is Agreed and Concluded, That all and singular
Duties shall be demanded and paid according to the Printed Tariffe, (or Book of
Rates) wherein shall be comprised all Customs and Duties to be paid as well
for Goods in the respective Ports, as for passage through the Soundt: And to
the end that this may be the more Strictly observed, Both Kings shall not only
enjoin his Officers and Collectors of his Customs under the highest penalty,
not to do any thing that may frustrate or elude this Agreement; But also that
they do not by Molestation or Exaction, cause any trouble, or offer any injury
to the Subjects of either King.

XIX.
Moreover, it is concluded and Agreed, That the King of Denmark shall
constitute the Overseers of his Customs or others, Commissioners for
re-measuring all Ships belonging to the Subjects of the King of Great Britain
Trading in Norway, according to their burden and content, so as that what has
been hitherto not rightly observed, either in excess or defect, may be
hereafter reduced into better Order.

XX.
But lest such freedom of Navigation or Passage of the One Allie and His
Subjects and People, during the War that the other may have by Sea, or Land
with any other Country, may be to the prejudice of the other Allie, and that
Goods and Merchandise belonging to the enemy, may be fraudulently concealed
under color of being in Amity; For the preventing of fraud, and clearing all
suspicion, It is thought fit, that the Ships, Goods and Men belonging to the
other Confederate in their passage and Voyages, be accompanied with Letters of
Passe-port and Certisicate; The forms whereof to be as follows;

CHARLES the Second by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, etc.
CHRISTIAN the Fifth by the Grace of God, King of Denmark and Norway, etc.
BE it known unto all and singular to whom these Our Letters of Safe Conduct
shall be shown; That (...) Our Subject and Citizen of Our City of (...) has
humbly represented unto Us, that the Ship called (...) of the burden of (...)
Tuns, does belong unto them and others our Subjects, and that they are sole
Owners and Proprietors thereof, and is now Laden with the Goods which are
contained in a Schedule which she has with her from the Officers of our
Customs, and do Solely, Truly and Really belong to Our Subjects or others in
Neutrality, bound immediately from the Port of (...) to such other place or
places, where she may conveniently Trade with the said Goods, being not
Prohibited nor belonging to either of the parties in hostility, or else find a
Freight, Which the foresaid (...) Our Subject having attested by a writing
under his hand, and affirmed to be true by Oath, under Penalty of confiscation
of the said Goods, We have thought fit to grant him these our Letters Of
Safe Conduct: And therefore We do hereby respectively Pray and desire All
Governors of Countries and Seas, Kings, Princes, Commonwealths, and free
Cities, and more especially the Parties now in War, and their Commanders,
Admiralls, Generals, Officers, Governors of Ports, Commanders of Ships,
Captains, Freighters and all others whatsoever having any Jurisdiction by Sea,
or the Custody of any Port, whom the Ship aforesaid shall chance to meet, or
among whose Fleet or Ships it shall happen to fall or make stay in their Ports,
that by virtue of the League and Amity, which we have with any King or State,
they suffer the said Master with the Ship (...) persons, things, and all
Merchandise on board her, not only freely and without any Molestation,
Detention, or Impediment to any place whatsoever to pursue his Voyage, but also
to afford him all Offices of Civility as to Our Subject if there shall be
occasion; Which upon the like or other occasion, We and Ours shall be ready to
return.

Given the (...) day of (...) in the year

WE the President, Consuls and Senators of the City of (...) do Attest and
Certify, That on the (...) day of (...) in the year (...) Personally before us
came and appeared (...) Citizen and Inhabitant of the City or Town of (...) and
under the Oath wherein he stands bound to Our Sovereign Lord the King, did
declare unto us, That the Ship or Vessel called (...) of the burden of (...)
Tuns does belong to the Port, City or Town of (...) in the Province of (...)
And that the said Ship does justly belong only to him and others, Subjects of
Our said Sovereign Lord, and now bound directly from the Port of (...) laden
with the Goods mentioned in a Schedule received from the Officers of the
Customs, and that he has affirmed under the Oath aforesaid, that the
forementioned Vessel with her Goods and Merchandise does only belong to
Subjects of His Majesty, and does carry no Goods prohibited, which belong to
either of the Parties now in War.

In testimony whereof we have caused this Certificate to be Subscribed by the
Syndic of Our City, and sealed with Our Seal.

Given, etc.


When therefore the Merchandise, Goods, Ships, or Men of either of the
Confederates and their Subjects and People, shall meet in open Sea, Streights,
Ports, Havens, Lands and places whatsoever, the Ships of War, whether Public
or Private, or the Men, Subjects and People of the other Confederate; Upon
exhibiting only the foresaid Letters of Safe Conduct and Certificate, there
shall be nothing more required of them, nor shall Search be made after the
Goods, Ships or Men, nor shall they be any other ways whatsoever molested or
troubled; But suffered with all freedom to pursue their intended Voyage; But
if this solemn and set form of Passeport and Certificate be not exhibited, or
that there be any other just and urgent cause of Suspicion; Then shall the Ship
be Searched, which is nevertheless in this case only understood to be
permitted, and not otherwise. If by either party any thing shall be committed
contrary to the true meaning of this Article, against either of the
Confederates, each of the said Confederates shall cause His Subjects and People
offending to be severely punished, and full and entire satisfaction to be
forthwith given, and without delay, to the party injured and His Subjects and
People for their whole loss and expenses.

XXI.
It is also concluded and Agreed, that all Ships of Subjects and People of the
King of Great Britain together with their lading and Merchandise, passing by
the Port of Gluckstad, or other Places and Towns, under the Dominion of the
King of Denmark, situate upon the Elve-stream, both going and returning, shall
be free and exempt from all Custom, Impost, Search, Seizure, and Molestation,
except only the case of Search in the time of War, when the King of Denmark
has War with any other King or State.

XXII.
If the Subjects of either Prince be hurt or injured in the Territories of the
other; Then the King of that place where the injury is done, shall take care
that speedy justice be administered according to the Laws and Customs of the
Country; And that the persons guilty be duly punished, with satisfaction to be
made to the party wronged.

XXIII.
It is also Agreed, That no ships whatsoever, Vessels, or Merchandise laden on
ships of whatsoever nature kind or quality, howsoever taken, belonging to any
the Subjects of either of the aforesaid Kings, under any color or pretense
whatsoever be adjudged Prise, unless by a Judicial Examination and Process in
form of Law, in a Court of Admiralty for Prises taken at Sea in that behalf
lawfully Constituted.

XXIV.
Both parties shall cause justice and equity to be Administered to the Subjects
and People of each other, according to the Laws and Statutes of either
Country, Speedily, and without long and unnecessary formalities of Law and
expenses, in all causes and Controversies, as well now depending, as which may
hereafter arise.

XXV.
If the ships of either of the Confederates, and their Subjects and People,
whether they be Merchant Men, or Men of War, shall happen to run on ground, or
fall upon Rocks, or be forced to lighten themselves, or shall otherwise suffer
Shipwreck (which God forbid) upon the Coasts of either King, the foresaid
Ships with their tackle, Goods, and Merchandise, or whatsoever shall be
remaining of them, shall be Restored to their owners and Proprietors; Provided
they or their Agents and Proctors do claim the said ships and Goods, within the
space of a year and a day after such Shipwreck suffered, saving always the
Rights and Customs of both Nations. The Subjects also and Inhabitants dwelling
upon the said Coasts and Shores, shall be obliged to come in to their help in
case of danger, and as much as in them lies to give their assistance; And shall
do their utmost endeavor, either for the freeing of the Ship, or saving the
Goods, Merchandise and Apparel of the said Ship, and what else of the same they
shall be able, and for the conveying the same into some safe place in order to
be restored to the Owners; They paying Salvage, and giving such recompense to
the persons by whose assistance and diligence the said Merchandise and Goods,
shall have been recovered and preserved as they shall deserve. And finally both
Parties, in case of such misfortune shall see observed on their side, what they
would desire to have observed and done on the other side.

XXVI.
The Commanders of Ships, or Governors, Soldiers, Mariners and Company
belonging to the same; As also the Ships themselves, and the Goods and
Merchandise on board them, shall not be detained by any Arrest or Seizure upon
any Warrant either General or Special, or for any cause, unless for the defense
and preservation of the Kingdom; Which yet shall not be understood to be meant
of Arrests laid by Authority of law, for debt contracted upon any other lawful
occasion whatsoever, in which case it shall be lawful to proceed according to
the rules of justice and Law.

XXVII.
It shall be free for the Merchants of both Kingdoms, their Factors and
servants, and also the Masters and Mariners of Ships upon the Sea, and in
other Waters, as likewise in the Ports, and upon the Coasts and Lands of either
Confederate, going, returning and walking, for the defense of their Persons and
Goods, to carry any kind of portable Arms, as well offensive as defensive, so
that they give no just cause of suspicion to the Commanders and Magistrates of
any place, of any Plots or Contrivances against the Public or private Peace.

XXVIII.
The Convoys or Ships of War of either Party, meeting in their Voyage, or
overtaking any Merchant Ships, or others belonging to the other Confederate or
His Subjects, and making the same course at Sea, in Europe or out of Europe,
shall be obliged to guard and defend them as long as they shall hold the same
course together.

XXIX.
For the greater security of Commerce and freedom of Navigation, it is
Concluded and Agreed, That neither Part, as much as may be, and shall lie in
their powers, shall permit that Public Pirates or other Robbers upon the Sea,
in any the Ports of the other Kingdom or Country have their Receptacles or
Retreats, or shall suffer that any of the Inhabitants, or People of either
Prince, do receive them into their houses, or supply them with provisions, or
be otherwise assisting to them; But on the contrary shall endeavor, that the
said Pirates or Robbers and their Partisans and Accomplices be apprehended, and
punished according to their demerit, and the Ships and Goods, as much as can be
found of them, restored to the lawful Owners or their Agents, Provided their
right be made appear by due proof of law in the Court of Admiralty.

XXX.
It is concluded and Agreed, that there shall be at all times free access for
the Subjects and People of either Party, to the Ports and Coasts of both
Princes, and it shall be lawful for them to remain therein, and from thence
again to depart, and also to pass through the Seas and Territories whatsoever
of either King respectively (Not committing any waste or injury) not only with
Merchant Ships and Ships of burden, but also with Ships of War, whether the
same be upon the Public account, or Acting by private Commissions; whether
they enter by reason of Tempest, and for avoiding the danger of the Sea, or to
refit or buy provisions: So that they exceed not the number of six Ships of
War, if they enter of their own accord, nor shall they remain longer in or
about the Ports, then shall be necessary for the refitting of their Ships,
buying provisions or other necessaries: And if they should upon occasion desire
to come into the said Ports with a greater number of Ships of War, It shall in
no wise be lawful for them to enter therein to without first giving timely
notice by Letter of their coming, and obtaining leave of those to whom the
foresaid Ports belong. But if by force of Tempest or other urgent necessity,
they shall be compelled to put into harbor, in such case without any precedent
notice, the Ships shall not be restrained to a certain number; But with this
condition nevertheless, that their Admiral or Commander in chief presently
after his Arrival, shall make acquainted the chief Magistrate or Commander of
the Place, Haven or Coast, whether they are come, with the cause of his coming;
Nor shall be stay longer there, then shall be permitted him by the chief
Magistrate or Commander, and shall not act or attempt any Hostility in the
Ports whereinto he has betaken himself, or any thing prejudicial to him of the
Two Confederates to whom they shall belong.

XXXI.
It shall not be lawful for the Subjects of either King, or the Inhabitants of
the Kingdoms or Lands under their obedience, to procure of any Prince or State
who is at difference, or in open War with either of the Confederates, Letters
Patents, called Commissions or Reprisals, much less by virtue of such Letters
to molest or damnify the Subjects of either. Both the said Kings shall strictly
prohibit their Subjects respectively, that they do not procure or accept from
other Princes or States any such Commissions; But shall as much as in them
lies, forbid and hinder the committing of any depredations by virtue of such
Commissions.

XXXII.
If any Ship or Ships belonging to the Subjects of either King be taken in the
Ports of either by a third party, they in whose Port, or within whose
jurisdiction whatsoever the foresaid Ships shall be taken, shall be mutually
obliged to use their endeavor together with the other party, for the finding
and retaking the said Ships or Ships, and restoring them to the Owners; Which
nevertheless shall be done at the charge of the said Owners, or the Parties
interrested.

XXXIII.
But if also in the Ships taken by the Subjects of either Confederate, and
brought into any Port belonging to the other, there be found any Seamen or
other Persons who are Subjects of that Confederate into whose Ports or Rivers
the prize shall be brought, they shall be civilly used by those who have taken
them, and restored to their liberty forthwith and without ransom.

XXXIV.
But if a Ship of War or any other laden with prohibited Goods belonging to the
other Crown happen to be taken; It shall not be lawful for the Captains or
Commanders who have taken her to open or break up any Chests, Tons or Bails on
board the said Ship, nor likewise to transport or otherwise alienate any of her
Merchandise, until they have been first put on shore, and an Inventory thereof
made before the Judges of the Admiralty.

XXXV.
And for the greater security of the Subjects of both Kings, and for preventing
of all violence toward them from the said Ships of War; All Commanders of any
the Ships of War belonging to the King of Great Britain and all other His
Subjects whatsoever, shall be strictly charged and required, that they do not
Molest or Injure the Subjects of the King of Denmark; If they shall do
otherwise, they shall be liable to answer it in their Persons and Estates, and
shall therein stand bound until just Satisfaction and Compensation shall be
made for the wrongs by them done, and the Damage thereby sustained or to be
sustained: In like manner, shall all Commanders of the Ships of War belonging
to the King of Denmark, and all other His Subjects whatsoever be straightly under
the same penalties charged and required that they do not molest or injure the
said Subjects of the King of Great Britain; Provided nevertheless, that all the
foresaid actions be examined and adjudged by due and legal proceeding in the
Court of Admiralty of both Kings; Or if it shall rather seem meet to either of
the parties, being a stranger in the place where the controversy is to be
decided, they shall be examined before certain Commissioners, which both Kings
so soon as they shall be desired, shall appoint to that end, that so
proceedings by this means may be not only carried on without great expenses,
but also ended within three months at furthest.

XXXVI.
Both Kings shall take care, That judgment and sentence in things taken at Sea,
be given according to the rules of justice and equity by persons not suspected
or interrested, and being once given by such Judges as aforesaid, they shall
straightly charge and require their Officers and whom it shall concern, to see
the same put in due execution according to the form and tenor thereof.

XXXVII.
If the Ambassadors of either King, or any other Public Ministers residing
with the other King, shall happen to make complaint of any such sentence, that
King to whom complaint shall be made, shall cause the said judgment and
sentence to be reheard and examined in His Council; That it may appear, whether
all things requisite and necessary have been performed according to the rules
of this Treaty and with due caution: If the contrary shall happen, it shall be
redressed, which is to be done at the furthest within three months time.

Neither shall it be lawful either before the giving of the first sentence, or
afterward during the time of Re-hearing, to unlade or sell and make away the
Goods in controversy, unless it happen to be done by consent of parties, and
to prevent the perishing of the said Goods and Merchandise.

XXXVIII.
The said Kings shall have in each others Court their Ministers, and in certain
Ports their Consuls, for the better and more easy communicating and proposing
such things, as they shall think advantageous to the Public interest, or
private concerns of any particular Person.

XXXIX.
No Private injury shall in any wise letten this Treaty, nor shall raise any
discord or hatred between the foresaid Nations, but every man shall answer for
his own doings, and shall be responsible therefore; Nor shall one man suffer
for that which another has offended in, by having recourse to Reprisals, or
such like rigorous proceedings, unless justice be denied or delayed longer then
is fitting. In which case it shall be lawful for that King, whose Subject has
received the Injury, to proceed according to the rules and prescriptions of the
Law of Nations until reparation be made to the party injured; Provided
notwithstanding that he have first in due manner advertised the other King
thereof.

XL.
Also it is Agreed that if the Hollander, or any other Nation whatsoever (the
Swedish Nation only excepted) has already, or shall hereafter obtain any
better Articles, Agreement, Exemptions or Privileges then what are contained
in this Treaty from the King of Denmark, that the same and like Privileges,
shall be likewise Granted to the King of Great Britain, and His Subjects
effectually and fully to all intents and purposes; And on the otherside if the
Hollander or any other Nation whatsoever, has or shall obtain from His Majesty
of Great Britain, any better Articles, Agreements, Exemptions or Privileges
then what are contained in this Treaty, that the same and like Privileges
shall be granted to the King of Denmark and His Subjects also, in most full and
effectual manner.

XLI.
It is also Concluded, That former Treaties and Leagues at any time heretofore
made between the foresaid Confederates or their Predecessors Kings, as well for
the Kingdoms of Great Britain, etc. as for the Hereditary Kingdoms of Denmark
and Norway, etc. respectively, be not in the least reputed or taken to be
broken and abolished by any Agreement, Covenants or Articles in the present
Treaty contained; But that the same remain in full force, effect and virtue, so
far as they are not contrary or repugnant to the present Treaty or any Article
therein contained.

XLII.
Finally, it is Covenanted, concluded and agreed, that the foresaid Kings shall
sincerely and bona fide observe all and singular the Articles contained and set
down in this Treaty, and shall cause them to be observed by their Subjects and
People; Nor shall transgress the same directly or indirectly, or suffer the
same to be transgressed by their Subjects or People, and shall Ratify and
Confirm all and singular the premises as before Agreed, by Letters Patents
Subscribed with their hands, and Sealed with their Great Seals in good
sufficient and effectual form, and shall deliver the same reciprocally within
three Months after the date of these Presents, or cause them to be delivered,
in good faith and reality, and with effect.

Given at Copenhagen the 12th. day of July, 1670.
In the SAVOY, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker,
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1672.


