ARTICLES OF PEACE and COMMERCE, Between The most Serene and Mighty PRINCE
CHARLES II. By the Grace of God King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Christian Faith, etc. And the Most Illustrious LORDS THE
BASHAW, DAI, AGA And Governors of the Famous City and Kingdom OF Algiers.

Concluded by Sir Edw. Spragge Knight, Admiral of His Majesty's Fleet in the
Mediterranean, November. 29. Old Style, 1671.

Published by His Majesty's Command.



In the SAVOY, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill, and Christopher Barker,
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1671/2.

ARTICLES of PEACE and COMMERCE between the most Serene and Mighty Prince
CHARLES the Second, by the Grace of God King of Great Britain, France, and
Ireland, Defender of the Christian Faith, etc. and the most Illustrious Lords,
the Bashaw, Dai, Aga, and Governors of the famous City and Kingdom of Algiers.
I.IN the first place it is Agreed and Concluded, That from this day and for
ever forward, there be a true, firm, and inviolable Peace between the most
Serene King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Christian
Faith, etc. and the most Illustrious Lords, the Bashaw, Dai, Aga and Governors
of the City and Kingdom of Algiers, and between all the Dominions and Subjects
of either Side; and that the Ships, or other Vessels, and the Subjects and
People of both Sides shall not henceforth do to each other any harm, offense,
or injury, either in word or deed; but shall treat one another with all
possible Respect and Friendship.

II. That any of the Ships or other Vessels belonging to the said King of Great
Britain, or to any of His Majesty's Subjects, may safely come to the Port of
Algiers, or to any other Port, or Place of that Kingdom, there freely to Buy
and Sell, paying the usual Customs of Ten per Cent. as in former times for such
Goods as they sell; and the Goods they sell not, they shall freely carry on
Board, without paying any Duties for the same; and that they shall freely
depart from thence whenever they please, without any stop or hinderance
whatsoever.

III. That all Ships and other Vessels, as well those belonging to the said
King of Great Britain, or to any of His Majesty's Subjects, as those belonging
to the Kingdom or People of Algiers, shall freely pass the Seas, and Traffic
without any search, hinderance, or molestation from each other; and that all
Persons or Passengers of what Country soever, and all Moneys, Goods,
Merchandises, and Movables to whatsoever People or Nation belonging, being on
Board of any of the said Ships or Vessels, shall be wholly free, and shall not
be stopped, taken, nor plundered, nor receive any harm or damage whatsoever
from either party.

IV. That the Algiers Ships of War, or other Vessels meeting with any
Merchant-ships or other vessels of His said Majesty's Subjects, not being in
any of the Seas appertaining to His Majesty's Dominions, may send on Board one
single Boat with two Sitters only, besides the ordinary Crew of Rowers; and
that no more shall enter any such Merchant-ship or Vessel without express leave
from the Commander thereof, but the two Sitters alone; and that upon producing
to them a Pass under the Hand and Seal of the Lord High-admiral of England, the
said Boat shall presently depart, and the Merchant-ship or Vessel shall proceed
freely on her voyage.

And although the said Commander of the Merchant-ship or Vessel, produce no
Pass from the Lord High-admiral of England; yet if the major part of the Seamen
of the said Ship or Vessel, be Subjects to the said King of Great Britain, the
said Boat shall presently depart; and the said Merchant-ship or Vessel shall
proceed freely on her voyage: And any of the Ships of War, or other Vessels of
His said Majesty meeting with any Ships, or other Vessels of Algiers, if the
Commander of any such Algier Ship or Vessel shall produce a Pass firmed by the
chief Governors of Algiers, and a Certificate from the English Consul living
there; or if they have no such Pass or Certificate, yet if the major part of
their Ships Company be Turks, Moors, or Slaves belonging to Algiers, then the
said Algier Ship or Vessel shall proceed freely.

V. That no Commander or other person of any Ship or Vessel of Algiers, shall
take out of any Ship or Vessel of His said Majesty's Subjects, any person or
persons whatsoever, to carry them any where to be examined, or upon any other
pretense; nor shall they use any torture or violence to any person, of what
Nation or Quality soever, being on Board any Ship or Vessel of His Majesty's
Subjects, upon any pretense whatsoever.

VI. That no Shipwreck belonging to the said King of Great Britain, or to any
of His Majesty's Subjects, upon any part of the Coast belonging to Algiers,
shall be made or become Prize; and that neither the Goods thereof shall be
seized, nor the Men made Slaves; but that all the Subjects of Algiers shall do
their best endeavors to save the said Men and their Goods.

VII. That no Ship, nor any other Vessel of Algiers shall have permission to be
delivered up, or to go to Sally or any other place in Enmity with the said King
of Great Britain, to be made use of, as Corsairs or Sea-rovers against His said
Majesty's Subjects.

VIII. That none of the Ships, or other smaller Vessels of Algiers, shall
remain cruising near His said Majesty's City and Garrison of T^^gi^^, or in
sight of it* nor any other way disturb the Peace and Commerce of that place.

IX. That if any Ship or Vessel of Tunis, Tripoli, or Sally, or of any other
place, bring any Ships, Vessels, Men or Goods belonging to any of His said
Majesty's Subjects to Algiers, or to any Port or Place in that Kingdom, the
Governors there shall not permit them to be sold within the Territories of
Algiers.

X. That if any of the Ships of War of the said King of Great Britain, do come
to Algiers, or to any other Port or Place of that Kingdom with any Prize, they
may freely sell it, or otherwise dispose of it at their own pleasure, without
being molested by any; And that His Majesty's said Ships of War, shall not be
obliged to pay Customs in any sort; and that if they shall want Provisions,
Victuals, or any other things, they may freely buy them at the Rates in the
Market.

XI. That when any of His said Majesty's Ships of War shall appear before
Algiers, upon notice thereof given by the English Consul, or by the Commander
of the said Ships to the chief Governors of Algiers, public Proclamation
shall be immediately made to secure the Christian Captives; and if after that
any Christians whatever make their escape on Board any of the said Ships of
War, they shall not be required back again; nor shall the said Consul or
Commander, or any other His Majesty's Subjects be obliged to pay any thing for
the said Christians.

XII. That all the Subjects of the said King of Great Britain, now Captives in
Algiers, or in any of the Territories thereof, shall be set at Liberty, and
delivered upon paying the Price they were first sold for in the market; And
that for the time to come no Subjects of His said Majesty shall be bought or
sold, or made Slaves in any part of the Kingdom of Algiers.

XIII. That if any Subject of the said King of Great Britain happen to dye in
Algiers, or its Territories, his Goods or Moneys shall not be seized by the
Governors, or any Minister of Algiers, but shall all remain with the English
Consul.

XIV. That neither the English Consul, nor any other Subject of the said King
of Great Britain, shall be bound to pay the Debts of any other of His Majesty's
Subjects, except that they become Sureties for the same by a public Act.

XV. That the Subjects of His said Majesty in Algiers, or its Territories, in
matter of Controversy, shall be liable to no other Jurisdiction, but that of
the Dai or Duan, except they happen to be at difference between themselves, in
which case they shall be liable to no other Determination, but that of the
Consul only.

XVI. That in case any Subject of His said Majesty being in any part of the
Kingdom of Algiers happen to strike, wound, or kill a Turk or a Moor, if he be
taken, he is to be punished in the same manner, and with no greater severity
then a Turk ought to be, being guilty of the same offense; but if he escape,
neither the said English Consul, nor any other of His said Majesty's Subjects,
shall be in any sort questioned and troubled therefore.

XVII. That the English Consul, now or at any time hereafter living in Algiers,
shall be there at all times with entire freedom and safety of his Person and
Estate; and shall be permitted to chose his own Druggerman and Broker, and
freely to go on Board any Ships in the Road as often and when he pleases, and
to have the Liberty of the the Country, and that he shall be allowed a place
to pray in, and that no man shall do him any injury in word or deed.

XVIII That not only during the continuance of this Peace and Friendship, but
likewise if any Breach or War happen to be hereafter between the said King of
Great Britain, and the Kingdom of Algiers, the said English Consul, and all
others His said Majesty's Subjects inhabiting in the Kingdom of Algiers, shall
always, and at all times both of Peace and War, have full and absolute liberty
to depart, and go to their own or any other Country, upon any Ship or Vessel
of what Nation soever they shall think fit; and to carry with them all their
Estates, Goods, Families, and Servants without any interruption or hinderance.

XIX. That no Subject of His said Majesty being a Passenger from or unto any
Port, shall be any way molested or meddled with, although he be on board any
ship or vessel in enmity with Algiers

XX. That presently after the Signing and Sealing of these Articles by the
Bashaw, Dai, and Governors of the Kingdom of Algiers, all injuries and damages
sustained on either part, shall be quite taken away and forgotten: And this
Peace shall be in full force and virtue, and continue for ever: And for all
depredations and damages that shall be afterward committed or done by either
side before notice can be given of this Peace, full satisfaction shall be
immediately made, and whatsoever remains in kind, shall be instantly restored.

XXI. That whenever it shall happen hereafter, that any thing is done or
committed by the Ships or Subjects of either side contrary to any of these
Articles, satisfaction being demanded therefore, shall be made to the full, and
without any manner of delay; and that it shall not be lawful to break this
Peace, until such satisfaction be denied. And Our Faith shall be Our Faith, and
Our Word Our Word; and whosoever shall be the cause of the breaking of this
Peace, shall assuredly be punished with present death.

Confirmed and Sealed in the presence of Almighty God the 29th. of November Old
Style, and the Year of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1671. being the 7th. day of the
Moon of Shaban, and the Year of the Hegira, 1082.

L. S. L. S. L. S.

It is further agreed, That when the Subjects of the said King of Great
Britain, Captives in the Kingdom of Algiers shall be redeemed, the Sum of
Twelve pieces of Eight and a half for each of them, shall be abated and cut off
from the Port Charges, usually paid in freeing of Slaves.

FINIS.

