HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT royal blazon flanked by the
English lion and Scottish unicorn
CHARLES the Second, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
To all to whom these presents shall come greeting,
Know ye that We out of Our Princely Care, tending as well to the Public Weal
of Our Kingdoms, as the private Commodity of Our Subjects, have diligently
looked into and observed the great plenty of Fish, wherewith the Seas,
Estuaries or Inlets, Creeks, Arms of the Sea, public Rivers, Nooks and Lakes
of Our Dominions, and the Isles thereunto belonging, by the blessing of
Almighty God does abound, and how great profits unto Our Subjects, and increase
of strength unto Our Sea Forces, as well in times of War as Peace, may from
thence arise; what an ease it will be to Our Kingdoms, to have Lazy and Idle
people set on Work, and Trained up in the Trade of Fishing, whereby they may be
able to relieve themselves, and how much Merchandise and Traffic may by their
industry be improved; And having also with the Advice of the Council of Our
Kingdom, weighed as well the public as private Commodity, and all other
consequences thereof, if Our Subjects shall diligently, seriously, and
effectually employ their care and pains to the use and improvement of Fishing;
And for other urgent Reasons and Causes Us thereunto moving, Have nominated and
constituted, and by these presents, We do make, constitute, ordain and appoint,
Our dearest and most entirely beloved Brother, James Duke of York, and our
right Trusty and right welbeloved Cousins and Counselors, Edward Earl of
Clarendon Our high Chancellor of England, Thomas Earl of Southampton Our high
Treasurer of England, and likewise Our right trusty and right welbeloved
Councellor John Lord Roberts Lord Privy Seal, and also Our right trusty and
right welbeloved Cousin Charles Duke of Richmond and Lenox, and Our right
trusty and right welbeloved Cousins and Counselors George Duke of Albemarle
Lord General of all Our Forces, James Duke of Ormond Lord Steward of Our
Household, Henry Marquis Dorchester, Mountague Earl of Lyndsey Lord great
Chamberlain of England, and also Our right trusty and right welbeloved Cousin
and Counselor Edward Earl of Manchester Lord Chamberlain of Our Household, and
also Our right trusty and welbeloved Cousin Awbrey Earl of Oxford, and Our
right trusty and right welbeloved Cousin and Counselor Algernon Earl of
Northumberland, and also Our trusty and right welbeloved Cousins, William Earl
of Bedford, Philip Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery, Theophilus Earl of Lincoln,
and also Our right trusty and right welbeloved Cousin and Councellor Robert
Earl of Leicester, and also Our trusty and right welbeloved Cousins James Earl
of Suffolk, James Earl of Marleborough, Jerome Earl of Portland, and also Our
right trusty and right welbeloved Cousins and Counselors George Earl of
Norwich, Edward Earl of Sandwich, Arthur Earl of Anglesey, and also Our trusty
and right welbeloved George Lord Berkley of Berkley, Francis Lord Willoughby of
Parham, William Lord Craven, John Lord Berkley of Straiton, and also Our right
trusty and right welbeloved Councellor Denzill Lord Hollis, Frederick Lord
Cornewallis Treasurer of Our Household, and also Our trusty and right welbeloved
Horace Lord Townesend, and also Our right trusty and welbeloved Counselors
Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir Charles Berkley Knight, Comptroller of Our Household,
Sir George Carteret Knight, Vice-Chamberlain of Our Household, Sir Edward
Nicholas Knight, one of Our principal Secretaries of State, Sir William Morice
Knight, another of Our principal Secretaries of State, and likewise Our right
trusty and welbeloved Sir Ieoffry Palmer Knight and Baronet Our Attorney
General, and Sir Heneage Finch Knight and Baronet Our Solicitor General, to be
the Council of the Royal-Fishing of Great Britain and Ireland, of which We Our
Heirs and Successors will vouchsafe ever to be and be called Protectors; And we
Grant License and Liberty that the Council and their Successors for the time
being, as often as to them or any Four of them, it shall seem expedient, may and
shall from time to time in such places, meet and make Assemblies, Elect,
Constitute, and Depute Officers and Ministers, such as shall be necessary for
their service, and consuit and debate of the business and affairs of the said
Fishing, and make, appoint, ordain and publish Laws, Ordinances and Statutes
whatsoever concerning their Ministers, Servants, Fishermen, Mariners, Masters,
Factors, and others employed about the business of the Fishing, and the same as
often as it shall seem necessary to them, Change, Revoke, Correct and Substitute
other Ordinances in their stead, and enjoin pecuniary mulctes or pains of
imprisonment to be inflicted according to the quality of the offense on such as
contemn or violate the same, and to new evils arising (wanting amendment) to
apply a new remedy fit and agreeable to reason, when and as often as it shall
seem expedient to them, yet so as those Laws, Ordinances and Statutes be by Us
and Our Heirs ratified and approved before they take force; And also they shall
and may in like like manner put the said Statutes in due execution, and punish
(according to the said Statutes, Laws, and Ordinances, and the tenors of the
same) such as contemn and do contrary to them, which Laws, Ordinances and
Statutes, We will to be observed in all things, and duly put in execution, yet
so as the said Statutes, Laws, Ordinances or Decrees be not derogatory to the
Statutes, Laws, Liberties, or Arts of Parliament of Our Kingdoms.

And We also Will, and by these presents for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, do
grant to the Council aforesaid and their Successors, that the Fishermen,
Mariners, Masters and Servants being in their Fishing business, and to every of
them which now are or hereafter shall be attending or employed in the taking or
preserving of Fish, be from time to time hereafter free from all Pleas or
Plaints in any the Courts or Seats of Justice, of Us our Heirs or Successors
wheresoever, for any thing concerning the Fishing business while they are
attending the taking or preservation of Fish, so as none of them shall or may
answer before any Justices or Stewards, Bailiffs, or Judges of the Courts and
Seats of Justice, of Us or Our Heirs or Successors, for any Trespass, or
Contracts touching the Fishing business, but before the Council aforesaid, nor
shall give over Fishing or their Fishing works upon the summons of any of the
Ministers of Us, Our Heirs or Successors, but only upon the summons of some
Officers or Ministers of the said Council, or of the Judges to be Delegated by
the said Council; and for the better Government, and to avoid expenses, and
other charge arising about any the differences that may arise among the
Fishermen, Mariners, Masters and Servants belonging to the Fishery, for the
sp^^dyer Administration of Justice, because it may often happen that
controversies may arise at Sea between the Fishing Masters, Factors, Mariners
and their Servants, to rem^^^ which without delay, the Office of Judge is
necessarily requisite, We for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, do Constitute and
Ordain, that in every Province of Our said Kingdom and Cities in this behalf
convenient (to be designed or appointed by the Council) there be Delegated
Judges under the said Council; And We also Will that the same Judges ^^side and
keep Courts in this Buroughs and Cities most convenient for business of
Fishing, to whom we grant full power to make, establish, and publish Laws,
Ordinances and Statutes, temporary, and duly to put them in execution, so as
the same Statutes and Laws do not repugne nor contradict the Laws, Acts of
Parliament, or Statutes of Our Kingdoms, or the Laws or Statutes to be
constituted or published by the Council aforesaid.

We Will also, and by these presents for Us, Our Heirs and Successors do grant
unto the Council and their Successors (as well present as to come) that none of
their Fishermen, Ministers nor Servants, neither their Boats, Sloops, Barks,
or Ships, little or great, or of whatsoever Bulk or Burden they be, nor their
Instruments or furniture, designed or prepared for taking of Fish or Carriage
of the same, whether they be in Sea, or in Port, or elsewhere, be Arrested or
Impressed for the Service or Employment of Us Our Heirs or Successors, or
compelled to go in Our Service or Affairs, without the consent of their Owners:
And We Will that none of the Fishermen, or any employed in the taking or
preserving of Fish, to be put in Assizes, Iuries, Attaints, Recognizances, or
any Inquisition, although they concern Us, Our Heirs or Successors, or any
others; nor that any of them be against his will made Collector of Tenths,
Fifteenths, Taxes, Tallages, or any other Charges or Impositions whatsoever,
any may granted to Us, Our Heirs or Successors, nor to be compelled to be
Contable or Tything-man against his will.

And for the better encouragement for the enabling of all men of Ingenuity to
Build Busses, or Fishing Vessels to carry on this Fishing Trade, it is
requisite that there should be erected Wharfs, Docks, Storehouses and Granaries
about the River of Thames, and all the Ports of Our Kingdoms, where the
convenience will be most advantageous for the Work, for the accommodations of
all those that shall set out the said Vessels to the Fishing Ground, to receive
their Provisions of Salt, Clapboard, Hemp, and Vessels, their Rigging and
Provisions, and the Nets (which the poor set on Work, shall make) there to be
Tanned and fitted up accordingly, which to effect will require many thousand
pounds, and cannot be procured but by way of Lottery, and by Letters Patents
for a Collection in all Parishes within Our Dominions: We do by these presents,
Give, Grant and License unto the Council aforesaid, for he setting up of a
Lottery within Our Kingdom of England for the space of three years, as King
James of blessed memory did grant for the Plantation of Virginia in the year
1612. And also Letters Patents for a free Collection in the Churches, giving it
in charge to the Ministers to evidence the goodness of the Work, as the Council
shall direct, unto whom it is referred; and what Moneys shall be so raised
shall be paid unto Our right trusty and welbeloved Cousin Philip Earl of
Pembroke, and by him to be issued out for the erectings of Wharfs, Docks,
Storehouses and Granaries aforesaid, with the consent of the aforesaid Council
or any four of them.

And also We do hereby grant, that for the space of seven years, from the first
entrance into the Trade of Fishing, all the Returns made for the sale of the
Fish, either in the Baltic Seas, Denmark, Norway and France, shall pay no
Customs inwards nor outward, and shall freely vend their Fish in Foreign
Parts, and make the returns thereof in the Commodities of the place, without
and interruption, by Power or Virtue of any Charter whatsoever to the contrary;
And all Victuallers, Inns, Alehouses, Taverns, Coffee-houses and the like,
shall take 1, 2, 3, 4. or mere Barrels of Herrings yearly, at the price of
Thirty shillings per Barrel, until Foreign vent be attained to perfection,
according as the Council shall order the same; And all Barrels of Pickled
Herrings and Codfish, that shall be brought into Our Kingdom by the Flemings or
others, shall pay two shillings six pence per Barrel to the Stock of that place
or Port where they shall vend the same, which shall be also ordered by the
Council aforesaid.

And further by these presents, We do Order that all Pickled Herrings and
Barrel Codd taken by the Fishing Busses and Vessels of Our Nation, when it is
to be exported to Foreign Parts, shall give a Bill of Entry of the quantity,
and quality, and place whether it is to be exported, unto the Officers that
shall be appointed thereunto by Council, their Commissioners or Agents
appointed, and also the returns made, whereby a due account may be kept yearly
to be exhibited to Our Lord Treasurer for the time being.

And whereas in case of breach of Peace with any Foreign Nation (which God
forbid) We are graciously pleased, and do hereby promise and grant, that the
said Fishers shall he protected in their Fishing Grounds, and shall have
Convoys for their exportation; And all other Privileges and Immunities shall
be granted unto them in future, as experience shall discover, for the better
carrying on this business of Our Royal Fishing. In witness whereof We have
caused these Our Letters to be made Patents,

Witness Our Self at Westminster the Two and Twenty day of August, in the
Thirteenth year of Our Reign.
LONDON: Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printer's to the KING'S
most Excellent Majesty. 1661.


