ARTICLES OF PEACE Between The Most Serene and Mighty PRINCE CHARLES II. By the
Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith,
etc. AND The Most Excellent SIGNORS, Mahomet Bashaw, the Duan of the Noble City
of Tunis, Hagge Mustapha Dei, Morat Bei, and the rest of the Soldiers in the
Kingdom of TUNIS, Concluded by Sir John Lawson Knight, the Fifth of October
1662.

Published by His Majesty's Command.

LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers
to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty. 1677.

ARTICLES of PEACE between His Sacred Majesty CHARLES the Second, by the Grace
of God King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith,
etc. and the Most Excellent Signors, Mahomet Bashaw, the Duan of the Noble City
of Tunis, Hagge Mustapha Dei, Morat Bei, and the rest of the Soldiers in the
Kingdom of Tunis, Concluded by Sir John Lawson Knight, the Fifth of October
1662.
Artic. I. and from henceforward a firm Peace for ever, free Trade and Commerce
shall be and continue between the Subjects of His Sacred Majesty the King of
Great Britain, etc. and the People of the Kingdom of Tunis, and the Dominions
thereunto belonging.

II. Goletta and the Marine, shall be reduced to the ancient Customs in those
Cases.

III. molestation or interruption, they displaying their Colors. And for
prevention of all Inconveniences that may happen, the Ships of Tunis are to
have a Certificate under the Hand of the English Consul there, that they belong
to the Place; which being produced, the English Ship shall admit two men to
come on board them peaceably, to satisfy themselves that they are English; and
although they have Passengers of other Nations on board, they shall be Free,
both them and their Goods.

IV. English ship shall receive on board them any Goods or Passengers belonging
to the Kingdom of Tunis, they shall be bound to defend them and their Goods, so
far as lies in their power, and not deliver them unto the Enemy.

V. be cast away upon any Coast belonging to either Party, the Persons shall be
free, and the Goods saved, and delivered to the Proprietors thereof.

VI. English that do at present, or shall at any time hereafter inhabit in the
City or Kingdom of Tunis, shall have free Liberty when they please to Transport
themselves with their Families and Children, although born in the Country.

VII.

VIII. English Nation residing in Tunis, shall not be forced to make his
Addresses in any Difference unto the Court of Justice, but unto the Dey
himself, from whom only they shall receive Judgment.

IX. English Nation, shall not be liable to pay the Debts of any particular
persons of the Nation, unless obliged thereunto under his Hand.

X.

XI. Tunis, shall take in any of their Enemies Ships any English man serving
for Wages, they are to be made Slaves, but if Merchants or Passengers, they are
to enjoy their Liberty and Goods free and entire.

XII. Tunis, Fighting under his own Colors, with any Ship not wearing English
Colors, and shall surprise under the same the said English Ship, shall be
Prize, notwithstanding the Peace.

XIII. Tunis, of any Nation whatsoever, shall make his escape and get on board
any Ship belonging to the Dominions of His Sacred Majesty the King of Great
Britain, etc. the Consul shall not be liable to pay his Ransom, unless timely
notice be given him, to Order that none such be entertained; and then if it
appear that any Slave has so got away, the said Consul is to pay to his Patron
the Price for which he was sold in the Market; and if no Price be set, then to
pay Three hundred Dollars and no more.

These Articles aforementioned are to remain firm for ever, without any
Alteration; and in all other particulars not mentioned in these Articles, the
Regulation shall be according to the Capitulations General with the Grand
Signior. Signed and Sealed in the presence of the Great God.

(L. S.) (L. S.) (L. S.) (L. S.)


WHereas there were Articles of Peace between His Sacred Majesty the King of
Great Britain, etc. and the Most Excellent Signiors, Mahomet Bassa, the Duana
of the Noble City of Tunis, Hagge Mustapha Dey, Morat Bey, and the rest of the
Soldiers in the Kingdom of Tunis, made and concluded by the said Most
Excellent Signiors on the one Part, and by Sir John Lawson Knight, on the other
Part, the Fifth day of October 1662.

WE the Most Excellent Signiors, present Governors of the Noble City and
Kingdom of Tunis, Mustapha Bassa, Hagge Mami Dei, the Duana, Morat Bei, Mahomet
Hosse Bei, and the rest of the Soldiers in the Kingdom of Tunis, have Seen,
Perused and Approved the said Articles, and do now by these Presents Accept,
Approve, Ratify and Confirm all and every the aforementioned Articles of
Peace, in the same Manner and Form as they are Inserted and Repeated in the
said Articles, the which are hereunto adjoining, hereby firmly promising on our
Faiths, Sacredly to maintain the said Peace and Agreement Our Selves, and to
cause all Our People of what Degree or Quality soever, punctually and
inviolably to observe and keep all and every the Articles thereof for ever; and
if any of Our said People shall at any time violate and break any part of the
said Articles, they shall be punished with greatest Severity at their Return
into the Dominions of Tunis.

Confirmed and Sealed in the presence of Almighty God, in Our House in the
Noble City of Tunis, the last day of the Moon Delcadi, and the Year of Hegira
1085. being the Fourth day of February Old Style, and the Year of the Lord
Jesus Christ 1674/5. (L.S.) Divan. (L.S.) Hosse Bey. (L.S.) Morat Bey. (L.S.)
Bashaw. (L.S.) Dey. (L.S.) Hamitt Bey.


FINIS.

