ARTICLES OF PEACE and COMMERCE Between The Most Serene and Mighty PRINCE
CHARLES II. By the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Christian Faith, etc. AND The Most Illustrious LORDS, The
Bashaw, Dey, Aga, Divan, And Governors of the City and Kingdom of TRIPOLI;
Concluded by Sir John Narbrough Knight, Admiral of His Majesty's Fleet in the
Mediterranean Seas, the First day of May, 1676.

Published by His Majesty's Command.

LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers
to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty. 1677.

Article I.
IN the first place, it is Agreed and Concluded, That from this day and for
ever forward, there be a true, firm, and inviolable Peace between the most
Serene King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Christian
Faith, etc. And the most Illustrious Lords the Bashaw, Dey, Aga, Divan, and
Governors of the City and Kingdom of Tripoli in Barbary, and between all the
Dominions and Subjects of either side, and that the Ships or other Vessels, and
the Subjects and People of both sides, shall not henceforth do to each other
any Harm, Offense or Injury either in Word or Deed, but shall Treat one another
with all possible Respect and Friendship.

II.
That any of the Ships or other Vessels belonging to the said King of Great
Britain, or to any of His Majesty's Subjects, may safely come to the Port of
Tripoli, or to any other Port or Place of that Kingdom, or Dominions thereunto
belonging, freely to Buy and Sell without the least disturbance, paying the
usual Customs as in former times has been paid, for such Goods as they Sell:
and for the Goods they Sell not, they shall have free liberty to carry on Board
their own Ships, without paying any Duties for the same, and when they please
they shall freely depart from thence without any Stop, Hindrance or Molestation
whatsoever.

III.
That all Ships and other Vessels, as well those belonging to the said King of
Great Britain, or to any of His Majesty's Subjects, As also those belonging to
the Kingdom or People of Tripoli, shall freely pass the Seas, and Traffic
where they please, without any Search, hindrance, or molestation from each
other; and that all Persons or Passengers of what Country soever, and a^l
Moneys, Goods, Merchandises, and Movables to whatsoever People or Nation
belonging, being on board of any the said Ships or Vessels, shall be wholly
free, and shall not be Stopped, Taken or Plundered, nor receive any harm or
damage whatsoever from either Party.

IV.
That the Tripoli Ships of War, or other Vessels thereunto belonging, meeting
with any Merchants Ships or other Vessels of the King of Great Britains
Subjects, not being in any of the Seas appertaining to His Majesty's Dominions,
may send on board one single Boat with but Two Sitters, besides the Ordinary
Crew of Rowers: and no more but the Two Sitters to enter any of the said
Merchants Ships, or any other Vessels, without the express leave from the
Commander of every such Ship or Vessel; and then upon producing unto them a
Pass under the Hand and Seal of the Lord High Admiral of England, the said Boat
shall presently depart, and the Merchants Ship or Ships, Vessel or Vessels
shall proceed freely on her or their Voyage. And although the Commander or
Commanders of the said Merchant Ship or Ships, Vessel or Vessels produce no
Pass from the Lord High Admiral of England, yet if the Major part of the said
Ships or Vessels Company be Subjects to the said King of Great Britain, the
said Boat shall presently depart, and the Merchant Ship or Ships, Vessel or
Vessels shall proceed freely on her or their Voyage; And if any of the said
Ships of War or other Vessels of His said Majesty, meeting with any Ship or
Ships, Vessel or Vessels belonging to Tripoli, if the Commander or Commanders
of any such Ship or Ships, Vessel or Vessels shall produce a Pass firmed by the
Chief Governors of Tripoli, and a Certificate from the English Consul living
there, or if they have no such Pass or Certificate, yet if the Major part of
their Ships Company or Companies be Turks, Moors, or Slaves belonging to
Tripoli, then the said Tripoli Ship or Ships, Vessel or Vessels shall proceed
freely.

V.
That no Commander or other person of any Ship or Vessel of Tripoli shall take
out of any Ship or Vessel of His said Majesty's Subjects, any person or persons
whatsoever, to carry them any where to be examined, or upon any other pretense,
nor shall use any torture or violence unto any person of what Nation or Quality
whatsoever, being on board any Ship or Vessel of His Majesty's Subjects, upon
any pretense whatsoever.

VI.
That no Shipwreck belonging to the said King of Great Britain, or to any of
His Majesty's Subjects, upon any part of the Coast belonging unto Tripoli,
shall be made or become Prize; and that neither the Goods thereof shall be
seized, nor the Men made Slaves, but that all the Subjects of Tripoli shall do
their best endeavors to save the said Men and their Goods.

VII.
That no Ship or any other Vessel of Tripoli shall have permission to be
delivered up, or to go to any other place in enmity with the said King of Great
Britain, to be made use of as Corsairs or Sea-Rovers against His said Majesty's
Subjects.

VIII.
That none of the Ships or other smaller Vessels of Tripoli shall remain
Cruising near His Majesty's City and Garrison of Tangier, or in sight of it,
nor any other way disturb the Peace and Commerce of that place.

IX.
That if any Ship or Vessel of Tunis, Algier, Tittuan, or Sally, or any other
place being in War with the said King of Great Britain, bring any Ships,
Vessels, Men or Goods belonging to any of His said Majesty's Subjects, to
Tripoli, or to any Port or place in that Kingdom, the Governors there shall not
permit them to be sold within the Territories of Tripoli.

X.
That if any of the Ships of War of the said King of Great Britain do come to
Tripoli, or to any other Port or place of that Kingdom, with any Prize, they
may freely Sell it, or otherwise dispose of it at their own pleasure, without
being molested by any; And that His Majesty's said Ships of War shall not be
obliged to pay Customs in any sort; And that if they shall want Provisions,
Victuals, or any other things, they may freely buy them at the Rates in the
Market.

XI.
That when any of His said Majesty's Ships of War shall appear before Tripoli,
upon notice thereof given to the English Consul, or by the Commander of the
said Ships, to the chief Governors of Tripoli, public Proclamation shall be
immediately made to secure the Christian Captives; and if after that any
Christians whatsoever make their escape on board any of the said Ships of War,
they shall not be required back again, nor shall the said Consul, or Commander,
or any other His said Majesty's Subjects, be obliged to pay any thing for the
said Christians.

XII.
That if any Subjects of the said King of Great Britain happen to die in
Tripoli, or its Territories, his Goods or Money shall not be seized by the
Governors or any Minister of Tripoli, but shall all remain with the English
Consul.

XIII.
That neither the English Consul, nor any other Subject of the said King of
Great Britain, shall be bound to pay the debts of any other of His Majesty's
Subjects; except that they become Surety for the same by a public Act.

XIV.
That the Subjects of His said Majesty in Tripoli or its Territories, in matter
of controversy shall be liable to no other Jurisdiction but that of the Dey,
or Divan, except they happen to be at difference between themselves; in which
case they shall be liable to no other Determination but that of the Consul
only.

XV.
That in case any Subject of His Majesty, being in any part of the Kingdom of
Tripoli, happen to strike, wound or kill a Turk, or a Moor, if he be taken, he
is to be punished in the same manner, and with no greater severity then a Turk
ought to be, being guilty of the same offense; but if he escape, neither the
said English Consul, nor any other of His said Majesty's Subjects shall be in
any sort questioned or troubled therefore.

XVI.
That the English Consul now or at any time hereafter living in Tripoli, shall
be there at all times with entire freedom and safety of his Person and Estate,
and shall be permitted to choose his own Druggerman and Broker, and freely to
go on board any Ship in the Road, as often and when he pleases, and to have the
liberty of the Country; And that he shall be allowed a place to pray in, and
that no man shall do him any Injury in Word or Deed.

XVII.
That not only during the continuance of this Peace and Friendship, but
likewise if any breach or War happen to be hereafter between the said King of
Great Britain and the City and Kingdom of Tripoli, the said Consul, and all
other His said Majesty's Subjects inhabiting in the Kingdom of Tripoli, shall
always, and at all times both of Peace and War, have full and absolute liberty
to depart, and go to their own or any other Country, upon any Ship or Vessel
of what Nation soever they shall think fit, and to carry with them all their
Estates, Goods, Families and Servants, although born in the Country, without
any interruption or hindrance.

XVIII.
That no Subject of His said Majesty, being a Passenger from or to any Port,
shall be any way molested or meddled with, although he be on board any Ship or
Vessel in enmity with Tripoli.

XIX.
That whereas a War has lately happened between the most Serene King of Great
Britain, etc. and the most Illustrious Lords, Halil Bashaw, Ibraim Doy, Aga,
Divan and Governors of the Noble City and Kingdom of Tripoli in Barbary, by
reason of the Injuries done unto the King of Great Britain and His Subjects, by
the Government and People of Tripoli, contrary to the Articles of Peace, We
Halil Bashaw, Ibraim Dey, Aga, Divan and Governors of the Noble City and
Kingdom of Tripoli in Barbary, do acknowledge the Injuries done, and that the
breach of the Peace between His most Excellent Majesty the King of Great
Britain and it is of Tripoli, was committed by our Subjects, for which some are
Banished, and some fled from our Justice; and for further satisfaction to His
most Excellent Majesty for the breach of Articles, (we are sorry for the same)
and do by these engage to set at Liberty and deliver unto the Right Honorable
Sir John Narbrough Knight, Admiral of His Majesty's Fleet in the Mediterranean
Seas, all English Captives residing in the City and Kingdom of Tripoli, and
Dominions thereunto belonging, without paying any Ransom for them: And likewise
by setting at liberty and delivering unto the said Sir John Narbrough Knight,
all other persons taken under English Colors, without paying any Ransom for
them, and by paying Eighty thousand Dollars in Moneys, Goods and Slaves to the
aforesaid Sir John Narbrough Knight. And moreover, We do engage our selves and
Successors, That if any Injury for the future be done contrary to these
Articles by the Government and People of Tripoli, to the King of Great Britain
and His Subjects; if upon demand of satisfaction from the Government and People
of Tripoli, We or they refuse or deny to give satisfaction therefore, so that a
War be occasioned thereby between the King of Great Britain and the Government
and People of Tripoli, We do engage Our selves and Successors to make
restitution for the Injuries done; and likewise to make satisfaction to the
King of Great Britain for the full charge and damage of that War.

XX.
That no Subject of the King of Great Britain, etc. shall be permitted to turn
Turk or Moor in the City and Kingdom of Tripoli (being induced thereunto by any
surprisal whatsoever) unless he voluntarily appear before the Dey or Governor
with the English Consuls Druggerman, Three times in Twenty four hours space,
and every time declare his resolution to turn Turk or Moor.

XXI.
That at all times when any Ship of War of the King of Great Britain, etc.
carrying His said Majesty's Flagg at the Main-Top-Mast Head, appear before the
said City of Tripoli, and come to Anchor in the Road, that immediately after
notice thereof given by His said Majesty's Consul, or Officer, from the Ship,
unto the Dey and Government of Tripoli, they shall in Honor to His Majesty
cause a Salute of One and twenty Cannon to be shot off from the Castle and
Forts of the City; And that the said Ship shall return an Answer by shooting
off the same number of Cannon.

XXII.
That presently after the Signing and Sealing of these Articles by us Halil
Bashaw, Ibraim Dey, Aga, Divan and Governors of the Noble City and Kingdom of
Tripoli, all Injuries and Damages sustained on either part, shall be quite
taken away and forgotten, and this Peace shall be in full force and virtue, and
continue for ever: And for all Depredations and Damages that shall be hereafter
committed or done by either side, before notice can be given of this Peace,
full Satisfaction shall be immediately made, and whatsoever remains in kind,
shall be instantly restored.

XXIII.
That whenever it shall happen hereafter that any thing is done or committed
by the Ships or Subjects of either side, contrary to any of these Articles,
Satisfaction being demanded therefore, shall be made to the full, and without
any manner of delay; and that it shall not be lawful to break this Peace, until
such Satisfaction be denied: And Our Faith shall be our Faith, and our Word our
Word; and whosoever shall be the cause of the breaking of this Peace, shall
assuredly be punished with present death.

Confirmed and Sealed in the presence of Almighty God, the 5th day of March Old
Style, and the Year of our Lord Jesus Christ 1675/6. being the last day of the
Moon Zelhedga, and the Year of the Hegira, One thousand eighty six, 1086.
(L.S.)(...) (L.S.) Bashaw. (L.S.) Dey. (L.S.) Divan.


WHereas there were Articles of Peace and Commerce between the most Serene and
Mighty Prince Charles the Second, by the Grace of God King of Great Britain,
France and Ireland, Defender of the Christian Faith, etc. and the most
Illustrious Lords, Halil Bashaw, Ibraim Dey, Aga, Divan and Governors of the
Noble City and Kingdoom of Tripoli in Barbary, lately made and Concluded by the
said Lords on the one part, and by Sir John Narbrough Knight, Admiral of His
said Serene Majesty's Fleet in the Mediterranean Seas on the other part, and by
them Confirmed and Sealed in the presence of Almighty God, the Fifth day of
March Old Style, and the Year of our Lord, Josus Christ, 1675/6, being the last
day of the Moon Zelhedga, and the Year of the Hegira, One thousand eighty six,
1086. Since which time of Confirming and Sealing the aforesaid Articles of
Peace and Commerce, the aforesai^ Lord Ibraim Dey being fled away from his said
Government of the City and Kingdom of Tripoli in Barbary; Now therefore we
Halil Bashaw, Aga, Divan, Governors, Soldiers and People of the aforesaid
City and Kingdom of Tripoli, have Chosen and Elected Vice Admiral Mustapha
Grande to be Dey of the said City and Kingdom of Tripoli in Barbary, to Succeed
Ibraim Dey in the aforesaid Government. And now We the said Halil Bashaw,
Mustapha Dey, Aga, Divan, Governors, Soldiers and People of Tripoli
aforesaid, having seen the aforesaid Articles of Peace and Commerce, which were
lately made and Concluded as aforesaid, and having seriously perused, and fully
considered all particulars therein mentioned, do fully approve of all and every
of the aforesaid Article and Articles of Peace; And we and every one of us do
now by these Presents consent and agree to and with Sir John Narbrough Knight
aforesaid, for the Just and Exact keeping and performing all of the said
Articles, and do Accept, Approve, Ratify and Confirm all and every of them, in
the same manner and form as they are inserted and repeated in the preceding
Articles aforesaid; Hereby firmly Engaging our Selves and Successors, assuring
on Our Faith, sacredly to maintain, and strictly to observe, perform and keep
inviolably all and every the aforesaid Article and Articles of Peace and
Agreement for ever: And to cause and require all Our Subjects and People, of
what Degree or Quality whatsoever, within the City and Kingdom of Tripoli in
Barbary, or Dominions thereunto belonging, both by Sea and Land, punctually,
inviolably, carefully and duly to observe, keep and perform all and every the
aforesaid Article and Articles thereof for ever; And our Faith shall be our
Faith, and our Word our Word; and whosoever shall at any time violate and break
any part of the said Article or Articles of Peace, they shall assuredly be
punished with greatest severity, and his or their Heads shall be immediately
Cut off, and forthwith be presented unto any Officer whom the most Serene King
of Great Britain, etc. shall authorize to make demand thereof.

It is farther Agreed, That the Subjects belonging unto the Most Serene King of
Great Britain, etc. Trading unto the Port of the City and Kingdom of Tripoli in
Barbary aforesaid, or unto any Port or Place of the Dominions thereunto
belonging, in any Merchants Ship or other Vessel belonging unto the said Serene
Kings Subjects, shall not Pay so much Custom by one per Cent. for whatsoever
Goods or Merchandises they Sell or Buy, as other Nations do for the Custom of
the like Goods or Merchandise, notwithstanding whatsoever is specified in the
Second Article aforesaid, to the contrary.

And that the most Serene King of Great Britain's Consul residing in Tripoli
aforesaid, shall have liberty at all times when he pleases, to put up His said
Serene Majesty's Flagg on the Flagg-staff on the Top of his House, and there to
continue it spread as long time as he pleases. Likewise, the said Consul to
have the same liberty of putting up and spreading the said Flagg in his Boat,
when he passes on the Water, and no Man whatsoever to oppose, molest, disturb
or injure him therein either by Word or Deed.

These and all other preceding Articles are to remain firm for ever, without
and Alteration; and in all other particulars not mentioned in any of these
Articles, the Regulation shall be according to the Capitulations General with
the Grand Seignior.

Confirmed likewise and Sealed in the presence of Almighty God, at Our Castle
in the Noble City and Kingdom of Tripoli in Barbary, the First day of May Old
Style, and the Year of Our Lord Jesus Christ, One thousand six hundred and
seventy six, being the Six and twentieth day of the Moon Zaphire, and the Year
of the Hegira, One thousand eighty seven. 1087.
(L.S.) Bashaw. (L.S.) Dey. (L.S.) Divan. (L.S.) Admiral.


FINIS.

