A LETTER TO A Nonconformist Minister OF THE KIRK, SHEVVING The NULLITY of the
PRESBYTERIAN Mission or Authority to Preach the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed for B. Took, at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1677.

TO THE Reader.
READER,
IT is not now the Order or Character of our CLERGY, nor their power of Binding
and Absolving Sinners, which the PEOPLE have any great regard for, but only
our Lungs and faculties of PREACHING: hence it comes to pass, that by this
curiosity after Preaching, the People are betrayed to the cozenage of every new
Light and Impostor in Religion, who is commonly a zealous and eloquent
Preacher, and so profound a Dissembler, that we are not otherwise able to
detect him, but by enquiring into his Mission.

A LETTER TO A Nonconformist Minister OF THE KIRK, Showing the NULLITY of the
Presbyterian Mission and Authority to PREACH the GOSPEL.
SIR,
I Should be very much obliged to receive a Satisfaction from you, which I could
never give my self concerning the Validity of your Presbyterian Mission: I
conceive it to be the most material thing in difference between us; and that it
ought to be considered in the first place, there being no Imposture like that
of assuming to be Preachers of the Gospel without lawful Authority. I shall
here trouble you with the Reasons of my dissatisfaction in this matter.

First then I must crave your pardon to look backward as far as your first
Reforming Ancestors, (from whom Presbytery does more immediately derive it
self) Mr. Calvin in Geneva, Mr. Knox in Scotland, etc. And then permit me to
ask a certain Question, which hitherto none of you would do us the kindness to
resolve, Who sent Them to reform the Church, or (as you phrase it) to Preach
the Gospel? and How should they Preach except they were sent? Romans 10. 15.
which words of St. Paul seem to be a question, but are indeed a full and
peremptory Affirmation, That no Abilities of popular Eloquence can qualify any
persons for Preachers of the Gospel, without external and lawful Mission.

This then I shall lay down as a Foundation to what I have to say, That lawful
Mission is essential to a Preacher of the Gospel. And if so, I shall endeavor
to make evident, That all your Predecessors of the Kirk (how able soever as to
other qualifications) wanted this essential; and consequently your self who
derive a Succession from them.

Grant me (Sir) a little of your patience, and consider, There are only these
Five imaginable AUTHORITIES from whence they could pretend to have received it.
1. The Spirit of God. 2ly, Themselves or their own internal Spirit. 3ly, Or the
People. 4ly, Christ and his Apostles. 5ly, Or the Church of Rome. Other
Authority or Mission (as namely, That of the Greek Church) you will not pretend
to.

First, From the Spirit of God. This you know to be the matter in question, and
the eternal Controversy, and the Allegation of all Fanatics; it will be
therefore a reasonable demand, By what Evidences did it appear to the World?
And how shall the Contemners of your Gospel be left unexcusable, but by
evidence of their Authority who are sent to reveal it? In the Affairs of this
World, Ambassadors you know, must not want their Credentials; how much less the
Ambassadors of Religion? Doubtless that of your Ancestors must needs have been
an Embassy extraordinary, being to Reform the World, overrun (in their sense)
with Idolatry and Superstition.

To this you answer, That the powerful gifts and sanctity of those persons were
sufficient Evidences of their being Inspired by the Spirit of God; and that the
Conversion of many Thousands from Superstition to Godliness was an undoubted
Seal to their Ministry. This is the Answer of all Dissenters and Parties of
what Name soever, Anabaptists, Behemists, etc. That they easily converted many
Thousands no body denies; but whether from Superstition to Godliness, or only
to pride, censoriousness, and contempt of all Authority, is the great
Controversy. Nay, was it never made a Note, of a man converted, (as the
excellent Friendly Debate observes) That though he have a great many Faults,
yet he is wrought to an Antipathy to Bishops, Common Prayer and Surplice? And
as to your self, I might appeal to your Conscience, whether you esteem any man
a right Convert, that is a FRIEND to these Things. As to those powerful Gifts
you speak of, you do not mean any thing that is miraculous, or that other Sects
will not as soon pretend to: And truly as for the Sanctity of your whole Party,
observable is the Confession of Mr. Calvin himself, in his Comment on the
Thirty fourth Verse of the Eleventh Chapter of Daniel; and I promise you not to
injure him in the Quotation, Sed in illorum exiguo numero qui sese ab
Idololatriis Papatus subduxerunt, major pars plena est perfidia and dolis:
praeclarum quidem zelum simulant; sed si intus excutias, reperies plenos esse
fraudibus. Of that small number of persons (says he) who profess the pure
Gospel, the greater part is full of perfidiousness and deceit; they pretend an
excellent Zeal, but if you inspect them narrowly, you shall find them
abounding with Frauds.

Secondly, Themselves, or their own internal Spirit. It is absurd; for so all
men may become Preachers of the Gospel, that will assume the confidence.

Thirdly, the People. Let us allow this Authority for good: and then, I pray,
will not Socinians, Anabaptists, Behemists, Fifth Monarchy-men (and who not)
enter in at this Door, and plead their Call by the People to Reform the
Presbyterians? be pleased to tell us what People do you mean? If those of your
own Opinion, they will not in some places amount to a Fourth or Fifth part of
the People, and must all the rest be debarred from Electing their own
Preachers? besides, you know, it is not the Peoples Election alone that can
Constitute a Preacher of the Gospel; it is the Mission and Ordination of your
Predecessors, that I am now enquiring after. You cannot be ignorant concerning
the popular Election of Ministers, that it had been disused many Centuries
before Calvin; for the Tumults, Factions, and Confusions that attended it: the
unstable People seldom or never agreeing about the Persons to be Elected; and I
am sure there is no Precept of Scripture Invests them with any such power.

Fourthly, Or will you derive your Ministry from Christ and his Apostles? But
all Dissenters proclaim their Extraction from the same Original: which of them
shall we believe? From Christ and his Apostles! Give me leave to ask whether
immediately or mediately? Immediately you will not say; if mediately, I pray
inform us by whom? Or from whose hands did your Puritan Ancestors receive their
Mission and Ordination?

Well, Fifthly, Some body must send them to Preach the Gospel: Was it the
CHURCH of Rome? Yes, I have heard you say; and is not this to confess your
selves the Emissaries of Antichrist, that Man of Sin, the Whore of Babylon?
Quid Christo cum Belial? But the unhappiness of it is, that this Mission from
Rome, or Roman Bishops, will as soon Watrant the Sermons of a Popish Friar, as
those of your Predecessors. And as to your pretended Ordination from Rome,
there is one Difficulty in it, that I confess I cannot resolve; Was it not
Episcopal Ordination, if any, they received from that Church? And was such
Ordination good and valid, yea or no? If good, wherefore will you needs abolish
it, as repugnant to the Word of God? If not, what will become of your Orders?
And further, I would gladly understand; are any persons sent to go and preach
the Gospel after their own sense? If so, then he that has received Mission
from your Kirk, may when he list become an Independent or Anabaptist Preacher,
and justify his new Doctrine by your Commission.

As for Calvin; Beza, who wrote his Life, informs us, that he was never
Initiated into any Orders of the ROMAN Church; Nullis erat Pontificiis In vita
Calvini.
ordinibus initiatus; are Beza's words, who being his great Acquaintance and
Successor at Geneva, could not but know it very well. I was of opinion, that
your Founder Calvin had been in some Orders, until your own Beza informed me to
the contrary. Farrellus also and Viret his fellow Preachers in Geneva, you will
find in the same querpo, without Orders: as for John Knoz, he was (says Mr.
Clark a Presbyterian Minister, who writes his life) put into orders very young;
that is, when he was professedly of the ROMAN Catholic Religion, he was made
Deacon or Priest of that Church, by Episcopal Ordination: but all this while we
are to seek for their Presbyterian Mission: did John Knox receive any Authority
to ordain other Presbyterians? could he confer a power on others, which he had
not received, of ordaining Ministers? to say there was necessity for it, is an
answer that will excuse also other dissenters, pleading the same necessity of
their Ministry; of all which, our Church is so sensible, that she will admit
none of your Brethren to her Eclesiastical Functions without Reordination.
Presbyteri and Diaconi praeter Episcopum nihil agere pertentent, Says the
Fortieth Canon of the Apostles; a Canon which, if it were not Apostolical, you
cannot deny be very ancient: and do not Epiphanius and Saint Austin recount it
among the Heresies of Aerius, that he affirmd, Bishop and Presbyter were the
same thing? Aerius cum esset Bresbyter (says Saint Austin) doluisse fertur,
quod Episcopus non potuit Haeres. 53. ordinari, etc. Aerius being a Presbyter,
resented his disappointment of a Bishopric; and to satisfy his humor of
revenge, would needs assert, that they are the same office. Thus for ought I
can see, your Presbyterian Ancestors had no Mission at all, or no more then
other Dissenters, who all derive themselves from Christ and his Apostles, from
the Spirit of God, etc. Sleidan a Protestant Historian reports in his
Commentaries, that Luther, hearing of the multitudes assembled, by Thomas
Muncer the famous Prophet of the Anabaptists, wrote an Epistle to the
Magistrates of Mulhusen a City in Germany, where the said Muncer remained,
advising them to require of him, who sent him to Preach the Gospel? and if he
answered God, that he evidence it by some sign or extraordinary token;
otherwise that he be rejected, hoc enim proprium and familiare est Deo (said
Luther) ut quoties consuetam and ordinariam viam velit immutari, tum voluntatem
suam aliquo signo declaret.

The same quaere, Sir, you may at your leisure do us the favor to resolve in
reference to your self.

You cannot alas! plead any necessity to Reform Episcopacy, but all the other
Sects will plead the same to Reform you. Nor will it relieve you to say, that
by this Argument the Jewish Church rejected Christ and his Apostles: The case
not being the same betwixt Christ and the Jewish Church, and between us and
you. To satisfy the Jews and their question, By what authority do thou
these things? Our blessed Savior appeals to the Miracles which he wrought, If
you believe not me, believe the works which I do. Nor will it avail you to
return the question upon our selves, who sent us to Reform the Church of Rome?
This truly is no answer, but a desiring us to answer for you. Be plkas'd to
know then that the Church of England was never of your froward and uncharitable
humor in relation to that Church, to Reform our selves (says Mr. Hooker) is
not to sever from the Church we were of before, Eccles. Pol. Lib. 3. Sect. 1.
We are very sensible of their Errors, and yet we confess with St. Austin, there
is no just necessity to divide the Unity of the Catholic Church; because
Separations in the Church tend to no other end, but to discredit the Christian
Religion, and render it less considerable, if not contemptible to its
Adversaries, Turks and Infidels: He that will admit no Church (says Primate
Bramhall) but that which is spotless, with Acesius, must provide a Ladder for
himself to climb alone to Heaven.

But as to your Party (Sir) I pray who gave them any Authority to Preach their
Reformation to these Kingdoms? Give me leave to observe to you this passage in
the Racovian Catechism there I remember the question is put, Number ii qui docent
in ecclesia (Sociniana) ut singulari aliqua ratione mittantur opus habent?
Whether the Preachers of Socinian Doctrine, have need of any extraordinary
mission? The Answer is, Nullo modo, quia nullam novam, nec inauditam afferunt
doctrinam, etc. That is not at all, because Socinians preach no new nor strange
Doctrine, but that only which is Primitive and declared in the Holy
Scriptures. The same is affirmed by Mr. Calvin concerning his own Reformation
in the Preface to his Institutions, which the Lutherans (you know) will by no
means admit for truth: See Conradus Scluselburg de Theologia Calvinistarum.
Indeed it had been somewhat, if it were not the matter in question; or if
Socinians, Behemists, and all the Sects that ever molested the Church, did not
urge as much for themselves, boasting of Gospel truth. To say that your Party
agree with us in all the Vital Articles of Religion, is to say what perhaps few
of you believe; for I doubt not (if opportunity served) every Sect of you would
advance its respective Religion, as if that only were Gospel, and all other
but Lies and Superstition: Or if you do believe it, the more is your
unhappiness to molest the Church about opinions, which you do not esteem of any
vital importance.

I wish I could oblige you to consider, whether you ought to take upon you to
Reform, that is, suppress the universal order of Christ's Church by Bishops etc.
Banish all ancient Liturgies; the use of the Creed, the Lords prayer, and ten
Commandments out of your public Devotions; all Anniversary Solemnities of
Christ's Nativity, Resurrection, etc. all Reverence or Kneeling at the holy
Sacraments of Christ's Body and Blood; revile the Church (whereof I cannot say,
you but your Ancestors, were made Members by Baptism) with the Names of
Superstition and Idolatry. Preach your desperate Doctrine of absolute
Reprobation, and the impossibility of keeping Gods Commandments; introduce your
own extemporary inventions instead of Liturgy: Levy War against your
Sovereign; and all this without any Authority!

For all these strange things I should think, Sir, your Ancestors had but need
of some extraordinary Mission. But perhaps you will Answer and tell us, That
there have been extraordinary Prophets sent into the World without Miracles, as
John the Baptist: And 2ly, That Miracles are no certain Signs of true Prophets.

As for John the Baptist, you may remember the words of the Angel, Luke 2. 15.
he was filled with the Holy Ghost from his Mothers Womb; he shall go before in
the Spirit and power of Elias (a Character to which your Brethren will not
pretend) he was a person prophesied of many Ages before his Birth, Isa. 40. 3.
The Voice of one crying in the Wilderness, make strait the way of the Lord, etc.

2ly, That Miracles are no certain Evidences of true Prophets; because there
shall arise false Christ's and false Prophets, which shall show great Signs and
Wonders, insomuch that if it were possible, they shall deceive the very Elect:
Wherefore if they shall say unto you, behold he is in the Desert, go not forth;
behold he is in the secret Chambers, believe it not, Math. 24. 24. That false
Prophets can work any miracle but deceptio visus, I do not believe. The meaning
of our Saviors words is this, That if any other Prophet after him shall arise,
assuming to be that Christ or Messiah sent from God, though he may pretend to
strange things, believe him not, go not forth after him. If new Prophets, Sir,
though they come with a show of miracles, are to be suspected; shall we
presently receive all the Preachers of new Lights, that have not so much as the
pretense?

I find a late Writer asserting, That in holy Scripture, there be two marks by
which together, not asunder, a true Prophet or one newly sent from God is to be
known: One is the doing of miracles; The other is the not teaching any moral
Doctrine adverse to that which has been already preached of old: Asunder (he
says) neither of these is sufficient: and for proof alleges two places of
Scripture, Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2, 3. compared with Matthew. 24. 24. Our blessed Savior
and his Apostles fulfilled both these marks, First, in their Miracles, Acts 2.
22. Secondly, they taught no Doctrine of Morality, opposite to that which they
found already established. Christ came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill
it, saying none other things, then what Moses and the Prophets did say should
come to pass. But he Preached a Doctrine, which had all the obliging Characters
of Virtue and Goodness, of Peace and Love; witness his excellent Sermon on the
Mount; non vox hominem sonat. There he presses the necessity of Moral Goodness,
and keeping the Commandments of God; otherwise methinks then Calvin has done:
I shall instance a remarkable passage in the Second Book of his Institutions,
the seventh Chapter and fifth Section. Quod autem impossibilem legis
observationem diximus, id est paucis verbis explicandum simul and confirmandum;
Solet enim vulgo absurdissima sententia videri, ut Hieronimus non dubitavit
Anathema illi denunciare: at quid visum sit Jeronimo, nihil moror: impossible
appello, quod nec fuit unquam, and ne in posterum sit, Dei ordinatione and
decreto impeditur. I shall now (says he) explain and confirm what I have said
of the impossibility to observe the Commandments: which commonly seems a very
absurd assertion; insomuch that Jerome doubted not to denounce it accursed: but
what seemed to him I do not care, I call that impossible which never was, and
which God has decreed that it never shall be. His Commandments are not
grievous, 1 John 5. 3.
Virtuous Doctrine! if the Commandments be impossible, and that God has
decreed them so, nemo tenetur ad impossible, Alas! we are of our selves too
prone to take an allowance of Sin, without this License from Mr. Calvin.

To be short, the Church of God may and ought to reform themselves in case of
error, or corruption of manners: But if we once admit others to do it,
unauthoriz'd or unsent, we open a wide door to all Sects and Heresies; and
another consequence is, we shall rest no where; but be tossed too and fro, (as
Saint Paul speaks) and carried about with every wind of Doctrine, with the
various lights of all Pretenders: This, one would think, has been apparent
enough in the experience of our Age.

Not that we deny our need of amendment and Reformation in this World of
imperfection; but we give heed to the admonition of our blessed Savior, John
10. 1. Verily I say unto you, he that enters not by the door into the
Sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a Theif and a Robber:
not entering in at the door, signifies entering without any Authority, either
extraordinary, when the Doctrines are new and strange, or ordinary, when they
are already known and confessed.

For grant (says Bishop Sanderson) for the suppression of Idolatry, in case
the Church will not do her Office, that it is lawful for any unauthoriz'd
Persons (such as Knox, etc.) to take upon them to reform what they think amiss;
there can be no sufficient cause given, why by the same reason, and upon the
same grounds, they may not take upon them to make Laws, raise Forces,
administer Justice, execute Malefactors (Malignants) or do any other thing the
Magistrate should do, in case the Magistrate slack to do his duty: which if it
were once granted, (as granted it must be, in case your Presbyterian
Reformation be justifiable) every wise man sees the end can be no other but
vast Anarchy, and confusion both in Church and Commonwealth: whereupon must un
avoidably follow the speedy subversion both of Religion and State. Second
Sermon ad Clerum on Rom 38.

This is our present case; you a private Person, pretending to no extraordinary
things, say all things are amiss; the Magistrate (and he a Christian too) is of
opinion, yea, persuaded in his Conscience, that you do all things amiss; who
shall be Judge? The Scripture; it is a ridiculous answer. The Scripture is a
Law; and no Law can ever pronounce either for one or the other, but in the mouth
of some Judge.

From all these premises I persuade my self, your Ancestors were no Prophets
sent from God, but intruded themselves into the Divine Function: and (as the
Prophet speaks) they followed their own Spirits, and prophesied out of their
own hearts. To add one word more, consider all the Prophets mentioned in Holy
Scripture, Samuel, Elias, Isaiah, Jeremy, Hosea, etc. At the beginning of their
Prophecies, that the World might understand their Divine Mission, they usually
declare how and in what manner they received it, Isa. 6. the first and second
Chap. of Jer. So as their Authority was confessed, when the matter of their
Prophecies was little regarded. Some of them were qualified extraordinarily
with the power of Miracles, prophecy of future events, etc. others had the
ordinary License from the Schools of the Prophets.

In the New Testament, our blessed Savior and his Apostles, beside the
internal excellency of their Doctrine, gave the World sufficient external
evidence that they were persons sent from God; and whereas you say, that you
Preach no other Doctrine then that of Christ and his Apostles, it is the answer
of Socinians, Anabaptists, etc. and will serve every man's turn as well as
yours. But in the last place, cannot you justify your selves by the Sobriety
and virtue of your Lives? By the Loyalty of your Actions? It is a great
controversy, and I shall not take upon me to pronounce my own sense of it; but
you have heard of King James his opinion in the matter, Ego a Puritanis non
solum a nativitate continuo In praefacione Monitoria.
vexatus sui, verum etiam in ipso matris utero propemodum extinctus, antequam
in Lucem editus fui. I have been disquieted (says he) by the Puritans from my
Mothers Womb, etc. And his Son the blessed King Charles the First, from a
certain intimate acquaintance with your Party, writes thus to our present
Sovereign King Charles the Second; If ever you stand in need of them, or must
stand to their courtesy, you are undone; you may never expect less of Loyalty,
Justice, or Humanity, then from those who engage into Religious Rebellion;
under the colors of piety, ambitious policies march, not only with greatest
security, but applause, as to the Populacy; you may hear from them Jacobs
voice, but you shall feel they have Esau's hands. (...). Chap. 27.

Thus I have given you the reasons of my dissatisfaction, cerning the validity
of your Presbyterian Mission; and I must confess that I have here expressed
only some wishes, not any hopes of convincing you; all my expectation is, that
perhaps some unprejudiced persons will believe, that your Presbyterian KIRK
has no advantage, in point of a solid Foundation, over Independents,
Anabaptists, etc. If instead of a pertinent answer to all this discourse, you
shall please to pass your censure on the Author, and say that he is some
Papist; I must reply to you in the words of the excellent Bishop Sanderson
concerning the Puritan Preachers.

Some of them, especially such as betake themselves to preaching betimes, and
have not the leisure and opportunity to look much into controversies,
understand very little of the true state of the question betwixt the Church of
Rome and us; and yet to show their Zeal against Popery, are forward enough to
be meddling with it in the Pulpit; but with so much weakness and impertinency,
that they leave the question worse then they found it; and the hearer, if he
brought any doubts with him, to go from Sermon more dissatisfied then he came.
Preface to 14. Sermons, Printed Anno 1657. Sect. 18.

Now, if you please, let us confer a few words about some others matters,
first, concerning that principle of yours, that nothing is to be done about the
Worship and Service of God, without express warrant or precept in the holy
Scriptures: and I pray inform me where has our blessed Savior or his Apostles
enjoined a Directory for public prayer? Has the Spirit any need of a
Directory? what Divine warrant can you produce for your Singing to God in a set
Form, and refusing to pray in a set Form? for speaking to him your sudden and
extemporary thoughts, but speaking to the people with a studied and composed
Sermon? In which of the Gospels are to be found those three significant
Ceremonies required at the taking your solemn League and Covenant? First, that
we must be uncovered. Secondly, that we must stand up. Thirdly, with our right
hand lift up bare? what express Scripture have you for your form of public
penance, called the stool of repentance? This principle of yours (as has been
already observed by the Friendly debate) makes that unlawful which the
Scripture allows; in which we find many holy men doing those things (without
any censure) in Gods worship, which he had no where commended; for instance,
what Commandment had David for his Design of building a Temple? Or Solomon for
keeping a Feast of seven days for the Dedication of the Altar? For erecting an
Altar to be ascended by steps? expressly forbidden in the 20. of Exodus verse
26. Thou shall not go up by steps unto mine Altar. Or what warrant had Hezekiah
for continuing the Feast of unleavened bread seven days longer then the time
appointed by the Law? 2 Chronicles. 30. 23. If you say that all these things
possibly were warranted, though not by Scripture; but now Scripture warrant is
necessary, since extraordinary inspirations are ceased: I pray tell us what
Scripture have you for this very assertion, That extraordinary inspirations are
ceased? In a word, This Principle of yours, makes the worship of God
impossible: The time, the place, the Vesture in which it shall be performed,
being no where appointed: Do not the Quakers retort it upon your selves?
Demanding Scripture for standing in a Pulpit, for Preaching upon a Text, and
that by an hourglass, stinting the Spirit; for wearing a Cloak or Gown, etc.

Another thing I would entreat you to reflect upon, is the reason of your
displeasure at the temporal Revenues and encouragement of the Church of
England; that which Dissenters (if I understand them aright) would be at, is
this, that the Clergy be reduced to their primitive poverty and dependence on
the People; and methinks Judas has very well expressed their sense, John 12.
4. To what purpose, is all this waste of precious ointment on the feet of
Christ? might it not have been sold for three hundred pence, and given to the
poor? This he said, not that he cared for the poor, but because he had the bag,
and was a Thief. They do not consider, how many virtues there are requisite in
a Churchman, which can have no place in the house of Scarcity; how little
exemplary charity, temperance or humility can be expected from a narrow estate:
that we cannot say, he is a temperat man, who is so, having scarcely
wherewithal to satisfy his thirst: or an humble person, whose fortune gives
him small temptation to be proud. Are not all Christians under the same
obligations of humility and contempt of Riches as the Clergy? Lay not up for
your selves treasures upon Earth, was said to all; and is it not true in
experience, that the poverty of Priests must be attended with ignorance or very
slender knowledge? The necessities of our blessed Savior and his Apostles upon
Earth, were supplied by Miracles; and therefore their case and our's not the
same.

Give me leave to commend to your consideration, those excellent words of King
Charles the First, (...). Chap. 14. The conclusion of the War, makes it
evident, that the main Reformation intended, was the Robbing the Church of its
Lands, and the abasing of Episcopacy into Presbytery; but no necessity shall
ever, I hope, drive me or mine to invade or sell the Priests Lands, which even
Pharaoh 's Divinity abhorred to do. If the poverty of Scotland might, yet the
plenty of England cannot excuse the envy and rapine of the Church Lands. The
next work will be Jeroboam 's Reformation, Consecrating the meanest of the
people to be Priests in Israel, to serve their Golden Calves, who have enriched
themselves with the Churches Patrimony.

Again, be pleased to reflect on your displeasure at the Liturgy of the Church
of England. Some of you are for no Forms at all; others are for Liturgy, but it
must be reformed. In the History of the Reign of About the Year 1585.
Queen Elizabeth, this passage is observable: four Classes of Presbyterians,
complained of the Liturgy to the Lord Burleigh then Secretary of State; his
Lordship bad them go and make a better; whereupon the first Classis went and
framed a new one, somewhat near that of Geneva; this the second Classis
dislikes, and alters in six hundred particulars; which alteration was excepted
against by the third Classis; and what the third resolved upon, the fourth
would not consent to: Thus your Party expect a satisfaction about the worship
of God, which is impossible to be given you. As to your praying by the Spirit,
there is a certain doubt in it, which hitherto none See the friendly debate.
of you would do us the favor to resolve: Either you mean praying by the
Spirit of God, or by your own Spirits; if you conceive the words and matter of
your prayer by the dictate of the Holy Ghost, then are your prayers as much the
word of God as any of David's Psalms, or as any part of the Bible; and, being
written from your mouths, may become Canonical Scripture. If by praying with
the Spirit, you only mean that you are inspired with devout affections, then
there is nothing in your prayers, but what others may pretend to, as well as
your selves.

In brief, Since you do not pretend to entertain your people with immediate
inspirations, you oblige them to a Service they know not what; to offer up
prayers, whereof they know not a syllable, nor your self neither, before you
begin: if you know them before hand, either for matter or words, then they
cannot be extempore, as you would have the people believe; peradventure the
reason why the people fancy your prayers, is, their variety; they love not to
go where they must be always entertained with the same expressions; but if the
sense of our own infirmities (which are always the same) cannot oblige us to
pray, why should a set of new words do it? Consider those words of the blessed
Martyr King Charles the First. Some men are so impatient, not to (...)
use in all their devotions their own invention and gifts, that they wholly
cast away and contemn the Lords Prayer. I ever thought that the proud
Ostentation of men's own Abilities for Invention, and the vain affectation of
variety for expressions in public prayer, merits a greater brand of Sin, then
that which they call coldness or barrenness; nor are men in those novelties,
less subject to formal and superficial tempers (as to their hearts) then in the
use of constant forms, where not the words, but men's hearts are to blame. I
make no doubt but a man may be very formal in the most extemporary variety, and
very fervently devout in the most wonted expressions: Nor is God more a God of
variety, then of constancy; nor are constant forms of prayer, more likely to
flat and hinder the Spirit of prayer, then unpremeditated and confused variety,
to distract and lose it.

FINIS.

