HIS MAJESTY'S SPEECH, To both HOUSES of Parliament: December the second. 1641.



LONDON: Printed by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty: And by the Assigns of JOHN BILL.

MDCXLI.

DIEV ET MON DROIT
HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE



HIS MAJESTY'S SPEECH, To both HOUSES of PARLIAMENT, December. 2. 1641.
My Lords and Gentlemen,

I Think it fit, after so long absence, at this first occasion, to speak a few
words unto you, but it is no ways in answer to Master Speakers learned Speech:
Albeit I have staid longer then I expected to have done when I went away, yet
in this I have kept my promise with you, that I have made all the haste back
again, that the settling of my Scotch affairs could any ways permit, in which I
have had so good success, that I will confidently affirm to you, that I have
left that Nation a most peaceable and contented People; so that although I have
a little misreckoned in time, yet I was not deceived in my end.

But if I have deceived your expectations a little in the time of my return,
yet I am assured that my expectation is as much and more deceived in the
condition wherein I hoped to have found businesses at my return. For since that
before my going I settled the Liberties of my Subjects, and gave the Laws a
free and orderly course, I expected to have found my People reaping the fruits
of these benefits, by living in quietness, and satisfaction of mind: But in
stead of this, I find them disturbed with Jealousies, Frights, and Alarms of
dangerous Designs and Plots; in consequence of which, Guards have been set to
defend both Houses: I say not this as in doubt that my Subjects affections are
any way lesned to me in this time of my absence, for I cannot but remember, to
my great comfort, the joyful reception I had now at my entry into London, but
rather as I hope that my presence will easily disperse these fears. For I bring
as perfect and true affections to my people as ever Prince did, or as good
Subjects can possibly desire. And I am so far from repenting me of any Act I
have done this Session for the good of my people, that I protest, if it were to
do again I would do it, and will yet grant what else can be justly desired for
satisfaction in point of Liberties, or in maintenance of the true Religion that
is here established.

Now I have but one Particular to recommend unto you at this time, It is
Ireland, for which though I doubt not your care, yet me thinks the preparations
for it go but slowly on. The occasion is the fitter for me now to mention it,
because of the arrival of two Lords from Scotland, who come instructed from my
Council there (who now by Act of Parliament have full power for that purpose)
to answer that Demand which it pleased both Houses to make me by way of
Petition, that met me at Barwick, and which the Duke of Richmont sent back by
my Command to my Scotch-Councel: Therefore my desire is, That both Houses would
appoint a select Committee to end this business with these Noblemen. I must
conclude in telling you, that I seek my peoples happiness, for their
flourishing is my greatest glory, and their affections my greatest strength.

FINIS.

