MORE WONDERS OF THE INVISIBLE WORLD: Or, The Wonders of the Invisible World,
Displayed in Five Parts.
Part. I. An account of the Sufferings of Margaret Rule, Written by the
Reverend Mr. C.M. P. II. Several letters to the Author, etc. And his Reply
relating to Witchcraft. P. III. The differences between the Inhabitants of
Salem Village, and Mr. Parris their Minister, in New England. P. IV. Letters of
a Gentleman uninterested, Endeavoring to prove the received Opinions about
Witchcraft to be Orthodox. With short Essays to their Answers. P. V. A short
Historical Account of Matters of Fact in that Affair.
To which is added, A Postscript relating to a Book entitled, The Life of Sir
William Phips.

Collected by Robert Calef, Merchant, of Boston in New England.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

LONDON: Printed for Nath. Hillar, at the Princes-Arms, in Leaden-Hall-Street,
over against St. Mary-Ax, and Joseph Collyer, at the Golden-Bible on
London Bridge. 1700.

The Epistle to the READER.
And more especially (...) Bereans of this Age, wherever Residing.

Gentlemen,
YOU that are freed from the Slavery of a corrupt Education; and that in spite
of human Precepts, Examples and Presidents, can hearken to the Dictates of
Scripture and Reason:

For your sakes I am content, that these Collections of mine, as also my
Sentiments should be exposed to public view; In hopes that having well
considered, and compared them with Scripture, you will see reason, as I do, to
question a belief so prevalent (as that here treated of) as also the practice
flowing from thence; they standing as nearly connext as cause and effect; it
being found wholly impracticable, to extirpate the latter without first curing
the former.

And if the Buffoon or Satirical will be exercising their Talents, or if the
Biggots wilfully and blindly reject the Testimonies of their own Reason, and
more sure word, it is no more than what I expected from them.

But you Gentlemen, I doubt not are willing to Distinguish between Truth and
Error, and if this may be any furtherance to you herein, I shall not miss my
Aim.

But if you find the contrary, and that my belief herein is any way Heterodox.
I shall be thankful for the Information to any Learned or Reverend Person, or
others, that shall take that pains to inform me better by Scripture, or sound
Reason, which is what I have been long seeking for in this Country in vain.

In a time when not only England in particular, but almost all Europe had been
laboring against the Usurpations of Tyranny and Slavery, The English, America,
has not been behind in a share in the Common calamities; more especially
New England, has met not only with such calamities as are common ^o the rest,
but with several aggravations enhansing such Afflictions, by the Devastations
and Cruelties of the Barbarous Indians in their Eastern borders, etc.

But this is not all, they have been harrast (on many accounts) by a more
dreadful Enemy, as will herein appear to the considerate.

P. 66. Were it as we are told in Wonders of the Invisible World, that ^he
Devils were walking about our Strees with lengthned Chains making ^ dreadful
noise in our Ears, and Brimstone, even without a Metaphor, ^as making a horrid
and a hellish stench in our Nostrils.

P. 49. And that the Devil exhibiting himself ordinarily as a blackMan, had
decoyed a fearful knot of Proud, Froward, Ignorant, Envious and Malicious
Creatures, to list themselves in his horrid. Service, by en^ing their Names in
a Book tendered unto them; and that they have ^ad their Meetings and
Sacraments, and associated themselves to destroy ^^e Kingdom of our Lord Jesus
Christ, in these parts of the World; ha^ing each of them their Specter, or
Devils Commissionated by them, and representing of them to be the Engines of
their Malice, by these wicked Specter, siezing poor People about the Country,
with var^ous and bloody Torments. And of those evidently preternatural Torments
some to have died. And that they have bewitched some even so far, as to make
them self destroyers, and others in many Towns, here and there languish'd under
their Evil hands. The People thus Afflicted miserably scratched and bitten; and
that the same Invisible Furies did stick Pins in them, and scaled them, distort
and disjoint them, with a Thousand other Plagues: and sometimes drag them out
of their Chambers, and carry them over Trees, and Hills Miles together, many of
them being tempted to Sign the Devils Laws.

P. 7. Those furies whereof several have killed more People perhaps than would
serve to make a Village. If this be the true state of the Afflictions of this
Country, it is very deplorable, and beyond all other outward Calamities
miserable.

But if on the other side, the Matter be as others do understand it, That the
Devil has been too hard for us by his Temptations, signs, and lying Wonders,
with the help of pernicious notions, formerly imbibed and professed; together
with the Accusations of a parcel of possessed, distracted, or lying Wenches,
accusing their Innocent Neighbors, pretending they see their Specter ( i. e.)
Devils in their likeness Afflicting of them, and that God in righteous Judgment
(after Men had ascribed his Power to Witches, of Commissionating Devils to do
these things) may have given them over to strong delusions to believe l^es, etc
And to let loose the Devils of Envy, Hatred, Pride, Cruelty, and Malice against
each other; yet still disguised under the Mask of Zeal for God, and left them
to the branding one another with the odious Name of Witch; and upon the
Accusation of those above mentioned, Brother to Accuse and Prosecute Brother,
Children their Parents, Pastors and Teachers their immediate F^ock unto death;
Shepherds becoming Wolves, Wise Men Infatuated; People hau^ed to Prisons, with
a bloody noise pursuing to, and insulting over, the (true) Su^ferers at
Execution, while some are fleeing from that call d'Iustice, Justice it self
fleeing before such Accusations, when once it did but begin to refrain further
proceedings; and to question such Practices, some making their Escape out of
Prisons, rather than by an obstinate Defense of their Innocence, to run so
apparent hazard of their Lives; Estates seized, Families of Children and others
left to the Mercy of the Wilderness (not to mention here the Numbers
prescribed, dead in Prisons, or Executed, etc.)

All which Tragedies, tho begun in one Town, or rather by one Parish, has
Plague-like spread more than through that Country. And by its Echo giving a
brand of Infamy to this whole Country throughout the World.

If this were the Miserable case of this Country in the time thereof, and that
the Devil had so far prevailed upon us in our Sentiments and Actions, as to
draw us from so much as looking into the Scriptures for our guidance in these
pretended Intricacies, leading us to a trusting in blind guides, such as the
corrupt practices of some other Countries, or the bloody Experiments of Bodin,
and such other Authors. Then tho our Case be most miserable, yet it must b^
said of New England, Thou have destroyed thy self, and brought this greatest of
Miseries upon thee.

And now whether the Witches (such as have made a compact by Explicit Covenant
with the Devil, having thereby obtained a power to Commissionate him) have been
the cause of our miseries.

Or whether a Zeal governed by blindness and passion, and led by president, has
not herein precipitated us into far greater wickedness (if not Witchcrafts)
than any have been yet proved against those that suffered;

To be able to distinguish aright in this matter, to which of those two to
refer our Miseries is the present W^^k. As to the former, I know of no sober
Man, much less Reverend Christian, that being asked dares affirm and abide by
it, that Witches have that power; viz. to Commissionate Devils to kill and
destroy. And as to the latter, it were well if there were not too much of truth
in it, which remains to be demonstrated.

But here it will be said, what need of Raking in the Goals that lay buried in
Oblivion. We cannot recall those to Life again that have suffered, supposing it
were unjustly; it tends but to the exposing the Actors, as if they had
proceeded irregularly.

Truly I take this to be just as the Devil would have it, so much to fear
disobliging men, as not to endeavor to detect his Wiles, that so be may the
sooner, and with the greater Advantages set the same on foot again (either here
or else where) so dragging as through the Pond twice by the same Cat. And if
Reports do not (herein) deceive us, much the same has been acting this present
Year in Scotland. And what Kingdom or Country is it, that has not had their
bloody sits and turns at it. And if this is such a catching disease, and so
universal, I presume I need make no Apology for my Endeavors to prevent, as
far as in my power, any more such bloody Victims or Sacrifices; tho indeed I
had rather any other would have undertaken so offensive, tho necessary a task;
yet all things weighed, I had rather thus Expose my self to Censure, than that
it should be wholly omitted. Were the notions in question, innocent and
harmless, respecting the Glory of God, and well being of Man, I should not have
engaged in them, but finding them in my esteem, so intollerably destructive of
both. This together with my being by Warrant called before the Justices, in my
own Just Vindication, I took it to be a call from God, to my Power, to
Vindicate his Truths, against the Pagan and Popish Assertions, which are so
prevalent; for tho Christians in general do own the Scriptures to be their only
Rule of Faith and Doctrine, yet these Notions will tell us, that the Scriptures
have not sufficiently, nor at all described the crime of Witchcraft, whereby
the culpable might be detected, tho it be positive in the Command to punish it
by Death; hence the World has been from time to time perplexed in the
prosecution of the several Diabolical mediums of Heathenish and Popish
Invention, to detect an Imaginary Crime (not but that there are Witches, such
as the Law of God describes) which has produced a deluge of Blood; hereby
rendering the Commands of God not only void but dangerous.

So also they own Gods Providence and Government of the World, and that
Tempests and Storms, Afflictions and Diseases are of his sending; yet these
Notions tell us, that the Devil has the power of all these, and can perform
them when commissioned by a Witch thereto, and that he has a power at the
Witches call to act and do, without and against the course of Nature, and all
natural causes, in afflicting and killing of Innocents; and this is that so
many have died for.

Also it is generally believed, that if any Man has strength, it is from God
the Almighty being: But these notions will tell us, that the Devil can make one
Man as strong as many, which was one of the best proofs, as it was counted,
against Mr. Buroughs the Minister; tho his contemporaries in the Schools
during his Minority could have testified, that his strength was then as much
superior to theirs as ever (setting aside incredible Romances) it was
discovered to be since. Thus rendering the power of God, and his providence of
none Effect.

These are some of the destructive notions of this Age, and however the
asserters of them seem sometimes to value themselves much upon sheltring their
Neighbors from Spectral Accusations. They may deserve as much thanks as that
Tyrant, that having industriously obtained an unintelligible charge against his
Subjects, in matters wherein it was impossible they should be Guilty, having
thereby their lives in his power, yet suffers them of his mere Grace to live,
and will be called gracious Lord.

It were too Icarian a task for one unfurnished with necessary learning, and
Library, to give any Just account, from whence so great delusions have sprung,
and so long continued. Yet as an Essay from those scraps of reading that I have
had opportunity of; it will be no great venture to ^ay, that Signs and Lying
Wonders have been one principal cause.

It is written of Justin Martyr, who lived in the second Century, that he was
before his conversion a great Philosopher; first in the way of the Stoics, and
after of the Peripateticks, after that of the Pythagorean, and after that of
the Platonists Sects; and after all proved of Eminent use in the Church of
Christ: Yet a certain Author speaking of one Apollonius Tyaneus, has these
words [ That the most Orthodox themselves began to deem him vested with power
sufficient for a Deity; which occasioned that so strange a doubt from Justin
Martyr, as cited by the Learned Gregory, Fol. 37 (...), and c. If God be the
Creator and Lord of the World, how comes it to pass that Apollonius his
Telis^s, have so much overruled the course of things! for we see that they
also have stilled the Waves of the Sea; and the raging of the Winds, and
prevailed against the Noisome Flies, and Incursions of wild Beasts, and c. If
so Eminent and Early a Christian were by these false shows in such doubt, it is
the less wonder in our depraved times, to meet with what is Equivalent thereto:
Besides this a cer^^^ Author informs me, that [ Julian (afterward called the
Apostate) being Ins^^uct^d in the Philosophy and Disciplines of the Heathen by
Libarius his Tutor, by this means he came to love Philosophy better then the
Gospel, and so by degrees turned from Christianity to Heathenism].

This same Julian did when Apostate, forbid that Christians should be infructed
in the Discipline of the Gentiles, which (it seems) Socrate, a Writer of the
Ec^l siastical History, does acknowledge to be by the singular Providence of
God; Christians having then begun to degenerate from the Gospel, and to betake
themselves to Heathenish learning. And in the Mercury for the Month of
February, 1695, there is this Account [ That the Christian Doctors conversing
much with the writings of the Heathen for the gaining of Eloquence. A Counsel
was held at Carthage, which forbad the reading of the Books of the Gentiles.]

From all which it may be easily perceived, that in the Primitive times of
Christianity, when not only many Heathen of the Vulgar; but also many learned
Men and Philosophers had embraced the Christian Faith; they still retained a
love to their Heathen-learning, owhich as one observes being transplanted into
a Christian Soil^, soon proved productive of pernicious Weeds, which overran
the face of the Church, hence it was so deformed as the Reformation found it.

Among other peruicious Weeds arising from this Root, the Doctrine of the power
of Devils, and Witchcraft as it is now, and long has been understood, is not
the least; the Fables of Homer, Virgil, Horace and Ovid, etc. being for the
Elegancy of their Language retained then (and so are to this Day) in the
Schools; have not only introduced, but established such Doctrines to the
poisoning the Christian World. A certain Author Expresses it thus [that as the
Christian Schools at first brought Men from Heathenism to the Gospel, so these
Schools carry Men from the Gospel to Heathenism, as to their great prfection]
and Mr. I.M. in his Remarkable Providence, gives an account that (as he calls
it) an Old Counsel did Anathematize all those that believed such power of the
Devils, accounting it a Damnable Doctrine. But as other Evils did afterward
increase in the Church (partly by such Education) so this insensibly grew up
with them, tho not to that degree, as that any Counsel I have ever heard or
Read of, has to this day taken off those Anathema's; yet after this the Church
so far declined, that Witchcraft became a Principal, Ecclesiastical Engine (as
also that of Heresy was) to root up all that stood in their way; and besides
the ways of Trial that we have still in practice, they invented some, which
were peculiar to themselves; which when ever they were minded to improve
against any Orthodox believer, they could easily make Effectual: That Deluge of
Blood which that Scarlet Whore has to answer for, shed under this notion, how
amazing is it.

The first in England that I have read of, of any note since the Reformation,
that asserts this Doctrine, is the famous Mr. Perkins, he (as also Mr. Gaul,
and Mr. Bernard, etc. seems all of them to have undertaken one Task, they)
taking notice of the Multiplicity of irregular ways to try them by, invented by
Heathen and Papists, made it their business and main work herein to oppose such
as they saw to be pernicious. And if they did not look more narrowly into it,
but followed the first, viz. Mr. Perkins whose Education (as theirs also) had
forestalled him into such belief, whom they readily followed; it cannot be
wondered at: And that they were men liable to Err, and so not to be trusted to
as perfect guides, will manifestly appear to him that shall see their several
receipts laid down to detect them by there Presumptive and Positive ones. And
consider how few of either have any foundation in Scripture or Reason; and how
vastly they differ from each other in both, each having his Art by himself,
which Forty or an Hundred more may as well imitate, and give theirs, ad
infinitum, being without all manner of proof.

But tho this be their main design to take off People from those Evil and
bloody ways of trial which they sp^nk so much against. Yet this does not hinder
to this day, but the same Evil ways or as bad are still used to detect them by,
and that even among Protestant^; and is so ^ar Justified that ^ Reverend Person
has said lately here, how else shall ^e d^^^ct Witches. And another being urged
to prove by Scripture such a sort of Witch as has power to send Devils to kill
men, replied, that he did as firmly believe it as any Article o^ his Faith. And
that he (the inquirer) did not go to the Scripture; to learn the Mysteries, of
his trade or Art. What can be said more to Establish there Heathenish notions
and to Villifie the Serp^nr^s, our only Rule; and that after we have seen such
dire effects thereof, as h^s threatened the utter Extirpation of this whole
Country.

And as to most of the A^tors in these Tragedies, tho they are so far from
Defending their A^tions that they will Readily own, that undue steps have been
taken, etc. Yet it ^e^ms they choose that the same should be Acted over again
enforced by their Example, rather than that it should Remain as a Warning to
Posterity, usherein they have mist it. So far are they from giving Glory to
God, and taking the due shame to themselves.

And now ^o sum up all in a few words, we have seen a Biggotted Zeal stirring
up a B^ind and most Bloody rage, not against Enemies, or Irreligious
Proffligate Persons. But (in Iudgm^nt^ of Charity, and to view) against as
Virtuous and Religious as any they have left behind them in this Country, which
have suffered as Evil doers (with the utmost extent of rigor, not that so high
a Charactor is due to all that Suffered, and this by the Testimony of Vile
Varlets as not only were known before, but have been further apparent s^^ce by
their Manifest Lives, Whordoms, Inc^st, etc. The Accusations of these, from
their Spectral Sight, being the chief Evidence against those that Suffered. In
which Accusations they were upheld by both Magistrates and Ministers, so long
as they Apprehended th^mselves in no Danger.

And th^n tho they could defend neither the Doctrine, nor the Practice, yet
none of them have in such a public manner as the case Requires, testified
against either; tho at the same time they could not but be sensible what a
Stain and lasting Infamy they have brought upon the whole Country, to the
Indangering the future welfair not only of this but of other places, induced by
their Example; if not, to an intailing the Guilt of all the Righteous Blood
that has been by the same means shed, by Heathen or Papists, etc. upon
themselves, whose deeds they have so far justified, occasioning the great
Dishonor and Blasphemy of the Name of God, Scandalizing the Heathen, hardening
of Enemies; and as a Natural effect thereof, to the great Increase of Ath^^sm.

I shall conclude only with acquainting the Reader that of these Collections,
the first containing more Wonders of the Invisible World, I received of a
Gentleman, who had i^ of the Author and communicated it to use, with his
express consent, of which this is a true Copy: as to the Letters, they are for
Substance the same I sent, tho with some small Variation or Addition. Touching
the two Letters from a Gentleman at his request, I have forhorn naming him. It
is great Pity the matters of Fast, and indeed the whole, had not been done by
some abler hand better Accomplished and Adnantages with both natural and
acquired Judgments, but others not Appearing, I have enforced myself to do what
is done, my other occasions Will not admit any further S^rntiny therein.

Boston in New England, Aug. 11. 1697. R. C.


THE INDEX.
PART I.
ANother Brand plucked out of the Burning, or, More Wonders of the Invisible
World; Written by Mr C. M. relating to the Afflictions of Margaret Rule. Page 1
PART II.
A Letter to Mr. C. M. containing a Narrative of two Visits given by him and
others to Margaret Rule. p. 13 With a repetition of a former Letter sent to
him, to offer a Meeting with him. p. 16 As also the repetition of a former
Letter, requesting Information in some Doctrinalls relating to Witchcraft.
Ibid. A letter of Mr. C. M. wherein he declines Speaking to those Doctrinalls;
Denying some parts of the Narrative, and defending others. The feeling the Imp
owned, etc. p. 19 The Copy of a Paper Subscribed by several, testifying
Margaret Rules being held up by Invisible Hands from the Bed. p. 22 A Letter to
Mr. C. M. relating to the Narrative, again Praying, an Answer to the
Doctrinalls. p. 23 The Copy of a paper showing what Sense the Indians had of
the Actions here, and what esteem they had thereby taken up of our Ministers.
p. 25 A Letter to Mr. C. M. again repeating several Fundamental Doctrinalls,
opposite to the Doctrine of Witchcraft, as now understood, praying his
Confirmation or Confutation thereof p. 26 A Letter to Mr. C. M. (after minding
him of his promise, viz. To give an Answer about Doctrinalls) several Passages
quoted in his, and his Relations Books, that need explaining p. 27 A Letter to
Mr. B, relating to the belief of Mr. C. M. which he forbad to be Coppyed. p. 30
A Letter to the Ministers repeating those Doctrinalls, sent to Mr. C. M. for
his Explanation, with the Summary of his Belief contained in those Papers,
forbidden to be Coppied; as also other Doctrinalls opposite thereto, beseeching
them to give their Confirmation or Confutation thereof. p. 33 A Letter to Mr.
S. W. relating to a Dialogue Written by him about Witchcraft, and to a Paper
set forth by the President, etc. of the University, abent Possessions and
Enchantments. p. 38 A Letter to Mr. C. M. relating to the Doctrinalls contained
in a Book of Mr. R. B. Printed in London 1691. Some of the Heathen Poets quoted
as the Fountain or Original of such Doctrinalls. p. 43 A Letter to the
Ministers mentioning the Doctrine of the Manichees, Demonstrating that the
present Age is not free from that Infection, repeating necessary Articles of
Faith opposite thereto. p. 48 A Letter to Mr. B. W. relating to the Witches
Covenant. p. 52
PART III.
THe Reasons given by some of the People why they withdrew from Communion, etc.
with the Church at Salem-Village, and from hearing Mr. Parris their Minister,
in whose House the Tragedies of Witchcraft begun. p. 55 Mr. Samuel Parris's
Acknowledgement. p. 57 The Advice and Determination of the Elders and
Messengers, met at Salem-Village, to Compose the Differences there. p. 59 A
Letter from the People of the Village to those Elders and Messengers of the
several Churches. p. 61 A State of the Controversy between Mr. Parris and his
People. p. 62 A Remonstrance, with further Reasons given in by the Attorneys
for the People of the Village to the Arbitrators, against Mr. Parris. p. 63
PART IV.
A Letter of a Gentleman endeavoring to prove the received opinions about
Witchcraft. p. 64 An Essay to the Answer thereof. p. 77 A Second Letter of the
Gentleman's further urging such Doctrines. p. 83 A Rejoinder to the former
Answer. p. 87
PART V.
An Account of the matter of Fact at Salem-Village, etc: p. 90 The Examination
of Mrs. Carry. p. 95 The Examination of Mr. John Aldin. p. 98 Bishop alias
Oliver Condemned. p. 100 An Abstract of the Ministers Advice to the Governor.
p. 101 Sarah Good, Rebecca Nurse, Sus. Martin, Eliz. How, and Sarah Wilds
Condemned. p. 101 The Declaration of the Foreman of the Jury, relating to words
spoken by Rebecca Nurse. p. 102 Rebeeca Nurses Interpretation of these words.
p. 103 Mr. George Buroughs, John Procter, Eliz. Procter, John Willard, George
Jacobs and Martha Carryer Condemned. Ibid. A Letter of John Procter to the
Ministers. p. 104 A Letter of Margaret Jacobs to her Father. p. 105 Martha
Carry, Mary Easty, Alice Parker, Ann Pudeater, Dorcas Hoar, Mary Bradbery,
Margaret Scot, W. Red, Samuel Wardwel, Mary Parker, Abigail Falkner, Rebecca
Emes, Mary Lacy, Ann Foster, and Abigail Hobs Condemned. p. 106 Giles Carry
Pressed to Death. Ibid. A Petition of Mary Easty to the Judge. p. 107 A
Declaration of some that had confessed themselves Guilty (at Andover.) p. 111 The
Preface of Mr. C. M. in Wonders of the Invisible World, to his Account of the
Trials of five of those that were Executed at Salem. p. 113
The whole of his said Account, with one Indictment added to each Trial, viz.
The Trial of Mr. Buroughs. p. 114 The Trial of Bridget Bishop. p. 120 The
Trial of Susanna Martin. p. 126 The Trial of Elizabeth How. p. 133 The Trial of
Martha Carryer. p. 136
The Trial of Wardwels Wife at the first Superior Court in Salem. p. 141 The
Trial of Sarah Daston at Charles Town. Ibid. The Trial of Mary Watkins at
Boston. p. 142 The Trial of Mr. Bennom at Hartford, in the Collony of
Connetticut. Ibid. A Proclamatim for a Fast in the Province of Massachuset. p.
143 The acknowledgement of several Iury-Men, relating to the Condemning of some
for Witches. p. 144 A Postscript relating to a Book Entitled, The Life of Sir
W. Phips. p. 145 Therein an Objection Answered, viz. But what are there no
Witches? p. 155
SIR,
I Now lay before you a very Entertaining Story, a Story which relates yet more
Wonders of the Invisible World, a Story which tells the Remarkable Afflictions
and Deliverance of one that had been Prodigiously handled by the Evil Angels. I
was my self a daily Eye Witness to a large part of these Occurrences, and there
may be produced Scores of Substantial Witnesses to the most of them; yea, I
know not of any one Passage of the Story, but what may be sufficiently
Attested. I do not Write it with a design of throwing it presently into the
Press, but only to preserve the Memory of such Memorable things, the forgetting
whereof would neither be pleasing to God, nor useful to Men; as also to give
you, with some others of peculiar and obliging Friends, a sight of some
Curiosities, and I hope this Apology will serve to Excuse me, if I mention, as
perhaps I may, when I come to a t^nth Paragraph in my Writing, some things
which I would have omitted in a farther Publication.

Cotton Mather.

ANOTHER BRAND Plucked out of the BURNING, Or, more Wonders of the Invisible
World.
Part I.
Section I. The Afflictions of MARGARET RULE.
WIthin these few years there died in the Southern Parts a Christian Indian,
who notwithstanding some of his Indian Weakness, had something of a better
Character of Virtue and Goodness, than many of our People can allow to most of
their Contrymen that profess the Christian Religion. He had been a Zealous
Preacher of the Gospel to his Neighborhood, and a sort of Overseer or
Officer, to whose Conduct was owing very much of what good ^rder was maintained
among those Proselited Savages: This Man re^urning home from the Funeral of his
Son, was Complemented by an Englishman, expressing Sorrow for his Less; now,
though the Indians use, upon ^he Death of Relations, to be the most Passionate
and Outrageous Crea^ures in the World, yet this Converted Indian, Handsomely and
Chear^ully replied, Truly I am sorry, and I am not sorry; I am sorry that I
have Buried a dear Son; but I am not sorry that the will of God is done. I know
that without the will of God my Son could not have Died, and I know that the
will of God is allways just and good, and so I am satisfied. Immediately upon
this, even within a few hours, he fell himself Sick of a Disease that quickly
killed him; in the time of which Disease he called his Folks about him,
earnestly persuading them to be Sincere in their Praying unto God, and beware
of the Drunkenness, the Idleness, the Lying, whereby so many of that Nation
disgraced their Prosession of Christianity; adding, that he was ashamed when he
thought how little Service he had hitherto done for God; and that if God would
prolong his Life he would Labor to do better Service, but that he was fully
sure he was now going to the Lord Jesus Christ, who had bought him with his own
Precious Blood; and for his part he longed to Die that he might be with his
Glorious Lord, and in the midst of such passages he gave up the Ghost, but in
such repute, that the English People of good Fashion did not think much of
Traveling a great way to his Interment. Left my Reader do now wonder why I
have related this piece of a Story, I will now hasten to abate that Wonder, by
telling that whereto this was intended, but for an Introduction: Know then that
this remarkable Indian being a little before he Died at work in the Wood making
of Tarr, there appeared unto him a Black-Man, of a Terrible aspect, and more
than humane Dimensions, threatening bitterly to kill him if he would not promise
to leave off Preaching as he did to his Contrymen, and promise particularly,
that if he Preached any more, he would say nothing of Jesus Christ unto them?
The Indian amazed, yet had the courage to answer, I will in spite of you go on
to Preach Christ more than ever I did, and the God whom I serve will keep me
that you shall never hurt me* Hereupon the Apparition abating somewhat of his
fierceness, offered to the Indian a Book of a considerable thickness and a Pen
and Ink, and said that if he would now set his hand unto that Book he would
require no thing further of him; but the Man refused the motion with
indignation and fell down upon his knees into a Fervent and Pious Prayer unto
Go^ for help against the Tempter, whereupon the Demon Vanished.

This is a Story which I would never have tendered unto my Reader if I had not
Received it from an honest and useful English Man, who i^ at this time a
Preacher of the Gospel to the Indians, nor would the probable Truth of it have
encouraged me to have tendered it, if this al^^ had not been a fit introduction
unto yet a further Narrative.

Sect 2. 'Twas not much above a year or two, after this Accident (o^ which no
manner of Noise has been made) that there was a Prodigiou^ de^cent of Devils
upon diverse places near the Center of this Province wherein some scores of
Miserable People were Troubled by horrible appearances of a Black-Man,
accompanied with Specter, wearing these an^ those Humane Shapes, who offered
them a Book to be by them signed, ^ token of their being Listed for the Service
of the Devil, and upon the denying to do it, they were Dragoon'd with a
thousand Preternatural Torments, which gave no little terror to the beholders
of these unhappy Energuments. There was one in the North part of Boston seized
by the Evil-Angels many Months after the General Storm of the late Enchantments
was over, and when the Country had long lain pretty quiet, both as to
Molestations and Accusations from the INVISIBLE WORLD, her Name was Margaret
Rule, a Young Woman, She was born of sober and honest Parents, yet Living, but
what her own Character was before her Visitation, I can speak with the less
confidence of exactness, because I observe that wherever the Devils have been
let loose to worry any Poor Creature amongst us, a great part of the
Neighborhood presently set themselves to inquire and relate all the little
Vanities of their Childhood, with such unequal exaggerations, as to make them
appear greater Sinners than any whom the Pilate of Hell has not yet Preyed
upon: But it is affirmed, that for about half a year before her Visitation, she
was observably improved in the hopeful symptoms of a new Creature; She was
become furiously concerned for the everlasting Salvation of her Soul, and
careful to avoid the snares of Evil Company. This Young Woman had never seen
the affliction of Mercy Short, whereof a Narrative has been already given, and
yet about half a year after the glorious and signal deliverance of that poor
Damsel, this Margaret ^ell into an affliction, mavelous, resembling hers in
almost all the circumstances of it, indeed the Afflictions were so much alike,
that the relation I have given of the one, would almost serve as the full
History of the other, this was to that, little more than the second part to the
same Tune, indeed Margarets case was in several points less remarkable than
Mercies, and in some other things the Entertainment did a little vary.

Sect 3. "It Was upon the Lords Day the 10th of September, in the Year 1693. that
Margaret Rule, after some hours of previous disturbance in the Public
Assembly, fell into odd Fits, which caused her Friends to carry her home, where
her Fits in a few hours grew into a Figure that satisfied the Spectators of
their being preternatural; some of the Neighbors were forward enough to
suspect the rise of this Mischief in an House hard by, where lived a Miserable
Woman, who had been formerly Imprisoned on the suspicion of Witchcraft, and who
had frequently Cured very painful Hurts by muttering over them certain Charms,
which I shall not endanger the Poisoning of my Reader by repeating. This Woman
had the Evening before Margaret fell into her Calamities, very bitterly treated
her, and threatened her; but the hazard of hurting a poor Woman that might be
innocent, notwithstanding Surmizes that might have been more strongly grounded
than those, causd the piou^ People in the Vicinity to try rather whether
incessant supplication to God alone, might not procure a quicker and safer Ease
to the Afflicted, than hasty Prosecution of any supposed Criminal, and
accordingly that unexceptionable course was all that was ever followed; yea,
which I looked on as a token for good, the Afflicted Family was as averse as
any of us all to entertain thoughts of any other course.

Sect 4. The Young Woman was assaulted by Eight cruel specter, whereof she
imagined that she knew three or four, but the rest came still with their Faces
covered, so that she could never have a distinguishing view of the co^ntenance
of those whom she thought she knew; she was very careful of my reitterated
charges to forbear blazing the Names, left any good Person should come to
suffer any blast of Reputation through the cunning Malice of the great Accuser;
nevertheless having since privately named them to my self, I will venture to
say this of them, that they are a sort of Wretches who for these many years
have gone under as Violent Presumptions of Witchcraft, as perhaps any creatures
yet living upon Earth; although I am far from thinking that the Visions of this
Young Woman were Evidence enough to prove them so. These cursed Specter now
brought unto her a Book about a Cubet long, a Book Red and thick, but not very
broad, and they demanded of her that she would set her Hand to that Book, or
touch it at least with her Hand, as a Sign of her becoming a Servant of the
Devil, upon her peremptory refusal to do what they asked, they did not after
renew the profers of the Book unto her, but instead thereof, they fell to
Tormenting of her in a manner too Hellish to be sufficiently described, in
those Torments confining her to her Bed, for just Six weeks together.

Sect. 5. Sometimes, but not always together with the Specter, there looked in
upon the Young Woman (according to her account) a short and a Black Man, whom
they called their Master, a Wight exactly of the same Dimensions and Complexion
and voice, with the Devil that has exhibited himself unto other infested
People, not only in other parts of this Country but also in other Countries,
even of the European World, as the relation of the Enchantments there inform
us, they all professed themselves Vassals of this Devil, and obedience unto him
they address themselves unto various ways of Torturing her: accordingly she was
cruelly pinch't with Invisible Hands very often in a Day, and the black and
blew marks of the pinches became immediately visible unto standers by. Besides
this, when her attendants had left her without so much as one pin about her,
that so they might prevent some feared inconveniences; yet she would ever now
and then be miserably hurt with Pins which were found stuck into her Neck, Back
and Arms, however, the Wounds made by the Pins would in a few minutes
ordinarily be cured; she would also be strangely distorted in her Joints, and
thrown into such exorbitant Convulsions as were astonishing unto the Spectators
in General; They that could behold the doleful condition of the poor Family
without sensible compassions might have Intrals indeed, but I am sure they
could have no true Bowels in them.

Sect. 6 It were a most Unchristian and uncivil, yea a most unreasonable thing
to imagine that the Fitt's of the Young Woman were but mere Impostures: And I
believe scarce any, but People of a particular Dirtiness, will harbor such an
Uncharitable Censure; however, because I know not how far the Devil may drive
the Imagination of poor Creatures when he has possession of them, that at
another time when they are themselves would scorn to Dissemble any thing. I
shall now confine my Narrative unto passages, wherein there could be no room
left for any Dissimulation. Of these the first that I Will mention shall be this;
From the time that Margaret Rule first found her self to be formally befieged
by the Specter until the Ninth Day following, namely from the Tenth of
September to the Eighteenth, she kept an entire Fast, and yet she was unto all
appearance as Fresh, as Lively, as Hearty, at the Nine Days End, as before they
began; in all this time, though she had a very eager Hunger upon her Stomach, yet
if any refreshment were brought unto her, her Teeth would be set, and she would
be thrown into many Miseries, Indeed once or twice or so in all this time, her
Tormentors permitted her to swallow a Mouthful of somewhat that might increase
her Miseries, whereof a Spoonful of Rum was the most considerable; but
otherwise, as I said, her Fast unto the Ninth day was very extreme and rigid:
However, afterward there scarce passed a day wherein she had not liberty to
take something or other for her Sustentation. And I must add this further, that
this business of her Fast was carried so, that it was impossible to be
dissembled without a Combination of Multitudes of People unacquainted with one
another to support the Iuggle, but he that can imagine such a thing of a
Neighborhood, so filled with Virtuous People is a base Man, I cannot call him
any other.

Sect. 7. But if the Sufferings of this Young Woman were not Imposture, yet
might they not be pure Distemper? I will not here inquire of our Siduces, what
sort of Distemper it is shall stick the Body full of Pins, without any Hand that
could be seen to stick them; or whether all the Pinmakers in the World would be
willing to be Evaporated into certain ill habits of Body producing a Distemper,
but of the Distemper my Reader shall be Judge when I have told him something
further of those unusual Sufferings. I do believe that the Evil Angels do often
take Advantage from Natural Distempers in the Children of Men to annoy them
with such further Mischiefs as we call preternatural. The Malignant Vapors and
Humors of our Diseased Bodies may be used by Devils, thereinto insinuating as
engine of the Execution of their Malice upon those Bodies; and perhaps for this
reason one Sex may suffer more Troubles of some kinds from the Invisible World
than the other, as well as for that reason for which the Old Serpent made where
he did his first Address. But I Pray what will you say to this, Margaret Rule
would sometimes have her Jaws forcibly pulled open, whereupon something
Invisible would be poured down her Throat; we all saw her swallow, and yet we
saw her try all she could by Spitting, Coughing and Shriking, that she might
not swalow, but one time the standers by plainly saw something of that odd
Liquor it self on the outside of her Neck; She cried out of it as of Scalding
Brimstone poured into her, and the whole House would Immediately scent so hot
of Brimstone that we were scarce able to endure it, whereof there are score; of
Witnesses; but the Young Woman her self would be so monstrously Inflamed that
it would have broke a Heart of Stone to have seen her Agonies, this was a thing
that several times happened and several times when her Mouth was thus pulled
open, the standers by clapping their Hands closethereupon the distresses that
otherwise followed would be diverted. Moreover there was a whitish Powder to us
Invisible sometimes cast upon the Eyes of this Young Woman, whereby her Eyes
would be extream'y incommoded, but one time some of this Powder was fallen
actually Visible upon her Cheek, from whence the People in the Room wiped it
with their Handkerchiefs, and sometimes the Young Woman would also be so
bitterly scorched with the unseen Sulphur thrown upon her, that very sensible
B^sters would be raised upon her Skin, whereto her Friends found it necessary
to apply the Oyl's proper for common Burning, but the most of these Hurts would
be cured in two or three days at farthest: I think I may without Vanity pretend
to have read not a few of the best System's of Physic that have been yet seen
in these American Regions, but I must confess that I have never yet learned the
Name of the Natural Distemper, whereto these odd symptoms do belong: However I
might suggest perhaps many a Natural Medicine, which would be of singular use
against many of them.

Sect. 8. But there fell out some other matters far beyond the reach of
Natural Distemper: This Margaret Rule once in the middle of the Night Lamented
sadly that the Specter threatened the Drowning of a Young Man in the
Neighborhood whom she named unto the Company: well it was afterward sound
that at that very time this Young Man, having been pressed on Board a Man of War
then in the Harbor, was out of some dissatisfaction attempting to swim a
snoar, and he had been Drowned in the attempt, if a Boat had not seasonably
taken him up; it was by computation a minute or two after the Young Woman's
discourse of the Drowning, that the Young Man took the Water; At another time
she told us that the Specter bragged and laughed in her hearing about an
exploit they had lately done, by stealing from a Gentleman his Will soon after
he had written it; and within a few hours after she had spoken this there came
to me a Gentleman with a private complaint, that having written his Will it
was unaccountably gone out of the way, how or where he could not Imagine; and
besides all this, there were wonderful Noises every now and then made about the
Room, which our People could Ascribe to no other Authors but the Specter, yea,
the Watchers affirm that they heard those friends clapping of their hands
together with an Audibleness, wherein they could not be Imposed upon: And once
her Tormentors pulled her up to the Cieling of the Chamber, and held her there
before a very Numerous Company of Spectators, who found it as much as they
could all do to pull her down again. There was also another very surprising
circumstance about her, agreeable to what we have not only Read in several
Histories concerning the Imps that have been Employed in Witchcraft; but also
known in some of our own afflicted: We once thought we perceived something stir
upon her Pillow at a little distance from her, whereupon one present lnying his
hand there, he to his horr^^ apprehended that he felt, though none could see it,
a living Creature, not altogether unlike a Rat, which nimbly escaped from him:
and there were diverse other Persons who were thrown into a great consternation
by feeling, as they Judged, at other times the same Invisible Animal.

Sect. 9. As it has been with a Thousand other Enchanted People, so it was with
Margaret Rule in this particular, that there were several words which her
Torment^rs would not let her hear, especially the word Pray or Prayer, and yet
she could so hear the letters of those words distinctly mentioned as to know
what they meant. The standers by were forced sometimes thus in discourse to
spell a word to her, but because there were some so ridiculous as to count it a
sort of Spell or a Charm for any thus to accommodate themselves to the capacity
of the Sufferer, little of this kind was done. But that which was more singular
in this matter, was that she could not use these words in those penetrating
discourses, wherewith she would sometimes address the Specter that were about
her. She would sometimes for a long while together apply her self to the
Specter, whom she supposed the Witches, with such Exhortations to Repentance
as would have melted an Heart of Adam^nt to have heard them; her strains of
Expression and Argument were truly Extraordinary; A Person perhaps of the best
Education and Experience and of Seize much beyond hers could not have
exceeded them: revertheless when she came to these Words God, Lord, Christ,
Good, Repent and some other such, her Mouth could not utter them, whereupon she
would sometimes in an Angry Parenthesis complain of their Wickedness in stopping
that Word, but she would then go on with some other Terms that would serve to
tell what she meant. And I believe that if the most suspicious Person in the
world had beheld all the Circumstances of this matter, he would have said it
could not have been dissembled.

Sect. 10. Not only in the Swedish, but also in the Salem Witchcraft the
Enchanted People have talked much of a White Spirit from whence they received
mavelous Assistances in their Miseries; what lately befell Mercy Short from
the Communications of such a Spirit, has been the just Wonder of us all, but
by such a Spirit was Margaret Rule now also visited. She says that she could
never see his Face; but that she had a frequent view of his bright, Shining and
Glorious Garments; he stood by her Bedside continually heartning and
comforting of her and counselling her to maintain her Faith and hope in God,
and never comply with the temptations of her Adversaries; she says he told her
that God had permitted her Afflictions to befall her for the everlasting and
unspeakable good of her own Soul, and for the good of many others, and for his
own Immortal Glory, and that she should therefore be of good Cheer and be
assured of a speedy deliverance; And the wonderful resolution of mind wherewith
she encountered her Afflictions were but agreeable to such expectations.
Moreover a Minister having one Day with some Importunity Prayed for the
deliverance of this Young Woman, and pleaded that she belonged to his Flock and
charge; he had so far a right unto her as that he was to do the part of a
Minister of our Lord for the bringing of her home unto God; only now the Devil
hindered him in doing that which he had a right thus to do, and whereas He had a
better Title unto her to bring her home to God than the Devil could have unto
her to carry her away from the Lord, he therefore humbly applied himself unto
God, who alone could right this matter, with a suit that she might be rescued
out of Satan's Hands; Immediately upon this, though she heard nothing of this
transaction she began to call that Minister her Father, and that was the Name
whereby she every day before all sorts of People distinguished him: the
occasion of it she says was this, the white Spirit presently upon this
transaction did after this manner speak to her, Margaret, you now are to take
notice that (such a Man) is your Father, God has given you to him, do you from
this time look upon him as your Father, obey him, regard him as your Father,
follow his Counsels and you shall do well; And though there was one passage more,
which I do as little know what to make of as any of the Rest, I am now going to
relate it; more than three times have I seen it fulfilled in the Deliverance of
Enchanted and Possessed Persons, whom the Providence of God has cast into my way,
that their Deliverance could not be obtained before the third Fast kept for
them, and the third day still obtained the Deliverance, although I have thought
of beseeching of the Lord thrice, when buffered by Satan, yet I must earnestly
Entreat all my Readers to beware of any superstitious conceits upon the Number
Three, if our God will hear us upon once Praying and Fasting before him it is
well, and if he will not vouchsafe his Mercy upon our thrice doing so, yet we
must not be so discouraged as to throw by our Devotion, but if the Sovereign
Grace of our God will in any particular Instances count our Patience enough
tried when we have Solemnly waited upon him for any determinate Number of
times, who shall say to him, what do thou, and if there shall be any Number
of Instances, wherein this Grace of our God has exactly holden the same course,
it may have a room in our humble Observations, I hope, without any
Superstition; I say then that after Margaret Rule had been more than five weeks
in her Miseries, this White Spirit said unto her. Well this day such a Man
(whom he named) has keep a third day for your deliverance, now be of good cheer
you shall speedily be delivered. I inquired whether what had been said of tha^
Man were true, and I gained exact and certain Information that it was precisely
so, but I doubt lest in relating this Passage that I have used more openness
than a Friend should be treated with, and for that cause I have concealed
several of the most memorable things that have occurred not only in this but in
some former Histories, although indeed I am not so well satisfied about the true
nature of this white Spirit, as to count that I can do a Friend much Honor by
reporting what notice this white Spirit may have thus taken of him.

Sect. 11. On the last day of the Week her Tormentors as she thought and said,
approaching toward her, would be forced still to recoil and retire as
unaccountably unable to meddle with her, and they would retice to the Fire side
with their Poppets; but going to stick Pins into those Poppets; they could not
(according to their visions) make the Pins to enter, she insulted over them
with a very P^oper de^ision, daring them now to do their worst, whilst she had
the satisfaction to see their Black Master strike them and kick them, like an
Overseer of so many Negro's, to make them to do their work, and renew the marks
of his vengeance on them, when they failed of doing of it. At last being as it
were tired with their ineffectual Attempts, to mortify her they suriously
said, Well you shant be the last. And after a pause they added, Go, and the
Devil go with you, we can do no more; whereupon they flew out of the Room, and
she returning perfectly to her self most affectionately gave thanks to God for
her deliverance; her Tormentors left her extreme weak and faint, and
overwhelmed with Vapors, which would not only cause her sometimes to Swoon
away, but also now and then for a little while discompose the reasonableness of
her Thoughts; Nevertheless her former troables returned not, but we are now
waiting to see the good effects of those troubles upon the Souls of all
concerned, And now I suppose that some of our Learned wi^lings of the
Coffee-House, for fear left these proofs of an Invisible-world should spoil
some of their sport, will endeavor to turn them all into sport, for which
Buffoonary their only pretense will be, they cant understand how such things as
these could be done, whereas indeed he that is but Philosopher enough to have
read but one Little Treatise, Published in the Year 1656. by no other Man than
the Chyrurgion of an Army, or but one Chap. of Helmont, which I will not quote
at this time too particularly, may give a far more intelligible account of
these Appearances than most of these Blades can give why and how their Tobacco
makes 'em Spit; or which way the flame of their Candle becomes illuminating, as
for that cavil, the World would be undone if the Devils could have such power
as they seem to have in several of our stories, it may be Answered that as to
many things the Lying Devils have only known them to be done, and then
pretended unto the doing of those things, but the true and best Answer is, that
by these things we only see what the Devils could have powers to do, if the
great God should give them those powers, whereas now our Histories affords a
Glorious Evidence for the being of a God, the World would indeed be undone, and
horribly undone, if these Devils, who now and then get liberty to play some
very mischievous pranks, were not under a daily restraint of some Almighty
Superior from doing more of such Mischiefs. Wherefore instead of all Apish
flouts and jeers at Histories, which have such undoubted confirmation, as that
no Man that has breeding enough to regard the Common Laws of Humane Society,
will offer to doubt of 'em; it becomes us rather to adore the Goodness of God,
who does not permit such things every day to befall us all, as he sometimes did
permit to befall some few of our miserable Neighbors.

Sect. 12. And what after all my unwearied Cares and Pains, to rescue the
Miserable from the Lions and Bears of Hell, which had siezed them, and after
all my Studies to disappoint the Devils in their designs to confound my
Neighborhood, must I be driven to the necessity of an Apology? Truly the hard
representations where with some Ill Men have reviled my conduct, and the
Countenance which other Men have given to these representations, oblige me to
give Mankind some account of my Behavior; No Christian can, I say none but
evil workers can criminate my visiting such of my poor flock as have at any
time fallen under the terrible and sensible molestations of Evil-Angels; let
their Afflictions have been what they will, I could not have answered it unto
my Glorious Lord, if I had withheld my just Counsels and Comforts from them;
and if I have also with some exactness observed the methods of the
Invisible-World, when they have thus become observable, I have been but a
Servant of Mankind in doing so; yea no less a Person than the Venerable Baxter,
has more than once or twice in the most Public manner invited Mankind to thank
me for that Service. I have not been insensible of a greater danger attending
me in this fulfillment of my Ministry, than if I had been to take Ten Thousand
steps over a Rocky Mountain filled with Rattle-Snakes, but I have considered,
he that is wise will observe things, and the Surprising Explication and
confirmation of the biggest part of the Bible, which I have seen given in these
things, has abundantly paid me for observing them. Now in my visiting of the
Miserable, I was always of this opinion that we were Ignorant of what Powers
the Devils might have to do their mischiefs in the shapes of some that had
never been explicitly engaged in Diabolical Confederacies, and that therefore
though many Witchcrafts had been fairly detected on Enquiries provoked and begun
by Specteral Exhibitions, yet we could not easily be too jealous of the Snares
laid for us in the devices of Satan; the World knows how many Pages I have
Composed and Published, and particular Gentlement in the Government know how
many Letters I have written to prevent the excessive Credit of Specteral
Accusations, wherefore I have still charged the Afflicted that they should Cry
out of no body for Afflicting of 'em. But if that this might be any Advantage
they might privately tell their minds to some one Person of discretion enough
to make no ill use of their communications, accordingly there has been this
effect of it, that the Name of No one good Person in the World ever come under
any blemish by means of any Afflicted, Person that fell under my particular
cognizance, yea no one Man, Woman or Child ever came into any trouble for the
sake of any that were Afflicted after I had once begun to look after 'em; how
often have I had this thrown into my dish, that many years ago I had an
opportunity to have brought forth such People as have in the late storm of
Witchcraft been complained of, but that I smothered all, and after that storm
was raised at Salem, I did my self offer to provide Meat, Drink and Lodging for
no less than Six of the Afflicted, that so an Experiment might be made, whether
Prayer with Fasting upon the removal of the distressed might not put a Period
to the trouble then rising, without giving the Civil Authority the trouble of
prosecuting those things which nothing but a Conscientious regard unto the
cries of Miserable Families, could have overcome the Reluctancies of the
Honorable Judges to meddle with; In short I do humbly but freely affirm it,
there is not that Man living in this World who has been more desirous than the
poor Man I to shelter my Neighbors from the Inconveniences of Specteral
Outcries, yea I am very jealous I have done so much that way as to Sin in what
I have done, such have been the Cowardice and Fearfulness whereunto my regard
unto the dissatisfactions of other People has precipitated me. I know a Man in
the World, who has thought he has been able to Convict some such Witches as
ought to Dye, but his respect unto the Public Peace has caused him rather to
try whether He could not renew them by Repentance: And as I have been Studious
to defeat the Devils of their expectations to set people together by the Ears,
thus, I have also checked and quelled those forbidden curiosities, which would
have given the Devil an invitation to have tarried amongst us, when I have seen
wonderful Snares laid for Curious People, by the secret and future things
discovered from the Mouths of Damsels possessed with a Spirit of divination;
Indeed I can recollect but one thing wherein there could be given so much as a
Shadow of Reason for Exceptions, and that is my allowing of so many to come and
see those that were Afflicted, now for that I have this to say, that I have
almost a Thousand times entreated the Friends of the Miserable, that they would
not permit the Intrusion of any Company, but such as by Prayers or other ways
might be helpful to them; Nevertheless I have not absolutely forbid all Company
from coming to your Haunted Chambers, partly because the Calamities of the
Families were such as required the Assistance of many Friends; partly because I
have been willing that there should be disinterested Witnesses of all sorts, to
confute the Calumnies of such as would say all was but Imposture and partly
because I saw God had Sanctified the Spectacle of the Miseries on the Afflicted
unto the Souls of many that were Spectators, and it is a very Glorious thing
that I have now to mention -- The Devil have with most horrendousoperations
broke in upon our Neighborhood and God has at such a rate overruled all the
Fury and Malice of those Devils, that all the Afflicted have not only been
Delivered, but I hope also savingly brought home unto God, and the Reputation
of no one good Person in the World has been damaged, but instead thereof the
Souls o^ many, especially of the rising Generation, have been thereby awakened
unto some acquaintance with Religion, our young People who belonged unto the
Praying Meetings, of both Sexes, a part would ordinarily spen^ whole Nights by
the whole Weeks together in Prayers and Psalms upon these occasions, in which
Devotions the Devils could get nothing but like Fools a Scourge for their own
Backs, and some scores of other young People, who were strangers to real Piety,
were now struck with the lively demonstrations of Hell evidently set forth
before their Eyes, when they saw Persons cruelly Frighted, Wounded and Starved
by Devils and Scalde^ with burning Brimstone, and yet so preserved in this
tortured Estate a^ that at the end of one Months wretchedness they were as able
still to undergo another, so that of these also it might now be said, Behold
the^ Pray in the whole -- The Devil got just nothing; but God got praise Christ
got Subjects, the Holy Spirit got Temples, the Church got Add^tion; and the
Souls of Men got everlasting Benefits; I am not so vain ^ to say that any
Wisdom or Virtue of mine did contribute unto this good order of things: But I
am so just, as to say I did not hinder this Goo^ When therefore there have been
those that pick up little incoherent scraps and bits of my Discourses in this
fruitful discharge of my Ministry, and so traversted 'em in their abusive
Pamphlets, as to persuade the Town that I was their common Enemy in those very
points, wherein, if in any one thing whatsoever I have sensibly approved my
self as true a Servant unto 'em as possibly I could, tho my Life and Soul had
been at Stake for it. Yea to do like Satan himself, by sly, base, unpretending
Insinuations as if I wore not the Modesty and Gravity which became a Minister
of the Gospel, I could not but think my self unkindly dealt withal, and the
neglects of others to do me justice in this affair has caused me to conclude
this Narrative with complaints in another hearing of such Monstrous Injuries.

PART II. A Letter to Mr. C. M.
Mr. Cotton Mather, Boston Jan. 11 th. 1693. REverend Sir,
I finding it needful on many accounts, I here present you with the Copy of
that Paper, which has been so much Misrepresented, to the End that what shall
be found defective or not fairly Represented, if any such shall appear, they
may be set right, which Runs thus.

September the 13 th. 1693:
IN the Evening when the Sun was withdrawn, giving place to Darkness to
succeed, I with some others were drawn by curiosity to see Margaret Rule, and
so much the rather because it was reported Mr. M -- would be there that Night:
Being come to her Fathers House into the Chamber wherein she was in Bed, found
her of a healthy countenance of about seventeen Years Old, lying very still,
and speaking very little, what she did say seemed as if she were Lightheaded.
Then Mr. M -- Father and Son came up and others with them, in the whole were
about 30 or 40 Persons, they being sat, the Father on a Stool, and the Son upon
the Bedside by her, the Son began to question her, Margaret Rule; how do you
do? then a pause without any answer. Question. What do there a great many
Witches sit upon you? Answer. Yes. Q. Do you not know that there is a hard
Master? Then she was in a Fit; He laid his hand upon her Face and Nose, but, as
he said, without perceiving Breath; then he brushed her on the Face with his
Glove, and rubbed her Stomach (her Breast not covered with the Bed-cloaths) and
bid others do so too, and said it eased her, then she revived. Q. Don't you
know there is a hard Master? A. Yes, Reply; Don't serve that hard Master, you
know who. Q. Do you believe? Then again she was in a Fit, and he again rubbed
her Breast, etc. (about this time Margaret Perd an attendant assisted him in
rubbing of her. The Afflicted spoke angerely to her saying don't you meddle
with me, and hastily put away her hand) he wrought his Fingers before her Eyes
and asked her if she saw the Witches? A. No, Q. Do you believe? A. Yes. Q. Do
you believe in you know who? A. Yes. Q. Would you have other People do so too,
to believe in you know who? A. Yes. Q. Who is it that Afflicts you? A. I know
not, there is a great many of them (about this time the Father questioned if
she knew the Specter? An attendant said, if she did she would not tell; The
Son proceeded) Q. You have seen the Black-man hant you? A* No, Reply; I hope
you never shall. Q. You have had a Book offered you, hant you? A. No, Q. The
brushing of you gives you case, don't it? A. Yes. She turned her self, and a
little Groaned. Q. Now the Witches Scratch you and Pinch you, and Bite you,
don't they? A. Yes, then he put his Hand upon her Breast and Belly, viz. on the
Cleaths over her, and felt a Living thing. as he said, which moved the Father
also to feel, and some others; Q. Don't you feel the Live thing in the Bed? A.
No. Reply, that is only Fancy. Q. the great company of People increase your
Torment, don't they? A. Yes. The People about were desired to withdraw. One
Woman said, I am sure I am no Witch, I will not go; so others, so none
withdrew. Q. Shall we go to Prayers, Then she lay in a Fit as before. But this
time to revive her, they waved a Hat and brushed her Head and Pillow therewith.
Q. Shall we go to PRAY, etc. Spelling the Word. A. Yes. The Father went to
Prayer for perhaps half an Hour, chiefly against the Power of the Devil and
Witchcraft, and that God would bring out the Afflicters: during Prayer-time,
the Son stood by, and when they thought she was in a Fit, rubbed her and brushed
her as before, and beckned to others to do the like, after Prayer be proceeded;
Q. You did not hear when we were at Prayer, did you? A. Yes. You don't hear
always? you don't hear sometimes past a Word or two, do you? A. No. Then turning
him about said, this is just another Mercy Short: Margaret Perd replied, she
was not like her in her Fits. Q. What does she eat or drink? A. Not eat at all;
but drink Rum. Then he admonished the young People to take warning, etc. Saying
it was a sad thing to be so Tormented by the Devil and his Instruments: A
Young Man present in the habit of a Seaman, replied this is the Devil all over,
Than the Ministers withdrew. Soon after they were gone the Afflicted desired the
Women to be gone, saying, that the Company of the Men was not offensive to her,
and having hold of the hand of a Young Man, said to have been her Sweetheart
formerly, who was withdrawing; She pulled him again into his Seat, saying he
should not go to Night.

September the 19th. 1693.
THis Night I renewed my Visit, and found her rather of a fresher Countenance
than before, about eight Persons present with her, she was in a Fit Screeming
and making a Noise: Three or four Persons rubbed and brushed her with their
hands, they said that the brushing did put them away, if they brushed or rubbed
in the right place; therefore they brushed and rubbed in several places, and
said that when they did it in the right place she could fetch her Breath, and
by that they knew. She being come to her self was soon in a merry talking Fit.
A Young Man came in and asked her how she did? She answered very bad, but at
present a little better; he soon told her he must be gone and bid her good
Night, at which she seemed troubled, saying, that she liked his Company, and
said she would not have him go till she was well; adding, for I shall Die when
you are gone. Then she complained they did not put her on a clean Cap, ^ut let
her ly so like a Beast, saying, she should lose her Fellows. She said she
^ondered any People should be so Wicked as to think she was not Afflicted, out
to think she Dissembled, a Young-woman answered Yes, if they were to see you in
this merry Fit, they would say you Dissembled indeed; She replied Mr. M -- said
this was her laughing time, she must laugh now: She said Mr. M -- had been
there this Evening, and she enquired, how long he had ^een gone? She said, he
stayed alone with her in the room half an Hour, and said that he told her there
were some that came for Sp^es, and to report about ^own that she was not
Afflicted. That during the said time she had no Fit, ^^at he asked her if she
knew how many times he had Prayed for her to Day? And that she answered that
she could not tell; and that he replied he had Prayed for her Nine times to
Day; the Attendants said that she was sometimes in Fit that none could open her
Ionts, and that there came an Old Iron-jaw'd Woman and tried, but could not do
it; they likewise said, that her Head could ^ot be moved from the Pillow; I
tried to move her Head, and found no more ^^fficulty than another Bodies (and
so did others) but was not willing to offend ^ lifting it up, one being
reproved for endeavoring it, they saying Angrily ^u will break her Neck; The
Attendants said Mr. M -- would not go to Prayer with her when People were in
the Room, as they did one Night, that ^ight he felt the Live Creature. Margaret
Perd and another, said they smell ^rimstone; I and others said we did not smell
any; then they said they did ^^ know what it was: This Margaret said, she
wished s^e had been here when Mr. M -- was here, another Attendant said, if you
had been here you might ^ have been permitted in, for her own Mother was not
suffered to be present. Sir, after the sorest Affliction and greatest Blemish
to Religion that e^r befell this Country, and after most Men began to Fear that
some un^^e steps had been taken, and after His Excellency (with their Majesty's
^pprobation as is said) had put a stop to Executions, and Men began to hope
there would never be a return of the like; finding these Accoun^ to contain in
them something extraordinary, I writ them down the sam^ Nights in order to
attain the certainty of them, and soon found them ^ confirmed that I have
(besides other Demonstrations) the whole, under the Hands of two Persons are
ready to attest the Truth of it, but not s^tisfied herewith; I showed them to
some of your particular Friends tha^ so I might have the greater certainty: But
was much surprised with the Message you sent me, that I should be, Arrested for
Slander, and at you^ calling me one of the worst of Liars, making it
Pulpit-news with the Name of Pernicious Libels, etc. This occasioned my first
Letter.

September the 29 th, 1693. Reverend SIR,
I Having written from the Mouths of several Persons, who affirm they we^
present with Margaret Rule, the 13th, Instant, her Answers and Beh^viours, etc.
And having showed it to several of my Friends, as also you^ and understanding
you are offended at it; This is to acquaint you, that you and any one
particular Friend, will please to meet me and some other l^ different Person
with me, at Mr. Wilkins, or at Ben. Harris 's, you in^^mating the time, I shall
be ready there to read it to you, as also a further A^count of proceedings the
19th, Instant, which may be n^edful to preve^^ Groundless prejudices, and let
deserved blame be cast where ^t ought;

From Sir, yours in what I may, R. C.


The effects of which, Sir (not to mention that long Letter only on^ read to
me) was, you sent me word you would meet me at Mr. Wilki^ but before that
Answer, at yours and your Fathers complaint, I w^^ brought before their
Majesty's Justice, by Warrant, as for Scandalous L^bels against your self, and
was bound over to Answer at Sessions; I d^ not remember you then objected
against the Truth of what I had wro^ but asserted it was wronged by omissions,
which if it were so was pa^ any Power of mine to remedy, having given a
faithful account of a^ that came to my knowledge; And Sir, that you might not
be wit^ out some Cognizance of the reasons why I took so much pains in it,
(...) also for my own Information, if it might have been, I wrote to you m^
second Letter to this effect.

November the 24 th, 1693. Reverend SIR,
Having expected some Weeks, your meeting me at Mr. Wilkins accordi^ to what
you intimated to me, J. M -- and the time drawing near (...) our meeting
elsewhere, I thought it not amiss to give you a Summary of (...) thoughts in
the great concern, which as you say has been agitated with so m^hea^. That
there are Witches is not the doubt, the Scriptures else were in vain, which
assign their Punishment to be by Death; But what this Witchcraft is, or wherein
it does consist, seems to be the whole difficulty: And as it may be easily
demonstrated, that all that bear that Name cannot be justly so accounted, so
that some things and Actions not so esteemed by the most, yet upon due
Examination will be found to merit no better Character.

In your late Book you lay down a brief Synopsis of what has been written on
that Subject, by a Triumvirate of as Eminent Men as ever handled it (as you are
pleased to call them) Viz. Mr. Perkins, Gaul, and Bernard consisting of about
30 Tokens to know them by, many of them distinct from, if not thwarting each
other: Among all of which I can find but one decisive, Viz. That of Mr. Gaul,
Head IV. and runs thus; Among the most unhappy Circumstances to convict a
Witch, one is a maligning and oppugning the Word, Work, or Worship of God, and
by any extraordinary Sign seeking to seduce any from it, see Deu. 13.1, 2. Mat.
24.24. Act. 13.8; 10. 2 Timothy 3.8. Do but mark well the places, and for this
very property of thus opposing and perverting, they are all there concluded
Arrant and absolute Witches.

This Head as here laid down and inserted by you, either is a Truth or not, if
not, why is it here inserted from one of the Triumvirate, if it be a Truth* as
the Scriptures quoted will abundantly testify, whence is it that it is so
little regarded, tho it be the only Head well proved by Scripture, or that the
rest of the Triumvirate should so far forget their Work as not to mention it.
It were to be unjust to the Memory of those otherwise Wise Men, to suppose them
to have any Sinister design; But perhaps the force of a prevai^ing opinion
together with an Education thereto Suited, might overshadow their Judgments, as
being wont to be but too prevalent in many other cases. But if the above be
Truth, then the Scripture is full and plain, What is Witchcraft? And if so,
what need of his next Head of Hanging of People without as full and clear
Evidence as in other Cases? Or what need of the rest of the Receipts of the
Triumvirate? what need of Praying that the Afflicted may be able to discover
who it is that Afflicts them? or what need of Searching for Tet's for the Devil
to Suck in his Old Age, or the Experiment of saying the Lords Prayer, etc.
Which a multitude more practiced in some places Superstitiously inclined. Other
Actions have been practiced for easing the Afflicted, less justifiable, if not
strongly savouring of Witchcraft it self, viz. Fondly Imagining by the Hand,
etc. to drive off Specter, or to knock of Invisible Chains, or by striking in
the Air to Wound either the Afflicted or others, etc. I write not this to
accuse any, but that all may beware believing. That the Devils bounds are set,
which he cannot pass, That the Devils are so full of Malice^ That it cant be
added to by Mankind, That where he has Power be neither can nor will omit
Executing it, That it is only the Almighty that set bounds to his rage, and that
only can Commissionate him to hurt or destroy any.

These last, Sir, are such Foundations of Truth, in my esteem, that I cannot
but own it to be my duty to ascert them, when called, though with the hazard of
my All: And consequently to detect such as these, That a Witch can
Commissionate Devils to Afflict Mortals, That he can at his or the Witches
pleasure Assume any Shape, That Hanging or Drawing of Witches can lessen his
Power of Afflicting, or restore those that were at a distance Tormented, with
many others depending on these; all tending, in my esteem, highly to the
Dishonor of God, and the Indangering the well-being of a People, and do
further add, that as the Scriptures are full that there is Witchcraft,
(u^*sup.) so it is as plain that there are Possessions, and that the Bodies of
the Possessed have hence been not only Afflicted, but strangely agitated, if not
their Tongues improved to foretell futurities, etc. and why not to accuse the
Innocent, as bewitching them; having pretense to Divination to gain credence.
This being reasonable to be expected, from him who is the Father of Lies, to
the end he may thereby involve a Country in Blood, Malice, and Evil,
surmising which he greedily seeks after, and so finally lead them from their
fear and dependence upon God to fear him, and a supposed Witch thereby
attaining his end upon Mankind; and not only so, but Natural Distemper, as has
been frequently observed by the Judicious, have so operated as to deceive, more
than the Vulgar, as is testified by many Famous Physicians, and others. And as
for that proof of Multitudes of Confessions, this Country may be by this time
thought Competent Judges, what credence we ought to give them, having had such
numerous Instances, as also how obtained.

And now Sir, if herein be any thing in your esteem valuable, let me entreat
you, not to account it the worse for coming from so mean a hand; which however
you may have received Prejudices, etc. Am ready to serve you to my Power; but
if you Judge otherwise hereof, you may take your own Methods for my better
Information. Who am, Sir, yours to command, in what I may,

P. C.


In Answer to this last, Sir, you replied to the Gentleman that presented it,
that you had nothing to Prosecute against me; and said as to your Sentiments in
your Books, you did not bind any to believe them, and then again renewed your
promise of meeting me, as before, though not yet performed. Accordingly, though I
waited at Sessions, there was none to object ought against me, upon which I was
dismissed. This gave me some reason to believe that you intended all should
have been forgotten; But instead of that, I find the Coals are fresh blown up,
I being supposed to be represented, in a late Manuscript, More Wonders of the,
etc. as Traversing your Discourse in your Faithful discharge of your Duty, etc.
And such as see not with the Authors Eyes, rendered Sadducees and Witlins, etc.
and the Arguments that square not with the Sentiments therein contained,
Buffoonary; rarely no doubt, agreeing with the Spirit of Christ, and his
dealings with an unbelieving Thomas, yet whose infidelity was without compare
less excusable, but the Author having resolved long since, to have no more than
one single Grain of Patience, with them that deny, etc. the Wonder is the less.
It must needs be that offenses come, but woe to him by whom they come. To
vindicate my self therefore from such false Imputations, of Satan-like
insinuations, and misrepresenting your Actions, etc. and to vindicate your
self, Sir, as much as is in my Power from those Suggestions, said to be
Insinuated, as if you wore not the Modesty, and Gravity, that becomes a
Minister of the Gospel; which it seems, some that never saw the said
Narratives, report them to contain; I say, Sir, for these reasons, I here
present you with the first Copy that ever was taken, etc. And purpose for a
Weeks time to be ready, if you shall intimate your pleasure to wait upon you,
either at the place formerly appointed, or any other that is indifferent to the
End; that if there shall appear any defects in that Narrative, they may be
amended.

Thus, Sir, I have given you a genuine account of my Sentiments and Actions in
this Affair; and do request and pray, that if I err, I may be showed it from
Scripture, or sound Reason, and not by quotations out of Virgil, nor Spanish
Rhetoric. For I find the Witlings mentioned, are so far from answering your
profound questions, that they cannot so much as pretend to show a distinction
between Witchcraft in the Common notion of it, and Possession; Nor so much as
to demonstrate that ever the Jews or primitive Christians did believe, that a
Witch could send a Devil to Afflict her Neighbors; but to all these, Sir, (ye
being the Salt of the E^arth, etc.) I have reason to hope for a Satisfactory
Answer to him, who is one that reverences your Person and Office; And am, Sir,
yours to Command in what I may,

R. C.


Boston January the 15th, 1693/4. Mr. R. C.
WHereas you intimate your desires, that what is not fairly, (I take it for
granted you mean truly also,) represented in a Paper you lately sent me,
containing a pretended Narrative of a Visit by my Father and self to an
Afflicted Young Woman, whom we apprehended to be under a Diabolical Possession,
might be rectified: I have this to say, as I have often already said, that do I
scarcely find any one thing in the whole Paper, whether respecting my Father or
self, either fairly or truly represented. Nor can I think that any that know my
Parents Circumstances, but must think him deserving a better Character by far,
than this Narrative can be thought to give him. When the main design we managed
in Visiting the poor Afflicted Creature, was to prevent the Accusations of the
Neighborhood; can it be fairly represented that our design was to draw out
such Accusations, which is the representation of the Paper. We have Testimonies
of the best Witnesses and in Number not a few* That when we asked Ral^ whether
she thought she knew who Tormented her? the Question was but an Introduction to
the Solemn charges which we then largely gave, that she should rather Dye than
tell the Names of any whom she might Imagine that she knew. Your Informers have
reported the Question, and report nothing of what follows, as essential to the
giving of that Question: And can this be termed a piece of fairness? Fair it
cannot be, that when Ministers Faithfully and Carefully discharge their Duty to
the Miserable in their Flock,^ little bits, scraps and shreds of their
Discourses, should be tackt together to make them contemt^ble when there shall
be no notice of all the Necessary, Seasonable, and Profitable things that
occurred in those Discourses; And without which, th^^ occasion of the lesser
Passages cannot be understood; And yet I am furnished with abundant Evidences,
ready to be Sworn, that will possitively prove this part of unfairness, by the
above mentioned Narrative, to l^ done both to my Father and self. Again, it
seems not fair or reasonabl^ that I should be exposed, for which your self (not
to say some others might have exposed me for, if I had not done, Viz. for
discouraging so much Company from flocking about the Possessed Maid, and yet, as
^ persuade my self, you cannot but think it to be good advice, to keep much
Company from such haunted Chambers; besides the unfairness do^^ more appear, in
that I find nothing repeated of what I said about the advantage, which the
Devil takes from too much Observation and Curiousity.

In that several of the Questions in the Paper are so Worded, as to carry in
them a presupposal of the things inquired after, to say the be^^ of it is very
unfair: But this is not all, the Narrative contains a number of Mistakes and
Falsehoods; which were they willful and designed might justly be termed gross
Lies. The representations are far from true, when it is affirmed my Father and
self being come into the Room, began the Discourse; I hope I understand
breeding a little better than so^ For proof of this, did occasion serve, sundry
can depose the contrary.

It Is no less untrue, that either my Father or self put the Question How many
Witches sit upon you? We always cautiously avoided tha^ expression; It being
contrary to our inward belief: All the standers b^ will (I believe) Swear they
did not hear us use it (your Witnesses excepted) and I tremble to think how
hardy those woeful Creatures mu^ be, to call the Almighty by an Oath, to so
false a thing. As false a representation it is, that I rubbed Rule's Stomach, her
Breast not being covered^ The Oath of the nearest Spectators, giving a true
account of that matte^ will prove this to be little less than a gross (if not a
doubled) Lie; and to be somewhat plainer, it carries the Face of a Lie
contrived on purpose (by them at least, to whom you are beholden for the
Narrative) Wickedly and Basely to expose me. For you cannot but know how much
this Representation has contributed, to make People believe a Smutty thing of
me; I am far from thinking, but that in your own Conscience you believe, that
no indecent Action of that Nature could then be done by me before such
observers, had I been so Wicked as to have been inclined to what is Base. It
looks next to impossible that a reparation shoud be made me for the wrong done
to, I hope, as to any Scandal, an unblemished, though weak and small Servant of
the Church of God. Nor is what follows a less untruth, that 'twas an Attendant
and not my self who said; if Rule knows who Afflicts her, yet she wont tell. I
therefore spoke it that I might encourage her to continue in that concealment
of all Names whatsoever; to this I am able to furnish my self with the
Attestation of Sufficient Oaths. It Is as far from true, that my apprehension of
the Imp. about Rule. was on her Belly, for the Oaths of the Spectators, and
even of those that thought they felt it, can restify that 'twas upon the
Pillow, at a distance from her Body. As untrue a Representation is that which
follows, Viz. That it was said unto her, that her not Apprehending of that odd
palpable, though not visible, Mover was from her Fancy, for I endeavored to
persuade her that it might be but Fancy in others, that there was any such
thing at all. Witnesses every way sufficien^ can be produced for this also.
It Is falsely represented that my Father felt on the Young-woman after the
appearance mentioned, for his hand was never near her; Oath can sufficiently
vindicate him. It Is very untrue, that my Father Prayed for perhaps half an
Hour, against the power of the Devil and Withcraft, and that God would bring
out the Afflictors. Witnesses of the best Credit, can depose, that his Prayer
was not a quarter of an Hour, and that there was no more than about one clause
toward the close of the Prayer, which was of this import; And this clause also
was guarded with a singular wariness and modesty, Viz. If there were any evil
Instruments in this matter God would please to discover them: And that there
was more than common reason for that Petition I can satisfy any one that will
please to Inquire of me. And strange it is, that a Gentleman that from 18 to 54
has been an Exemplary Minister of the Gospel; and that besides a station in
the Church of God, as considerable as any that his own Country can afford, has
for diverse years come off with Honor, in his Application to three Crowned
Heads, and the chiefest Nobility of three Kingdoms, Knows not yet how to make
one short Prayer of a quarter of an hour, but in New England he must be
Libelled for it. There are diverse other downright mistakes, which you have
permitted your self, I would hope, not knowingly, and with a Malicious design,
to be receiver or Compiler of, which I shall now forbea^ to Animadvert upon. As
for the Appendix of the Narrative I do find myself therein Injuriously treated,
for the utmost of your proof for wha^ you ^ay of me, amounts to little more
than, viz. Some People told you that others told them, that such and such
things did pass, but you may assure your self, that I am not unfurnished with
Witnesses, that can convict the same. Whereas you would give me to believe the
bottom o^ these your Methods, to be some dissatisfaction about the commonly
received Power of Devils and Witches; I do not only with all freedom^ offer
you the use of any part of my Library, which you may see caus^ to peruse on
that Subject, but also if you and any else, whom you please will visit me at my
Study, yea, or meet me at any other place, less inconvenient than those by you
proposed; I will with all the fairness and calmness in the World dispute the
point. I beg of God that he would bestow as many Blessings on you, as ever on
my self, and out of a since^ wish, that you may be made yet more capable of
these Blessings, I tak^ this occasion to lay before you the faults (not few nor
small ones neither which the Paper contained, you lately sent me in order to be
Examine^ by me. In case you want a true and full Narrative of my Visit, where^
such an indecent Traversty (to say the best) has been made, I am no^ unwilling
to communicate it, in mean time must take liberty to say, (...) scarcely
consistent with Common Civility, much less Christian Charity to offer the
Narrative, now with you, for a true one, till you have ^ truer, or for a full
one, till you have a fuller. Your Sincere (tho I^^ jur'd) Friend and Servant,

C. Mather.


The Copy of a Paper Received with the above Letter.
I Do Testify that I have seen Margaret Rule in her Afflictions from the
Invisible World, lifted up from her Bed, wholly by an Invisible for^ a great
way toward the top of the Room where she lay; in her bei^ so lifted, she had
no Assistance from any use of her own Arms or Hand^ or any other part of her
Body, not so much as her Heels touching h^ Bed, or resting on any support
whatsoever. And I have seen her the lifted, when not only a strong Person has
thrown his whole weight cross her to pull her down; but several other Persons
have endeavoure^ with all their might, to hinder her from being so raised up,
which suppose that several others will testify as well as my self, when call
unto it. Witness my Hand,

Samuel Aves.

WE can also Testify to the substance of what is above Written, a^ have
several times seen Margaret Rule so lifted up from her Bed, that she had no use
of her own Lims to help her up, but it was the declared apprehension of us, as
well as others that saw it, impossible for any hands, but some of the Invisible
World to lift her,

Copia.

Robert Earl. John Wilkins. Dan. Williams.


WE whose Names are under-writted do testify, That one Evening when we were in
the Chamber where Margaret Rule then lay, in ^er late Affliction, we observed
her to be, by an Invisible Force, lifted up from the Bed whereon she lay, so as
to touch the Garret Floor, while ^et neither her Feet, nor any other part of
her Body rested either on the Bed, or any other support, but were also by the
same force, lifted up from all that was under her, and all this for a
considerable while, we ^udg'd it several Minutes; and it was as much as several
of us could do, with all our strength to pull her down. All which happened when
there was not only we two in the Chamber, but we suppose ten or a dozen more,
whose Names we have forgotten,

Thomas Thornton.
Copia. William Hudson Testifies to the substance of Thorntons Testimony, to
which he also has set his Hand.

Mr. Cotton Mather, Boston Jan. 18 1693 Reverend SIR,
YOurs of the 15 th, Instant, I received yesterday; and soon found I had
promised my self too much by it, Viz, Either concurrence with, or a denial of
those Fundamentals mentioned in mine, of Novem. the 24 th. finding this waved
by an Invitation to your Library, etc. I thank God I have the Bible, and do
Judge that sufficient to demonstrate that cited Head of Mr. Gaul, to be a
Truth, as also those other Heads mentioned, as the Foundations of Religion. And
in my apprehension, if it be asked any Christian, whether God governs the
World, and whether it be he only can Commissionate Devils, and such other
Fundamentals, He ought to be as ready as in the Question, who made him? (a
^ittle Writing certainly might be of more use, to clear up the controver^ed
points, than either looking over many Books in a well furnished Library, or
than a dispute, if I were qualified for it; the Inconveniences of Passion
being this way best avoided) And am not without hopes that you will yet oblige
me so far, as to consider that Letter, and if I Err* to let me see it by
Scripture, etc.

Yours, almost the whole of it, is concerning the Narrative I sent to you, and
you seem to intimate as if I were giving Characters, Reflections, and Libell's
etc. concerning your self and Relations; all which were as far from my
thoughts, as ever they were in writing after either your self, or any other
Minister. In the front you declare your apprehension to be, that the Afflicted
was under a Diabolical Possession, and if so, I see not how it should be
occasioned by any Witchcraft (unless we ascribe that Power to a Witch, which is
only the Prerogative of the Almighty, of Sending or Commissionating the Devils
to Afflict her.) But to your particular Objections against the Narrative; and
to the first my intelligence not giving me any further, I could not insert that
I knew not. And it seems improbable that a Question should be put, whether she
knew (or rather who they were) and at the same time to charge her, and that
upon her Life, not to tell, and if you had done so, I see but little good you
could promise your self or others by it, she being Possessed, as also having it
inculcated so much to her of Witchcraft. And as to the next Objection about
company flocking, etc. I do profess my Ignorance, not knowing what you mean by
it. And Sir, that most of the Questions did carry with them a presupposing the
things inquired after, is evident, if there were such as those relating to the
Black*man and a Book, and about her hearing the Prayer, etc. (related in the
said Narrative, which I find no Objection against.) As to that which is said of
mentioning your self first discoursings and your hopes that your breeding was
better (I doubt it not) nor do I doubt your Father might first apply himself to
others; but my intelligence is, that you first spoke to the Afflicted or
Possessed, for which you had the advantage of a nearer approach. The next two
Objections are founded upon mistakes: I find not in the Narrative any such
Question, as how many Witches sit upon you? and that her Breast was not
covered, in which those material words, (with the Bed-Cloaths) are wholly
omited; I am not willing to retort here your own Language upon you; but can
tell you, that your own discourse o^ it publicly, at Sir W. P's Table, has
much more contributed to, etc. As to the Reply, if she could she would not
tell, whether either or both spoke it it matters not much. Neither does the
Narrative say you fel^ the live thing on her Belly; tho I omit now to say what
further demonstrations there are of it. As to that Reply, that is only her
fancy, I find the word (her) added. And as to your Fathers feeling for the live
Creature after you had felt it, if it were on the Bed it was not so very fa^
from her. And for the length of his Prayer, possibly your Witnesse^ might keep
a more exact account of the time than those others, and ^ stand not for a few
Minutes. For the rest of the Objections I suppos^ them of less moment, if less
can be (however shall be ready to receiv^ them, those matters of greatest
concern I find no Objection against) these being all that yet appear, it may be
thought that if the Narrative be no^ fully exact, it was as near as Memory
could bear away; but should be glad to see one more perfect (which yet is not
to be expected* seeing none writ at the time) You mention the appendix, by
which I understand the Second Visit, and if you be by the possessed belyed (as
being half an hour with her alone (excluding her own Mother) and as telling her
you had Prayed for her Nine times that day, and that now was her Laughing time,
she must Laugh now) I can see no Wonder in it,; what can be expected less from
the Father of Lies, by whom, you Judge, she was possessed.

And besides the above Letter, you were pleased to send me another Paper
containing several Testimonies of the Possessed being lifted up, and held a
space of several Minutes to the Garret floor, etc. but they omit giving the
account, whether after she was down they bound her down: or kept holding her:
And relate not how many were to pull her down, which hinders the knowledge what
number they must be to be stronger than an Invisible Force. Upon the whole, I
suppose you expect I should believe it; and if so, the only advantage gained,
is that which has been so long controverted between Protestants and Papists,
whether Miracles are ceast, will hereby seem to be decided for the latter; it
being, for ought I can see, if so, as true a Miracle as for Iron to swim, and
that the Devil can work such Miracles.

But Sir, leaving these little disputable things, I do again pray that you
would let me have the happiness of your approbation or confutation of that
Letter before referred to.

And now, Sir, that the God of all Grace may enable us Zealously to own his
Truths, and to follow those things that tend to Peace, and that your self may
be as an useful Instrument in his hand, effectually to ruin the remainders of
Heathenish and Popish Superstitions, is the earnest desire and prayer of yours
to command, in wha^ I may,

R. C.
Postscript.
Sir, I here send you the Copy of a paper that lately came to my Hands, which
though it contains no Wonders, yet is remarkable, and Runs thus.

An account of what an Indian told Captain Hill, at Saco-Fort.

THE Indian told him that the French Ministers were better than the English,
for before the French came among them there were a great many Witches among the
Indians, but now there weri none, and there were much Witches among the English
Ministers, as Buroughs, who was Hanged for it.

Were I disposed to make reflections upon it, I suppose you will Judge the
Field large, enough, but I forbear, as above.

R. C.




Mr. Cotton Mather. Boston Feb. the 19th. 1693. R Everend Sir,
Having received as yet no Answer to mine of Novem. the 24th. except an offer
to peruse Books, etc. relating to the Doctrinals therein contained: Nor to my
last of January the 18th. In which I did again pray that if I erred I might be
showed it by Scripture, Viz. in believing that the Devils bounds are set,
which he cannot pass; That the Devils are so full of Malice that it cant be
added to by Mankind: That where he has power he neither can nor will omit
Executing it; That it is only the Almighty that sets bounds to his rage, and
that only can commissionate him to hurt or destroy any; And consequently to
detest as erroneous and dangerous, the belief that a Witch can Commissionate
Devils to Afflict Mortals; That he can at his or the Witches pleasure assume
any shape: That Hanging or Chaining of Witches can lessen his Power of
Afflicting, and restore those that were, at a distance, Tormented by him. And
whether Witchcraft ought to be understood now in this Age, to be the same that
it was when the Divine Oracles were given forth, particularly, those quoted by
Mr. Gaul in that cited Head ( Wonders of the Invisible World; Mr. Gauls IV.
Head, to discover Witches) which do so plainly show a Witch, in Scripture-sense
to be one that malign, etc. And that pretend to give a Sign in order to
seduce, etc. For I have never understood in my time, any such have Suffered as
Witches, though sufficiently known; But the only Witch now inquired after, is one
that is said to become so by making an Explicit Covenant with the Devil, i. e.
the Devil appearing to them, and making a compact mutually, promising each to
other, testified by their signing his Book, a material Book, which he is said
to keep, and that thereby they are Entitled to a power, not only to Afflict
others, but such as is truly exorbitant, if not highly intrenching upon the
prerogative of him who is the Sovereign being; For who is he that says, and it
comes to pass, when the Lord commands i^ not.

Such explicit Covenant being as is said in this Age reckoned essential to
complete a Witch: Yet I finding nothing of such covenant (or power thereby
obtained) in Scripture, and yet a Witch therein so fully described, do pray
that if there be any such Scriptures I may be directed to them, for as to the
many Legends in this case I make no account of them; I Read indeed of a
Covenant with Death and with Hell, but suppose that to be in the Heart (or
Mental) only, and see not what use such explicit one can be of between Spirits,
any further than as it is a Copy of that Mental which is in the Heart. The dire
effects and consequences of such notions may be found written in indellible
Roman Characters of Blood in all Countries where they have prevailed, and what
can less be expected when Men are Indicted for that, which, as it is impossible
to prove so, for any to clear himself off, Viz, Such explicit Covenant with the
Devil, and then for want of better Evidence, must take up with such as the
Nature of such secret Covenant can bear, as Mr. Gaul has it, i. e. Distracted
Stories, and strange and Foreign Events, etc. Thereby endeavoring to find it,
tho by it is but supposed effects; By the same Rules that one is put to purge
himself of such Compact, by the same may all Mankind.

This then being so Important a case, it concerns all to know what Foundations
in Scripture is laid for such a Structure; For if they are deficient of that
Warrant, the more Eminent the Architects are the more dangerous are they
thereby rendered, etc. These are such considerations as I think will vindicate
me in the esteem of all Lovers of Humanity, in my endeavors to get them
cleared. And to that End, do once more pray, that you would so far oblige me
as to give your Approbation or Confutation of the above Doctrinals; But if you
think silence a Virtue in this case, I shall (I suppose) so far comply with it
as not to loose you any more time to look over my papers. And if any others
will so far oblige me, I shall not be ungrateful to them; Praying God to guide
and prosper you, I am, Sir, yours to my power, [ He that does Truth, comes to
the Light.]

R. C.


Mr. Cotton Mather. Boston April the 16 th. 1694. REverend Sir,
Having as yet Received no Answer to my last, touching the Doctrinals therein
referred to, though at the delivery of it, you were pleased to promise the
Gentleman that presented it, that I should have it, and after that you
acquainted the same Gentleman that you were about it. The length of time since
those promises, makes me suppose you are preparing something for the Press (for
I would not question your veracity do think it may not be amiss, when you do
any thing of that Nature for the public view, that you also explain some
passages of some late Books of yours and your Relations, which are hard to be
understood, to Instance in a few of many Wonders of the Invisible-World, page
17. [Plagues are some of these woes with which the Devil causes our Trouble,
page 18. Hence come such Plagues as that besom of destruction which within our
Memory swept away such a throng of People from one English City, in one
Visitation. Wars are some of those wo^s with which the Devil causes our
Trouble, page 16. Hence it is that the Devil like a Dragon keeping a Guard upon
such Fruits as would refresh a Languishing World, has hindered Mankind for many
Ages from hitting upon those useful Inventions. The Benighted World must Iogg
on for thousands of Years, without the knowledge of the Lodestone, Printing
and Spectacles, page 10, It is not likely that every Devil does know every
Language. It Is p^ssible the Experience, or if I may call it so, the Education of
all Devils is not alike; Cases of Conscience, page, 63. The Devil has inflicted
on many the Disease called Lycanthropia.

Memor. provid. Relat. To Witch Disc. on Wit. page, 24. I am also apt to think
that the Devils are seldom able to hurt us in any of our exterior concerns,
without a Commission from some of our fellow Worms. when foul Mouthed Men shall
wish harm to their Neighbors, they give a Commission to the Devil to perform
what they desire, and if God should not Mercifully prevent, they would go through
with it; Hear this you that in wild Passion will give every thing to the
Devil; Hear it you that bespeak a Rot, a Pox, or a Plague, on all that shall
provoke you; I here Indict you as Guilty of Hellish Witchcraft in the Sight of
God. More Wonders of the Invisible World, page 49. They each of them have their
Specter or Devils Commissioned by them and representing of them, page 14. But
such a permission from God for the Devil to come down and break in upon
Mankind, must often times be accompanied with a Commission from some of Mankind
it self, Enchantments Encountered. These Witches have driven a Trade of
Commissionating their confederate Spirits, to do all sorts of Mischiefs to
their Neighbors, page 50. They have bewitched some even so far, as to make
them Self-destroyers, page 144. As I am abundantly satisfied, that many of the
Self-murders committed here, have been the effects of a cruel and Bloody
Witchcraft, letting fly Demons upon the Miserable Seneca's, page, 51. We have
seen some of their Children so Dedicated to the Devil, that in their Infancy
the Imps have Sucked them. Cases of Conscience, page 24. They bequeath their
Demons to their Children as a Legacy, by whom they are often assisted to see
and do things beyond the Power of Nature, page 21. There are in Spain a sort of
People called Zahurs, that can see into the Bowels of the Earth. On Tuesdays
and Fridays] (And to add) that in page 49. The words are [ For the Law of God
allows of no Revelation from any other Spirit but himself, Isa. 8.19. It is a
Sin against God to make us^ of the Devils help, to know that which cannot be
otherways known; And I testify against it as a great transgression, which may
Justly provoke the Holy on^ of Israel, to let loose Devils on the whole Land.
Although the Devils Accusa^tion may be so far regarded, as to cause an inquiry
into the Truth o^ things, Job. 1.11, 12. and 2, 5, 6. Yet not so as to be an
Evidence (...) Ground of Conviction, for the Devils Testimony ought not to be
taken i^ WHOLE Nor In PART] It is a known Truth, that some unwary expressions
of the primitive Fathers, were afterward improved for the Introducing and
establishing of Error, as their calling the Virgin Mary the Mother of God, etc.
Hence occasion and Advantage was taken to propagate the Idolizing of her (the
like might be said of the Eucharist, these assertions, above rehearsed, being
apparently liable to a like Male Construction, and no less dangerous, are
therefore as I said highly needful to be explained, and that in a most public
manner. For were they to be understood Literally and as they are spoken, it
must seem as if the Authors were Introducing among Christians very dangerous
Doctrines, such, as were they asserted by the best of Men, yet ought to be
rejected by all, etc. Viz. That it is the Devil that brings the most of Evils
upon Mankind, by way of Infliction, that do befall them; And that the Witch can
Commissionate him to the performance of these, with many others as dangerous
Doctrines, and such as seem in their tendency to look favorably upon the
Ancient Pagan Doctrine of this Country, who did believe that God did hurt to
none, but Good to all, but that the Devil must be pleased by Worshipping, etc.
From whom came all their Miseries, as they believed. For what were all this but
to Rob God of his Glory in the highest manner, and giving it to a Devil and a
Witch; Is it not he that has said shall there be Evil in a City and the Lord
has not done it? But if any are fond of their own notions because some Eminent
Men have before now asserted them; they may do well to compare them with that
excellent Saying, Wonders of the Invisible World, page 7. About this Devil
there are many things, whereof we may reasonably and prositably be inquisitive,
such things I mean as are in our Bibles revealed to us; according to which if
we do not speak on so dark a Subject, but according to our own uncertain and
perhaps Humoursom Conjectures, there is no Light in us. Or that other, page 75.
At every other Weapon the Devil will be too hard for us] For it is most certain
that other Notions, Weapons and Practices have been taken up with; And that the
event has been answerable, the Devil has been too hard for such as have so
done. I shall forbear to instance from the Dogmatical part; and shall mention
some practices that as much need explaining. Mem. provid. Relat. to Witch. page
29, 30, 31. Where account is given that it was Prayed for that the afflicted
might be able to declare, whom she apprehended herself Afflicted by, together
with the Immediate Answer of such Prayer. To this you once Replied when it was
mentioned to you, that yon did not then understand the wiles of Satan.

To which I have nothing to object, but it might be a good Acknowledgment; But
considering that the Book is gone forth into all the World, cannot but think
the Salve ought to be proportioned to the Sore, and the notice of the Devils
wiles as Universal, as the means recommending them. Another Practice is page
20, 21. [ there was one singular passion that frequently attended her, an
Invisible Chain would be clapped about her, and she in much pain and fear cry out
when they began to put it on, once I did with my own hand knock it off as it
began to be fastened about her] If this were done by the Power or Virtue of any
ord'nance of Divine Institution, it is well, but would have been much better if
the Institution had been demonstrated, or was there any Physical Virtue in that
particular Hand. But supposing that neither of these will be asserted by the
Author, I do think it very requisite, that the World may be acquainted with the
Operation, and to what Art or Craft to refer their Power of Knocking off of
Invisible Chains.

And thus, Sir, I have Faithfully discharged (what in this I took to be my
Duty) and am so far from doing it to gain applause, or from a Spirit of
Contradiction, that I expect to procure me many Enemies thereby, (but as in
case of a Fire) where the Glory of God, and the Good and Welfare of Mankind
are so nearly concerned, I thought it my duty to be no longer an Idle
Spectator; And can, and do say, to the Glory of God, in this whole Affair, I
have endeavored a Conscience void of offense, both toward God and toward
Man; And therein at the least have the advantage of such as are very Jealous
they have done so much herein, as to Sin in what they have done, viz. In
sheltring the Accused, such have been the Cowardice and Fearfulness, whereunto
the regard to the Dissatisfaction of other People have precipitated them; Which
by the way must needs acquaint all, that for the future other measures are
resolved upon (by such) which how Bloody they may prove when opportunity shall
offer, is with him who orders all things, according to the counsel of his own
Will: And now that the Song of Angels may be the Emulation of Men, is the
earnest Desire, and Prayer, of Sir, Yours to Command in what I may,

Glory to God in the Highest, and on Earth Peace and Good Will toward Men. R.
C.


Mr. B. Boston March the 1 st. 1694. Worthy Sir,
AFter more than a Years waiting for the performance of a reiterated promise
from one under singular obligations, and a multitude of advantages to have done
it sooner, The utmost compliance I have met with, is (by your Hands) the sight
of four Sheets of recinded Papers, but I must first be obliged to return them
in a Fortnight, and not Copied, which I have now complied with: And having read
them am not at all Surprised at the Authors Caution in it, not to admit of such
crude matter and impertinent absurdities, as are to be found in it to spread.
He seems concerned that I take no notice of his several Books, wherein, as he
says, he has unanswerably proved things to which I might reply, that I have
sent him Letters of quotations out of those Books, to know how much of them he
will abide by, for I thought it hard to affix their Natural consequences till
he had opportunity to explain them. And says that he had sent me (Mr. Baxters
Worlds of Spirits) an ungainsayable Book, etc. (tho I know no ungainsayable
Book, but the Bible) which Book I think no Man that has read it will give such
a Title to but the Author, he speaks of my reproaching his public Sermons, of
which I am not conscious to my self, unless it be about his interpretation of a
Thunder Storm (that broke into his House) which savoured so much of Enthusiasm.

As to those papers, I have (as I read them) noted in the Margin where, in a
hasty reading, I thought it needful, of which it were unreasonable for him to
complain; seeing I might not take a Copy, thereby to have been enabled, more at
leisure to digest what were needful to be said on so many Heads; and as I have
not flattered him, so for telling what was so needful, with the hazard of
making so many Enemies by it, I have approved my self one of his best Friends:
And besides his own sense of the weakness of his Answer, testified by the
prohibition above, he has wholly declined answering to most of those things
that I had his promise for, and what he pretends to speak to, after mentioning,
without the needful Answer or Proof drops it.

His first main Work is after his definition of a Witch, which he never proves
(without saying any thing to Mr. Gauls Scriptural description, though so often
urged to it, and though himself has in his Book recommended and quoted it) is to
magnify the Devils Power, and that as I think beyond and against the
Scripture, this takes him up about 11 Pages, and yet in Page 22 again returns
to it, and as I understand it, takes pa^^ with the Pharisees against our
Savior in the Argument, for they charge him that he cast out Devils through
Beelzebub, Our Saviors Answer is, Mat. 12,25. Every Kingdom divided against it
self is brought to desolation; and every City or House divided against it self,
shall not stand, and if Satan cast out Satan, he is divided against himself,
how shall then his Kingdom stand: And yet notwithstanding this Answer together
with what follows, for further Illustration, our Author is it seems resolved to
assert, that our Savior did not in this Answer deny that many did so, ( Viz.)
cast out Devils by Beelzebub, and Page 23 grants that the Devils have a
Miraculous Power, but yet must not be called Miracles, and yet can be
distinguished, as he intimates, only by the Conscience or Light within, to the
no small scandal of the Christian Religion.

Though our Savior and his Apostles accounts this the chief or principal proof
of his Godhead, John 20.30, 31. John 10.37, 38. John 5.30. Mark 16.17, 18. Acts
2.2^* and 4, 30. with many others and that Miracles belong only to God, who
also Governs the World, Psalm. 136.4. Ier. 14.22. Isa. 38.8. Psalm. 62.11. Lam.
3.37. Amos. 3.6. But to forbear quoting that which the Scripture is most full
in, do only say that he that dares assert the Devil to have such a Miraculous
Power had need have other Scriptures than ever I have seen. In Page 12. our
Author proceeds and states a question to this effect, If the Devil has such
Powers, and cant exert them without permission from God, what can the Witch
contribute thereunto? Instead of an Answer, to this weighty objection, our
Author first concedes, that the Devil does ordinarily exert their Powers,
without the Witches contributing to it, but yet that to the end to increase
their guilt he may cheat a Witch, by making her believe her self the Author of
them. His next is, if Witchcraft be, as I suppose it is, the skill of applying
the Plastic Spirit of the World, etc. then the consent of the Witch does
naturally contribute to that mischiefs that the Devil does. And his last answer
runs to this effect, Is it not the Ordination of God, that where the Devil can
get the consent of a Witch for the hurting of others, the hurt shall as
certainly be as if they had set Mastiff Dogs upon them, or had given them
Poison into their Bowels; and Gods Providence must be as great in delivering
from one as from the other, and this it seems is not only his Belief, but the
most Orthodox and most learned answer that our Author could pitch upon. If
Witchcraft be as I suppose it is, etc. and is it not the Ordination of God,
that, etc. What is all this but precarious, and begging the question, and a
plain dropping the Argument he cannot manage; however, to amuse the Ignorant,
and to confound the Learned, he hooks in a cramp word, if not a nonentity, (
viz.) Plastic Spirit of the World, for who is it either knows that there is a
Plastick-Spirit, or what it is, or how this can any way serve his purpose.

He then proceeds to Scripture Instances of Witches, and c. and where I thought
it needful, I have, as I said, showed my dissent from his Judgment. He accounts
it unreasonable to be held to the proof of his definition of a Witch, which he
makes to consist in a Covenant with the Devil; and chooses rather a tedious
process about a Pistol to defend him from it, which indeed is one particular
way whereby Murder has been Committed, and so the Door becomes Culpable; But
his definition of a Witch, which as I said, still remains to be proved, is to
this effect, That a Witch is one that Covenants with, and Commissions Devils to
do mischiefs, that she is one in Covenant, or that by Virtue of such Covenant
she can Commissionate him to Kill. The not bringing Sculpture to prove these
two, is a sufficient demonstration there is none; and so that our Author leaves
off just where he began, viz. in a bare Assertion, together with his own
Biggoted experiences, hinting also at multitudes of Histories to confirm him in
the belief of his definition. Here being all that I take notice of to be
considerable.

And now, Sir, If you think fit improve your Friendship with the Author for the
Glory of God, the Sovereign Being, the good and welfare of Mankind, and for
his real and true Interest, as you see it convenient, put him in mind, That the
Glory of God is the End why Mankind was made, and why He has so many
Advantages to it. That the Flames we have seen threatening the utter extirpation
of the Country, must own their Original to these dangerous Errors (if not
Heresies) which if they remain Unextinguished, may and most likely will be
acted over again.

That it is more Honor to own an Error in time, than tenaciously after full
Conviction to retain it. But if our Author will again Vindicate such matters,
please to acquaint him, that I shall not any more receive his Papers, if I may
not Copy and use them; and that when he does, instead of such abstruse matters,
I still pray his determination in those things I have his promise for. And thus
begging Pardon for thus long detaining of you, I am, Sir, yours to Command,

R. C.


To the Ministers, whether English, French or, Dutch,
Boston March 18. 1694:
I Having had not only occasion, but renewed provocation to take a view of the
Mysterious Doctrines, which have of late been so much contested among us, could
not meet with any that had spoken more, or more plainly the sense of those
Doctrines (relating to the Witchcraft) than the Reverend Mr. C. M. but how
clearly and consistent, either with himself or the truth, I meddle not now to
say, but cannot but suppose his Strenuous and Zealous asserting his opinions,
has been one cause of the dismal Convulsions we have here lately fallen into;
Supposing that his Books of Memorable Providence, relating to Witchcraft, as
also his Wonders of the Invisible World, did contain in them things not
warrantable, and very dangerous, I sent to him a Letter of Quotations out of
those Books, and c.

That so if it might have been, I might understand what tolerable Sense he
would put upon his own words, which I took to be a better way of Proceeding,
than to have affixed what I thought to be their natural consequences, and left
I might be Judged a Skeptic I gave him a full and free account of my belief
relating to those Doctrines, together with the grounds thereof; And prayed him
that if I erred I might be showed it by Scripture, and this I had his
reiterated promise for. But after more than a Years waiting for the performance
thereof, all that is done in compliance therewith, is that in Feb. last, he
sent me four sheets of his writing as his belief, but before I might receive it
I must engage to deliver it back in a Fortnight and not Copied. A Summary
accoun of which I shall give you, when I have first acquainted you what the
Doctrines were which I sent to him for his concurrence with, or confutation of,
and to which I had his promise, as above.

These by way of Question, ( Viz.) whether that fourth Head cited and
recommended by himself (In Wonders of the Invisible World, of Mr. Gauls) ought
to be believed as a truth, which runs thus; Among the most unhappy
circumstances to Convict a Witch, one is a Maligning and Oppugning the Word,
Work, and Worship of God, and seeking by any Extraordinary sign to seduce any
from it, D^u. 13.1, 2. Mat. 24. 24. Acts 13. 8, 10. 2 Timothy 3, 8. do but mark
well the places, and for this very property of thus oppugning and perverting,
they are all there concluded arrant and absolute Witches.

And if in Witchcraft the Devil by means of a Witch does the Mischief, how it is
possible to distinguish it from Possession, both being said to be performed by
the Devil, and yet without an Infallible distinction there can be no certainty
in Judgment. And whether it can be proved that the Jewish Church in any Age
before, or in our Saviors time, even in the time of their greatest Apostasy
did believe that a Witch had power to Commissionate Devils to do Mischief.

So much to the Questions. These were sent as my belief: That the Devils bounds
are set, that he cant pass; That the Devils are so full of Malice, that it
cant be added to by Mankind; That where he has power he neither can nor will
omit executing it; That it is only the Almighty that lets bounds to his rage and
that only can Commissionate him to hurt or destroy. And now I shall give you
the Summary account of his four sheets above mentioned, as near as memory could
recollect, in Ten Particulars.

1. That the Devils have in their Natures a power to work Wonders and Miracles;
particularly that the Pharisees were not mistaken in asserting that the Devils
might be cast out by Beelzebub; and that our Saviors Answer does not oppose
that Assertion; and that he has the Power of Death, that he can make the most
Solid things Invisible; and can Invisibly bring P^yson and force it down
Peoples Throats.

2. That to assert this Natural, wonderful Power of the Devil, makes most for
the Glory of God, in preserving Man from its effects,

3. Yet this Power is restrained by the Almighty, as pleases him.

4. That a Witch is one that makes a Covenant with the Devil.

5. That by virtue of such a Covenant, she arrives at a Power to Commissionate
him,

6. That God has ordained, that when the Devil is called upon by the Witch,
though he were before restrained by the Almighty, the desired mischiefs
ordinarily shall as certainly be performed, as if the Witch had lodged Poison
in the Bowels of her Neighbor; or had set Mastiff Dogs on them.

7. That the Witches Art of applying the Plastic Spirit of the World to
unlawful purposes, does Naturally contribute to the mischiefs done by the Devil.

8. That that God which restrained an Abimelich and a Laban from hurting, does
also restrain the Witch from Calling upon or Improving the Devil, when he will
not have his Power so exerted.

9. That to have a Familiar Spirit, is to be able to cause a Devil to take
bodily shapes, whereby either to give responses, or to receive orders for doing
mischief.

10. That this is the Judgment of most of the Divines in the Country, whether
English, Dutch or French.

This as I said, I took to be most material in the four sheets sent to me as
his belief, and is also all the performance he has yet made of his several
promises; which ten Articles being done only by memory, lest through mistake or
want of the Original, I might have committed any errors, I sent them to him
that, if there were any, they might be rectified: But instead of such an
Answer, as might be expected from a Minister and a learned Gentleman, one Mr. W
-- showed me a Letter writ by Mr. C. M -- to himself, which I might read, but
neither borrow nor Copy, and so, if I were minded, could give but a short
account of it.

And passing over his hard Language, which, as I am conscious to my self; I
never deserved (relating to my writing in the margin of the four sheets; and to
these ten Articles) so I hope I understand my Duty, better than to imitate him
in retorting the like. Among his many words in his said Letters, I meet with
two small Objections; one is against the word ( Miracle) in the first Article,
the word, I say, not the matter, for the works he artributes to the Devil are
the same in their being above or against the Course of Nature and all Natural
causes, yet he will not admit of these to be called Miracles, and hence he
reckon's it the greatest difficulty he meets with in this whole affair, to
distinguish the works of the Devil from Miracles. And hence also he concedes to
the Devil the Power to make the most Solid things Invisible, and Invisibly to
bring Poison and force it down Peoples Throats, and c. Which I look upon to be
as true Miracles as that. 2 Kings 6. 18. and this is the sense I understand the
word in, and in this sense, he himself in the four sheets admits it; for he has
an objection to this effect, Viz. [If the Devils have such power, and c. then
Miracles are not ceased; and where are we then? (his Answer is) Where! even
just where we were before, say I] so that it seems the only offense here is at
my using his words. His second objection (for weight) is against the whole
ninth Article, and wonders how it is possible for one Man so much to
misunderstand another; Yet as I remember, he speaking of the Witch of Endor in
the said four sheets says, she had a familiar Spirit, and that [a Spirit
belonging to the Invisible World, upon her calling appeared to Saul] and c. and
if so it is certain he gave responses, he also tells of Balaam, that it was
known that he could set Devils on People to destroy them, and therefore how
this objection should bear any Force I see not; The rest of the objections are
of so small weight that once reading may be sufficient to clear them up, and if
this be not so, he can, when he pleases, by making it Public together with the
Margins I writ, Convince all People of the truth of what he asserts; But here
it is to be noted, that the 2 d. 3 d. 4 th. and 5 th. Articles he concedes to,
as having nothing to object against them, but that they are his belief; and
that the 6 th. and 7 th. he puts for Answer to an objection which he thus
frames, Viz. If the Devil have such powers but cannot exert them but by
permission from God, what can the Witch contribute thereto. And thus I have
faithfully performed what I undertook, and do solemnly declare, I have not
intentionally in the least wronged the Gentleman concerned, nor designed the
least blemish to his Reputation; but if it stands in competition with the Glory
of God, the only Almighty Being, his truths and his Peoples welfare, I suppose
these too valuable to be trampled on for his sake, though in other things I am
ready to my power (though with denying some part of my own interest) to serve
him. Had this Gentleman declined or detracted his four sheets, I see not but he
might have done it, and which I think there was cause enough for him so to have
done, but to own the four sheets, and at the same time to disown the Doctrine
contained in them, and this knowing that I have no Copy, renders the whole of
the worse aspect.

And now I shall give you a further account of my Belief, when I have first
premised, that it is a prevailing Belief in this Country, and elsewhere, that
the Scriptures are not full in the Description of, and in the way and means how
to detect a Witch, tho possitive in their Punishment to be by Death; and that
hence they have thought themselves under a necessity of taking up with the
Sentiments of such Men or Places that are thought worthy to give rules to
detect them by: And have accordingly practiced, viz. In searching for Tets for
the Devil to suck; Trying whether the suspected can say the Lords Prayer; And
whether the Afflicted falls at the sight, and rises at the touch of the
supposed Witch; As also by the Afflicted or Possessed giving account who ^s the
Witch.

Tou^h^ng these my belief is, that it is highly Derogatory to the wisdom of the
Wise Lawgiver, to ascert* That he has given a Law by Moses, the Penalty whereof
is Death; and yet no direction to his People, whereby to know and detect the
culpable, till our Triumvirate Mr. Perkins, Gaul, and Bernard, had given us
their receipts, and that that fourth Head of Mr. Gauls, being so well proved by
Scripture is a truth, and contains a full and clear Testimony, who are Witches
culpable of Death, and that plainly and from Scripture, yet not excluding any
other branch, when as well proved by that infallible rule. And that the going
to the Afflicted or Possessed, to have them Divine who are Witches by their
Specteral sight, is a great wickedness, even the Sin of Saul (for which he also
Died) but with this difference, the one did it for Augury, or to know future
Events, the other in order to take away Life; and that the searching for Tets;
the experiment of their saying the Lords Prayer; the falling at the sight and
rising at the touch of the supposed Criminal, being all of them foreign from
Scripture, as well as reason, are abominations to be abhorred and repented of.
And that our Salem Witchcraft, either respecting the Judges and Juries, their
tenderness of Life, or the Multitude and pertinency of witnesses, both
Afflicted and Confessors, or the Integrity of the Historians, are as Authentic,
and made as certain as any ever of that kind in the World; and yet who is it
that now sees not through it, and that these were the Sentiments that have
procured the sorest Affliction, and most lasting infamy that ever befell this
Country, and most like so to do again, if the same notions be still
entertained and finally that these are those last times, of which the Spirit
speaks expressly, Tim. 4.1. And now ye that are Fathers in the Churches, Guides
to the People, and the Salt of the Earth.

I beseech you consider these things; and if you find the Glory of God
diminisht by ascribing such power to Witches and Devils; His truths opposed by
these notions; and his People aspersed in their Doctrines and Reputations, and
endangered in their Lives; I dare not dictate to you, you know your duty as
Watchmen, and the Lord be with you.

But if you find my belief contrary to sound Doctrine, I entreat you to show it
me by the Scripture; And in the mean time blame me not if I cannot believe that
there are several Almighties; for to do all sorts of wonders, beyond and above
the Course of Nature, is certainly the work of Omnipotency. So also, he that
shall Commissionate or Empower to these, must also be Almighty; and I think it
not a sufficient Salvo, to say they may be restrained by the most High; and
hope you will not put any hard Construction on these my Endeavors to get
information (all other ways failing) in things so needful to be known; praying
the Almighties Guidance and protection, I am Yours to the utmost of my Power.

R. C.


Mr. Samuel Willard, Boston Sept. the 20 th, 1695. Reverend Sir,
MY former of March the 18th. directed to the Ministers (and which was lodg^d
with your self) containing several Articles, which I sent as my belief, praying
them if I ererd to ^^ew it me by Scripture, I have as yet had no Answer to,
either by word or writing, which makes me gather that they are approved of as
Orthodox, or at least that they have such Foundations, as that none are willing
to manifest any opposition to them: And therefore with submission, and c. I do
think that that late seasonable and well-design^d Dialogue entitled, Some
miscellany Observations, etc. of which, your self is the supposed Author (and
which was so serviceable in the time of it) is yet liable to a male
construction, even to the endangering to revive what it most opposes, and to
bring those practices again on Foot, which in the day thereof were so terrible
to this whole Country: The words which I suppose so liable to Misconstruction,
are Page 14. B. Who informed them? S. The Spectre, B. very good, and that is the
Devil turned Informer. How are good Men like to fare against whom he has
particular Malice!

It is but a Presumption, and Wise Men will weigh Presumptions against
Presumptions. There is to be no Examination without grounds of Suspicion. Some
Persons Credit ought to be accounted too good to be undermined so far as to be
suspected on so slight a ground: and it is an Injury done them to bring them
upon Examination, which renders them openly Suspected. I will not deny but for
Persons already suspected and of Ill fame, it may occasion their being
examined. In which these words ('it is but a presumption, and c.) (and some
Persons credit, and c.) (and I will not deny but for Persons already suspected,
and c.) this I take to be waving to discuss those points, the speaking to which
might at that time have hindered the usefulness and success of that Book,
rather than any declaring the Sentiments of the Au^hor. But notwithstanding
many Persons will be ready to understand this, as if the Author did wholly
leave it with the Justice, to Judge who are Ill Persons, such as the Devils
Accusations may fasten upon; And that the Devils Accusation of a Person, is a
Presumption against them of their guilt; and that upon such presumptions, they
may be had to Examination, if the Justice counts them Persons of ill fame (for
the Author I suppose knows that the bear Examination will leave such a stain
upon them, and well if their Posterity escape it!) as the length of a Holy and
unblameable Life will be found too short to Extirpate. And if the Justice may
go thus far with the Devils Evidence, then the addition of a story or two of
some Cart overset, or person taken Sick after a quarrel, might as well be
thought sufficient for their Commitment, in order to their Trial as it is called
(though this too often has been more like a Stage Play, or a Tragicomical Scene)
and so that otherways useful Book, may prove the greatest Snare to revive the
same practices again.

These things being so liable, as I said, to such male construction, it were
needful that Men might be undeceived, and the matter more fully demonstrated, (
Viz.) That the Devils Accusation is not so much as any presumption against the
Life or Reputation of any person, for how are good Men like to fare, if his
malicious accusations may be taken as a presumption of their Guilt; and that
his acusations as they are no presumption against persons of unspotted Fame, so
neither are they to be heard, or any ways regarded, against persons though
otherways of ill Life, much less for their having long since had their Names
abused by his outcries, or by the Malice of Ill Neighbors; and that Justice
knows no difference of Persons; that if this Evidence be sufficient to bring
one person it is so to bring any other to Examination, and consequently to the
utmost extent of odium, which such Examination will certainly expose them to,
for who can know any other, but that as the one may be Maliciously accused by
Devils and a Devilish report gone before it; so that another who has not been
so much as accused before, being more Cunning or more seeming Religious, might
yet be more guilty: the whole depending upon Invisible Evidence, of which
Invisible stuff though we have had more than sufficient, yet I find (among other
Reverend Persons) your Names to acertain Printed Paper, which runs thus,


Certain Proposals made by the President and Fellows of Harvard College, To the
Reverend Ministers of the Gospel, in the several Churches of New England.
FIrst; To observe and record the more Illustrious Discoveries of the Divine
Providence, in the Government of the World, is a design so holy, so useful, so
justly approved, that the too general neglect of it in the Churches of God, is
as justly to be Lamented.

2. For the redress of that neglect, although all Christians have a Duty
in^umbent on them, yet it is in a peculiar manner to be recommended unto the
Ministers of the Gospel, to improve the special advantages which are in their
Hands, to obtain and preserve the knowledge of such notable occurrences as are
sought out by all that have pleasure in the great Works of the Lord.

3. The things to be esteemed Memorable, are especially all unusual accidents
in the Heaven, or Earth, or Water. All wonderful Deliverances of the
Distressed, Mercies to the Godly, Judgments on the Wicked, and more Glorious
fulfillments of either the Promises or Threatenings in the Scriptures of Truth,
with Apparitions, Possessions, Enchantments, and all extraordinary things,
wherein the Existence and Agency of the Invisible World is more sensibly
demonstrated.

4. It is therefore Proposed, That the Ministers throughout this Land, would
manifest their Pious regards unto the Works of the Lord, and the Opperation of
his hands, by reviving their cares to take Written Accounts of such
Remarkables: But still well Attested with credibled and sufficient Witness.

5. It is desired that the Accounts thus taken of these Remarkables, may be
sent in unto the President, or the Fellows of the College, by whom they shall
be carefully reserved for such a use to be made of them, as may by some fit
Assembly of Ministers be Judged most conducing to the Glory of God, and the
Service of his People.

6. Though we doubt not, that love to the Name of God will be motive enough unto
all good Men, to Contribute what Assistance they can unto this Undertaking; yet
for further Encouragement, some singular Marks of Respects shall be studied for
such good Men, as will actually assist it, by taking pains to Communicate any
Important Passages proper to be inserted in this Collection.

Cambr. March 5. 1693/4
Increase Mather, President. James Allen, Fellow. Char. Morton, Fellow. Sam.
Willard, Fellow. Cotton Mather, Fellow. John Leverett, Fellow. Will. Brattle,
Fellow. Neh. Walter, Fellows.
Here being an Encouragement to all good Men, to send in such remarkables as
are therein expressed, I have sent in the following, not that I think them a
more sensible demonstration of the being of a future State (with rewards and
Punishments) or of Angels good and bad, and c. than the Scriptures of truth
hold forth, and c. Or than any of those other demonstrations God has given us;
for this were Treacherously and Perfidiously to quit the Post to the Enemy; the
Saducee, Deist, and Atheist would hereby be put in a condition so Triumphantly
to deny the Existence and Agency thereof. As that a few Sories told (which at
best must be owned to be fallible and liable to misrepresentations) could not
be thought Infallibly sufficient to demonstrate the truth against them. I have
heard that in Logic a false Argument is reckoned much worse than none; Yet
supposing that a Collection of Instances may be many ways useful, not only to
the present but succeeding Ages, I have sent you the following remarkables,
which have lately occurred, the certainty of which, if any scruple it, will be
found no hard matter to get satisfaction therein: But here, not to insist on
those less occurrents, as the sudden Death of one of our late Justices, and a
like Mortallity that fell upon the two Sons of another of them, with the Fall
of a Man that was making provision to raise the New Northern Bell, which, when
it was up, the first person, whose death it was to signify, was said to be a
Child of him, who by Printing and speaking, had had as great hand in procuring
the late Actions as any, if not the greatest; And the Splitting the Gun at
Salem, where that furious Marshal, and his Father, and c. was rent to pieces,
and c. As to all these it must be owned, that no man knows love or hatred by
all that is before him, much less can they be more sensible demonstrations of
the Existence and Agency of the Invisible World, than the Scriptures of Truth
afford, and c. though the Rich Man in the Parable might think otherwise, and c.
who was seeking to send some more sensible Demonstrations thereof to his
Brethren, and c. In that Tremendous Judgment of God upon this Country, by the
late amazing Prosecution of the People here, under the Notion of Witches;
whereby 20 Suffered as Evil doers (besides those that died in Prison) about ten
more Condemned, and a hundred Imprisoned, and about two hundred more Accused,
and the Country generally in fears, when it would come to their turn to to be
Accused; and the Prosecution and manner of Trial such, that most would have
chosen to have fallen into the hands of the Barbarous Enemy, rather than (under
that notion) into the hands of their Brethren in Church Fellowship; and in
short, was such an Affliction as far exceeded all that ever this Country has
labored under.

Yet in this Mount, God is seen; when it was thus bad with this distressed
People, a full and a sudden stop is put, not only without, but against the
Inclination of many, for out of the Eater came forth Meat: Those very Accusers
which had been improved as Witnesses against so many, by the Providence of the
most High, and perhaps blinded with Malice, are left to accuse those in most
High esteem, both Magistrates and Ministers, as guilty of Witchcraft, which
showed our Rulers, that necessity lay upon them, to confound that which had so
long confounded the Country, as being unwilling themselves to run the same
risque; this that was in the Event of it to this Country, as Life from the
Dead, is most easy with him, in whole Hands are the Hearts of all Men, and was
a very signal deliverance to this whole Country. No less Observable wat it,
that though at the time when the Devils Testimony, by the Affl^cted, was first
laid aside, there were great Numbers of (real or pretended) Afflicted: Yet when
this was once not Judged of Validity enough to be any longer brought into the
Court against the Accused as Evidence, the Affliction generally ceased, and
only some remainders of it in such places; where more Encouragement was given
to the Actors God seeming thereby plainly to Decypher that Sin of going to the
Devil, and c. as the rise and foundation of those Punishments.

And thus, Reverend Sir, I have, as I understand it, performed my Duty herein,
for the Glory of God, and the well being of Men. And for my Freedom used in
this, and former Writings, relating to the Actors in this Tragedy, I shall not
Apologize, but give you the words of one to whom some can afford the title of
Venerable (when he is arguing for that which they have undertaken to ascert,
tho at other times, more Diminitive Epithire must serve) it is the Reverend Mr.
R. Baxter in his Book, The Cure of Church Divisions, p. 257, 258. But (I pray
you mark it) the way of God is to shame the Sinner, how good soever in other
respects, That the sin may have the greater shame, and Religion may not be
shamed, as if it allowed men to sin; Nor God the Author of Religion be
Dishonored; Nor others be without the Warning; But the way of the Devil is, to
hide or justify the sin, as if it were for fear of Disparaging the goodness of
the Persons that committed it; that so he may hereby Dishonor Religion and
Godliness it self, and make men believe it is but a Cover for any Wickedness,
and as consistent with it, as a looser Life is, and that he may keep the Sinner
from Repenting, and blot out the Memory of that warning, which should have
preserved After-Ages from the like falls. Scripture shameth the Professors
(though a David, ^ Solomon, Peter, Noah, or Lot) that the Religion professed may
not be shamed but vindicated: Satan would preserve the Honor of Professors,
that the Religion professed may bear the shame; and so it may fall on God
himself.

And now that all that have had a hand in any horrid and bloody practices may
be brought to give glory to God, and take the due shame to themselves; And that
our Watchmen may no longer seek to palliate (much less give thanks for) such,
and c. (thereby making them their own) and that the people may no longer perish
for want of knowledge in the midst of such means of light; Nor God be any
longer dishonored by false sentiments in these matters, is the earnest desire
and prayer of, Sir, yours to my power*

R. C.

Mr. Cotton Mather. Reverend Sir,
HAving long since sent you some doctrinals as to my belief, together with my
request to you, that if I erred you would be pleased to show it me by
Scripture, viz. That the Devils bounds are set which he cannot pass; That the
Devils are so full of malice that it cannot be added to by mankind; That where
he has power he neither can nor will ^om^ executing it; That it is only the
Almighty that sets bounds to his rage and that only can commissionate him to
hurt and destroy, and c. But instead of such an Answer as was promised, and
justly expected, you were pleased to send me a Book, which you since called an
ungainsayable one; which Book till lately I have not had opportunity so fully
to consider. And to the end you may see I have now done it, I have sent t^ you
some of the remarkables contained in the said Book* Entitled,

The Certainty of the Worl^ of Spirits, written by Mr. R. B. London, Printed.
1691.
IT is therein conceded (Preface) That to see Devils and Spirits ordinarily
would not be enough to convince Atheists. P. 88. Atheists are not to be
convinced by stories, their own senses are not enough to convince them any more
than sense will convince a Papist from Transubstantiation. ( D. Laderd.) P. 4.
No Spirit can do any thing but by God's will and permission. ( Preface) It Is
the free will of Man that gives the Devils their hurting power: And without our
own consent they cannot hurt us. ( It is asserted. P. 222, 223. That it is a
perverse opposition of Popery which causes many Protestants not to regard the
benefits we receive by Angels. And Ministers are faulty, that do not pray and
give thanks to God for their Ministry; and that neglect to teach Believers,
what love and what thanks they owe to Angels. P. 225. Most good people look so
much to God and to Ministers, that they take little notice of Angels, which are
God's great Ministers. P. 234. The Author dares not, as some have done, judge
the Catholic Church to become Antichristian Idolaters, as soon as they gave
too much Worship to Saints and Angels. P. 7. The Blessed Souls shall be like
the Angels, therefore may appear here, P. 3, 4. It Is hard to know whether it be
a Devil or a human Soul that appears, or whether the Soul of a good or a bad
person. P. 61. or the Soul of some dead friend that suffers, and yet retains
love, and c. P. 222. No doubt the Souls of the wicked carry with them their
former inclinations of Covetousness, Revenge, and c. P. 7. When Revengeful
things are done, as on Murderers, Defrauders, and c. it seems to be from the
revengeful wrath of some bad Soul, if it be about Money or Lands, then from a
Worldly minded one; some significations of God's mercy to wicked Souls after
this Life. P. 4. It Is a doubt whether besides the Angels (good and bad) and the
Souls of men, there is not a third sort, called Faries and Goblins. It is
unsearchable to us how far God leaves Spirits to freewill in small things,
suspending his predetermining motion.

P. 246. The Devils have a Mavelous power, if but a silly wretched Witch
consent. P. 10.202. The stories of Witches and Spirits are many ways useful,
particularly to convince Atheists, and confirm Believers, and to prove the
Operation of Spirits. P. 232. To help men to understand that Devils make no
small number of Laws, and Rulers in the World, and are Authors of most of the
Wars, and of many Sermons, and of Books that adorn the Liberaries of learned
men. P. 6.102. The Devil's lying with the Witch is not to be denied, and is
more to Exercise the Lust of the Witch than of the Devil, who can also bring in
another Witch without opening the door, and so perform it by one Witch with
another. P. 105, Witches can raise Storms, sell Winds, and c. as is commonly
affirmed. P. 107. In America it is a common thing to see Spirits day and night.
P. 95, 96, 97, 110. Stories of a Child that could not be cured of Witchcraft,
because the Ember-Weeks were past* Vomited a Knife a span long, Cart. Nails,
and c. and neither eat nor drank fifteen days and nights together; a long piece
of Wood, four Knives, and two sharp pieces of Iron, every one above a span
long, taken out of the Stomach, and c. Hair, Stones, Bones, Vomited, and c.
1000 l. of Blood lost by one person in a years time.

P. 250. A story that makes the Author think it possible that such great things
(as he mentions) should be gotten down and up Peoples Throats,

P. 164. Partial credibility spoils many a good story.

P. 125. The Devil's substance enters into the possessed.

P. 174. Distracted are possessed.

P. 149. A sick Woman while she lay in bed went to see her Children.

P. 153. A Dog appeared like a Fly or a Flea.

P. 165. Some knowing Agents directs Thunder storms, though the Author knows not
who, and that they so often fall on Churches he knows not why.

P. 2, 80. Mr. I. M. and Mr. C. M. Recommended together with B^d^n, etc.

P. 237. A Crispian, if through Ignorance he believes not what he says, may be
a Christian.

In this, Sir, I suppose that if I have not wronged the sense of the Author in
the places quoted (which I trust you shall not find I have done) I cannot be
thought accountable for the Errors or Contradictions to him^self or to the
truth, if any such be found, particularly what he grants in the Preface (of the
free will of Man giving the Devil his hurting power.) This being not only more
than those called Witch-Advocates would desire to be conceded to them: But is a
palpable and manifest overturning the Authors design in all his Witch stories.
For who would consent to have the Devil afflict himself? As also his concession
[that no Spirit can do any thing but by God's will and permission,] I cannot
persuade my self but you must be sensible of their apparent contradictor^ness
to the rest. Others there are of a very ill aspect, as p. 234. the Catholics
are much encouraged in their Adoration of Angels and and Saints. If that were
so Innocent as not to render them Antichristian Idolaters; and that p. 4. if
admitted, will seem to lay an ungainsayable foundation for the ^agan, Indian,
and Diabolists Faith; by telling us it is beyond our search to know how far God
leaves the Devils to free will, to do what they please, in this World, with a
suspension of God^s Predetermination; which if it were a truth, what were more
rational than to oblige him that has such power over us. The Atheists also
would take encouragement if it were granted that we cannot know how far God
suspends his predetermining motion, he would thence affirm, we as little know
that there is a predetermining motion, and consequently whether there be a God,
and p 165. would abundantly strengthen them, when such a Learned, experienced,
and highly esteemed Christian shall own that he knows not who it is that governs
the Thunder-storms; for it might as well discover ignorance, who it is that
disposes of Earthquakes, Gunshot, and Afflictions that befall any, with the
rest of Mundane Events. I design not to remark all that in the Book is
remarkable, such as the departed Souls wandering again hither to put men upon
revenge, and c. favoring so much of Pithagoras his Transmigration of Souls,
and the Separation of the Soul from the Body without death, as in the case of
her that went to see her Children* while yet she did no^ ^^ir out of her Bed,
which seems to be a new speculation* unless it determins in favor of
Transubstantiation, that a Body may be at the same time in several places. Upon
the whole it is ungainsayable, That that Book, though so highly extolled, may be
justly expected to occasion the staggering of the weak, and the hardening of
unbelievers in their Infidelity. And it seems amazing, that you should not only
give it such a recommend, but that you should send it to me, in order as I take
it) to pervert me from the belief of those fundamental Doctrinals. (above
recited) Though I account them more firm than Heaven and Earth. But that which
is yet more strange to me, is that Mr. B -- his Friends did not advise him
better, than in his declined Age to emit such crude matter to the public. As
to the sometime Reverend Author, let his works praise the Remembrance of him;
but for such as are either Erroneous and foisted upon him, or the effect of an
aged Imbecility, let them be detected that they may proceed no further.

I a^ not ignorant that the manner of Education of Youth in, I think* almost
all Christian Schools has a natural tendency to propagate those Doctrines of
Devils heretofore (solely) professed among Ethnicks, and particularly in matters
of Witchcraft, and c. For notwithstanding the Council of Carthage their taking
notice that the Christian Doctors did converse much with the writings of the
Heathens for the gaining of Eloquence, forbad the reading of the Books of the
Gentiles; yet it seems this was only a Bill without a penalty, which their
Successors did not look upon to be binding. He that should in this age take a
view of the Schools, might be induced to believe that the ages since have
thought, that without such Heathen Learning a man cannot be so accomplished, as
to have any pretense to Academick Literature: and that the vulgar might not be
without the benefit of such Learning some of their Disciples have taught them
to speak English, which has given me the opportunity to send you these
following Verses. Virg. Bucolicks: Eclog. 13. -- Eclog. 8. --
Sure love is not the cause their bones appear.
Some eyes bewitch my tender Lambs I fear.
For me these Herbs in Pontus Maeris chose,
There every powerful Drug in plenty grows;
Transformed to a Wolf, I often Maeris saw,
Then into shady Woods himself withdraw:
Often he from deepest Sepulchers would Charm
Departed Souls. And from another Farm,
Into his own ground Corn yet standing take.
Now from the Town my Charms bring Daphnis back.
Vanquished with charms from Heaven the Moon descends
Circe with Charms transformed Ulysses friends:
Charms in the Field will burst a Poysonus Snake,
Now from the Town, etc.
Ovids Metamorphosis: Lib. 7.
Her Arms thrice turns about, thrice wets her crown
With gathered dew, thrice yawns, and kneeling down;
Oh Night! thou friend to secrets you clear fires,
That with the Moon succeed when day retires.
Great Hecate, thou know and aid Imparts,
To our design, you Charms and Magic Arts:
And thou, oh Earth, that to Magicians yields
Thy powerful Simples: Airs, Winds, Mountains, Fields,
Soft murmuring Springs, still Lakes and Rivers clear,
You Gods of Woods, you Gods of night appear;
By you at will, I make swift Streams retire,
To their first Fountain, while their Banks admire.
Seas toss and smooth; clear Clouds with Clouds deform,
Storms turn to Calms, and make a Calm a Storm.
With Spells and Charms, I break the Vipers Iaws,
Cleave solid Rocks, Oaks from their sisures draw;
Whole Woods remove, the Airy Mountains shake;
Earth forced to groan, and Ghosts from Graves awake.
-- her Journey takes,
Lib. 14.
To Rhegium opposite to Zanle's shore,
And treads the troubled Waves, that loudly roar;
Running with unwet Feet on that profound,
As if Sh' had trod upon the solid ground.
This with portentous poisons she pollutes,
Besprinkled with the juice of wicked roots,
In words dark, and perplexed nine times thrice,
Enchantments mutters with her wicked voice, etc.


These Fables of the Heathens (though in themselves of no more validity than the
idle Tales of an Indian, or the Discourses of a known Romancer) are become the
School-learning, not to say the Faith of Christians, and are the Scriptures
brought (instead of that most sure Word) if not to prove Doctrine, yet as
illustrations thereof. Cases of Conscience concerning Witch. page 25.
Remarkable Providence, page 250. (This perhaps might be the cause that in
England a people otherways sober and Religious have for some ages (in a manner
wholly) refused the admitting those so educated to the work of the Ministry.
Such education and practice, have so far prevailed that it has been a means of
corrupting the Christian World, almost to that degree as to be ungainsayable;
for though there is Reason to hope that these Diabolical principles have not so
prevailed (with multitudes of Christians) as that they ascribe to a Witch and a
Devil the Attributes peculiar to the Almighty; yet how few are willing to be
found opposing such a torrent, as knowing that in so doing they shall be sure
to meet with opposition to the utmost, from the many; both of Magistrates,
Ministers and People; and the name of Sadducee, Atheist, and perhaps Witch too
cast upon them most liberally, by men of the highest profession in Godliness.
And if not so learned as some of themselves, then accounted only fit to be
trampled on, and their Arguments (tho both Rational and Scriptural) as fit only
for contempt. But tho this be the deplorable Dilemma; yet some have dared from
time to time (for the glory of God, and the good and safety of Men's lives, and
c.) to run all these Risques. And that God who has said, My glory I will not
give to another, is able to protect those that are found doing their duty
herein against all opposers; and however other ways contemptible can make them
useful in his own hand, who has sometimes chosen the weakest Instruments, that
his power may be the more Illustrious.

And now, Reverend Sir, if you are conscious to your self, that you have in
your principles, or practices been abetting to such grand Errors, I cannot see
how it can consist with sincerity to be so convinced in matters so nearly
^eidting to the glory of God, and lives of Innocents; and at the same time so
much to fear disparagement among Men, as to stifle Consc^^nce, and dissemble an
approving of former sentiments; you know that word, he that honors me I will
honor, and he that despises me shall be ^ightly esteemed. But if you think
that in these matters you have done your duty; and taught people theirs; and
that the Doctrines cited from the (...) Book are ungainsayable: I shall
conclude in almost his words, He that teaches such Doctrine, if through
Ignorance he believes not what he says, may be a Christian: But if he believes
them, he is in the broad path to Heathenism, Devilism, Popery or Atheism. It is
a solemn caution, Gal. 1. 8. But tho we or an Angel from Heaven preach any
other Gospel unto you than that which we have preached unto you, let him be
accursed. I hope you will not misconstrue my Intentions herein, who am,
Reverend Sir, Yours to command, in what I may,

R. C.


To the Ministers in and near Boston. January, 12. 1696.
Christianity had been but a short time in the World, when there was raised
against it, not only open prosest Enemies; but secret and imbred underminers,
who sought thereby to effect that which open force had been so often basled in.

And notwithstanding that primitive purity and sincerity, which in some good
measure was still retained; yet the cunning deceivers and Apostate Heretics
found opportunity to beguile the unwary, and this in fundamentals.

Among others which then sprung up, with but too much advantage in the third
Century, the Maniche did spread his Pestiferous sentiments, and taught the
Existence of two Beings, or Causes of all things, viz. a good and a bad; but
these were soon silenced by the more Orthodox Doctors, and Anathematized by
General Councels. And at this day the American Indians, another sort of Maniche
entertaining, (thus far) the same belief, hold it their prudence and interest
to please that evil Being, as well by perpetrating other Murders, as by their
Bloody Sacrifices, that so he may not harm them. The Iron teeth of time have
now almost devoured the name of the former, and as to the latter, it is to be
hoped that as Christianity prevails among them, they will abhor such abominable
belief.

And as those primitive times, were not privileged against the spreading of
dangerous Heresy, so neither can any now pretend to any such. Immunity, tho
professing the enjoyment of a primitive purity.

Might a Judgment be made from the Books of the modern learned Divines, or from
the practice of Courts, or from the Faith of many, who call themselves
Christians, it might be modestly, tho sadly concluded that the Doctrine of the
Maniche, at least great part of it, is so far from being forgotten that it is
almost every where professed. We in these ends of the Earth need not seek far for
Instances, in each respect to demonstrate this. The Books here Printed and
recommended not only by the respective Authors, but by many of their Brethren,
do set forth that the Devil inflicts Plagues Wonders of the Invisible World. p.
17.18.
Wars p. 18.
Diseases Cases of Conscience, p. 63.
Tempests Remarkable providence p. 124.
and can render the most solid things invisible Wonders of the Invisible ^orld.
p. 141.
and can do things above and against the course of Nature, and all natural
causes.

Are these the Expressions of Orthodox believers? or are they not rather
expressions becoming a Maniche, or a Heathen, as agreeing far better with these
than with the sacred Oracles our only rule; the whole current whereof is so
Diametrically opposite thereto, that it were almost endless to mention all the
Divine cautions against such abominable belief; he that runs may read, Psalm.
62.11. and 136.4. Lam. 3.37. Amos 3.6. Jer. 4.22. Psalm. 78.26. and 148.6, 8.
Job 38.22 to the 34. v.

These places with a Multitude more, do abundantly testify that the Assertors
of such power to be in the e^il Being, do speak in a dialect different from the
Scriptures, (laying a firm foundation for the Indians adorations, which agrees
well with what A. Ross sets forth, in his Mistag. Poetic. p. 116. that their
ancients did Vsurp the furies and their God Averinci, that they might forbear
to hurt them.)

And have not the Courts in some parts of the World by their practice,
testified their concurrence with such belief, prosecuting to Death many people
upon that notion, of their improving such power of the Evil one, to the raising
of Storms; afflicting and killing of others, tho at great distance from them;
doing things in their own persons above humane strength, destroying of Cattle,
flying in the Air, turning themselves into Cats or Dogs; and c. Which by the
way must needs imply something of goodness to be in that evil Being, who, tho
he has such power, would not exert it, were it not for this people, or else
that they can some way add to this mighty power.

And are the people a whit behind in their beliefs? is there any thing
(abovementioned,) their strong Faith looks upon to be too hard for this evil
Being to effect?

Here it will be answered, God permits it. Which answer is so far an owning the
Doctrine; that the Devil has in his nature a power to do all these things, and
can exert this power, except when he is restrained, which is in effect to say
that God has made Nature to fight against it self. That he has made a Creature,
who has it in the power of his Nature to overthrow Nature; and to act above and
against it. Which he that can believe may as well believe the greatest
contradiction. That Being which can do this in the smallest thing, can do it in
the greatest. If Moses with a bare permission might stretch forth his Rod, yet
he was not able to bring Plagues upon the Egyptians, or to divide the Waters,
without a Commission from the most high; so neither can that evil Being perform
any of this without a Commission from the same power. The Scripture recites
more Miracles wrought by Men than by Angels good and bad: Tho this Doctrine be
so dishonorable to the only Almighty Being, as to ascribe such Attributes to
the Evil one, as are the incommunicable prerogative of him, who is the alone
Sovereign Being; yet here is not all: But as he that Steers by a false Compass,
the further he Sails the more he is out of his way; so though there is in some
things a variation from, there is in others a further progression in, or
building upon the said Doctrine of the Maniche.

Men in this Age are not content barely to believe such an exorbitant power to
be in the nature of this evil Being; but have imagined that he prevails with
many to sign a Book, or make a contract with him, whereby they are enabled to
perform all the things abovementioned. Another Account is given hereof, viz.
that by virtue of such a Covenant they attain power to Commissionate him. And
though the two parties are not agreed which to put it upon, whether the Devil
impowers the Witch, or the Witch commissionate him; yet both parties are agreed
in this, That one way or other the mischief is effected, and so the Criminal
becomes culpable of Death. In the search after such a sort of Criminals, how
many Countries have fallen into such Convulsions. That the Devastations made by
a Conquering Enemy, nor the Plague it self, has not been so formidable.

That not only good persons have thus been blemished in their Reputations, but
much innocent Blood has been shed, is testified even by those very Books,
Cases of Conscience, p. 33. Remarkable provid. p. 179. Memor. provid. p. 28.

And (to add) what less can be expected, when Men having taken up such a
belief, of a covenanting, afflicting and killing Witch; and comparing it with
the Scripture, finding no footsteps therein of such a sort of Witch, have
thereupon desperately concluded; that tho the Scripture is full in it, that a
Witch should not live; yet that it has not at all described the crime, nor
means whereby the culpable might be detected.

And hence they are fallen so far as to reckon it necessary to make use of
those Diabolical and Bloody ways, always heretofore practiced for their
Discovery. As finding that the Rules given to detect other crimes, are wholly
useless for the Discovery of such.

This is that which has produced that deluge of Blood mentioned, and must
certainly do so again, the same belief remaining.

And who can wonder, if Christians that are so easily prevailed with to lay
aside their Sword as useless, and so have lost their Strength (if with Samson)
they are led blind^old into an Idol Temple, to make sport for Enemies and
Infidels, and to do abominable actions, not only not Christian, but against
even the light of Nature and Reason. And now Reverend Fathers, you who are
appointed as Guides to the People, and whose Lips should preserve Knowledge;
who are set as Shepherds, and as Watchmen, this matter appertains to you. I did
write to you formerly upon this head, and acquainted you with my Sentiments,
requesting that, if I erred, you would be pleased to show it me by Scripture;
but from your silence, I gather that you approve thereof. For I may reasonably
pre^u^e, that you would have seen it your duty to have informed me better, if
you had been sensible of any Error. But if in this matter you have acquitted
your selves, becoming the Titles you are dignified with, you have cause of
rejoicing in the midst of the calamities: that afflict a sinning World.

Particularly, if you have taught the People to fear God, and trust in him, and
not to fear a Witch or a Devil. That the Devil has no power to afflict any,
with Diseases, or loss of Cattle, and c. without a Commission from the most
high. That he is so filled with malice, that whatever Commission he may have
against any, he will not fail to execute it. That no mortal ever was, or can be
able to Commissionate him, or to lengthen his Chain in the least, and that he
who can Commissionate him is God; and that the Scriptures of truth not only
assign the punishment of a Witch; but give sufficient Rules to detect them by,
and that (according to Mr. Gauls fourth head) a Witch is one that hates and
opposes the word, work, and worship of God, and seeks by a sign to seduce
therefrom. That they who are guilty according to that head, are guilty of
Witchcraft, and by the Law given by Moses, were to be put to Death. If you have
taught the People the necessity of Charity, and the evil of entertaining so
much as a jealousy against their Neighbors for such crimes, upon the Devils
suggestions to a person pretending to a Spectral (or Diabolical) sight; who
utter their Oracles from malice, frenzy or a Satanical Delusion; that to be
inquisitive of such, whose Specter they see, or who it is that afflicts? In
order to put the accused persons life in question, is a wickedness beyond what
Saul was guilty of in going to the Witch. That to consult with the dead, by the
help of such as pretend to this Spectral sight, and so to get Information
against the life of any person, is the worst sort of Necromancy. That the
pretending to drive away Specter, i. e. Devils, with the hand, or by striking
these to wound a person at a distance, cannot be without Witchcraft, as
pretending to Assign in erder to deceive in matters of so high a Nature. That
it is Ridiculous to think by making Laws against feeding, employing, or
rewarding of evil Spirits, thereby to get rid of them. That their natures
require not sucking to support it.

That it is a horrid Injury and Barbarity to search those parts, which even
Nature it self commands the concealing of, to find some Excrescence to be
called a Tet for these to suck; which yet is said sometimes to appear as a
Fleabite. Finally if you have taught the People what to believe and practice,
as to the probation of the Accused, by their saying, or not saying the Lord's
Prayer; and as to praying that the Afflicted may be able to Accuse. And have
not shunned in these matters to declare the whole mind of God. You have then
well acquitted yourselves (in a time of General Defection) as faithful
Watchmen. But if instead of this, you have some by word and writing propagated;
others recommended such writings, and abetted the false Notions, which are so
prevalent in this Apostate Age, it is high time to consider it. If when
Authority found themselves almost nonplust in such prosecutions, and sent to
you for your Advice what they ought to do, and you have then thanked them for
what they had already done (and thereby encouraged them to proceed in those
very by Paths already fall(...) it so much the nearly concerns you, Cases of
Conscience, Vit.
Ezekiel, 33.2. to 8.

To conclude, this whole People are invited and commanded to humble their Souls
before God, as for other causes, so for the Errors that may have been fallen
into in these prosecutions on either hand, Vid The Proclamation for a F^st, to
be the 14 Instant. as set forth by Authority.
and to pray that God would teach us what we know not, and help us wherein we
have done amiss, that we may do so no more.

This more immediately concerns your selves, for it is not supposed to be
in^ended, that God would show us these things by Inspiration. But that such who
are called to it, should show the mind of God in these things on both hands, i.
e. whether there has been any Error in Excess or Deficiency, or neither in the
one nor the other. And if you do not thus far serve the public, you need not
complain of great Sufferings and unrighteous Discouragements; if People do not
applaud your conduct, Vid. The Declaration, as drawn by the Deputies with the
Assistance of the Ministers; but received a Nonconcurrence.
as you might otherways have expected. But if you altogether hold your peace at
such a time as this is; your silence at least seemingly will speak this
Language; that you are not concerned tho Men ascribe the power and providence
of the Almighty to the worst of his Creatures. That if other Ages or Countries
improve the Doctrines and Examples given them, either to the taking away of the
Life or Reputations of Innocents you are well satisfied. Which that there may
be no shadow of a Reason to believe, but that your Conduct herein may remove
all such Jealousies; and that God would be with you in declaring his whole mind
to the People, is the earnest desire and prayer of, Reverend Sirs, Yours to my
utmost,

R. C.


Mr. Benjamin Wadsworth. Reverend Sir,
AFter that dreadful and severe Persecution of such a Multitude of People,
under the notion of Witches, which in the day thereof, was the sorest trial and
affliction that ever befell this Country. And after many of the principal
Actors, had declared their fears and jealousies, that they had greatly erred in
those Prosecutions. And after a Solemn day of Fasting had been kept, with
Prayers that God would show us what we knew not; viz. what errors might therein
have been fallen into, and c. And after most People were convinced of the Evil
of some, if not of most of those Actions. At such a time as this, it might have
been justly expected that the Ministers would make it their work to Explain the
Scriptures to the People; and from thence to have shown them, the evil and
danger of those false Notions which not only gave some occasion; but in a blind
Zeal hurried them into those unwarrantable practices, so to prevent a falling
into the like for the future.

But instead of this, for a Minister of the Gospel (Pastor of the old Meeting)
to abet such Notions; and to stir up the Magistrates to such Prosecutions, and
this without any cautions given, is what is truly amazing, and of most
dangerous consequence.

It is a truth, Witchcraft is, in the Text then insisted on, reckoned up as a
manifest work of the Flesh. Viz. Gal. 5.19, But it is as true, that in
recounting those other Works (which are indeed Manifest Fleshly Works) the
Magistrate was not stirred up against those others; but as if the rest were
either not to be taken notice of by him, or as if all Zeal against Murder,
Adulteries, and c. was swallowed up, and over-shadowed by this against
Witchcraft.

The description that was then given, was that they were such as made a
Covenant with the Devil, and sold themselves to the evil Angels. It seems
faulty, that when such Minister is inquired of and requested to give the
Reasons, or Grounds in Scripture of such Description; for such Minister to
assert that it is the Inquirers work to disprove it. And his saying further, in
answer that there are many things true, that are not asserted in Scripture;
seems to speak this Language, viz. that the Law of God is imperfect, in not
describing this Crime of Witchcraft, though it be therein made Capital.

These perfect Oracles inform us, concerning Ahab, that he sold himself to work
Wickedness; which may signify to us, that great height of Wickedness he had
arrived at; which yet might be, without his being properly, or justly accounted
a Witch; any more than those that are said to have made a Covenant with Death,
and with Hell, and c. Can it be thought that a^l those, or such as are there
spoken of, are Witches, and ought to suffer as Witches?

As the Servants and People of God, have made a Solemn explicit Covenant with
him, Josh. 24. 25. Nehem. 9.38. and c. So no doubt a Covenant has been made by
Heathen Indian Nations, to serve, and adore the Devil; yet even for this, it
were very hard to affix the Character of a Witch upon each of those Heathen
that so do: And accordingly to Execute them as such. It is also possible, that
some that have been called Christians, have sealed a Writing, signed with their
own Blood, or otherways, thereby Covenanting to be the Devil's Servants, and c.
but from far other grounds, or inducements than what sways with the Indians;
these Heathen hoping to please him, that so he may not harm them. But these
having been Educated and Confirmed in the Belief, that by virtue of such
Covenant, they shall have a Knowledge and Power more than Humane, assisting of
them; this may have prevailed with some to so horrible a wickedness; for none
can seek Evil for Evils sake but as the Serpent in his first tempting of Man,
made use of this of the knowledge of Good and Evil; so to teach Men that such
effects do usually follow such Covenant, is properly the work of the Serpent;
for without this, what inducement, or temptation could they have to make such a
Covenant?

These having thus chosen a false God, may well be accounted of the worst sort
of Idolaters. Yet it does not hence follow that in a Scripture sense, they are
thereby become Witches, till they have, or rather till they pretend to have
assistances answerable: and do thereby endeavor to deceive others, which
endeavors to deceive, by a sign may be without any previous Covenant.

But supposing none of all those several sorts of Covenants was intended, it
remains that the Covenant, that was understood to be intended, in that
Discourse at Old Meeting, is agreeable to the late dangerous Notion that has so
much prevailed Viz. That the Devil appears to the persons', that they and the
Devil make mutual engagements each to other, confirmed by signing to the
Devil's Book; a^^ are from hence enabled, not only to know futurities, and
things done at distance; but are also thereby empowered to do harm to the
Neighbors, to raise Storms, and do things above and against a course of
Nature: This being the notion th^^ has occasioned the shedding so much Blood in
the World, it may be thought to need explaining.

For as Reason knows nothing of an Afflicting, Covenanting Witch; so it seems
as Foreign from Scripture in general, as it is from the Text then insisted on;
which speaks of such wickednesses as are manifestly the works of the flesh: but
such Communication with Spirits, the flesh does manifestly dread even as death
it self. Therefore the usual Salvation of the Holy Angels to the best of Men
was, fear not; and experience shows, that the most wicked, are most afrighted
at the apprehensions of the appearances of Devils; therefore such an explicit
Covenanting cannot be a manifest work of the Flesh.

Yet this is manifest, that the belief of the Witches power to do the things
above mentioned, is an ancient belief of the Heathen. And that from them it was
received by the Papists, as a part of their Faith, who have since improved upon
it, and brought in the notion of a Covenant. But it seems yet a further
improvement lately made by Protestants, that such Witches can Commissionate
Devils to do those mischiefs, thereby setting the Witch in the place of God;
for tho few of the Papists are known to be thus absurd; yet when such Doctrines
have been Preached, and Printed in New England, they have met with none to
oppose; but many to encourage them. Other considerable additions or new
improvements have been made here; as the art to knock off invisible chains with
the hand, to drive away Spect^es ( i. e. Devils) by brushing, spelling words to
the Afflicted, and c. What has followed upon these notions, and upon such
improvements, is needless here to repeat, it were unaccountable to recount that
effusion of Blood that has been hereby occasioned, such remaining Scars, and
such yet bleeding wounds as are to be found; which none can wholly pretend
ignorance of.

And if Blood shall be required of that Watchman that sees the Sword a coming,
and gives not the needful warning; how much more of such as join with the
Enemy, to bring in the Sword to destroy them, over whom he was placed a
Watchman.

And if the law of God be perfect, and exceeding broad, as being given forth by
the Omniscient Lawgiver; it is exceeding high Presumption and arrogance, and
highly destructive to the lives of Innocents, for any to pretend to give
another, and a pretended better description of a crime made thereby Capital,
with new rules to try such offenders by,

Reverend Sir, the matter being of such high concern requires (and it is again
prayed) that you would be pleased to consider, and give the grounds from
Scripture, or Reason of such Definition, or else that you would explode it, as
inconsistent with both. From, Reverend Sir, Yours to my utmost,

R. C.


PART III An Account of the Differences in SALEM Village.
THE Reasons why we withdraw from Communion with the Church of Salem Village,
both as to hearing the word Preached, and from partaking with them at the
Lord's Table, are as follows.

Why we attend not on public Prayer; and preaching the word, there are

1. The Distracting, and Disturbing tumults, and noises made by the persons
under Diabolical Power and delusions; preventing sometimes our hearing,
^nderstanding, and profiting by the word preached. We having after many Trials
and Experiences found no redress in this matter, accounted our selves under ^
necessity to go where we might hear the word in quiet.

2. The apprehension of danger of our selves, being accused as the Devil's
Instruments, to afflict the persons complaining, we seeing those that we have
reason to esteem better than our selves thus accused, blemished; and of their
lives bereaved; for seeing this, thought it our prudence to withdraw.

3. We found so frequent and positive preaching up some Principles and
Practices by Mr. Parris, referring to the dark and dismal mystery of Iniquity
working among us, was not profitable, but offensive.

4. Neither could we in Conscience join with Mr. Parris, in many of the
Requests which he made in Prayer, referring to the trouble than among us a^^
upon us; therefore thought it our most safe and peaceable way to withdraw.

The Reasons why we hold not Communion with them at the Lord's Table, are
because we find our selves justly agrieved, and offended with the Officer, who
does administer, for the Reasons following.

1. From his declared and published Principles; referring to our molestations
from the Invisible World: Differing from the Opinion of the generality of the
Orthodox Ministers of the Country.

2. His easy, and strong Faith and Belief of the beforementioned Accusations,
made by those call the Afflicted.

3. His laying aside that grace (which above all we are to put on,) viz.
Charity toward his Neighbors, and especially those of his Church, when there
is no apparent reason, but for the contrary.

4. His approving and practicing unwarrantable and ungrounded methods, for
discovering what he was desirous to know referring to the bewitched, or
possessed persons, as in bringing some to others, and by them pretending to
inform himself and others, who were the Devil's instruments to afflict the sick
and maimed.

5. His unsafe unaccountable Oath, given by him against sundry of the accused.

6. His not rend^ing to the World so fair (if so true) account of what ^e wrote
on Examination of the afflicted.

7. Sundry unsafe (if sound points of Doctrine delivered in his Preaching)
which we find not warrantable (if Christian.)

8. His persisting in these Principles, and justifying his Practice; not
rendering any satisfaction to us, when regularly desired, but rather offending,
and d^ssatisfying our seives.

We whose Names are under written, heard this Paper read to our Pastor, Mr.
Samuel Parris, the 21 st. of April, 1693.

Nathaniel Iigars^n, Edward Pulman, Aaron Way, William Way, Peter Cloyce,
Seniour. Samuel Nurce, John Iarboll, Thomas Wilkins.
Mr. Parris's Acknowledgment.

FOR as much as it is the undoubted duty of all Christians to pursue Peace,
Psalm. 34.14. even to a reaching of it, if it be possible. Amos 12.18, 19. And
whereas through the righteous, Sovereign, and awful Providence of God, the
grand Enemy to all Christian Peace, has been of late tremendously let loose in
diverse places hereabout, and more especially among our sinful selves, not only
to interrupt that partial peace which we did sometimes enjoy, but also through
his wiles and temptations, and our weakness, and corruptions, to make wider
breaches, and raise more bitter Animosities between too many of us. In which
dark and difficult dispensations, we have been all or most of us of one mind
for a time; and afterward of differing apprehensions. And at last we are but
in the dark, upon serious thoughts of all; and after many Prayers, I have been
moved to present to you (my beloved Flock) the following particulars, in way of
Contribution toward a regaining of Christian Concord; if so be we be not
altogether unappeaseable, irrecosileable, and so destitute of that good Spirit,
which is first pure, then peaceable; gentle, and easy to be entreated, James,
3.17. Viz.

1. In that the Lord ordered the late horrid calamity (which afterward
plague-like spread in many other places) to break out first in my Family, I
cannot but look upon as a very sore rebuke, and humbling providence, both to my
self and mine, and desire some may improve it.

2. In that also in my Family were some of both parties, viz. Accusers and
Accused, I look also upon as an aggravation of that rebuke, as an addition of
Wormwood to the Gall.

3. In the means were used in my Family, though totally unknown to me or mine
(except Servants) till afterward, to raise Spirits and Apparitions in a no
better than a Diabolical way, I do also look upon as a further rebuke of Divine
Providence. And by all, I do humbly own this day before the Lord, and his
People, that God has been righteously spitting in my face, Numb. 12.14. And I
desire to lie low under all this reproach, and to lay my hand on my mouth.

4. As to the management of these Mysteries, as far as concerns my self I am
very desirous upon further light to own any errors I have therein fallen into,
and can come to a discerning of; in the mean while I do acknowledge upon
after-considerations, that were the same troubles again (which the Lord of his
rich mercy for ever prevent) I should not agree with my former apprehensions in
all points. As for Instance,

1. I question not but God sometimes suffers the Devil, as of late, to afflict
in shape of not only Innocent, but Pious persons, or so to delude the Senses of
the afflicted, that they strongly conceit their hurt is from such persons, when
indeed it is not. 2. The improving of one afflicted to inquire by who afflicts
the other, I fear may be, and has been unlawfully used to Satan's great
Advantage. 3. As to my writing, it was put upon me by Authority, and therein I
have been very careful to avoid the wronging of any. 4. As to my Oath I never
meant it, nor do I know how it can be otherwise construed, than as vulgarly,
and every one understood, yea and upon inquiry it may be found so worded also.
5. As to any passage in preaching, or praying in the sore hour of distress and
darkness, I always intended but due Justice on each hand, and that not
according to Men but God; who knows all things most perfectly; however through
weakness, or sore exercise, I might sometimes, yea and possibly sundry times
unadvisedly express my self. 6. As to several that have confessed against
themselves, they being wholly strangers to me, but yet of good account with
better Men than my self, to whom also they are well known, I do not pass so
much as a secret condemnation upon them. But rather seeing God has so amazingly
lengthened out Satan's Chain, in this most formidable outrage, I much more
incline to side with the Opinion of those that have grounds to hope better of
them. 7. As to all that have unduly suffered in these matters, either in their
Persons or Relations, through the clouds of humane weakness, and Satan's wiles
and sophistry, I do truly sympathize with them, taking it for granted, that
such as know themselves clear of this great transgression, or that have
sufficient grounds so to look upon their dear Friends, have hereby been under
those sore trials and temptations, that not an ordinary measure of true grace
would be sufficient to prevent a bewraying of remaining corruption. 8. I am
very much in the mind, and abundantly persuaded that God for holy ends (though
for what in particular, is best known to himself) has suffered the Evil Angels
to delude us on both hands; but how far on the one side, or the other, is much
above me to say, and if we cannot reconcile till we come to a full discerning
of these things, I fear we shall never come to agreement, or at soonest not in
this World. 9. Therefore in fine, the matter being so dark and perplexed, as
that there is no present appearance, that all God's Servants should be
altogether of one mind in all circumstances, touching the same: I do most
heartily, fervently, and humbly beseech pardon of the merciful God, through the
Blood of Christ for all my mistakes and trespasses in so weighty a matter. And
also all your forgiveness of every offense, in this or other affairs, wherein
you see or conceived that I have erred and offended, professing in the presence
of the Almighty God, that what I have done has been as for substance as I
apprehended was duty, however through weakness. Ignorance, and c. I may have been
mistaken. I also through grace promising each of you the like of me; so again I
beg, entreat, and beseech you, that Satan, the Devil, the roaring Lion, the old
Dragon, the Enemy of all Righteousness, may no longer be served by us, by our
Envy and Strifes, where every evil work prevails whilst these bear sway, James,
3.14, 15, 16. But that all from this day forward may be covered with the mantle
of love, and we may on all hands forgive each other heartily, sincerely and
thoroughly, as we do hope and pray, that God for Christ's sake would forgive
each of our selves, Mat. 18.21. to the end. Colos. 3.12, 13. Put on therefore
(as the elect of God, holy and beloved) bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness
of mind, meekness, long-suffering; Forbearing one another, and forgiving one
another, if any man have a quarrel against any, even as Christ forgave you, so
also do ye. Ephesians. 4.31, 32. Let all bitterness, and anger, and clamor, and
evil-speaking be put away from you with all malice. And be ye kind one to
another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake
has forgiven you. Amen, Amen.
Samuel Parris.

Given to the Dissenting Brethren, for their consideration of, as their
request. Nov. 26. 1694.

The Elders and Messengers of the Churches met at Salem Village, April, 3.
1695. to consider and determine what is to be done, for the composure of the
present and unhappy differences in that place. After solemn invocation of God
in Christ for his direction, do unanimously declare, as follows, viz.

1. WE judge that all be it in the late and dark time of the confusions,
wherein Satan had obtained a more than ordinary liberty, to be sifting of this
Plantation, there were sundry unwarrantable, and uncomfortable steps, taken by
Mr. Samuel Parris, the Pastor of the Church in Salem Village, then under the
hurrying distractions of amazing Afflictions; yet the said Mr. Parris, by the
good hand of God brought unto a better sense of things, has so fully expressed
it, that a Christian charity may and should receive satisfaction therewith.

2. In as much as diverse Christian Brethren, in the Church of Salem Village,
have been offended at Mr. Parris, for his conduct in the time of their
difficulties, which have distressed them; we now advise them Charitably to
accept the satisfaction which he has tendered in his Christian acknowledgment
of the Errors therein committed; yea to endeavor, as far as it is possible,
the fullest reconciliation of their minds unto communion with him, in the whole
Exercise of his Ministry, and with the rest of the Church, Matthew. 6.12, 14.
Luke 17.3. James 5.16.

3. Considering the extreme trials and troubles, which the dissatisfied
Brethren in the Church of Salem Village have undergone, in the day of sore
temptation, which has been upon them; we cannot but advise the Church to treat
them with bowels of much compassion, instead of all more critical, or rigorous
proceedings against them for the Infimities discovered by them, in such an
heart breaking day; and if after a patient waiting for it, the said Brethren
cannot so far overcome the uneasiness of their Spirits, in the remembrance of
the disasters that have happened, as to sit under his Ministry; we advise the
Church with all tenderness to grant them admission to any other Society of the
Faithful, whereunto they may be desired to be dismissed. Gal. 6.1, 2. Psalm.
103.13, 14. Job 19.21.

4. Mr. Parris having (as we understand) with much fidelity and integrity
acquitted himself, in the main course of his Ministry, since he has been
Pastor of the Church of Salem Village; about his first call whereunto, we look
upon all contestations now to be both unreasonable and unseasonable: And our
Lord having made him a blessing to the Souls of not a few, both old and young
in this place, we advise that he be accordingly respected, honored and
supported, with all the regards that are due to a painful Minister of the
Gospel. 1 These. 5.12, 13. 1 Timothy 5.17.

5. Having observed that there is in Salem Village, a Spirit full of contention
and animosity, too sadly verifying the blemish which has heretofore lain upon
them: And that some complaints against Mr. Parris have been either causeless or
groundless, or unduly aggravated; we do in the name and fear of the Lord
solemnly warn them to consider, whether if they continue to devour one another
it will not be bitterness in the latte^ end, and beware lest the Lord be
provoked thereby utterly to deprive them of those (which they should count)
their precious and pleasant things, and abandon them to all the desolations of
a People that sin away the Mercies of the Gospel. James 3.16. Gal. 5.15: 2 Samuel
2.26. Isa. 5.45. Mat. 21.43.

6. If the Distempers in Salem Village should be (which God forbid) so
incurable, that Mr. Parris after all find that he cannot with any comfort and
service continue in his present Station, his removal from thence will not
expose him to any hard Character with us; nor we hope with the rest of the
People of God, among whom we live. Mat. 10.14. Acts 22.18. All which advice we
follow, with our Prayers that the God of Peace would bruise Satan under our
Feet; now the Lord of Peace himself give you Peace always by all means.

Ios. Bridgham, Samuel Chickley, William Tory, Ios. Boynton, Richard
Middlecutt, John Walley, Ier. Dummer, Neh. Iewitt, Ephr. Hunt, Nath. Williams,
Incr. Mather, Samuel Phillips, James Allen, Samuel Tory, Samuel Willard, Edward
Paison, Cotton Mather.

To the Reverend Elders of the Three Churches of Christ, at Boston, with others
the Elders and Brethren of other Churches, late of a Council at Salem Village.

WE whose Names are hereunto Subscribed, are bold once more to trouble you with
our humble Proposals. That whereas there has been long and uncomfortable
differences among us, chiefly relating to Mr. Parris; and we having, as we
apprehend attended all probable means for acomposure of our troubles; and
whereas we had hopes of an happy Issue, by your endeavors among us, but now
are utterly frustrated of our Expectations, and that instead of uniting, our
rent is made worse, and our breach made wider.

We humbly Query, Whether your selves being straightened of time, might not omit
such satisfactory liberty of debating the whole of our Controversy; whereby
your selves had not so large an opportunity of understanding the Case; nor the
offended so much reason to be satisfied in your advice: We therefore humbly
propose, and give full liberty of proving and defending of what may be charged
on either hand leaving it to your selves to appoint both time and place.

1. That if your selves please to take the trouble with patience once more to
hear the whole Case.

2. Or that you will more plainly advise Mr. Parris, (the Case being so
circumstanced, that he cannot with comfort or profit to himself, or others,
abide in the Work of the Ministry among us) to cease his labors, and seek to
dispose himself elsewhere, as God in his Providence may direct; and that your
selves would please to help us in advising to such a choice, wherein we may be
more unanimous; which we hope would tend much to a composure of our differences.

3. Or that we may without any offense take the liberty of calling some other
approved Minister of the Gospel, to Preach the word of God to us and ou^s: and
that we may not be denied our proportionable privilege, in our public
Disbursments in the place.

So leaving the whole case with the Lord and your selves, we Subscribe our
Names. Signed by 16 young Men, from 16 upwards; and 52 Householders, and 18
Church Members.
This was delivered to the Ministers, May, 3. 1695.
The Copy of a Paper that was handed about touching those Differences.

AS to the contest between Mr. Parris and his Hearers, and c. it may be
composed by a Satisfactory Answer, to Levit. 20.6. And the Soul that turns
after such as have familiar Spirits, and after Wizards, to go a whoring after
them, I will even set my face against that Soul; and will cut him off from
among his People. 1 Chronicles. 10.13, 14. So Saul died for his transgression, which
he committed against the Lord, even against the word of the Lord, which he kept
not, and also for asking Counsil of one that had a familiar Spirit to inquire
of it. And inquired not of the Lord, therefore he slew him, etc.

Some part of the Determination of the Elders and Messengers of the Churches,
met at Salem Village, April, 3. 1695. relating to the Differences there.

IF the Distemper in Salem Village should be (which God forbid) so incurable
that Mr. Parris after all, find that he cannot with any comfort and service
continue in this present station, his removal from thence will not expose him
to any hard Character with us, nor we hope) with the rest of the People of God,
among whom we live, Mat. 10.14. And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear
your words: when you depart out of that house, or city, shake off the dust of
your feet, and c. Acts 22.18. All which Advice we follow with our Prayers, that
the God of Peace would bruise Satan under our feet, Now the Lord of Peace give
you Peace always, by all means, etc.

Quest. Whether Mr. Parris his going to Abigail Williams (and others) whom he
supposed to have a Spectral sight (to be informed who were Witches, and who
afflicted those pretended sufferers by Witchcraft) in order to their being
questioned upon their lives for it, were not a turning after such as had
familiar Spirits; and a greater wickedness than Saul was guilty of sin that he
did not intend thereby bodily hurt to any others.)

And whether in a crime of such a high nature, the making a slender and general
confession, without any proposals of reparations, or due time of probation,
ought so far to be accounted sufficient, from such a Pastor to his People.

And whether such as were accused, or the surviving Friends and Relations of
those that were any ways sufferers, by Accusations so by him proved, are in
duty and conscience bound to continue their respect, honor and support to him,
in the Ministry, after such known departures from the Rule of Gods word, and
after such dire effects as followed thereupon, under the penalty of the dust
shaken from his feet, testifying against them, even so as to render them in a
worse case than those of Sodom and Gomorrah.

To the Honorable Wait Winthrop, Elisha Cook, and Samuel Sewall, Esquires,
Arbitrators indifferently chosen, between Mr. Samuel Parris, and the
Inhabitants of Salem Village.
THE Remonstrances of several agrieved persons in the said Village, with
further reasons why they conceive they ought not to hear Mr. Parris, nor to own
him as a Minister of the Gospel, nor to contribute any support to him as such,
for several Years past; humbly offered as fit for consideration.

We humbly conceive that having in April, 1693, given our Reasons why we could
not join with Mr. Parris in Prayer, Preaching, or Sacraments. If these Reasons
are found sufficient for our withdrawing, (and we cannot yet find but they are)
Then we conceive our selves virtually discharged, not only in Conscience, but
also in Law; which requires maintenance to be given to such as are Orthodox,
and blameless. The said Mr. Parris having been teaching such dangerous Errors,
and preached such scandalous Immoralities, as ought to discharge any (tho ever
so gifted otherways) from the work of the Ministry.

Particularly in his Oath against the lives of several, wherein he swears that
the Prisoners with their looks knock down those pretended sufferers. We humbly
conceive, that he that Swears to more than he is certain of, is equally guilty
of Perjury with him that Swears to what is false And tho they did fall at such
a time, yet it could not be known that they did it, much less could they be
certain of it; yet did Swear positively against the lives of such, as he could
not have any knowledge but they might be Innocent.

His believing the Devil's Accusations, and readily departing from all Charity
to persons, tho of blameless and godly lives, upon such suggestions, his
promoting such Accusations, as also his partiality therein, in stifling the
Accusations of some, and the same time vigilantly promoting others; as we
conceive are just causes for our refusal, and c.

That Mr. Parris's going to Mary Walut, or Abigail Williams, and directing
others to them, to know who afflicted the People in their illnesses; we
understand this to be a dealing with them that have a familiar spirit, and an
implicit denying the providence of God, which alone, as we believe, can send
Afflictions, or cause Devils to Afflict any; this we also conceive sufficient
to justify such refusal.

That Mr. Parris by these Practices and Principles, has been the beginner and
procurer of the sorest Afflictions, not to this Village only, but to this whole
Country, that did ever befall them.

We the Subscribers, in behalf of our selves, and of several others of the same
mind with us (touching these things) having some of us had our Relations by
these practices taken off by an untimely Death; others have been imprisoned,
and suffered in our Persons, Reputations, and Estates; submit the whole to your
Honors decision, to determine whether we are ought to be any ways obliged to
honor, respect and support such an Instrument of our miseries; praying God to
guide your Honors, to act herein, as may be for his Glory, and the future
settlement of our Village, in Amity and Unity.

Boston, July 21. 1797. John Tarball, Samuel Nurse, Ios. Putman, Dan. Andrew,
Attorneys for the People of the Village.



According to the order of the aforesaid Arbitrators, the said Mr. Parris had
some of his Arrears paid him, as also a Sum of Money for his Repairs of the
Ministerial House of the said Village, and is dismissed therefrom.

PART IV. A Letter of a Gentleman, endeavoring to prove the received Opinions
about Witchcraft.
SIR,
I Told you, I had some thoughts concerning Witchcraft, and an Intention of
conferring with the Gentleman, who has published several Treatises about
Witchcraft, and persons afflicted by them, lately here in New England; but
since you have put those three Books into my hands, I find my self engaged in a
very hard Province, to give you my opinion of them, I plainly foresee, that
should this scribbling of mine come to public view, it would displease all
Parties, but that is the least; moreover it is so far out of my Road to set my
thoughts to consider a matter on every side, which in it self is so abstruce,
and every step I advance therein, if I miss truth (which is a narrow and
undivided line) I must tumble down headlong into the Gulf of dangerous error;
yet notwithstanding I have forced my self to send these few lines, if so be I
may clear to you a truth, you now seem to be offended at, because of the ill
consequences, which (you think) lately have and again may be drawn from it, by
the ill conduct of some Men. I am not ignorant that the pious frauds of the
Ancient, and the inbred-fire (I do not call it pride) of many of our Modern
Divines have precipitated them to propagate, and maintain truth as well as
falsehoods, in such an unfair manner, as has given advantage to the Enemy, to
suspect the whole Doctrine, these Men have professed to be nothing but a mere
trick. But it is certain, that as no lover of truth will justify an
Illegitimate Corollary, tho drawn from a true Proposition; so neither will he
reject a truth, because some or many Men take unfair mediums to prove it, or
draw false consequences from it: The many Heresies among Christians, must not
give a mortal wound to the Essence of the Christian Religion; neither must any
one Christian Doctrine be exterminated, because Evil Men make use of it, as a
Cloak to cover their own self ends; particularly, because some men perhaps
among all sorts of Christians, have under pretense of Witchcraft colored their
own Malice, Pride and Popularity; we must not therefore conclude (first) that
there are no Witches (2) or that Witches cannot be Convicted by such dear and
undeniable proof, as the Law of God requires in the case of Death (3.) Or that
a Witch so Convicted ought not to be put to death. 1. That there are Witches is
manifest from the precept of Moses, Thou shall not suffer a Witch to live.
Exodus 22.18. for it is certain God would not have given a vain and
unintelligible Law, as this must be of putting Witches to death, if there are
no Witches. But you object that this does not answer our Case, for we have
formed another Idea of Witches than what can be gathered from Scriptures; you
quote four place, viz. Deuteronomy 13. Mat. 24. Acts 13.2 Tim. 3. from all which you
infer that Witchcraft is a maligning and opugning the Word, Works, and Worship
of God; and by an extraordinary sign, seeking to seduce any from it, and this
you readily grant. But then you say, What is this to Witches now a days? who
are said to have made an explicit Covenant with the Devil, and to be empowered
by him, to the doing of things strange in themselves, and besides their natural
course. This you say does not follow, and herein indeed consists the whole
Controversy. Therefore it is necessary, that first of all we clear this point,
laying aside those prejudices we may have from the fatal application of this
Doctrine to some (who were in your judgment) really at least in Law, and before
Men Innocent. In a word, we are seeking after truth, and truth shall and will
be truth, in spite of Men and Devils. I do not repeat this caution to forestall
you, to believe the Doctrine of Witchcraft, as it is above defined, without
inquiring into the reason and truth of it; only I desire you to enquire into
it, as a thing doubtful. For no Man can be certain of a Negative, unless either
the Affirmative imply a contradiction, or he can prove it by certain testimony,
to neither of which you pretend; only you allege it cannot be proved by
Scripture, i.e. you cannot prove it, nor have seen it proved by any other you
have read on that Subject. I am not so vain to think I can do better than the
Learned Authors you have consulted with (tho I know not what they have done,
for I had no other Book but the Bible, to make use of on this occasion;) but
because I am satisfied my self, I am willing to communicate my Reasons, which I
divide into Three heads. 1. The appearance of Angels. 2. The nature of
Possession. 3. And the Scripture notion of Witchcraft. 1. Good Angels did
appear to Abraham, and did eat, Genesis 15. it seems he washed their Feet, it is
certain he saw and heard them, therefore there is no impossibility in Angels
being conversant with men. God is true, and whatever is contained in Sacred
Writ is true; If we poor shallow Mortals do not comprehend the manner how, that
argues only our weakness and ignorance in this dark Prison of Flesh, wherein we
are enclosed, during our abode in this vale of misery, but does not in the
least infringe the verity of the Scripture; it is sufficient that we
undoubtedly know they have appeared unto Men in bodily shape, and done their
Errand they were sent on from God. Now if good Angels have appeared, why may
not bad? Surely the Devils, because fallen and Evil, have not therefore lost
the Nature of Angels, neither is there any contradiction in their appearing in
a bodily shape, now after any more than before their Fall. But you will say,
you must allow of the appearances of Good Angels, because of the Scripture
testimony; but not of bad, seeing there is no place of Scripture that clearly
proves it. Mat. 4. The words in the Gospel do as plainly signify the Devils
outward appearance to our Savior, when he was tempted, as can be expressed,
and when the tempter came to him he said -- but he answered -- the same from
St. Luke uses to signify the appearance of Moses and Elias, in the
transfiguration, And behold there talked with him two men; for what follows, v.
31, who appeared is used to signify (not their appearance, but) the manner of
their appearance in great Glory. But you will urge that it is very easy to be
understood, that Moses and Elias did appear, because they had human bodies; but
that it is unintelligible to you, how the Devil being a Spirit can appear, a
Spirit, i.e. a substance void of all dimensions; therefore the words in the
History must not be taken in a literal Sense. Do not mistake; tho some
Philosophers are of opinion (which whether true or false, is all one to our
present Argument) that a Spirits substance is extended, and has besides
length, breadth and depth, a fourth dimension, viz. essential spissitude; yet
the same do not say, that pure substance is perceptible by our bodily Senses;
on the contrary, they tell us, that Spirits are clothed with vehicles, i.e.
they are united to certain portions of matter, which they inform, move and
actuate. Now this we must not reject as impossible, because we cannot
comprehend the forma^ reason, how a Spirit acts upon matter: For who can give
the Reason, that upon the Volition of the human Soul, the Hand should be lifted
up, or any ways moved? for to say the Contraction of the Muscles is the
Mechanic cause of voluntary motion, is not to solve the Question which recurs,
why upon Volition should that Contraction ensue which causes that motion? all
that I know the wisest Man ever said upon this head is, that it is the will of
the Creator; who has ordered such a species of thinking Creatures, by a
Catholic Law to be united to such portions of matter, so and so disposed, or,
if you will in the vulgar Phrase, to Organized bodies, and that there should be
between them and the several bodies, they are united to, a mutual re-action and
passion: Now you see how little we know of the reason, of that which is most
near to us, and most certain, viz. The Souls informing the Body, yet you would
think it a bad Argument, if one should, as some have done, include from this
our Ignorance, that there was nothing in us but matter, it is no otherways to
deny a Spirits acting a Vehicle. The plainest and most certain things when
denied are hardest to be proved, therefore the Axiom faith well, contra
principia, etc. There are some certain truths which are rather to be explained
to young beginners than proved, upon which yet all Science is built, as every
whole is more than his part, and of this sort I take these two following, 1.
That there are two substances, Cor^us and Men's, Body and Spirit, altogether
different, for the Ideas we have of them are quite distinct. 2. That a Spirit
can Actuate, Animate, or inform a certain portion of matter, and be united to
it: from whence it is very evident, that the Devil united to a portion of
matter (which hereafter I Will call a Vehicle) may fall under the cognizance of
our Senses, and be conversant with us in a bodily shape. Where then is the
reason or need to run to a Metaphorical, and forced Interpretation, when the
words are so plain, and the literal sense implies no contradiction, nor any
greater difficulty than (as has been said) what arises from the Union of the
Soul and Body, which is most certain. Now after all to say, God will not permit
the Devil so to appear, is to beg the question without saying any thing to the
preceding Argument, and it is against the sense of almost all in ^kind; for in
all Ages, and all places there have been many Witnesses of the appearances of
D^mons, all of whom that taught any thing contrary to the right Worship of the
true God, were certainly evil ones: and it were most presumptuous, barely to
assert that all these witnesses were always deceived, and it is impossible they
could all agree to deceive. 2. We come to consider the nature of Possession.
The Man possessed, Luke 8.27. had a Power more than Natural, for he brake the
bands, which he could not have done by his own strength: Now from whom had he
this Power? The Scripture says, He had Devils a long time, and often times it
had caught him, and c. he was kept bound with Chains, and in Fetters, and he
brake the bands, and was driven of the Devil into the Wilderness; this Power
then was immediately from the Devil, and whatsoever possessed persons does, or
suffers things beyond his natural power; he is enabled by the Demon so to do:
or to speak more properly, it is the Damon who acts the same, as is plain
from St. Mark's Relation of this passage, v. 5.2. A Man with an unclean Spirit,
v. 3.2. and no Man could bind him, no not with Chains, 6. v. but when he saw
Jesus afar off he ran and worshipped him, and the same He v. 7. said, I adjure
thee by God that thou torment me not, v. 10. My name is Legion, for we are
many, v. 11. and he besought him much, that he would not send them away out of
the Country: it is manifest from hence, that it was not the poor Man who was
possessed, but the Devils who possessed him, by whom the Chains had been plucked
a sunder, and the Fetters broken in pieces; now here is Divine testimony, that
the Devils have actuated a Humane body to the doing of things beyond the
Natural strength of that Body, as it was simply united to its humane Soul; how
much more then can the Devil actuate any other proportion of simple Matter,
Earth, Air, Fire or Water; and make it a fit Organ for himself to act in.


But enough of this already, let us rather enquire how the Devil enters info
the body of the possessed, to move it at his pleasure; this I think he cannot do
as a mere Spirit, or by any never so strict Union with the Humane Soul, for in
that case he is only a tempter or seducer; and nothing above humane strength
can be done: But here there being something performed (the bonds broken) by a
force which could not proceed from humane strength, it necessarily follows that
the Devils entered into the possessed, otherways qualified than as a mere Spirit,
he did not enter without some portion of matter, to which he was united by the
Intermedium, whereof he acted upon and actuated the humane body. Again if it is
said that the Devil entered as a mere Spirit, and immediately acted upon and
moved that Body; it follows the Devil has a Vehicle, a certain portion of
matter (that Body) to actuate and dispose of at will; which is absurd, 1.
Because it asserts what it seems to deny, viz. the Devils having a Vehicle to
act immediately upon, and to be united to a portion of matter (as has been said
before) is the same thing. 2. It sights against the CatholickLaw of the Union
of Soul of and Body, by which the Omnipotent has ordained the voluntary motion
of a humane body to depend upon the Will of its humane Soul, and those that are
not voluntary to proceed either from its own Mechanison, or material force,
hence we may certainly conclude, that it is by the Intervening of the Devils
Vehicle, that he enters into the Body of the possessed. But what if you and I
cannot agree about this Notion of possession, must w^ therefore reject the
truth it self, and run to a far fetched and intolerable sense of the words;
No, our opinions do not alter the Nature of things, it is certain there were
persons possessed, and it is as certain that the De^il entered into them, either
with or without a Vehicle, it is all one which part of the contradiction you
taken, the consequence is the same. Viz.

That the Devil does act immediately upon matter, there is another acceptance
of the word possession in Scripture, Acts 16.16. where one is said to be
possessed with a Spirit of Divination ((...)) the word commonly used to the
Priestess of Apollo, who gave responses; and it seems this Damsel was such an
one, for she brought her Masters much Money, or gain by sooth saying, (...).
Now if the History of them be true that they were demented, and knew not
themselves what they uttered, donec erant Deo plenae (as they word it) their
case is not different, but the same with the foregoing; but if they understood
what they spoke, then had they familiar Spirits, whereof there is frequent
mention made in the Old Testament, and one good King is commended for having
cut off them that had such, therefore I think the meaning of the word was very
obvious in his time, neither was it ever controverted, being joined with any
other name than spirit Familiar, one of our own Family, that is often, every day
conversant with us, and almost ever ready upon call to attend us. But the
consideration of them, who have familiar Spirits, falls under the head of
Witchcraft, which we are to consider in the third place. 3. Witchcraft, to
inquire into the Scripture Notion of it, and compare whether it be the same
with that above d^fined; the Cabalistick learning would be of great use in this
search, and afford us much light; there is little doubt but that there are many
great truths not commonly known. (Non est Religio ubi omnia patent) And our
Savior expressly cautions his Disciples that they do not throw their Pearl
before Swine; therefore it is no wonder that some Doctrines, though
unquestionably true are not so fully described, because the Authors who treat
of them are afraid, lest evil Men should be the more deproved by being
informed; but I am in no such fear; nor can I give you any other thoughts but
what are obvious to any Man, from the plain sense of the Scripture. Our
definition we will divide into two Propositions, and handle them severally. 1.
Proposition. The Witch is empowered by the Devil to do things strange in
themselves, and beside their natural course. 2. Prop. The manner how the Witch
is empowered to do those strange things, is by Explicit Compact, or Covenant
with the Devil. For clearing of the first, we will consider the four places
above cited, wherein a Witch is called a false Prophet, a false Christ, a
Sorcerer, a resister of the truth, and is said to show signs to seduce the
People to seek after other Gods: whence let us note, 3 things, 1. That those
terms Witch, false Christ, false Prophet, and Sorcerer, are all Synonimous;
i.e. signify the same thing. 2. That a Witch does do things strange in
themselves, and beyond their Natural course: for it were most ridiculous, to
allege that our blessed Savior, when he said, there shall arise false
Christ's, and shall show great signs and wonders, in so much that (if it were
possible) they should deceive the very Elect, meant that cunning cheats should
arise and show Legerdemain tricks; the words will in no wise bear it, and I
believe you are from interpreting them, so it is manifest, they signify not a
feigned, but a real doing of things, beyond their Natural course; therefore the
Sorceries of Elimas and Simon were not simple delusions, but real effects that
could not have been produced by Physical causes in the ordinary course of
nature. 3. That the end of the Witches showing these signs, is to seduce the
People to seek after other Gods, from which premises I infer, that the Witches
have the power of doing those wonders, or strange things immediately from the
Devil: they are without the reach of Nature, and therefore above humane power,
and no mere Man can effect them; the Witch then who does them must have the
power of doing them from another; but who is the other? God will not give his
testimony to a lie, and to say God did at any time empower a Witch to work
wonders to gain belief to the Doctrine of Devils, were with one breath to
destroy root and branch of all revealed Religion; no, it cannot be, it is only
God's permission, who proves his People, whether they love him with all their
heart, and with all their Soul. Therefore the Witch has a power of doing
Wonders, or strange things immediately from the Devil. 2. Proposit, we'll
subdivide into these two. 1. That there is an express Covenant between the
Witch and the Devil. 2. That it is not reasonable to suppose this Covenant to be
transacted mentally. 1. The Devil cannot communicate this power, by never so
strict a Union with the Soul of the Witch; for in that case he is only a
tempter, and nothing above humane power can be done, as has been already
proved; therefore the Devil who improves the Witch to do things above humane
power, must either appear in an External shape, and instruct him how, and upon
what terms he will enable him to do those Wonders; or else he must enter into
the body of the Witch and possess it. The Denominacs in the Gospel are such
whom the Devils invade, by main force, their Soul having no further command of
their bodies, which are subjected to the Will of the Devils; whose end is to
wound and torment those miserable Creatures, to throw them into the fire, and
into the water: but the Witch, who likewise is possessed, is not treated in
such an outrageous manner, kis Demon is tame and familiar unto him, and
suffers him for a time to live quietly, without any further molestation, then
prompting him to do his utmost endeavor to withdraw Men from God; he is not
bereaved of his Senses as the poor lunatic, but is conscious of all he does,
and wills all his crimes, he receives power from the Devil to do wonders,
and does them to serve the Devils turn. Therefore there must be a Covenant, an
express Covenant, between the Devil and him, viz. that he shall obey the Devil
and serve him, and that the Devil shall both enable him so to do, and also
reward him for so doing; for if there is no contract between them, How comes
the Witch to know he has a supernatural power? or how can be so peremptorily
pretend to do that which is so much above his natural power, not knowing he has
a supernatural one inabling him to do the same: There can be no doubt but there
was a very intimate commerce between Satan and him; who is called by St. Paul
thou Child of the Devil (not as other unholy men but) in an especial manner, as
being the Enemy of all righteousness, who would not cease to pervert the right
ways of the Lord, it is not to be supposed that he entered into this so near a
Relation with Satan, with which he is stigmatized, that others may beware of
him, without his own knowledge and consent; and is not this a Covenant, an
Express Covenant on his part to serve the Devil incessantly, and on the Devils,
to empower him to act his Sorceries wherewith he bewitched the People; now I
think, I have from Scripture fully satisfied you of the truth of what I
offered, in a Discourse at -- but since you have told me an Explicit Covenant
with the Devil, signifying the Devil's appearing in a bodily shape to the
Witch, and their signing an express Covenant, which you say cannot be proved
from Scripture. It were most unreasonable to imagine that the ceremonies of
this bellish m^stery are particularly set down in the word of God; therefore we
must gather by Analogy and Reason the manner how this express Covenant is
transacted: and to that end I Will set down these following Considerations.

1. Under the Law, God did ordain his People in all their matters to have
recourse immediately to himself, and depend upon him for Counsil, which they
were ready to obey, with full assurance of aid and protection from him against
their Enemies; this the Devil imitateth by setting up of Oracles among the
Heathen, to which all the Kings, Nations, and mighty Conquerors upon Earth did
come and paid their humblest Adoration to the God (as the Devil blasphemously
called himself) of the Temple, in which they were imploring his direction and
assistance in their doubtful and prosperous affairs. Again, God instituted
Sacrifices to put Men in mind of their duty to their Creator, to whom they owe
all things, even themselves; but the Devil is not contented with the bare
^imitation hereof; the acknowledgment and worship he receives from the deluded
World is not enough, tho they offer up unto him innumerable Hecatombs, unless
they cause their Children to pass through the fire unto him. to whom no
sacrifice is so well pleasing, as that of humane Blood. And there is no reason
to think, that now under the Economy of the Gospel, the Devil has left off to
vie with God, and thereby to ensnare Men. No, it is rather to be feared that
his Kingdom does now more prevail, for by how much the light is greater; so
much greater is their condemnation, who do not receive it: it is reasonable to
suppose that (seeing the Son of God, when he came to transact with Men, the
wonderful Covenant of their Redemption, took upon him their Nature, and was
perfect Man) the Devil likewise does counterfeit the same, in appearing in an
humane shape to them, who receive him, and confedetate themselves with him, and
become his Vassals.

2. Consider, It is not probable that those false Apostles mentioned, 2 Cor.
11.13. erred only in Ceremonies or Circumstances, or that their Errors, tho
great, did proceed rather from their Ignorance, than from the perverseness of
their minds. 1 Cor. 3.15. For, for such we may have charity and hope, that God
will be merciful unto them, if they sincerely do the best they know, tho they
dissent in some, nay many things, from the practices and belief of the
Christian Church; but those St. Paul threatens with a heavy curse, that their
end shall be according to their works; therefore it seems they immediately
struck at the very root and being of the Christian Religion, and were the same
with them spoken of, 2 Timothy 2.6. but with this difference, that they did not
resist, but beholding the Miracles and Signs which were done by the true
Apostle of our Lord, wondered and believed also, and were Baptized; yet being
Sorcerers they were unwilling to loose that great esteem they had obtained; as
it is related of Simon, who had bewitched the People of Samaria, giving out
that he himself was some great one, to whom they all gave heed, from the least
to the greatest, laying, this Man is the great Power of Go^d, therefore he
could not brook that Peter or John should have a greater Power than himself;
but offered them Money, that on whomsoeve he laid hands he (that person) should
receive the Holy Ghost; which shows him, who thus designed to make Merchandise
of the B. Spirit, tho Baptized, to have been no true believer, but still a
Sorcerer in the Gall of bitterness, and in the bond of Iniquity; such were
those deceitful workers, who not being able barefaced to resist, did put on
Christianity as a Mask, that they might undermine the truth, and introduce the
Doctrines of Devils. Samaria and Paphos, were not the only two places where the
Devil had such Agents, there was no part of the Earth where his Kingdom was not
Established, and where he had not his Emissaries before the preaching of the
Gospel; and since the Text tells us, he has his Ministers, who do imitate
their Master, by being transformed into the Apostles of Christ, as he himself
is transformed into an Angel of light: whose design, in being thus transformed,
cannot be to impose upon the Almighty; for whatever shape he appears in, he
cannot hide his ugliness from the Eyes of him who is Omniscent, therefore he
appears thus in the shape of an Angel of light, either to tempt and seduce
the blessed Spirits to rebel against God, or to ensnare wicked Men, who by
their heinous crimes (being lovers of themselves, covetous, boasters, proud
blasphemers) were before disposed to be fit Instruments to serve him, and to
enter into league with him. Surely I who am ignorant of the Laws by which the
Intellectual World is governed, dare not affirm that it is impossible for Satan
so to appear, as to hide his deformities from the good Angels, and under that
vail to tempt them. But certain I am that it is more consonant to Reason, to
think that the Apostles intention here was to reach that the Devil appeared as
a glorified Angel unto Men to gain Ministers, whom he might imbue with the
Poison of his BlackArt, and (when he had gotten full possession of them)
instruct them by his own Example to transform themselves into the Apostles of
Christ, that under that Vizard they might with the greater Advantage promote
his ends, and join with him in doing the utmost despite to the Spirit of Grace.

3. Consideration, It is against the Nature of this Covenant, that is should be
consuminated by a mental Colloquy, between the Devil and the Witch. I know not
how many Articles it consists of, but it is certain from what has been already
proved, that the renouncing of Christ to be the Son of God, and owning the
Devil to be, and worshipping him as God, are the two chief, to which our
Savior who was accused of casting out Devils by Beelzebub ( i.e.) of being
confederated with Beelzebub) was tempted to consent: If thou be the Son of God
command that these stones be made bread: And again, throw thy self down from
hence, for it is written, he will give his Angels charge over thee; and again
all these things will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me:
Whence it is evident that here the Devil labored to insinuate into our Lord,
either to do things rash and unwarrantable, or to suspect his Sonship, revolt
from God his Father, and worship Satan, that he might obtain the glory of the
World. Now it has been already said, that when Jesus was tempted, the Devil
appeared unto him in a bodily shape; therefore it is agreeable to Reason, that
he does appear in the same manner to all them, whom he also tempts to worship
him: moreover the form of renouncing a Covenant ought to bear resemblance to
the form of entering into the same Covenant; therefore Men who are received into
the Mystical Body of Christ by God's Minister, who in God's stead expressly
covenanteth with and then Administreth the Sacrament of Baptism unto them, must
in the like ^ anner go out of, or renounce the said Covenant; and of them there
are two sorts, one who through the perverseness of their own hearts, the luere
of the World, the fear of Men more than of God abjure their Savior, turn
Apostates, Turks, or Pagans; The other sort is of them who do contract with the
Devil to be his Subjects, in the imitation of whom, it is not to be supposed
that the Devil will omit any material Circumstances, which tend both to bring
them into and confirm them in his Service. To effect which his outward
appearance, when he receives his Catechumens is of greater force than any
mental contract, for many wicked men who have denied God and Christ not only in
their practice, but also blasphemously in profession, yet have repented, and at
last obtained some hope of mercy; I dare not say it is impossible for a Witch
to repent and find mercy, the secrets of the Almighty are too high for me; but
it is certain, these wretches are strangely hardened, by what passes between
them and the Devil in a bodily shape, particularly their worshipping him, which
necessarily implies his outward appearance unto them; for no man can apete Evil
as Evil, because the Law of self preservation deeply rooted in all men,
determines their wills to pursue that which seems good, and fly from that
which seems evil unto them, but the inbred notions that every man has of the
Devil, is that he is an Enemy and destroyer of mankind, therefore every man
has a Natural aversion from him, and consequently cannot formally worship him
as such, because the object of worship must be esteemed to be propitious and
placable by the worshippers, otherwise if fear alone be the adequate cause of
Adoration, it follows that the Devils and damned in Hell do worship God, which
is contrary to Scripture, which faith they blasphemed, because of their pains,
whence it follows, that they who worship the Devil must have changed the innate
Idea that they had of him, viz. that he is an in placable Worrier of Men, and
take him to be benign at least to his own; but this change cannot be wrought by
any suggestion of Satan unto the minds of Men, whom indeed he mentally tempts
to Lust, Pride and Malice; but it is his greatest Artifice to cause his
Insinuations to and in the hearts of Men, as their own natural thoughts, and if
conscience discovers their Author and opposes them, then he varnishes them over
with the specious colors of pleasure, honor and glory; and so represents them
as really good, to be willed and desired by the Soul, which judges of all
things without according to the Ideas she has of them; but because most
objects have two, and some many faces, and she not always attends, therefore
she often errs in her choice, nevertheless it is impossible for her to apete an
object, whose simple Idea is Evil; but the Idea we have of the Devil is such,
for we cannot represent him an our minds any otherwise than as the great
destroyer of Men, therefore no mental temptation can make us believe this our
grand Enemy to be ever Exorable by, or in any measure favorable to us, whence
it evidently follows, that the Devil to work this change of opinion his
wor^^^pers have of him, must appear unto them in a bodily shape, and impose
(...) them, whom because of their great Corruption and Sinfulness, God (...)
wholly left, and given up strong delusions that they should believe a lie, and
the Father of lies; who now appearing in a humane shape, ^elleth them that he
is no such Monster, as he has been represented to them by his Enemy, who calls
himself God, which Title of right belongs to him, and that he (if they be
contract to be his Servants) will both amply reward them, by giving them power
to do many things very suitable to their abominable depraved Nature) that the
Christians, whatever opinion they may pretend to have of their God, cannot so
much as pretend to, and also that he will protect and defend them against him,
whom heretofore they have mistaken for the Almighty, and his pretended Son
Christ, whom they must abjure ere they can be received by or expect any benefit
from him. Upon no other consideration is it possible for any Man to worship the
Devil? for the Atheists, who deny the Being of a God, do likewise deny the
Existence of any Spirit good or bad; therefore their drinking the Devils
health, even upon their knees (tho a most horrid Crime) cannot be construed any
part of worship paid to him, whom they assert to be a Chimera, a mere figment
of States men to keep the vulgar in awe. Now I have evinced to you that there
are Witches, that the Witch receives power from the Devil to do strange
things, that there is an express Covenant between the Devil and the Witch, that
this Covenant cannot be transacted mentally, but that the Devil must appear in
a bodily shape to the Witch; therefore I conclude, that a Witch in the
Scripture is such, who has made an Explicit Covenant with the Devil, and is
empowered by him to do things strange in themselves, and beside their natural
course.

^. S. I persuade my self you do nor expect from me any Essay concerning the
methods, how Witches may or ought to be convinced; I with that those Gentlemen,
whose Eminent station both inables them to perform it, and likewise makes it
their duty so to do, may take this Province upon them, and handle it so fully
as to satisfy you herein. I once intended to have provided some materials for
this Work, by de^ining four principal things relating to Witchcraft, viz. 1.
Witch-fits. 2. The Imps that are said to attend on the Witch. 3. The
transportation of the Witch through the Air. 4. Lastly, the invisibility of the
Witch; out upon second thoughts that it was foreign from my purpose, who am not
concerned to compose a just Treatise of Witchcraft, which would require more
vacant time, than my present Circumstances will allow, only I did promise you
to give you my Opinion privately; therefore I Will venture to make use of an
Argument, which shows neither Art nor Learning in the Author, and it is this,
that seeing there are Witches, and that the Law of God does command them to be
put to death; therefore there must be means to Convict them, by clear and
certain Proof, otherwise the Law were in vain; for no Man can be justly
condemned, who is not fairly convicted by full and certain Evidence.

III. S. In the last place we are to inquire whether a Witch ought to be put to
death or no? you Answer in the Negative; because you say that that Law, thou
shall not suffer a Witch to live, is Judicial, and extends only to the People
of the Jews; but our Savior, or his Apostles have not delivered any where any
such command, therefore they ought to be suffered to live, this indeed seems
somewhat plausible at first view, but upon through Examination has no weight
in it at all for these Reasons, 1. All Penal Laws receive their Sanction from
him or them, who have the sovereign Power in any state, as thou shall not
commit Adultery, is a Moral-law, and obligatory over the Consciences of Men in
all places and Ages; but the Adulterers shall be put to death is a judicial
law, and in force only in that state, where it is enacted by the Sovereign. 2.
The Government of the Jews was a Theocracy, and God himself did condescend to
be their King, not only as he is King of Kings; for in that sense he is, always
was, and ever will be supreme Lord, and Governor of all his Creatures; but in
an especial manner to give them Laws for the Government of their State, and to
protect them against their Enemies; in one word to be immediately their
Sovereign. 3. Our Savior's Kingdom was not of this World, he was no Judge to
divide so much as an Inheritance between two Brethren; nay, he himself
submitted patiently to the unjust Sentance of the Governor of the Country in
which he lived; therefore both the rewards and punishments annexed to his Laws
are Spiritual, and then shall have their full accomplishment, when the Son of
Man at the last day shall pronounce, Come unto me ye blessed, and depart ye
cursed into Everlasting fire. 4. That Sovereigns who have received the Gospel
of our Lord, have not therefore lost their Power of enacting Laws for the
ruling and preserving their People, and punishing Malefactors even with Death;
so that the Criminal is as justly condemned to die by our Municipal, as he was
heretofore by the Judicial Law among the Jews: How much more then ought our Law
to advert against the highest of all Criminals, those execrable Men and Women,
who tho yet alive, have listed themselves under Satan's banner, and explicitly
Sworn Allegiance to him, to fight against God and Christ; indeed all unholy Men
afford great matter to the Devils of Blaspheming, but these wretches have
confederated themselves with the Devils, to blaspheme and destroy all they can;
and do you think that these common Enemies of God and Mankind ought to be
suffered to live in a Christian Common wealth, especially considering that we
have a President of putting them to death from God himself, when he acted as
King over his own peculiar People. But me thinks I hear you saying, all this
does not satisfy me, for I am sure nothing can be added to the Devils Malice,
and if he could, he certainly would appear and frighten all Men out of their
wits. I Answer, 1. We must not reject a truth, because we cannot resolve all
the Questions that may be proposed about it; otherwise all our Science must be
turned into Sceptism, for we have not a Comprehensive knowledge of any one
thing. 2. When you say, that if the Devil could he would appear and frighten
all Men; the Lawful consequence is not that he cannot appear at all, for we
have undoubtedly proved the contrary; but that we are Ignorant of the bounds
that the Almighty has has set to him, whose malice indeed, if he were not
restrained, is so great as to destroy all Men; but the goodness of our God is
greater, who has given us means to escape his fury, if we will give earnest
heed to the Gospel of our Savior, which only is able to comfort us against the
sad and miserable condition of our present state, for not only the Devils, but
likewise all do conspire against us to work our ruin: The deluge came and
swept away all the race (save eight persons) of mankind: the Fire will in time
devour what the Water has left, and all this comes to pass because of Sin; but
we who have received the Lord Jesus, look for new Heavens, and a new Earth,
wherein dwells Righteousness. Therefore he, if we purify our selves as he is
pure, will save us (for when he appears we shall be made like unto him; to whom
be Glory for ever, Amen) from the great destruction that must come upon all the
World, and the Inhabitants thereof. Farewell.

March, 8 th. 1693/4.

Boston March 20. 1693* Worthy Sir,
THAT great pains you have taken for my Information and Satisfaction in those
controverted points relating to Witchcraft, whether it attain the end or not,
cannot require less than suitable acknowledgments and gratitude, especially
considering you had no particular obligation of office to it, and when others,
whose proper Province it was had declined it. It is a great truth, [that the
many Heresies among the Christians (nor the lying Miracles, or Witchcrafts used
by some to induce to the worship of Images, etc.) must not give a Mortal wound
to Christianity or Truth;] but the great question in these controverted points
still is, what is truth. And in this search being agreed in the Judge or Rule,
there is great hopes of the Issue. That there are Witches is plain from that
Rule of Truth, the Scriptures, which commands their punishment by Death. But
what that Witchcraft is, or wherein it does consist is the whole difficulty.
That head cited from Mr. Gaul, and so well proved thereby (not denied by any)
makes the work yet shorter; so that it is agreed to consist in a Malignity,
etc. and seeking by a sign to seduce, etc. not excluding any other sorts or
branches, when as well proved by that infallible Rule. That good Angels have
appeared, is certain, tho that instance of those to Abraham may admit of a
various construction; some Divines supposing them to be the Trinity, others
that they were Men-messengers, as Judges 2.1. and others that they were Angels;
but tho this as I said might admit of a debate, yet I see no question of the
Angel- Gabriel's appearance, particularly to the B. Virgin; for tho the Angels
are Spirits, and so not perceptible by our bodily Eyes, without the appointment
of the most high, yet he who made all things by his word in the Creation, can
with a word speak things into Being. And whether the Angels did assume matter
(or a Vehicle) and by that appear to the bodily Eye; or whether by the same
word there were an Idea framed in the mind, which needed no Vehicle to
represent them* to the Intellects, is with the All-wise, and not for me to
dispute. If we poor shallow Mortals do not comprehend the manner how, that
argues only our weakness. Two other times did this glorious Angel appear. Dan.
8.16. Dan 9.21. The first of these times was in Vision, as by the text and
context will appear. The second was the same as at the first; which being
considered, as it will ascertain that Angels have appeared; so that it is at the
will of the Sender how they shall appear, whether to the bodily Eye, or
Intellect only. Mat. 1.20. The appearance of the Angel to Joseph was in a
Dream, and yet a real appearance; so was there a real appearance to the
Apostle, but whether in the body or out of the body he could not tell; and that
they are sent and come not of their own motion. Luke 1.26. And in the sixth
Month the Angel Gabriel was sent from God. Dan. 9.23. At the beginning of thy
supplication the commandment came forth, and I am come, v. 21. Being caused to
fly swiftly, etc. but from these places may be set down as undoubted truths or
conclusions, 1. That the glorious Angels have their Mission and Commission from
the most high. 2. That without this they cannot appear to mankind. And from
these two will necessarily flow a third, 3. That if the glorious Angels, have
not that power to go till commissioned, or to appear to Mortals, then not the
fallen Angels; who are held in Chains of darkness, to the Judgment of the great
day. Therefore to argue, that because the good Angels have appeared, the evil
may or can; is to me as if -- because the dead have been raised to life by Holy
Prophets, therefore Men wicked Men can raise the dead. As the sufferings, so
the temptations of our Savior were (in degree) beyond those common to Man; he
being the second Adam, or public head, the strongest assaults were now
improved; and we read that he was tempted, that he might be able to succor
them that are tempted, as also that he was led of the Spirit into the
Wilderness, that he might be tempted, etc. But how the tempter appeared to him
who was God Omniscient; whether to the bodily Eye, or to the Intellect, is as
far beyond my cognizance, as for a Blind Man to judge of Colors. But from the
whole set down this fourth conclusion, 4. That when the Almighty Free Agent has
a work to bring about for his own glory, or Man's good; he can employ not only
Blessed Angels, but the evil ones in it, as 2 Cor. 12.7. And left I should be
exalted above measure, there was given to me a thorn in the flesh, the
Messenger of Satan to buffet me. 1 Samuel 10.14, 15.23. An evil Spirit from the
Lord troubled him. It is a great truth, we understand little, very little, and
that in common things, how much less then in spirituals, such as are above
humane cognizance. - But tho upon the strictest Scrutiny in some natural
things, we can only discover our own Ignorance, yet we must not hence deny what
we do know, or suffer a Rape to be committed upon our Reason and Senses in the
Dark; and say* that the Devil by his ordinary Power can act ^ Vehicle (i.e.)*
some matter distinct from himself, who is wholly a Spirit, and yet this matter
not to be felt nor heard, and at the same time to be seen; or may be felt, and
not heard nor seen, etc. seems to me to be a Chimera, invented at first to
puzzle the belief of reasonable Creatures, and since Calculated to a Roman
Latitude, to uphold the Doctrine of Transubstantiation; who teach, that under
the Accidents of Bread, is contained the Body of our Savior, his humane Body,
as long, and as broad, etc. for here the Power of the Almighty must not be
confined to be less than the Devils, and it is he that has said, hoc est meum
Corpus. As to the consent of almost all Ages, I meddle not now with it, but
come to the fifth Conclusion, 5. That when the Divine Being will imp^o^ the
Agency of Evil Spirits for any service, it is with him the manner how they shall
exhibit themselves, whether to the bodily Eye, or Intellect only; and whether
it shall be more or less formidable -- To deny these three last, were to make
the Devil an Independent Power, and consequently a God. As to the nature of
Possessions by Evil Spirits, for the better understanding of it, it may be
needful to compare it with its contraries; and to instance in Samson, of whom
it was foretold, that he should begin to deliver Israel, and how was he enabled
to this work? Judges 13.25. The Spirit of the Lord began to move him at times
in the Camp* etc. chapter 15.13, 14. v. and they bound him with two new cords, and
brought him up from the rock, and when they came to Le^^ the Philistines
shouted against him, and the Spirit of the Lord came mightily upon him, and the
cords that were upon his Arms became as Flax, that was burnt with fire, and his
bands loosed from his hands, etc. I might instance further, but this may
suffice to show that he had more than a natural strength, as also whence his
strength was, viz. he was empowered by the Spirit from God. And now will any
say, that it was not Samson, but the Spirit that did these things, or that
there being things done, bonds broken, etc. by a force that could not proceed
from humane strength, and that therefore the Spirit entered into him, otherwise
qualified than as me^r Spirit; Or that the spirit entered not without some
Portion of Matter, and by the Intermediation thereof acted Samsons body. If any
say this and more too, this does not alter the truth, which remains, viz. that
the Spirit of God did enable Samson, to the doing of things beyond his Natural
strength. And now what remains but upon parity of Reason, to apply this to the
case of Possession, which may be summed up in this sixth Conclusion, 6. That
God for wise ends, only known to himself, may and has empowered Devils to
Possess and strangely to act ^uma^e Bodies, even to the doing of things beyond
the Natural strength of that body. And for any to tell of a Vehicle, or Matter
used in it, I must observe that General Rule, Colos. 2.8. Beware left any spoil
you through Philosophy, and vain deceit, after the tradition of Men, after the
Rudiments of the World, and not after Christ. To come next to that of
Witchcraft, and here taking that cited head of Mr. Gaul, to be uncontroverted,
set it as a seventh Conclusion, 7. That Witchcraft consists in a maligning and
oppugning the Word, Work and Worship of God, and seeking by any extraordinary
sign to seduce any from it. Deuteronomy. 13.12. Mat. 24.24. Acts 13.8, 10.2 Tim. 3.8.
Do but mark well the places, and for this very property of thus opposing and
perverting, they are all there concluded arrant and absolute Witches; and it
will be easily granted, that the same that is called Witch, is called a false
Christ, a fals^ Prophet, and a Sorcerer, and that the terms are Synonimous; and
that what the Witches aim at is to seduce the People to seek after other Gods.
But here tht Question will be, whether the Witch do really do things strange in
themselves, and beyond their natural course, and all this by a Power
immediately from the Devil. In this inquiry, as we have nothing to do with
unwritten verities, so but little with Cabalistick Learning, which might
perhaps but lead us more astray, as in the Instance of their charging our
Savior with casting out Devils by Beelzebub, his Answer is, if Satan be
divided against himself, his Kingdom has an end; But seeing all are agreed set
this eighth Conclusion, 8. That God will not give his testimony to a lie. To
say that God did at any time empower a Witch to work Wonders, to gain belief to
the Doctrine of Devils, were with one breath to destroy root and branch all
revealed Religion. And hence it is clear the Witch has no such wonder-working
Power from God; and must we then conclude she has such a Miraculous Power from
the Devil; if so, then it follows that either God gives the Devil leave to
empower the Witch to make use of this Seal, in order to deceive, or else that
the Devil has this Power independent of himself; to assert the first of these
were in effect to say, that tho God will not give his testimony to a lie, yet
that he may empower the Devil to set to Gods own Seal, in order to deceive; and
what were this but to overthrow all revealed Religion. The last if asserted
must be to own the Devil to be an unconquered Enemy, and consequently a
Sovereign Deity, and deserving much thanks, that he exerts his Power no more.
Therefore in this Dilemma it is Wisdom for shallow Mortals to have recourse to
their only guide, and impartially to inquire, whether the Witches really have
such a Miraculous or Wonder-working Power? And it is remarkable, that the
Apostle, Gal. 5.20. Reckons up Witchcraft among the Works of the flesh, which
were it indeed a Wonder-working Power, received immediately from the Devil, and
wholly beyond the Power of Nature; it were very improper to place it with
Drunkenness, Murders; Adulteries, etc. all manifest fleshly works. It Is also
remarkable, that Witchcraft is generally in Scripture joined with spiritual
Whoredom, i. e. Idolatry. This thence will plainly appear to be the same, only
pretending to a sign, in order to deceive, seems to be yet a further degree,
and in this Sense Manasseh and Jezebel, 2 Chronicles. 33.6. 2 Kings 9.22. used
Witchcraft and Whoredoms, Nahum. 3.4. The Idolatrous City is called, Mistress
of Witchcrafts. But to instance in one place instead of many, that 2 These. 2.
from the 3 to the 12. v. particularly 9, and 10. v. Even him, whose coming is
after the working of Satan, with all power and signs, and lying wonders, and
with all deceivableness. And for this cause God shall ^^nd them strong
delusions that they should believe a lie, that they all might be damned, who
belie^e not the tr^th, etc. This, that then was spoken in the Prophecy of that
Man of Sin, that was to appear, how abundantly does History testify the
fulfillment of it? particularly to seduce to the Worship of Images: Have not the
Images been made to move? to smile, etc. too tedious were it to mention the
hundredth part of what undoubted History does abundantly testify. And hence do
set down this nineth Conclusion. 9. That the Man of Sin, or Seducer, etc. makes
use of lying wonders to the end to deceive, and that God in Righteous Judgment
may send strong delusions that they should believe a lie, that they might be
damned, who believe not the truth, etc.


It Is certain, that the Devil is a p^^ud Being, and would be thought to have a
Power equal to the Almighty; and it cannot but be very grateful to him to see
Mortals charging one another of doing such works by the Devil's Power, as in
truth is the proper prerogativ^ of the Almighty, Omnipotent Being. The next
head should have been about an Explicit Covenant, between the Witch and the
Devil, etc. But in this, the whole of it I cannot persuade my self but you must
be sensible of an apparent leaning to Education (or tradition) the Scriptures
being wholly silent in it; and supposing this to fall in as a dependent on what
went before shall say the less to it; for if the Devil has no such Power to
communicate, upon such compact, then the whole is a Fiction; tho I cannot but
acknowledge you have said so much to uphold that Doctrine, that I know not how
any could have done more; however, as I said, I find not my self engaged
(unless Scripture proof were offered) to meddle with it. For as you have in
such cases your Reason for your guide, so I must be allowed to use that little
that I have, do only say, that as God is a Spirit, so he must be worshipped in
spirit and truth. So also that the Devil is a Spirit, and that his rule is in
the hearts of the Children of Disobedience, and that an Explicit Covenant of
one nature or another can have little force, any further than as the heart is
engaged in it. And so I pass to the last, viz. Whether a Witch ought to be put
to death. And without accumulation of the offense do Judge, that where the Law
of any Country is to punish by death such as seduce and tempt to the worship
of strange Gods (or Idols, or Statues) by as good Authority may they (no doubt)
punish these as Capital Offenders, who are distinguished by that one remove,
viz. to their seducing is added a sign, i. e. they pretend to a sign in order
to seduce. And thus worthy Sir, I have freely given you my thoughts upon yours,
which you so much obliged me with the sight of, and upon the whole, tho I
cannot in the general but commend your Caution in not asserting many things
contended for by others; yet must say, that in my esteem there is retained so
much as will secure all the rest (to instance) if a Spirit has a Vehicle, i. e.
some portion of matter which it acts, etc. hence as necessarily may be inferred
that Doctrine of Incubus and Succubus, and why not also that of Procreation by
Spirits both good and bad? Thus was Alexander the Great, the British Merlin,
and Martin Luther, and many others said to be begotten. Again if the Witch has
such a Wonder-working Power, why not to afflict? will not the Devil thus far
gratify l^e? And have none this Miracculous Power, but the Covenanting Witch?
then the offense lies in the Covenant, then it is not only hard, but Impossible
to to find a Witch by such Evidence as the Law of God requires; for it will not
be supposed that they call Witness to this Covenant; therefore it will here be
necessary to admit of such as the nature of such Covenant will bear (as Mr.
Gaul has it in his 5th. head, i. e.) the testimony of the afflicted, with
their Spectral sight, to tell who afflicts themselves or others; the experiment
of saying the Lords Prayer, falling at the sight, and rising at the touch,
searching for Tets ( i. e. Excrescencies of Nature) strange and foreign stories
of the Death of some Cattle, or ove^ setting some Cart; and what can Iu^ies
have better to guide them to ^^ad out this Covenant by.

It Is matter of lamentation, and let it be for a lamentation, to consider how
these things have opened the Floodgates of Malice, Revenge, Incharitableness,
and Bloodshed, what Multitudes have been swept away by this Torrent.

In Germany Countries depopulated: In Scotland no less than 4000 have said to
have suffered by Fire and Halter at one heat.

Thas we may say with the Prophet, Isa. 59.10. We grope for the Wall like the
blind, and we grope as if we had no Eyes; we stumble at Noonday as in the
Night, we are in desolate places as dead Men; and this by seeking to be wise
above what is written, in framing to our selves such crimes and such Ordels (or
ways of Trial) as are wholly foreign from the direction of our only guide,
which should be a light to our feet, and a Lanthorn to our paths; but instead
of this, if we have not followed the direction we have followed the Example of
Pagan and Papal Rome, thereby rendering us contemptible, and base before all
People, according as we have not kept his ways, but have been partial in his
Law.

And now that we may in all our sentiments and ways, have regard to his
testimonies, and give to the Almighty the glory due to his Name, is the earnest
desire and Prayer of, Sir,

Yours to Command, R. C.


A second Letter of a Gentleman, endeavoring to prove the received Opinions
about Witchcraft.

SIR,
SInce your design of giving Copies of our Papers (if not to the public at
least) out of your hands, I find my self obliged to make a Reply to your
Answer, left silence should be construed an Assent to the positions whereby I
think) truth would be scandalized. I remember that some have taught that it is
not certain there is any such thing really in being as matter; because the
Ideas which we have of our own, and all other bodies, may be caused to arise in
us by God, without the real existence of the objects they represent. But this
opinion is not only absurd and false, but likewise Atheistical, destroying the
veracity of the Almighty, whom it asserts to have determined us by a fatal
necessity to believe things to be which are not; and I wonder that you should
allude unto it, because that Angels have appeared in a Dream, in a Vision; for
we dream also of Trees, Birds, and c. are there therefore no such things in
nature, because we sometimes Dream to see and hear them, when we are asleep? St
Paul in his Vision was so far from believing the Objects that were represented
to him, to come by the intermedium of his Senses, that he declares, he does not
know whether he was in the body, or out of the body; therefore the Instance is
in no wise proper. For Abraham and the B Virgin did see and hear; and if there
were not such things really, as were represented to them by their Senses, they
were deluded, by being made to believe they saw and heard what was not. There
is none who denies God causing thoughts to arise in Men's minds: but thence to
infer he makes Objects which are not, by forming their Ideas in our minds, to
appear to us through the Ministry of our Senses as tho they were, is a piece
not only of vain, but very dangerous Philosophy. It is true, the good Angels
will not appear without the appointment of God, they will not do any one
Action, but according to the laws he has prescribed to them. But you say they
cannot (which does not follow from your premises) supposing their not appearing
to proceed from the defect of their power, and not the rectitude of their will,
which fallacy has deceived you into a third Conclusion. For the fallen Angels
are not so held under Chains of darkness; but that they can, and do go to fro
on the earth seeking whom they may devour. Before their fall they could have
appeared if sent, and would not then do any thing without a Divine Command But
now they have rebelled against God, and do all they can to despise him,
therefore their not appearing now (if it were true they never did, they never
shall appear) must proceed from a restraint they are under, which is accidental
not, Essential to their nature; so that the true Conclusion is* the fallen
Angels, while they are under forcible restraint from God to the contrary cannot
appear. But what this (being clear^d from the Ambiguity you express it in)
makes to the purpose I know not, unless God had promised for a determinate
time to detain them under this restraint, I do not understand what you intend
by the dead being raised by Holy Men; the most natural inference is, that in
imitation of them wicked men by their Enchantments, calling on a Damon to
appear in the shape of the dead, will pretend that they also can raise the
dead. The Romanists are much obliged to you for making Transubstantiation (so
much contended for by them) to be of as old a date as the appearance of Devils,
and that the one implies no more contradiction than the other: If so we do
well to think seriously whether we are not guilty of great sin in separating
from them; for certainly whatever private Men's Notions in this Age may be, yet
it is matter of great moment, that all Antiquity (the Saduce^s the Elder
Brethren of our Hobbists excepted) has believed the appearance of Evil Spirits
and their Illusions. I should be too officious if I offered to explain, how
matter, real matter may fall under the cognizance of one of our senses, and not
the rest. It is for you to show the impossibility thereof, if you will build
any thing upon your Assertion, to prove which your first Argument is (it seems
to me) a Chimera, which is not enough, when there are many to whom it seems to
be a truth: Your second is very dangerous, and highly derogatory of the honor
of God, between whom and the Devil you make comparison more than once as the
power of the Almighty must not be confined to be less than the Devils. And
again, to deny these three last were to make the Devil an Independent Power and
consequently a God. These expressions (which cannot but be very pleasing to the
Devil, who vainly boasts himself to be a Being without dependence) are
altogether groundless, and very unmeet to proceed from a Christian: Consider
what you are a doing, to establish a Doctrine (the contrary whereof the
greatest part of mankind does believe) you run upon such precipices, as if you
are mistaken, and that is not impossible, must totally destroy all Religion,
Natural and Revealed; for suppose it were generally believed according to you,
that the Devil cannot appear, because if he could he must be a God,
independent, an unconquered Enemy, and he does appear to us as we hear he has
to multitudes, both of the past and present ages: In such a case what remains
for us to do; but to fall down and worship him. Upon the head of possession,
you have recourse to that instance of Samson, who was empowered by God, to the
doing of things beyond the Natural strength of common Men, and thence you say,
we may least learn the Nature of Possession by evil Spirits, this comparison is
indeed very odious, and I had rather think you have fallen into it unawares;
for what greater Blasphemy than that God and the Devil do act the bodies, which
the one and the other do possess in the same manner; if the hypothesis I laid
down had not pleased you, yet you ought not (for fear of being deceived by vain
Philosophy, to have run so horrible an extreme, as to Assimulate God's manner
of working to the Devils, which necessarily implies, that either their Powers
are equal, or at least that they do not diffe^ in kind but in degree only; than
which nothing can be more impious or absurd: for the most possibly perfect
Creature, is infinitely distant from the Creator, and there can be no
Comparison between them. On the head of Witchcraft, you acknowledge the Witch
has not his Wonder-working Power from God; but then you say, the Devil has no
such Power to give; for if he had, he must be -- This way of reasoning as I
noted before, is very dangerous, and I think ought not to be used; besides
there is a great fallacy in your Dilemma; which because I perceive, you lay the
whole weight of the matter upon it, I will evince unto you. The Devil tho
superlatively Arrogant and Proud, nevertheless depends on the first cause for
his Being, and all his Powers, without whose Influx he or any other Creature
cannot subsist a moment, but must either return to their primitive Nothing, or
be continually preserved by the same Power, by the which they were at first
produced; therefore the Beings and Powers of all Creatures (because they
immediately flow from God) are good, and consequently the simple Actions, as
they proceed from those Powers, are in their own nature likewise good, the Evil
proceeding only from the Rebellious will of the Creature, wherefore it is no
Paradox, but a certain truth, that the same Action in respect of the first
cause is good, but in respect of the second is Evi^; for instance, the act of
Copulation is in it self good, instituted by God, and may be explicitly willed
and desired by the Soul, which sins not for exerting the simple Act; but for
exerting it contrary to the Laws prescribed by God: as in Wedlock and Adultery
there is the same specifical natural Action, which considered simply, as
flowing from a Power given to Man by God is certainly good; but considered with
relation to the rebellious will of the Adulterer (who lies with his Neighbors
Wife, whom he is forbid to touch) is a very great Evil. We may say the same of
all humane Actions, the Executioner and the Murderer do the same natural Act
of striking and killing: The difference consists in the rectitude of the ones
and depravation of the others will. These things premised, what more reason
have we to conclude that the Devil (because he shows signs and wonders to gain
belief to lies, which is very contrary to the will of God) must be therefore an
Independent Power; than that the Adulterer, the Murderer, or any other sinner
(because their Actions being Evil, of which God cannot be the cause) must be
Independent Beings: The deceit of the last is very palpable, and I doubt not
but you will readily acknowledge it, for it is obvious from what has been said
to the meanest Capacity, to distinguish between the Action it self, which is
good, and flows from God, and the Circumstances of the Action, the choice
whereof proceeds from the Iniquity of the Will, wherein does solely consist the
Sin; the parallel is so exact, that I cannot see the least shadow of reason,
why we ought not in like manner to distinguish whatever effect is produced by
the Devil; To whom (as to Man) God having given Powers, and a Will to Rule them
Powers, is truly and properly the cause of all the Actions (in a Natural, but
not Moral Sense) that flow from the Powers he has given. Therefore the
Wonder-working Power of the Devil, and the effects thereof, considered as Acts
of one of God's. Creatures, are not Evil but Good; the using that Power (which
proceeds from the Rebellion of Satan) to bear testimony to a lie, is that one,
which constitutes the Evil thereof.

And now I have done with your Argument, wherein you have indeed shown great
skill and dexterity in turning to your Advantage, what being fairly stated
makes against you, as the Appearance of Angels, and c. observing nicely the
rules of Art, and particularly that grand one of concealing, nay dissembling
the same Art, as when you quote that Scripture concerning vain Philosophy (of
which tho altogether foreign from the matter in hand yet) you intend to serve
your self with the Unthinking, who measure the Sense of words by their Jingle,
not knowing how to weigh the things they signify, and truly herein your end is
very Artificial; for you intend both to throw dirt at them that differ from
you, and at the same time to cover your self with such a subtle web, through
which you may see, and not be seen. What follows, is rather a Rhetorical
Lecture, such as the Patriots of Sects (who commonly Explain the Holy
Scriptures according to their own Dogma's, and so obtrude humane Invention for
the pure word of God) use with their Auditors, to recommend any Principle they
have a mind to establish, than an Impartial and through disquisition of a
controverted point; wherefore I do not think my self obliged to take any
further notice of it: especially seeing truth, which for the most part is
little regarded in such florid Discourses, and not any prejudice of Education,
Interest, or Party, did set me about this subject. I have never been used to
Complement in points of Controversy, therefore I hope you will not be angry,
because I have given you my thoughts naked and plain. I have not the least
motion in my mind of accusing you of any formal design to injure Religion; I
only observe unto you, that your over eager contention to maintain your
Principle, has hurried you to assert many things of much greater danger, both
in themselves and their consequences, than those you would seem to avoid; which
do amount to no more then that, Men being (in the ordinary course of
Providence) the Depositories of both Divine and Humane Laws, may (instead of
using them to preserve) pervert them to destroy; which indeed is very
lamentable.

But it is the inevitable consequent of our depraved nature, and cannot be
wholly remedied, till Sin, and the grand Author of Sin, the Devil, be entirely
conquered, and God be all in all; to whom, with the Son, and Holy Ghost, be
Glory for ever, Amen.

Sir, Your Affectionate Friend to serve you.
Boston, July, 25. 1694.

Boston August, 17. 1694. Worthy Sir,
YOURS of July, 25. being in some sort surprising to me, I could do no less
than say somewhat, as well to vindicate my self from those many Reflections,
mistakes and hard sensures therein; as also to vindicate what I conceive to be
Important truth, and to that end find it needful to repeat some part of mine,
Viz. Conclusion.

1. That the glorious Angels have their Mission and Commission from the most
High.

2. That without this they cannot appear to mankind.

3. That if the glorious Angels have not that power to go till commissioned, or
to appear to Mortals, then not the fallen Angels, who are held in Chains of
Darkness to the Judgment of the great Day.

4. That when the Almighty free Agent has a work to bring about for his own
glory, or Man's good, he can employ not only the Blessed Angels, but evil ones
in it.

5. That when the Divine Being will employ the Agency of Evil Spirits for any
service, it is with him the manner how they shall exhibit themselves, whether to
the bodily Eye, or Intellect only, or whether it shall be more or less
formidable.

To deny these three last, were to make the Devil an Independent Power, and
consequently a God.

The bare recital of these is sufficient to vindicate me from that reitterated
charge, of denying all appearances of Angels or Devils.

That the good Angels cannot appear without Mission and Commission from the
most high, is you say more than follows from the premises; but if you like not
such Negative deduct^on, though so natural, it concerns you (if you will assert
this Power to be in their Natures, and their non appearance only to proceed
from the rectitude of their Wills, and that without such Commission they have a
Power to appear to Mortals, and upon this to build so prodigious a Structure,
and c.) very clearly to prove it by Scripture, for Christians have good reason
to take the Apostles warning (if some Philosophers have taught that Man is
nothing but Matter. And others that it is not certain there is any Matter at
all) to take heed least they be spoiled through vain Philosophy, etc. but that
this should be alluded to by such as never heard of either Notion, or that it
was asserted that those real appearances to Joseph, and to the Apostle, was
through the Ministry of the Senses, is as vain as such Philosophy. As to the
Dead being raised, had I used Art or Rhetoric enough to explain my meaning to
you, I needed not now to rejoin. That it is as good an Argument to say, that
because Holy Prophets have raised the dead, therefore wicked Men have a Power
to raise the dead. As it is to say, because good Angels have appeared, therefore
the Evil have a Power to appear; for who can doubt, but if the Almighty shall
Commissionate a wicked Man to it, he also shall raise the dead, as is
intimated, Mat. 7.22. And in thy name done many wonderful Works. As to
comparisons being odious, particularly that concerning Samson, I think it
needful here to add these Scriptures further to confirm the fourth Conclusion.
2 Samuel 24.1. compared with 1 Chronicles. 21.1. In one it is God moved, etc. and in
the other, Satan provoked David to number the People. 2 Chronicles. 18.21. And the
Lord said, thou shall entice him, and thou shall also prevail, go out and do
even so; all which, with many more that might be produced, as they will show
the truth of the Conclusion; so that it is no odious Comparison to say, that as
the Almighty can make use of Good, so also of Evil Spirits, for the
accomplishing of his own wise ends, and can empower either without the help of
a Vehicle. For possessions must be numbered among Gods afflictive dispensations,
who also orders all the Circumstances thereof. But if any object God is not the
Author of Evil, and c. you have furnished me with a very learned Answer, by
distinguishing between the Act and the Evil of the Act, and to which it is
adapt, but will no wise suit where it is placed, till it be first proved that
the Devil has of himself such Power not only of appearing at pleasure, but of
working Miracles, and to the Almighty reserved only the Power of restraining;
for till this be proved the Dilemma must remain stable. He that asserts that --
Because good Angels have appeared, that therefore the fallen Angels have a
Power of themselves to appear to Mortals; And that they cannot be employed by
the Almighty; nor that he does not order the manner and Circumstances of such
appearance, what does he less than make the Devil an Independent Power, and
consequently a God! So he that asserts that the Devil has a Power of himself,
and Independent to work Wonders, and Miracles, and to empower Witches to do the
like in order to deceive, and c. What does he less than own him to be an
unconquered Enemy, and consequently a Sovereign Deity! and who is it that is
culpable? he that ascribes such Attributes to the Evil one, or he that asserts
that the so doing gives him (or ascribes to him) such Power as is the
prerogative of him only who is Almighty? And here Sir, it highly concerns you
to* consider your foundations, what proof from Scripture is to be found for
your Assertions; and who it is you are contending for. For hitherto nothing
like a proof has been offered from Scripture, which abounds so with the
contrary, that he that runs may read, As shall there be evil in the City, and
the Lord has not done it? who is he that says, and it comes to pass when the
Lord commands it not. Who among the Gods of the Heathen (of which the Devil
is one) can give Rain, and c.

But I shall not be tedious in multiplying proofs, to that which all seem to
own. For as to that stale plea of Universality, do say that I have read of one,
if not several, general Councels, that have not only disapproved, but
Anathematized them that have ascribed such Power to the Devils. And several
National Protestant Churches at this day in their Exhortation before the
Sacrament (among other Enormous Crimes) admonish all that believe any such
Power in the Witch, and c. to withdraw as unmeet to partake at the Lords Table.

And I believe Christians in general, if they were asked, would own that what
Powers the Devil may at any time have to appear, to afflict, destroy, or cause
tempests, and c. must be by Power or Commission from the Sovereign Being. And
that having such a Commission, not only Hail, but Frogs, Lice, or Flies shall
be empowered to plague a great King and Kingdom. And if so, this Sandy
Structure of the Devils appearance, and working Wonders at pleasure, and of
Impowering Witches to afflict, and c. (for to this narrow Crisis is that whole
Doctrine reduced) the whole disappears at the first shaking.

Thus worthy Sir, I have given you my sentiments, and the grounds thereof, as
plainly and as concise as I was able, tho it is indeed a subject that calls for
the ablest Pens to discuss, acknowledging my self to be insufficient for these
things; however I think I have done but my duty for the glory of God, the
Sovereign Being; and have purposely avoided such a reply as some parts of yours
required.

And pray that not only you and I, but all mankind may give to the Almighty the
glory due unto his name. From, Sir, Yours to command,

Witchcraft is manifestly a Work of the Flesh.

R. C.


PART V. An Impartial Account of the most Memorable Matters of Fact, touching
the supposed Witchcraft in New England,
MR. Parris had been some years a Minister in Salem-Village, when this sad
Calamity (as a deluge) overflowed them, spreading it self far and near: He was
a Gentleman of Liberal Education, and not meeting with any great Encouragement,
or Advantage in Merchandising, to which for some time he applied himself,
betook himself to the work of the Ministry; this Village being then vacant, he
met with so much Encouragement, as to settle in that Capacity among them.

After he had been there about two years, he obtained a Grant from a part of
the Town, that the House and Land he Occupied, and which had been Allotted by
the whole People to the Ministry, should be and remain to him, and c. as his
own Estate in Fee Simple. This occasioned great Divisions both between the
Inhabitants themselves, and between a considerable part of them and their said
Minister, which Divisions were but as a beginning or Praeludium to what
immediately followed.

It was the latter end of February 1691. when diverse young Persons belonging to
Mr. Parris's Family, and one or more of the Neighborhood, began to Act after a
strange and unusual manner, viz. as by getting into Holes, and creeping under
Chairs and Stools, and to use sundry odd Postures and Antic Gestures, uttering
foolish, ridiculous Speeches, which neither they themselves nor any others
could make sense of; the Physicians that were ^alled could assign no reason for
this; but it seems one of them, having recourse to the old shift, told them, he
was afraid they were Bewitched; upon such suggestions, they that were
concerned, applied themselves to Fasting and Prayer, which was attended not
only in their own private Families, but with calling in the help of others.

March the 11 th. Mr. Parris invited several Neighboring Ministers to join
with him in keeping a Solemn day of Prayer at his own House; the time of the
exercise those Persons were for the most part silent, but after any one Prayer
was ended, they would Act and Speak strangely and Ridiculously, yet were such
as had been well Educated and of good Behavior, the one a Girl of 11 or 12
years old, would sometimes seem to be in a Convulsion Fit, her Limbs being
twisted several ways, and very stiff, but presently her Fit would be over.

A few days before this Solemn day of Prayer, Mr. Parris's Indian Man and Woman
made a Cake of Rye Meal, with the Childrens Water, and Baked it in the Ashes,
and as is said, gave it to the Dog; this was done as a means to Discover
Witchcraft; soon after which those ill affected or afflicted Persons named
several that they said they saw, when in their F^s, afflicting of them.

The first complained of, was the said Indian Woman, named Tituba, she
confessed that the Devil urged her to sign a Book, which he presented to her,
and also to work Mischief to the Children, and c. She was afterward Committed
to Prison, and lay there till Sold for her Fees. The account she since gives of
it is, that her Master did beat her and otherways abuse her, to make her
confess and accuse (such as he called) her Sister-Witches, and that whatsoever
she said by way of confessing or accusing others, was the effect of such usage;
her Master refused to pay her Fees, unless she would stand to what she had said.

The Children complained likewise of two other Women, to be the Authors of
their Hurt, Viz. Sarah Good, who had long been counted a Melancholy or
Distracted Woman, and one Otburn, an Old Bedridden Woman; which two were Persons
so ill thought of, that the accusation was the more readily believed; and after
Examination before two Salem Magistrates, were committed: Mar^h the 19 th. Mr.
Lawson (who had been formerly a Preacher at the said Village) came thither, and
has since set fourth in Prin^ an account of what then passed, about which
time, as he says, they complained of Goodwife Cory, and Goodwife Nurse,
Members of the Churches at the Vilage and at Salem, many others being by that
time Accused.

March the 21 st, Goodwife Cory was examined before the Magistrates of Salom,
at the Meeting House in the Village; a throng of Spectators being present to
see the Novelty. Mr. Noyes one of the Ministers of Salem began with Prayer,
after which the Prisoner being called, in order to answer to what should be
Alleged against her, she desired that she might go to Prayer, and was answered
by the Magistrates, that they did not come to hear her pray, but to examine her.

The number of the Afflicted were at that time about Ten, Viz. Mrs. Pope, Mrs.
Putman, Goodwife Bibber, and Goodwife Goodall, Mary Wolco^t, Mercy Jews (at
Thomas Putmans) and Dr. Griggs Maid, and three Girls, Viz. Elizabeth Parris,
Daughter to the Minister, Abigail Williams his Neice, and Ann Putman, which
last three, were not only the beginners, but were also the chief in these
Accusations. These Ten were most of them present at the Examination, and did
vehemently accuse her of Afflicting them, by Biting, Pinching, Strangling, and
c. And they said, they did in their Fits see her likeness coming to them, and
bringing a Book for them to Sign: Mr. Hathorn a Magistrate of Salem, asked her,
why she Afflicted those Children? she said, she did not Afflict them, he asked
her, who did then? she said, I do not know, how should I know* she said, they
were Poor Distracted Creatures, and no heed to be given to what they said; Mr.
Hathorn and Mr. Noyes replied that it was the Judgment of all that were there
present, that they were bewitched, and only she (the Accused) said they were
Distracted: She was Accused by them, that the Black Man Whispered to her in her
Ear now (while she was upon Examination) and that she had a Yellow Bird, that
did use to Suck between her ^ingers, and that the said Bird did Suck nowin the
Assembly; order being given to look in that place to see if there were any
sign, the Girl that pretended to see it said, that it was too late now, for she
had removed a Pin, and put it on her Head, it was upon search found, that a Pin
was there sticking upright. When the Accused had any motion of their Body,
Hands or Mouth, the Accusers would cry out, as when she bit her Lip, they would
cry out of being bitten, if she grasped one hand with the other, they would cry
out of being Pinched by her, and would produce marks, so of the other motions
of her Body, as complaining of being Pressed, when she leaned to the seat next
her, if she stirred her Feet, they would stamp and cry out of Pain there. After
the hearing the said Cory was committed to Salem Prison, and then their crying
out of her abated.

March the 24 th, Goodwife Nurse was brought before Mr. Hathorn and Mr. Curwin
(Magistrates) in the Meeting House, Mr. Hale Minister of Beverly, began with
Prayer, after which she being Accused of much the same Crimes made the like
answers, asserting her own Innocence with earnestness. The Accusers were mostly
the same, Tho. Putmans Wife, and c. complaining much. The dreadful Shreiking
from her and others, was very amazing, which was heard at a great distance; she
was also Committed to Prison.

A Child of Sarah Goods, was likewise apprehended, being between 4 and 5 years
Old, the Accusers said this Child bit them, and would show such like marks, as
those of a small Set of Teeth upon their Arms, as many of the Afflicted as the
Child cast its Eye upon, would complain they were in Torment: which Child they
also Committed.

Concerning these that had been hitherto Examined and Committed, it is among
other things observed by Mr. Lawson (in Print) that they were by the Accusers
charged, to belong to a Company that did muster in Arms, and were reported by
them to keep Days of Fast, Thanksgiving and Sacraments; and that those
Afflicted (or Accusers) did in the Assembly, Cure each others, even with a
touch of their Hand, when strangled and otherways tortured, and would endeavor
to get to the Afflicted to relieve them thereby (for hitherto they had not used
the Experiment of bringing the Accused to touch the Afflicted, in order to
their Cure) and could foretell one another Fits to be coming, and would say,
look to such a one, she will have a Fit presently and so it happened, and that
at the same time when the Accused person was present, the Afflicted said they
saw her Spectre or likeness in other places of the Meeting House Sucking of
their Familiars.

The said Mr. Lawson being to Preach at the Village, after the Psalm was Sung,
Abigail Williams said, Now stand up and name your Text, after it was read, she
said, It is a long Text. Mrs. Po^e in the beginning of Sermon said to him, Now
there is enough of that. In Sermon, he referring to his Doctrine, Abigail
Williams said to him, I know no Doctrine you had, if you did name one I have
forgot it. Ann Putman an afflicted Girl, said, There was a yellow Bird face on
his Hat as it hung on the Pin in the Pulpit.

March 31. 1692. Was set apart as a day of Solemn Humiliation at Salem, upon
the Account of this Business, on which day Abigail Williams said, That she saw
a great number of Persons in the Village at the Administration of a Mock
Sacrament, where they had Bread as red as raw Flesh, and red Drink.

April 1. Mercy Lewis affirmed, That she saw a man in White, with whom she went
into a Glorious Place, viz. In her fits, where was no Light of the Sun, much
less of Candles, yet was full of Light and Brightness, with a great Multitude
in White Glittering Robes, who Sang the Song in 5. Rev. 9. and the 110 and 149
Psalms; And was grieved that she might tarry no longer in this place. This
White Man is said to have appeared several times to others of them, and to have
given them notice how long it should be before they should have another Fit.

April the 3 d. Being Sacrament Day at the Village, Sarah Cloys Sister to
Goodwife Nurse, a Member to one of the Churches, was (though it seems with
difficulty prevailed with to be) present; but being entered the place, and Mr.
Parris naming his Text, 6 John, 70. Have not I chosen you Twelve, and one of
you is a Devil (for what cause may rest as a doubt whether upon the account of
her Sisters being committed, or because of the choice of that Text) she rose up
and went out, the wind shutting the Door forcibly, gave occasion to some to
suppose she went out in Anger, and might occasion a suspicion of her; however
she was soon after complained of, examined and Committed.

April the 11 th. By this time the number of the Accused and Accusers being
much increased, was a Public Examination at Salem, Six of the Magistrates with
several Ministers being present, there appeared several who complained against
others with hidious clamours and Screechings. Goodwife Proctor was brought
thither, being Accused or cried out against; her Husband coming to attend and
assist her, as there might be need, the Accusers cried out of him also, and
that with so much earnestness, that he was Committed with his Wife. About this
time besides the Experiment of the Afflicted falling at the sight, and c. they
put the Accused upon saying the Lords Prayer, which one among them performed,
except in that petition [ Deliver us from Evil] she expressed it thus [ Deliver
us from all Evil] this was looked upon as if she Prayed against what she was now
justly under, and being put upon it again, and repeating those words [ Hallowed
be thy Name] she expressed it [ Hollowed be thy Name] this was counted a
depraving the words, as signifying to make void, and so a Curse rather then a
Prayer, upon the whole it was concluded that she also could not say it, and c.
Proceeding in this work of examination and Commitment* many were sent to
Prison. As an Instance, see the following Mittimus.

To Their Majesty's Goal-keeper in Salem.
YOU are in Their Majesty's Names hereby required to take into your care, and
safe custody, the Bodies of William Hobs, and Deborah his Wife, Mary Easty, the
Wife of Ilaac Easty, and Sarah Wild, the Wife of John Wild, all of Topsfield;
and Edward Bishop of Salem-Village, Husbandman, and Sarah his Wife, and Mary
Black, a Negro of Lieutenant Nathaniel Putmans of Salem-Vilage; also Mary
English the Wife of Philip English, Merchant in Salem; who stand charged with
High Suspicion of Sundry Acts of Witchcraft, done or committed by them lately
upon the Bodies of Ann Putman, Mary Lewis and Abigail Williams, of
Salam-Village, whereby great Hurt and Damage has been done to the Bodies of
the said Persons, according to the complaint of Thomas Putman and John Buxton
of Salem-Village, Exhibited. Salem Apr. 21. 1692. appears, whom you are to
secure in order to their further Examination. Fail not.

Dated Salem Ap. 22. 1692. John Hathorn, Assistants. Jona. Curwin, Assistants.

To Marshal George Herrick of Salem Essex, You are in their Majesty's Names
hereby required to convey the abovenamed to the Goal at Salem. Fail not.

Dated Salem Apr. 22. 1692. John Hathorn, Assistants. Jona. Curwin, Assistants.

The occasion of Bishops being cried out of, was he being at an Examination in
Salem, when at the Inn an afflicted Indian was very unruly, whom he undertook,
and so managed him, that he was very orderly, after which in riding home, in
company of him and other Accusers, the Indian fell into a fit, and clapping
hold with his Teeth on the back of the Man that rode before him, thereby held
himself upon the Horse, but said, Bishop striking him with his stick, the
Indian soon recovered, and promised he would do so no more; to which Bishop
replied, that he doubted not, but he could cure them all, with more to the same
effect; immediately after he was parted from them, he was cried out of; and c.

May, 14. 1692. Sir William Phips arrived with Commission from Their Majesty's
to be Governor, pursuant to the New-Charter; which he now brought with him;
the Ancient Charter having been vacated by King Charles, and King James (by
which they had a power not only to make their own Laws; but also to choose their
own Governor and Officers; and the Country for some years was put under an
absolute Gommission-Government, till the Revolution, at which time, tho more
than two thirds of the People were for reassuming their ancient Covernment (to
which they had encouragement by His then Royal Highness's Proclamation) yet
some that might have been better employed (in another Station) made it their
business (by printing, as well as speaking) to their utmost to divert them from
such a settlement; and so far prevailed, that for about seven Weeks after the
Revolution, here was not so much as a face of any Government; but some few Men
upon their own Nomination would be called a Committee of Safety; but at length
the Assembly prevailed with those that had been of the Government, to promise
that they would reassume; and accordingly a Proclamation was drawn, but before
publishing it, it was underwritten, that they would not have it understood that
they did reassume Charter-Government; so that between Government and no
Government, this Country remained till Sir William arrived; Agents being in
this time empowered in England, which no doubt did not all of them act
according to the Minds or Interests of those that empowered them, which is
manifest by their not acting jointly in what was done; so that this place is
perhaps a single Instance (even in the best of Reigns) of a Charter not
restored after so happy a Revolution.

This settlement by Sir William Phips his being come Governor put an end to
all disputes of these things, and being arrived, and having read his
Commission, the first thing he exerted his Power in, was said to be his giving
Orders that Irons should be put upon those in Prison; for tho for some time
after these were Committed, the Accusers ceased to cry out of them; yet now the
cry against them was renewed, which occasioned such Order; and tho there was
partiality in the executing it (some having them taken off almost as soon as
put on) yet the cry of these Accusers against such ceased after this Order.

May, 24. Mrs. Carry of Charlestown, was Examined and Committed. Her Husband Mr.
Nathaniel Carry has given account thereof, as also of her Escape, to this Effect,

I having heard some days, that my Wife was accused of Witchcraft, being much
disturbed at it, by advice, we went to Salem- Village, to see if the afflicted
did know her; we arrived there, 24. May, it happened to be a day ^p^ointed for
Examination; accordingly soon after our arrival, Mr. Hathorn and Mr. Curwin,
etc. went to the Meeting House, which was the place ap^ointed for that W^rk,
the Mininister began with Prayer, and having taken care to get a convenient
place, I observed, that the afflicted were two Girls of about Ten Years old,
and about two or three other, of about eighteen, one of the Girls talked m^st,
and could discern more than the rest. The Prisoners ^^re called in one by one,
and as they came in were cried cut of, etc. The Prisoner was placed about 7 or
8 fcot from the Justices, and the Accusers between the I^stices and them; the
Prisoner was ordered to stand right before ^ti^e Justices, with an Officer
appointed to hold each band, least they should tre^^iti^ aff^ict them, and the
Prisoners Eyes must be constantly on the Justices; for if they ^^ok'd on the
aff^icted, they would either fall into their Fits, or cry out of being ^urt by
them; after Examination of the Prisoners, who it was afflicted these Girls,
etc. they were put upon saying the Lords Prayer, as a (...) of their g^^il^;
after the afflicted seemed to be out of their Fits, they would l^ok s^eadj^st^^
on some one person, and frequently not speak; and then the Ius^ices said they
were struck dumb, and after a little time would speak again; then the Ius^ices
said to the Accusers, which of you will go and touch the Prisoner at the Bar?
then the most courageous would adventure, but before they ^ad made three steps
would ordinarily fall down as in a Fit; the Justices ordered that they should
be taken up and carried to the Prisoner, that she might touch them; and as soon
as they were touched by the accused, the Justices would say, they are well,
before I could discern any alteration; by which I observed that the Justices
understood the manner of it. Thus far I was only as a Spectat^r, my Wife also
was there part of the time, but no notice taken of her by the afflicted, except
once or twice they came to her and asked her name.

But I having an opportunity to Discourse Mr. Hale (with whom I had forme^^y
acquaintance) I took his advice, what I had best to do, and desired of him that
I might have an opportunity to speak with her that accused my Wife; which b^
pr^mised should be, I acquainting him that I reposed my trust in him.

Accordingly be came to me after the Examination was over, and told me I ^ad
now an opportunity to speak with the said Accuser, viz. Abigail Williams, a
Gi^l of 11, or 12 Years old; but that we could not be in private at Mr.
Parris's House, as he had promised me; we went therefore into the Alehouse,
where an Indian Man attended us, who it seems was one of the afflicted: to him
we gave some Cider, be showed several Scars, that seemed as if they had ^^en
long there, and showed them as done by Witchcraft, and acquainted us that his
Wife, who also was a Slave, was imprisoned for Witchcraft. And now instead of
one Accuser, they all came in, who began to tumble down like Swine, and then
three Women were called in to attend them. We in the Room were a^l at a s^^nd,
to see who they would cry out of; but in a short time they cried out, Carry; and
immediately after a Warrant was sent from the Iuslices to bring my Wife before
them, who were sitting in a Chamber near by, waiting for this.

Being brought before the Justices, her chief accusers were two Girls; my Wife
declared to the Justices, that she never had any knowledge of them before that
day; she was forced to stand with her Arms stretched out. I did request that I
might hold one of her hands, but it was denied me; then she desired me to wipe
the Tears from her Eyes, and the Sweat from her Face, which I did; then she
desired she might lean her self on me, saying, she should faint.

Justice Hathorn replied, she had strength enough to torment those persons, and
she should have strength enough to stand. I speaking something against their
cruel proceedings, they commanded me to be silent, or else I should be turned
out of the Room. The Indian before mentioned, was also brought in, to be one of
her Accusers: being come in, he now (when before the Justices) fell down and
tumbled about like a Hog, but said nothing. The Justices asked the Girls, who
afflicted the Indian? they answered she (meaning my Wife) and now lay upon him;
the Justices ordered her to touch him, in order to his cure, but her head must
be turned another way, least instead of curing, she should make him worse, by
her looking on him, her hand being guided to take hold of his; but the Indian
took hold on her hand, and pulled her down on the Floor, in a barbarous manner;
then his hand was taken off, and her hand put on his, and the cure was quickly
wrought. I being extremely troubled at their Inhumane dealings, uttered a hasty
Speech [That God would take vengeance on them, and desired that God would
deliver us out of the hands of unmerciful men.] Then her Mittimus was writ. I
did with difficulty andcharge obtain the liberty of a Room, but no Beds in it;
if there had, could have taken but little rest that' Night, she was committed
to Boston Prison; but I obtained a Habeas Corpus to remove her to Cambridge
Prison, which is in our County of Midldesex. Having been there one Night, next
Morning the Iaylor put Irons on her legs (having received such a command) the
weight of them was about eight pounds; these Irons and her other Afflictions,
soon brought her into Convulsion Fits, so that I thought she would have died
that Night, I sent to entreat that the Irons might be taken off, but all
entreaties were in vain, if it would have saved her Life, so that in this
condition she must continue. The Trials at Salem coming* on, I went thither, to
see how things were there managed; and finding that the Spectre-Evidence was
there received, together with Idle, if not malicious Stories, against Peoples
Lives, I did easily perceive which way the rest would go; for the same Evidence
that served for one, would serve for all the rest, I acquainted her with her
danger; and that if she were carried to Salem to be tried, I feared she would
never return. I did my utmost that she might have her Trial in our own County,
I with several others Petitioning the Judge for it, and were put in hopes of
it; but I soon saw so much, that I understood thereby it was not intended,
which put me upon consulting the means of her escape; which through the goodness
of God was effected, and she got to Road-Island, but soon found her self not
safe when there, by reason of the pursuit after her; from thence she went to
New York, along with some others that had escaped their cruel hands; where we
found his Excellency Benjamin Fletcher Esquire Governor, who was very courteous to
us. After this some of my Goods were seized in a Friends hands, with whom I had
left them, and my self imprisoned by the Sheriff, and kept in Custody half a
day, and then dismissed; but to speak of their usage of the Prisoners, and their
Inhumanity shown to them, at the time of their Execution, no sober Christian
could bear; they had also trials of cruel mockings; which is the more,
considering what a People for Religion, I mean the profession of it, we have
been; those that suffered being many of them Church Members, and most of them
unspotted in their Conversation, till their Adversary the Devil took up this
Method for accusing them.

Per Jonathan Carry.

May, 31. Captain John Aldin was Examined at Salem, and Committed to Boston
Prison, the Prison-Keeper seeing such a Man Committed, of whom he had a good
esteem, was after this the more Compassionate to those that were in Prison on
the like account; and did refrain from such hard things to the Prisoners, as
before he had used. Mr. Aldin himself has given account of his Examination, in
these Words.

An Account how John Aldin, Senior, was dealt with at Salem-Village.
John Aldin Senior, of Boston, in the County of Suffolk, Mariner; on the 28th.
Day of May 1692, was sent for by the Magistrates of Salem, in the County of
Essex, upon the Accusation of a company of poor distracted, or possessed
Creatures or Witches; and being sent by Mr. Stoughton, arrived there the 31st
of May, and appeared at Salem- Village, before Mr. Gidney Mr. Hathorn, and Mr.
Curwin.

Those Wenches being present, who played their juggling tricks, falling down,
crying out, and staring in Peoples Faces; the Magistrates demanded of them
several times, who it was of all the People in the Room that hurt them? one of
these Accusers painted several times at one Captain Hill, there present, but
spoke nothing; the same Accuser, had a Man standing at her back to hold her up;
he stooped down to her Ear, then she cried out, Aldin, Aldin afflicted her; one
of the Magistrates asked her if she had ever seen Aldin, she answered no, he
asked how she knew it was Aldin? She said, the Man told her so.

Then all were ordered to go down into the Street, where a Ring was made; and
the same Accuser cried out, there stands Aldin, a bold fellow with his Ha^ on
before the Judges, be sells Powder and Shot to the Indians and French, and lies
with the Indian Squares, and has Indian Papooses. Then was Aldin committed to
the Marshal's Custody, and his Sword taken from him; for they said he afflicted
them with his Sword. After some hours Aldin was sent for to the Meeting House
in the Village before the Magistrates; who required Aldin to stand upon a
Chair, to the open view of all the People.

The Accusers cried out that Aldin did pinch them, then, when he stood upon the
Chair, in the sight of all the People, a good way distant from them, one of the
Magistrates bid the Marshal to hold open Aldin's hands, that he might not pinch
those Creatures. Aldin asked them why they should think that he should come to
that Village to afflict those persons that he never knew or saw before? Mr.
Gidney bid Aldin confess, and give glory to God; Aldin said he hoped he should
give glory to God, and hoped he should never gratify the Devil; but appealed
to all that ever knew him, if they ever suspected him to be such a person, and
challenged any one, that could bring in any thing upon their own knowledge,
that might give suspicion of his being such an one. Mr. Gidney said he had
known Aldin many Years, and had been at Sea with him, and always looked upon
him to be an honest Man, but now he did see cause to alter his judgment: Aldin
answered, he was sorry for that, but he hoped God would clear up his Innocence,
that he would recall that judgment again, and added that he hoped that he
should with Job maintain his Integrity till he died. They bid Aldin look upon
the Accusers, which he did, and then they fell down. Aldin asked Mr. Gidney,
what Reason there could be given, why Aldin's looking upon him did not strike
him down as well; but no reason was given that I heard. But the Accusers were
brought to Aldin to touch them, and this touch they said made them well. Aldin
began to speak of the Providence of God, in suffering these Creatures to accuse
Innocent persons, Mr. Noyes asked Aldin why he would offer to speak of the
Providence of God, God by his Providence (said Mr. Noyes) governs the World,
and keeps it in peace; and so went on with Discourse, and stopped Aldin's mouth,
as to that. Aldin told Mr. Gidney, that he could assure him that there was a
lying Spirit in them, for I can assure you that there is not a word of truth in
all these say of me. But Aldin was again committed to the Marshal, and his
Mittimus written, which was as follows.

To Mr. John Arnold, Keeper of the Prison in Boston, in the County of Suffolk.
WHereas Captain John Aldin of Boston, Mariner, and Sarah Rice, Wife of
Nicholas Rice of Reding, Husbandman, have been this day brought before us, John
Hathorn, and Jonathan Curwin, Esquires; being accused and suspected of
perpetrating diverse acts of Witchcraft, contrary to the form of the Statue, in
that Case made and provided: These are therefore in Their Majesty's, King
William and Queen Marys Names, to Will and require you, to take into your
Custody, the bodies of the said John Aldin, and Sarah Rice, and them safely
keep, until they shall thence be delivered by due course of Law; as you will
answer the contrary at your peril; and this shall be your sufficient Warrant.
Given under our hands at Salem- Village, the 31 st. of May, in the Fourth Year
of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord and Lady, William and Mary, now King and
Queen over England, etc. Anno Dom. 1692.

John Hathorn, Assistants. Jonathan Curwin Assistants.
To Boston Aldin was carried by a Constable, no Bail would be taken for him;
but was delivered to the Prison-keeper, where he remained Fifteen Weeks; and
then observing the manner of Trials, and Evidence then taken, was at length
prevailed with to make his Escape, and being returned, was bound over to Answer
at the Superior Court at Boston, the last Tuesday in April, Anno, 1693. And
was there cleared by Proclamation, no^e appearing against him.

Per. John Aldin.

At Examination, and at other times, 'twas usual for the Accusers to tell of
the black Man, or of a Spectre, as being then on the Table, and c. The People
about would strike with Swords, or sticks at those places. One Justice broke
his Cane at this Exercise, and sometimes the Accusers would say, they struck
the Spectre, and it is reported several of the accused were hurt and wounded
thereby, though at home at the same time.

The Justices proceeding in these works of Examination, and Commitment, to the
end of May; there was by that time about a Hundred persons Imprisoned upon that
Account.

June. 2. A special Commission of Oyer and Terminer, having been Issued out, to
Mr. Stoughton, the New Lieutenant Governor; Major Saltonstall, Major Richards,
Major Gidny, Mr. Wait Winthrop, Captain Sewall, and Mr. Sergeant; These (a
Quorum of them) sat at Salem this day, where the most that was done this Week,
was the Trial of one Bishop, alias Oliver, of Salem; who having long undergone
the repute of a Witch, occasioned by the Accusations of one Samuel Gray: he
about 20 Years since, having charged her with such Crimes, and though upon his
Deathbed, he testified his sorrow and repentance for such Accusations, as
being wholly groundless; yet the report taken up by his means continued, and
she being accused by those afflicted, and upon search a Ter, as they call it,
being found, she was brought in guilty by the Jury; she received her Sentence
of Death, and was Executed, June 10. but made not the least Confession of any
thing relating to Witchcraft.

June 15. Several Ministers in and near Boston, having been to that end
consulted by his Excellency, expressed their minds to this effect, viz.

That they were affected with the deplorable state of the afflicted; That they
were thankful for the diligent care of the Rulers, to detect the abominable
Witchcrafts, which have been committed in the Country, praying for a perfect
discovery thereof. But advised to a cautious proceeding, least many Evils
ensue, and c. And that tenderness be used toward those accused, relating to
matters presumptive and convictive, and also to privacy in Examinations, and to
consult Mr. Perkins, and Mr. Bernard, what tests to make use of in the
Scrutiny: That Presumptions and Convictions ought to have better grounds, than
the Accusers affirming that they see such persons Specter afflicting of them:
And that the Devil may afflict in the shape of good Men; and that falling at
the sight, and ris^ng at the touch of the Accused, is no infallible proof of
guilt; That seeing the Devils strength consists in such Accusations, our
disbelieving them may be a means to put a period to the dreadful Calamities;
Nevertheless they humbly recommend to the Government, the speedy and vigorous
prosecution of such as have rendered themselves obnoxious, according to the
direction given in the Laws of God, and the wholesome Statutes of the English
Nation, for the Detection of Witchcraft.

This is briefly the substance of what may be seen more at large in Cases of
Conscience. (ult.) And one of them since taking occasion to repeat some part of
this advice, Wonders of the Invisible World, p. 83. declares, (notwithstanding
the Dissatisfaction of others) that if his said Book may conduce to promote
thankfulness to God for such Executions, he shall rejoice, and c.

The 30 th. of June, the Court according to Adjournment again fat; five more
were tried, viz. Sarah Good, and Rebecca Nurse, of Salem-Village; Susanna
Martin of Amsbury; Elizabeth How of Ipswich; and Sarah Wilds of Topsfield;
these were all condemned that Sessions, and were all Executed on the 19th. of
July.

At the Trial of Sarah Good, one of the afflicted fell in a Fit, and after
coming out of it, she cried out of the Prisoner, for stabing her in the breast
with a Knife, and that she had broken the Knife in stabbing of her, accordingly
a piece of the blade of a Knife was found about her. Immediately information
being given to the Court, a young Man was called, who produced a Haft and part
of the Blade, which the Court having viewed and compared, saw it to be the
same. And upon inquiry the young Man affirmed, that yesterday he happened to
break that Knife, and that he cast away the upper part, this afflicted person
being then present, the young Man was dismissed, and she was bidden by the Court
not to tell lies; and was improved after (as she had been before) to give
Evidence against the Prisoners.

At Execution, Mr. Noyes urged Sarah Good to Confess, and told her she was a
Witch, and she knew she was a Witch, to which she replied, you are a liar; I am
no more a Witch than you are a Wizard, and if you take away my Life, God will
give you Blood to drink.

At the Trial of Rebecka Nurse, this was remarkable that the Jury brought in
their Verdict not Guilty, immediately all the accusers in the Court, and
suddenly after all the afflicted out of Court, made an hideous outcry, to the
amazement, not only of the Spectators, but the Court also seemed strangely
surprised; one of the Judges expressed himself not satisfied, another of them as
he was going off the Bench, said they would have her Indicted anew. The chief
Judge said he would not Impose upon the Jury; but intimated, as if they had not
well considered one Expression of the Prisoners, when she was upon Trial, viz.
That when one Hobbs, who had confessed her self to be a Witch, was brought into
the Court to witness against her, the Prisoner turning her head to her, said [
What do you bring her? she is one of us] or to that effect, this together with
the Clamours of the Accusers, induced the Jury to go out again, after their
Verdict, not Guilty. But not agreeing, they came into the Court, and she being
then at the Bar, her words were repeated to her, in order to have had her
explanation of them, and she making no Reply to them, they found the Bill, and
brought her in Guilty; these words being the Inducement to it, as the Foreman
has signified in writing, as follows.

July, 4. 1692.
I Thomas Fisk, the Subscriber hereof, being one of them that were of the Jury
the last Week at Salem- Court, upon the Trial of Rebecka Nur^e, etc. being
desired by some of the Relations to give a Reason why the Jury brought her in
Guilty, after her Verdict not Guilty; I do hereby give my Reasons to be as
follows, viz.

When the Verdict not Guilty was, the honored Court was pleased to object
against it, saying to them, that they think they let slip the words, which the
P^isoner at the Bar spoke against her self, which were spoken in reply to
Goedwife Hobbs and her Daughter, who had been faulty in setting their hands to
the Devils Book, as they have confessed formerly; the words were [What do these
persons give in Evidence against me now, they used to come among us.] After the
honored Court had manifested their dissatisfaction of the Ver* dict, several
of the Jury declared themselves desirous to go out again, and thereupon the
honored Court gave leave; but when we came to consider of the Case, I could
not tell how to take her words, as an Evidence against her, till she had a
further opportunity to put her Sense upon them, if she would take it; and then
going into Court, I mentioned the words aforesaid, which by one of the Court
were affirmed to have been spoken by her, she being then at the Bar, but made
no reply, nor interpretation of them; whereupon these words were to me a
principal Evidence against her.

Thomas Fisk.

When Goodwife Nurse was informed what use was made of these words, she put in
this following Declaration into the Court.

THese presents do humbly show, to the honored Court and Jury, that I being
informed, that the Jury brought me in Guilty, upon my saying that Goodwife
Hobbs and her Daughter were of our Company; bu^ I intended no otherways, then
as they were Prisoners with us, and therefore did then, and yet do judge them
not legal Evidence against their fellow Prisoners. And I being something hard
of hearing, and full of grief, none informing me how the Court took up my
words, and therefore had not opportunity to declare what I intended, when I
said they were of our Company.

Rebecka Nurse.

After her Condemnation she was by one of the Ministers of Salem
excommunicated; yet the Governor saw cause to grant a Reprieve, which when
known (and some say immediately upon granting) the Accusers renewed their
dismal outcries against her, insomuch that the Governor was by some Salem
Gentleman prevailed with to recall the Reprieve, and she was Executed with the
rest.

The Testimonials of her Christian behavior, both in the course of her Life,
and at her Death, and her extraordinary care in educating her Children, and
setting them good Examples, and c. under the hands of so many, are so numerous,
that for brevity they are here omitted.

It was at the Trial of these that one of the Accusers cried, out publicly of
Mr. Willard Minister in Boston, as afflicting of her, she was sent out of the
Court; and it was told about she was mistaken in the person.

August, 5. The Court again sitting, six more were tried on the same Account,
viz. Mr. George Buroughs, sometime Minister of Wells, John Procter, and
Elizabeth Procter his Wife, with John Willard of Salem-Village, George Jacobs
Senior, of Salem, and Martha Carryer of Andover; these were all brought in
Guilty and Condemned; and were all Executed, Aug. 19. except Procters Wife, who
pleaded Pregnancy.

Mr. Buroughs was carried in a Cart with the others, through the Streets of
Salem to Execution; when he was upon the Ladder, he made a Speech for the
clearing of his Innocence, with such Solemn and Serious Expressions, as were to
the Admiration of all present; his Prayer (which he concluded by repeating the
Lord's Prayer) was so well worded and uttered with such composedness, and such
(at least seeming) fervency of Spirit, as was very affecting, and drew Tears
from many (so that it seemed to some, that the Spectators would hinder the
Execution) the accusers said the black Man stood and dictated to him; as soon
as he was turned off, Mr. Cotton Mather, being mounted upon a Horse, addressed
himself to the People, partly to declare, that he was no ordained Minister, and
partly to possess the People of his guilt; saying, That the Devil has often
been transformed into an Angel of Light; and this did somewhat appease the
People, and the Executions went on; when he was cut down, he was dragged by the
Halter to a Hole, or Grave, between the Rocks, about two Foot deep, his Shirt
and Breeches being pulled off, and an old pair of Trousers of one Executed, put
on his lower parts, he was so put in, together with Willard and Carryer, one of
his Hands and his Chin, and a Foot of one them being left uncovered.

John Willard, had been employed to fetch in several that were accused; but
taking dissatisfaction from his being sent, to fetch up some that he had better
thoughts of, he declined the Service, and presently after he himself was
accused of the same Crime, and that with such vehemence, that they sent after
him to apprehend him; he had made his Escape as far as N^shawag, about 40 Miles
from Salem; yet it is said those Accusers did then presently tell the exact
time, saying, now Willard is taken.

John Procter and his Wife being in Prison, the Sheriff came to his House and
seized all the Goods, Provisions, and Cattle that he could come at, and sold
some of the Cattle at half price, and killed others, and put them up sor the
West Indies; threw out the Beer out of a Barrel, and carried away the Barrel;
emptied a Pot of Broth, and took away the Pot, and le^t nothing in the House
for the support of the Children: No part of the said Goods are known to be
returned. Procter earnestly requested Mr. Noyes to pray with and for him, but
it was wholly denied, because he would not own himself to be a Witch.

During his Imprisonment he sent the following Letter, in behalf of himself and
others.

Mr. Mather, Mr. Allen, Salem- Prison, July, 23. 1692. Mr. Moody, Mr. Willard,
and Salem- Prison, July 23. 1692. Mr. Bailey. Salem- Prison, July, 23. 1692.
Reverend Gentlemen.
THe Innocence of our Case with the Enmity of our Ascusers and our Judges, and
Jury, whom nothing but our Innocent Blood will serve their turn, having
Condemned us already before our Trials, being so much insensed and engaged
against us by the Devil, makes us bold to B^g and Implors your Favorable
Assistonce of this our Humble Petition to his Excellency, That if it be
possible our Innocent Blood may be spared, which undoubtedly otherwise will be
shed, if the Lord does not mercifully step in. The Mag^strates, Ministers,
Iewries, and all the People in general, being so much enraged and incensed
against us by the Delusion of the Devil, which we can term no other, by reason
we know in our Own Consciences, we are all Innocent Persons. Here are five
Persons who have lately confessed themselves to be Witches, and do accuse some
of us, of being along with them at a Sacrament, since we were committed into
close Prison, which we know to be Lies. Two of the 5 are (CarriersSons)
Young Men, who would not confess any thing till they tied them Neck and Heels
till the Blood was ready to come out of their Noses, ana 'ti; credibly believed
and reported this was the occasion of making them confess that they never did,
by reason they said one had been a Witch a Month, and another five W^eks, and
that their Mother had made them so, who has been confined here this nine Weeks.
My Son William Procter, when he was examined, because he would not confess that
he was Guilty, when he was Innocent, they eyed him Neck and Heels till the
Blood gushed out at his Nose, and would have kept him so 24 Hours, if ^word
more Merciful then the rest, had not taken pity on him, and caused him to be
unbound. These Actions are very like the Popish Cruelties. They have already
undone us in our Estates, and that will not serve their turns, without our
Innocent Bloods. If it cannot be granted that we can have our Trials at Boston,
we humbly beg that you would endeavor to have these Magistrates changed, and
others in their rooms, begging also and beseeching you would be pleased to be
h^re, if not all, some of you at our Trials, hoping thereby you may be the
means of saving the shedding our Innocent Bloods, desiring your Prayers. to the
Lord in Our behalf, we rest your Poor Afflicted Servants,

John Procter, and c.


He pleaded very hard at Execution, for a little respite of time, saying that
he was not fit to Die; but it was not granted.

Old Jacobs being Condemned, the Sheriff and Officers came and seized all he
had, his Wife had her Wedding Ring taken from her, but with great difficulty
obtained it again. She was forced to buy Provisions of the Sheriff, such as he
had taken, toward her own support, which not being sufficient, the Neighbors
of Charity relieved her.

Margaret Jacobs being one that had confessed her own Guilt- and testified
against her Grandfather Jacobs, Mr. Buroughs, and John Willard, She the day
before Executions, came to Mr. Buroughs, acknowledging that she had belyed
them, and begged Mr. Buroughs Forgiveness, who not only forgave her, but also
Prayed with and for her. She wrote the following Letter to her Father.

From the Dungeon in Salem-Prison, August 20. 92. Honored Father,
AFter my Humble Duty Remembered to you, hoping in the Lord of your good Health,
as Blessed be God I enjoy, tho in abundance of Affliction, being close confined
here in a loathsome Dungeon, the Lord look down in mercy upon me, not knowing
how soon I shall be put to Death, by means of the Afflicted Persons; my
Grandfather having Suffered already, and all his Estate Seized for the King.
The reason of my Confinement is this, I having, through the Magistrates
Threa^nings, and my own Vil^ and Wretched Heart, confessed several things
contrary so my Conscience and Knowledge, tho to the Wounding of my own Soul, the
Lord pardon me for it; but Oh! the terrors of a wounded Conscience who can
bear. But blessed be the Lord, he would not let me go on in my Sins, but in
mercy I hope so my Soul would not suffer me to keep it in any longer, but I was
forced to confess the truth of all before the Magistrates, who would not
believe me, but it is their pleasure to put me in here, and God knows how soon I
shall be put to Death. Dear Father, let me beg your Prayers to the Lord on my
behalf, and send us a Joyful and Happy meeting in Heaven. My Mother poor Woman
is very Craz^y, and remembers her kind Love to you, and to Uncle, viz. D. A. So
leaving you to the protection of the Lord, I rest your Dutiful Daughter,

Margaret Jacobs.


At the time appointed for her Trial, she had an Imposthume in her head, which
was her Escape.

September 9. Six more were tried, and received Sentance of Death, viz. Martha
Cory of Salem-Village, Mary Easty of Topsfield, Al^c^ Parker and Ann Pudeater
of Salem, Dorcas Hoar of Beverly, and Mary Bradberry of Salisbury. September
16. Giles Cory was pressed to Death.

September 17. Nine more received Sentance of Death, viz. Margaret Scot of
Rowly, Goodwife Redd of Marblehead, Samuel Wardwell, and Mar^ Parker of
Andover, also Abigail Falkner of Andover, who pleaded Pregnancy, Rebecka Eames
of Boxford, Mary Lacy, and Ann F^sie of Andover, and Abigail Hobbs of
Topsfield. Of these Eight were Executed, September 22. viz. Martha Cory, Mary
Easty, Alice Parker, Ann Pudeat^r, Margaret Scot, Willmet Redd, Samuel
Wardwell, and Mary Parker.

Giles Cory pleaded not Guilty to his Indictment, but would not put himself
upon Trial by the Jury (they having cleared none upon Trial) and knowing there
would be the same Witnesses against him, rather chose to undergo what Death
they would put him to. In pressing his Tongue being pressed out of his Mouth, the
Sheriff with his Cane forced it in again, when he was dying. He was the first
in New England, that was ever pressed to Death.

The Cart going go the Hill with these Eight to Execution, was for some time at
a set; the afflicted and others said, that the Devil hindered it, and c.

Martha Cory, Wife to Giles Cory, protesting her Innocence, concluded her Life
with an Eminent Prayer upon the Ladder.

Wardwell having formerly confessed himself Guilty, and after denied it, was
soon brought upon his Trial; his former Confession and Spectre Testimony was
all that appeared against him. At Execution while he was speaking to the
People, protesting his Innocence, the Executioner being at the same time
smoking Tobacco, the smoke coming in his Face, interrupted his Discourse,
those Accusers said, the Devil hindered him with smoke.

Mary Easty, Sister also to Rebecka Nurse, when she took her last farewell of
her Husband, Children and Friends, was* as is reported by them present, as
Serious, Religious, Distinct, and Affectionate as could well be expressed,
drawing Tears from the Eyes of almost all present. It seems besides the
Testimony of the Accusers and Confessors, another proof, as it was counted,
appeared against her, it having been usual to search the Accused for Tets; upon
some parts of her Body, not here to be named, was found an Excrescence, which
they called a Tet. Before her Death she put up the following Petition,

To the Honorable Judge and Bench now sitting in Judicature in Salem, and the
Reverend Ministers, humbly shows, That whereas your humble poor Petitioner
being Condemned to die, does humbly beg of you, to take it into your Judicious
and Pious Consideration, that your poor and humble Petitioner knowing my own
Innocence (blessed be the Lord for it) and seeing plainly the Wiles and
Subtilty of my Accusers, by my self, cannot but judge charitably of others,
that are going the same way with my self, if the Lord step not mightily in. I
was confined a whole Month on the same account that I am now condemned for, and
then cleared by the Afflicted persons, as some of your Honors know, and in two
days time I was cried out upon by them, and have been confined, and now am
condemned to die. The Lord above knows my Innocence th^n, and likewise does
now, as at the great day will be known to Men and Angels. I Petition to your
Honors not for my own Life, for I know I must die, and my appointed time is
set; but the Lord he knows it is, if it be possible, that no more Innocent
Blood be shed, which undoubtedly cannot be avoided in the way and course you go
in. I question not, but your Honors do to the utmost of your powers, in the
discovery and detecting of Witchcraft and Witches, and would not be guilty of
Inn^cent Blood for the World; but by my own Innocence I know you are in the
wrong way, the Lord in his infinite Mercy direct you in this great work, if it
be his blessed will, that Innocent Blood be not shed; I would humbly beg of
you, that your Honors would be pleased to Examine some of those confessing
Witches, I being confident there are several of them have belyed themselves and
others, as will appear, if not in this World, I am sure in the World to come,
whither I am going; and I question not, but your selves will see an alteration
in these things: They say, my self and others have made a league with the
Devil, we cannot confess, I know and the Lord he knows (as will shortly appear)
they belie me, and so I question not but they do others; the Lord alone who is
the searcher of all hearts, knows that as I shall answer it at the Tribunal
Seat, that I know not the least thing of Witchcraft, therefore I cannot, I
durst not belie my own Soul. I beg your Honors not to deny this my humble
Petition, from a poor dying Innocent person, and I question not but the Lord
will give a blessing to your Endeavors.

Mary Esty.


After Execution Mr. Noyes turning him to the Bodies, said, what a sad thing it
is to see Eight Firebrands of Hell hanging there.

In October, 1692, One of Wenham complained of Mrs. Hale, whose Husband, the
Minister of Beverly, had been very forward in these Prosecut^ons, but being
fully satisfied of his Wives sincere Christianity* caused him to alter his
Judgment; for it was come to a stated Controversy, among the New England
Divines, whether the Devil could Afflict in a good Man's shape; it seems
nothing else could convince him: yet when it came so near to himself, he was
soon convinced that the Devil might so Affl^ct. Which same reason did
afterward prevail with many others; and much influenced to the succeeding
change at Trials.

October, 7. ( Edward Bishop and his Wife having made their Escape out of
Prison) this day Mr. Co^win the Sheriff, came and Seiz^d his Goods, and Cattle,
and had it not been for his second Son (who borrowed Ten Pound and gave it him)
they had been wholly lost, the Receipt follows; but it seems they must be
content with such a Receipt as he would give them.

Received this 7 th. day of October, 1692. of Samuel Bishop* of the Town of
Salem, of the County of Essex, in New England, Cordwainer, in full
satisfaction, a valuable Sum of Money, for the Goods and C^attels of Edward
Bishop, Senior, of the Town and County aforesaid, Husbandman; which Goods and
Chattels being seized, for that the said Edward Bishop, and Sarah his Wife,
having been committed for Witchcraft and Felony, have made their Escape; and
their Goods and Chattles were forfeited unto their Majesty's, and now being in
Possession of the said Samuel Bishop; and in behalf of Their Majesty's, I do
hereby discharge the said Goods and Chattles, the day and year above written,
as witness my hand,

George Corwin, Sheriff.

But before this the said Bishops Eldest Son, having Married into that Family
of the Putmans, who were chief Prosecutors in this business; he holding a Cow
to be branded lest it should be seized, and having a Push or Boil upon his
Thigh, with his straining it broke; this is that that was pretended to be burnt
with the said Brand; and is one of the bones thrown to the Dogmatical to pick,
in Wonders of the Invisible World, P. 143. the other of a Corner of a Sheet,
pretended to be taken from a Spectre, it is known that it was provided the day
before, by that Afflicted person, and the third bone of a Spindle is almost as
easily provided, as the piece of the Knife; so that Apollo needs not herein be
consulted, and c.

Mr. Philip English, and his Wife having made their Escape out of Prison, Mr.
Corwin the Sheriff seized his Estate, to the value of about Fifteen Hundred
Pound, which was wholly lost to him, except about Three H^ndred Pound value,
(which was afterward restored).

After Good wife Hoar was Condemned, her Estate was seized, and was also bought
again for Eight Pound.

George Jacobs, Son to old Jacobs being accused, he fled, then the Officers
came to his House, his Wife was a Woman Crazy in her Senses and had been so
several Years She it seems had been also accused, there were in the House with
her only four small Children, and one of them sucked her Eldest Daughter, being
in Prison; the Officer persuaded her out of the House, to go along with him,
telling her she should speedily return, the Children ran a great way after her
crying.

When she came where the Afflicted were, being asked, they said they did not
know her, at length one said, don't you know Jacobs the old Witch, and then
they cried out of her, and fell down in their Fits; she was sent to Prison, and
lay there Ten Months, the Neighbors of pity took care of the Children to
preserve them from perishing.

About this time a New Scene was begun, one Joseph Ballard of Andover, whose
Wife was ill (and after died of a Fever) sent to Salem for some of those
Accusers, to tell him who afflicted his Wife; others did the like: Horse and
Man were sent from several places to fetch those Accusers who had the Spectral
sight, that they might thereby tell who afflicted those that were any ways ill.

When these came into any place where such were, usually they fell into a Fit;
after which being asked who it was that afflicted the person, they would, for
the most part, name one whom they said sat on the head, and another that sat on
the lower parts of the afflicted. Soon after Ballard's sending (as above) more
than Fifty of the People of Andover were complained of, for afflicting their
Neighbors. Here it was that many accused themselves, of Riding upon Poles
through the Air; Many Parents believing their Children to be Witches, and many
Husbands their Wives, and c. When these Accusers came to the House of any upon
such account, it was ordinary for other young People to be taken in Fits, and
to have the same Spectral sight.

Mr. Dudley Bradstreet, a Justice of Peace in Andover, having granted out
Warrants against, and Committed Thirty or Forty to Prisons, for the supposed
Witchcrafts, at length saw cause to forbear granting out any more Warrants.
Soon after which he and his Wife were cried out of, himself was (by them) said
to have killed Nine persons by Witchcraft, and found it his safest course to
make his Escape.

A Dog being afflicted at Salem-Village, those that had the Spectral sight
being sent for, they accused Mr. John Bradstreet (Brother to the Justice) that
he afflicted the said Dog, and now rid upon him: He made his Escape into
Pescattequa-Government, and the Dog was put to death, and was all of the
Afflicted that suffered death.

At Andover, the Afflicted complained of a Dog, as afflicting of them, and
would fall into their Fits at the Dogs looking upon them; the Dog was put to
death.

A worthy Gentleman of Boston, being about this time accused by those at
Andover, he sent by some particular Friends a Writ to Arrest those Accusers in
a Thousand Pound Action for Defamation, with instructions to them, to inform
themselves of the certainty of the proof, in doing which their business was
perceived, and from thence forward the Accusations at Andover generally ceased.

In October some of these Accusers were sent for to Gloucester, and occasioned
four Women to be sent to Prison, but Salem Prison being so full it could
receive no more; two were sent to Ipswich Prison. In November they were sent
for again by Lieutenant Stephens, who was told that a Sister of his was
bewitched; in their way passing over Ipswich-Bridge, they met with an old
Woman, and instantly fell into their Fits: But by this time the validity of
such Accusations being much questioned, they found not that Encouragement they
had done elsewhere, and soon withdrew.

These Accusers swore that they saw three persons sitting upon Lieutenant
Stephens's Sister till she died; yet Bond was accepted for those Three.

And now Nineteen persons having been hanged, and one pressed to death, and Eight
more condemned, in all Twenty and Eight, of which above a third part were
Members of some of the Churches in N. England, and more than half of them of a
good Conversation in general, and not one cleared. About Fifty having confessed
themselves to be Witches, of which not one Executed; above an Hundred and Fifty
in Prison, and above Two Hundred more accused. The Special Commission of Oyer
and Terminer comes to a period, which had no other foundation than the
Governors Commission, and had proceeded in the manner of swearing Witnesses,
viz. By holding up the hand, (and by receiving Evidences in writing) according
to the Ancient Usage of this Country; as also having their Indictments in
English. In the Trials, when any were Indicted for Afflicting, Pining, and
wasting the Bodies of particular persons by Witchcraft; it was usal to hear
Evidence of matter foreign, and of perhaps Twenty or Thirty Years standing,
about over-setting Carts, the death of Cattle, unkindness to Relations, or
unexpected Accidents befalling after some quarrel. Whether this was admitted by
the Law of England, or by what other Law, wants to be determined; the
Executions seemed mixed, in pressing to death for not pleading, which most
agrees with the Laws of England, and Sentencing Women to be hanged for
Witchcraft, according to the former practice of this Country, and not by
burning, as is said to have been the Law of England. And though the confessing
Witches were many; yet not one of them that confessed their own guilt, and
abode by their Confession were put to Death.

Here follows what account some of those miserable Creatures give of their
Confession under their own hands.

We whose Names are under written, Inhabitants of Andover, when as that
horrible and tremendous Judgment beginning at Salem- Village, in the Year,
1692. (by some) called Witchcraft, first breaking forth at Mr. Parris's House,
several Young persons being seemingly afflicted, did accuse several persons for
afflicting them, and many there believing it so to be; we being informed that
if a person were sick, that the afflicted persons could tell, what or who was
the cause of that sickness. Joseph Ballard of Andover (his Wife being sick at
the same time) he either from himself, or by the advice of others, fetched two
of the persons called the afflicted persons, from Salem- Village to Andover.
Which was the beginning of that dreadful Calamity that befell us in Andover. And
the Authority in Andover, believing the said Accusations to be true, sent for
the said persons to come together, to the Meeting House in Andover (the
afflicted persons being there.) After Mr. Bernard had been at Prayer, we were
blindfolded, and our hands were laid upon the afflicted persons, they being in
their Fits, and falling into their Fits at our coming into their presence (as
they said) and some led us and laid our hands upon them, and then they said
they were well, and that we were guilty of afflicting of them; whereupon we
were all seized as Prisoners, by a Warrant from the Justice of the Peace, and
forthwith carried to Salem. And by reason of that sudden surprizal, we knowing
our selves altogether Innocent of that Crime, we were all exceedingly
astonished and amazed, and consternated and affrighted even out of our Reason;
and our nearest and dearest Relations, seeing us in that dreadful condition,
and knowing our great danger, apprehending that there was no other way to save
our lives, as the case was then circumstantiated but by our confessing our
selves to be such and such persons, as the afflicted represented us to be, they
out of tender love* and pity persuaded us to confess what we did confess. And
indeed that Confession, that is said we made, was no other than what was
suggested to us by some Gentlemen; they telling us, that we were Witches, and
they knew it, and we knew it, and they knew that we knew it, which made us
think that it was so; and our understanding, our reason, and our faculties
almost gone; we were not capable of judging our condition; as also the hard
measures they used with us, rendered us incapable of making our Defense; but
said any thing and every thing which they desired, and most of what we said,
was but in effect a consenting to what they said. Sometime after when we were
better composed, they telling of us what we had confessed, we did profess that
we were Innocent, and Ignorant of such things. And we hearing that Samuel
Wardwell had renounced his Confession, and quickly after Condemned and
Executed, some of us were told that we were going after Wardwell.

Mary Osgood, Mary Tiler, Deliv. Dane, Abigail Barker, Sarah Wilson, Hannah
Tiler.

It may here be furth^r added concerning those that did Confess, that besides
that powerful Argument, of Life (and freedom from hardships, and Irons, not
only promised, but also performed to all that owned their guilt.) There are
numerous Instances, too many to be here inserted, of the redious Examinations
before private persons, many hours together; they all that time urging them to
Confess (and taking turns to persuade them) till the accused were wearied out
by being forced to stand so long, or for want of Sleep, and c. and so brought
to give an Assent to what they said; they then asking them, Were you at such a
Witch meeting, or have you signed the Devil's Book, and c. upon their replying,
yes, the whole was drawn into form as their Confession.

But that which did mightily further such Confessions, was their nearest and
dearest Relations urging them to it. These seeing no other way of escape for
them, thought it the best advice that could be given; hence it was that the
Husbands of some, by counsel often urging, and utmost earnestness, and Children
upon their Knees entreating, have at length prevailed with them, to say they
were guilty.

AS to the manner of* Trials, and the Evidence taken for Convictions at Salem,
it is already set forth in Print, by the Reverend Mr. Cotton Mather, in his
Wonders of the Invisible World, at the Command of his Excellency, Sir William
Phips; with not only the Recommendation, but thanks of the Lieutenant
Governor; and with the Approbation of the Reverend Mr. I. M. in his Postscript
to his Cases of Conscience; which last Book was set forth by the consent of the
Ministers in and near Boston.

Two of the Judges have also given their Sentiments in these words, P. 147.

The Reverend and worthy Author, having at the direction of his Excellency the
Governor, so far obliged the Public, as to give some account of the
sufferings, brought upon the Country by Witchcrafts, and of the Trials which
have passed upon several executed for the same.

Upon perusal thereof, We find the matters of Fact and Evidence truly reported,
and a prospect given of the Methods of Conviction, used in the proceedings of
the Court at Salem.

Boston, October 11. 1692. William Stoughton Samuel Sewall.


And considering that this may fall into the hands of such as never saw those
Wonders, it may be needful to transcribe the whole account he has given
thereof, without any variation (but with one of the Indictments annexed to the
Trial of each) which is thus prefaced, P. 81, 82, 83.

BUt I shall no longer detain my Reader from his expected entertainment, in a
brief account of the Trials, which have passed upon some of the Malefactors,
lately Executed at Salem, for the Witchcrafts whereof they stood convicted. For
my own part I was not present at any of them; nor ever had I any personal
prejudice at the persons thus brought upon the Stage; much less, at the
surviving Relations of those persons, with and for whom, I would be as hear^y a
mourne^, as any Man living in the World: The Lord comfort them! But having
received a command so to do, I can do no other than shortly relate the chief
Matters of Fact, which occurred in the Trials of some that were Executed; in an
Abridgment collected out of the Court-Papers, on this occasion put into my
hands. You are to take the truth, just as it was; and the truth will hurt no
good Man. There might have been more of these, if my Book would not thereby
have been swelled too big; and if some other Worthy hands did not perhaps
intend something further in these Collections; for which cause I have only
singled out four or five, which may serve to Illustrate the way of dealing,
wherein Witchcrafts use to be concerned; and I report matters not as an
Advocate, but as an Historian.

They were some of the Gracious words inserted in the Advice, which many of the
Neighboring Ministers did this Summer humbly lay before our Honorable Judges,
We cannot but with all thankfulness, acknowledge the success, which the
merciful God has given unto the Sedulous and Assiduous Endeavors of our
Honorable Rulers* to detect the Abominable Witchcrafts, which have been
committed in the Country; Humbly praying that the discovery of those
Mysterious, and Mischievous wickednesses, may be perfected. If in the midst of
the many Dissatisfactions among us, the publication of these Trials, may
promote such a Pious thankfulness unto God, for Justice being so far executed
among us, I shall rejoice that God is glorified; and pray that no wrong steps
of ours may ever sully any of his glorious works.

The Indictment of George Buroughs.
Essex ff. Anno Regni Regis and Reginae Willielmi and Mariae, nun^ Angliae,
etc. quarto --
THE Jurors for our Sovereign Lord and Lady the King and Queen present, That
George Buroughs, late of Falmouth, in the Province of the Massachusetts Bay,
in New England, Clerk.

The 9th. Day of May, in the fourth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord and
Lady William and Mary, by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, King and Queen Defenders of the Faith, and c. And diverse other days
and times, as well before as after, certain detestable Arts, called
Witchcrafts, and Sorceries, Wickedly and Felloniously has used, practiced, and
exercised, at and within the Township of Salem, in the County of Essex
aforesaid, in upon, and against one Mary Wolcott of Salem-Village, in the
County of Essex, Single woman, by which said wicked Arts the said Mary Wolcott,
the Ninth day of May, in the fourth Year abovesaid, and diverse other days and
times, as well before as after* was and is Tortured, Afflicted, Pined,
Consumed, Wasted and Tormented, against the Peace of our Sovereign Lord and
Lady, the King and Queen, and against the Form of the Statute in that Case made
and provided.

Witnesses, Mary Wolcott, Sarah Vibber, Mercy Lewis, Ann Putnam, Eliz. Hubbard,

Endorsed by the Grand Jury, Billa Vera.

There was also a second Indictment for afflicting Elizabeth Hubbard, the
Witnesses to the said Indictment were Elizabeth Hubbard, Mary Wolcott, Ann
Putnam.

The third Indictment was for afflicting Mercy Lewis; the Witnesses, the said
Mercy Lewis, Mary Wolcott, Elizabeth Hubbard, and Ann Putnam.

The fourth for acts of Witchcraft on Ann Putnam, the Witnesses, the said Ann
Putnam, Mary Wolcot, Elizabeth Hubbard, Mary Warren.

The Trial of G. B. as Printed in Wonders of the Invisible World, from P. 94.
to 104.
GLad should I have been, if I had never known the name of this Man; or never
had this occasion to mention so much as the first Letters of his name. But the
Government requiring some Account of his Trial, to be inserted in this Book, it
becomes me with all obedience to submit unto the Order.

1. This G. B. was Indicted for Witchcrafts; and in the Prosecution of the
Charge against him, he was Accused by five or six of the Bewitched, as the
Author of their Miseries; he was accused by Eight of the confessing Witches, as
being an head Actor at some of their Hellish Randezvouzes, and who had the
promise of being a King in Satan's Kingdom, now going to be erected; he was
accused by Nine persons, for extraordinary lifting, and such feats of strength
as could not be done without a Diabolical Assistance. And for other such things
he was accused, until about Thirty Testimonies were brought in against him; nor
were these, judged the half of what might have been considered, for his
Conviction: however they were enough to fix the Character of a Witch upon him,
according to the Rules of Reasoning, by the Judicious Gaul, in that case
directed.

The Court being sensible, that the Testimonies of the Parties Bewitched, use
to have a Room among the Suspicio^s, or Presumptions, brought in against one
Indicted for Witchcraft, there were now heard the Testimonies of several
Persons, who were most notoriously bewitched, and every day tortured by
Invisible hands, and these now all charged the Specter of G. B. to have a
share in their Torments. At the Examination of this G. B. the bewitched People
were grievously harrassed, with preternatural Mischiefs, which could not
possibly be dissembled; and they still ascribed it unto the Endeavors of G. B.
to kill them. And now upon his Trial, one of the bewitched persons testified,
That in her Agonies a little Black-haired-Man came to her, saying his name was
B. and bidding her set her hand unto a Book, which he showed unto her; and
bragging that he was a Conjurer above the ordinary Rank of Witches; that he
often persecuted her, with the offer of that Book, saying, she should be well,
and need fear no body, if she would but sign it: but he inflicted cruel pains
and hurts upon her, because of her denying so to do. The Testimonies of the
other Sufferers concurred with these; and it was remarkable, that whereas
Biting, was one of the ways, which the Witches used* for the vexing of the
Sufferers, when they cried out of G. B. biting them, the print of his Teeth
would be seen on the Flesh of the Complainers; and just such a set of Teeth as
G. B's. would then appear upon them, which could be distinguished from those of
some other Men's.

Others of them testified, that in their Torments G. B. tempted them to go unto
a Sacrament, unto which they perceived him with a sound of Trumpet summoning of
other Witches; who quickly after the sound would come from all quarters unto
the Randezvouz. One of them falling into a kind of Trance, afterward affirmed,
that G. B. had carried her into a very high Mountain, where he showed her
mighty and glorious Kingdoms, and said he would give them all to her, if she
would write in his Book; but she told him, They were none of his to give; and
refused the Motions; enduring of much misery for that refusal.

It cost the Court a wonderful deal of trouble to hear the Testimonies of the
Sufferers; for when they were going to give in their Depositions, they would
for a long while be taken with Fits, that made them incapable of saying any
thing. The chief Judge asked the Prisoner, Who he thought hindered these
Witnesses from giving their Testimonies? and he answered, He supposed it was
the Devil. That Honorable person then replied, How comes the Devil so lo^^h to
have any Testimony born against you? Which cast him into very great confusion.

3. It has been a frequent thing for the bewitched People, to be entertained
with Apparitions of Ghosts of murdered People, at the same time that the
Specter of the Witches trouble them. These Ghosts do always affright the
beholders, more than all the other Spectral Representations; and when they
exhibit themselves, they cry out of being murdered by the Witchcrafts or other
Violences of the persons who are then in Spectre present. It is further
considerable, that once or twice these Apparitions have been seen by others, at
the very same time they have shown themselves to the bewitched; and seldom have
there been these Apparitions, but when something unusal and ^nspected has
attended the death of the Party th^s appearing. Some that have been accused by
these Apparitions, according of the bewitched People, who had never heard a
word of any such persons ever being in the World, have upon a fair Examination,
freely and fully confessed the Murders of those very persons, although these
also did not know how the Apparitions had complained of them. Accordingly
several of the bewitched had given in their Testimony, that they had been
troubled with the Apparitions of two Women, who said they were G. B.'s two
Wives; and that he had been the death of them; and that the Magistrates must be
told of it, before whom, if B. upon his Trial denied it, they did not know but
that they should appear again in the Court. Now G. B. had been infamous, for
the barbarous usage of his two successive Wives, all the Country over.
Moreover, it was testified, the Spectre of G. B. threatening of the Sufferers
told them he had killed: besides others) Mrs. Lawson and her Daughter Ann. And
it was noted, that these were the Virtuous Wife and Daughter of one, at whom
this G. B. might have a prejudice, for being serviceable at Salem-Village, from
whence himself had in ill terms removed some Years before, and that when they
died, which was long since, there were some odd circumstances about them, which
made some of the Attendants there suspect something of Witchcraft, though none
imagined from what quarter it should come.

Well G. B. being now upon his Trial, one of the bewitched persons was cast
into horror at the Ghosts of B's. two deceased Wives, then appearing before
him, and crying for vengeance against him. Hereupon several of the bewitched
persons were successively called in, who all, not knowing what the former had
seen and said, concurred in their horror of the Apparition, which they
affirmed, that he had before him. But he, though much appalled, utterly denied
that he discerned any thing of it, nor was it any part of his Conviction.

4. Judicious writers have assigned it a great place, in the Conviction of
Witches, when persons are Impeached by other notorious Witches to be as ill as
themselves, especially if the persons have been much noted for neglecting the
Worship of God. Now as there might have been Testimonies enough of G. B's.
Antipathy to Prayer, and the other Ordinances of God, though by his Profession
singularly obliged thereunto; so there now came in against the Prisoner, the
Testimonies of several persons, who confessed their own having been horrible
Witches, and ever since their Confessions, had been themselves terribly
tortured by the Devils and other Witches, even like the other Sufferers; and
therein undergone the pains of many deaths for their Confessions.

These now testified, that G. B. had been at Witch-meetings with them; and that
he was the person who had seduced and compelled them into the Snares of
Witchcraft: that he promised them fine Clothes for doing it; that he brought
Poppets to them, and thorns to stick into those Poppets, for the afflicting of
other People: And that he exhorted them, with the rest of the Crew, to bewitch
all Salem Village; but be sure to do it gradually; if they would prevail in
what they did.

When the Lancashire Witches were Condemned, I don't remember that there was
any considerable further Evidence, than that of the bewitched, and than that of
some that had confessed. We see so much already against G. B. But this being
indeed not enough, there were other things to render what had already been
produced credible.

5. A famous Divine, recites this among the Convictions of a Witch; the
Testimony of the party bewitched, whether pining or dying; together with the
Joint Oaths of sufficient persons, that have seen certain prodigious pranks or
feats, wrought by the party accused. Now God had been pleased so to leave this
G. B. that he had ensnared himself, by several instances which he had formerly
given of a preternatural strength; and which were now produced against him. He
was a very puny Man, yet he had often done things beyond the strength of a
Giant. A Gun of about 7 Foot barrel, and so heavy that strong Men could not
steadily hold it out, with both hands; there were several Testimonies given in
by persons of Credit and Honor, that he made nothing of taking up such a Gun
behind the Lock with but one hand, and holding it out like a Pistol, at
Arms-end. G. B. In his vindication was so foolish, as to say, that an Indian
was there, and held it out, at the same time: whereas, none of the Spectators
ever saw any such Indian; but they supposed the black Man (as the Witches call
the Devil; and they generally say he resembles an Indian) might give him that
Assistance. There was Evidence likewise brought in, that he made nothing of
taking up whole Barrels filled with Mellasses, or Cider, in very
disadvantageous Postures, and carrying of them through the difficultest places,
out of a Canoa to the Shore.

Yea, there were two Testimonies, that G. B. with only putting the Forefinger
of his right hand into the Muzzel of an heavy Gun, a fowling piece of about six
or seven foot Barrel; did lift up the Gun, and hold it out at Arms-end; a Gun
which the Deponents, though strong men, could not with both hands lift up, and
hold out at the Butt-end, as is usual. Indeed one of these Witnesses, was
over-perswaded by some persons to be out of way upon G. B's. Trial; but he came
afterward, with sorrow for his withdraw, and gave in his Testimony. Nor were
either of these Witnesses made use of as Evidence in the Trial.

6. There came in several Testimonies, relating to the Domestic affairs of G.
B. which had a very hard Aspect upon him; and not only proved him a very ill
Man, but also confirmed the belief of the Character, which had been already
fastened on him.

'Twas Testified, That keeping his two successive Wives in a strange kind of
slavery, he would when he came home from abroad pretend to tell the talk which
any had with them. That he has brought them to the point of Death, by his harsh
dealings with his Wives, and then made the People about him to promise that in
case Death should happen they would say nothing of it. That he used all means
to make his Wives Write, Sign, Seal, and Swear a Covenant never to reveal any
of his Secrets. That his Wives had privately complained unto the Neighbors
about frightly Apparitions of Evil Spirit, with which their House was sometimes
insested; and that many such things have been whispered among the
Neighborhood. There were also some other Testimonies, relating to the death of
People, whereby the Consciences of an impartial Jury were convinced, that G. B.
had bewitched the persons mentioned in the Complaints. But I am forced to omit
several such passages in this as well as in all the succeeding Trials, because
the Scribes who took notice of them, have not supplied me.

7. One Mr. Ruck, Brother in Law to this G. B. testified that G. B. and he
himself, and his Sister, who was G. B's. Wife, going out for two or three
Miles, to gather Strawberries, Ruck with his Sister, the Wife of G. B. rode
home very softly, with G. B. on foot in their company, G. B. stepped aside a
little into the Bushes; whereupon they halted and hollowed for him. He not
answering, they went away homewards, with a quickened pace; without any
expectation of seeing him in a considerable while: and yet when they were got
near home, to their astonishment they found him on foot, with them, having a
Basket of Strawberries, G. B. immediately then fell to chiding his Wife, on the
account of what she had been speaking to her Brother of him on the Road: which
when they wondered at, he said, He knew their thoughts. Ruck being startled at
that, made some reply, intimating that the Devil himself did not know so far;
but G. B. answered, my god, makes known your thoughts unto me. The Prisoner now
at the Bar had nothing to answer unto what was thus witnessed against him,
that was worth considering. Only he said, Ruck and his Wife left a man with
him, when they left him. Which Ruck now affirmed to be false; and when the
Court asked G. B. What the man's name was? His countenance was much altered;
nor could he say who it was. But the Court began to think that he then stepped
aside, only that by the Assistance of the black Man, he might put on his
invisibility, and in that fascinating Mist, gratify his own jealous humor, to
hear what they said of him. Which trick of rendering themselves invisible, our
Witches do in their Confessions pretend that they sometimes are masters of;
and it is the more credible, because there is demonstration that they often
render many other things utterly invisible.

8. Faultring, Faulty, Unconstant, and contrary Answers, upon Judicial and
deliberate Examination, are counted some unlucky symptoms of Guilt in all
Crimes, especially in Witchcrafts. Now there never was a Prisoner more Eminent
for them, than G. B. both at his Examination and on his Trial. His
Tergiversations, Contradictions, and Falsehoods, were very sensible: he had
little to say, but that he had heard some things that he could not prove,
Reflecting upon the Reputation of some of the Witnesses. Only he gave in a
Paper to the Jury; wherein, although he had many times before granted, not only
that there are Witches, but also that the present Sufferings of the Country
are the Effects of Horrible Witchcrafts, yet he now goes to evince it, that
there neither are, nor ever were, Witches, that having made a compact with the
Devil, can send a Devil to torment other People at a distance. This Paper was
transcribed out of Ady; which the Court presently knew, as soon as they heard
it. But he said, he had taken none of it out of any Book; for which his evasion
afterward was, that a Gentleman gave him the Discourse in a Manuscript, from
whence he transcribed it.

9. The Jury brought him in Guilty; but when he came to dye, he utterly denied
the Fact, whereof he had been thus Convicted.

The Indictment of Bridget Bishop.
Essex ff. Anno Regni Regis and Regin^e Willielmi and Mariae, nunc Angliae,
etc. quarto.
THE Jurors for our Sovereign Lord and Lady, the King and Queen present, That
Bridget Bishop, alias Oliver, the Wife of Edward Bishop in Salem, in the County
of Essex, Sawyer, the Nineteenth day of April, in the Fourth Year of the Reign
of our Sovereign Lord and Lady, William and Mary, by the Grace of God, of
England, Scotland, France and Ireland; King and Queen, Defenders of the Faith,
etc. and diverse other days and times, as well before as after, certain
detestable Arts, called Witchcrafts, and Sorceries, wickedly and Felloniously
has used, practiced, and exercised at, and within the Township of Salem, in
the County of Essex aforesaid, in, upon, and against one Mercy Lewis, of
Salem-Village, in the County aforesaid, single Woman; by which said wicked
Arts, the said Mercy Lewis, the said Nineteenth day of April, in the Fourth
Year abovesaid, and diverse other days and times, as well before as after, was
and is Hurt, Tortured, Afflicted, Pined, Consumed, Wasted and Tormented,
against the Peace of our Sovereign Lord and Lady, the King and Queen, and
against the form of the Statute, in that case made and provided.

Endorsed Billa Vera. Witnesses, Mercy Lewis, Nathaniel Ingarsoll, Mr. Samuel
Parris, Thomas Putnam, Junior, Mary Walcott, Junior, Ann Putnam, Junior,
Elizabeth Hubbard, Abigail Williams.

There was also a Second Indictment, on the said Bishop, for afflicting and
practicing Witchcraft on Abigail Williams. Witnesses to the said Indictment,
were the said Abigail Williams, Mr. Parris, Nathaniel Ingarsoll, Thomas Putnam,
Ann Putnam, Mary Walcott, Elizabeth Hubbard.

The Third Indictment was for afflicting Mary Walcott, Witnesses to which said
Indictment, were Mary Walcott, Mercy Lewis, Mr. Samuel Parris, Nathaniel
Ingarsoll, Thomas Putnam, Ann Putnam, Elizabeth Hubbard, Abigail Williams.

The Fourth Indictment was for afflicting Elizabeth Hubbard, Witnesses to which
said Indictment, were the said Elizabeth Hubbard, Mercy Lewis, Mr. Parris,
Nathaniel Ingarsoll, Thomas Putnam, Ann Putnam, Mary Walcott, Abigail Williams.

The Fifth Indictment was for afflicting Ann Putnam, Witnesses to which said
Indictment, were the said Ann Putnam, Mr. Samuel Parris, Nathaniel Ingarsoll,
Thomas Putnam, Mercy Lewis, Mary Wolcott, Abigail Williams, Elizabeth Hubbard.

The Trial of Bridget Bishop as Printed, In Wonders of Invisible World, June 2.
1692. P. 104, to 114.
1. SHE was Indicted for bewitching of several persons in the Neighborhood.
The Indictment being drawn up, according to the form in such cases usual, and
pleading not guilty, there were brought in several persons, who had long
undergone many kinds of miseries, which were preternaturally inflicted, and
generally ascribed unto an horrible Witchcraft. There was little occasion to
prove the Witchcraft, it being evident and notorious to all beholders. Now to
fix the Witchcraft on the Prisoner at the Bar, the first thing used was, the
testimony of the bewitched; whereof several testified, that the shape of the
Prisoner did oftentimes very grievously pinch them, choke them, bite them and
afflict them; urging them to write their names in a Book, which the said
Spectre called, Ours. One of them did further testify, that it was the shape
of this Prisoner, with another, which one day took her from her Wheel, and
carrying her to the River side, threatened there to drown her, if she did not
sign the Book mentioned, which yet she refused. Others of them did also
testify, that the said shape, did in her threats, brag to them, that she had
been the death of sundry persons, then by her named. Another testified, the
Apparition of Ghosts unto the Spectre of Bishop, crying out, You murdered us.
About the truth whereof, there was in the matter of Fact, but too much
suspicion.

2. It was testified, that at the Examination of the Prisoner, before the
Magistrates, the bewitched were extremely tortured. If she did but cast her
Eyes on them, they were presently struck down; and this in such a manner as
there could be no collusion in the business. But upon the touch of her hand
upon them, when they lay in their swoons, they would immediately revive; and
not upon the touch of any ones else. Moreover upon some special Actions of her
Body, as the shaking of her head, or the turning of her Eyes, they presently
and painfully fell into the like postures. And many of the like accidents now
fell out, while she was at the Bar. One at the same time testifying, that she
said, She could not be troubled to see the Afflicted thus tormented.

3. There was Testimony likewise brought in, that a Man striking once at the
place, where a bewitched person said, the shape of this Bishop stood, the
bewitched cried out, that he had tore her Coat, in the place then particularly
specified; and the Woman's Coat was found to be torn in the very place.

4. One Deliverance Hobbs, who had confessed her being a Witch, was now
tormented by the Specter for her Confession. And she now testified that this
Bishop tempted her to sign the Book again, and to deny what she had confessed.
She affirmed, that it was the shape of this Prisoner, which whipped her with
Iron Rods, to compel her thereunto. And she affirmed, that this Bishop was at a
General-meeting of the Witches in a Field, at Salem- Village, and there partook
of a Diabolical Sacrament, in Bread and Wine then administered.

5. To render it further unquestionable, that the Prisoner at the Bar, was the
Person truly charged in this Witchcraft; there were produced many Evidences of
other Witchcrafts, by her perpetrated. For instance, John Cook testified, that
about five or six Years ago, one morning about Sunrise, he was in his Chamber,
assaulted by the shape of this Prisoner: which looked on him, grinn'd at him,
and very much hurt him, with a blow on the side of the head; and that on the
same day about Noon, the same shape walked in the Room where he was, and an
Apple strangely flew out of his hand, into the lap of his Mother, six or eight
foot from him.

6. Samuel Gray testified, that about fourteen Years ago, he waked on a Night,
and saw the Room where he lay full of light; and that he then saw plainly a
Woman between the Cradle, and the Bedside, which looked upon him. He rose, and
it vanished; tho he found the Doors all fast: Looking out at the Entry door, he
saw the same Woman in the same garb again; and said, In God's name, what do you
come for* He went to Bed, and had the same Woman again assaulting him. The
Child in the Cradle gave a great S^tre^ch, and the Woman disappeared. It was
long before the Child could be quieted; and tho it were a very likely thriving
Child, yet from this time it pined away, and after diverse Months died in a sad
condition. He knew not Bishop, nor her name; but when he saw her after this, he
knew by her countenance, and apparel, and all circumstances, that it was the
Apparition of this Bishop, which had thus troubled him.

7. John Bly and his Wife, testified, that he bought a Sow of Edward Bishop,
the Husband of the Prisoner; and was to pay the price agreed unto another
person. This Prisoner being angry that she was thus hindered from fingring the
Money, quarreled with Bly, soon after which the Sow was taken with strange
Fitts, jumping, leaping, and knocking her head against the Fence, she seemed
blind and deaf, and would neither eat nor be sucked. VVhereupon a Neighbor
said, she believed the creature was over-looked; and sundry other circumstances
concurred, which made the Deponents believe that Bishop had bewitched it.

8. Richard Coman testified, that Eight Years ago, as he lay awake in his Bed,
with a light burning in the Room, he was annoyed with the Apparition of this
Bishop, and of two more that were strangers to him; who came and oppressed him,
so that he could neither stir himself, nor wake any one else: and that he was
the Night after molested again in the like manner; the said Bishop taking him
by the Throat, and pulling him almost out of the Bed. His Kinsman offered for
this cause to lodge with him; and that night, as they were awake discoursing
together, this Coman was once more visited by the Guests which had formerly
been so troublesome, his Kinsman being at the same time struck speechless, and
unable to move hand or foot. He had laid his Sword by him; which those unhappy
Specter, did strive much to wrest from him, only he held too fast for them. He
then grew able to call the People of his house; but although they heard him, yet
they had not power to speak or stir, until at last, one of the People crying
out, What Is the matter! the Specter all vanished.

9. Samuel Shattock testified, that in the Year, 1680. This Bridget Bishop,
often came to his house upon such frivolous and foolish Errands, that they
suspected she came indeed with a purpose of Mischief. Presently whereupon his
Eldest Child, which was of as promising health and sense, as any Child of its
Age, began to droop exceedingly; and the oftener that Bishop came to the house,
the worse grew the Child. As the Child would be standing at the Door, he would
be thrown and bruised against the Stones, by an Invisible hand, and in like
sort knock his face against the sides of the house, and bruise it after a
miserable manner. Afterward this Bishop would bring him things to Dye, whereof
he could not Imagine any use; and when she paid him a piece of Money, the Purse
and Money were unaccountably conveyed out of a locked Box, and never seen more.
The Chlid was immediately hereupon taken with terrible Fits, whereof his
friends thought he would have died: Indeed he did almost nothing but cry and
sleep, for several Months together: and at length his understanding was utterly
taken away. Among other Symptoms of an Enchantment upon him one was, that there
was a Board in the Garden, whereon he would walk; and all the Invitations in
the world could never fetch him off. About seventeen or eighteen Years after,
there came a stranger, to Shattocks house, who seeing the Child said, This poor
Child is bewitched; and you have a Neighbor living not far off who is VVitch.
He added, Your Neighbor has had a falling out with your Wife; and she said in
her heart, your Wife is a proud Woman, and she would bring down her pride in
this Child: He then remembered, that Bishop had parted from his Wife in
muttering, and menacing terms, a little before the Child was taken ill. The
abovesaid stranger would needs carry the bewitched Boy with him, to Bishops
House, on pretense of buying a Pot of Cider. The Woman entertained him in
furious manner; and flew also upon the Boy, scratching his face till the Blood
came, and saying, Thou Rogue, what? do thou bring this fellow here to plague
me? Now it seems the Man had said before he went, that he would fetch Blood of
her. Ever after the Boy was followed with grievous Fits, which the Doctors
themselves generally ascribed unto Witchcraft; and wherein he would be thrown
still into the Fire or Water, if he were not constantly looked after; and it
was verily believed that Bishop was the cause of it.

10. John Louder testified, that upon some little controversy with Bishop
about her Fowls, going well to bed, he did awake in the Night by Moonlight, and
did see clearly the likeness of this Woman grievously oppressing him. In which
miserable condition she held him unable to help himself, till near day. He told
Bishop of this; but she utterly denied it, and threatened him very much. Quickly
after this, being at home on a Lord's Day, with the doors shut about him, he
saw a black Pig approach him; at which he going to kick, it vanished away.
Immediately after sitting down he saw a black thing jump in at the Window, and
come and stand before him. The body was like that of a Monkey, the feet like a
Cocks, but the face much like a Man's. He being so extremely affrighted, that he
could not speak; this Monster spoke to him and said, I am a Messenger sent unto
you, for I understand that you are in some trouble of Mind, and if you will be
ruled by me, you shall want for nothing in this World. Whereupon he
endeavored to clap his hands upon it; but he could feel no substance, and it
jumped out of the Window again; but immediately came in by the Porch, though
the doors were shut, and said, You had better take my counsel! He then struck
at it with a stick, but struck only the Groundsel, and broke the stick. The Arm
with which he struck was presently disenabled, and it vanished away. He
presently went out at the back door, and spied this Bishop, in her Orchard,
going toward her House; but he had not power to set one foot forward unto her.
Whereupon returning into the House, he was immediately accosted by the Monster
he had seen before; which Goblin was now going to fly at him: whereat he cried
out, The whole Armor of God be between me and you! so it sprang back, and flew
over the Apple Tree; shaking many Apples off the Tree in its flying over. At
its leap, it flung dirt with its Feet, against the Stomach of the Man; whereon
he was then struck dumb, and so continued for three Days together. Upon the
producing of this Testimony, Bishop denied that she knew this Deponent. Yet
their two Orchards joined, and they had often had their little quarrels for
some Years together.

11. William Stacy testified, that receiving Money of this Bishop, for work
done by him, he was gone but a matter of three Roods from her, and looking for
his Money, found it unaccountably gone from him. Some time after, Bishop asked
him whether his Father would grind her Grist for her? He demanded why* she
replied, because folks count me a Witch. He answered, no question, but he will
grind it for you; being then gone about six Roods from her, with a small load
in his Cart, suddenly the off Wheel slumpt, and sunk down into an hole, upon
plain ground, so that the Deponent, was forced to get help for the recovering
of the Wheel. But stepping back to look for the hole which might give him this
disaster, there was none at all to be found. Some time after he was waked in
the Night; but it seemed as light as day, and he perfectly saw the shape of
this Bishop, in the Room troubling of him, but upon her going out, all was dark
again. He charged Bishop afterward with it, and she denied it not; but was
very angry. Quickly after, this Deponent having been threatened by Bishop, as he
was in a dark Night going to the Barn, he was very suddenly taken or lifted
from the ground, and thrown against a Stone-wall; after that he was again
hoisted up, and thrown down a bank, at the end of his House. After this, again
passing by this Bishop, his Horse with a small load, striving to draw, all his
Gears flew to pieces, and the Cart fell down; and this Deponent going then to
lift a bag of Corn, of about two Bushels, could not budge it with all his might.

Many other pranks of this Bishops, this Deponent was ready to testify, He
also testified, that he verily believed, the said Bishop was the Instrument of
his Daughter Priscilla's death; of which suspicion, pregnant reasons were
assigned.

12. To crown all, John Bly, and William Bly testified, that being employed by
Bridget Bishop, to help take down the Cellar-wall, of the old House, wherein
she formerly lived, they did in holes of the said old Wall, find several
Poppets made up of Rags, and Hogs Bristles, with headless Pins in them, the
points being outward. Whereof she could now give no Account unto the Court,
that was reasonable or tolerable.

13. One thing that made against the Prisoner was, her being evidently
convicted of Gross lying in the Court, several times, while she was making her
Plea. But besides this, a Jury of Women, found a preternatural Tet upon her
Body; but upon a second search, within three or four hours, there was no such
thing to be seen. There was also an Account of other People, whom this Woman
had Afflicted. And there might have been many more, if they had been enquired
for. But there was no need of them.

14. There was one very strange thing more, with which the Court was newly
entertained. As this Woman was under a guard, passing by the great and spacious
Meeting House of Salem, she gave a look toward the House; and immediately a
D^emon invisibly entering the Meeting House, Tore down a part of it; so that tho
there were no person to be seen there, yet the People at the Noise running in,
found a board which was strongly fastened with several Nails, transported unto
another quarter of the House.

The Indictment of Susanna Martin.
Essex ff. Anno Regni Regis and Regine Willielmi and Mariae, nunc Angliae, etc.
quarto --
THE Jurors for our Sovereign Lord and Lady the King and Queen, present, That
Susanna Martin of Amesbury, in the County of Essex, Widow, The second Day of
May, in the fourth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord and Lady William and
Mary, by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, King and
Queen, Defenders of the Faith, and c. And diverse other days and times, as well
before as after, certain detestable Arts, called Witchcrafts, and Sorceries,
Wickedly and Felloniously has used, practiced, and exercised, at and within
the Township of Salem, in the County of Essex aforesaid, in, upon, and against
one Mary Wolcott of Salem-Village, in the County of Essex, Single Woman, by
which said wicked Arts the said Mary Wolcott, the Second Day of May, in the
fourth Year aforesaid, and at diverse other days and times, as well before as
after, was and is Tortured, Afflicted, Pined, Consumed, Wasted and Tormented;
as also for sundry other Acts of Witchcraft, by said Susanna Martin, committed
and done before and since that time, against the Peace of our Sovereign Lord
and Lady, William and Mary, King and Queen, of England; Their Crown and
Dignity, and against the Form of the Statute, in that Case made and provided.

Returned by the Grand Jury, Billa Vera.

Witnesses, Sarah Vibber, Mary Wolcott, Mr. Samuel Parris, Elizabeth Hubbard,
Mercy Lewis.

The Second Indictment was for afflicting Mercy Lewis. Witnesses, Samuel
Parris, Ann Putnam, Sarah Vibber, Eliz. Hubbard, Mary Wolcott, Mercy Lewis,

The Trial of Susanna Martin, June, 29. 1692. As is Printed, In Wonders of
Invisible World, from P. 114, to P. 116.
1. Susanna Martin, pleading not Guilty, to the Indictment of Witchcrafts
brought in against her; there were produced the Evidences of many persons very
sensibly and grievously bewitched; who all complained of the Prisoner at the
Bar, as the person whom they believed the cause of their Miseries. And now as
well as in the other Trials, there was an extraordinary endeavor by
Witchcrafts, with cruel and frequent Fits, to hinder the poor Sufferers, from
giving in their Complaints; which the Court was forced with much patience to
obtain, by much waiting and watching for it.

There was now also an Account given, of what had passed at her first
Examination before the Magistrates. The cast of her Eye, then striking the
Afflicted People to the Ground, whether they saw that cast or no: There were
these among other Passages between the Magistrates and the Examinate.

Magistrate. Pray, What ails these People?


Martin. I don't know.


Magist. But, What do you think ails them?


Martin. I don't desire to spend my Judgment upon it.


Magist. Don't you think they are bewitched?


Martin. No, I do not think they are.


Magist. Tell us your thoughts about them then.


Martin. No, my thoughts are my own when they are in, but when they are out,
they are another. Their Master --


Magist. Their Master; Who do you think is their Master?


Martin. If they be dealing in the black Art, you may know as well as I.


Magist. Well, what have you done toward this?


Martin. Nothing at all.


Magist. Why, it is you or your appearance?


Martin. I cannot help it.


Magist. Is it not your Master? How comes your appearance to hurt these?


Martin. How do I know? He that appeared in the shape of Samuel, a Glorified
Saint may appear in any ones shape.


It was then also noted in her, as in others like her, that if the Afflicted
went to approach her, they were flung down to the ground. And, when she was
asked the reason of it, she said, I cannot tell, it may be, the Devil bears me
more Malice than another --

The Court accounted themselves Alarmed by these things, to inquire further
into the Conversation of the Prisoner; and see what there might occur, to
render these Accusations further credible. Whereupon John Allen, of Salisbury
testified, that he refusing, because of the weakness of his Oxen, to Cart some
Staves at the request of this Martin, she was displeased at it, and said, It
had been as good that he had; for his Oxen should never do him much more
service. Whereupon this Deponent said, Do thou threaten me, thou old Witch;
I Will throw thee into the Brook: which to avoid, she flew over the Bridge and
escaped. But as he was going home, one of his Oxen tired, so that he was forced
to unyoke him, that he might get him home. He then put his Oxen with many more,
upon Salisbury-Beach, where Cattle did use to get Flesh. In a few Days, all the
Oxen upon the Beach were found by their Tracks, to have run unto the mouth of
Merrimack-River and not returned; but the next day they were found come ashore
upon Plum-Island. They that sought them, used all imaginable gentleness, but
they would still run away with a violence, that seemed wholly Diabolical, till
they came near the mouth of Merrimack-River; when they ran right into the Sea,
swimming as far as they could be seen. One of them then swam back again, with a
swiftness amazing to the beholders, who stood ready to receive him, and help up
his tired Carcass: but the Beast ran furiously up into the Island, and from
thence thorough the Marshes, up into Newbury Town, and so up into the Woods;
and there after a while found near Amesbury. So that of Fourteen good Oxen,
there was only this saved: the rest were all cast up, some in one place, and
some in another, Drowned.

4. John Atkinson testified, that he exchanged a Cow, with a Son of Susanna
Martins, whereat she muttered, and was unwilling he should have it. Going to
receive this Cow, tho he Hamstring'd her, and halter'd her, she of a tame
Creature grew so mad, that they could scarce get her along. She broke all the
Ropes that were fastened unto her, and tho she was tied fast unto a Tree, yet
she made her escape, and gave them such further trouble, as they could ascribe
to no cause but Witchcraft.

5. Bernard Peache testified, that being in Bed, on a Lords Day Night, he heard
a scrabbling at the Window, whereat he then saw, Susanna Martin come in, and
jump down upon the floor. She took hold of this Deponents Feet, and drawing his
body up into an heap, she lay upon him near two hours; in all which time he
could neither speak nor stir. At length when he could begin to move, he laid
hold on her hand, and pulling it up to his mouth, he bit three of her Fingers
as he judged to the Bone. Whereupon she went from the Chamber, down the Stairs,
out at the door. This Deponent thereupon called unto the people of the House to
advise them, of what passed; and he himself did follow her. The People saw her
not; but there being a Bucket at the Left Hand of the door, there was a drop of
Blood on it; and several more drops of Blood upon the Snow, newly fallen
abroad. There was likewise the print of her two Feet, just without the
Threshold; but no more sign of any scoting further off.

At another time this Deponent was desired by the Prisoner, to come unto a
husking of Corn, at her House; and she said, If he did not come, it were better
that he did! He went not; but the night following, Susanna Martin, as he
judged, and another came toward him. One of them said, here he is! but he
having a Quarterstaff, made a blow at them. The Roof of the Barn, broke his
blow; but following them to the Window, he made another blow at them, and
struck them down; yet they got up, and got out, and he saw no more of them.

About this time, there was a Rumor about the Town, that Martin had a broken
head; but the Deponent could say nothing to that.

The said Peache also restified, the bewitching of Cattle to Death, upon
Martins discontents.

6. Robert Downer restified, that this Prisoner being some years ago prosecuted
at Court for a Witch, he then said unto her, He believed she was a Witch.
Whereat she being dissatisfied, said, That some she Devil would shortly fetch
him away; which words were heard by others, as well as himself; the night
following, as he lay in his Bed, there came in at the Window, the likeness of a
Cat, which flew upon him, and took fast hold of his Throat, lay on him a
considerable while, and almost killed him; at length he remembered what Susanna
Martin had threatened the Day before, and with much striving, he cried out,
Avoid thou she Devil, In the name of God the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost, avoid: Whereupon it left him, leaped on the Floor, and flew out at the
Window.

And there also came in several Testimonies that before ever Downer spoke a
word of this Accident, Susanna Martin and her Family had related, how this
Downer had been handled.

7. John Kembal testified, that Susanna Martin, upon a causeless disgust had
threatened him about a certain Cow of his, that she should never do him any more
good, and it came to pass accordingly; for soon after the Cow was found stark
dead on the dry ground, without any Distemper to be discerned upon her. Upon
which he was followed with a strange death upon more of his Cattle. Whereof he
lost in one Spring, to the value of 30 l. But the said John Kembal, had a
further Testimony to give in against the Prisoner, which was truly admirable.
Being desirous to furnish himself with a Dog, he applied himself to buy one of
this Martin, who had a Bitch with Whelps in her House, but she not letting him
have his choice; he said, He would supply himself then at one Blezdels Having
marked a Puppy which he liked at Blezdels, he met George Martin, the Husband of
the Prisoner going by, who asked whether he would not have one of his Wives
Puppy's; and he answered, No. The same day one Edmond Eliot, being at Martins
house heard George Martin, relate where this Kembal had been, and what he had
said; whereupon Susanna Martin replied, If I live I Will give him Puppies enough.
Within a few Days after this, Kembal coming out of the Woods, there arose a
little black Cloud in the N. W. and Kembal immediately felt a force upon him,
which made him not able to avoid running upon the stumps of Trees that were
before him, albeit he had a broad plain cart way before him; but tho he had his
Axe also on his Shoulder to endanger him in his falls, he could not forbear
going out of his way to tumble over them. When he came below the Meeting house,
there appeared unto him a little thing like a Puppy of a darkish Color, and it
shot backwards and forwards between his Legs. He had the Courage to use all
possible endeavors of cutting it with his Axe, but he could not hit it; the
Puppy gave a jump from him and went, as to him, it seemed into the Ground.
Going a little further there appeared unto him a black Puppy, somewhat bigger
than the First, but as black as a Coal. It Is motions were quicker than those of
his Axe. It flew at his Belly, and away at his Throat, so over his Shoulders
one way, and then over his Shoulders another way, his heart now began to fail
him, and he thought the Dog would have tore his Throa^ out. But he recovered
himself, and called upon God in his distress, and naming the name of Jesus
Christ it vanished away at once. The Deponent spoke not one word of these
Accidents, for fear of affrighting his Wife, But the next morning, Edmond Eliot
going into Martins house, this Woman asked him, where Kembal was? He replied,
at home a Bed, for ought he knew. She returned; they say he was frighted last
night. Eliot asked with what? She answered with Puppies. Eliot asked, where she
heard of it, for he had heard nothing of it! She rejoined, about the Town.
Although Kembal had mentioned the matter to no creature living.

8. William Brown testified, that Heaven having blessed him with a most Pious
and Prudent Wife, this Wife of his, one day met with Susanna Martin; but when
she approached just unto her, Martin vanished out of fight, and left her
extremely affrighted. After which time the sad Martin often appeared unto her,
giving her no little trouble; and when she did come, she was visited with Birds
that sorely peck'd and pricked her; and sometimes a bunch like a Pullers Egg
would rise on her Throat, ready to choke her, till she cried out, Witch, you
shall not choke me! While this good Woman was in this Extremity, the Church
appointed a Day of Prayer on her behalf; whereupon the trouble ceased; she saw
not Martin as formerly; and the Church instead of their Fast, gave thanks for
her deliverance. But a considerable while after, she being summoned to give in
some Evidence at the Court, against this Martin, quickly this Martin came
behind her, while she was Milking her Cow, and said unto her, For thy defaming
me at Court, I Will make thee the miserablest Creature in the World. Soon after
which she fell into a strange kind of Distemper, and became horribly Frantic,
and incapable of any Reasonable Action; the Physicians declaring, that her
Distemper was preternatural, and that some Devil had certainly bewitched her;
and in that condition she now remained.

9. Sarah Atkinson testified, that Susanna Martin came from Amesbury, to their
House at Newbury, in an extraordinary Season, when it was not fit for any one
to Travel. She came (as she said, unto Atkinson) all that long way on foot. She
bragged and showed, how dry she was; nor could it be perceived that so much as
the Soles of her Shoes were we^. Atkinson was amazed at it, and professed, that
she should her self have been wet up to the Knees, if she had then came so far;
but Martin replied, She scorned to be drabbled! It was noted, that this
Testimony upon her Trial, cast her into a very singular confusion.

10. John Pressy testified, that being one Evening very unaccountably bewildred
near a Field of Martins, and several times as one under an Enchantment,
returning to the place he had left, at length he saw a Mavelous light, about
the bigness of an half Bushel, near two Rood out of the way. He went, and
struck at it with a Stick, and laid it on with all his might. He gave it near
Forty blows; and felt it a palpable substance. But going from it, his heels
were struck up, and he was laid with his back on the ground: sliding as he
thought, into a Pit; from whence he recovered, by taking hold on the Bush;
although afterward he could find no such Pit in the place. Having after his
recovery, gone five or six Rood, he saw Susanna Martin standing on his Left
hand, as the Light had done before; but they changed no words with one another.
He could scarce find his House in his return; but at length he got home,
extremely affrighted. The next Day it was upon enquiry understood, that Martin
was in a miserable condition, by pains and hurts that were upon her.

It was further testified by this Deponent, that after he had given in some
Evidence against Susanna Martin many Years ago, she gave him foul words about
it, and said, He should never prosper, more particularly, that he should never
have more than two Cows; that tho he were never so likely to have more, yet he
should never have them. And that from that very day to this; namely for Twenty
Years together, he could never exceed that number; but some strange thing or
other still prevented his having of any more.

11. Iarvis Ring testified, that about Seven Years ago, he was oftentimes
grievously oppressed in the Night; but saw not who troubled him, until at last
he lying perfectly awake, plainly saw Susanna Martin approach him. She came to
him and forcibly bit him by the Finger; so that the print of the bite is now so
long after to be seen upon him.

12. But besides all these Evidences, there was a most wonderful Account of one
Joseph Ring produced on this occasion. This Man has been strangely carried
about by Demons. From one Witch-meeting to another, for near two Years
together; and for one quarter of this time they made him and kept him Dumb, tho
he is now again able to speak. There was one T. H. who having as it is judged, a
design of Engaging this Joseph Rule, in a snare of Devilism, contrived a while,
to bring this Ring two Shillings in Debt unto him. Afterward this poor Man
would be visited with unknown shapes, and this T. H. sometimes among them;
which would force him away with them, unto unknown places, where he saw
Meetings, Feastings, Dancings; and after his return wherein they hurried him
along through the Air, he gave demonstrations to the Neighbors, that he had
indeed been so transported. When he was brought unto these hellish meetings,
one of the first things they still did unto him, was to give him a knock on the
back, whereupon he was ever as if bound with Chains, incapable of stirring out
of the place, till they should release him. He related, that there often came
to him a Man, who presented him a Book, whereto he would have him set his hand;
promising to him, that he should then have even what he would; and presenting
him with all the delectable things, persons, and places, that he could imagine.
But he refusing to subscribe, the business would end with dreadful shapes,
noises and screetches, which almost scared him out of his wits. Once with a
Book, there was a Pen offered him, and an Inkhorn, with liquor in it, that
seemed like Blood: but he never touched it.

This Man did now affirm, that he saw the Prisoners, at several of those
hellish Randezvouzes.

Note, This Woman was one of the most Impudent, Scurrilous, wicked Creature in
the World; and she did now throughout her whole Trial, discover her self to be
such an one. Yet when she was asked what she had to say for her self, her chief
plea was, that she had led a most virtuous and holy life.

The Indictment of Elizabeth How.
Essex ff. Anno Regni Regis and Regine Willielmi and Mariae, nunc Angliae, etc.
quarto --
THE Jurors for our Sovereign Lord and Lady, the King and Queen present, That
Elizabeth How, Wife of James How, of Ipswich, the Thirty first Day of May, in
the Fourth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord and Lady, William and Mary,
by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, King and Queen,
Defenders of the Faith, and c. and diverse other days and times, as well before
as after, certain detestable Arts, called Witchcrafts, and Sorceries, wickedly
and Felloniously has used, practiced, and exercised at, and within the
Tounship of Salem, in the County of Essex aforesaid. in, upon, and against one
Mary Wolcott, of Salem-Village, in the County aforesaid, single Woman; by which
said wicked Arts, the said Mary Wolcott, the said Thirty first Day of May, in
the Fourth Year as abovesaid, and diverse other days and times, as well before
as after, was and is Tortured, Afflicted, Pined, Consumed, Wasted and
Tormented; and also for sundry other Acts of Witchcrafts, by said Elizabeth
How; committed and done before and since that time, against the Peace of our
Sovereign Lord and Lady, the King and Queen, and against the form of the
Statute, in that case made and provided.

Witnesses, Mary Wolcott, Ann Putnam, Abigail Williams, Samuel Pearly and his
Wife Ruth, Joseph Andrews, and Wife Sarah, John Sherrin, Joseph Safford,
Francis Lane, Lydia Fosier, Isaac Cummins, Junior.

There was also a second Indictment for afflicting of Mercy Lewis.

Witnesses, Mercy Lewis, Mary Wolcott, Abigail Williams, Ann Putnam, Samuel
Pearly and Wife, Joseph Andrews and Wife, John Sherrin, Joseph Safford, Franis
Lane, Lydia Foster.

The Trial of Elizabeth How, June, 30. 1692. As is Printed, In Wonders of the
Invisible World, from P. 126. to P. 132, inclusively.
1. Elizabeth How, pleading, not Guilty, to the Indictment of Witchcrafts, then
charged upon her; the Court, according to the usual proceeding of the Courts in
England; in such Cases, began with hearing the Deposition of several Afflicted
People, who were grievously torment^d by sensible and evident Witchcrafts, and
all complained of the Prisoner, as the cause of their trouble. It was also
found that the Suffers were not able to bear her look, as likewise, that in
their grea^est ^woons, they distinguished her touch from other Peoples, being
thereby raised out of them.

And there was other Testimony of People to whom the shape of this How, gave
trouble Nine or Ten Years ago.

2. It has been a most usual thing for the bewitched persons at the same time
that the Specter representing the Witches, Troubled them to be visited with
Apparitions of Ghosts, pretending to have been murdered by the Witches then
represented. And sometimes the confessions of the Witches afterward
acknowledged those very Murders, which these Apparitions charged upon them;
although they had never heard what Information had been given by the Sufferers.

There were such Apparitions of Ghosts testified by some of the present
Sufferers, and the Ghosts affirmed, that this How had murdered them: which
things were feared, but not proved.

3. This How had made some attempts of Joining to the Church, at Ipswich,
several Years ago; but she was denied an Admission into that holy Society,
partly through a suspicion of Witchcraft, then urged against her. And there now
came in Testimony, of preternatural Mischiefs, presently befalling some that
had been Instrumental to debar her from the Communion whereupon she was
intruding.

4. There was a particular Deposition of Joseph Safford, that his Wife had
conceived an extreme Aversion, to this How, on the reports of her Witchcrafts;
but How, one day taking her by the hand, and saying, I believe you are not
Ignorant of the great scandal, that I lie under, by an Evil report raised upon
me. She immediately, unreasonably, and unperswadeably, even like one Enchanted,
began to take this Woman's part. How being soon after propounded, as desiring an
Admission to the Table of the Lord, some of the Pious Brethren were unsatisfied
about her. The Elders appointed a meeting, to hear matters objected against
her; and no arguments in the World could hinder this Goodwife Safford, from
going to the Lecture. She did indeed promise with much ado, that she would not
go to the Church-meeting; yet she could not refrain going thither also. How Is
affairs there were so canvased, that she came off rather Guilty, than cleared;
nevertheless Goodwife Safford could not forbear taking her by the Hand, and
saying, Tho you are condemned before Men, you are justified before God. She was
quickly taken in a very strange manner; Franrick, Raving, Raging, and crying
out, Goody How must come into the Church; she is a precious Saint, and tho she
be condemned before Men, she is justified before God. So she continued for the
space of two or three hours; and then fell into a Trance. But coming to her
self, she cried out, Ha! I was mistaken! and afterward again repeated, Ha! I
was mistaken! being asked by a slander by, Wherein? she replied, I thought
Goody How, had been a precious Saint of God, but now I see is a Witch; she has
bewitched me and my Child, and we shall never be well, till there be Testimony
for her, that she may be taken into the Church.

And How said afterward, That she was very sorry to see Safford at the
Church-meeting mentioned. Safford after this, declared her self to be Afflicted
by the shape of How, and from that shape she endured many miseries.

5. John How, Brother to the Husband of the Prisoner testified, that he
refusing to accompany the Prisoner unto her Examination, as was by her desired,
immediately some of his Cattle, were bewitched to Death, leaping Three or four
Foot high, turning about, squeaking, falling, and dying at once; and going to
cut off an Ear, for an use, that might as well perhaps have been omitted, the
Hand wherein he held his Knife, was taken very Numb; and so it remained, and
full of pain for several Days; being not well at this very time. And he
suspected this Prisoner, for the Author of it.

6. Nehemiah Abbot testified, that unusual and mischievous accidents would
befall his Cattle, whenever he had any difference with this Prisoner. Once
particularly, she wished his Ox choked, and within a little while, that Ox was
choked with a Turnip in his Throat. At another time, refusing to lend his
Horse, at the request of her Daughter, the Horse was in a preternatural manner
abused. And several other odd things of that kind were testified.

7. There came in Testimony, that one Goodwife Sherwin, upon some difference
with How was bewitched, and, that she died, charging this How of having an hand
in her Death. And that other People had their Barrels of Drink unaccountably
mischiev'd, spoiled, and spilt upon their displeasing of her.

The things in themselves were trivial; but there being such a course of them,
it made them the more to be considered. Among others, Martha Wood gave her
testimony, that a little after, her Father had been employed in gathering an
account of this How Is Conversation, they once and again lost great quantities
of Drink, out of their Vessels, in such a manner, as they could ascribe to
nothing but Witchcraft. As also that How giving her some Apples, when she had
eaten of them, she was taken with a very strange kind of a maze, in so much
that she knew not what she said or did.

8. There was likewise a Cluster of Depositions, that one Isaac Cummings,
refusing to lend his Mare, unto the Husband of this How; the Mare was within a
Day or two, taken in a strange condition. The beast seemed much abused; being
bruised, as if she had been running over the Rocks, and marked where the Bridle
went, as if burnt with a red hot Bridle. Moreover one using a Pipe of Tobacco
for the cure of the Beast, a blew flame issued out of her, took hold of he
hair, and not only spread and burnt on her, but it also flew upwards toward
the Roof of the Barn, and had like to have set the Barn on fire. And the Mare
died very suddenly.

9. Timothy Perly and his Wife, testified, not only that unaccountable
Mischiefs befell their Cattle, upon their having of differences with this
Prisoner; but also that they had a Daughter destroyed by Witchcrafts; which
Daughter still charged How, as the cause of her Affliction: and it was noted,
that she would be struck down, whenever How were spoken of. She was often
endeavored to be thrown into the Fire, and into the Water, in her strange
Fitts; tho her Father had corrected, for charging How with bewitching her, yet
(as was testified by others also) she said she was sure of it, and must dye
standing to it. Accordingly she charged How to the very death; and said, Tho
How could Afflict and Torment her Body, yet she could not hurt her Soul, and
that the truth of this matter would appear, when she should be dead and gone.

10. Francis Lane testified, that being hired by the Husband of this How, to
get him a parcel of Posts and Rails, this Lane hired John Pearly to assist him.
This Prisoner then told Lane, that she believed the Posts and Rails would not
do, because John Pearly helped him; but that if he had got them alone, without
John Pearly's help, they might have done well enough. When James How came to
receive his Posts and Rails of Lane, How taking them up by the Ends, they, tho
good and sound yet unaccountably broke off, so that Lane was forced to get
Thirty or Forty more. And this Prisoner being informed of it, she said, She
told him so before; because Pearly helped about them.

11. Afterward there came in the Confessions, of several other (penitent)
Witches, which affirmed this How to be one of those, who with them had been
baptized by the Devil in the River, at Newberry-Falls: before which he made
them there kneel down by the Brink of the River, and Worship him.

The Indictment of Martha Carryer.
Essex ff. Anno Regni Regis and Reginae Willielmi and Mariae, nunc Angliae,
etc. quarto --
THE Jurors for our Sovereign Lord and Lady the King and Queen, present, That
Martha Carryer, Wife of Thomas Carryer of Andover, in the County of Essex,
Husbandman, The Thirty first Day of May, in the fourth Year of the Reign of our
Sovereign Lord and Lady William and Mary, by the Grace of God, of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland, King and Queen, Defenders of the Faith, and c.
And diverse other days and times, as well before as after, certain detestable
Arts, called Witchcrafts, and Sorceries, Wickedly and Felloniously has used,
practiced, and exercised, at and within the Town-ship of Salem, in the County
of Essex aforesaid, in, upon, and against one Mary Wolcott of Salem-Village,
Single Woman, in the County of Essex aforesaid; by which said wicked Arts the
said Mary Wolcott, the Thirty first Day of May, in the fourth Year aforesaid,
and at diverse other days and times, as well before as after, was and is
Tortured, Afflicted, Pined, Consumed, Wasted and Tormented; against the Peace
of our Sovereign Lord and Lady, William and Mary, King and Queen, of England;
Their Crown and Dignity, and against the Form of the Statute, in that Case made
and provided.

Witnesses, Mary Wolcott, Elizabeth Hubbard, Ann Putnam.

There was also a Second Indictment for afflicting of Eliz. Hubbard, by
Witchcraft. Witnesses, Elizabeth Hubbard, Mary Wolcott, Ann Putnam, Mary Warrin.

The Trial of Martha Carryer, August 2. 1692. As may be seen in Wonders of the
Invisible World, from P. 132, to 138.
1. MArtha Carryer, was Indicted for the bewitching of certain persons,
according to the form usual in such Cases: Pleading not Guilty to her
Indictment; there were first brought in a considerable number of the Bewitched
persons; who not only made the Court sensible of an horrid Witchcraft committed
upon them, but also deposed, That it was Martha Carryer, or her shape, that
grievously tormented them, by biting, pr^cking, pinching and choking them. It
was further-deposed, that while this Carryer was on her Examination before the
Magistrates, the poor People were so tortured, that every one expected their
Death upon the very spot; but that upon the binding of Carryer they were eased.
Moreover the looks of Carryer then laid the Afflicted People for dead, and her
Touch, if her Eyes at the same time were off them, raised them again. Which
things were also now seen upon her Trial. And it was testified, that upon the
mention of some having their Necks twisted almost round by the shape of this
Carryer, she replied, Its no matter, tho their Necks had been twisted quite off.

2. Before the Trial of this Prisoner, several of her own Children, had frankly
and fully confessed not only that they were Witches themselves, but that this
their Mother had made them so. This Confession they made with great shows of
Repentance, and with much Demonstration of Truth. They related Place, Time,
Occasion; they gave an Account of Journeys, Meetings, and Mischiefs by them
performed; and were very credible in what they said. Nevertheless, this
Evidence was not produced against the Prisoner at the Bar, in as much as there
was other Evidence enough to proceed upon.

3. Benj. Abbot gave in his Testimony, That last March was a Twelve Month, this
Carryer was very angry with him, upon laying out some Land near her Husbands.
Her expressions in th^s Anger were, That she would stick as close to Abbot, as
the Bark stuck to the Tree; and that he should repent of it before seven Years
came to an end, so as Doctor Prescot should never cure him. These words were
heard by others, besides Abbot himself, who also heard her say, She would hold
his Nose as close to the Grindstone, as ever it was held since his name was
Abbot. Presently after this, he was taken with a swelling in his Foot, and then
with a Pain in his Side, and exceedingly tormented. It bred unto a Sore, which
was lanced by Dr. Prescot, and several Gallons of Corruption ran out of it. For
six Weeks it continued very bad; and then another Sore bred in his Groin, which
was also lanced by Dr. Prescot. Another Sore bred in his Groin which was
likewise Cut, and put him to very great misery. He was brought unto Death's
door, and so remained until Carryer was taken, and carried away by the
Constable. From which very day he began to mend, and so grew better every day,
and is well ever since.

Sarah Abbot also his Wife testified, that her Husband was not only all this
while Afflicted in his Body; but also that strange, extraordinary and
unaccountable calamities befell his Cattle; their Death being such as they could
guess at no Natural Reason for.

4. Allin Toothaker testified, that Richard the Son of Martha Carryer, having
some difference with him, pulled him down by the Hair of the Head, when he rose
again, he was going to strike at Richard Carryer, but fell down flat on his
back to the ground, and had not power to stir Hand or foot, until he told
Carryer he yielded; and then he saw the shape of Martha Carryer, go off his
Breast.

This Toothaker had received a wound in the Wars, and he now testified, that
Martha Carryer told him. He shall never be cured. Just before the apprehending
of Carryer, he could thrust a Knitting-Needle into his wound four Inches deep;
but presently after her being seized, he was thoroughly healed.

He further testified, that when Carryer and he sometimes were at variance, she
would clap her Hands at him and say, He should get nothing by it. Whereupon he
several times lost his Cattle, by strange Deaths, whereof no natural causes
could be given.

5. John Roger also testified, that upon the threatening words of this malicious
Carryer, his Cattle would be strangely bewitched; as was more particularly then
described.

6. Samuel Preston testified, that about two Years ago, having some difference
with Martha Carryer, he lost a Cow in a strange, preternatural, unusual manner;
and about a Month after this, the said Carryer, having again some difference
with him, she told him, He had lately lost a Cow, and it should not be long
before he lost another! which accordingly came to pass; for he had a thriving
and well kept Cow, which without any known cause quickly fell down and died.

7. Phebe Chandler testified, that about a Fortnight before the Apprehension of
Martha Carryer, on a Lords Day, while the Psalm was singing, in the Church,
this Carryer then took her by the Sho^lder, and shaking her, asked her, Where
she lived? she made her no Answer, although as Carryer, who lived next door to her
Father's House, could not in Reason but know who she was. Quickly after this,
as she was at several times crossing the Fields she heard a Voice, that she
took to be Martha Carryers, and it seemed as if it were over her head. The
Voice told her, She should within two or three Days be Poisoned: Accordingly
within such a little time, one half of her Right Hand became greatly swollen
and very painful; as also part of her Face; whereof she can give no Account how
it came. It continued very bad for some days; and several times since she has
had a great pain in her Breast; and been so seized on her Legs, that she has
hardly been able to go. She added that lately, going well to the House of God,
Richard the Son of Martha Carryer, looked very earnestly upon her, and
immediately her Hand which had formerly been Poisoned, as is abovesaid, began
to pain her greatly, and she had a strange burning at her Stomach; but was then
struck deaf, so that she could not hear any of the Prayer, or Singing, till the
two or three last words of the Psalm.

8. One Foster, who confessed her own share in the Witchcraft, for which the
Prisoner stood Indicted, affirmed, that she had seen the Prisoner at some of
their Witch-meetings, and that it was this Carryer, who persuaded her to be a
Witch. She confessed that the Devil carried them on a Pole, to a Witch-meeting,
but the Pole broke, and she hanging about Carryers Neck, they both fell down,
and she then received an hurt by the fall, whereof she was not at this very
time recovered.

9. One Lacy, who likewise confessed her share in this Witchcraft, now
testified that she and the Prisoner, were once bodily present, at a
Witchmeeting in Salem-Village, and that she knew the Prisoner to be a Witch,
and to have been at a Diabol^cal Sacrament, and that the Prisoner was the
undoing of her and her Children, by enticing them into the Snare of the Devil.

10. Another Lacy, who also confessed her share in this Witchcraft, now
testified, that the Prisoner was at the Witch-meeting, in Salem-Village, where
they had Bread and Wine administered unto them.

11. In the time of this Prisoners Trial, one Susana Shelden, in open Court,
had her Hands unaccountably tied together, with a Wheel-band, so fast, that
without cutting, it could not be loosed. It was done by a Spectre; and the
Sufferer affirmed, it was the Prisoners.

Memorandum. This Rampant Hag, Martha Carryer, was the person of whom the
Confessions of the Witches, and of her own Children, among the rest, agreed,
that the Devil had promised her, she should be Queen of Hell.

Thus far the Account given in Wonders of the Invisible World; in which setting
aside such words as these, in the Trial of G. B. viz. [ They, (i.e.) the
Witnesses were enough to fix the character of a Witch upon him.

In the Trial of Bishop, these words, [ but there was no need of them] i.e. of
further Testimony.

In the Trial of How, where it is said, [and there came in Testimony of
preternatural Mischiefs, presently befalling some that had been instrumental to
debar her from the Communion, whereupon she was intruding.] Martin is called
[one of the most impudent, scurrilous, wicked Creatures in the World.] In his
Account of Martha Carryer, he is pleased to call her [ a Rampant Hag,] etc.

These Expressions as they manifest, that he wrote more like an Advocate than
an Historian; so also that those that were his Imployers, were not mistaken in
their choice of him for that work, however he may have mist it in other things.

As in his owning (in the Trial of G. B.) That the Testimony of the bewitched,
and confessors was not enough against the Accused, for it is known, that not
only in New England, such Evidence has been taken for sufficient, but also in
England, as himself there owns, and will also hold true of Scotland, etc. they
having proceeded upon such Evidence, to the taking away of the Lives of many,
to assert that this is not enough, is to tell the World, that such Executions
were but so many Bloody Murders; which surely was not his intent to say.

His telling that the Court began to think that Buroughs stepped aside to put on
Invisibility. is a rendering them so mean Philosophers, and such weak
Christians, as to be fit to be imposed upon by any silly pretender.

H^s calling the Evidence against How trivial, and others against Buroughs, he
accounts no part of his Conviction; and that of lifting a Gun with one Finger,
its being not made use of as Evidence, renders the whole but the more perplexed.
(Not to mention the many mistakes therein contained).

Yet all this (and more that might have been hinted at) does not hinder, but
that his Account of the manner of Trials of those for Witchcraft, is as
faithfully related as any Trials of that kind, that was ever yet made public;
and it may also be reasonably thought, that there was as careful a Scrutiny,
and as unquestioned Evidences improved, as had been formerly used in the Trials
of others, for such crimes in other places. Tho indeed a second part might be
very useful, to set forth which was the Evidence Convictive in these Trials,
for it is not supposed, that Romantic or Ridiculous stories should have any
influence, such as biting a Specter Finger, so that the Blood flowed out, or
such as Shattock's Story of 12 Years standing, which yet was presently 18 Years
or more, and yet a Man of that excellent Memory, as to be able to recall a
small difference his Wife had with another Woman, when Eighteen Years were past.

As it is not to be supposed, that such as these could Influence any Judge or
Jury, so not unkindness to relations, or God's having given to one Man more
strength than to some others, the over-setting of Carts, or the death of
Cattle, nor yet Excrescencies (called Tets) nor little bits of Rags tied
together (called Poppets.) Much less any persons illness, or having their
Clothes rent, when a Spectre has been well banged, much less the burning the
Mares Fart, mentioned in the Trial of How.

None of these being in the least capable of proving the Indictment; The
supposed Criminals were Indicted for Afflicting, and c. such and such
particular persons by Witchcraft, to which none of these Evidences have one
word to say, and the Afflicted and Confessors being declared not enough, the
matter needs yet further explaining.

But to proceed, the General Court having sat and enacted Laws, particularly
one against Witchcraft, assigning the Penalty of Death to any that shall feed,
reward, or employ, and c. Evil Spirits, tho it has not yet been explained what
is intended thereby, or what it is to feed, reward, or employ Devils, and c.
yet some of the Legislators have given this instead of an Explanation, that
they had therein but Copied the Law of another Country.

January, 3. By virtue of an Act of the General Court, the first Superior
Court was held at Salem, for the County of Essex, the Judges appointed were,
Mr. William Stoughton (the Lieutenant Governor) Thomas Danforth, John
Richards, Wait Winthorp, and Samuel Sewall, Esquires. Where Ignoramus was found
upon the several Bills of Indictment against Thirty, and Billa Vera against
Twenty six more; of all these Three only were found Guilty, by the Jewry upon
Trial, two of which were (as appears by their Behavior) the most Senseless and
Ignorant Creatures that could be found; besides which it does not appear, what
came in against those more than against the rest that were acquitted.

The Third was the Wife of Wardwell, who was one of the Twenty Executed, and it
seems they had both confessed themselves Guilty; but he retracting his said
Confession, was tried and Executed; it is supposed that this Woman fearing her
Husbands fate, was not so stiff in her denyals of her former Confession, such
as it was. These Three received Sentence of Death.

At these Trials some of the Jewry made Inquiry of the Court, what Account they
ought to make of the Spectre Evidence? and received for Answer [as much as of
Chips in Wort.]

January, 31. 1692/3. The Superior Court began at Charlestown, for the County
of Middlesex, Mr. Stoughton, Mr. Danforth, Mr. Winthorp, and Mr. Sewall Judges,
where several had Ignoramus returned upon their Bills of Indictment, and Billa
Vera upon others.

In the time the Court sat, word was brought in, that a Reprieve was sent to
Salem, and had prevented the Execution of Seven of those that were there
Condemned, which so moved the chief Judge, that he said to this effect, We were
in a way to have cleared the Land of these, etc. who it is obstructs the course
of Justice I know not; the Lord be merciful to the Country, and so went off
the Bench, and came no more that Court: The most remarkable of the Trials, was
of Sarah Daston, she was a Woman of about 70 or 80 Years of Age, To usher in
her Trial, a report went before, that if there were a Witch in the World she
was one, as having been so accounted of, for 20 or 30 Years; which drew many
People from Boston, etc. to hear her Trial. There were a multitude of Witnesses
produced against her; but what Testimony they gave in seemed wholly foreign,
as of accidents, illness, and c. befalling them, or theirs, after some Quarrel;
what these testified, was much of it of Actions said to be done 20 Years before
that time. The Spectre Evidence was not made use of in these Trials, so that
the Jewry soon brought her in not Guilty, her Daughter and Granddaughter, and
the rest that were then tried were also acquitted. After she was cleared Judge
Danforth Admonished her in these words, Woman, Woman, repent, there are shrewd
things come in against you; she was remanded to Prison for her Fees, and there
in a short time expired. One of Boston that had been at the Trial of Daston,
being the same Evening in company with one of the Judges in a public place,
acquainted him that some that had been both at the Trials at Salem, and at this
at Charlestown, had asserted that there was more Evidence against the said
Daston, than against any at Salem, to which the said Judge conceeded, saying,
That it was so. It was replied by that person, that he dare give it under his
hand that there was not enough come in against her to bear a just reproof.

April, 25. 1693, The first Superior Court was held at Boston, for the County
of Suffolk, the Judges were the Lieutenant Governor, Mr. Danforth, Mr.
Richards and Mr. Sewall, Esquires.

Where (besides the acquitting Mr. John Aldin by Proclamation) the most
remarkable was, what related to Mary Watkins, who had been a Servant, and lived
about Seven Miles from Boston, having formerly Accused her Mistress of
Witchcraft, and was supposed to be distracted, she was threatened if she
persisted in such Accusations to be punished, this with the necessary care to
recover her Health, had that good effect, that s^e not only had her Health
restored, but also wholly acquitted her Mistress of any such Crimes, and
continued in Health till the return of the Year, and then again falling into
Melancholy humors she was sound strangling her self; her Life being hereby
prolonged, she immediately accused her self of being a Witch; was carried
before a Magistrate and committed. At this Court a Bill of Indictment was
brought to the Grand Jury against her, and her confession upon her Examination
given in as Evidence, but these not wholly satisfied herewith, sent for her,
who gave such account of her self, that they (after they had returned into the
Court to ask some Questions) Twelve of them agreed to find Ignoramus, but the
Court was pleased to send them out again, who again at coming in returned it as
before.

She was continued for some time in Prison, and c. and at length was Sold to
Virginia. About this time the Prisoners in all the Prisons were released.

To omit here the mentioning of several Wenches in Boston, etc. who pretended
to be Afflicted, and accused several, the Ministers often visiting them, and
praying with them, concerning whose Affliction Narratives are in being. In
Manuscript not only these, but the generality of those Accusers may have since
convinced the Ministers by their vicious courses, that they might err in
extending too much Charity to them.

The conclusion of the whole in the Massachusetts Colony was, Sir William Phips
Governor being called home, before he went he pardoned such as had been
condemned, for which they gave about 30 Shillings each to the Kings Attorney.

In August 1697. The Superior Court sat at Hartford, in the Colony of
Connecticut, where one Mistress Benom was tried for Witchcraft, she had been
accused by some Children that pretended to the Spectral sight; they searched
her several times for Tets; they tried the Experiment of casting her into the
Water, and after this she was Excommunicated by the Minister of Wallinsford.
Upon her Trial nothing material appearing against her, save Spectre Evidence,
she was acquitted, as also her Daughter, a Girl of Twelve or Thirteen Years
old, who had been likewise Accused; but upon renewed Complaints against them,
they both flew into New York Government.

Before this the Government Issued forth the following Proclamation.

By the Honorable the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Assembly of his
Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay, in General Court Assembled.
WHereas the Anger of God is not yet turned away, but his Hand is still
stretched out against his People in manifold Judgments, particularly in drawing
out to such a length the troubles of Europe, by a perplexing War; and more
especially, respecting our selves in this Province* in that God is pleased
still to go on in diminishing our Substance, cutting short our Harvest,
blasting our most promising undertakings more ways than one, unseding of us,
and by his more Immediate hand, snatching away many out of our Embraces, by
sudden and violent Deaths, even at this time when the Sword is devouring so
many both at home and abroad, and that after many days of public and Solemn
addressing of him. And although considering the many Sins prevailing in the midst
of us, we cannot but wonder at the Patience and Mercy moderating these Rebukes;
yet we cannot but also fear that there is something still wanting to accompany
our Supplications. And doubtless there are some particular Sins, which God is
Angry with our Israel for, that have not been duly seen and resented by us,
about which God expects to be sought, if ever he turn again our Captivity.

Wherefore it is Commanded and Appointed, that Thursday the Fourteenth of
January next, be observed as a Day of Prayer, with Fasting throughout this
Province, strictly forbidding all Servile labor thereon; that so all Gods
People may offer up fervent Supplications unto him, for the Preservation, and
Prosperity of his Majesty's Royal Person and Government, and Success to attend
his Affairs both at home and abroad; that all iniquity may be put away which
has stirred Gods Holy jealousy against this Land; that he would show us what
we know not, and help us wherein we have done amiss to do so no more; and
especially that whatever mistakes on either hand have been fallen into, either
by the body of this People, or any orders of men, referring to the late
Tragedy, raised among us by Satan and his Instruments, through the awful Judgment
of God, would humble us therefore and pardon all the Errors of his Servants and
People, that desire to love his Name, and be attoned to his Land; that he would
remove the Rod of the wicked from off the Lot of the Righteous; that he would
bring the American Heathen, and cause them to hear and obey his Voice.

Given at Boston, December. 17. 1696, in the 8 th Year of his Majesty's Reign.
Isaac Addington, Secretary.

Upon the Day of the Fast in the full Assembly, at the South Meeting House in
Boston, one of the Honorable Judges, who had sat in Judicature in Salem,
delivered in a Paper, and while it was in reading stood up, But the Copy being
not to be obtained at present, It can only be reported by Memory to this
effect, viz. It was to desire the Prayers of God's People for him and his, and
that God having visited his Family, etc. he was apprehensive that he might have
fallen into some Errors in the Matters at Salem, and pray that the Guilt of
such Miscarriages may not be imputed either to the Country in general, or to
him or his family in particular.

Some that had been of several Jewries, have given forth a Paper, Signed with
their own hands in these words.
WE whose names are underwritten, being in the Year 1692, called to serve as
Jurors, in Court at Salem, on Trial of many; who were by some suspected Guilty
of doing Acts of Witchcraft upon the Bodies of sundry Persons:

We confess that we our selves were not capable to understand, nor able to
withstand the mysterious delusions of the Powers of Darkness, and Prince of the
Air; but were for want of Knowledge in our selves, and better Information from
others, prevailed with to take up with such Evidence against the Accused, as on
further consideration, and better Information, we justly fear was insufficient
for the touching the Lives of any, Deuteronomy. 17.6. whereby we fear we have been
instrumental with others, tho Ignorantly and unwittingly, to bring upon our
selves, and this People of the Lord, the Guilt of Innocent Blood; which Sin the
Lord says in Scripture, he would not pardon, 2 Kings 24. 4. that is we suppose
in regard of his temporal Judgments. We do therefore hereby signify to all in
general (and to the surviving Sufferers in especial) our deep sense of, and
sorrow for our Errors, in acting on such Evidence to the condemning of any
person.

And do hereby declare that we justly fear that we were sadly deluded and
mistaken, for which we are much disquieted and distressed in our minds; and do
therefore humbly beg forgiveness, first of God for Christ's sake for this our
Error; And pray that God would not impute the guilt of it to our selves, nor
others; and we (...) pray that we may be considered heartily, and aright by the
living ^^^^rers, as being then under the power of a strong and general (...),
utterly unacquainted with, and not experienced in matters of that Nature.

We do heartily ask forgiveness of you all, whom we have justly offended, and
do declare according to our pr^sent minds, we would none of us do such things
again on such grounds for the whole World; praying you to accept of this in way
of Satisfaction for our Offense; and that you would bless the Inheritance of
the Lord, that he may be entreated for the Land.

Foreman,
Thomas Fisk, William Fisk, John Batcheler, Thomas Fisk, Junior. John Dane,
Joseph Evelith, Thomas Perly, Senior. John Pebody, Thomas Perkins, Samuel
Sayer, Andrew Elliott, Henry Herrick, Senior.
POSTSCRIPT.
Since the making the foregoing Collections of Letters, to the Reverend Mr.
Cotton Mather, and others, etc. (which as yet remain unanswered) a Book is come
to hand Entitled,

THE Life of Sir William Phips, Printed in London, 1697, Which Book, tho it
bears not the Authors name, yet the Style, manner and matter is such, that were
there no other demonstration or token to know him by, it were no Witchcraft to
determine that the said Mr. C. M. is the Author of it. But that he that has
encountered Enchantments, and gone through the Wonders of the Invisible World, and
discovered the Devil, that he should step aside into a Remote Country to put on
Invisibility! Tho the reason of this be not so manifest, yet it may be thought
to be to gratify some peculiar fancies; and why may not this be one, that he
might with the better grace extol the Actions of Mr. Mather, as Agent in
England, or as President of Harvard College, not forgetting his own.

As to Sir William, it will be generally acknowledged, that notwithstanding the
meanness of his Parentage and Education, he attained to be Master of a Ship,
and that he had the good hap to find a Spanish Wreck, not only sufficient to
repair his Fortunes, but to raise him to a considerable Figure; which King
James did so far accommodate, as to make him a Knight.

And that after this, in the Reign of his Present Ma^^^^^ he took up with those
of the Agents, that were for accepting the New C^arter, hereby himself became
Governor.

It is not doubted, but that he aimed at the good of the People, (...) great
Pity it is that his Government was so fullied (for want of better Information
and Advice, from those whose duty it was to have given ^t) by that H^bgeblin
Monster Witchcraft, whereby this Country was NightMar'd, and harrast at such a
rate, as is not easily imagined.

After which some complaints going to England, about Male Administration, in
the least matters comparatively; yet were such, that he was called home to give
account thereof, where he soon after expired, so finishing his Life and
Government together.

Death having thus drawn the Curtain, forbidding any further Scene, it might
have been prudence, to let his dust remain without disturbance.

But the said Book endeavoring to raise a Statue to him (i.e.) to ascribe to
him such Achievements, as either were never performed by him, or else unduly
aggravated, this has opened the Mouth, both of Friends and Enemies, to recount
the mistakes in the said Book; as also those miscarriages, wherewith Sir
William was charge^ble; such as had it not been for this Book, had been buried
with him.

In P. 3. search is made over the World, to whom to compare him in his
Advancement; and most unhappily Pizarro is pitched upon, as a match for him,
who was a Bastard, dropped in a Church Porch, put to Suck of a Sow, and being
grown, ran away* and Shipped himself for America; there so prospered, as to
Command an Army; and therewith did mighty things, particularly took
Attaballipa, one of the Kings of Peru Prisoner, and having received for his
Ransom, in Gold and Silver to the value of Ten Millions, perfidiously put him
to Death; and was the Death of no Man knows how many Thousands of Innocents,
and is certainly one of the worst that could have been pitched upon for such
comparison.

Tho this together with the Rhetorical flourishes, and affected strains
therein, are instances of the Authors variety of Learning; for which he is
recommended by these Three Venerable Person, in the entrance to the said Book.
Yet the Integrity, Prudonce, and Veracity thereof, is not so manifestly to be
seen. Passing over a multitude of Misrepresentations that are therein, relating
to the Acts of Sir William, as not designing to rake in the Grave of the Dead,
Who is it can see the Veracity of those words? P. 40. [He lay within
Pistol-Shot of the Enemies Cannon, and beat them from thence, and much battered
the Town, having his Ship sho^ through in an hundred places, with Four and twenty
Pounders,] When in the Judgment of those present, they were not nearer to the
Enemy, than about half or three quarters of a Mile; that there might be in all
about Seven Shot that struck the Hull of the Vessel, none of them known to be
bigger than 18 Pounders, the Enemy having but one Gun that could carry so big
as an 18 pound Ball.

It were a fondness, after such assertions, to take any notice of this bedecked
Statue, when there was so much the less need of erecting one (as is asserted P.
108.) having already been done so well, that even this Author himself despairs
of doing it better; and that by one, a Man of such diffused and Embalmed a
Reputation, as that his Commendations are asserted to be enough to Immortalize
the Reputation of Sir William, or whomsoever else he should please to bestow
them upon, viz. That Reverend person who was the President of the only
University, then in the English America, P. 109. Which by the way, is a much
fairer Statue, in honor of the President of the University, than that erected
for Sir William.

For notwithstanding all this noise of Erecting Statues, and the great danger
in plucking them down, etc. yet in P. 89. it is said, that even Sir William
showed Choler enough, leaving it open for others, thereby to understand, that
he was wholly given over to Passion and Choler. And in P. 92. it is said he did
not affect any mighty show of Devotion; these expressions with others may
prevail with the unbiast Reader, to think that these builders of Statues, had
some further design in it, than to blazen the Achievements of Sir William
Phips, viz. To set forth Mr. I. Mathers Negotiation in England, his procuring
the New-Charter for Sir William to be Governor, and himself Established
President of the College, are the things principally driven at in the Book.

Another principal thing is to set forth the supposed Witchcrafts in
New England, and how well Mr. Mather the Younger therein acquitted himself.

As to the New Charter, for the right understanding that Affair, it will be
needful to say, that the People that afterward settled in New England, being
about to leave their Native soil, and to seek (as the Providence of God should
direct them) a settlement in remote Regions, wherein they might best secure
their Civil and Religious Interests, before they entered upon this, considering
it might be needful on many accounts for their future well-being, they obtained
a Charter to be in the nature of a prime agreement, setting forth the
Sovereigns Prerogative, and the Peoples Privileges; in the enjoyment whereof
they long continued, after having purchased the Title to their Lands, of the
Natives of the Country, and settled themselves therein, without any charge to
the Crown.

That Clause in their Charter for this Country, viz. (Provided that no other
Christian Prince be prepossest of it) being a tacit acknowledgment, that before
settlement no one Christian Prince had any right thereto more than another.
During this time of New-Englands Prosperity, the Government here were very
sparing of Granting Freedoms, except to such as were so and so qualified.
Whereby the number of Non-Freemen being much increased, they were very uneasy,
by their being shut out from having any share in the Government, or having any
Votes for their Representatives, etc. it rendered many of them ready to join
with such as were undermining the Government, not duly considering that it had
^een far more safe to have endeavored to prevail with the Legislators for an
enlargement.

So that it will not be wondered at that in the latter end of the Reign of King
Charles the II. and of King James, (when most of the Charters in England were
vacated) that this was quo warranto'd, and finally Judgment entered up against
it, and the Country put into such a form of Government, as was most agreeable
to those times, viz. A Legislative power was lodged in the Governor (or
President) and some few appointed to be of his Counsel, without any regard
therein, either to the Laws of England, or those formerly of this Colony: Thus
rendering the Circumstances of this Country beyond comparison worse than those
of any Corporation in England. The People of those Corporations being
acknowledged still to have a right to Magna Charta, when their particular
Charters were made void. But here when Magna Charta has been pleaded, the
People have been answered, that they must not expect that Magna Charta would
follow them to the end of the World: not only their Estates, but their Lives
being thereby rendered wholly precarious. And Judge Palmer has set forth in
Print, that the King has power to grant such a Commission over this People.

It is not hard to imagine, that under such a Commission, not only the People
were liable to be oppressed by Taxes, but also by Confiscations, and Siezing of
Lands, unless Patents were purchased at Excessive prizes, with many other
Exorbitant Innovations.

The first that accepted this Commission was Mr. Dudley, a Gentleman born in
this Country, who did but prepare the way for Sir Edm. Andres. In whose time
things being grown to such Extremities, not only here, but in England, as
rendered the succeeding Revolution absolutely necessary, the Revolution here
being no other than an acting according to the Precedent given by England.

During the time of Sir Edmonds's Government, Mr. Increase Mather, Teacher of
the No^th Church in Boston; having undergone some trouble by Fobb-Actions laid
upon him, etc. (tho with some difficulty) he made his Escape, and got passage
for England, being therein assisted by some particular Friends; where being
arrived, he applied himself to King James for redress of those Evils the
Country then groaned under; and meeting with a seeming kind reception, and some
promises, it was as much as might at that time be reasonably expected.

Upon the Day of the Revolution here, tho for the greatest part of the People
were for reassuming their Ancient Government, pursuant to his Royal Highness's
Proclamation; yet matters were so clogged, that the People were dismissed without
it, who did not in the least mistrust, but that those, who were put out of the
Government by Mr. Dudley, would reasume: Mr. Broadstreet who had been then
Governor, being heard to say that Evening, when returned home, That had not he
thought they would have reassumed, he would not have stirred out of his House
that Day. But after this, some that were driving at other matters, had
opportunities by Threats and other ways, not only to prevail with that good Old
Gentleman, but with the rest of the Government wholly to decline it; which some
few observing, they took the opportunity to call themselves a Committee of
Safety, and so undertook to Govern such as would be governed by them.

It has been an Observation of long continuance, that matters of State seldom
prosper, when managed by the Clergy. Among the opposers of the reassuming few
so strenuous as some of the Ministers, and among the Ministers none more
vehement than Mr. Cotton Mather, Pastor of the North-Church in Boston, who has
charged them as they would answer it another day not to reassume. Among his
Arguments against it, one was that it would be to put a ^light upon his Father,
who, he said, was in England, laboring for a complete Restoration of Charter
Privileges, not doubting, but they would be speedily obtained. Any Man that
knows New England cannot but be sensible, that such Discourses from such Men,
have always been very prevalent. And hence it was that even those that would
think themselves wronged, if they were not numbered among the best Friends to
New England, and to its Charter, would not so much as stoop to take it up, when
there was really nothing to hinder them from the Enjoyment thereof.

After the Committee of Safety had continued about seven Weeks, or rather after
Anarchy had been so long Triumphant, an Assembly having been called, came to
this resolve, and laid it before those Gentlemen that had been of the
Government, that if they would not act upon the Foundation of the Charter, that
persuant to it, the Assembly would appoint some others in that Station. The
Answer to which was, that they would accept, etc. And when a Declaration
signifying such a reassuming* was prepared with the good liking of the
Deputies, in order to be published, some that were opposers, so terrified those
Gentlemen, that before publishing it was underwritten [that they would not have
it understood that they did reassume Charter Government] to the no small
amazement of the People, and disappointment of the Deputies, who if these had
not promised so to act, had taken other care, and put in those that would.

The next principal thing done was, they chose two of their Members, viz. One
of the upper House, the other of the lower, both of them Gentlemen of known
Integrity, as well as ability, to go to England, in order to obtain their
Resettlement; And in regard Mr. I. Mather was already there, they joined him,
as also a certain Gentlemen in London with these other two: Those from hence
being arrived in London, they all united for the common Interest of the
Country, tho without the desired effect. They were in doubt, whether it were
best to Improve their Utmost for a reversal of the Judgment in a Course of Law,
or to obtain it in a Parliamentary way, or to Petition his Majesty for a New
Grant of former Privileges; And considering that the two first might prove
Dilatory and Expensive, as well as for other reasons, they resolved upon the
latter, and Petitioned his Majesty for the Countries Resettlement, with former
Privileges, and what further additionals his Majesty in his Princely Wisdom
should think fit. Accordingly it pleased his Majesty to declare in Counsel his
Determination. viz. That there should be a Charter granted to New England. But
the Minutes then taken thereof, and a Draught of the New-Charter being seen, it
was the Opinion of the two Gentlemen sent from hence, that it were best to
tarry his Majesty's return from Flanders; in hopes then to obtain ease in such
things, as might be any ways deemed to be grievous. And this was the result of
the Advice of such as were best able to give it, that they could meet with, and
accordingly they wholly desisted taking it out of the Offices.

But Mr. Mather, and that other Gentleman had, as it is said, other advice
given them, which they strenuously pursued, and his Majesty having left it as
is asserted in this of the Life of Sir William, P. 57, to them to nominate a
Governor, they pitched upon Sir William Phips, who was then in England. [As the
most likely and able to serve the King's Interests among the People there;
under the changes in some things unacceptable now brought upon them, P. 62.]
and without tarrying for the concurrence of those other Agents, the Charter was
taken out, and c.

But Mr. Mather perhaps fearing he should have but small thanks here, for his
having so far an hand in bringing upon them those unacceptable Changes, wrote,
and caused to be Printed, an Account of his Negotiation, but surely by some
Error in the Conception, it proved only an Embrio, and was stifled as soon as
born. One indeed, designed to be as it were a Posthumus was left with Mr.
Bailey, formerly of Boston, and a Member of the North-Church, with a charge not
to suffer it to be seen, till he were gone to New England; yet it seems some
other person got a sight of it, which was the occasion of Mr. Mather's sending
him that Minatory Epistle, by some called a Bull. But besides this, for fear of
the worst, Mr. M. got several Non-con Ministers to give him a Testimonial, or
Letters of Commendations for his great Service herein.

In the mean time Mr. Cotton Mather, being in some doubt of the same thing,
handed about a Paper of Fables; wherein his Father under the Name of Mercurius,
and himself under the Name of Orpheus, are extolled and the great Actions of
Mercurius magnified; the present Charter exalted, by trampling on the former,
as being very defective, and all those called unreasonable that did not readily
agree with the New one: And indeed (...) ^hole Country are compared to no
better than Beasts, except Mercurius (...) ^^^heus, the Governor himself must
not Escape being termed an Elephant, (...) good as he was great, and the
Inferiors told by Orpheus that the quiet (...) of their Lands, and c. they
were beholding to Mercurius for. Tho this (...) ^as judged not convenient ot be
Printed, yet some Copies were taken, the Author (...) Heathen Learning in it.

This is in short that eminent Service for which the said Mr. I. M. is in the
present Book so highly extolled. In so many Pages, that to repeat them were to
transcribe a considerable part of the said Book.

And no doubt he deserves as much thanks as Dr. Sharp did, when he was sent by
the Presbytery of Scotland, to procure the settlement of their Kirk by King
Charles II. at his Restoration.

Not but that the present Charter of New England, is indeed truly valuable, as
containing in it peculiar Privileges, which abundantly Engages this People to
pay the tribute of thankfulness to his Majesty, and all due subjection to whom
it shall please him to substitute as Governor over us; and to pray that the
King of Kings would pour out of his richest blessings upon him, giving him a
long and prosperous Reign over the Nations, under the benign Influences
whereof, Oppression and Tyranny may flee away.

And if his Majesty has put this People into the present form of Government,
to the end they might be in the better condition of Defense in a time of War;
or that they might the better understand the Privilege of choosing their own
Governor by the want of it, and should be graciously pleased (the War being
over) to restore to these, as has been already granted to the rest of his
Majesty's Subjects, the full enjoyment of their Ancient Privileges, it would
be such an obligation upon them to thankfulness and Duty, as could never be
forgotten, nor sufficiently expressed, and would rather abate than increase
charge to the Crown.

As to the supposed Witchcrafts in New England, having already said so much
thereof, there is the less remains to be added.

In the times of Sir Ed. Andros his Government, Goody Glover, a despised,
crazy, ill-conditioned old Woman, an Irish Roman Catholic, was tried for
Afflicting Goodwins Children; by the Account of which Trial, taken in
Shorthand, for the use of the Jury, it may appear that the generality of her
Answers, were Nonsense, and her behavior like that of one distracted. Yet the
Drs. finding her as she had been for many Years, brought her in Compos Mentis;
and setting aside her crazy Answers to some insnaring questions, the proof
against her was wholly deficient: The Jury brought her Guilty.

Mr. Cotton M^ther, was the most active and forward of any Minister in the
Country in those matters, taking home one of the Children (...) managing such
Intreagues with that Child, and after printing (...) Account of the whole, in
his Memorable Providence, as (...) much to the kindling those Flames, that in
Sir William (...) threatened the devouring this Country.

(...) Witches out of Israel, is thought by many to have exceeded, and in his
Zeal to have slain the Gibeonites wrongfully under that notion: Yet went after
this to a Witch to know his Fortune. For his wrongful destroying the Gibeonites
(besides the Judgments of God upon the Land) his Sons were hanged; and for his
going to the Witch, himself was cut off. Our Sir William Phips did not do this,
but as appears by this Book, had first his Fortune told him (by such as the
Author counts no better) and tho he put it off (to his Pastor, who he knew
approved not thereof) as if it were brought to him in writing, without his
seeking, and c. Yet by his bringing it so far, and safe keeping it so many
Years, it appears he made some Account of it; for which he gave the Writer,
after he had sound the Wreck, as a reward, more than Two hundred Pounds. His
telling his Wife ( P. 6.) that he should be a Commander; should have a
Brick-House in Green Lane, etc. might be in confidence of some such Prediction,
and that he could foretell to him (P. 90.) that he should be Governor of
New England, was probably such an one (the Scriptures not having revealed it)
Such Predictions would have been counted at S^lem, pregnant proofs of
Witchcraft, and much better than what were against several that suffered there.
But Sir William, when the Witchcrafts at Salem began (in his Esteem) to look
formidable, that he might Act safely in this Affair, he asked the Advice of the
Ministers in and near Boston; the whole of their Advice and Answer is Printed
in Cases of Conscience the last Pages. But lest the World should be Ignorant
who it was that drew the said Advice, in this Book of the Life of Sir William
Phips, P. 77. are these words, the Ministers made unto his Excellency and the
Counsel a return, drawn up at their desire, by Mr. Mather the Younger, as I
have been informed. Mr. C. M. therein intending to beguile the World, and make
them think that another, and not himself had taken that notice of his
(supposed) good Service done therein, which otherwise would have been ascribed
to those Ministers in General, tho indeed the Advice then given, looks most
like a thing of his Composing, as carrying both Fire to increase, and Water to
quench the Conflagration. Particularly after the Devils testimony, by the
supposed Afflicted had so prevailed, as to take away the Life of one, and the
Liberty of an Hundred, and the whole Country set into a most dreadful:
consternation, then this Advice is given, ushered in with thanks for what was
already done, and in conclusion, putting the Government upon a speedy and
vigorous prosecution according to the Laws of God, and the wholesome Statutes of
the English Nation, so adding Oil rather than Water to the Flame; for who so
little acquainted with proceedings of England, as not to know that they have
taken some methods, with those here used to discover who were Witches. The rest
of the Advice consisting of cautions and directions, are inserted in this of
the Life of Sir William. So that if Sir William, looking upon the thanks for
what was past, and Exhortation to proceed, went on to take away the Lives of
Nineteen more, this is according to the Advice said to be given him by the
Ministers, and if the Devil after those Executions be affronted, by
disbelieving his testimony, and by clearing and Pardoning all the rest of the
Accused; yet this also is according to that Advice, but to cast the Scale; the
same that drew this Advice, says, in Wonders of the Invisible World,
Enchantments Encountered; [that to have a hand in any thing that may stifle or
obstruct a regular direction of that Witchcraft, is what we may well with a
Holy fear avoid: Their Majesty's good Subjects must not every day be torn to
pieces by horrid Witchcraft, and those bloody Felons be wholly left
unprosecuted. The Witchcraft is a business that will not be shamm'd]. The
Pastor of that Church, of which Sir William was a Member, being of this
Principle, and thus declaring it, after the former advice; no wonder tho it
cast the Scale against those Cautions. It is rather a Wonder that no more Blood
was shed, for if that Advice of his Pastors could still have prevailed with the
Governor, Witchcraft had not been so shammed off as it was. Yet now in this
Book of the Life of Sir William, the pardoning the Prisoners when Condemned,
and clearing the Goals, is called (P. 82.) a Vanquishing the Devil, adding this
Conquest to the rest of the Noble Achievements of Sir William, tho Performed
not only without, but directly against his Pastors* Advice. But this is not
all, tho this Book pretends to raise a Statue in Honor of Sir Wiliiam, yet it
apears it was the least part of the design of the Author to Honor him, but it
was rather to Honor himself, and the Ministers; It being so unjust to Sir
William, as to give a full Account of the cautions given him, but designedly
hiding from the Reader the Encouragements and Exhortations to proceed, that
were laid before him (under the name of the Ministers Advice) in effect,
telling the World that those Executions at Salem, were without, and against the
Advice of the Ministers, expressed in those Cautions, purposely hiding their
giving thanks for what was already done, and exhorting to proceed; thereby
rendering Sir William of so sanguin a Complexion, that the Ministers had such
cause to fear his going on with the Tragedy, tho against their Advice; that
they desired the President to write his Cases of Conscience, etc. To plead
msinformation will not salve here, however it may seem to pallitate other
things, but is a manifest, designed traversty, or misrepresentation of the
Ministers Advice to Sir William, a hiding the truth, and a wronging the dead,
whom the Author so much pretends to honor; for which the Acknowledgments ought
to be as Universal as the Offense. But tho the Ministers Advice, or rather Mr.
C. Mathers was perfectly Ambidexter, giving as great or greater Encouragement
to proceed in those dark methods, then cautions against them; yet many Eminent
persons being accused, there was a necessity of a stop t^ be put to it. If it
be true what was said at the Counsel-board, in answer to the commendations of
Sir William, for his stopping the proceedings about Witchcraft, viz. That it
was high time for him to stop it, his own Lady being accused; if tha^ Assertion
were a truth, then New England may seem to be more beholden to the accusers for
accusing of her, and thereby necessitating a stop, than to Sir William or to
the Advice that was given him by his Pastor.

Mr. C. M. having been very forward to write Books of Witchcraft, has not been
so forward either to explain or defend the Doctrinal part thereof, and his
belie^ (which he had a Years time to Compose) he durst not venture so as to be
copied. Yet in this of the Life of Sir William he sufficiently testifies his
retaining tha^ Here^^^^ox belief, seeking by frightfull stories of the
sufferings of some, and the r^sined light of others, ^^. P. 69 to obtrude upon
the World, and confirm it i^ such a belief, as hitherto he either cannot or
will not defend, as if the Blood already shed thereby were not sufficient.

Mr. I. Mather, in his Cases of Conscience P. 25. tells of a Bewitched Eye, and
that such can see more than others. They were certainly bewitched Eyes that
could see as well shut as open, and that could see what never was, that could
see the Prisoners upon the Assisted, harming of them, when those whose Eyes
were not bewitched could have sworn that the^ did not stir from the Bar. The
Accusers are said to have suffered much by biting, P. 73. And the prints of
just such a set of Teeth, as those they Accused, had, but such as had not such
bewitched Eyes have seen the Accusers bite themselves, and then complain of the
Accused. It has also been seen when the Accused, instead of having just such a
set of Teeth, has not had one in his head. They were such bewitched Eyes that
could see the Poisonous Powder (brought by Specter P. 70.) And that could see
in the Ashes the print of the Brand, there invisibly heat to torment the
pretended Sufferers with, etc.

These with the rest of such Legends have this direct tendency, viz. To tell
the World that the Devil is more ready to serve his Votaries, by his doing for
them things above or against the course of Nature, showing himself to them, and
making explicit contract with them, etc. than the Divine Being is to his
faithful Servants, and that as he is willing, so also able to perform their
desires. The way whereby these People are believed to arrive at a power to
Afflict their Neighbors, is by a compact with the Devil, and that they have a
power to Commissionate him to those Evils, P. 72. However Irrational, or
Inscriptural such Assertions are, yet they seem a necessary part of the Faith
of such as maintain the belief of such a sort of Witches.

As the Scriptures know nothing of a covenanting, or commissioning Witch, so
Reason cannot conceive how Mortals should by their Wickedness arrive at a power
to Commissionate Angels, Fallen Angels, against their Innocent Neighbors. But
the Scriptures are full in it, and the Instances numerous, that the Almighty,
Divine Being has this prerogative to make use of what Instrument he pleases,
in Afflicting any, and consequently to commissionate Devils: And tho this word
commissioning, in the Authors former Books, might be thought to be by
inadvertency; yet now after he has been cautioned of it, still to persist in
it seems highly Criminal. And therefore in the name of God; I here charge such
belief as guilty of Sacrilege in the highest Nature, and so much worse than
stealing Church Plate, etc. As it is a higher Offense to steal any of the
glorious Attributes of the Almighty, to bestow them upon Mortals, than it is to
steal the Utensils appropriated to his Service. And whether to ascribe such
power of commissioning Devils to the worst of Men, be not direct Blasphemy, I
leave to others better able to determine. When the Pharisees were so wicked as
to ascribe to Beelze^ub, the mighty works of Christ (whereby he did manifestly
show forth his Power and Godhead) then it was that our Savior declared the Sin
against the Holy Ghost to be unpardonable.

When the Righteous God is contending with Apostate Sinners, for their
departures from him, by his Judgments, as Plagues, Earthquakes, Storms and
Tempests, Sicknesses and Diseases, Wars, loss of Cattle, etc. Then not only to
ascribe this to the Devil, but to charge one another with sending or
commissionating those Devils to these things, is so abominable and so wicked,
that it requires a better Judgment than mine to give it its just denomination.

But that Christians so called should not only charge their fellow Christians
therewith, but proceed to Trials and Executions; crediting that Enemy to all
Goodness, and Accuser of the Brethren, rather than believe their Neighbors in
their own Defense; This is so Diabolical a Wickedness as cannot proceed, but
from a Doctrine of Devils; how far damnable it is let others discuss. Tho such
things were acting in this Country in Sir William time, yet p. 65. There is a
Discourse of a Guardian Angel, as then over-seeing it, which notion however it
may suit the Faith of E^^^icks, or the fancies of Trithemius; it is certain
that the Omnipresent Being, stands not in need as Earthly Potentates do, of
governing the World by Vicegerents. And if Sir William had such an Invisible
pattern to imitate, no wonder tho some of his Actions were unaccountable,
especially those relating to Witchcraft: For if there was in those Actions an
Angel super-intending, there is little reason to think it was Gabriel or the
Spirit of Mercury, nor Handel the Angel or Spirit of Ven^s, nor yet Samuel the
Angel or Spirit of Mars; Names seigned by the said Trithemius, etc. It may
rather be thought to be Apollyon, or Ab^ddon.

Obj. But here it will be said. What are there no Witches? Does not the Law of
God command that they should be extirpated? Is the Command vain and
Unintelligible? Sol. For any to say, that a Witch is one that makes a compact
with, and Commissions Devils, etc. is indeed to render the Law of God vain and
Unintelligible, as having provided no way whereby they might be detected, and
proved to be such; And how the Jews waded through this difficulty for so many
Ages, without the Supplement of Mr. Perkins and Bernard thereto, would be very
mysterious. But to him that can read the Scriptures without prejudice from
Education, etc. it will manifestly appear that the Scripture is full and
Intelligible, both as to the Crime and means to detect the culpable. He that
shall hereafter see any person, who to confirm People in a false belief, about
the power of Witches and Devils, pretending to a sign to confirm it; such as
knocking off of invisible Ghains with the hand, driving away Devils by
brishing, striking with a Sword or Stick, to wound a person at a great
distance, etc. may (according to that head of Mr. Gauls, quoted by Mr. G. M.
and so often herein before recited, and so well proved by Scripture) conclude
that he has seen Witchcraft performed.

If Baalam became a Sorcerer by Sacrifizing and Praying to the true God against
his visible people; Then he that shall pray that the afflicted (by their
Spectral Sight) may accuse some other Person (whereby their reputations and
lives may be endangered) such will justly deserve the Name of a Sorcerer. If
any Person pretends to know more then can be known by humane means, and
professes at the same time that they have it from the Black-Man, i. e. the
Devil, and shall from hence give Testimony against the Lives of others, they
are manifestly such as have a familiar Spirit; and if any, knowing them to have
their Information from the Black-Man, shall beinquisitive of them for their
Testimony against others, they therein are dealing with such as have a
Familiar-Spirit.

And if these shall pretend to see the dead by their Spectral Sight, and others
shall be inquisitive of them, and receive their Answers what it is the dead
say, and who it is they accuse, both the one and the other are by Scripture
Guilty of Necromancy.

These are all of them crimes as easily proved as any what soever, and that by
such proof as the Law of God requires, so that it is no Unintelligible Law.

But if the Iniquity of the times be such, that these Criminals not only Escape
Indemnified, but are Encouraged in their Wickedness, and made use of to take
away the Lives of others, this is worse than a making the Law of God Vain, it
being a rendering of it dangerous, against the Lives of Innocents, and without
all hopes of better, so long as these Bloody Principles remain.

As long as Christians do Esteem the Law of God to be Imperfect, as not
describing that crime that it requires to be Punished by Death.

As long as men suffer themselves to be Poisoned in their Education, and be
grounded in a False Belief by the Books of the Heathen.

As long as the Devil shall be believed to have a Natural Power, to Act above
and against a course of Nature.

As long as the Witches shall be believed to have a Power to Commission him.

As long as the Devils Testimony, by the pretended afflicted, shall be received
as more valid to Condemn, than their Plea of Not Guilty to acquit.

As long as the Accused shall have their Lives and Liberties confirmed and
restored to them, upon their Confessing them-selves Guilty.

As long as the Accused shall be forced to undergo Hardships and Torments for
their not Confessing.

As long as Tets for the Devil to Suck are searched for upon the Bodies: of the
accused, as a token of guilt.

As long as the Lords Prayer shall be profaned, by being made a Test, who are
culpable.

As long as Witchcraft, Sorcery, Familiar Spirits, and Necromancy, shall be
improved to discover who are Witches, etc.

So long it may be expected that Innocents will suffer as Witches.

So long God will be Daily dishonored, And so long his Judgments, must be
expected to be continued.

FINIS.

