C2 R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
At the Court at Hampton Court, The Thirteenth of June 1683.
Present, The Kings most Excellent Majesty, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury Lord
Keeper Lord President Lord Privy Seat Duke of Ormond Duke of Albemarle Earl of
Huntingdon Earl of Sunderland Earl of Clarendon Earl of Bathe Earl of Craven
Earl of Rochester Lord Bishop of London Lord Dartmouth Mr. Secretary Jenkins
Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer Mr. Chancellor of the Duchy Lord Chief Justice
of the Common Pleas. Master Godolphin.

WHereas the Right Honorable the Lords of the Committee for Trade and Foreign
Plantations, did this day Report to the Board, That in obedience to an Order of
the Eleventh of April last, They have examined the Petition of the Merchants
Adventurers of England, setting forth, That diverse Aliens and other Foreigners
have Traded, and continued to Trade, contrary to the Charter granted by His
Majesty, and His Royal Predecessors, to the said Fellowship of Merchants,
whereby their Privileges are invaded, and the great Advantages enjoyed by His
Majesty's Subjects at Hamburgh, and elsewhere, brought into danger of being
lost; to the discouragement of the Trade of Woollen Manufactures, and
Navigation of this Kingdom: And further, That their Lordships have likewise
been attended as well by the chief Merchants of the said Company, as by some of
the Persons complained of, as Interlopers; and although it was Proposed, That
for the satisfaction of all Parties, and the better Management of this ancient
and beneficial Trade, the said Persons might become Members of the Company, and
enjoy the same Privileges and Advantages as are granted to His Majesty's
Subjects by the said Charter, and the Concordats agreed on by the City of
Hamburgh; Yet finding that the said Interlopers have not only refused to enter
into the said Company, but seem resolved to persist in their former Practices;
The said Lords Committees did humbly offer it as their Opinion, That Directions
be given for Prosecuting in His Majesty's Name, all such as shall violate the
Privileges of the said Company: And further, That no Letters of Denization be
hereafter granted to any Person by His Majesty, without a Clause whereby the
same shall become void, in case such Person shall presume to Trade contrary to
His Majesty's Royal Charters. Which His Majesty having taken into
Consideration, and approving of their Lordships Advice herein, did accordingly
Order, That Sir Robert Sawyer Knight, His Majesty's Attourney-General, do from
time to time, as Application shall be made unto him by the said Company of
Merchant Adventurers, effectually Prosecute in His Majesty's Name, all such
Persons as the said Company shall Inform him, and be able to prove that they
have violated their Privileges, by Trading contrary to their said Charters.

And it was further Ordered by His Majesty in Council, That in all Patents of
Denization hereafter to be granted, there be Inserted a Clause for Vacating the
same, in case it shall be made appear that the Person Endenized do Trade
contrary to the Royal Charters granted to the said Fellowship, or any other
Company. Whereof the Right Honorable His Majesty's Principal Secretaries of
State, His Attourney-General, and Sollicitor-General are to take notice, and to
cause this His Majesty's Pleasure to be carefully observed.

JOHN NICHOLAS.

London, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill Deceased: And by Henry Hills, and
Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1683.


