THE ANSWERS COMMANDED BY His MAJESTY To be given by the Right Honorable The
EARL of NOTTINGHAM Ld H. Chancellor of ENGLAND, Upon Several ADDRESSES
Presented to His MAJESTY in Council at Hampton Court, The 19 th of May, 1681.
HIs Majesty has considered the several Addresses which have been now
presented to Him, and commands me to return these Answers to Them.

First, I am to let the Commissioners of the Lieutenancy know, That His Majesty
does very well accept and approve the Address they have made, and thinks that
Zeal with which they have expressed their Loyalty and good Affections to His
Person and Government, to be at this time a very seasonable piece of Duty and
Service, and does heartily Thank them for it.

To the Gentlemen of the Borough of Southwark, His Majesty does not only give
His hearty Thanks, but declares Himself to be extremely well pleased with the
Form of their Address, and thinks they proceed upon the truest and the surest
Grounds that can be, when they lay it down for a Maxim, That steady Loyalty is
the only Foundation of true Felicity.

And I am to assure you Both, That His Majesty will always retain a Gracious
Remembrance of your good Services, and that you shall not fail to find the
Effects of it, whenever you shall apply your selves to His Majesty for His
Favor.

As for that other Address, which styles it self, The humble Petition of the L.
Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of London in Common Council assembled,
and which is very much discredited by these other Addresses which accompany it,
I have many things in Command to say to it.

The King did expect, that a Petition which seems to come from the Mayor,
Aldermen, and Common Counsel of the City of London, should have consisted of
such Matters only, as relate to the particular Concerns of the City; at least
He thought He should have found in it some due Acknowledgment of His continual
Care in Preserving and Improving your Trade, and Supporting your Liberties and
Franchises.

But, contrary to His Expectation, and (as He thinks) to your Duty, He finds
this Petition meddling with Matters of State and Government, Things which do in
no sort appertain to you, but are quite out of your Sphere: And if this should
pass without Reproof, the meanest Corporation, nay, the meanest Village in
England, will have as much right to be meddling in these Matters, as you have.

The only End and Use of Common-Councels in London, is for the Business of
London; you are not the Common Counsel of the Nation, and yet you behave your
selves so, as if you thought you were.

But the King does not look upon this Petition as proceeding from the unanimous
Consent of the Common Counsel; He is very well informed that it past there by
an inconsiderable Majority, but fourteen Votes in the whole, and against the
Sense of the Major part of the Court of Aldermen, And His Majesty has a great
Value and Kindness for the Honesty and Discretion of those who dissented from
it. And He looks upon the rest as misled by some ill Men, who make it their
business to begin that Confusion in the City, which they see no hopes of
beginning elsewhere.

And the King does not believe that the Matter of this Petition was ever well
Considered by you, because He finds in it so many Presumptions and Mistakes.

It prays the Calling of a Parliament at a time when the King has already
Declared to all the World, That there shall be frequent Parliaments, and so
seems to Doubt of that Assurance which all good Subjects give the King most
humble Thanks for.

It prays a Continuation of that Parliament till all their Business be
dispatched, and so breaks in upon the highest Trust which is lodged in the King,
to whom alone it belongs to appoint the Times and Seasons.

It deprives the King of the whole Honor of His Grace and Goodness in Calling
a Parliament, by making it seem to be the effect of your Importunity.

So that nothing in the World could be more contrary to the seeming Ends of
this Address, then the Address it self.

And besides all this, the King takes notice of another Expression in your
Address, wherein you pretend to be much troubled, that certain Pamphlets have
lately come out which speak very dishonourably of the Proceedings of the two
last Parliaments.

Now the King would have been glad, you had mentioned what Pamphlets you mean,
lest otherwise the World suppose you to have a secret meaning in this general
Expression; such a meaning as no Honest man or good Subject dares own.

And the King would have been glad too, that you had likewise taken Notice of
such other Pamphlets as defame His Majesty's Person and Government, and Libel
all the Orders and Constitutions both of Church and State.

But it seems your Curiosity has been very great to look after some kind of
Pamphlets, but your Diligence has been very little when you should have looked
after the rest, and have punished the Seditious.

Notwithstanding all this, the King it still of Opinion, That there are but
very few among you, who deserve these Reproofs, He is not only Confident of the
Affections of the City in general, as knowing that no Prince ever deserved
better of His People; But He believes the greatest part of the Court of
Aldermen and of the Common Counsel too, if they had all been present, to be
very much addicted to His Service.

If therefore there be any among you who seeks to make Divisions, He hopes you
will mark them, and avoid them, and that you will Study to be quiet and to do
your own Business; For the King has set His Heart upon this City to do them
all the good He can, and it is only the Peace of His Government which can bring
you any Prosperity.

The King therefore recommends it to you and requires it of you, to take
effectual Care, that there be no kind of Disturbance or Disorder among you.

LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill, Thomas Newcomb, and Henry Hills,
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1681.


