HIS MAJESTY'S TWO SPEECHES: ONE To the Knights, Gentlemen, and Freeholders of
the County of Nottingham at NEWARK.

THE OTHER To the Knights, Gentlemen, and Freeholders of the County of Lincoln
at LINCOLN.

LONDON: Printed by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty: And by the Assigns of JOHN BILL.

MDCXLII.

DIEV ET MON DROIT
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
CR


His Majesty's Speech To the Knights, Gentlemen, and Freeholders of the County
of Nottingham, at Newark.
GENTLEMEN,
YOur honest Resolutions and Affections to me and your Country, for the
defense of my Person, and the Laws of the Land, have been, and are so notable,
that they have drawn me hither only to thank you: I go to other places to
confirm and undeceive my Subjects, but am come hither only to thank and
encourage you: You have made the best judgment of happiness, by relying on
that foundation, which the experience of so many hundred years has given such
proof of, The Assurance and Security of the Law: And assure your selves when
Laws shall be altered by any other Authority, then that by which they were
made, your foundations are destroyed; And though it seems at first but to take
away my Power, it will quickly swallow all your Interest. I ask nothing of you
(though your demeanor gives me good evidence that you are not willing to deny)
but to preserve your own Affections to the Religion, and Laws established; I
will justify and protect those Affections, and will live and die with you in
that quarrel.

His Majesty's Speech To the Knights, Gentlemen, and Freeholders of the County
of Lincoln, at Lincoln.
GENTLEMEN,
IF I could have suspected your affections, or have censured the duty of this
County by some late Actions in it, I should not have taken this pains to have
given you a Testimony of my Affection to you, and to remove those Objections,
which being raised by a Malignant Party, may, by their cunning and industry,
get credit even with honest minds. The truth is, I come to you to assure you
of my purposes and Resolutions for the Defense of what ever is or should be
dear unto you, your Religion, your Liberty, your Common Interest, and the Law
of the Land: and to undeceive you of that Opinion, which I hear has mis led
many of you, That the pretended Ordinance of the Militia is warranted by my
Consent and Authority. As I have already informed you, by my several
Declarations and Messages, that the same is against the known Law, and an
Invasion of my unquestionable Right, and of your Liberty and Property, so I do
now declare unto you, that the same is imposed upon you against my Express
Consent, and in Contempt of my Regal Authority; And therefore whosoever shall
henceforth presume to Execute or Obey the same, I shall proceed against them,
as against such who promote Rebellion, and actually leavie War against me: And
I doubt not, but you will sadly consider, That if any Authority without and
against my Consent may lawfully impose such Burdens upon you, it may likewise
take away all that you have from you, and subject you to their Lawless
Arbitrarie Power and Government: And how far they are like to exercise that
Jurisdiction toward you, you may guess by the Insolence of Sir John Hotham at
Hull, who (being a Subject) not only presumes to keep His Sovereign, by force
of Arms, out of His Town, but murders his Fellow Subjects, imprisons them,
burns their Houses, drowns their Land, takes them Captives, and commits such
Outrages, and Acts of Hostility, as the most equal and outrageous Enemies
practice in any Country; That you may see how impossible it is for your
Liberties and Properties to be preserved, when your King is Oppressed, and His
just Rights taken from Him. Who has brought these Calamities upon your
Neighbors at Hull, every Man sees; and they only can bring the same upon you.
I will not believe you to be so insensible of the benefits you have received
from me, that I need put you in mind of the Gracious Acts passed by me this
Parliament on your behalfs; And if there be any thing wanting, to the making
you the happiest Subjects in the world, I am sure it is not my fault that you
have not that too: Be not deceived with words, and General Expressions; It is
not in your power to name one Particular, which might make you happy, that I
have refused to Grant: Be not frighted with Apprehensions, That this Country
is like to be the Seat of a war; the Seat of a war will be only where persons
rise in Rebellion against me; that will not, I hope, be here, and then you
shall be sure of my Protection. I will live and die in your Defense; And that
you may be in a Readiness, and a Posture to Defend your selves and me, against
any Invasion or Rebellion, I have Armed several Persons of Honor, Quality and
Reputation amongst you, and of your own Country, with a Commission of Array to
that purpose: There is no honest end declared in that Ordinance, which is not
provided for by this Commission, which being according to the old known Law, is
fit for your Obedience, and I doubt not will find it.

In a word, I assure you, upon the Faith and Honor of a Christian King, I will
be always as tender of any thing which may advance the true Protestant
Religion, protect and preserve the Laws of the Land, and defend the just
Privilege and Freedom of Parliament, as of my Life, or my Crown: and when I
fail in either of these, I will not look for your assistance; till then you are
concerned not to see me suffer.

FINIS.

