COPIES Of Two PAPERS Written by the Late King Charles II.

TOGETHER With a Copy of a Paper written by the late Duchess of York.

Published by his Majesty's Command.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's most Excellent Majesty,
for his Household and Chapel. 1686.

These two next following papers (in my apprehension) seem rather to be
written to King Charles ye 2d: and after transcribed by him, than to be endited
by him.

The First Paper.
THE Discourse we had the other Day, I hope satisfied you in the main, that
Christ can have but one Church here upon Earth, and I believe that it is as
visible as that the Scripture is in Print; That none can be that Church, but
that, which is called the Roman Catholic Church. I think you need not trouble
your self with entering into that Ocean of particular Disputes, when the main,
and, in truth, the only Question is; Where that Church is, which we profess to
believe in the two Creeds? We declare there to believe one Catholic, and
Apostolic Church, and it is not left to every fantastical man's head to
believe as he pleases, but to the Church, to whom Christ left the power upon
Earth to govern us in matters of Faith, who made these Creeds for our
directions. It were a very Irrational thing to make Laws for a Country, and
leave it to the Inhabitants, to be the Interpreters and Judges of those Laws;
For then every man will be his own Judge, and by consequence no such thing as
either right or wrong. Can we therefore suppose that God Almighty would leave
us at those uncertainties, as to give us a Rule to go by, and leave every man
to be his own Judge? I do ask any ingenuous man, whether it be not the same
thing to follow our own Fancy or to interpret the Scripture by it? I would
have any man show me, where the power of deciding matters of Faith is given to
every particular man. Christ left his power to his Church even to forgive sins
in Heaven, and left his Spirit with them, which they exercised after his
Resurrection: First by his Apostles in these Creeds, and many years after by
the Council at Nice, where that Creed was made that is called by that name, and
by the power which they had received from Christ, they were the Judges even of
the Scripture it self many years after the Apostles, which Books were Canonical
and which were not. And if they had this power then, I desire to know how they
came to lose it, and by what Authority men separate themselves from that
Church? The only pretense I ever heard of, was, because the Church has failed
in wresting and interpreting the Scripture contrary to the true sense and
meaning of it, and that they have imposed Articles of Faith upon us, which are
not to be warranted by Gods word? I do desire to know who is to be Judge of
that, whether the whole Church, the Succession whereof has continued to this
day without interruption, or particular men who have raised Schisms for their
own advantage?

This is a true Copy of a Paper I found in the late King my Brothers Strong
Box, written in his own Hand. JAMES R.

The Second Paper.
IT is a sad thing to consider what a world of Heresies are crept into this
Nation; Every man thinks himself as competent a Judge of the Scriptures as the
very Apostles themselves; and it is no wonder that it should be so, since that
part of the Nation, which looks most like a Church, dares not bring the true
Arguments against the other Sects, for fear they should be turned against
themselves, and confuted by their own Arguments. The Church of England (as it is
called) would fain have it thought, that they are the Judges in matters
Spiritual, and yet dare not say positively that there is no Appeal from them;
for either they must say, that they are Infallible (which they cannot pretend
to) or confess that what they decide in matters of Conscience, is no further to
be followed, then it agrees with every man's private judgment. If Christ did
leave a Church here upon Earth, and we were all once of that Church, how? and
by what Authority, did we separate from that Church? If the power of
Interpreting of Scripture be in every man's brain, what need have we of a Church
or Churchmen? To what purpose then did our Savior, after he had given his
Apostles power to Bind and Loose in Heaven and Earth, add to it, that he would
be with them even to the End of the World? These words were not spoken
Parabolically, or by way of Figure. Christ was then ascending into his Glory,
and left his power with his Church even to the End of the World. We have had
these hundred years past, the sad effects of denying to the Church that Power
in matters Spiritual, without an Appeal. What Country can subsist in peace or
quiet, where there is not a Supreme Judge from whence there can be no Appeal?
Can there be any Justice done where the Offenders are their own Judges, and
equal Interpreters of the Law, with those that are appointed to administer
Justice? This is our Case here in England in matters Spiritual; for the
Protestants are not of the Church of England, as it is the true Church from
whence there can be no Appeal; but because the Discipline of that Church is
conformable at that present to their fancies, which as soon as it shall
contradict or vary from, they are ready to embrace or join with the next
Congregation of People, whose Discipline and Worship agrees with their opinion
at that time; so that according to this Doctrine there is no other Church, nor
Interpreter of Scripture but that which lies in every man's giddy brain. I
desire to know therefore of every serious considerer of these things, whether
the great work of our Salvation ought to depend upon such a Sandy foundation as
this? Did Christ ever say to the Civil Magistrate (much less to the People)
that he would be with them to the End of the World? Or, did he give them the
power to forgive Sins? St. Paul tells the Corinthians, Ye are Gods Husbandry,
ye are Gods Building; we are Laborers with God. This shows who are the
Laborers, and who are the Husbandry and Building, And in this whole Chapter
and in the preceding one, S. Paul takes great pains to set forth that they, the
Clergy, have the Spirit of God, without which no man searches the deep things
of God; and he concludes the Chapter with this Verse, For who has known the
mind of the Lord that he may instruct him? But we have the mind of Christ. Now
if we do but consider in humane probability and reason, the powers Christ
leaves to his Church in the Gospel, and St. Paul explains so distinctly
afterward, we cannot think that our Savior said all these things to no
purpose; And pray consider on the other side, that those, who resist the truth,
and will not submit to his Church, draw their Arguments from Implications, and
far fetched Interpretations, at the same time that they deny plain and positive
words; which is so great a Disingenuity, that it is not almost to be thought
that they can believe themselves. Is there any other foundation of the
Protestant Church, but that if the Civil Magistrate please, he may call such of
the Clergy as he thinks fit for his turn at that time; and turn the Church
either to Presbytery, Independency, or indeed what he pleases? This was the way
of our pretended Reformation here in England; and by the same Rule and
Authority it may be altered into as many more Shapes and Forms as there are
Fancies in men's Heads.

This is a true Copy of a Paper written by the late King my Brother in his own
Hand, which I found in his Closet. JAMES R.

IT is so Reasonable to expect, that a person always Bred up in the Church of
England, and as well Instructed in the Doctrine of it, as the best Divines, and
her capacity could make her, should be liable to many censures, for leaving
That, and making her self a member of the Roman Catholic Church, to which, I
confess, I was one of the greatest enemies it ever had; That I choose rather to
endeavor to satisfy my friends, by reading this Paper, then to have the
trouble, to answer all the questions that may daily be asked me: And first, I
do protest in the presence of Almighty God; That no Person, Man, or Woman,
Directly, nor Indirectly, ever said any thing to me (since I came into England)
or used the least endeavor to make the change my Religion: It is a blessing I
wholly owe to Almighty God, and I hope the hearing of a Prayer I daily made
him, ever since I was in France, and Flanders; Where seeing much of the
Devotion of the Catholics (tho I had very little my self) I made it my
continual request to Almighty God; That, if I were not, I might, before I died,
be in the true Religion: I did not in the least doubt, but that I was so, and
never had any manner of scruple till November last; When reading a book, called
the History of the Reformation, by Doctor Heylin, which I had heard very much
commended, and had been told, if ever I had any doubt in my Religion, that
would settle me; Instead of which, I found it the description of the horridest
Sacriledges in the World; And could find no reason, why we left the Church, but
for Three the most Abominable ones, that were ever heard of amongst Christians:
First, Henry the Eighth Renounces the Pope's Authority, because he would not
give him leave to part with his Wife, and Marry another, in her lifetime:
Secondly, Edward the Sixth was a Child, and governed by his Uncle, who made his
Estate out of Church Lands. And then Queen Elizabeth, who being no Lawful
Heiress to the Crown, could have no way to keep it, but by Renouncing a Church
that could never suffer so Unlawful a thing to be done by one of Her Children.
I confess, I cannot think the Holy Ghost could ever be in such Counsels; and it
is very strange, that, if the Bishops had no design, but (as they say) the
restoring us to the Doctrine of the Primitive Church; they should never think
upon it, till Henry the Eighth made the Breach upon so Unlawful a Pretense.
These Scruples being raised, I begun to consider of the difference between the
Catholics and Us; and Examined them as well as I could by the Holy Scripture,
which, though I do not pretend to be able to understand, yet, there are some
things I found so easy, that I cannot but wonder, I had been so long without
finding them out: As the Real Presence in the Blessed Sacrament, the
Infallibility of the Church, Confession, and Praying for the Dead. After this,
Sheldom A.B. of Cant. Blandford B. of Worcest.
I spoke severally to Two of the best Bishops we have in England, who both told
me, there were many things in the Roman Church, which (it were very much to be
wished) we had kept; As Confession, which was, no doubt, Commanded by God: That
Praying for the Dead was one of the Ancient things in Christianity: That for
their parts, they did it Daily, though they would not own it: And afterward,
pressing one of them very much upon the other Points, he told me, Blandford B.
of Worcest.
That if he had been bred a Catholic, he would not change his Religion; but,
that being of another Church, wherein, he was sure, were all things necessary
to Salvation, he thought it very ill, to give that Scandal, as to leave that
Church, wherein he had received his Baptism.

All these Discourses did but add more to the desire I had, to be a Catholic,
and gave me the most terrible Agonies in the World, within my self. For all
this, fearing to be rash in a matter of that Weight, I did all I could to
satisfy my self; made it my Daily Prayer to God, to settle me in the Right,
and so went on Christmass-day to Receive in the King's Chapel; after which, I
was more troubled then ever, and could never be in quiet, till I had told my
desire to a Catholic, who brought a Priest to me, and that was the First I
ever did Converse with, upon my Word. The more I spoke to him, the more I was
Confirmed in my design; and, as it is impossible for me to doubt of the Words
of our Blessed Savior, who says, the Holy Sacrament is his Body and Blood, so
I cannot Believe, that He who is the Author of all truth, and who has promised
to be with his Church to the End of the World, would permit them to give that
Holy Mystery to the Laiety but in one kind, if it were not Lawful so to do.

I am not able, or, if I were, would I enter into Disputes with any Body; I
only in short, say this for the changing of my Religion, which I take God to
Witness I would never have done, if I had thought it possible to Save my Soul
otherwise. I think, I need not say, it is any Interest in this World leads me
to it: It will be plain enough to every body, that I must lose all the Friends,
and Credit I have here, by it; and have very well weighed, which I could best
part with, my share in this world, or the next: I thank God I found no
difficulty in the Choice.

My only Prayer is, that the poor Catholics of this Nation, may not suffer for
my being of their Religion: That God would but give me Patience to bear them,
and then, send me any afflictions in this World, so I may enjoy a Blessed
Eternity hereafter.

St. James's Aug. 20th. 1670.
This mistaken and deceived lady deserves lamentation.


