Sold by R. Tonson at Grayes Inn Gate.


THE COURTIER'S Calling: Showing the Ways of making a FORTUNE, AND THE Art of
Living at Court, According to the MAXIMS OF POLICY and MORALITY.

In TWO PARTS.

The First concerning NOBLEMEN: The Second concerning GENTLEMEN.

By a Person of Honor.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. for Richard Tonson, at Grays-Inne Gate in Grays-Inne
Lane. 1675.

A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS Contained in this Book.
THE FIRST PART.
Chap. 1. THat our good and bad Fortune depend on our Conduct. page. 1. Chap.
2. That persons of Quality ought to seek their Fortune at Court. page. 8. Chap.
3. Two ways of advancing a man's Fortune. page. 18. Chap. 4. The speediest way
is to insinuate himself into the Pleasures of the Prince. page. 23. Chap. 5.
How dangerous it is to intermeddle with the Amour's of his Master. page. 31.
Chap. 6. That great Fortune oftentimes blindes the Favorite. page. 34. Chap. 7.
An Example of a wise Favorite. page. 38. Chap. 8. The Method of living with
our Friends at Court. page. 41. Chap. 9. How we ought to behave our selves
toward our Enemies, and those that envy us. page. 46. Chap. 10. How we should
supplant our hidden Enemies. page. 50. Chap. 11. That we ought to have private
Friends, and how we should beware of men in Holy Orders. page. 59. Chap. 12. Of
the Wisdom and Economy of a young Courtier. page. 69. Chap. 13. That Fortune
cannot advance a Fool. page. 75. Chap. 14. That Marriage contributes to our
Fortune: And whether a Nobleman ought to prefer a Princess before a Lady of his
own Quality. page. 79. Chap. 15. Whether it be requisite to be in Love, for to
be Married. page. 86. Chap. 16. Whether Money ought to be preferred before
Birth. page. 89. Chap. 17. That we ought to make a faithful Friend: And that a
Gentleman of a good Estate is not to be accounted unhappy, if the Court does
him Injustice. page. 92: Chap. 18. That the Cassock is more proper to raise a
Man's Fortune than the Sword: And the advantages which may accrue to a person
of Quality from thence. page. 100.
THE SECOND PART.
Chap. 1. THat no man is content with his own Fortune. page. 107. Chap. 2. That
Merit is proper to all men; and that the Nobility ought to desire only a
Monarchical State. page. 110. Chap. 3. That our Neighbors attribute more to
the Merit of a Person than to his Birth. And of the Prositableness of Commerce.
page. 118. Chap. 4. What a Gentleman ought to practice, who seeks his Fortune
in the War. page. 125. Chap. 5. That the Fortune of a Gentleman depends on the
good or bad choice which he makes of a Master. page. 131. Chap. 6. That he
ought to establish his esteem in the mind of his Master, before he enters into
his service: and how he should bring that to pass. page. 135. Chap. 7. Whether
it be better to serve a very understanding Master, or one of no great wit.
page. 140. Chap. 8. That the sublime Sciences do rather prejudice, than
advantage a Gentleman of the Sword. What he ought to know: And that Application
is necessary to succeed well in all Affairs. page. 146. Chap. 9. That he ought
to love his Master; and how he should demean himself toward him. page. 159.
Chap. 10. That he ought to endeavor to be employed in the negotiation of his
Master's Affairs at Court; and wherefore? page. 165. Chap. 11. That he may be
advanced from the service of a Great Lord, to that (...) he King Prince: And
that a Master ought to treat a Gentleman courteously. page. 174. Chap. 12. That
he ought not to be distasted at his Master's cross humor: And of the error of
such as despise the Charge of Secretary. page. 181. Chap. 13. How it comes to
pass that we are less knowing than the Ancients. page. 190. Chap. 14. That a
Gentleman who perceives in himself a natural disposition to Study, ought to
apply himself thereto: And that no man can be learned without his inclination.
page. 1^6. Chap. 15. That a learned Gentleman ^as the choice of all
Professions; and the Knowledge of the World is very requisite for him. page.
202. Chap. 16. That Conferences are more profitable than the Reading of Books.
page. 211. Chap. 17. That we ought to avoid the Company of the Debauched and
Ignorant. page. 217. Chap. 18. Whether a Private Gentleman may play at Games of
Hazard, and upon what account. page. 222. Chap. 19. Whether the Knowledge and
Exercise of Hunting contribute to the making of a Fortune. page. 230. Chap. 20.
That the Treasurers are the most profitable Masters. page. 233. Chap. 21.
Whether the Rules of Prudence are sufficient to render us happy. page. 236.
Chap. 22. Of the Vanity of Judicial Astrology: Of the Folly of Men: And that
Honesty really makes our Fortune. page. 242.
Licensed December 30th 1674.

Roger L'Estrange.

THE FORTUNE OF NOBLEMEN.
THE FIRST PART.
CHAP. I. That our good and bad Fortune depend on our Conduct.
ANtiquity seems to me never to have been less reasonable in the worship of her
Gods, than when she erected Altars to Fortune: for what could she hope from a
Deity which neither saw her Sacrifices, nor heard her Prayers, but did every
thing by chance? The Wisest men have always termed her unjust and inconstant,
and by depriving her of the faculty of choosing and discerning, confessed, that
we have as little reason to complain of her Frowns, as to rejoice at her
Favors. Sed te nos facimus Fortuna deam, coeloque locamus. Juvenal.
Nevertheless she has had more Temples than the other Gods; and seeing her
Empire was extended over all the Affairs of the World, the greatest part of men
became her adorers. It Is true, the small number of Stoics never owned her to
be any other than a Capricious Goddess, who rules among us only to prove the
Forces of Philosophy. Et si fractus illabatur Orbis, impavidum feriant ruinae.
All the Precepts of Morality are chiefly to defend us against her, and to
instruct us, that she can easily subvert the most puissant States of the World,
but not discompose the Soul of a Philosopher. ^fficacior ^st Fortuna Juam
virtus: quam verumest illud quod nouens effiavit, non in resed in verbo tantun
esse virtutem. Flor.
Brutus, who always followed this Sect, when he di'd acknowledged her power;
and declared, that the Virtue which he so much esteemed, was not able to
encounter her; that her Injustice was the cause of the unhappy success of his
great Designs: and knowing not how to impute any fault to his Valor, who had
dared to deliver Rome from its Tyrant, he accused her alone for having
established another to succeed in the place. These great Examples amaze the
whole World, and are therefore more worthy of the consideration of mighty
Monarchs. We are so inconsiderable a part of the State wherein we live, that we
should be accounted ridiculous to perplex our minds therewith. We are here
even as in a Vessel, whose motion carries us whither it pleases; nevertheless
every one of us have one peculiar to our selves, that is to say, every man has
his designs and his proper conduct: And yet such as Fortune has not condemned
to a retired life for to extinguish the luster of their parts, ought not to
despair of their Enterprises, when they understand the nature of this Fabulous
Deity, to whom men attribute the absolute command over General and Particular
Affairs: For my part, I look upon her as void of all Divinity, as I esteem her
destitute of all Power. And although this Proposition seems Paradoxical, it
will be no difficult matter for me to prove it to be most conformable to Reason.

For the understanding of which, we must know, that among the efficient Causes,
some are determined, which act necessarily; others undetermined and accidental,
which may act or not act, and which do not produce their effects but by the
concurrence of some other: The first are called necessary; the last fortuitous
or casual: from hence were formed in the imagination of Men those two grand
Deities; Desine fata Deum flecti sperare precandum. Virgil.
the one of which had even power over the Gods themselves, the other over
humane Affairs, viz. Destiny and Fortune: So that I may say, Fortune is nothing
else but a concurrence of things not discerned by our judgment, which happen
contrary to our expectation; or suppose it to be a second Cause, it must
necessarily depend from a first; Fata regunt orbem, cert a stant omnia lege.
Manil.
which first being absolutely determined, I conclude there is nothing in the
World fortuitous or casual, seeing all things that are brought to pass, proceed
from a necessary and determined Cause. Upon this account let us accuse our own
weakness, which being not able to comprehend the cause of Events, does term
them accidental or casual. With this pretext the greatest Wits have endeavored
to excuse their errors, and the most renowned Captains to comfort themselves
for the loss of their Battles: For the Historians describing the advantages of
the ground of which they had made choice, the exquisite order of their Armies,
their Retrenchments, their Bodies of Reserve, and all the other circumstances,
which denote the experience of brave Commanders; then having spoken of their
famous Exploits with astonishment, at last do accuse malicious Fortune for
their unhappy success, which humane Wisdom knew not how to prevent. But les us
rather say, that our knowledge is limited: that our sight is very dim in the
discovery of future things: that certain bounds are prescribed to our Wisdom,
which it can never pass; and as that has its Natural imperfections, so the
affairs of the World have their ordinary revolutions. I do not intend by
showing that the Events of things are not accidental, to render them so
necessary, that we should banish Prudence from the management of our concerns:
for I should conclude absurdly, if I should affi^m, that we ought with duli
patience, Nullum numen abe^, si sit prude^tia tecum Juvenal.
to expect every thing that should happen to us. On the contrary, I conceive
that we are workers of our own Fortune, and our good or bad Conduct is often
the source of our good or evil, without seeking a more remote cause. I must
confess, that the most piercing Wits, who seem to know things perfectly, and to
their very roots, do not always see their own affairs prosper; because they
depend from many other different Causes, which it is impossible by the force of
our judgment to penetrate: and forasmuch as we know nothing but by our Senses,
which deceive us every moment, how can we judge truly of what will befall us?
and what certain consequences can we draw from such uncertain principles? The
Pyrrhonians had so bad an opinion of them, that they taught, that humane Sense
was altogether incapable of knowledge; that we were not assured of any thing we
saw with our eyes, or heard with our cars; that our Discourse and Reason, which
proceed only from the Idea's, which external Objects presented to our Senses,
were nothing else but Error and Illusion. We must not therefore be amazed, if
Events deceive us, seeing we know not their Principles and Causes: yet we may
reasonably say, that although our Senses sometimes deceive us, yet experience
teaches us, that they do not always so: and the most ingenious and
understanding persons being happily endowed with an excellent disposition of
Organs, and an exact temperament of Body, have brighter lights, and a more
distinct knowledge of Affairs, than other men, and consequently are the
seldomest mistaken in their judgments, and not so subject to those unexpected
accidents, which the Ancients called Fortune.

This was that, which in my Opinion caused the ^oet to say that they were
happy, F^^lix qui put^^t rer^m cognoscere causas.
who could know the causes of things: for indeed, to know the causes, is to
know their Natures, their Principles, and their Motions, from whence proceed
the Events, which can establish our good or our evil. I profess with him, that
this happiness is beyond comparison, but it is not to be found but in the
imagination, and ought to be rather the Object of our desires, than of our
hopes. I have no design to draw the pourtraict of an infallible man; I know
there was never any such; and if I had such a thought, I should my self be
guilty of that error, from which I endeavor to keep others: It is sufficient
to represent one not of the weakest, who by his own experience can give us some
Precepts whereby to sermon the happiness of our life, without depending
absolutely on the capriciousness of that Fortune, to whom the Wisest men would
never owe any thing.

CHAP. II. That Persons of Quality ought to seek their fortune at Court.
EVery man hunts after Honor and Wealth; these are the two grand Wheels, upon
which the whole world is moved; these are the two Springs of our disquiet;
these are the two Ignes fatui, which lead us so often out of our way. We
propound to our selves this Honor and this Wealth, as the aim and end of our
hopes: we engage our selves in the pursuit of them with the greatest vigor,
not considering that the ways to arrive at our ends are full of trouble and
uncertainty; that they require every minute of our time: and our whole life is
almost spent in Care and Toil, when we begin to reap the Fruit of our labors.
There are two causes of this disorder; the one is, that our designs are too
extravagant, the other, that we carry them on indiscreetly.

The first default touches certain Wits, whose Presumption blinds their
Judgment, who framing in themselves a false Idea of their own worth, even as
so many Ixion's never embrace any thing but the empty Clouds. I esteem this
sort of people better quali^'d for the College of Madmen, than for the Courts
of Princes, and so have no intention either to reprehend or reclaim them. I
address my self to such only, who form no projects beyond their forces; and are
mistaken rather in the means, which ought to promote them, than in the end,
which should periect them.

Never was there any Question so often debated, as that concerning a chief
Good: The Stoics acknowledged no other than the tranquillity of the Soul; but
it seems it was impossible ever to attain to that, unless they could have
divested themselves of their passions. The Epicureans, (whom all the World
revile, though not thoroughly understand) placed it in Pleasure. For my part, I
find this Opinion so agreeable to the nature both of Soul and Body, that it is
very difficult not to admit it when it is well understood. I affirm moreover
that it contains nothing in it which contradicts the Principles of Religion,
for who can deny that Men as devout as the holiest Saints have been, enjoy an
extreme Pleasure in the contemplation of God, when the fervencie of their zeal
separates their thoughts from earthly things? And is any man ignorant that the
more austere Hermits find more Roses than Thorns in their Deserts? Opinionem
fides sequitur. Aristor. lib. de Anima. Nullus porro foelix est, qui se judice
foelix non est.
It is most certain that our Opinions are the only Rules of our own good or
evil, and that in respect of our selves things are really such as we conceive
them to be. A Student delights in his Books and his Closet; a Huntsman takes
his pleasure in the Fields; a Soldier at the Head of an Army; and a Merchant
in the enjoyment of Peace, and living at his ease: Trahit sua quemq^e voluptas.
Virg.
The excess of Wine is a Punishment to a Sober person, and the greatest
Pleasure to a Drunkard. I could collect a thousand more instances to prove this
Opinion; but if shall suffice to conclude with the Philosopher, that Wealth and
Pleasure are the only Objects of our happiness: That which I assert is purely
natural to the Soul; but I confess by the Fallibility of our Senses she is
often deceived, and makes a bad choice. Mark Ant^ny's Prefuseness seems to me
as unjust, as Old Cato's Parsimony unreasonable; and I look upon Croesus as
imprudent in the management of his Treasure, as Diogenes ridiculous in his Tub.
Wealth is necessary for our subsistence; and being so, we ought to seek it,
Haud facile emergunt quorum virtutibus obstat Res angusta domi. Juvenal.
though not to excess: On the contrary, Poverty is the Mother of all
inconveniences, an Enemy to generous Actions, which liberality produces;
therefore as such, we ought to avoid it. I speak of that shameful Poverty,
which deprives us of the Means of showing our Parts, debases our Spirits,
suffocates our good Qualifications in the press of the Rabble, and by
destroying in us these advantages of Nature, hinder us from raising our selves
to the pitch of Virtue. I know there is a voluntary and Evangelical Poverty,
which having God for its Object, takes no care to abound in earthly Riches; but
these perfect Souls, which we admire as above the World, and who possess
nothing in particular, yet do not refuse to enjoy the Benefit and Revenues of
their estates in common. The Magnificence of their Temples and Monasteries is
not inferior to the Beauty of Princes Palaces; and not withstanding they
renounce the property, yet they reserve to themselves the Profits. God gave us
our life, but Nature as the second Cause has fastened many inconveniences to
it, which we are obliged to overcome for our own preservation; her imperfection
is communicated to our essence. Hunger and Thirst are two mortal Maladies; we
heal them with Pleasure, by using those remedies which are appropriated to
them: Cold is an enemy to our natural Heat; our Clothes and Houses defend us
against it. Men may tell me, the Savages live as long as we do, and perhaps
more happily, without perplexing themselves with acquiring many things, which
cost us much trouble, and yet are not more necessary for us than for them. I
own it, and cannot blame them: If I was a Savage, I confess they would have yet
greater reason to tell me so; but that man must be mad, who lives after the
manner of Savages among people that are not so. I should think my self very
extravagant, if I should walk up and down naked among men that wear Clothes.
And no man in these days would set an estimate on Diogenes the Philosopher, if
he should do what he then did in the open Market. We have neither made the Laws
nor the Customs, and so have no right to reform them. Every one in particular
has his own Sense, and his own Conduct; and every Nation has its proper
Customs: it is our duty to conform our selves to those of our own Country, it
being more reasonable that we should comply with many, than to expect that many
should comply with us. Sapiens non conturbaott publicos mores, nec pepulum in
se novitate vitae convertet. Senec.
Wisemen are not prohibited from entertaining different opinions from those of
the Vulgar, provided they observe not to infringe the General Cusioms. One of
the Ancients said, that he lent himself to the Public, but he gave himself to
himself. The Salvages enjoy the use of Reason as well as we, and so may have
their particular Policy; therefore I do not admire, that they are persuaded
that their manner of life is happy, seeing they know no other. Poverty pleases
them, and Riches us, their happiness is, not to regard them, and ours is to
make use of them* and p^^^aps both of us have equally reason so to do. For my
part, I yield to the general sentiment of the Vulgar, who esteem those
happiest, who are born Rich, and have their extraction from a Noble Family; if
these be of a fit disposition to accomplish themselves, they cannot want Guides
to direct them in the paths of Honor: Their Name alone opens to them the
Cabinet of Princes; their Virtue manifests it self without others assistance;
they do that with great ease, which a poor Gentleman cannot do, but with
extreme trouble: Nay, if they want Wit, their Riches make them courted, and
their Birth respected: These being the two Golden Calves which the Common
people worship; and if they be not born to be accomplished persons, gallant or
honest men, yet they are in a condition to do good to such as are so; and being
not able to attain to Virtue themselves, may entertain in their Retinue those
that are. At Court we seldom see a Person of Quality, Merit and Riches, without
great Honors and great Employs: Fortune, as malicious as she is, does never in
the least oppose his advancement, when he has wherewithal to please Soverain
Powers. I know that good qualifications are requisite for this purpose: for I
do not pretend here to make an honest or gallant man; I suppose he is that
already, and has no need of any thing but conduct to arrive at his end. I will
only demonstrate, that Wealth and Birth do infinitely contribute to the
rendering us happy, and to the obtaining of Honors suitable to the Quality of a
Gentleman. If any one objects, that Riches may be prejudicial; I answer, that
if he looks upon the right bias of the thing, the error proceeds from us, and
not from them; they are good of themselves, and nothing is hurtful but the bad
use we make of them. The commendation of Poverty, with which we meet so often
in the Writings of the Ancient Philosophers, is a Paradox more proper to
exercise the vivacity and sharpness of their Wits, than to convince us of the
truth thereof. Plato and Aristotle have Philosophiz'd of it very much at their
ease, being the most considerable men of Greece both for their Birth and for
their Employments. Seneca extols it highly in the midst of a vast abundance;
and though he so often insinuates, nay inculcates into us the contentedness of
his Spirit, yet did not die without great suspicion of having had a design of
seating himself in the Throne of his Master and Benefactor. Without doubt a
Gentleman born rich and of a good Family has no reason to complain of Fortune:
if he continues in the Country, she is not obliged to go find him out there:
He ought to show himself at the King's Court; there it is that he can hope to
raise himself above others his equals, providing he knows two things: The first
is, the inclination and humor of his Master; the second is, his own
inclination, and natural disposition.

CHAP. III. Two ways of advancing a man's Fortune.
THere are two ways of advancing a man's Fortune; one is to follow the War, and
the other is to apply himself to the Prince's Person. It is true, that Military
services render a Gentleman infinitely ^ore meritorious than any other: but
F^^rces are men as well as our selves, they act according to the impulses of
Nature; and we see, they daily bestow their favors and caresses on persons
that please them, rather than on such as advantagiously serve them. We have in
our time seen a person raised to the dignity of Constable of France, for having
taught Magpies to fly at Sparrows; and others from Pages become Dukes and
Peers; and in former Ages those who could cunningly manage the intrigue of a
Maidenhead, have made themselves great Lords by it. I say again, that a
Gentleman who designs to raise his Fortunes at the Court, must perfectly
understand his own natural disposition; because it is impossible to divert his
Prince, if he takes no pleasure himself in what he does. It would be a great
folly for a person to seek his advancement by H^nting or Hawking, who is not
delighted with those Recreations: we do every thing we fancy not, with a very
bad grace, because our Soul can never apply it self to any Objects that do not
please it; and therefore we should not think to render our selves agreeable,
when we do things contrary to our inclinations: Neither study nor the force of
Reason can correct this default. We are not masters of the Appetites which
Nature has inspired into us; and whatsoever pains we take to suppress them, our
discontent will sometimes appear, and make all our forced complaisance
ineffectual. I may assert the same of the War, which I have of Hunting; we
ought to perceive in our selves courage to despise dangers, vigor to endure the
toils of the Army, and ambition to aspire to great Charges: without these we
can expect no adva^^age from this painful exercise. This way without dispute is
the most honorable: for besides the Wealth that is acquired by it, we have the
pleasure of beholding our Virtues accompanied with an advantageous Rep^tation,
and a Renown which lives eternally in the memory of men: yet we cannot but
acknowledge it is the most difficult; for among those that aspire to the honor
of Marshal of France, many faulter in the Enterprise. It would be a very
inconsiderable business, if we should rencounter no other obstacles but
hazards. A man is not to complain when he dies in the pursuit of his ends: the
same end which limits his life, terminates likewise his Designs, his Hopes,
and his Fortune: There are two other things which do more incommode him; the
first is, that his advancement depends from the happy success of Battles, of
which all humane Prudence is not sufficient to assure us: The last is, that it
is requisite to have a Patron of great Authority in the Cabinet, without whom
his services will not find that just reception they deserve: it is true, that
it is a hard matter to surmount these two difficulties which render this way by
War to great honors very uncertain, and at last the Rewards are in the hands
of the Sovereign: if he delights in War, he does often ascribe to himself the
happy success of his Arms, which he frequently commands in person; and when bad
success happens, the Officers of his Army are hardly put to it to defend
themselves a against his anger and reproaches. But if he be addicted to his
Pleasures more than to his Affairs, he sees almost nothing but with the eyes of
his Favorite, who represents the Actions of every man in those colors that
please him best; and having abandoned all his Authority at his Councils, he
must of necessity become a Slave to his Ministers. Therefore after this manner
a Gentleman ought to employ his policy; and if he builds upon any other
foundation, he has often for the only recompense of his famous Exploits an Arm
of iron, or a Leg of wood. I speak of such Gentlemen only, who make great
Dignities the Object of their Archiovments. I know there are many, who go into
the Field only to gain esteem, and to make appear that they are men of Courage;
which indeed, is a du^y that seems incumbent upon every Person of Quality; and
without dissembling, it would be a shameful thing never to have performed some
gallant Exploit by their Arms, whenas they make Arms their proper Profession. I
add further, they are obliged to attempt something bravely by their own hands,
to establish their Reputation. It is not sufficient never to have been guilty
of any ignoble Act; the world thinks it obliges us very much, in speaking well
of the Virtues we have made appear, without making Almanacks to our advantage.
Nothing more is required of these, but to do well: for as they look upon their
houses as a R^treat, they are not obliged to concern themselves with the
Ministers, or the Court; neither is it necessary that they sp^nd their whole
lives in Military Ex^rcises, it is enough that they have once shown themselves;
and pretending to no other advantage than that which they have already
acquired, which is to be esteemed Valiant, they may reasonably ^^joy the
benefit thereof in their own Families, with the pleasure which attends the
society of Friends, and the diversion of an honest Economy.

CHAP. IV. The speediest way is to insinuate himself into the Pleasures of the
Prince.
THe other way of advancing a man's Fortune by applying himself to the person
of the Prince, is to contribute to his divertisements, which is indeed the most
casie, and the most infallible: the great secret is to render himself
agreeable, to use complaisance, and be diligent, and very expert in those
Exercises in which he chiefly delights; which ought to be managed with such
discretion, that no opportunity must be omitted of giving him all the
advantage at them, and never to maintain any thing obstinately against him. It
is likewise a prudent part in a Courtier to loose sometimes at Play on purpose,
to put his Master in a good humor: For to command is such an innate quality in
Princes, that they cannot permit without regret that any person should out do
them. These precepts are also more necessary to be observed in conversation,
which ought always to be with respect; and if there be an occasion of
contending, that it be done in such terms as propound our Opinion only, not
establish it. The most gallant things loose their luster, when spoken
unseasonably; and men are not easily convinced of any thing by others disputing
too imperiously; there is nothing so frequently used, and therefore requires
our greatest circumspection. Every man is satisfied of his own Sense and
Understanding, and it is this which makes us so outrageous against those who
pretend to have more than our selves. Truly there is nothing more irksome than
to give car to those people who have seen every thing, who understand every
thing, and who have done every thing. A Gallant and an accomplished person ought
not to relate his own deeds; he that cannot forbear doing it, passes ordinarily
for ridiculous, and is accounted but a liar: if we have performed worthy
actions, Laus in ore proprio sordescit. Proverb.
it does not become us to publish them: he is ever an impertinent Orator, who
makes his own Panegyrique. I will not advise one to flatter the Prince:
Flattery is so base a thing, that it is unworthy of a person of Honor; but I
do very well approve, that we should entertain him with some obliging
discourse, and praise that in which he most delights, and which he best
understands: In doing which, the air of the Action contributes extremely to the
insinuating us into his favor. Indeed the Respect that is due to his Person,
obliges us to banish our ill humor from his presence. There are I know not
what spirits in our eyes, which imprint their qualities on those that behold
us: If we are dull, we inspire Melancholy; if we are brisk, we seem to rejoice
those with whom we converse. Nescio quis teneros oculus mihi fascinat agnos.
Virg.
The Ancients were so persuaded of the force of these Rays, that they would
never suffer old and deformed Women to come near their Children. And my Lord
Bacon assures us, that a passionate Lover does very much advance his affairs,
Oculi sunt in amore duces. Ovid.
when he can steadfastly gaze upon the eyes of his Mistress; because, says he,
certain enflamed Spirits proceeding from his to her eyes, do communicate to
them this invisible Poison, which diffusing it self in the Mass of blood, is
conveyed to the heart it self. This may be proved by an Effect obvious to all
persons: We can scarce refrain spending a tear with those that weep; and we
cannot look steadfastly on Red or Blear-eyes, Dum speclant oculi laesos,
laeduntur and ipsi Mu^taq^e corporibus transitionenocent. Ovid. Amor. l. 2.
without resenting some pain, or at least some alteration: both these Effects
proceeding from no other cause but the emission of Rays. If it be true that
eyes which look upon us with anger, inspire an aversion into us, why should I
not conclude that they may inspire an affection, if they look upon us with love?

Nature has made some men amiable; these are happy, and have nothing more to do
but let her act freely: But if she has made us melancholic, let us correct her
imperfections by habituating our selves to mirth and gayety; and by keeping a
continual guard, we shall at last wholly prevail against them. Socrates
consented to him that judged of his manners by his Physiognomy, viz. that he
was naturally inclined to debauchery, but the Precepts of Philosophy had made
him virtuous. Above all, let the Courtier endeavor to persuade his Master that
he loves his Person, better than his Dignity: Curtius says of the two grand
Favorites Craterus and Ephaestion, that the one loved the King, the other
Alexander. The love which men have for us, is a snare, wherein the whole World
is caught; and even when a person has no qualities to recommend him, if by his
perseverance and continual application, he makes us believe: that he loves us,
and is wholly at our service, Ut ameris, ama.
we can hardly deny him our affection. This Compassion extends it self even to
Beasts. In Holland I saw a Mastiff make his fortune: This poor Dog singled out
the late Prince of Orange in the midst of his Army before Maestricht; and
notwithstanding that the Guards often beat him away, yet he always returned to
the door of the Tent, and when he saw the Prince come out, this Animal leapt
for joy, faun'd upon him and followed him. At last the Prince, in stead of
being offended, esteemed this kindness worthy of acceptance, and made much of
him, giving a charge to one of his Servants to take care of him; and afterward
permitted him to come always into his Chamber, and lie at his Beds-feet.
However, we ought to take great heed not to become importunate by our
addresses; the highest point of wisdom is to nick the time. But above all, a
Gentleman, who is well in the favor of his Master, ought never to pretend to
understand those Affairs which the Prince would keep private. There is nothing
which so soon creates hatred of him, and consequently his ruin. No man can
endure that any one should pry into his secrets without his consent. Confidence
is inconsistent with constraint. Forasmuch as our Soul is born free, and seeing
she has nothing but the disposing of our Will, which is really hers independent
of all other Power whatsoever, she is jealous of her secrets, and must not be
forced to reveal them by the indiscretion of our Friends. It is common civility
not to approach near them that read Letters, or discourse privately. Davilt.
This indiscretion succeeded very ill with one of the Duke of Anjou's
Gentlemen: the Dake having with confidence imparted to him Charles the IX's
design of extirpating the Hugonots on St. Bartholomew's day; this Gentleman
discoursing in private with the King, happened to mention this Secret. His
Majesty very much surpised to see it discovered, dissembled his anger; and
supposing that the Queen Mother was the person guilty of this Levity, upbraided
her with it; but she having cicar'd her selt, they (...) concluded, that it
must come from the Duke of Anjou. The King caused this Gentleman to be killed
as he was Hunting, conceiving no other way to secure a Secret of so great
importance, which the Duke had inconsiderately discovered. I knew a person for
whom Cardinal de Richelieu had a very great esteem, and began to employ him in
business of consequence: One day the Cardinal returning from his Park into his
Chamber, surpised this Young man reading some Papers which he had left upon
the table. The Cardinal reprehended him no otherwise than with his eyes,
looking severely upon him, closed his Papers himself; and two days after
commanded that this ill-advis'd Courtier should retire to house, and would
never more employ him.

CHAP. V. How dangerous it is to intermeddle with the Amors of his Master.
ANother way, though very slippery, is to be concerned in the Amors of his
Master. Confidence in this case proves many times very dangerous, although it
seems to be a particular mark of his esteem and friendship: there is a certain
Medium to be observed, which requires a prudence and circumspection refined
even to the highest degree: It is a very intricate business to content the
Lover and his Mistress. Incedis per ignes suppositos cincri dolo^o, Horat.
And I conceive there is not less danger in being in her favor than out of it:
Her kindness does never fail of producing Jealousy; and this passion is
capable of transporting the most moderate Spirit into such an excess, that even
reaches the very life of his dearest Friends. It missed but narrowly that a
Prince of our time had not caused a Person of Quality to be thrown out of the
Windows or his Palace. The Order which he had given to his Servants had been
put in execution, if a friend of this unhappy Victim, seeing him enter into the
Court, had not ran to him, and prevented him from going up into the Salle,
where they expected him. Those who have had experience of this Passion, know
with what tyranny it domineers over the heart of a Lover. It is a fury which
suffers no other thoughts but those of revenge to remain in the minds of such
as it possesses; and forasmuch as it is not subject to Counsel or Reason, we
ought to fear and avoid all the occasions which may create it. But if the
Courtier be not complaisant to this Mistress, Notumque furens quid foemina
possit. Virg.
or that she unhappily has an aversion to him, she will do him such bad
offices, that first or last they will deprive him of his Masters friendship.
These two dangers may be avoided by a little discretion, especially if we will
not voluntarily thrust our fingers into the fire; he may show her that
deference and civility, that seem affectionated to her interests, without ever
really engaging himself therein; and he ought to entertain her on no other
subject, but the Passion and Grandeur of her Lover. If it happens that the
Prince should speak to him concerning it, he ought to praise his Mistress with
great caution, and in such terms as may a little flatter his Love, but not give
him cause to suspect that he is enamored on her. If he manages discreetly his
Conduct in this as well as in his other Affairs, he advances himself extremely
in the esteem and favor of his Master; because he gives him sufficient
evidence of his Respect, his Affection, and his Abilities; which oblige his
Master to disclose his mind, and make him the confident of his more important
Secrets. It Is then he may hope for any thing; for the Prince being so far
engaged, cannot dispense with the not conferring on him the princ^pal charges
of his Household and Kingdom.

When he has arrived to this hight, he may call himself happy. The Court has
this property, that she never desists doing of good, when she has once begun.
Her first Favor draws on the second, and at last she is not contented with
making us rich, but gives us the power of settling our friends likewise in an
Estate of enriching themselves.

CHAP. VI. That great Fortune oftentimes blinds the Favorite.
It Is in this Case that a Courtier ought to unite all the Forces of his
Judgment: Rarus enim Sensus in illa Fortuna. Magnae virtutis est cum
foelicitate luctari; magnae foelicitatis est a foelicitate non vinci. Aug. de
Verb. Domini.
Great Prosperity often disorders the brains of many, whom an ordinary Fortune
would have rendered wise. The joy he conceives from being caressed by the
Prince and adored by the whole Court, does frequently infect his Soul with a
presumption as insupportable to others, as unjust to himself: it causes him to
feel the sweetness of becoming superior to those who were formerly his equals,
and makes him like the Ass in the Fable who carried the Goddess upon his back,
and ascribed to himself the Incense which was burnt before her. Therefore he
ought to consider that he is seated upon a Pyramide which has but one point to
sustain him: that all his Friends which fill his antichamber, and even those
whom he admits into his closet, are weak supporters of his establishment: Cun
fueris foelia, multos numerabis amicos; Tempora si fuerint nubila, solus eris.
Ovid.
That those who court him with so much earnestness during his favor, are ready
to forsake him so soon as he falls into disgrace: That this Troop of hungry
Courtiers seek nothing but their private Interest; and being elevated far above
them by the Princes goodness, he cannot expect from them a true and sincere
friendship; the essence of which is the uniting together of men who have some
relation or some equality among themselves. His Advancement resembles the
growth of lofty Trees, which casting a great shadow, hinder young Plants from
increasing: It creates envy in the Grandees, and despair among his Equals. The
Princes favor is the only prop of his Felicity; but who can think himself
secure upon so uncertain a Foundation? Princes are men like our selves; and was
there ever any one found to continue always of the same mind? it is impossible
it should be so, unless we could stop the motions of Nature, which acts without
ceasing upon the matters which are subject to it; and this Action does
necessarily infer her inconstancy. The Pleasures and Wishes of our Infancy have
no resemblance with those of our Youth; those of our Youth are very different
from those of our middle Age, and these last from those of our old Age. There
is no mind so regulated, that does not sometime change its conduct: And those
who observe exactly their temperament, must acknowledge that they do not find
themselves of the same humor after dinner as before. Alexander loved entirely
his Favorite Clytus; yet when he had drank to excess, he killed him with his
own hand. The greatest Fortune of the World depends on a Sound and a Vapor: A
Defamation cunningly insinuated into the mind of the Prince, is sufficient to
overthrow this huge Structure, which he looks upon as the work of his own
hands. The Exhalations and vapors of Wine ascending to the brain, are of force
enough to confound all the Species of imagination, and make him abhor that
which he loved before. What I assert proceeds from the Universal cause of our
Nature, which the Philosopher terms the Principle of motion and rest. Pleasures
themselves are no pleasures, but because of their variety, they change and
succeed one another. Chiron was weary of being God of the Poets, because all
their Sacrifices were of the same kind: And Polycrates complained that he had
been too long happy. Those who are subject to violent Passions, do not remain
long of the same mind; commonly they are as easily inclined to hate as to
love. Time blots out of our memory the Idea's which our Senses had presented
for the forming our Ratiocination and Passions, and there is no friendship so
dear, that a long habit will not at last render importunate: It is like to
Flambo's, the Wax is the cause that the fire takes, and the flame vanishes when
that matter is consumed. As Conversation contracts friendships, so it like wise
dissolves them. Men are naturally weary one of another; and this axiom is true
in all respects, Ab assuetis non fit Passio. Aristot.
that Custom destroys Passion.

From hence I make this inference, that a Ceurtier ought to look upon his
condition as wavering and naturally unstable, and use all the Rules of Prudence
to uphold it: It Is by observing this Rule, that wise man have been less
obnoxious to those Accidents which are called Fortune; for having penetrated
into the causes of things, they prevent their effects by their discreet
management.

CHAP. VII. An Example of a wise Favorite.
IN my judgment, Examples are not useless, when conjoined with the Maxims of
Reason and Policy. The Marshal de Rhetz may serve for one, to them who knew
how he managed his Fortune, and the Favors of the King his Master. This wise
Courtier had always such a b^haviour as pleased all people: after he had
advanced himself, he took delight to serve his Friends; but when he begged any
favor for them, he beseecht his Majesty to do it in person, to the end that
they receiving it immediately from his hand, might be the more sensibly obliged
to acknowledge it by their services and their loyalty: By this means the King
was not importuned with his prayers; and this submission was by so much the
more acceptable, as it seemed to have no other Object but the design of
gaining the Peoples affection to his Majesty, without intermingling his own
Interest. Nevertheless, his Friends were not less obliged to him, and did not
omit the acknowledgeing him to be the Author of those Graces they received from
the King. The Access to his Person was ever easy, his Humor not morose, his
Countenance serene: and when the necessity of Affairs or private Reasons
obliged him not to grant a Petition, it was with such terms that sweetened the
discontent of the unsuccesful. Never man upheld his Rank and Dignity with less
arrogance, and never was complaisance like to his: Therefore never was there a
Favorite in France less envied. It is most certain, that Reason and Experience
are two admirable lights to guide our Actions; by their assistance we may with
safely pass by all Precipices. But yet we must confess, that our Temperament,
and the easiness of our Humor, do extremely contribute to the rendering us
accomplished. A man naturally choleric and proud, may appear pleasing and civil
by the effort of his Reason; Gaudeant hene nati. Si quid enim placet, si quid
dulce hominum sensibus influit, debentur tepidis omnia gratiis. Horat.
but it is distasteful to keep a continual guard over himself; and a very long
habit is requisite, to subdue those Passions which are innate. It was not
therefore without ground, that the Ancients so often said, They might rejoice
that were well born.

If I might have my choice, I would choose this rich present of Nature before
all the recompenses of Philosophy. A good Disposition is ever peaceable in it
self, and agreeable to others; it performs good without constraint, and resists
evil without trouble.

CHAP. VIII. The Method of living with our Friends at Court.
I Am very sensible that neither the Prudence nor the gifts of natural
Qualifications, of which we have already treated, can promise continual
happiness to a Courtier; forasmuch as the Court consists of diverse persons who
aspire to the same Fortune: Whose principal study is, to take advantage from
one another Misfortunes. A Favorite will seldom find a Friend so faithful as
not to succeed him, if he thought it lay in his power to undermine him.
Cabinet-councils are always full of Intrigues; Fraud and Dissimulation reign
there as in their proper Sphere: it is here that a wise man hears much and
speaks little, by which means (...) learns the secret of the more heedless,
while he conceals his own from the most cautious: There is no place where
confidence is more difficult to be chosen, because here it is ordinarily
accompanied with some danger. A Trifle in the mouth of an ingenious man may be
so neatly disguised, that it shall be taken for a business of consequence. A
wise man shows nothing but his outside, and it is certain, Nulli creed unquam,
quod tu ^idm feceris. Paling. Zod. vit.
that never any man revealed a Secret of importance, of which he did not
afterward repent him: for although he received no damage there by, yet he
could never free himself from disquiet.

I conceive the answer of that Italian very witty, who had published a Libel
against Pope Sixtus: His Holiness being extremely offended at it, promised a
considerable sum to any one that should discover the Author Some days being
past without hearing any news thereof, they found these words written at the
bottom of the Pasquil. No'l sapray Santissimo Padre; quando so feci cra solo:
which is to say, Most Holy Father you shall never know it; when I made it, I
was alone. Palingenius says, Se^per amicum habeas, um darat j^^dus, at igsum
posst putes bo^^em fi^^i. Paling.
that those who are so ready to disclose their minds, are most commonly weak
and heedless, and that we ought to consider our present Friend as our future
Enemy. But for my part, I do not approve of this reservedness; friends^^p
demands something more free: And to find some qualification for this Opinion,
I conceive that we ought not to impart those things that may prejudice our
concerns when discovered, and not benefit our Friends when they know them: To
do otherwise, is in my Opinion rather a mark of Imprudence, than a testimony of
Friendship. We do not perceive that we satisfy our own natural Levity, much
more than our Friend: It is sufficient for us to do every thing that may be
advantageous for his Interest; forasmuch as thereby we run a great Risque of
being repaid with ingratitude, without exposing our selves further to his
falsehood. If he be exempt from these Vices which are to be mistrusted, our
reservedness does not diminish our friendship; and if he at any time abandons
himself to this treachery, our conduct gives us no cause of fearing him.

This manner of living seems to me the more reasonable, forasmuch as it secures
our Interest, without prejudicing that of our Friends. Prudence is not
inconsistent with Freedom, but with levity: we may comfort our selves with them
about the disasters that have befallen us; take their advice in our
enterprises; rejoice with them for the Wealth and Honor they have acquired;
interest our selves in their Affairs; be always complaisant and good-humored
to them; assist them with our Cares and Moneys; visit them; eat with them;
entrust them with our Purse, our Papers, the Deeds of our Lands; and even
expose our lives for their service. These are tokens of Freedom which we must
not deny them, since we have esteemed them worthy of our friendship: These in
diverse respects may be profitable to us both. But our Secret ought to remain in
our own h^ads; and we are guilty of great imprudence if we disclose it, seeing
it does not concern them.

True Friendship has more noble and disinteress'd foundations: if it be
perfect, it relies only upon generosity. I should love my Friend purely,
because he is amiable, without thinking that he will release me out of Prison
if I should be taken Captive: but if he should be so unfortunate, I should
believe my self obliged to loose his Fetters. I ought not to consider him as
one that will furnish me with money to pay my debts, although I should devote
my whole fortune to his service. If I take the Counter-part, it is my self I
love, and not my friend. Amicitia tempori serviens, mercatura dicitur. Aristot.
Vulgus amicitias utilitate probat.
Aristotle says that the Friendship that accommodates it self to the times, and
to our Affairs, ought to be called a Commerce or Trade. It Is after this fashion
that the Vulgar sort of people love their Friends; their thoughts reflect upon
no body but themselves; and as they have no knowledge of Virtue, so they have no
use of it. There is only one Interest in Friendship, which can consist with
generosity, that is, to wish that our Friend would love us for a recompense of
the good affection we have for him.

CHAP. IX. How we ought to behave our selves toward our Enemies, and those
that envy us.
IT is not very difficult to carry our selves well with our Friends; Nature is
our guide herein as well as Prudence, but it is otherwise among our Enemies,
and those that envy us. The best means to make these despair, is to oppose a
great goodness against them, never to behave our selves arrogantly toward
them, and even sometimes to procure favors for them: Courtesies do very often
change their hearts. Emulation may enter into the Soul of a Person of Honor,
without destroying in it the beeds of Virtue; yet there is no other difference
between that and En^y, but this: Emulation is an ar^ent desire, which is
confined to our own Interest, of becoming as great in Merit and Fortune as
others; but Envy has this particular quality, that this desire produces in us a
regret or grief for another good, which transports us to undervalue him as
much as lies in our power. This Vice is a shadow which commonly follows Virtue;
it ordinarily wishes more hurt than it does: and he who entertains it, is the
worst treated by it. ^t is a bad guest, who sets fire to his own Lodgings; and
at last when he cannot have his effect upon another, he destroys himself.

The other Enemies are much more to be feared, of which there are two sorts;
open and hidden.

The first we ought to repulse with generosity, they having no more privilege
to attack us, than we to defend our selves. The Precepts which incline us to be
patient, have not bound our hands to let our selves be insulted on: Nature
teaches us to defend our lives, and Reason to preserve our honor. I esteem
this Maxim worthy of Caesar's Gallantry; Neither to give an affront, Nec
infer, nec perpeti. Sueton.
nor take one. A man of Courage has no need of Rules in this case, he is only
to consult his resentment to do his duty: if he loves his Honor, he will never
suffer it to be hurt without satisfaction; it is a place that is very tender
among Persons of Quality: if it be once wounded, it is no easy matter to heal
it again: To be guilty of one weakness is sufficient to loose it, and a hundred
worthy actions can hardly regain it. Without doubt there can be nobody more
miserable than a Courtier who has committed an ignoble act: If any one should
chance to be so unhappy, I would advise him to hide his Cowardice under a Gown
or a Surplice. Valor is a Virtue so absolutely requisite for a Gentleman, that
without it he cannot boast of any good quality: the way to serve himself of it
advantageously, is never to make use of any artifice in Quarrels; to behave
himself so gallantly, that his Commence may not reproach him of having been
possessed with a fear of engaging; not to be too curious in the choice of
Weapons, and to be fully persuaded that it is not enough to be valiant in
appearance, but to be so in reality: Stat contra ratio, and secretam gannit in
anrem. Perseus.
There are none so equitable Judges of our thoughts as our selves; if we are
well satisfied of our own courage, our Enemies will soon enough perceive it.
True Valor is a Fire, Huffing is nothing else but Smoke: This displeases all
people, that is ever grateful to Persons of Honor, especially if it
enterprises nothing without just cause. Justice has this property, she
infallibly places good men on her side; and (...) she cannot always give them
good success, she never refuses them the Credit and Reputation they have
deserved.

I have affirmed, Haec est certissima vitae custodia, nemint nocere. Senec.
that as we ought not to give an affront, so we must have a care not to put up
one: If the dispute does oblige us to fight, we should observe to put our
antagonist on the worst ground; for when we have already had the satisfaction
to repulse the injury, we then keep him in play with his own weapons: And if
the Affair be accommodated without a Duel, he has no cause to laugh at his
Proceeding. For my part, I had rather beg a thousand pardons for having given
one box on the ear, than see my enemy prostrate at my feet if I had taken it.
It is more easy to profer excuses, than to suffer blows; and in this case the
Agent is always to be preferred before the Patient.

CHAP. X. How we should supplant our hidden Enemies.
THat which I have spoken concerning open Enemies, is too obvious to all common
Sense, that it is not requisite to enlarge my Discourse: But the Courtier ought
to employ all his cunning in supplanting hidden Enemies: It Is in this case he
should muster up all the Forces of subtle Policy; and forasmuch as they attack
us after a strange manner, we must use an extraordinary diligence to defend our
selves. Their Weapons are Artifice and treachery: These are the two Serpents
lying perdu under the flowers; the main point is to discover them for to avoid
them; but as it is a difficult matter to discern them, they are so much the
more to be feared. The Italians say, Non e fierone mico, chi non sa fingere
l'amico, He is no terrible Enemy, who cannot counterfeit the Friend. The Fable
of the Satyr is very ingeniously invented, who retired himself from the Society
of men, because he perceived from their mouths proceeded both hot and cold.

Without dissembling, it is no easy matter to distinguish them: there is
nothing comes so near a good Friend, as an officious flatterer; the one and the
other take the same course to obtain our favor, and differ not but in their
intentions: Both make us Compliments, offer us their Services, and assure us of
their Fidelity; and we cannot discern them before we bring them to the touch,
as good Gold from bad: But we are sensible of it too late, if we wait until
they declare themselves against us by a treacherous action: Our Prudence ought
to prevent that, by a timely discovery; the best means to do which, is to
examine the Conduct of those who court us, Magna virtus boni cognoscere malos,
and firma tutela salutis. Gregor. l. 3. Moral.
and seek our friendship: if they are esteemed honest persons, they are not
much to be feared; but if they have lived as libertines, and their avarice and
ambition made them remarkable, they are to be entertained with great
circumspection. It is good to give them Compliment for Compliment, and by a
cunning and ingenious Dissimulation assure them into the Snares they have set
for us. The Italians advise us, if we should see our Enemy in the water up to
the middle, to help him out, seeing he is in a condition of saving himself
without our assistance; but if he should be up to the chin, to set our foot
upon his head and drown him. It is very hard to be always masked; the Hatred of
our Enemies exhales perpetually some smoke, though never so little: if we have
a sedate and peaceable mind, we see more distinctly than he that is clouded
with Passion; and it will be more easy for us to discover him, than for him to
conceal himself. Machiavel says, that that which causes great designs to be
abortive, is, that there are very few perfectly good, or altogether bad. The
property of our Nature is, not to run into extremes without passing through the
Mediums. The uncertainty of our Judgment keeps us always floating betwixt Hope
and Fear. We deliberate much, and execute little. Hatred and Interest inspire a
malice into the wicked to do evil, which does not always proceed so far as
execution; Qua n stultum est verbis bostem irritare potentem; Dissimulat
prudens, fortis tacet, ast ubi venit Opportuna dies facienda viriliter, audet.
Paling. Zod.
the turns which it makes, alarms us, and puts us into a posture of defense.
Palingenius counsels us not to threaten our Enemies when they are discovered,
but to dissemble our resentment until a fair occasion presents it self of
ruining them.

I am very sensible that these Precepts are not too Christian-like, forasmuch
as it is very difficult to reconcile the Maxims of the World, and the Court
with the Principles of our Religion. Abneget semetipsum, tollat crucem suam and
sequatur me.
It Is in my Opinion for this reason that Jesus Christ commanded those that
sought his Glory and aspired to his perfection, to forsake all for his love,
and to carry nothing but their own Crosses, when they followed him. For truly
if we hope for all Felicities in the other World, we ought not to pretend to
great Matters in this. I do not admire that the Saints are always afflicted,
seeing they hold for a Maxim to suffer patiently all outrageous insults that
are offered them: and forasmuch as they do not aim at earthly possessions, they
do not greatly trouble themselves to preserve them; And their most fervent
Passion being to arrive at Heaven, they ever bless the hand which shortens
their Journey. Misera est magni custodia sensus.
I admire indeed their Virtue, and would willingly be able to imitate it. This
Treatise is not written for their instruction; I treat only of a Conduct purely
Humane and Moral, which may prevent those ordinary Lapses, into which
indiscretion often precipitates us. I should esteem the state of Gallant and
Accomplished men too happy, Perdidit nos aliena persidia, parents seesimus
parricidas. Cyprianus de Lapsis.
if nothing more were requisite, than to oppose Virtue against Vice to destroy
it: but alas, Virtue does not extend its Essicacie so far, as to have an
influence on our Enemies. Our Integrity does not render them less wicked; nor
our good deeds make them more just to us. Their hatred and their malice are
impediments, which we are obliged to remove, or renounce all our pretenses to
Fortune and an establishment. As our Religion does not permit us to hate them,
so it does not expose us to their fury: if they do us an injury, they
transgress; and if we repulse it without malice, we do a just action. But men
may tell me, we ought not to be Judge and Party in our own Concerns: I
acknowledge it; but it does not always hold good, for there are some wicked
Actions which are not subject to the rigor of the Laws. Those of our hidden
Enemies are of this number, and I conceive them to be so much the more
dangerous, as they are concealed, and their effects the more to be feared, the
less they are manifest. So that in this Case where shall we demand Justice? and
what accusation shall we frame against those real Crimes which we cannot prove?
My Enemy will spread false reports against me; he will surprise the
understanding of my Master by his artifice; he will destroy all the esteem he
has for me; he will never visit me but as a Spy; he will kiss my hand which he
would cut off, and will not embrace me but to suffocate me more securely: His
evil intentions are covered with a vail, which hides them from the sight of all
people. But if at last I perceive his guile, Stultus est qui per ignominiam non
commovetur ad injuriam. Isidor.
as being chiefly concerned, and after that should remain as quiet as a sheep,
without seeking my own defense, should I not be accounted a fool or a wretch?
The final Cause of our Actions is that which determines them; that is, which
renders them good or evil: and we judge it to be so much the more punishable,
as its effects are perilous. For example, if my Enemy should take my Purse, or
drive me out of my House, all the World will agree that he ought to be
chastised, and give me satisfaction for my damage: And if at Court by his wiles
he steals from me the good will of the Prince whom I serve, he deprives me of
all the advantages of his favor, which are of greater value to me than my
Purse or my House. If he excited only by the capriciousness of his bad humor,
attacks my Repute, will it not be lawful for me to do my self that Justice
which I can demand of nobody else? My Religion prohibits me to hate my
Neighbor, but it permits me to love my proper Interest, which I cannot
maintain but by repulsing such as oppose it. I may therefore conclude that I
ought to defend my self, and may be Judge in my own Cause. My duty as a
Christian is, not to act out of a principle of hatred; and never to procure
mischief to any person, if there remains any other way of preventing that which
he has prepared for me. The Holy Scripture blames not Mardocheus for having
seen Haman hanged on the same Gibbet, that Haman had caused to be set up for
him. We ought to love our Neighbor, but this love is not ordained for our
destruction: we are to our selves our nearest Neighbors; and the same law
which forbids us to destroy our life by our own hands, obliges us to preserve
it against the violence of our Enemies. These Reasons being well examined, men
cannot condemn these Maxims, which at first sight seem too licentious, seeing
they derive their Power and Justice from an absolute necessity. If our hidden
Enemies had right of doing every thing without restraint, the more wicked would
put on Religious habits, to exercise their unjustice with greater ease and
freedom: but if their wicked contrivances awaken our Prudence, and that it
clearly discovers to us their malicious intentions, who can blame us for
endeavoring to prevent them?

CHAP. XI. That we ought to have private Friends, and how we should beware of
men in Holy Orders.
THe principal Effort which the address of a Courtier ought to make, is to
render himself Master of the Prince's ear, and to get faithful friends, that
may truly inform him of all that is spoken against his Interest in his
absence. As it is very dangerous to have secret Enemies, so it is very useful
to have private and unknown Friends: Men are not so reserved in speaking before
them; they will with greater facility pump out the Secrets of others: By the
liberty they take of censuring the Favorite, they will discover every one's
inclinations, by which means the Favorite may take just measures of what he
ought to practice or avoid. This kind of Friendship is seldom found among
those of any great Rank at Court; for to speak truly they very much resemble
honest Spies: It Is oftener met withal among private persons, who have more Wit
than Fortune; and men must be bountiful, and open their purses to this sort of
people; for experience teaches us, that no money is so advantageously employed,
as when they choose discreetly on whom to bestow it. This Age has seen a grand
Minister admired by all, a most exact observer of this Maxim, which ever
succeeded well to him. Designs of importance are like to Mines, which become
ineffectual when once discovered.

But if a Courtier judges that the Cabal and Intrigues of his Enemies are too
difficult to sustain, and that he mistrusts his own address of preventing them,
I do not disapprove his pulling off the masks from their faces, and declaring
himself openly their Enemy. By this means he destroys or at least diminishes
the Faith which the Prince might otherwise give to their imposture: and after
this he hearkens to them but as interessed parties, who carry rather Revenge in
their hearts, than Truth in their mouths. Moreover, the Courtier shows that he
does not fear them by taking the liberty to decry them at Court, and make their
Malice appear before the World, by which he also justifies and confirms his own
innocence in the Opinion of his Master. This proceeding is always advantageous,
when managed with discretion; and for my part, I had rather follow it, and run
the hazard of what may happen, than to perplex my mind with so many
circumspections, which cannot but be troublesome to a Man of Courage: for I
esteem it more glorious to wage War as a Lion, than as a Fox. I look upon a
Courtier to be in a great perplexity, that reckons Priests and Women among his
secret Friends: This last remedy is nor convenient for him, and such a
Gallantry of spirit is unseasonable. These are indeed a sort of flies, which
although not of great force, are very importuning. Princes Cabiners are filled
with them; and I hold him a prudent and discreet man, who can win them to his
party: in order to which, it is requisite to use complaisance, sweetness, and
sometimes liberality. I^ the Court be devour, he must beware of Men in Orders;
the weakness of these people is not less to be feared, than the malice of
others: They are commonly possessed with chymerical fancies; they think they have
authority to judge the whole world, when once initiated in the holy Rights, and
imagining to render themselves acceptable to God in reforming men's manners,
they do most rashly and unworthily decry the most Gallant and accemplish^ men
upon the first report, which a Puritanical Hypocrite makes them. This has no
need of farther illustration, there being few who have not had some experience
hereof: the best precaution is, to be reserved in our discourse, to have a
probity not fictitious or affected, to persuade our selves strongly that it is
more advantageous to be an honest man in reality than in appearance. Disguises
may sometimes contribute to deliver us our of a bad pass, but certainly it is a
great folly to build our conduct upon so i^l a foundation. Lying is always weak
of it self, and there is no contrivance or address that can maintain it long.
Naturam expellas furca licet, usque recurret. Juvenal.
Cloth an Ape like a President, he cannot forsake his apish tricks: At first
or last we appear to be such as we are. A man of Sense finds out so many
Reasons which oblige him to embrace Virtue, that it is easy to him to resolve:
and though the interest of his Advancement and Salvation did not engage him, he
would do it out of the consideration of his Esteem and Reputation. Nobody
takes pleasure in being accounted wicked; the most impious could never suffer
that we should upbraid them with their Crimes; and although they commit them
with little remorse, yet they are enraged when once discovered: The reason is,
that we naturally love Glory, which is as essential to our Soul as motion; this
is the cause that we can never loose it without extreme regret. Thus we see,
that contempt does not less torment us than our transgressions. From hence I
conclude, that it is more secure and more easy to advance our Fortunes by a
real, than by a feigned Honesty: the first produces of it self, and without
constraint, the effects we desire; the latter is ever accompanied with disquiet
and hazards. Virtue has this property, that it permits us to enjoy a
tranquillity of mind, which defends us against those Fears, Men's palpitat
assiduo flagitiosa metu. Pictorius. Conscia men's recti famae mi^dacia^idet.
Ovid.
to which the wicked are continually exposed. One who has a true sense of our
Religion, does not fear being branded with the ignominy of an impious man; his
mind is not perplexed with that multiplicity of insupportable Arguments, which
serve only to confound the Intellect: For to solve all these objections, we
need only call to mind, that Reason alone is so blind, that it does not know
it self; and so extravagant, that it is only fit to form clumera's to desturb
its own repose. Without dissembling, I find that Faith is not less useful to
the peace of our Mind, than necessary to our Salvation: When we are
sufficiently satisfi^d thereof, it delivers us out of many perplexities: We
have then nothing more to do, but to follow it to arrive at Happiness; for as
it assures us of the rewards of the other Life, it shows us the way to deserve
them. If we take it rightly, Devotion contains nothing contrary to Gentility,
but it must be practiced with judgment, as all other things should be. The
habit of a Capuchin would not fit well on a Courtier. Our Piety ought to be
real and unfeigned, and herein consists the highest perfection: when we do not
adjust it to our Profession, it becomes indiscreet. We may lawfully carry the
Chalice with rich and embroydred habits: for to be chaste and continent, it is
not requisite to shun the Society of Ladies of Quality; their approbation
contributes often to our good Fortune; and I conceive it necessary for an
Accomplished person to enjoy their Conversation; it is from them we learn a good
Deportment; they inspire into us a desire of rendering our selves complaisant
to all people, and by consequence guide us in the path to Virtue. A Courtier
becomes ridiculous, when he avoids the divertisements, of which the w^^le Court
approves: it is a strange means of advancing his fortune, to go hear a Sermon,
when the Prince goes to a Play: And I suppose he makes his addresses very ill,
to retire himself to his Chamber, when the Court is at a Ball, where his good
mien and his gentile behavior might gain him both advantage and esteem. One
that is thus superstitiously scrupulous, ought to quit his pretensions to a
Fortune: It is a duty incumbent on him, either to conform himself to the
Manners of the Court, or not to come at it. He must think, that he is made for
the Court, and not the Court for him; if he finds it inconsistant with his
Piety, Exeat aula qui vol^t esse pius. Pers.
he should change his design; the Cloister is undoubtedly more proper for the
practice of his Austerities. To be a good Religious man of any Order, it is
necessary to observe exactly its Rule and Contututions; and to be a good
Courtier, the same consequence teaches us to live after the mode of the Court.
As all Professions have their different ends, so likewise there are diverse ways
to arrive at them; what is advantageous in the one, is often prejudicial in the
other. An Officer of an Army would be very ill obeyed, if he should command his
his Soldiers in the same tone that a Fanatic says his Prayers. Would not also
a man in holy Orders be thought as ridiculous to entertain a Lady with
gallantry; as a Courtier, if he should attempt to make exhortations to her? We
have occasion of making use of our judgment in all the actions of this life:
Devotion may have its excess, as well as other things. Virtue is never
extravagant and undetermined; as being perfect, it derives its Rules from
Mediocrity, and to take it rightly, it is Mediocrity it self. Sunt certi
deaiq^e fines, Quos ultr^ citraque nequit consistere rectum
Avarice and Prodigality are two vicious extremes, Liberality the Medium is a
Virtue. Cowardice and Rashness are two Vices which a Gentleman should always
avoid; and Valor is a Virtue which he should always embrace. From hence we may
infer, that it is as impossible to be a Courtier in a Cloister, as a Monk in
the Court: And to live here conformably to its Maxims, we ought to love our
friends with Fidelity, and repulse our enemies with Discretion and Courage.
It Is in this case a Courtier ought to serve himself prudently both of his head
and his hands; to do himself Justice as exactly as he does it to others; to
resent Injuries as well as Courtesies; never to wander out of the path of
Equity; to lend his ear to Advice, and to give himself leisure to consider
thereof. We meet with so few disinteress'd Counselors, that it always behooves
us to examine their Propositions. A wise man takes not fire at first touch,
like Powder; he understands too well the nature of his Passions, to consult of
any thing with them: but notwithstanding his Reason banishes them from his
Counsel, yet it recals them usefully at Execution. Men deliberate in cold blood
to fight a good Duel, but a little commotion is requisite to perform it
advantageously. ^rascimini and nolite peocare.
The Psalmist allows us Anger, provided it be not accompanied with sin: I
believe he intends the same likewise of the other Passions. Nature is better
directed, than to produce any thing that is bad; but we bun^lers pervert her
Works, by the sottish use we make thereof.

CHAP. XII. Of the Wisdom and Economy of a young Courtier.
THis default, although very common, seems more in use among Men of the Sword,
than of any other Profession. I know not whether it is from Custom or
Necessity, that we allow them more liberty than others: For my part, I do not
disapprove of a Young man's showing himself somewhat brisk, provided he be not
arrogant and imperious. The Wisdom, which does every thing by compass, which
affects a censorious Gravity, which has always a frowning brow, and which
speaks not but in monosillables, like Kablais's Gray Friar, is not in my
Opinion that which becomes a man of the Court. This wisdom, I say, ought not to
have so much left her as her nails, wherewith she might scratch and offend her
Friends; but should always appear both agreeable and debonaire, and above all,
suitable to the years of him, who possesses her: For that of young persons
admits of nothing severe, receives complaisance into the number of Virtues, and
rejects neither decency nor any other thing which contributes to the making of
a good mien: Comeliness has great Charms to bewitch hearts; we can hardly
forbear having an inclination for one that enters into a company with a good
grace. His Carriage and his Countenance convince us of his Merit, and the
freedom which appears in his actions, that he is a person of Quality. To know
how to dress himself advantageously, is not an unprofitable science. A Courtier
of our time said, that a Gentleman was fine enough when he was black, new, and
neat: And indeed it is not always the great expense, which denotes a Gentleman;
undoubtedly it has a great luster, but it is uneasi^ to make it continue.
Excesses are always followed with inconveniences: it is better that one should
make himself ordinary Clothes often, than rich, and wear them a long time.
Moreover, his chief care ought to be, not to affect strange fashions, or any
out of the mode. The fantastickness of his habit, gives men cause to suspect
that of his Manners. If he is proper in his own person, he will be so in his
equipage and retinue. It Is his duty to consult his purse, for to increase or
diminish it; and I would advise him rather to get many Merits, than a quantity
of Servants: the great train of Pages and Footmen, which pass not the Court of
the Louvre, make no great noise in the Presence Chamber; it becomes only the
Lords of Low Britain, who come once or twice in their lives to show their Noses
at Court, to be accompanied like the Ambassadors of the great Mogol: These are
but wiles to amuse Citizens and Countrymen. He ought to wear such a garb as he
can maintain a long time, and which may secure him from the disgrace of falling
into Bailiffs clutches. Profuseness goes never without Injustice and Folly: It
is not the property of a discreet man to contract Debts, and not to be in a
condition to pay them: If he be of this humor, he will find much to do to
save his Repute, and not pass for a Cheat. What I speak concerning the
Equipage, is also to be understood of the Table; if he concerns himself
therewith, he is obliged to keep a good one. This is a way to extend his
acquaintance, but no sure one to procure friends: The greatest part of those
who dine with us, come not to oblige us; it is very much if they forbear
controwling the Sawces and the Drink. When one keeps open house, the whole
Court think they have right to sit down at his Table: This Galimaufry of men
would make me abhor this kind of Expense, which deprives him of his liberty
that makes it. There were three rich Martyns at Paris, who thought to gain
great Credit by this means; but they reapt no other benefit by their expenses,
than to be called Martyn the eater, Martyn that is eaten, and Martyn whom men
eat: For my part, I look upon the first as the most prudent. The pleasure of
good Cheer ceases to be a pleasure, so soon as it is constrained. I would very
much approve of making good Meals, provided they were not Ordinaries, free to
all Comers. It Is enough that a Courtier resignes to his Master all his liberty;
it is too precious a Jewel to be prostrated before the multitude; he ought to
husband it as well as his Purse. The Farmers of the Crowns Revenues may treat
at their Tables private persons out of that which they extort from the Public;
and it is wisdom to make themselves considered for those things which they
possess of greatest value: It Is sufficient for them that men admire their Cooks
and their Plate; for we should not oblige them by endeavoring to inform our
selves of their qualifications, and should be hardly put to it to praise their
worth. This Counsel which I give to a young Courtier, would not be proper for a
Minister of State, or a great Lord, whose Fortunes are already well advanced:
To these, a Table is a mark of grandeur, which is not unprofitable, for it
facilitates the access to their persons, and gives their friends, who court
them, an opportunity of receiving their caresses; and seeing they are superior
to their Guests, they cannot be much importuned by them. It behooves a Courtier
to know and to consider, that as there is a great difference between him that
seeks his fortune, and him that has made it; so their manner of living ought
not to be alike. What we do without discretion, cannot be well done: Deprive a
man of this guide, and you take away the Rudder from the Vessel.

CHAP. XIII. That Fortune cannot advance a Fool.
ALthough I should acknowledge that power of Fortune which I will abolish,
Stultitia est proficiendi impedimentum. Stob.
yet I could maintain with Reason, that she cannot Advance a Fool; she may give
the Prince a great inclination for him. This is a motion of the Soul, the
reason of which is not easy to be comprehended, and may puzzle the most
ingenious to resolve it: but this Inclination will proceed no further, when the
Prince shall perceive what a bad choice he has made. Friendship resembles Fire,
it must be supplied with Fuel to subsist. Princes understand they are our
Masters; when they set one step to descend to us, they believe we ought to make
all the rest to ascend to them. Indeed it is but reasonable, that we should do
our utmost to please them, who owing us nothing, do out of their own goodness
oblige us. It is our Duty to divert them, and conform our selves to their
humors. For seeing they honor us with their Favors, it is but just that we
should endeavor to deserve them.

There are always found at Court many fair Counterfeits; these are false
Diamonds which have the resemblance of true; their mien and their Birth make us
conceive they are of some value; and we cannot disabuse our selves before we
hear them discourse: Loquere puer, ut te ^ognoscam.
by this Socrates would know the young Athenian, who was presented to him to be
Instructed. There is but little difference between a fair Statue, and a man of
a good Countenance without Wit. I would advise the Parents of such as these, to
bring them seldom to Court. It is sufficient that the Countrymen know that they
have once been there; the stay which they make there, serves only to discover
their weakness, and make them the Cullies of a company of Wits, who lose no
occasion of diverting themselves at their Clownishness. A little rudeness is
pardonable in those poor unhappy Creatures; and when it is known that their
Hands are nimble, men's tongues do not run so fast. But these are not subjects
fit to make a Fortune, they want Counsel only to keep them from committing
gross absurdities in their Country: Civility, Generosity, and Liberality, are
to be Inculcated into them. If they be rich, a great Retinue is requisite, that
they might be attended as splendidly as great Lords: The generality of men
being taken more with appearances than realities; because they judge of those
things only which make an impression on their Senses. They will give more
respect to fine Clothes and the retinue of a Nobleman, than to his Merit and
his Virtue; and nothing is worthy of their approbation, but Wealth, and a vast
Revenue. These are the Blind, which force the more Prudent to accommodate
themselves to their Blindness. The enterprise would be Succesless, to attempt
to render them more discerning. A man of Wit makes use of their sottishness to
his advantage, as Physicians administer Poison to expel Diseases. The
imperfections of Nature are not easy to be corrected: The Multitude has for
ever been obstinate, inconstant, and ignorant; and seeing it began so with the
world it self, and has not hitherto changed, there is great probability it will
always continue the same. I have not a design to enlarge my self upon this
Subject, having nothing to say to those whom I suppose not to be at Court: If
they are not capable of any preferment, they have no need of Counsel: That
which they ought to take, is to live at home, and suffer themselves to be
directed and governed by one who may keep them from being guilty of ridiculous
Extravagancies.

CHAP. XIV. That Marriage contributes to our Fortune: And whether a Nobleman
ought to prefer a Princess before a Lady of his own quality.
IT seems to me not to be sufficient for a Person of Quality who designs to
raise his Family, to think only upon the favor of his Master, and forget all
other means that may contribute to his Fortune. I conceive that his allying
himself is not to be lightly esteemed, if he considers of what importance it is
to his establishment. The Germans want no advice in this point, the Laws of
their Country forbidding them to mis-ally themselves, viz. That in case a Count
of the Empire should espouse a Wife beneath his quality, His Children must lose
their Rank and Dignity. Our France has different Customs, which perhaps are
not better; but as I am no Reformer of them, it shall suffice me to draw from
thence some profitable Observations. In Marriages there are three essential
things to be considered; the Birth, the Person, and the Wealth.

I put the Birth in the first place, because it is of marvelous weight, and
gives me occasion to treat of a question which perhaps has never yet been
debated, viz. Whether a Great Lord who may pretend to the Marriage of a
Princess, ought to preser her before a Lady of his own quality? This Problem
has at first sight such a luster that dazles our Eyes; and without controversy
prevails over our opinion; we shall meet but with very few, who do not suppose
it to be too evident to be disputed: they will say, that the Children of a
Princess, although no Princes, have yet somewhat more than other Gentlemen;
that their Birth, making them related to those Grandees whom the World adores,
demands some respect from the Nobility, and makes them partakers of their
greatness: That Princes considering them as their own Blood, are obliged to
promote their Interests at Court and in the Country, and to procure them the
greatest Charges and the chief honors of the State; that even if they should
want Natural qulifications, yet Princes would be engaged to do as much for
them, by the care they have of upholding their own Glory. Men may add many
other fine Flourishes to adorn this side of the Medail; but what would appear
if we should turn it, seeing all things are Problematical? And if they should
answer, that a Princess being not able to make a Prince, she is not able to
make a great Lord, it being true he should be such by the only Quality of his
Father; that his Merit joined to his Birth, will make him to be respected by
the Nobility without the addition of a Principality, is only an error; as
also to believe that Princes as being his Relations do espouse his Interest:
For on the contrary, as being above him, they look upon him as unworthy of the
honor of their alliance, if he be not inseparably grafted into their Fortune
and Grandeur: that their Credit is not an infallible way for to obtain the
greatest Employs; the Court having this Policy, that disswades her from
bestowing such extraordinary favors by the hands of Princes, forasmuch as she
makes them more Creatures, which she raises up against her own Interest: She
knows, that they will receive to themselves all the acknowledgements and
gratitude of those, for whom they have procured these Honors: And that to
gratify them after this manner, is to foment their Ambition, and fortify
their Party: Therefore there must be always some extraordinary Violence to
snatch out of her hands favors of such Importance. They may also add, that the
Court delights not to oblige any but her Favorites; and we seldom see that
Princes possess this Station in the hearts of Kings: for if they look upon them
as their Relations, they cannot easily rid themselves of the thoughts, that
they may one day revolt; and so cannot suffer their greatness, without some
reluctancie and disquiet. All these considerations have made many conclude,
that such alliances are more inconvenient than advantageous for those who apply
themselves directly to the service and person of our Kings; Si vis nubere, unbe
pari.
and that a Family of their own rank may furnish them with a wife of less
appearance, but of more substance for their fortunes.

But in case Parents will not follow this Policy, being charmed or d^z'led by
the glittering of this grandeur, but contract their Son to a Princess; it is
very difficult in espousing her, to dispense with the not espousing the
Interest of her Family. The great Ministers will always suspect him, and will
never be persuaded that he can disingage him from it fairly, and with safety.
And indeed, with what eye can a great Lord behold the ruin of a Prince his
near Relation, without centributing to uphold his Fortune when it totters? And
how can he believe that he shall not be crushed under its Ruins, if the
unhappiness of his affairs is such, that it does fall? Does he think that the
Ministers for saving himself will have a good opinion of him? And if he be
wanting to his Relations in an urgent necessity, how can they rely upon his
generosity? Or what reason can they have to put any confidence in the services
of one, who could forget his Extraction, and prefer his private Interest,
before the Obligations of Civility, of Nature, and of Blood? There are no Rules
so general, but what admit of some exceptions: Loyalty is necessary, I confess
it; but Generosity is not prohibited; and we know it does not appear, but in
difficult times, and on perilous occasions. I say, moreover, it is so much the
more to be esteemed in our Enemies, as it is more remote from the ordinary
sentiments of base and vulgar Souls; who have no other object, but their
Interest, and who act nothing by the impulse of Virtue alone. These are like to
AEsop's Dog; they expect to receive the recompenses which are figured at that
time in the Court, which are but shadows and smoke: she promises every thing,
to dis-unite those that molest her; but no man is in a condition of forcing her
to keep her word: Her negotiations seldom fail of success; her end is to
separate friendships, to put a diffidence into the parties, and even to produce
hatred among Relations, when she meets with inconstant and irresolute minds.
For my part, I conceive that we ought to resolve betimes, either to resign up
our selves absolutely to the Court, making it a Case of Conscience and our
Duty; it being true, that the Allegiance we owe to the King, renders his Part
the most just; or to follow the fortune of the Prince, to whom we are related,
let what will happen. Things were never so long time calm among us, that we are
not forced sometimes to discover our selves, and to conceal our selves again in
our Burrows like Foxes. Those who promise nothing oblige no body; and they who
promise every thing, are oblig^d to hold their word. A person of Quality should
be always undaunted, and never show the least fear: His Courage ought to be
greater than his Fortune; and it is not then a time to deliberate, when that to
execute is at hand.

CHAP. XV. Whether it be requisite to be in Love, for to be Married.
AFter the Birth of a Mistress, her Person is the next thing to be considered
before Marriage, seeing this Sacrament is an indissolvable Bond. I esteem that
man absolutely happy, who espouses a Lady of a handsome Body and a good
disposition. I should hardly condescend to the opinion of those who maintain,
that Love is not requisite for the driving a bargain of such Importance;
because, say they, the question being concerning the establishment of our
Fortune and repose, it is dangerous to listen to a violent passion, which
Tyrannizes over us, and blinds us at the same time; that being an enemy to
Wisdom, cannot give us very sound Counsels, nor assure us of pleasures as
lasting as the continuance of our Marriage, forasmuch as it is extinguished in
the enjoyment; and experience teaches us, that Possession, Time, and Use,
diminish the value of things which are the most excellent in our Imagination.
They add, that every one now conspires to free himself of this Passion, seeing
years deface the Beauty which we adore; and such a one Courted a Mistress as
fair as an Angel, and as wise as a Saint, who finds himself burdened with a
Wife as Ugly as the Devil, Forma bonum fragile est, quantumque accedit ad annos
fit minor, and spano carpitur ipsa suo. Ovid.
and as mad as Bess of Bedlam. From hence they conclude, that the custom is
well grounded, which leaves the choice and approbation of our Marriages to our
Parents and Tutours, who considering only the Interest of our Fortune and our
Happiness, judge thereof so much the more soundly, as they are less transported
by the Passion of Love.

But to Answer to these Reasons; is there any thing more Tyrannical, than to
share all the moments of our Life, all our Troubles, and all our Pleasures,
with a person, who is unknown, and even indifferent to us? If it be true that
Enjoyment extinguishes Love, might we not infer, that the same Enjoyment will
change our indifference into hatred; and this last Passion will precipitate us
into a gulf of Griefs and Displeasures? That having espoused one, without
having before seen her but with the eyes of another, she will not appear to us
agreeable; and having not known her but by the report of our Parents, we
abandon our selves as hond-winkt to her cross humors, and perhaps to semething
worse. To be dealt withal after this manner, is to be carried to a Prison, which
loads us with Chains, from which we can never be released, but by Death.

It is not reasonable that our Will, so necessary in Matrimony, should be
forced by the choice and authority of our Parents; seeing it is so free by
Nature, that the most cruel Tyrants in the World have not the power to violate
its freedom. Suppose, that a fair Lady should in a short time loose her Charms,
and become a very homely Woman; we are well assured that a homely Lady will
never grow handsome after she is married; and her malice will rather increase
than diminish. But this Question being a Problem, which may be equally disputed
on both sides, it will be more proper for me to suspend my judgment, than
absolutely determine it. The first Opinion seems to me the more solid for the
establishment of our Fortune, but the more dangerous for our Content; and for
the last, if it offers less Wealth, it promises more Pleasure and Satisfaction.

CHAP. XVI. Whether Money ought to be preferred before Birth.
WEalth is the last circumstance which is to be examined in our Marriage; we
dispute not of the quantity, for no body can deny but the greatest is most to
be desired: but I conceive the quality thereof ought to be considered. I am not
of the Emperor Vespatian's Opinion, who said that the money which he raked out
of excrements, had as good a savor as that which came from Fruits and Flowers.
If we receive into our alliance a Maid of a low extraction, because she brings
much Money; we ought continually to fix our Eyes upon her Purse, and never cast
them upon her Family. Alliances of this sort are not to be contracted, but when
our Lands are Mortgaged, and our Houses beset with Sergeants; these being
insupportable Maladies, we must resolve to apply to them extreme Remedies.
Iustillata Patris virtus tibi, fortes creantur fortibus. Hor.
This disorder is often accompanied with another more grievous; our Offsprings
are tainted with the filth of her Stock. The Noble Families which ally
themselves after this manner, resemble Fountains whose Waters are disturbed in
running from their Springs, when they pass through Marshygrounds. A great
Italian Lord was one day asked, how it came to pass that the Romans, who had in
former times made the whole World tremble, and whose Valor never met with its
like, were become now so unexpert at, and so unfit for the War? He answered,
Nec feroces progenerant columb as.
that so long as the Soldiers begat their Children, they resembled their
Fathers; but when their Wives became licentious, and Gown-men gallanted them,
they engendered none but Trifling and Peaceable men. It Is much to be admired,
says Montagne, that we are less circumspect in perpetuating the Virtue of our
Families, than in preserving the breed of our good Horses. For my part, I will
never advise one to contract a villainous alliance, if he can dispense
therewith. A woman of Quality with less money far otherwise maintains the
grandeur of her Family: and it is an advantage considerable, in the highest
degree, for the Children, to see themselves sustained by two mighty Houses,
which have an equal Interest in their Fortune and Greatness: who as they have
received no impressions but of Honor and Virtue, they have commonly a noble
Soul, and never render themselves unworthy of the name of their Family or the
Glory of their Predecessors.

CHAP. XVII. That we ought to make a faithful Friend: and that a Gentleman of a
good Estate is not to be accounted unhappy, if the Court does him Injustice.
HItherto I have spoken of the means to avoid some dangerous precipices into
which a Gentleman that follows the Court might fall, if he did not carry
himself discreetly toward his Master, and be watchful against his Enemies. It
now remains that I Counsel him to make a faithful Friend, on whose advice he
may safely rely in matters of consequence.

It is certain, that never any wise man abandoned himself absolutely to his own
conduct: if we believe that our Reason is without error, we understand it very
ill; by having too great thoughts of it, we destroy it; we are like Apes, who
suffocate their young ones by embracing of them too much; it is after this
manner that we cause our Judgment to degenerate into presumption; the love we
have for our interests, is an invincible obstacle to our reason: Our Passions
and our hopes put it every hour upon the rack, and incline it as it pleases
them best. As they are of greater force, they act with greater impetuosity upon
the mind of a young man, so that he frequently pursues that which he loves,
and embraces that which he desires. Presumption is a malady which must of
necessity be healed; it is so much an Enemy to deference and Counsel, that it
cannot be reconciled with Wisdom: yet it is not requisite that he devests
himself altogether of the good opinion he has of himself; that is another
extreme which would produce as dangerous consequences. Humility does not oblige
a man of courage to think himself a Coward, nor a Doctor to believe himself
Illiterate, nor a Courtier to persuade himself that he understands not to live
among the better sort: It is enough if we are as severe Judges of our own vices
and defaults as we would be of others. We may examine our selves in private as
well without shame, as without witnesses. Let us keep our Passions silent,
while Reason informs us what we are, and what we are worth, and we shall never
fail of knowing our selves. If these Reflections could but enter into the minds
of Young men; if they would not consult their own Reason, yet they would more
adhere to that of their Friends, which is ever the more solid; acting with
greater freedom, and less interest. Humane Prudence has not found out better
precautions against these Accidents. I have formerly said, that she has her
Bounds, and her natural weakness; and performs her duty, when she does what she
is able. Providence accomplishes the remainder according to her pleasure; Ipsa
suispollens opibus, nil indiga nostri. Lucret.
she has Springs, which exert their power without our assistance: She directs
all things by an infinite wisdom, and does nothing by hazard. A prudent and
resolved man expects with patience, the arrival of that which she has
determined of his Fortune: if he be turned out of the Court, he suffers it
without regret, and does not esteem himself unhappy when he is retired to his
own house. He sees that many were never there, who yet live very contentedly:
If he has that popular air to make himself beloved in the Country, he receives
there the homages and respects, which he before rendered to many. This change
which diminishes his hopes, increases his Repose: And from the time he forsook
the Empire of Fortune, he finds himself in the arms of Philosophy. His Conduct
which does not reproach him for his faults, comforts him in his bad success. He
perceives, that Nature has not confined Pleasures to gr^^^ Fortanes alone. Men
may laugh and spend their time merrily, without being Dukes and Peers, or
Marshals of France. He does not want people to contribute to his Recreations,
as he formerly did to those of his Master, whom he sees no more; and at length
he may find the reverse of the Medail, as fair as the Face. It is not very
difficult to philosophize after this manner, if he be a great Lord in his
Province: Quid enim salvis infamia nummis? Juven. 1. Sat.
He is indeed extremely unhappy, to be forced to live on four or five thousand
pounds per annum. I dare affirm, that all the Writings of the ancient and
modern Philosophers do not contain so great consolation in them against the
adversities of Fortune, as the Inheritance of three or four rich Manors.
Poverty is an evil that puts the valiant out of his play, and disarms him. The
Precepts of Philosophy concerning the contempt of things that perish, are no
current money, with which we can pay our debts: That which gives me a bad
opinion of them, is, that their Authors never were reduced to any extremity or
want. They have furnished us with Weapons, of which they never made any use;
they have vanquished an Enemy, who was not in a capacity to do them any hurt:
And I can hardly be induced to believe that Dionysius took as great pleasure in
commanding his Scholars, as in reigning over Syracuse. It is hard to tumble
down from a steep place without bruising our selves; there is nothing but
Wealth that can save us, and uphold our spirits in great extremities. It Is
that, which exempts us from the insupportable inconveniences, into which
Poverty precipitates us; and it is that alone, which can defend us against the
contempt of our Equals, and the pity of our Inferiors. The greatest Worth in
the world buried under indigence, is a Mine of Gold which no man has
discovered: those who possess it, are not more at their ease; and those who
know it not, trample it under their feet, without informing themselves of its
value. The Cruelty of the Emperor Justinian had not reduced Bellisarius to the
last extremity, if after having deprived him of the honor of so many Battles,
he had not forced him to beg an Alms at the same Gate of Rome, through which he
had entered so often in Triumph with Captive Kings bound to his Chariot. And
that Emperor of Germany had not more cause to lament, for the loss of his
States and Dignity, than to see himself necessitated to cut faggots in the
Forest of Swaben for the sustenance of his wretched life. I am very sensible,
that the Spirit of a wise man is not dejected nor debased, when he obtains not
those Honors which he deserved by his services: I know that he bears it out
gallantly, when he is deprived thereof unjustly; but I understand not with what
rules of Philosophy he can render his mind sedate and undisturbed, when he
shall endure the afflictions of an extreine Poverty. The Philosopher would be
very impertinent, that endeavors to prove, that ragged Clothes will defend me
against Cold, and that I ought not to be troubled, when I have not whereon to
dine. He may tell me, that Nature is contented with a little, I confess it; but
it is according to that degree we are accustomed: A Prince would be very poor,
if he should have no greater Revenue left him, than would very well accommodate
a private Gentleman.

From this reasoning I conclude, that a Gentleman who has Wit and Wealth
according to his condition, may live happily, whatsoever befalls him: That he
ought to make an attempt to arrive at the great Honors of the State, either by
the War, or by the Services which he shall render to the person of the Prince:
If he succeeds, he will enjoy the benefit of his labors with pleasure; if his
designs do not prosper, he has no cause to despair absolutely, being in a
condition of living privately in the same splendour his Ancestors lived before
him. Paulum sepultae dista^ inertiae celata Virtus.
There is a great satisfaction in having polished his Manners, shown his Worth,
and gained Esteem: This is a recompense, for which it is well worth the
hazarding something, although he should hope for no other; this alone ought to
oblige him to leave his house, that he might return thither with greater Honor
and Renown.

CHAP. XVIII. That the Cassock is more proper to raise a Man's Fortune, than
the Sword: And the Advantages which may accrue to a Person of Quality from
thence.
IF he puts on the Cassock, he will meet with many things in the conduct of a
Man of the Sword, which he ought not to follow: His Profession obliges him to a
more grave Modesty, to a more reserved Conversation, to a more exemplary Piety,
and to more regulated Manners. As the Exercises of a Gentleman are of no use to
him, so Learning is very necessary for him; it is a shameful thing for one of
that Profession to be illiterate. The Sciences never appear with so much grace,
as in the possession of a Nobleman; they have Charms which ravish all people,
and constrain even the most insensible, to love those who know how to serve
themselves advantageously thereof. It Is almost an infallible way of arriving at
great Employs: we have so many examples of this kind, that it would be very
impertinent to seek for them in Ages remote from our own knowledge; and to
understand it aright, is it not just, that those who can see should lead those
that are blind? and who can deny, that Learning joined to good natural parts,
does not qualify a Person extraordinarily? The Sciences lead him in a Path
strown with Roses, to arrive at Fortune; they put a gloss on his Worth; they
give him entrance into the Councils of Kings; they teach him the Art to incline
men as he pleases; and at last, they make him either a great Prelar in the
Church, or a great Minister in the State. Oh, what a happy Profession is this,
and how many persons of Quality would follow it, if they knew all the benefits
thereof! I mean, what I have before hinted, if they have a natural disposition
thereto: For indeed, it is no easy Enterprise, to render our selves learned:
the Sciences are tedious and painful to be acquired; and to have them infused,
we must be Saints. The Poets had reason to lodge them upon the top of
Parnassus, whose excessive height made the access very difficult. The Muses who
presided there, took delight in being courted, and it was a great advantage to
be in their favor: It belongs to them only to give a satisfaction to the
Living, and a resurrection to the Dead. We should have had no knowledge of
Alexander, if History had not described him; and all the brave Exploits of
Julius Caesar and of Xenophon had been buried in an Eternal Oblivion, if they
themselves had not written them. Virtue it self, as admirable as it is, cannot
be without them, seeing her true Recompense is Glory and Immortality. On whom
do you think future Ages will bestow greatest Encomiums, either on Cardinal
Richlieu, or on the Captains who fought in his time? His Head gave motion to
their hands; if they have had good Success, the Glory thereof is due to him; he
was the Cause, and they the Instruments; and we may say, that their Valor
could not appear without contributing to the Renown of him that directed them.
The Orders which he gave at ease in his Cabinet, made all Europe tremble: his
Prudence prevented the bad accidents; his Reason penetrated the most obscure
things; his Judgment was without error; and his Conduct has appeared so good,
that we cannot speak of the Grandeur of the King, without praising his Worth
and Virtue.

It is very rare, that a person of Quality, of extraordinary Worth, does not
make a great Fortune: His Sufficiency imposes a certain necessity on the
Prince to employ him, who although he has no natural inclination, yet the
Welfare of his affairs will urge him to it: He perceives they cannot be
entrusted in better hands; and by doing it, discharges himself of a multitude
of cares, which make the Crown as uneasy to him that wears it, as it appears
glorious to the eyes of those that adore it. But suppose he be not so happy as
to arrive at this height, he is not out of Fortune's way, if he be not in the
least concerned in the affairs of State; it will be much more easy for him to
obtain a good Bishopric, or a rich Abbey, than for a Man of the Sword of his
condition, a considerable Government for a reward of his services: yet the
first walks in a smooth path, and almost secure; the other in a rugged road
full of perils: Both have their Fortunes for their Objects, but are not equally
happy in the choice of the Ways that bring them thither. The great unhappiness
of Young men, is, that the heat of their Blood ferments in their Veins, and
renders them incapable of being persuaded to any thing: They fancy, that there
is nothing so brave as the Esteem of a man of Courage, and that they ought to
parallel the noble Exploits of the Heroes in History. They never propound to
themselves any thing, but the pleasure of satisfying their Passions, without
having any respect to the difficulties that may occur: And if it happens that
they are once enamored, every thing must then give place to their Love, that
persuades them that the Possession of their Mistress is the only blessing, which
can render them happy; they look then upon the Cassock with disdain, seeing it
opposes it self to their design. These are sick people who fly the
Physicians, blind who refuse to be led, and who quit the path of Fortune to
pursue that of Pleasure. But I would willingly put the Question to a
dis-interessed man: If they had but once learnt from the experience of their
Friends, that there is but three months fruition required to destroy this
violent Passion, which treats them so imperiously; if they were convinced, that
the Charms of this Beauty which ravishes him, would vanish in a few days in
their minds, like as the enchanted Castles of Romances; if they could but
conceive that an adored Mistress becomes often an importunate Wife, whether it
is possible they could be so incensed as to sacrifice their establishment and
their quiet to an Idol, which will stand no longer, than their folly and
blindness support it?

Let us finish this Discourse with this which follows from the proofs of my
first Proposition; that we ought not to attribute to Fortune that which happens
to us by our Imprudence; that those who penetrate into the Causes, easily
discover their Effects: And that our ignorance and heedlessness are the Sources
of our Adversity, and our Judgment and Experience of our Prosperity.

The end of the first Part.
THE FORTUNE OF GENTLEMEN.
THE SECOND PART.
CHAP. I. That no man is content with his own Fortune.
THere is not any Passion so natural to men, as the defire to be always happy;
but we must acknowledge that nothing is more obscure to divine, than the end of
their Felicity. Quid enim ratione timemus, Aut cupimus? quid tam dextro pede
concipis, ut te conatus noa paeniteat votique pera^i.
Every one in particular propounds to himself a happiness according to his own
Fancy, and no man finds himself contented in the possession of that for which
he had so fervently wished. We be (...) down the Idol which our own hands had
set up, we sigh after what we have not; and Death is as necessary to terminate
our desires, as to finish our Life. I see no greater mark of the imbecility of
our Nature, than this inconstancy which never forsakes us. The most moderate
propound to themselves a Good proportionable to their Merits, Reason permits
them to pretend to it; and when they have obtained it, they consider it but as
a degree to mount to something higher; it is now their desires are inflamed,
their hopes augmented, and their cares redouble their access. Princes think
themselves not happy, because they are not Kings; and Kings cannot live
contented, because they are not alone. It is recorded of Caesar and Pompey,
that as the one could not admit of a Superior, the other could not suffer an
Equal. We are certainly extremely unjust, to attribute Inconstancy and
Blindness to Fortune. Is there any levity can exceed that of being never
content, or a blindness like to that which cannot perceive what is convenient,
nor what can terminate its desires? We pass this Life in coveting and pursuing
Riches; and when old age deprives us of the use thereof, it increases in us the
desire of possessing them. I have formerly said, that we ought to have
wherewithal to supply our wants and our pleasures, and have no intention to
make an Encomium on Poverty, or lead my Friends to the Hospital, but to Examine
well the Conduct of such as are reduced to the Extremity of seeking their
Fortune.

I have, as I conceive, sufficiently proved, that a Gentleman born Rich, ought
to quit his Village, and come to Court. The Enterprise may be resolved on
without any difficulty: for in departing from his House, he looks upon it as a
place where he shall be always welcome, if his hopes and designs are
frustrated elsewhere; and he will do nothing against the order of Nature, if
from a mean beginning he raises himself to a higher pitch. It belongs to none
but God to draw Beings out of nothing. A most prudent Conduct is to be observed
by a private Gentleman, destitute of all other Succor but his own Virtue, to
make such a mean Fortune, as can establish the repose of his Family, and
maintain him in his old age. It would be impossible to treat of this Subject in
particular, unless I should examine all the professions of the World, which is
an Enterprise that would surpass my forces as much as it would my Patience; and
I shall be well satisfied with my performances, if I can render my self
Serviceable to these of my own condition; my princ^pal design being to write
for the Gen^^y.

CHAP. II. That Merit is proper to all men; and that the Nobility ought to
desire only a Monarchical Peace.
IT is evident to the World, that Nature, which comprehends all men under the
same kind, puts no difference between them, when she gives them their
Existence, she takes as little pains in the Womb of a Queen to frame a King, as
in that of a Beggar to produce a Wretch. Providence which guides her in her
Operations, does not constrain her Motions: Since the beginning of the world
she has taken the same Course; and the men which she has engendered among our
Antipodes, are born after the same manner that we are. Nevertheless to form the
society of a civil Life, we are forced to forget our proper Principle, and to
overthrow that of Nature. To make an Union of the State, we have divided our
own Conditions; to extend the public Liberty, we have confined our own
particular Freedom; and that we might not become Slaves to our Enemies abroad,
we are necessitated to receive Masters at home. This default proceeds from the
weakness of our Senses; which being not of one accord, ought necessarily to be
united under the will of one person. I had (...) enlarge this Discourse, if
(...) would not run so far from my Subject * I will only say, that it has made
the wisest conclude, that a Monarchical Government is the best and safest. (The
Philosopher adds, When the Prince is the justest and the wisest of his
Subjects. For my part, I am of opinion that it is the only form to be wished
for by the Nobility: For in no other st^te can they expect Happiness and
Preferment. Notwithstanding I am very sensible, that Aristocracy had never
been, but for them. And so it ought to be considered as their Center, but to
take it aright, the Nobles in an Aristocratical State are only obliged to
their Birth for their Fortunes. If they govern the people, they are strictly
bound by their own Laws: Their manner of living is full of grimaces, and
requires great circumspection; if they advance themselves, it is more by the
antiquity of their Family than their proper Virtue, and whatsoever Service they
do for their Republic, they have no great share in its Fortune.

On the contrary, in a Monarchical State, as Ki^g^ do not acknowledge any Power
above them, but their Justice, and their Reason; they have right to prefer,
either those that deserve it, or those that please them: They make a Gentleman
of a Yeoman, and a great Lord of a Gentleman; their Benefits breed emulation in
their Subjects, and awaken a Virtue in private persons to aspire to Honor with
Justice.

Nobility has in all Ages been the reward of generous Exploits performed in the
War. It was by this means that Princes always engaged the most Valiant in their
Service; and this just recompense of Honor, which was but personal, descended
afterward to their Posterity, and became Hereditary to Infants, who through
the imbecility of their age, were not capable of deserving it. Therefore men
cannot deny, but it is a great advantage to be born a Gentleman; and that
Virtue appears with a greater luster in persons of a good Extraction: But I
suppose there is no other reason for it, than a Custom we have to believe it
so. We are easily convinced, that our Progenitors have raised themselves; but
received Customs have such a Tyrannical power, that they force even our very
Judgments. For to examine things very well, what has Nature done more for the
Nobleman than for the Yeoman? Nobilitas sola est atque unica Virtus.
and who can perceive any difference between them, when they suck the Breasts
of their Nurses? If we agree that they have the same Organs, the same
Temperament, and the same Faculties of Soul and Body; where shall we find that
difference, that exalts the Nobleman to that degree, and depresses the Yeoman
so unjustly? We have an infinity of Examples, which would contradict this
opinion, and make us acknowledge, that Virtue and Merit are equally proper to
all men. When the People of Rome constrained the Senate to admit the Plebeans
to the dignity of the Consulship as well as the Patricians, the Republic did
not find its Puissance lessened, nor its Dominions limited. We do not read
that those Plebean Consals were ever more guilty of Cowardice, or had less Zeal
for their Honor than their Colleagues. If we consider the men of Learning, the
greatest Proficients have not been Noblemen. Homer's Birth was so obscure,
Smyrna, Rhodos, Colophon, Salamis, Chios, Argos, Athenae.
that after his death, the Excellency of his Works caused a great contention to
arise between Chios, Smyrna, and five other Cities, which pretended every one
to the glory thereof. When it pleases the King to Nobilitate a Yeoman by virtue
of his absolute power, do we observe that his Patent increases his Worth? I
should have a particular reverence for this Quality, if it was the recompense
of Virtue, Et genus, and proavos, and quae non fecimus ipsi, vix ca nostra voco.
rather than the chance of Succession. We enjoy with pleasure that which we
have acquired; we look kindly upon the works of our own hands, and cannot
justly attribute to our selves any thing but what we have deserved.

Nevertheless we must follow the general Custom, and not strive against the
Stream; but confess, that a man of Honor, Wit, and Merit, finds a wonderful
Impediment in bringing himself forth, when this qualification is wanting: It is
to great purpose for him to Philosop^^^ against popular Errors; he sees
himself exposed to a thousand trouble some rencounters, and finds he ha^ so
much the more cause to be wa^ his condition, as he has been to well educated.
If he has much worth, if he possesses a great Soul he cannot conceive mean
projects his politeness cannot accommodat^ it self with the rudeness of those
o^ his own rank, and his Virtue cannon suffer obscurity; yet he lives in the
Court as in an Enemies Country (...) he finds there more contempt for his
Quality, than esteem for his Merit; and is commonly obliged to embrace meaner
Sentiments, hiding his lofty humor under the Cassoc^ of a Priest, or the Gown
of a Law^ yer; this is the only means left him whereby he can put himself in
a^ good a condition as those who formerly scorned his Company. Thi^ is a Lion,
who chains up himself or to speak more properly, a Wis^ man, who understands
his true Interest. The War in my opinion would not be more proper for him than
the Court: Our Nation cannot bear Yoke, that is not painted or gilt. ^e are
persuaded, that they who ^mmand us, are born to com^and; and that we owe
nothing (...) our equals, but all to our Su^riors. This opinion of the peo^e,
with Time, has created the Gran^ur of the Nobility. A person of ^uality has no
difficulty to make ^^mself be obeyed; his name sup^ies even the defect of his
Merit; ^d men do not enquire if he be complisht, when they understand (...) is
of a good Family.

CHAP. III. That our Neighbors attribute more to the Merit of a Person, than
to his Birth; and of the Profitableness of Commerce.
OUr Neighbors do not observe this Maxim: We have seen in our days, great Men
raised from the dregs of the People in the service of the Emperor and the King
o^ Spain. In Germany, Aldringher from a Clerk became a General of the Army;
John de Waert from a Servant was made General of the Emperors Cavalry; and
Beck a Carrie^ at Brussels obtained the principal Employs of the Low Countries.
These Examples which are not very frequent in any place, are almost unknown
among us; so that although one may happen sometimes, it ough^ not to turn a
wise man cut of the beaten road. I mean, that the Employs of the Church and the
Law ought to make the profession of (...) man of the middle Rank, who has
Wealth and Wit above those of his ^ondition: but if he has a more ^ean Soul,
Traidng is the way to ^ake his Fortune. I have often re^ark'd among men of
Sense, that (...) is a very rare thing to find any ^^cht by the excellency of
the Arts ^hey have possessed. The greatest ^ainters, and the most famous
Staturies, have got more glory than pro^it by their works. The admirable
Players on the Lute, and the most ^xcellent Musicians, spend their lives ^n
diverting the curious, and commonly let slip the occasions of ma^ing their
Fortune.

I speak this to show that the Common people are not unhappy in their
^ondition, seeing there are so many ways of bettering it: I speak not of ^he
Treasurers, nor of the Farmers of ^he Crown-Revenues; if they take ^ot a Course
that is the most just, I ^m well assured, that it is the shortest and the most
infallible: These are Mushrooms which grow up in one ^ight: Their progress
toward Wealth, has something in it of the nature of Enchantments: The people
hate them, rail against them, and curse them; but notwithstanding all this,
they make themselves Great Lords: And if it happens, that their Children have
any wit, they advance them to the most honorable Charges: they marry them into
great Families, and assume to themselves the name of one of their best Manors:
Time obliterates that of their Fathers, and the People forget the oppressions
they have undergone by them.

I cannot but with discontent consider the posture of a younger Brother of a
good House, who has naturally a generous and noble Soul, reduced to the
necessity of seeking his Fortune and Livelihood; his Quality, which seems to
make all his Glory, is an Embarras which opposes it self to his happiness, and
obstructs those ways, which the Laws set open to Yeomen to acquire Riches.
Among others, I find this to be very severe, which forbids them Trafick; it
seems to me to be grounded upon very weak principles, to be so absolute: For to
prohibit the use of a thing, it is necessary, that it must either be bad in it
self, or produce bad effects. And can we blame Commerce as vicious, without
offending all the Nations of the World? Is there any thing so solidly
established among men? and with so Universal a consent? The usefulness thereof
is so great, that we cannot abolish it, without molesting the whole Society of
a civil State: It Is that, which peoples the great Cities; it is that, which
brings forth Wealth and Plenty in all Nations, which gives Strangers a
courteous reception, and furnithes us with all things necessary. Are these the
Effects so unworthy of a Gentleman's employ? If we should restrain the Nobility
to the only profession of Arms, is there any thing which can accommodate it
self so well therewith as Trafick? These two things joined together, have made
the Virtue of many great men appear to admiration; the memory of which, will
never die. Do we know any more bold attempts, than the V^yages or Paul Der^ise.
of Drake, and of Magelan? Do we read of any more resolute Enterprises, than
those of Pacheco, of Albuquerque, and of Suarez in America? If these
Illustrious Merchants had not made a discovery of this New World, should we not
have been destitute of the most curious things we now enjoy in Europe? Could
they have framed such great Designs, without having great Souls? Could they
have made them succeed so happily, if their Courages had not been above the
greatest Perils, and their Resolutions proof against the most extreme
difficulties? Is there any better means of carrying the Glory and Names of our
Kings even to the other end of the World? The Republic of Venice, which has
subsisted above twelve hundred years, has ever looked upon Commerce, as the
Basis which sustains its greatness, notwithstanding it is governed by the
Nobles, who have not banished this from among them: And this wise Policy has so
well succeeded, that it has put the State in a condition to defend it self
against the Forces of the most redoubtable Monarch of the World. It Is upon the
same foundation the Hollanders have erected into a Republic their little
corner of the Earth, and have so well disputed their Interests, that the House
of Austria, as puissant as it is, was constrained to treat with them as with
Sovereigns, and renounce all their Rights of Superiority. This Democratical
State, governed by good Merchants, has it not given sufficient proofs by its
Conquests in diverse Places, that a Gentleman may very well be a Merchant,
seeing that a Merchant equalizes without trouble the worthiest actions of a
Gentleman? But if this Profession be so much beneath Noblemen, that it is a
disgrace for them to follow it, why do they serve in the Armies of these
Merchants, whom they acknowledge to be their Masters, and receive their Pay? Is
it not a great extravagance to obey (in the Indies and in Holland) those as
Masters, whom we do not esteem to be our Equals in France? Let the Laws enjoin
what they will, Commerce is so necessary, that they cannot hinder any man from
being a Merchant. The relation is so just between the Buyer and the Seller,
that if you take away the one, you destroy the other. When a Jockey sells me a
Horse, he is not more a Merchant for selling it, than I am for buying it. And
if I sell the Corn of my fields, or the Sheep of my fold, I am a Merchant of
Corn and Sheep, seeing that men so call as well such as sell, as those that
buy. They may tell me, that there is a necessity for converting the Fruits of
our Lands into money, that we might purchase other things, which they do not
produce. I confess it: and is it agreater baseness to sell again the Corn,
which I had bought of my Neighbor a good peny-worth, to gain thereby, than to
put off that of my own growing to get money instead thereof? The Fruits ought
to change their condition in the Lands of Noblemen; and Nature should give them
some prerogative above those of the Yeomen, that therein might be found this
difference, which is really nothing else but the effect of our grippleness.
Nevertheless men cease to be Gentlemen, when they begin to be Merchants; and
our Customs are not contented with bestowing the greatest Wealth of the Family
on the Eldest Sons; but after having rendered the Youngest, poor, they even deny
them the power of acquiring a subsistence, of which they have deprived them.

CHAP. IV. What a Gentleman ought to practice, who seeks his Fortune in the War.
TO say that to drive them from their Houses, is a means to send them to the
War; the consequence dees not always hold good. Nil habet infaelix paupertas
durius in se, Quam quod ridiculos homines facit. Juven.
Such a on lives unhappily in the Country, who would serve as a man of Courage
in the Army, if he had an equipige and Money whereon to subsist. Poverty has a
certain force, which depresses the courage of some, and makes others desperate:
those whose minds are heightened by their Birth and education, cannot
condescend without great regret to list themselves under Captains, who are not
so good as themselves. This way of raising their Fortune is tedious, painful
and uncertain, but necessary to those who have never studied, nor rendered
themselves expert at their Exercises. I would advise a Gentleman who is reduced
to this point, to seek the favor of some considerable Officer of the Army, and
gain him to be his Patron; this will shorten the way which he is to keep, to
arrive at Military Charges, without which I should esteem him very unhappy to
serve. Valor loves not the Crowd; it seeks the open Day, that it might be
seen. I have known Soldiers, who have made attempts desperate in the highest
degree, which were never mentioned but in their own Company. The scope of a
Gentleman ought not to be to gain Esteem only, but also to make his Fortune by
his Sword: So that he should omit nothing whereby he might obtain such Charges,
as may expose him to the sight of all people; to the end that his Valor being
known, he might aspire to those recompenses which he has deserved. The art is
to apply himself diligently to his business, to persuade himself that he may
obtain the chief Employs, by passing through the Inferior; to learn the
general and particular Orders; to remark carefully the Encamping and Decamping
of the Army, the forms of Battle-array, the Storming of places; to be with the
Engineers at their Circumvallations, at the construction of Fortresses, and at
the opening of Trenches; to enter into the Mines and Counter-mines; to instruct
himself of every thing concerning the Artillery; to accompany the General
Officers, when they go to take a view of the places they design to attaque, or
the Pass through which the Army must march; to apply himself seriously to the
study of Geometry and Fortification, joining the Theory with the Practice: and
to serve himself advantageously of all these, Autfuit, aut veniet; nihil est
presentis in illa, Morsque minus pa^^, quam mora mortis habet.
he must accustom himself to think, that Death is not an evil, that it meets as
infallibly with the Cowards as the Valiant, and that it is but a moment which
terminates our fears as well as our hopes. When he shall be advanced to the
Charge of a Captain, he ought to look upon that but as one degree to ascend to
that of a Master of the Camp; and resolve to go as far as Worth and Valor can
lead a Gentleman: but he must ground his hopes upon the knowledge which he has
acquired, and which can render him worthy of so great a Fortune. Ignorance
hinders often a Soldier from propounding to himself any considerable employ;
he must understand the function of a Captain, before he can justly wish to be
one. When we perceive our own forces, Seasit vim q^^que saam.
our Soul has a certain vigorous quality, which causes us to embrace the means
of arriving at our ends. It assumes a fierceness, by which she surmounts all
the difficulties which ^ecur; she Arms her self with a resolution, which causes
her equally to despise the opposition both of Toils and Perils: for without
doubt, by resolving steadfastly on that which we undertake, we make a mighty
progress in difficult matters, and reunite (...) powers of our minds, by
which they are also rendered fertile in inventions: From hence proceeds that
holdness accompanied with a confidence of succeeding well in our designs,
which wise men esteem so necessary, and which Religion it self d^mands for the
making of Miracles. It is upon this sure Foundation, that P^mpey the Great
said, By knocking with his Foot, he would make Soldiers spring out of the
Earth. And Caesar not regarding the most violent ragings of the Sea and Winds,
animated his Pilot, by telling him, that he had Caesar and his Fortune aboard.
Boldness and Resolution are necessary in a Martial man; the one confronts and
seeks dangers, the other is not dejected by any bad accidents that persecute
it. A^daces Fortu^a juvat, ti^^d^^q, ^epel^^.
Great men have all been adventurous: Alexander enterprized the Conquest of the
World with 30000 men: Caesar with 40000 took the City of Alesia belonging to
the Gauls, defended by 80000 Combatants, and succored by 200000 Soldiers of
the same Nation. Edward discomfited an Army of 40000 French, with 7000 English,
and took King John Prisoner. And King Gustavus Adolphus in our days, made a
descent into Pomerain with 8000 Swedes, to fight against all the Forces of the
Empire. These mighty Successes are not always the effects of Fortune: the
Virtue of those, who make the Enterprises, has often the greatest share in
them: And it is very apparent, that they are grounded upon some reason: For as
great men penetrate more profoundly into the Causes ^f things, so they discover
more clearly the possibility of their effects, which were enveloped under
contrary appearances. From these prodigious examples we may descend to these
particular Reasonings, and affirm, that a Gentleman, after he has acquired the
Sciences necessary for his profession, ought continually to aspire to great
Employs, and to have more Zeal to deserve them, than care to preserve his Life:
If he fixes his eyes upon them as the end of his hopes, he cannot live without
obtaining them of Fortune; and will not wax old in the Army without an
honorable Charge, because his courage sollicites him to Enterprise, not
valuing the dangers and other obstacles that oppose themselves to his designs.

CHAP. V. That the Fortune of a Gentleman depends on the good or bad choice
which he makes of a Master.
IF the Peace be so universal, that he cannot get any Military employ; and if
the necessity of his affairs, or his Passion of advancing his Fortune, causes
him to abandon his home, and get himself a Service; it is not to be doubted but
his happiness will depend from the choice which he shall make of a Master. To
attend on a Lord, who is not capable of advancing our Fortune, is the same as
to embark our selves in a leaky Vessel. And to discern this, we must endeavor
to understand his Interest and Abilities: for I may assert, that if he be
destitute of an Employment, and has no good parts, he is not proper to render a
Gentleman happy. We reason idly and sottishly, to persuade our selves, that he
being rich, will recompense us: Never any Ingenious man built his Fortune upon
the Purse of his Master. If he be a Great Lord, his Quality obliges him to
great Expenses, and consequently puts him in a very bad condition of making
such considerable Presents as may enrich a Gentleman; and if he be not rich, we
can expect no benefit in his service. Liberality is a Saint, which has no
Altars in the World; and the greatest part of Noblemen have less knowledge of
her, than private Gentlemen. The Respect which is given them from their
Infancy, persuades them, that every thing is created for them; they receive
services as deb^s that are paid them, and not as gifts that are presented them:
they believe that their Bread has the faculty of making all those slaves that
eat thereof; they exact a Reverence as insupportable to those that render it,
as it is unjustly rendered to them that receive it; and the quality of a
Domestic makes them frequently forget the Merits of such as serve them:
Neither are they contented themselves to treat them without any respect; but
they force them sometimes to give respect to other persons much inferior, both
in Merit and Extraction to them, who have nothing recommendable, but Wealth,
which exempts them from living in subjection: Their Masters will permit these
to sit down and be covered, whilst they must stand behind them with their hats
off. One can hardly distinguish them in this posture from Valets de Chamber,
and they are sometimes abused like Villains. It is very hard for a poor
Gentleman to undergo all these grievous disasters. Subjection is an evil which
draws on a thousand others after it; and therefore I do not admire, that it
should be so inconsistent with Worth and Virtue. The Romans fought Six hundred
years to win their liberty; and the Switzers and Hollanders have hazarded all
to regain theirs. I esteem it the Sovereign good of this life, when Fortune
suffers us to enjoy it without want or ambition. From hence I conclude, that we
ought never to engage it, but with a probability of reassuming it one day with
great advantage, after having faithfully served.

CHAP. VI. That he ought to establish his esteem in the mind of his Master,
before he enters into his service: and how he should bring that to pass.
IT is very difficult, that such a design should prosper without the
assistance of our Friends; forasmuch as our Worth ought to be known before our
Person: it being always advantageous, to make our selves to be desired. It Is
through this fair gate we should make our entry into Great Families; and it is
in this that our Friends can render us good Offices, if they make a beautiful
draught of our Extraction, and Qualifications. It is a vanity to have Worth,
and want an Address to gain the R^putation thereof. Hidden Virtues are
Treasures which enrich nobody; therefore to make a beneficial discovery
thereof, we must procure the friendship of those who have the greatest
Authority in the Provinces, where we would settle our selves. Among the
Nobility, there are ever some wise, and more ingenious than others. Among the
Clergy, some more learned, who pretend to instruct the rest. And in Cities, are
Officers of good repute and credit; when once we are known to them, and they
have thought us worthy of their approbation, without doubt they will give a
good Character of us to such as know us not. Their Testimonies and Reports will
make us pass for what we are, and in a little time will extend our Reputation
through the whole Province. The Multitude, Ducimur ut nervis alienis mobile
lignum.
which examines nothing, consents presently to those who have the greatest
Vogue among them: and seeing our Esteem is formed by the number, and we have no
other opportunity of manifesting our Parts in public; Prudence commands us to
make use of these Trumpets, to spread abroad our good Qualifications. Thus the
minds of men being possessed with a great opinion of our Worth, a Great Lord, who
understands his own Interests, believes himself as much obliged to entertain
us, as we are to serve him. Another Reason is, that every one considers himself
in the first place, and that both Glory and Profit will redound to him by being
attended by an Ingenious person; and especially if he has great Employments,
forasmuch as being obliged to give out many Commissions, which depend on his
Ministry, he takes pleasure to entrust them with understanding persons, who can
give a good account thereof: so that there happens a certain connection between
the Master and Servant, which frequently produces Friendship in the one, and
Profit for the other. If we acquit our selves worthily of an ordinary Employ,
they are easily inclined to bestow a better upon us. Employments are linkt one
to another; our Sufficiency and Conduct turn the Wheel, which raises them in
our favor, and we become rich without impoverishing our Masters. Their
services resemble Flambo's, which give light to many, without diminishing any
thing of their heat or brightness. Our Fidelity and Affection joined to the
acknowledgement of the favors which they have procured us, make them rejoice
at our prosperity; they look upon it as one of their fairest Productions,
without desisting from giving us some means of increasing it; forasmuch as it
contributes to their Glory, without putting them to any expense or charge.
Experience teaches us, that there is no person absolutely dis-interested; and
the most generous are never to that degree, as to do good out of the
consideration of Virtue alone. Thus Wise men for the obtaining of a Courtesy,
find out some way to interess their Benefactors in their own concern. The very
Countrymen who follow the light of Nature only, perceiving themselves equally
destitute of Abilities and Merits, have their recourse to presents, Placatur
bouis Jupiter ipse datis. Ovid.
thereby to render themselves acceptable to those of whose help they stand in
need; they know by experience that gifts excite Charity: and if I may with
permission speak it, the Prayers both for the Living and for the Dead, would
not be so frequent, if our bounty did not engage those that make them. By this
Discourse we see, that there are none but the services which we render to Lords
of great Charges, that can be advantageous to us; and all others are incapable
of promoting our Interest. The time we spend with them, serves only to bring us
to an unhappy Old Age, Dat libera cuique Fata Deus propriisque fluunt mortalia
causis. Borb.
full of inconveniences and afflictions. If we fall into this fault, let us
accuse our own folly and indiscretion, and not complain of Fortune. If we had
discretion enough to penetrate into Causes, we might prognosticate their
Effects, and should not aim at any thing above that, which they can naturally
produce.

CHAP. VII. Whether it be better to serve a very understanding Master, or one
of no great wit.
THere are some popular errors, which have gained such Authority by the number
of those that follow them, that the wisest men find it very difficult to
unwinde themselves out of them. If a particular person consults his Friends
about the choice of a Master, they will inform him that an ingenious person (as
I suppose he is) would be happy to get into the service of a Prince or a great
Lord, very rich, and of little Wit; that he would infallibly posess himself of
his Inclinations; that he would become Master of his affairs, as also of his
Conduct; that the whole house would have dependence on him; that he would have
the disposal of his Wealth, and his Authority; and that at last he should want
only the Name and the Arms of his Master, to entitle himself the absolute
Patron of the Family. I consess that this proposition at first glance, seems to
be very probable; but let us examine it strictly, and nearer at hand, and we
shall gather from thence far different consequences.

There is nothing so opposite to a man of understanding as an ignorant person,
and consequently more inconsistant: the property of a soft man, is to cashire,
or to fear one that is more ingenious than himself. This being supposed, I see
no Friendship that can be made between two Subjects so disagreeing: But if it
happens through the secret operation of some sympathy, that this Lord has an
inclination for such a person, and this incomprehensible Passion of the Soul
renders him Master of his Heart, and confident of his Secrets; it will not
continue long, before he remembers himself, that he lives as under a Guardian,
and the jealousy of his Superiority will make him change his sentiments; the
lights of his Counselor dazie rather than enlighten him; his Reasons over-set
him, not persuade him; his Merit becomes a burden to him, and his Esteem
displeases him; he imagines that men attribute to his attendant the good
success of his affairs; and so will make him responsible for the events of his
Counsels; but if they have happy ends, he willingly attributes them to himself;
if unhappy, he lays the whole fault on the other's ill conduct. This Employ is
too troublesome for the benefit thereof; and I conceive, that to be able to
continue himself therein, is to have attained the greatest perfection of humane
prudence: For if by his address he causes his Master to escape some dangerous
passage, he must not expect to have any thanks therefore; because his Master is
Blind, and neither comprehends the excellency of any Counsels, not discerns of
what importance the Services are, that are rendered him i^ there can be nothing
more difficult than to take right measures with him: the most Illuminated Wits
are forced here to grope out their way, and all their address cannot secure
them from falling into disfavour.

To believe, that he may hope for any considerable advantage, when even he has
acquired all the credit with his Master he wished for, is an error which ought
to be rejected, as very prejudicial. Men of little sense are not capable of
great Virtues. It belongs not to feeble and Vulgar Souls to make efforts, which
may elevate them above other men. The Virtues are habits of the Soul, by the
which our intellect is rendered fit to conceive well, and to act well; and he
who has no Wit, being not capable of reasoning well, is so much the less of
doing well. If this Proposition is false, we must necessarily overthrow the
principles of Morality; and if it is true, what ought we to expect from a man
that cannot be liberal, seeing that Liberality is a Virtue, the acquifition
whereof surpasses the power of his Wit? and it is so much the more out of his
reach, as it is contrary to the Sentiments of the multitude, whose most fervent
Passion is to possess Wealth, and never to part with it: and indeed Liberality
is the effort of a Soul, who has in it the sparks of all other Virtues. It is
so noble, that it seems to have been made for Heroes alone: She presides as a
Queen among Courageous Spirits; she keeps in her Retinue, Justice and
Generosity; and Prudence marches before her, to give her light, and to conduct
her. When men know her Origin, they do not admire that she abhors common
Souls: to give without Judgment, is not Liberality; we must know how to
discern the worth of those on whom it is exercised. This Virtue is the Sister
of Charity; the one rewards the Merit of the Virtuous, the other comforts the
Misery of the Afflicted.

On the contrary, when an ingenious person falls into the hands of a wise and
understanding Prince, he can never want satisfaction. It Is the property of
homogeneous things to unite themselves together; we love naturally those who
have inclinations like to our own, or have some relation to us. A Learned man
takes great delight to be with Sonolars; a Warlike man with Shoudiers; a
Merchant with those that trafick. There are none but Universal Wits agreeable
to the whole World, because they have the advantage of transforming themselves
into all shapes without trouble, as Protheus: They are Lawyers in company of
Advocates, Divines with Doctors of the Church, Captains and Engineers with men
of Martial Affairs; so that they seem to be born and bred to all the
Professions of a Civil life. As these Wits are rare, so men cannot esteem them
sufficiently; but notwithstanding they have received from Nature these
admirable dispositions to acquire an extraordinary Merit, yet they obtain it
not without vast pains. Long studies are requisite, frequent Speculations,
learned Conferences, painful Voyages, to expose themselves to many Perils, and
to have a consummate experience of all the Professions of the World; and then
must make great haste to arrive at the perfection before the age of fifty years.

CHAP. VIII. That the sublime Sciences do rather prejudice, than advantage a
Gentleman of the Sword. What he ought to know: And that Application is
necessary to succeed well in all Affairs.
LEarning has somewhat of the nature of a Dropsy; Quo plus sunt potae, plus si
tiuntur aquae.
it causes an alteration in those that love it, and sometimes puffs them up:
The more men know, the more they would know: The Sciences are so linkt one to
another, that the first draws on the second, and that the rest that follow.
This happens, because we know nothing but by our Senses, which present to us
the Images of things successively. Plato assured us, that our Souls were
naturally knowing, and that the Objects, which made their impressions on our
Senses, served only to display the consus'd notions which were innate in us. As
when men present us with two bedies of the same matter, of the same form, and
of the same weight, we say, they are equal; and this relation which is found
within us, makes us remember and conclude at the same instant, that there is an
Universal term called Equality: And when we behold things which appear
beautiful, we think there is such a term as is called Beauty. These inferences
and consequences cannot be made, but by successive gradations, which lead us
from one Science to another; and as they always remount toward Universal
terms, they carry our understanding so far, that it can never meet with limits
to its curiosity.

This Proposition has often caused me to make reflections upon this, that
sublime Wits are more commonly rich in Esteem and Reputation, than in the gifts
of Fortune: And I conceive the reason to be, that the Powers of the greatest
Soul in the World are bounded, and have nothing of Infinity; but when she
addicts her self to the Sciences with a vehement desire to comprehend them; she
applies her self so eagerly to that she is about, that her Speculations possess
her entirely; and the more force and light she has, the more she abstracts them
from matter, spiritualizing the Objects of her knowledge: From hence it comes,
that being flown above things purely material, she meets with Charms in her
Speculations, which hinder her from descending, to reduce into practice those
things she has conceived. The Cassock is comparably more suitable to these
soating Wits, than the Sword; because it furnishes them with many occasions of
making themselves admired. The Pulpit would cause them to be followed by all
people; and we seldom see a famous Preacher grow gray without a Benefice. The
Bar also might prove very advantageous to them. Esteem and Wealth do
continually accompany their eloquence: Moreover, they have the satisfaction to
speak before such as are as well able to judge of their Learning, as of their
Frocess.

But to consider it aright, to what purpose serves this lofty Science in a
Military man, but to render him poor, by hindering him from applying himself to
his Fortune? What profit can he draw from the Philosophy of Aristotle and
Plato, or from the Rhetoric of Quintilian? I do very well approve of his
studying them until he comes to the age of Sixteen or Seventeen; forasmuch as
before that time he is not fit for any thing. But when he shall have acquired
that at the College which a good Scholar might have learnt, he should share
out his time, and become a good husband thereof, allotting part to the
Exercises which are proper for him, and part to the Sciences which are useful
to him. He should learn the use of his Arms, to manage his Horse, Geometry,
Fortification, Geography; the Latin and French History, the Art of Designing;
and if he can, he may add to these the Latin, German, Italian and Spanish
Tongues. These Qualifications are sufficient for a Military person, and can
also render any Private man agreeable greeable and useful at the same time to
any great Lord. The sublime Sciences are too tedious and too difficult; and I
dare affirm, that they endamage more than they advantage any person who will
not wear the Cassock; forasmuch, as I have said, they are inconsistant with the
application to those things that should render him excellent in his Profession;
and being out of the reach of great Lords, they value them not, because they
will never give themselves the trouble of understanding them.

And indeed, Age quod agis.
the application of which I speak, is so necessary for every one in his
Profession, that it is impossible to succeed well without it: Pluribus intentus
minor est ad singula Sen^us.
for the faculties of our Soul are too feeble to grasp many things at the same
time; she has strength enough to contain but one, and particularly when she
follows her own natural inclination. The proof of this will appear more clearly
by the consideration of one of a mean spirit, who has no other lights, but
those of Nature and common sense. If a Citizen designs to make himself Rich by
Trafick, he will learn Arithmetic, and the Prizes of Merchandises; he will
inform himself of those things that can be bought cheap in one place, and sold
dear in another: All his thoughts will be full of these remarks; his
ratiocination will gather no other consequences from his discourses: his
ordinary conversation will be with those of his own profession; he will not
perplex himself with the subtle Arguments of the School; he will not trouble
himself to seek any thing in the History of Alexander, or in Caesar's
Commentaries. His whole Library consists of his Vespers and Mattins to say his
Prayers to God, and his Almanac to know the time of Fayrs. He will use an
ordinary prudence to escape unhappy accidents, and beware of Cheats and
Bankrupts. He will propound to himself an incorruptible fidelity to gain
Credit, and at length he will become Rich, without the assistance of any other
Science, than that which he shall have learned from his own Reason and
Experience. A Farmer less Spiritual yet than a Citizen; who is born with a
Plough in his hand, and has never learnt any thing but to cultivate the Ground,
and to feed Cattle, shall advance his Fortune sooner by hiring a Farm, than a
Philosopher with all his Notions and admirable Speculations. From hence we may
conclude, the greatest Wits, and the sublimest Sciences are not requisite for
obtaining the goods of Fortune; but the middle are far the most proper for this
purpose; and the art consists in choosing well his profession, and in resigning
himself entirely up to it, and without incerruption: the great and sublime
Genius's are as Diamonds, which all the World esteem, both for their luster and
their rarity; but they serve only for Ornaments. Aristotle says, that they are
not good but for themselves, and finds them very unfit for the Government of
Republics; because their elevation has no correspondence with the weakness of
others, and consequently cannot form Laws, which may be accommodated to their
Infirmity. If he excludes them from the Government upon this account, I may
more justly say, that they are also incapable of Obedience and Subjection, and
therefore in vain would they seek their Fortune in the Retinue of Princes and
Great Lords. Nequid quamsapere sapientem, qui sibi ipst prodesse non queat.
It Is not for the Instruction of these people that I write, I know well that
they are above my Rules; they should teach the World (if they think it fit) how
to feed themselves with Arguments, Consequences, and Speculations. I stand in
need of more material, and more sensible Substances, which are better
proportionable to what I am. I endeavor to dissuade my Friends from the choice
of unprofitable Masters, and persuade them to the study of those Sciences,
which may introduce them into the Road of Fortune: and for this, I require but
a very ordinary and mean spirit, who diligently applies himself to please his
Master, who gives him his advice with all submission, and the deference that is
due to him; who can punctually execute his orders, who is incorruptible in his
Trust, who loves his Interest and his Service above all other things in the
World, who does nothing with regret, who appears always well-affected, and
ready to serve and obey. These Qualifications are much more essential then
Rhetoric and Philosophy; yet this will not make me of the Sentiment of one of
our Duke's and Peers, who believed that a Gentleman offended his Nobility when
he spoke Latin. For my part, I do not only approve of understanding it, but
moreover conceive it very difficult for one to pretend to the Quality of an
accomplished person, without having some knowledge also of the Arts and
Sciences. I seek mediocrity in all things, and do not pretend, that he ought to
soar so high in these sublime Speculations, as not to descend again; that would
be to undertake a Voyage to the Globe of the Moon, from which he will reap no
other benefit than the dangers of its Influences. So I cannot suffer, that he
should be ignorant in common Affairs: for seeing that his Birth exposes him to
the conversation of Great Lords, he ought to speak pertinently and properly
before them. Would it not be ridiculous to place Nurenburgh in Italy, and
Florence in Germany? to say that the Bucentaure is the Duke of Venice, that
Julius Caesar and Charlemain were intimate Friends, that Alexander was unhappy
in dying without Confession? If he discourses of the War, or is to render an
account of a Siege, or the circumstances of a Battle; is there any thing more
shameful than to be ignorant of the terms? If he discourse of Hunting, or the
exercises of the Academy, and cannot speak properly thereof is he not obliged
to be silent, or else must become a Laughing Stock to those that hear him? This
sort of Ignorance is not pardonable, because he ought to know what concerns his
Profession. I wish also that he had read the ancient and modern Poets, and
could make Verses in our Language; provided that this Study be his
divertisement only, and not his business: For this Gentility of spirit gives
him often a great advantage in good conferences, and is not altogether unuseful
in gaining the favor of Ladies: Mediocribus esse Poetis, Non Dii, non homines,
non concessere Columnae.
but this unhappiness attends it, that it wholly ruins his Repute, when he
makes an open profession thereof, unless he does excel in the art: Whether it
arises from Folly, or from Reason, it is a custom so ancient, and so
universally established, that it is impossible to abolish it; so that we should
make use of this Talent with great circumspection. A man well accomplished, and
of a good disposition, is happy, if he meets with a Master that delights in
Learning: This is a means of diverting him, and gaining his Friendship: he does
not every day find occasions of rendering him great and important Services. We
seldom see our selves in a condition of saving our Masters Life, or of
negotiating his affairs so discreety, that our management thereof may procure
him the most honorable Charges of the State. These are chances of an
extraordinary happiness, which are not often in our power: but if we have any
ingenuity, we may render our selves agreeable by our complaisance, insinuate our
selves into his thoughts, dispel his Melancholy, and prevent his Orders by our
diligence. Great Services make a fairer show, and are more obliging and
advantageous; he that neglects the performance thereof, passes for one that is
Ignorant or Treacherous.

Honor and Justice, which engage us therein, diminish in some measure the
resentments which Masters ought to have of them, because we our selves are
interessed therein by our own glory: But these little intrigues of pleasing
being continued and often reiterated, are received as Tokens of our inclination
and friendship, and make a mavelous Progress in the mind of the Lord, who
knows how to judge well thereof. It is impossible that he should refrain from
having a friendship for us, seeing that friendship is a motion of Nature, which
derives its Origin and principle from things that please us, and are presented
to our judgment under the appearances of good. I say that this ^ffect of our
complaisancy is infallible, supposing always that we have to do with an
Ingenious person, who understands something; otherwise we loose our time and
our labor. Ignorance to the Soul, is as deafness to the Far; tell it wonders
or impertinencies, you are alike understood, and alike esteemed. Men cannot
have an esteem for unknown things: and it is the greatest misfortune that can
befall a well-accomplisht Gentleman, to be engaged in the service of a Master
of this nature: it is better to be concerned with the wickedest Ingenious man,
than any Innocent fool: The one is moved, either by the consideration of the
pleasure you do him, or by that of some other interest; but the other escapes
from you, when you think you hold him the fastest: He frustrates all the
designs of Prudence and Reason: He is a Quick-sand, which has no solid
Foundation; and as he does not distinguish m^n but by their Fortune, and by
their Habits, they ought not to look upon him, but with Galileo's Spectacles.

CHAP. IX. That he ought to love his Master; and how he should demean himself
toward him.
I Have made this Repetition, because it is of great importance to avoid this
kind of subjection; and that which remains to be spoken concerning the Conduct
of a Gentleman with his Master, presupposes that he has made a better choice.
It is certain, that it appertains not to all people, to form indissoluble bonds
of Friendship: This Sacred knot of civil Society, requires many other
circumstances, of which all the world is not capable. Goodness is the best
foundation, and the pleasure of mutual Offices and of Conversation makes the
continuance thereof as long as the life of them whom it has united. I am
sensible that men add hereto the equality of persons, without which it is
somewhat defective: And so we cannot properly call this goodwill Friendship,
that happens between Master and Servant. But I answer, that this inequality of
Birth and Fortune does not hinder true Friendship, providing that the respect
of the Inferior tempers it accordingly. It would be a sort of tyranny, not to
love him whom we esteem worthy of our favor, and an intolerable injustice to
deprive a particular person of the most delightful function of his life. For my
part I assert, that men may love their Master, and ought so to do, if they
would be beloved again. This being supposed, Reason requires, that the
Qualities of which I have spoken, meet in the bond of this Friendship, but more
apparently in the person of the Attendant, than in the Master; because the one
must court it by his services, and purchase it by the effica^ie of his Merit,
not being able to possiss it but as a favor; and the other bestows it as a
Gratuity, which depends more from his generosity, than his acknowledgements.
From this Principle I infer, that the Attendant should be pliable and expert,
and contribute to the Pleasures of his Master; that he should do his utmost
endeavor to conform himself to his humors, and not omit any thing that will
either serve him or please him: for to succeed well in this case, he has need
of a good judgment to discern what his Master loves, and an inclination to
perform very well what he undertakes. A too profound respect is not always
advantageous; it would be more convenient if it proceeded from Reason, rather
than Fear: The Quality of a Gentleman cannot accommodate it self with that
villainous Passion of the Soul, which is suitable to none but Valets. The
respect which he renders, ought to be accompanied with a certain freedom, which
makes him known to be what he is. And a man of Sense will never exact more than
is due to him.

I have seen some, who running into the other extreme, became so familiar with
Princes, that they grew impudent: This is a manner of living, which has ever
seemed to me sottish and ridiculous, and which is never practiced but by
dizzy-headed people: it is not because it does not sometimes succeed well at
Court, and in the Families of Great Lords, and that these men do not attain
their ends; for they demand their assistance with such impudence and
importunity, that Princes cannot tell how to refuse them: And being for the
most part more brisk than judicious, they are commonly great talkers; and if
they cannot persuade, they deafen. Thus these free and prattling humors being
not capable of serious reflections, hazard all things, and are not very
sensible of contempts or abuses. They are exposed every hour to receive
affronts; if they are driven out at the door, they will enter again at the
window, and do never conceive themselves to be in disgrace. But whatsoever
swerves from the Rules of Wisdom and Modesty, cannot become a person of Honor;
his Scope is not only to make a Fortune, but to preserve his Reputation: The
most profitable course is not permitted him, when it ceases to be honorable.
Men may gather Wealth by deceit, if they are willing to be reputed Cheats; and
commonly they who are too greedy and covetous, have little regard to their
Esteem. Our Souls are not capable of two equal Passions at the same time:
Equality is contrary to their Nature, which is to transport themselves
violently toward the Object which has the predominance; and every one knows
that balances made equal, have no inclination. A wise man may have these two
Passions, provided he considers that of Honor as essential and necessary, the
other as profitable and accidental: The first cannot miss its Effect, because
it is wholly in his power, and its greatest tyranny cannot extort any thing
from him contrary to Virtue: But the Effect of the last is not wholly in his
power. Therefore we see that men do not pardon the faults which we commit
against our Honor, but they easily pity the unhappy success of our Fortune.

I have often observed, that great Wits, who have this fire which hears and
enlightens them, are subject to violent Passions; but they always weigh down
the balance on the most honest part. They say that Julius Caesar had two
principal ones, which were his Masters during the whole course of his life;
Love and Ambition. Never was any man so lascivious, and took so much pleasure
in winning the favors of Ladies; but the enraged desire of commanding was ever
predominant over that of Love; he made Glory his Idol, to which he sacrificed
his thoughts, his sleep, his cares, his sweats, his toils, his perils, and even
his love it self. This Passion reigned so imperiously in his Soul, that it
suffered none others but as slaves which she entertained only for her own
service. For my part, I conceive that that of gaining Esteem and Honor ought
to possess the sovereign command in a Gentleman's mind, forasmuch as Wealth,
far from being contrary to his fortune, naturally produces effects, which
successfully tend to the same end: For if he aspires to the repute of more than
an ordinary man, he is obliged to perform such noble actions as may procure him
this advantage; and this necessity engages him to apply himself seriously to
the knowledge of the affairs of his own Profession, and to behave himself after
that manner, that he may not give any person an occasion of condemning his
proceedings. This is so necessary a circumstance for his fortune and his
establishment, that it makes the very foundation of all his hopes; seeing it is
manifest, that his Master cannot love him, unless he esteems him; and cannot
esteem him, unless he be convinced of his merits. They may tell me, that the
good opinion we have of things does not always oblige us to love them; and that
a rational man will acknowledge the valor of his Enemy, without bearing any
friendship toward him: but this objection is not pertinent to the subject of
which I treat, forasmuch as our enemy may conserve his good qualities, and
despise our friendship: But a Gentleman receives an advantage by his Worth,
viz. he renders himself amiable in his Masters sight, and this esteem and
friendship accompany one the other, as a shadow the body, and are ever
inseparable.

I have said that he ought to avoid Impudence, and that ridiculous familiarity,
which savours too much of the Buffoon. I do not advise him to be continually so
reserved, that he dares not speak a witty word, if he finds an opportunity of
doing it discreetly: Silence is as well a mark of stupidity as of respect. It is
sufficient if he speaks to the purpose, and never becomes importunate: he may
entertain his Master with some privacies in particular, if he perceives that
his conversation pleases him, provided he be careful to observe his distance in
the presence of strangers.

CHAP. X. That he ought to endeavor to be employed in the negotiation of his
Master's Affairs at Court; and wherefore?
THe World is a Comedy; the best Actors are those that represent their Parts
the most naturally; but the wisest do not always act Kings and Great Lords, and
are seldom the Hero's of the Play. In the Subject whereof I treat, the most
difficult is that of the inferior; he has much to act before he can hope for
any thing: his faults retort upon himself, and his spectators are ever more
ready to abuse than to favor him. It Is upon this account that he ought to keep
a continual guard against his Imprudence, as well as against the Malice of his
Enemies. A grand domestic cannot be without intrigues; and we seldom see a
Gentleman in a great Family so much respected by the others, as that they will
not pretend in the least to his Employments. It Is not sufficient to deserve
them better than his Competitours; but it is convenient to promote his Interest
with great circumspection and cunning, viz. To demand them most submissively,
or to employ the Friendship of his Masters confidents for to suggest to him
that he has deserved them. There is no Justice so exact, nor Bounty so perfect,
but receives more life by being follicited: There is no impudence in demanding
great Employs, when men know themselves to be capable of discharging them
honorably; they have always for a pretext the passion of serving their Master,
and making appear their fidelity. I do particularly esteem that Gentleman
happy, who is employed by a Great Lord to negotiate his affairs at Court; if he
has any ingenuity, he promotes his own interest together with his Masters, by
giving there great evidences of his sufficiency, which beat him out a path to
arrive at greater preferments. There are many accomplished persons who are not
unhappy, but because they are unknown; those who walk in the long Gallery
without being admitted into the Council Chamger, are like the Souls in Limbo,
who cannot go to Paradise. The most difficult thing is to make their worth
known. Kings have Eyes and Ears throughout the whole World, and their
inclinations are not more determined to confer Honors on Great Lords than on
private Gentlemen: If they have an advantage by their Birth, these have one by
their good Qualifications. Nature is not unjust in the distribution of her
favors, she seldom bestows an extraordinary Wit, on such as she causes to be
born in the midst of abundance; and she often delights to give but very little
Wealth to the most ingenious persons: But let us rather say, that is an effect
of the Wisdom of God, who orders her operations.

I once heard a paradox proved before the King of Sweden, which had great
relation to what I have asserted. A certain man extolled the mighty progress of
his Arms in Germany, and maintained in his presence that his Valor, his vast
designs, and his noble Exploits, were the most perfect works of Providence
that ever were; that without him, the house of Austria had raised it self to an
Universal Monarchy, to the utter Ruin and Extirpation of the Protestant
Religion: that it was most evident by the Miracles of his Life, that God had
Created him for the safety of Mankind; that the unlimited greatness of his
Courage was a present of God's Omnipotency, and a visible effect of his
infinite goodness. Say rather, replied the King, that it is a token of his
Wrath and Indignation: Quaedam remedia tristiora sunt ipso morbo. Plu.
If the War which I wage be a Remedy, it is more intolerable than the Disease.
God never departs from mediocrity to go into Extremes without Chastising some
body: It is a sign of his love to the people, when he inspires but ordinary
Souls into Kings. He who is not framed out of the purest mould, cannot conceive
any grand projects. Glory and Ambition leave him to his repose: if he applies
himself to his affairs, his dominion is the more happy, if he discharges
himself of his cares upon one of his Subjects, to whom he imparts his
Authority, the worst that can happen is, that he increases his Fortunes at the
expense of the Public, that he imposes some Subsidies to raise moneys whereby
to advance his Friends, and that he causes his equals to grumble, who can
hardly brook his Power; but these Evils are very inconsiderable if compared
with those which the humors of a haughty Prince produce: The excessive Passion
which he has for Renown, by destroying his own repose, does necessarily oblige
him to deprive his Subjects of the same: He cannot endure any equals in the
World; he accounts all his Enemies, who will not be his Vassals. This is a
Torrent which makes all places desolate through which it slides: and by
carrying his Arms as far as his Hopes, he fills the world with Terror, Misery,
and Confusion. Victory is the effect of Ambition, and War is the Recreation of
Conquerours: it is an evil which entertains a multitude of others in its
retinue, and there is not one to be found comparable to it. The Quarrel of
Caesar and Pompey has formerly interessed all the States of the World, because
they both pretended to an Universal Monarchy: their Courages were so undaunted,
and their Virtue so equal, that Valor not being able to determine the point,
left the decision thereof to Fortune. The Enterprises of great Princes are
always grievous to their own Subjects; their Laurels cast such shadows as Blast
the smaller Plants, and produce none but hurtful Fruits themselves. By this
Reasoning we may conclude, that Providence, which watches perpetually over us,
never brings forth a haughty Prince, but from time to time to curb the
Licentiousness of the People; and her bounty is much greater in bestowing mean
and ordinary, than ambitious and extraordinary Spirits on Kings and Princes.

And for my part, I assert from the like consequence, that the same Justice is
conspicuous in the distribution of Favors among all sorts of men: for as she
gives to nobody all perfections together, so she produces not one altogether
incapable of Discipline; and it is but reasonable, that she should bestow less
Wit on those who are born rich, than on such as a low Extraction, or an unhappy
disaster has impoverished. The first have need only of an ordinary Conduct to
live happily, the last must be owners of extraordinary Merits, to supply their
necessities. It was the saying of a Greek Poet, That Indigence awakens Arts,
and Poverty is the Mother of Invention: there is great pobability, that this
Author did not elevate his thoughts to the first cause of this effect. Poverty
of it self does nothing that is worthy; but it is the temperament, which God has
made in the Soul of him, who is filled with Light and understanding; as
Simplicity and Ignorance are ingredients in the Souls of those who abound in
Wealth and Riches.

CHAP. XI. That he may be advanced from the service of a Great Lord, to that of
the King or Prince: And that a Master ought to treat a Gentleman courteously.
I Have spoken in my first Part, of the wonderful progress which persons of
Quality make in the Court, when their wit and judgment are equal to their
Riches and Fortune. I have nothing more to say to them; my design being only
to advertise a Gentleman, that as I have set no bounds to his Worth, so he
ought to prescribe none to his Fortune. One of our Constables had no cause to
complain of changing his Master; the support of the Trunk is ever more firm
than that of the Branches: There is not the least imprudence in passing from
the retinue of a great Lord to the service of a King, or of some other
sovereign Prince, provided that it be done fairly and without treachery. If he
loves us, he will be extremely glad of our preferment; and if he does not love
us, we do not owe him that dull complaisance of consuming our life under the
tyranny of his ingratitude and injustice. Our services ought to be sincere and
faithful, but not perpetual: Our condition would be worse than that of a slave,
if we were obliged to do all for him, and nothing for our selves: Reason and
Nature teach us to pursue our Interests, when they are not contrary to the
Maxims of Honor.

For my part, I am well satisfied with a Great Lord, who is not naturally
liberal, when he gives his Servants the good words which they deserve, although
he does them no other courtesy. This testimony of his friendship is obliging,
and may become profitable in time: but I meet with nothing more rare in the
mouths of persons of Quality, than this sort of Commendation; they will rather
praise the Horses paces, than the Teachers skill; and if a Gentleman by his
discreet management makes their affairs prosper, they will attribute the cause
thereof to some other circumstance rather than to his conduct. This Injustice
as a contagion is communicated from Parents to Children; it is an ancient
tradition of which husbands and their wives make a mystery; and it passes for a
politic Rule in Noble Families: But I cannot forbear proving, that this Maxim
is as erroneous as it is ungrateful, and it ought not to be entertained by any
generous or noble Soul.

Can any one deny that Praise and Esteem are the true and essential rewards of
Virtue? And that the Ancient Heroes did not propound to themselves Glory as
their Object, Si Virtus oculis cerneretur, mirabiles sui amores excitaret.
Cicero. Laudataque Virtus crescit, and immensum gloria calcar babet. Ovid
when they enterpriz'd to eternize their memory by their brave Exploits? Cicero
says, that if Virtue could assume a body to present it self to our eyes, she
would even to admiration ravish the hearts of all Spectators. And Ovid says,
that Praise nourishes her, and Glory has a sharp spur, which excites and
animates the most slothful. Therefore if she deserves our esteem and our
applause, is it not an error to believe that men ought not to speak well of
those that possess her? and if an inferior employs his Virtue only to serve
his Master more advantageously, can he conceal it without being guilty of
ingratitude and baseness? Why does he not take as great pleasure in extolling
the Merit of a Gentleman that serves him, as in boasting of his fine Horses, or
in describing his rich Farniture, and his stately Houses? He is Master of all
these, but of a Gentleman after a more noble manner. He cannot set forth his
Worth, without adding at the same time somewhat to his own Glory. Would it not
be more advantageous for him to make appear that he has for a Domestic a
Person worthy to command a whole Province? and that he receives homages and
respects from one to whom no man can ref^^ his approbation and ^steem? To (...)
otherwise, is to understand his (...) Interest very ill, and to be guilty
ignorance as well as ingratitude. he does it from a principle of jealousy,
this Passion must needs be ridiculous, seeing there is no equality in their
Fortune; and if he fears to create any vain thoughts thereby in his Servant,
from that instant in which he suspects him inclinable to this extravagance, he
becomes injurious, by imputing to him a crime, to which he is not obnoxious: It
would be more reasonable that he should turn the Medial, and think that by
publishing his Worth, he should bind him to his service with a new chain; that
this proof of his friendship would make him in love with his subjection; that
it is to render him justice, which he receives as a favor; and that at length
all the World will judge, that he cherishes in another the worth which he
possesses in himself.

I find it not strange, that a Common Spirit is not capable of these
reflections; but I cannot conceive how a man of Sense should be inveagled to
follow those Errors, which are not authorized, but by the ignorant multitude,
who cannot esteem that which they understand not. Yet I could pardon this in a
Country-Lord, who fancies he is not Master there, unless he has an imperious
tone to make himself reverenced by the Countrymen, and respected by his
Domestics; who persuades himself, that his Grandeur consists in seeing those
about him prostrate at his sect; who holds a Council without intrigues or
affairs; who confounds Vanity with the point of Honor; who puts no difference
between Glory and Arrogance; and who frames a ridiculous Chimera of his own
quality, which makes him unworthy of the respects and services of any brave or
gallant man. He who does not know what he is himself, will hardly find out
what we are: he must first do himself justice, before he can be capable of
rendering it to others. Greatness and Meanness are two opposite terms, but not
contrary; these two extremes are easily united by the courtesy of the one, and
the respect of the other: A Lord is as much obliged to be civil to us, as we
are to be respectful to him. Arrogance produces not that effect which seeks in
the mind of a Gentleman, it exasperates more than subjects him; it
extinguishes all his friendship, because it persuades him, that he is not in
the least beloved, but has great injustice done him: And if the necessity of
his affairs, or the hope of his fortune, hinders him from shaking off his Yoke,
Tacito mala vota susurro concipimus.
he studies rather to dissemble than forget his resentment, and serves no
longer but with regret. I would advise persons of Quality always to inspire
love into Gentlemen, and fear into Valets. Love in the Soul of a man of Honor,
makes all things pleasant and easy: the Roses which he gathers for his Master,
are ever without Throns; he slights all hardship, travel or perils; he
interests himself so far in his service, that he looks upon it as his Glory,
his point of Honor, and his Satisfaction: On the contrary, meaner Servants who
have no Sense, are not capable of great friendship; their scope being to live,
and their pleasure to do nothing, they are seldom contained within the bounds
of their duty, but by the fear of chastisements. A Person of Quality, who acts
otherwise, labors much against his own Interest, which consists in being well
and decently attended.

CHAP. XII. That he ought not to be distasted at his Master's cross humor: And
of the error of such as despise the Charge of Secretary.
I Have made this digression from the conduct of the attendant to that of his
Master, because there is such a connection between these two, that it is a
difficult matter to separate them.

Arrogant and hasty men are commonly unprofitable and uneasy to be served; the
gentleness of men's humor is an infallible token of the goodness of their
Manners. Passionate men are like Lions, always tormented with a Fevour; and as
they are not in the least moved with the sweetness of pleasures, they are not
diverted with the ingenuity of a witty person: Their Life is a perpetual
Winter, which has seldom any fair days: this is the most ordinary temperament
of men of business, which naturally produces Melancholy; and these are the most
profitable Masters. I have known some, who have advanced the Fortunes of many:
these do more for others than for themselves, because they give with so bad a
grace, that they wholly destroy the Merit of their favors: and if any person
does resent them, it is because he should be unjust to do otherwise. For my
part, I shall ever prefer the acknowledgments which proceed from Love, before
those which Generosity produces; forasmuch as these are made in respect of the
Benefactors, the other in consideration of themselves. Moreover, we must
resolve to bear with our Master's cross humor, when we can hope to receive any
great benefit by him: Although the road we keep, be rugged and difficult, yet
we must not leave it, if it brings us to the place whither we tend. The aim of
a Gentleman is not to seek all pleasures in a Service, it is to make his
Fortune; and he would be extremely happy, if he should meet with these two
together. A teachey and Passionate disposition is not more incompatible with
Justice and discretion, than Choler with a good Wit; these cannot but esteem
the good qualifications of such as approach them, although they are not
diverted therewith: Sufficiency pleases them, because they possess it
themselves, and are very sensible, that it is profitable to them in the persons
of their Domestics. It is very difficult to preserve an even humor in the
midst of a continual harras of weighty affairs; the greatest Souls bear this
burden very impatiently, and receive no small impressions from bad successes;
the multiplicity of cares overwhelms them, and the people surround them in that
manner, as to block up all the Avenues to their Recreations: it does not belong
to us to change them; it is sufficient to make our parts known, and to persuade
them of our affection. Their employments and favors will find us as soon in
the Antichamber as in the Cabinet; and to take it aright, their presents
contribute more to our Fortune than their Caresses.

It Is a wonderful thing that the Tyranny of Custom should compel us to follow
the Multitude, Usus efficacissimus rerum omnium Magister. Plin.
and abandon our Reason. Let the Country-Nobility speak their opinions freely,
and you shall find them all of one accord, that a particular Gentleman cannot
seek his Fortune better than in the retinue of a Prince, or a Minister of
State; that the little Employs which they bestow upon him, are but so many
steps to mount to higher; that he ought to have a submissive Soul, and not
disdain to begin at the meanest Scrvices to arrive at the greatest honors;
that from a Page he should attempt to become a Gentleman-attendant, or Master
of his Game: but in case you should propound to them the charge of Secretary,
they will condemn it as beneath his Quality, and say, that a Gentleman ought
not to wear a Feather, unless in his Hat; and that it would be a dishonor to
quit his Sword, to carry a Lettercase. I must confess, that these givers of
advice are very competent Judges in this matter, and know admirably well how to
make a distinction between the honor and the profitableness of Employments:
Doubtless they understand the point of Honor very well, to assure one that it
is more Noble to fill his Master Drink at his meals, than to explain his
thoughts and his intentions in his Letters; that it is more honorable to dress
Horses, and whip Pages, than to converse with Ambassadors, and be the Confident
of the most important Secrets between the Court and him. In my opinion he will
take greater pleasure in entertaining his Master about his Dogs, and his
Hunting, than about his great Negotiations; and his sufficiency will better
appear in chasing a Beast, than in managing those concerns which pass through
his hands. But if they would consider the advantages of these Places, they must
consult those that have been Secretaries, to learn, that never any one missed a
Fortune. There are certain mysteries in this art, which it is not permitted to
reveal; it is sufficient to say, that an Ingenious person in this employ, must
necessarily have an opportunity of raising his Fortune, without wounding his
Honor, or offending his Virtue. It Is the most fair place in the whole House to
acquire Friends, because the Favors and Graces of Princes are distributed by
his hands, he has a thousand occasions every day of obliging persons of
Quality, who resent such Civilities at first or last. For my part, I conceive,
that the difficulty of the Function has of late days excluded most Noblemen
from it; and that this error had not crept into the World, but because of
(...) Ignorance; and to speak truth, he who can acquit himself worthily of this
Charge, is capable of many other: he must not only have Virtue and
Faithfulness in his Conduct, but contain in himself all the good qualities of
an accomplished person: It is necessary, that he be skilled in all Arts and
Sciences; that he understands foreign Languages, and all the Criticisms and
elegancies of our own. It is not enough to have a quick Invention, a tenacious
Memory, and a clear Judgment; he must also have agreeable expressions, and
make use of select words, which smell neither of the Pedantry of the School,
nor of the Poetry of Parnassus. I was always of opinion, that the most
difficult kind of writing was that of Letters; and I have heard knowing
persons protest, that Cicero's Epistles were worth all his other works. The
reason is, that a Letter is the true production of our mind, that it is the
lively and natural Picture of our thoughts and imaginations; all the
excellencies and soloecisms thereof can be attributed to none but to our selves
alone: we cannot say so much of our common and familiar discourses; our
thoughts which present themselves in a crowd, give us not leisure to make
choice of the aptest expressions: But this default is not to be in our Letters;
we can adorn them with all the graces of Eloquence, seeing we have time to add
both a method and politeness to our style. Lawyers in writing their Orations,
and Priests their Sermons, have nothing that is so worthy of our esteem; if we
consider, that these Harangues are patcht up of commonplaces, Quotations,
Apothegmes, remarkable Examples, and Philosophical Axioms, and modelled by the
Rules of Rhetoric, which furnishes them with Exordiums, Narrations, their
pathetical Inferences, and their Figures. But Letters require not these strange
ornaments; their Beauties please us best, when they are wholly naked; they
begin without Exordiums, proceed without Narrations, explain without Artifice,
prove without citing Authors, reason without Logic, delight and persuade
without tropes and figures. It is certain they ought to be purged from all
these, forasmuch as they cease to be good, when they appear learned and
studied. This is, in my Judgment, the reason that we see so few Scholars write
agreeably, they know nothing but what others have said; Apud alies loqui
dedixerunt, non ipsi socum.
they make their Brains portable Libraries, in which is pyl'd up all the
Ancient Greek and Latin, they have studied the Sciences of others, and have not
increased their own knowledge; they are Parrots, which speak nothing but what
they are taught; they are unskilful Husbandmen, who leave their Understanding
fallow, to till their Memory; and they are bad Frenchmen, who never understand
well their Mother Tongue. Certainly there is not more miserable stuff than the
Letters of those famous men of Colleges; you would say they have a Language
different from ours, and that they purpose not to be understood: Learning is so
prevalent in them, that Nature her self is obliterated; and when they have not
a Subject whereof they can speak by Book, they become either silent or
ridiculous.

CHAP. XIII. How it comes to pass that we are less knowing than the Ancients.
A Famous man of our age told me one day, Campanella.
that he had found out three reasons, why we were become less knowing than the
Ancients: He did not attribute the default to the imperfection of times, and
the succession of years; he was sufficiently convinced, that men were always
born, have ever lived and died after one and the same manner; and in the time
of Aristotle and Plato, he who did arrive to the age of Eighty years, was
accounted very Old.

The first of his Reasons was, that we spent our Youth in the study of the
Greek and Latin Tongues, which are no Sciences, but petty Tyrants, who seize
on our minds, to remove us farther from them. The second, that we read too
much: The third, that we do not reason thoroughly of things. Aristotle was a
Grecian, and perhaps understood none but his Nurses Language; yet he instructed
his Posterity in all Parts of Philosophy, and eternized his Memory by his
learned Works. From his time they began to learn the terms of Grammar and
Geometry: these two Sciences were so common among those of his Nation, that he
continually draws Consequences from these Principles, without giving himself
the trouble of explaining them, supposing that no man was ignorant thereof.
From thence they proceeded to Logic, and to the other Parts of Philosophy,
which consist in establishing certain and manifest Principles, to draw
therefrom infallible Conclusions. This Science was followed by the Rules of
Rhetoric, which instructed them to put in good order what the other Sciences
had taught them; and by sweet expressions joined with the grace of tropes and
figures, both to delight and persuade the Auditory. The study of that age was,
to resolve difficult Questions, to discover the causes of Things, to learn the
most apparent by Experiments, and the more occult by Reasoning. They were
better persuaded by their Perception that fire has a hot quality, than by the
Physicians authority, who taught, that its property was to heat and to burn.

Their Sciences were beyond comparison more noble than ours, Sydera seu terra
distant, ita nostra vetustis secula temporibus.
forasmuch as they were more free; they acknowledged only demonstrative Reason
for their Mistress, without submitting themselves to the tyranny or
capriciousness of Authors. This method of studying multiplied the Sects of
Philosophers, and every one maintained his Opinion as he understood it. Obest
plerumque iis, qui aiscere volunt, authoritas eorum qui docent. Archesilaus.
But in our days, men would be accounted ignorant by the Regents of our
Universities, if they should contradict any Opinion of their Aristotle: They
cause our Studies to degenerate into Religion, and the Sciences into Faith: It
suffices to cite the Philosopher, for to impose silence on the Assertor of the
most reasonable and most sound Opinion of the World, if it does not agree to
his Maxims.

I am persuaded that the inconstancy of times is sufficient both to destroy
and abolish this Error. In S. Augustin's days, men were excommunicated for
teaching or reading the Books of this Philosopher. Geographers who described
our Antipodes, were condemned for Heretics; and Astronomers passed for
Magicians, when they predicted the Eclipses of Sun and Moon. Thomas Aquinas,
the most clear and most judicious Wit of the World, restablisht the honor of
these unhappy men; and recalling them from the Cabinets of the Curious, whither
Ignorance had banished them, restored them to that liberty, of which the
Anathema's of the Church had deprived them. His Authority made them appear
reasonable, and his Sanctity purged all the malice from the minds of Students.
After this, consider whether these Regents ought so imperiously to render
themselves Masters of our sentiments; and who will assure us, that they shall
not be one day suppressed? and that our Posterity shall not think them as
frivolous and weak, as we conceive them worthy and great? This uncertainty of
our judgments, denotes without doubt both their weakness and our own, and
makes me conclude with great probability, that an ingenious person may seek
among this diversity of Opinions the most sound by profound and free
contemplations, and embrace that without offense which seems to him the best
and the most reasonable. I hope I shall be pardoned for speaking after this
manner: for I must acknowledge my self more indebted to Nature, than to my
Tutours; and having spent more than half of my life in Armies, I have had
little converse with Books, but have applied my self chiefly to the study of
the World, to furnish and succor my Speculations with some slight
observations. This method of Studying, has taught me not to envy the esteem of
the Learned, and to comfort my self without regret, that I have not been able
to arrive at the least glimpse of their glory. I look upon them as men who have
written much, but not as such as are never deceived: I do not wonder that they
have so established their errors among the generality of Students, seeing the
greatest part are not always of the best sense; and Truth, which suffers
neither contrariety nor division, does never remain constant among them. This
consideration makes me take the liberty, not to consent always to the
sentiments of the Multitude, and to assert, according to my first Project, that
the Opinion is very ridiculous, which deprives a Gentleman of the Charge of
Secretary. And if I was a great Lord, I would alter this custom in my house;
for indeed, what antipathy is there between the Pen and the Sword? If they
grant that a Learned man may be Valiant, will they not also allow that a
Valiant man may be a Secretary? Knowledge and a good Apprehension are not less
requisite for Conduct, than a great Courage for dangerous and desperate
Attempts.

CHAP. XIV. That a Gentleman who perceives in himself a natural disposition to
Study, ought to apply himself thereto: And that no man can be learned without
his inclination.
I Will not deny that a Soldier cannot well be without the politeness of
discourse and knowledge, which are necessary for an expert Secretary; so I look
not upon this Employ as a thing, to which every Nobleman can aspire. I pretend
only to prove that it is not beneath a Gentleman, and that such as are sensible
they have Wit and Capacity enough to discharge themselves well thereof, ought
not to contemn it. I farther add to this proposition, that the Design being to
make his Fortune, he comprehends very ill his own Interest, to refuse the most
certain means that conduce thereto, when they are honorable; and I see no
reason why he who knows how to serve a Prince-in his Cabinet with his Pen,
should not serve him honorably with his Sword against his Enemies.

I have formerly said, that there is no Obligation in cumbent on a Gentleman to
render himself learned, if he designs to follow the War: But I have ever
recourse to the General Thesis which I established, that every one ought to
know his own inclination and natural disposition. This would render a person
unworthy of the benefits of Nature, not to improve a good Wit; the love of
learning, which she inspires into him, is a sign that being not able to
prevail against Destiny nor the Laws which deprive him of worldly Goods, she
has reserved for his Portion, Worth and the Sciences. It is his duty to
advantage himself by this Present, which he ought so much the less to neglect,
as it is impossible to obtain it whithout her succor: It Is she that carries
the Flambo before him, when he searches to discover obscure and difficult
matters; it is she that makes him admired in the Pulpit; it is she that makes him
prevail in Councils; it is she that sweetens his Manners, and rendering him
amiable to all the World, raises him from the dust to exalt him above other men.

It would most certainly be a very judicious and advantageous Law, not to
permit any to the study of the Arts and Sciences, but such as Nature has
disposed thereto. There is no fear, that by the retrenching of Scholars, the
number of the Learned would be diminished. This promiscuous throng of all sorts
of People, who flock to the gates of Colleges, and who loyter under Tutors,
scarce produces one accomplished and understanding Person among a thousand
Students. That which they learn, serves only to render them importunate, and
make them enterprise designs above their forces; they persuade themselves that
all the Truths of Philosophy are shut up in their Note-book: and the dullness of
their brains not being able to conceive any objection, they believe that they
have attained to the utmost perfection of Knowledge; because they see nothing
but with the eyes of their Tutor, and Nature seems not to have given any other
faculty to their friends but Memory. We daily observe, that there is nothing
more hurtful than this sort of People, who doubt of things, and do not
understand them. It Is from them, Neque enini natae sunt haereses, nisi dum
scripturae bonae intelliguntur non been Aug.
that so many Heresies have infected Religion, and so many Scruples have
troubled the best Consciences; it is from them, proceeded those rash judgments
which filled the world with Libertines.

I remember, that I once heard it asserted before a Great and Wise Prince, that
there was never any worse Policy, than that of Francis the First; who not
being contented with having acquired the Renown of a Valiant Prince, thought
that his Glory would be imperfect, if Posterity should not one day publish that
he had also been the Father of the Learned, and the Restorer of Learning. This
Passion caused him to erect more Colleges in his Dominions, and in diverse
places establish Conveniences for Scholars. But this Prince did not perceive
that he procured to himself a certain Evil, in seeking an uncertain good: He
thought by this establishment to people France with Learned men, but he made
very few thereby, but infected it with an infinite number of Persons unuseful
to the Commonwealth. I mean to say, that he filled the Bar with Pettifoggers
and Lawyers, the Cities with impertinent idle Fellows, and the Cloisters with
lazy Monks. In the mean time, he neither extended the Doctrine nor augmented
Piety in his Kingdom; but diminished the number of Soldiers, of Merchants, of
Laborers, and of Mechanics, from whom the State has its Defense, its Riches,
its Food and Manufactures. I cannot forbear admiring the Policy of the Turks,
which I find as prudent, as their Religion ridiculous. It is not out of
sottishness, that they banished Learning out of Greece, which was heretofore
the great Nurse of the Muses, when they subdued its Inhabitants, and rendered
them tributary to their Empire: Their Conduct is too discreet, to impute to
them that Barbarism; of which the World accuses them, and which they seem to
affect. They understood more judiciously than we, the value of the Sciences,
when they rendered them not so common; and to conclude impartially, they have
done them far less injury by restraining them to a small number of Ingenious
persons, than we in prostituting them to all sorts of men. They considered,
that as too great a quantity of Flambo's in a Salle filled with people, offends
them by their heat and smoke, so a vast number of Scholars might very much
prejudice the State, by thinking to instruct their Countrymen. Thus they have
not renounced the Lights of the Arts and Sciences, but have moderated the
number of Students; and it is in this particular chiefly, that I admire their
Judgment, that they follow Nature as a Sovereign Mistress in the instruction
of their Children; they constitute Judges of their inclinations to this or that
Profession, and according to their natural dispositions they are encouraged and
employed.

CHAP. XV. That a learned Gentleman has the choice of all Professions; and the
Knowledge of the World is very requisite for him.
AMong the advantages which an ingenious person draws from his Studies, I
esteem not this the least, that he has his choice of all professions: If
Fortune runs from him in the War, he will overtake her in Peace. There is
nothing more required of him than application, to excel all others in that
which he undertakes: If he will be a Soldier, he will be more brave than the
Brutish, who are determined only by the heat and impetuosity of their Blood,
which deprives them of the sense of the Danger: But as by Nature, so he is also
disposed thereto by his Reason, which represents to him the Perils such as they
are, persuading him to be resolute and undaunted, and that Death is not an
evil, but the end of all evils, and the consummation of our Repose.

If he should seek preferment by the Gown, he is there as in his Center; it is
here his mind exerts its faculties with pleasure, and makes it self known by
private conversations, by public actions, and by his Writings. I could extend
much farther his advantages, if I should pursue the Idea which I have thereof;
but I shall conclude with this last, which I esteem above all others, viz. That
he may be Master of his own Liberty; that he may gain Reputation and Wealth
without dependence and subjection; and he has no need of his address, but to
insinuate himself into the favor of the Prince, when he shall once have
obtained the approbation of the people. It is true, that the sublime Sciences
are not made to be slaves; and it is not reasonable, that such as have right to
instruct us as Masters, should obey us as infeferiours. Their price and their
luster are so great, that they supply the defect of Riches, and even the
obscurity of Birth. They have often placed men of a low extraction above the
Lillies in Parliaments, in Episcopal seats, in the Conclave of Cardinals, and
even in St. Peter's Chair. It seems that they alone joined with Piety, have
been in all Ages required for the creating of great Prelates and Ministers of
State: And does not the Holy Scripture introduce Melchisedeck the high Priest
without any genealogy, or mention of his Parents? although this was accounted
the chiefest dignity among the people of Israel? to learn us, that the Sacred
dignities of the Church ought to be the Portions of the Learned and the Pious.

But I do not perceive that I write unprofitably, when I address my self only
to extraordinary Wits, and that my Counsels will be condemned by them of vanity
and imprudence, seeing they have Lights which Eclipse mine, and that I should
be more discreet to ask their advice, than to give them mine. This would indeed
be feared, if I had a design to instruct them; but I speak to young men, who
have as yet only natural dispositions to do well, and are not determined in
the election of their applications. I here make them a draught of the beauty of
the Sciences; I show them that they are ordinarily accompanied with Esteem,
with Glory, and with Fortune, when they are managed by a discreet Person.

It is not sufficient to be a great proficient in the learning of the
University: there is another Science, which instructs us to make use thereof;
which is a Traveller that goes from house to house, speaks neither Greek nor
Latin, and yet teaches us how we should make use of those two Languages: we
find it in Palaces, we meet with it among Princes and great Lords; it intrudes
into Ladies Bed-chambers; it takes delight in the society of Soldiers, and
contemns not Merchants, Artists, or Mechanics: it is that men commonly call the
knowledge of the World, whose guide is Prudence, and Tutors are conversations
and experience of affairs. It renders the same office to the other Sciences,
that a Lapidary does to unpolisht Diamonds, who by his art gives them their
beauty, luster and estimation: Ut fuerit melius non dedicisse sibi.
And truly, can there be any thing more impertinent than a man of St. James's
quarter, who never saw the Louvre, but from the other side of the Seine? To
what purpose do his Greek and Latin serve, but to render him ridiculous among
accomplished persons, and make them profess that he is more ignorant in the
knowledge of the World, than the most stupid are in that of the University? The
College gives us the first notions of things; it heaps together Materials for
the structure of a beautiful Palace: but it is the knowledge of the World, which
teaches us the Architecture, which shows us the order and connection of all the
parts; which makes us appear accomplished, without affecting the vanity of being
accounted Learned; which polishes our discourse and our Manners; which renders
us discreet in our conversations, and agreeable to the whole World. Without it
Learning becomes barbaroas and displeasing, and it is the reason why persons of
a mean extraction, to whom Nature has given Wit, and the University Learning,
find it so difficult a matter to get their Bread: they almost ever appear such
as they are; because they receiving a tincture from the filth of their
education, which having no resemblance with that of persons of Quality, cannot
conceal their natural difference. The greatest art to purge a Gentleman of this
Intection, is to bring him forth early into the World, to prescribe him select
discourses, to oblige him to make his Court to persons of Quality, to make him
observe all the Punctilio's of a gentile and courteous deportment; to give him
a certain boldness in all his actions, without impudence or affectation; to
render him civil without debasing himself, and complaisant without flattering
others; to enjoin him the conversation of Ladies, and permit him to carry on
some intrigues with them. Truly, the most prudent and learned receive
oftentimes very useful Lessons from the ignorant of this Sex. It seems that
Nature created it not only for our delight, but also to give us Rules whereby
we might become more agreeable. Beauty has a certain efficacious power, whereby
it renders us wise and discreet, as much by hazard as by any result of our
Reason: And as that has right to charm us, so we suppose that we have the same
to please it; and not being able to satisfy our selves without the fruition
thereof, we most servently embrace all the means that may render us amiable.
This Passion instructs us much better than Rhetoric, the art of persuading,
and discovers to us all the graces of Eloquence: It compares our actions, it
regulates our Steps, it makes us gentile, it quickens our Fancy, it polishes
and a wakens our Wit, and it is very profitable, when it runs not into excets;
it is like to that liquour which exhilarates the better sort, but intoxicates
the Rabble. Therefore I do not permit it to any but good Wits, who take it as a
means to perfect themselves in the knowledge of the World, and not thereby to
become Vicious. The most excellent things are corrupted by a bad use; it is in
our power not to render our selves faulty by our moderation. Our Condition
would be worse than that of the Beasts, if we should abstain from every thing,
that carries danger along with it: The Fire which warms us, may also Burn us:
the Air which we Breath, may be Infected: and the Wine which comforts and
nourishes us, may in like manner make us Drunk: And from hence would it be
reasonable to conclude, that we ought to be deprived of the use of Fire, Air,
and Wine? It Is the same with our Passions as with our Arms, they serve for our
defense, when they obey us; but they have a contrary effect, when they pass
into the hands of our Enemies. We represent them as Monsters, for want of
knowing them; their force proceeds from the weakness of our Reason: let us give
it leisure to examine them thoroughly, it will easily subject them: It Is then
that it will appoint them to good uses, and that Love it self, as dangerous as
it is, will cease to be hurtful: The most Renowned Ancient and Modern Captains
have found out a way of adjusting this with their Employments; they have
accounted it only a slight Barricado, which could not put a stop to the
success of their Enterprises, nor to the progress of their Glory. The Learned
have pursued it as the Soul of Nature, the Bond of civil society, and the
Father of Pleasure and Peace. The Devout have made it a necessary Virtue, and
the principle of Charity, which unites them with their Neighbor. And for my
part, I propound it as a light, which heating the Heart, enlightens the Mind
to discover the Excellencies of this Knowledge of the World, which I esteem so
necessary for an accomplished Person.

CHAP. XVI. That Conferences are more prositable than the Reading of Books.
DIogenes the Cynick, being one day at Dinner, and seeing Aristippus pass by
his Tub, said to him; Aristippus, if you could content your self with Bread and
Garlike as I do, you would not be the King of Syracuse's Slave. And you
(replied the Courtier) if you knew how to live with Princes, would not make so
bad cheer. It is true, that this Morose and Pedantick Philosophy is not
designed for Gentlemen; they are born to be sociable, and ought to understand
all the Maxims of the World. Complaisant humors, assisted with this practical
knowledge, gain and ravish the friendship of all people; because they know how
to set forth gracefully and pertinently the Talents of Nature, and the
advantages of the Sciences, which they have acquired.

I say moreover, that it has often made accomplished persons, without the
assistance of Learning. The World is a great Book, which instructs us
continually; Conversations are living Studies, which are not at all inferior
to Books: Good Conferences are like Flints, which from a cold and dark heap,
produce heat and light, if men strike them one against another. The familiar
Discourses of two or three good Wits, may be more advantageous to us, than the
empty disputations of all the Pedants of the Universities together; they vent
more Matter in one day, than we read in a Library in three. The action and air
of the Countenance have certain Charms, which have a great influence on our
minds; for every one confesses that an Oration spoken by a good Orator, appears
great and lofty, although it be penned in common terms, and compounded of
ordinary conceptions: I must acknowledge, that a Person onc. caused me to
admire his Verses, when he recited them in a good tone; but giving me them to
read, very much diminished the esteem I had for them: and there is great
probability, that the reason of this alteration proceeded from the harmony
which was then wanting. Although our Senses are distinct and separate, there is
continually a great correspondence between them, that from one the Image of the
Object passes insensibly into another: The Ear receives the sound, and the
Idea's which it conveys to our imagination, have so great relation with the
Order which our judgment frames in our thoughts, that it is even surpised by
this conformity, because it has no time to digest that impression which is made
by this harmony. We should not look upon as strange, this effect of good
Orations and agreeable Conferences, if we call to mind that of Musical
instruments touched by the hands of an exquisite Master: There are Tunes which
inspire sadness, and sweetly incline our Souls to languish; there are Airs
which rejoice and make our Hearts merry, and pleafingly compel our Feet to
dance to their time. They say, that Alexander one day excited by the music of
a Harp, took Arms, and played the part of a Common Soldier; and we daily see
that the sound of Drums and Trumpets animates us to engage our Enemies.

David himself charmed the contorsions of the Evil Spirit in the body of his
Father-in-law by the sweetness of his Harmony. Without doubt, the Voice
persuades and instructs much more than Reading; the one is accompanied with
certain Spirits which we may call Living, and the other is nothing but the
Pourtraicture of the thoughts of a dead Person: So in like manner we are more
sensibly concerned at the occurrence of Affairs, than at the relation that is
made us thereof. A man who has Traveled and been long Voyages, understands
much better the situation of Places, than he who has learnt them only by Maps
and Sea-charts: And we cannot but acknowledge that an Old Soldier, who has
seen many Sieges, Storms and Battles, understands the War better, than one who
is instructed only by Books. A Great Lawyer well read in the Institutions and
Digests, is not always a good Counselor: I would sooner take the advice of an
Advocate well versed in Affairs, and who is grown hoary in the Palace. Physic
it self with all its Aphorisms is very dangerous in the brain of a young
Doctor; it is not enough that he has a perfect knowledge of Galen and
Hippocrates, if he has had no experience in Diseases, whereby he might
understand to administer the Remedies which his Science teaches him. The Theory
of things is always uncertain, if it be not reduced into practice: I affirm the
same of all other Professions. A Gentleman born for the Court and for the War,
will never become a Soldier by Books, nor a Courtier in the Country. The
World, which lends us its Elements to form our existence, attributes to it self
likewise the faculty of rendering us accomplished. This knowledge is nothing else
but the Practice and Experience which we make of the different professions of a
Civil Life: for as they have their distinctions, they have also their Rules and
their Manners. The diversity we meet with not only among Nations, but in
Cities, between several Orders and Professions, is a most wonderful thing. You
will say, that Nature delights to truckle under Custom. The humors of a
Gentleman are altogether different from those of a Merchant; their Civilities,
their Compliments, their forms of Writing, have no resemblance; and among the
Nobility it self, those of the Court, have quite another air from those of the
Country. We ought to know all these varieties, but addict our selves wholly to
that of our Profession. Citizens Gallantry would make but a little progress in
obtaining the favors of a Court-Lady: So to take it in a right sense, that
which we call a very accomplished Gentleman, is one of the most perfect works of
Nature and Art. Of Nature, because it is requisite that she gives him a good
shape, a good mien, an inclination to generous Actions, and an honest ambition.
It Is upon this Foundation that Art labors to accomplish so beautiful a
structure, in polishing his Mind by the knowledge of the Arts and Sciences,
and his deportment by the Exercises of his Body. For to succeed happily herein,
we must begin betimes; it is a great Enterprise, tedious and difficult, which
deserves all our application.

CHAP. XVII. That we ought to avoid the Company of the Debauched and Ignorant.
ALas, how dangerous is it for a Gentleman to mistake himself in the choice of
his ordinary Conversations? and with what circumspection ought he to avoid
Debauched and Sottish Company! This is a point of that importance, that from it
depends the whole course of his manners, and of his Life. The frequenting with
wicked men, brings us acquainted with Vice, and makes us behold it without any
emotion; Nemo fit repent malus.
by degrees we begin to act it with some pleasure; time breeds in us a habit,
Principiis obsta, sero medicina paratur, Cum mala per longas invaluere moras.
Ov.
and the habit will at last be converted into a necessity. St. Austin
admirably-well expresses the efficacy of this Custom, in saying, that it is as
a Nail driven into a Post with a Hammer; after the first and second stroke, we
may draw it out with very little difficulty; but when it is once driven up to
the Head, the Pincers not being able to take any hold, it cannot be drawn out
but by the destruction of the Wood it self. Debauchery has certain Charms which
insinuate themselves most pleasingly into a young man's mind: It Is a Thief
which breaks into Houses, when the Masters are asleep; it comes to us with a
smiling Countenance, it is always bedeckt with the Ornaments of the pleasure
which it proposes to us; it enters into our Hearts to seduce our Sentiments; it
guides us to the brink of a Precipice in a most delicious way strown with
Flowers, and it embraces us and takes us about the Neck only to Strangle us:
As it is a mortal Enemy to Virtue, it always turns its back upon the path to
Fortune; from the time that it seizes on a man, it governs him as it pleases.
Vices and wicked habits are Chains which Fetter him: He sees the occasions of
gaining his Master's favor pass by, through the Windows of a Bawdy House or
Tavern, where Sloth detains him, or Letchery unmans him, and keeps him from
doing his duty: This is indeed a dangerous Rock, where Youth is oftentimes
Shiprackt. I have known some, that prosperity has pursued through all places,
and from whom Fortune seemed never able to gain their consent, only to Elevate
them. These perceive too late, that Time is Bald behind, when they are reduced
to Poverty and Want; and if Age kindles in them a spark of Reason, they
endeavor then, but in vain, to recall and overtake him. These are bad players
at Tennis, who are forced to run after their Ball: And as they are not
accustomed to Labor or Subjection, being abandoned by their Friedd^; and
destitute of a subsistence, they from Luxury and Debauchery run into the most
extreme Wickedness. Then they quit the Court, and instead of doing duty at the
Prince's Palace, they take up their station on some Highway. They are never
without Almanacks to know the Country-Fayres and Marts. These are a sort of
Merchants who sell all, and buy nothing; and in the end their Destiny, or
rather their Conduct, prepares for them a Fortune at the end of a Gibbet, or
upon a Scaffold.

I protest, the frequenting the company of Fools is not so dangerous, and does
not cause a man to make such dreadful Lapses; but it is a Barricado which always
blocks up the way to Fortune. All agree, that no man can Accomplish himself
with them: Folly is no good Tutour to teach us Wisdom: Neither can I conceive
what bond of Friendship an Ingenious man can make with a Fool; all their
qualities are so different, that they cannot be supposed to be reconciled
together. I think there need not many arguments to dissuade a Prudent person
from being concerned with such a one; I can scarce believe that he is able to
endure him. When any one is taken with our Conversation, and Courts our
Friendship, it is a great argument without doubt that he is much of the same
Sentiments and opinion. Nature has not created Heterogeneous Bodies to be
United; she is a Mistress that inspires Passions and inclinations more prevalent
than our Reason. A Fool is fit for nothing but to divert an Ingenious person
sometimes; he may make a pastime of him, but not a Friend. I could say, that he
would serve very well to be cullied, if I would adhere to the opinion of many
who believe, that men of parts ought to be maintained at his Expense. But this
Maxim comes not within my precepts, as being contrary to Honesty: I had rather
that men should avoid his Company, than cheat him. Injustice is upon all
accounts Injustice: his weakness ought to move us to compassion, and his Holly
should neither dismount our Wisdom, nor violate our own Integrity. But let us
pass him by, forasmuch as he cannot instruct us in that which remains to be
known of the knowledge of the world.

CHAP. XVIII. Whether a Private Gentleman may play at Games of Hazard, and upon
what account.
GAmes of Hazard are a Recreation, or rather a kind of Commerce among men;
from whence arises a Problem, which well deserves to be illustrated. Such as
follow a severe Virtue, banish them as Vicious, and will not permit Youth to
use them. They consider them as a violent passion which domineers Tyrannically
over the Mind, and filling our Heads with empty hopes, oftentimes brings us to
the Hospital. It Is this which causes Shipracks on the main Land, which
frustrates our designs, by depriving us of the means of executing them; which
renders us chargeable, and beholding to our Friends; and which causes our
Company to be avoided, as importunate and unprofitable. There is nothing more
easy, than to make it appear deformed and villa^^ous when we paint it on the
worst side: It Is a Proteus which receives diverse forms, and a Cameleon which
often chang^s its Colors. But if we compare its advantages together with its
defects, examining it in its whole, as well as in its parts, it will not be
impossible to evince, that it may be more profitable than hurtful, if we
observe circumstances which are necessary therein.

I affirm, that Gaming is as dangerous to a person of Quality, as it is
advantageous to a private Gentleman: the one hazards very much, because he is
Rich; the other hazards but little, because he is not so; and yet a Private
person may hope for as much from the fortune of Play, as the greatest Lord: So
that what I shall hereafter say as to this particular, concerns only private
Gentlemen. I have always esteemed the love of Gaming to be a gift of Nature, of
which I have acknowledged the benefit: my opinion is not to be suspected in
this matter; forasmuch as she has given me no inclination to it, therefore I
speak thereof as a difinteress'd person, and without Passion. I lay this for a
foundation, that we should naturally delight therein; for without such a
Disposition, we shall never be other than Cullies. The Exercises of the Body
are a great accomplishment, but very improper to win Money withal: our known
address is obliged to give others such odds, as render the parties so equal,
that it seems unuseful to our good success. I intend to speak only of Cards
and Dice, which require our study and our application. First of all, we ought
to know all the advantage which the most subtle Cheats have by their slight of
hand, and afterward understand the make of all sorts of Dice, and the Cut and
marks of Cards. Then so soon as we have gathered together a considerable Stock
of Money, let us get into the greatest Gaming-houses, and hold for a Maxim
always to attaque the b^st Purses. I have heard a wise Gamester, who had won a
very considerable Estate, profess, that for to reduce Gaming into an Art, he
had found out no other secret, than to make himself Master of his Passion, and
to propose to himself this Exercise as a Trade of gaining Money, by discreetly
managing his fortunate and unfortunate hours, without being transported or
dejected: His reason was, that Chance being the Soul of Gaming, it would not be
Chance, if it did not oftentimes change; that every thing has its continuance,
which although unknown to us, does yet come within the reach of the Rules of
our Prudence. Your good Fortune does vex and trouble him that looses against
you: Venture at whatsoever he sets you, so long as you can answer it out of his
Stock: the more he looses, the less he will be capable of managing his bad
Fortune; Passion precipitates him into a blindness, of which you ought to take
an advantage; and if Fortune runs against you, Grata superveniet, quae non
sperahitur hora.
give her time to spit out her Venom, and do not set very much at once:
propound to your self a sum to lose, without hazarding any more; devide your
Stock, to reunite your Fortune, and your last piece will bring back all your
others, if you be engaged with passionate Gamesters. We seldom see a Gamester
want Money; as he looses it with care, so he regains it with little trouble:
There is a certain Charity among them, which does not permit them to desert one
another in distress. Although they have but three Dice for their whole Estate,
and can give no other security but Fortune, yet they will be sooner entrusted
with a considerable sum of Money, than an honest Merchant. Moreover, this
Gaming gives private Gentlemen admittance into the best Companies, and from
thence an accomplished person may draw notable advantages, if he can manage his
affairs discreetly. It has also this quality peculiar to it self, that for the
time it lasts, it makes all men equal; and every man has a right to dispute his
own interest, without giving place in any thing to the most honorable. I know
some, who have no other Revenue, but three Dice and a Pack of Cards, who
maintain themselves in greater splendor, than Country-Lords do by their vast
and rich Mannours: But to arrive to this point, a long habit, and an exact
knowledge of Gaming is required. If these Maxims do not always produce their
effects, however they are conformable to Reason. Cheating is somewhat infamous,
and unworthy of a Gentleman, and is not to be endured by any gallant men. A
Gentleman of my acquaintance discoursed one day very pleasantly with a Monk; to
whom he confessed, that when he dealt at Piquet, he could Shussle four Aces, or
four Kings into the Stock, and that this trick had often succeeded very well.
The good Father told him, that he was obliged to re^ore all the Money which he
had won after this manner. The Genti^^^ maintained the contrary, alleging this
for his reason; that it was not more unjust to Shuffle the Cards well, than to
play them well; and that his end that Shufflles, being to give himself a good
game, and to break that of his Antagonist, he believed, that it ought not to
trouble his Conscience if he gave himself a quatorze of Aces after the
abovementioned manner.

After all, Cheating at play is very dangerous; it causes so many unhappy
accidents to besal the Authors thereof, that it ought always to be avoided. I
advise a man who understands and loves Play, to venture his Money; as he has
but little to loose, he will not hazard any great matter, and possibly may win
much: but I would, as I have said before, that he should be able to contain
himself, and not be Transported; that he should make this a Science, and not a
Passion; that he may look upon his loss with moderation, and prudently husband
his profits and Advantages. That which I assert is a great proof of Wisdom,
that is seldom met withal; and seeing the practice thereof is very difficult,
many passionate men have prohibited Gaming, because it produced contrary
effects in the greatest part of our minds, wherein Fury and a haughty humor
are not capable of that reservedness, which should render it profitable to us,
if we could but attain to it by the assistance of our Reason.

I speak freely my opinion in all things after I have examined them; because
our Conduct is properly our own, and every one can perceive, whether he is
capable of what I propound to him. I write neither for the Ignorant nor for the
Obstinate: let the Wilful take their own course, if they will not follow their
Guide. Reason carries us safe by many Rocks and Precipices; but yet it cannot
hinder them from being; and it would be a great folly not to dare to pass over
a Bridge, because we might be Drowned if we should fall over it. We find no
propositions, but what may be probably defended both ways: It behooves us
therefore to follow that which seems the most reasonable, and the most
agreeable to our humor. For my part, I approve of Gaming in another, although
I practice it very little my self, because it does not divert me in the least:
I have this natural defect with many other, which the result of my Reason
cannot correct. It Is Natures office to give us inclinations to Things, and to
make us expert in their practice.

CHAP. XIX. Whether the Knowledge and Exercise of Hunting contribute to the
making of a Fortune.
HUnting is a very Innocent and Gentile Exercise; but it seldom contributes to
the Fortune of a Gentleman, unless it be in the retinue of the King or some
great Prince, who delights very much in this Recreation. It is very good not to
be altogether ignorant of it, and very dangerous to addict himself wholly to
it. The best Hunts-men in the world could never boast of making a Fortune; it is
not upon this Scent their dogs open; and though they can never give her a turn,
they are resolved to chase her, and not to hunt in sight. They who excessively
love the Woods and solitary places, do not take the least delight in the
Society of Ingenious persons: yet as every Child is enamoured of his own Baby,
the greatest part of the Country Nobility believe, that the quality of Hunting
is as essentially necessary to a Gentleman, as that of Witty and Valiant. For,
to define an accomplished and gallant man, they will tell you, that he keeps
Dogs, and Hunting-Horses, and goes every day a Coursing. They are not aware,
that they define themselves, either what they really are, or what they would be
accounted; and as their mind is wholly occupied with this Passion, they
persuade themselves, that it ought to reign over all; and that it alone has the
privilege of composing a gallant and an accomplished person.

If my design was to write of the difference of Pleasures, I would not place
this in the lowest rank: undoubtedly it has certain Charms, and ought to be so
much the rather permitted, because it is exempted from those Vices, which
ordinarily accompany other Recreation. I acknowledge, that it is purely
Innocent; that it makes men's Bodies more agile; and when moderately used, it
contributes very much to the Health. But my endeavors are to Conduct a
Gentleman in the path of Fortune, and I do not see how this can be the safest
or the best to be kept.

CHAP. XX. That the Treasurers are the most profitable Masters.
I Will now conclude with the last way, which is that which Yeomen commonly
take, and which we desert, although it be the Smoothest, the Shortest, and the
most Infallible of all: It Is the Retinue of the Treasurers, and the Employments
which depend on their Charges. The daily experience which we have of their
extreme Wealth, compels me to approve of the usefulness of this Counsel. It
seems as if Fortune had no reverse for them; and being elevated above her
Wheel, they have nothing else to do, but load it with Gold, to hinder it from
turning: I may safely say, that she becomes their Slave; and the respect which
she bears them, passes even to the least of their Commissioners. Their Houses
resemble Great Lakes, which traversing through the more fertile grounds,
receive all the Waters of the Mountains and the neighboring Plains. For to
render himself well-qualified for these Employs, there is neither Learning, nor
an extraordinary Wit required; diligence is the most necessary qualification:
But such as the necessity of their affairs, or the desire of raising their
Fortunes, does cause to resolve to seek such Services; they must forget the
glory of their Extraction, and trample Gallantry under their Feet; they must as
the younger Brothers of Bretagne let their Nobility ly dormant, and not be too
inquisitive or curious to inform themselves of the Extraction or parts of their
Masters, from whom they expect their advancement. Poverty is a Monster, which
is to be vanquished with all sorts of Weapons; it is dangerous to suffer her to
be too long engaged with Generosity; if that should triumph over her, it would
but obtain a Victory full of regret and Melancholy: let them then keep this
sotrish glory silent, which holds the Reigns so straight, that they cannot
troop to a Man, whom Fortune has raised; let them rather think, that they have
an advantage by approaching to him; let them consider, that a Diamond does not
loose its value when it is set in Steel; and that the Sun, as glorious as it
is, sometimes suffers Eclipses: let them also take a great care not to confound
Glory and Vanity together; the one is the recompense of Virtue, the other is an
effect of our Folly. If Nature has made one a Gentleman, and if the Laws of his
Country, or some other mishap has rendered him poor; let him thank Heaven for
his Extraction, and endeavor to remedy the unhappiness of his Fortune: let him
know, that Life without Wealth is a tedious and insupportable affliction; that
the yoke of Poverty is heavier than that of a Treasurer; and that if he be
ingenious, he may become as great a Lord as his Master: Then he shall revive
his Quality, and from obscure and hidden as it was in the Country, he shall
render it glorious and Triumphing in the midst of the Better sort; let him not
fear the reproach of having been Clerk or Commissioner, when they shall see him
seated in the Privy Council. Ut quisque Fortuna utitur, ita praeceliet, atque
exinde sapere illum dicimus.
His Birth will wipe out all the blemishes of his Servitude. It Is not in the
War only that men mount to higher Offices from the Inferior: The Law and the
Treasury have also their degrees, through which he must pass, for to render
himself capable of the greater Employs. The Art is to behave himself
discreetly, and the greatest happiness is to arrive at them by the way of
Honor, Prudence, and Honesty.

CHAP. XXI. Whether the Rules of Prudence are sufficient to render us happy.
BUt in conclusion, do all these Observations, which follow so exactly the
Rules of Reason, and the Maxims of Experience, infallibly produce the effects,
at which we aim? Will our Honesty and Sufficiency, once known to the World,
stop the mouths of the Envious, and frustrate the Machinations of our Enemies?
Will the Princes whom we have served, do us that Justice which our Services
have merited at their hands? And will the tedious Travels wherein we have
withered the Flower of our Age, be recompensed with that good Fortune, which
was the motive of our cares, and the object of our Hopes? Will our Prudence in
the choice of our Masters, our Foresight in our Enterprises, and our Conduct in
our Actions, render our Life happy, either by the pleasing Charms of Liberty,
to which our acquired Wealth shall restore us, or by the sweetness of our
Servitude continued under a Master who will love us as his Children, and treat
us as his Friends? At last, are there any Precepts in Morality sufficient to
defend us against bad Fortune, and to Espouse us to Prosperity? The Question is
good, and worthy of the curiosity of an accomplished person.

It you con^u^t with Philosophy, she will tell you that she knows not the
future, and that the Knowledge of things pre-supposes their formal existence.
If you demand it of Experience, she will inform you, that the same cause may
produce different effects; that she has seen such variety of things, that she
knows nothing certain but uncertainty it self. And if you ask Reason, she will
answer you, that she concerns her self only to instruct men, and not to
regulate the events of things. Those who guide Travelers cannot assure them
that they shall not meet with Thieves, that their Horses shall neither stumble
nor fall, that the Winds shall be favorable, and the Weather fair: Their
Function is to show them the best and directest way, but not to secure them
from the insults of Robbers, or the injuries of the Weather. Humane Prudence
has too weak a sight to penetrate into general and particular Causes:
notwithstanding they are all determined, and admit of nothing that is
Fortuitous; yet their infinite number surpasses our knowledge and capacity.
Poor Aeschylus, whom the Stars threatened with a fall, that should crush him to
death under its weight, got but little by living in the open Fields, having no
other Canopy but Heaven; an Eagle killed him by a great Tortoise, which it let
fall upon the Bald Head of this unhappy Philosopher. Men will say, that this
was an effect of his bad Fortune, if they follow Vulgar opinions; but if they
examine the thing better, they will judge quite otherwise. Aeschylus had reason
to leave the abode of covered places, seeing he knew, that a House or a Tree
might sooner fall upon his Head, than the Heavens, of which he had made choice
for a Covering. These neighboring Causes offered themselves to his Sense, his
Reason found out a probable remedy to prevent them; but he did not div^ne that
an Eagle should mistake his Bald Pate for a Stone, upon which she would let
fall a Tortoise, to break the Shell, that she might feed on the Animal which it
enclo^ed. The one and the other made a determined action: Aeschylus's end was
to avoid the fall of Houses and Trees; the Eagle's, to break the Shell of the
Tortoise: the Accident which happened, proceeded from the ignorance of
Aeschylus, who foresaw not the flight of the Eagle; and from the mistake of the
Eagle, which took the Head of the Philosopher for a Rock.

The Pyrronians banished all cares and Prudence from the Conduct of Man's Life;
they believed that they ought not to turn out of the Road when they met either
a Cart or a Horse, because they were persuaded, that every thing was
determined; that the causes necessarily produced their effects; and that our
Knowledge, uncertain as it is, was not capable of discovering them, for to
avoid them: Moreover, they thought they should offend Providence, by presuming
to prevent or alter her Eternal Decrees.

But alas, how weak is our Reason in every thing, and how difficult is it to
establish one sound opinion? These poor people were not sensible, that their
Principles destroyed themselves, when they neither affirmed nor judged of any
thing, and that their Philosophy was founded upon a manifest contradiction.

They would affirm nothing, and yet the foundation of their Science was an
affirmative, viz. All things are uncertain to our knowledge, and consequently
there is no Science in the Minds of men. To this may be answered, If all things
are uncertain, there is somewhat certain to our knowledge; forasmuch as this
uncertainty is infallible. You affirm something in saying, that every thing is
uncertain; and from hence I conclude, that your Science is false in its
Principles.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Vanity of Judicial Astrology: Of the Folly of Men: And that
Honesty really makes our Fortune.
LEt us rather say, that all things are certain, but our Senses are deceitful,
because we are not perfect: notwithstanding this, our Ignorance would know
every thing; it is not contented to examine the operations of Nature, and to
rake in her Secrets; it would also pry into future things, Quod stat ante pedes
nemo spectat, coeli scrutantur plagas. Ci. cero.
which have no being: it imagines to read in the Constellations as in a large
Book, every thing that shall come to pass here below; and figuring to it self
admirable rencounters from the Aspects and Conjunctions of the Planets, it
draws from thence consequences as remote from Truth, as the Stars themselves
are from the Earth. I confess I have ever esteemed this Science vain and
ridiculous: for indeed, it must either be true or false; if true, that which it
predicts is infallible, Ne utile quidem est scire quod futurum sit, miserum
enim est nihil proficientem angi. Cicero.
and inevitatable, and consequently unuseful to be foreknown: For what will it
advantage me to understand the Evil that shall happen to me, if it is not in my
power to prevent it? and what will it benefit an unhappy man to be advertised
that he shall loose his Head by the hands of a Hangman, but only burden his
Soul with grief and disquiet, becoming miserable twenty years before he ought
to be? And if Prosperity and happiness shall be my lot, what necessity is there
that I should entertain with care and anxiety this hope, which will at last
infallibly make me happy? But if it is false, as it may easily be evinced to
be; would not a man of Sense be blamed, to apply his mind to, and loose his
time in the Study thereof? It ought to be the occupation of a Shallow brain
that feeds himself with Chimerical Fancies, or of an Impostor who makes a
mystery of every thing which he understands not, for to deceive Women and
Credulous people.

Folly is certainly a Malady, which has many different Symptoms; Stultorum
infinitus numerus. Ecclesiast. Stultorum plena sunt omnia. Cicero.
it reigns so Universally, that I admire for what cause the Ancients have not
Dedicated Temples to her as well as to Fortune. If we should make reflections on
our Prudence, and on our most discreet Conduct, we could not but acknowledge,
that the most clear and sound Reason is oftentimes subject to strange
Convulsions. The most true cause of our Extravagancies is, that the Object
which should terminate our desires, is seldom fixed and determined. Pyrrhus
making one day great preparations to invade Italy, Cineus the Philosopher asked
him what he designed to do, when he should have subdued the Romans? He
answered, I will then pass with my Army into Sicily. And whither then, replied
the Philosopher? I will, said the King, if Fortune favors me, carry my Arms
into Africa, and make my self Lord of Carthage and Lybia. And if you should be
Victorious, replied Cineus, what will you then do? I will, answered the King,
resolve on some greater Exploits and Enterprises. And at last, (said the
Philosopher) what shall be the end of your toils and labor? Repose, replied
the King. Then the Philosopher exclaimed; Oh Prince, enjoy it from this
instant; to what purpose will you make such vast Projects, to conquer that
which you have already under your command? Can your ambition be reconciled with
Prudence, to deprive your self, out of a gayety of humor, of that pleasure
which you perfectly enjoy without stirring from your Palace, to engage your
self in the most extreme perils for an uncertain Victory, and most inevitable
Evils? Men might have said as much to Charlemaigne, to Francis the First; to
Charles the Fifth, and to the King of Sweden. A Prince by extending his
Dominions, increases the sound of his Name, and contributes nothing to his
repose; but on the contrary, multiplies his cares and troubles by creating to
himself new Enemies. Nevertheless, the World admires the Conquerours: there is
no Divinity so reverenced, as the Valor of these illustrious Robbers, who
sacrifice the wealth, life, and liberty of men to their ambition. Men fear
their arms whilst they live; when dead, they praise them, nay sometimes they
are canonized. Never was any thing so unreasonable, but it found abettors. A
famous Orator of Athens spent his life in making a Panegyric of the third
Ague. Poverty bereaves the whole World of its repose, and Riches ravished it
from Anacreon, in such manner, that he returned again to Polycrates Tyrant of
Samos, the ten thousand Ducats which he had presented him, because they
disturbed his sleep. As every one has his peculiar Sense, so every one has his
peculiar Folly; they follow their temperament in this, as in all other things.
There is great Probability, Alter ridebat quoties a limine moverat unum
Protuleratque pedem, flebat contrarius alter.
that Democritus was of a Sanguine Complexion, Heraclitus of a Melancholic.
The one made the principle of his Philosophy to deride the World, and to make
all serious things ridiculous; the other established his upon Lamentations and
Tears: perhaps a third person would have been more reasonable as less
interessed. There are few States governed by the same Policy; they tend all to
the same end, by diverse ways. Religion it self, as holy as it is, could never
Universally be the same in all parts of the world. The diversity of our
judgments is the Origin of all these things; and ignorance, which is natural
to us, is the Source of the diversity of our judgments. Truth is so stately
and majestic, that she disdains men, as being unworthy to behold her; she
conceals her self under so many shapes, that there is hardly one wise man in an
age, whom she admits to her sight: She communicates her self unmasked to Faith
alone, because that is the Creature of the Eternal Truth. It Is that which gives
us infallible lessons for our Conduct, as well as for our Salvation; without it
our Reason is blind, and leads us into precipices: Her precepts are always
just, and her promises are never ineffectual. If we give ear to her, she will
tell us in two words the whole method we should observe to advance our
fortunes, viz. first of all seek the Kingdom of God; and all your affairs shall
succeed happily. This precept is an admirable abridgment of the best Morality
in the world, and deserves both our belief and our consideration. For what is
it but to follow Virtue which guides us in the path, and sly Vice which leads
us astray? The examination of this Proposition shall make the Epilogue to this
Discourse.

Virtue is a tendency of the Soul to Goodness, as to its natural Object; if we
follow it, it will never lead us amiss, nor where we shall meet with bad
Fortune. I am very sensible, you will object, that honest men are not always
the happiest. To which I answer, If they be really virtuous, you are deceived
to believe they can be unfortunate: Virtue is the chiefest good, and
consequently stands not in need of other things for completing the happiness
of her followers. If God sometimes exalts the wicked, it is but to make the fall
the more terrible, and the catastrophe the more remarkable. ^olluntur in ltum,
ut ^psu gravire ruant.
We seldom see a wicked man die peaceably in his bed; his death will be
violent, like as his life has been full of trouble and confusion. Malice may be
subtle and expert: she is a Coward that takes all advantages, by which she may
sometimes prevail against Virtue; but she is utterly ruined so soon as
discovered: The eyes of a man of Honor, like a Basilisk, kill her immediately.
Although Virtue be in general the Exercise of a person of Honor, it does not
hinder him from being more cunning and wiser than a wicked man. Prudence is one
of the Retinue; it is she which carries the Flambo to give light to the other
Virtues; she understands how to incline the Prince's mind in favor of him
whom she serves. The Sincerity of his Actions, the Justice of his Counsels, and
the Fidelity of his Services, speak always advantageously of him; and
Generosity, which preserves his Soul from being guilty of ignoble Acts,
vigorously repulses the attacks of his Enemies. There is so great an Union of
the Virtues, that they cannot be separated. The absence of one, causes the
destruction of the rest; because they all tend to the same end. Honesty is like
the Ocean; this comprehends all the Rivers of the Earth, and that compiles all
the Virtues together to frame an Honest and Gallant man. God leaves second
Causes to act, as well as our Free Will; he has armed the Wise with Counsel and
Reason; which would be in vain, if he should deprive them of the Success
thereof, and grant nothing to our prudence. We are the Operators of our own
good and evil. A blind man is more subject to stumble, than he that has the
use of his eyes. Victrix Fortunae sapientia. Juven.
Let us therefore apply our selves earnestly to the study of Wisdom, for to
regulate our Conduct; and if affairs answer not our expectations, let us adore
the Judgments of God, who disposes of us according to his pleasure, and
frustrates our designs for reasons unknown to us: Ludit in humanis divina
potentia rebus. Ovid.
Let us receive them from his hand as chastisements of our faults; let us
submit our selves to his justice, and not condemn Fortune for those evils which
she has not committed.

THE END.
ERRATA.
PAge 3. l. 14 and yet such, read and that such. p. 4. margent. precandum, r.
precando. p. 30. l. 21. to house, r. to his house. p. 50. l. 17. too obvious,
r. so obvious. p. 110. l. 20. Peace, r. State. p. 142. l. 18. passage, r.
passes. p. 145. l. 25. then. r. men. l. 25. the perfection, r. this perfection.
p. 148. l 14. comparably, r. incomparably. p. 153. l. 16. proportionable, r.
proportionated. p. 169. l. 17. of abundance, r. of an abundance. p. 171 l. 22,
slides, r. glides. p. 208. l. 3 ignorant, r. ignorance. l. 21. compares, r.
composes.


