HIS MAJESTY'S GRACIOUS LETTER TO THE Convention of Estates IN SCOTLAND, The 13
of JUNE, 1678.
CHARLES R.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
AS We have, by many former Letters directed to preceding Parliaments and
Conventions, so often and so fully expressed Our great Confidence in the
Hearty, Loyal and Sincere Affections both of the Representative, and of the
much greater part of the Body of that Our Ancient Kingdom; so now We cannot but
assure you, That We repose the same Confidence in you of this Convention;
Resolving that this Our renewed Assurance We have of you, shall remain on
Record to Posterity as well as the former. Those Conventions preceding you, did
fully answer Our Expectations, and We have good reason to have the same
Confidence of you: And therefore We shall only acquaint you with the Reasons of
Our Calling you together.

The great Kindness We bear to that Our Ancient Kingdom, has, at all Times,
inclined Us to be very watchful over all its Concerns; And considering that all
Kings and States do at present carefully Secure Themselves and their People, by
providing against all such Foreign Invasions, and Intestine Commotions, as may
make them a Prey to their Enemies; It is not fit, That that Our Kingdom should
only, of all others, remain without Defense; Especially at a time wherein those
dangerous Field-Conventicles (so justly termed in our Laws, The Rendevouzes of
Rebellion) d^ still grow in their Numbers and Insolences; Against all which,
Our present Forces cannot in reason be thought a suitable Security. Therefore,
and that we may be the better enabled to raise some more Forces, for securing
that Our Kingdom against all Foreign Invasions, and Intestine Commotions, and
to the end they may be maintained by such equal and regular Ways as may give
least Dissatisfaction to Our People, and to let the World see the Unanimous
Affection of Our People to Us: These are the only Reasons of Calling you
together at this time. And although We have been always very unwilling to lay
Burden upon that Our Kingdom, yet We could not neglect the giving you this
opportunity, to witness your Affection to Our Service, especially in so
dangerous a Time, and for so important a Cause. And seeing We are resolved to
employ what you shall give, only for the Peace and Security of that Our
Kingdom, We doubt not but you will cheerfully give such a Supply as may be
effectual for the Ends proposed, such as the Kingdom can bear.

As to the way of raising this Supply, We know the like has been formerly
done, both by way of Taxation, and by way of Valuation of the yearly
Land-Rents, and we know Taxation to be the ancient way, yet We understand it
will take so much time in Collecting, that it will not answer the present
Exigent; Therefore we do earnestly recommend to you, to take the most easy and
expedite way of raising Money for this so necessary a Work. We confidently
expect that all Ranks and Conditions of Men (excepting only Colleges and
Hospitals) will willingly Contribute for the Defense of the Kingdom, and their
own Preservation, against Foreign and Domestic Enemies: This is the only
Business you are to do in this Convention.

We have made choice of the Duke of Landerdale to be Our Commissioner for this
Convention, who has so often faithfully served Us in that Station; and not
only in this, but in all other Capacities, as well for Our Interest, as for the
Advantage of His Native Country; And therefore We do expect you will give
entire Credit unto him whom We so much trust. He will more particularly
acquaint you of what may concern this Business, for which We have now called
you. He will also tell you how confident We are of you, and how ready we shall
be, upon all occasions, to do every thing that may be, for the Good of that Our
Kingdom, whose Interest shall ever be dear unto Us; And so we cannot but be
confident, That after your Dissolution, you will in your several Stations, give
real Testimonies of your Zeal to Our Service, to the Maintenance of Our
Government both in Church and State, as it is now Established by Law, and to
the preserving the Peace of the Kingdom; in which, according to every Man's
Actions, he may expect Marks of Our Royal Favor. And so We bid you heartily
Farewell.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the 13th day of June, 1678. and of Our Reign
the 30th Year.
THE SPEECH OF HIS GRACE THE Duke of Lauderdale, HIS MAJESTY'S High
Commissioner, TO THE Convention of Estates at EDENBVRGH, The 4th of JVLY, 1678.
My Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and you Gentlemen the Commissioners of the
Shires, and of the Royal Buroughs.
YOU have heard in His Majesty's Most Gracious Letter, now read to you, the
renewed Expressions of His Kindness to, and Confidence in the Hearty, Loyal and
Sincere Affection of you the Representers, and of the much greater part of the
Body of this His Ancient Kingdom. He has so fully expressed this to all the
Sessions of His Two Parliaments, and to the Two former Conventions; He has
given such real, and such convincing Testimonies of this, in all the Acts of
His Government these Eighteen Years, since His Most Glorious and Happy
Restoration, which I am sure are so deeply rooted in all your Hearts, that I
shall not further insist. His Majesty has fully and clearly expressed the
Reasons of His Calling this Convention, and of His Expectation of such a
Supply, as may Enable Him to protect and defend you against Foreign Invasion,
or Intestine Rebellion: On this I shall enlarge a little.

You may remember that Four Years ago, in the last Session of the last
Parliament, though the King was actually Engaged in a great War, yet knowing
the low Condition of this Kingdom, He asked no Supply, for then there was no
appearance of any Insurrection here, though soon after the end of that
Parliament, the Fanatics broke out very insolently in diverse places; I shall
not reflect how this came.

But this Year they have been much more insolent in numerous Field
Conventicles, which the Law justly terms, Rendevouzes of Rebellion; And the
Countries most infested, declared, That they were not able to suppress them, so
there was a necessity to draw Forces together: I shall not repeat what followed
upon that Occasion, nor reflect upon any thing that past since; I will only
look forward, how the Kingdom may be secured in this great Conjuncture, by the
fairest and most easy ways.

About the time of the date of the Kings Letter, there was an appearance of
Peace betwixt our nearest Neighbors, in France, Flanders, and the United
Provinces, which now seems to be at least retarded, and all Countries prepare
for their Defense; which makes it necessary that this Kingdom should not be the
only Country left naked without any Defense: Here is no more than one Regiment
of Foot, and one Troop of Guards, of standing Force, and the Kings Revenue can
bear no more; I need not therefore enlarge on the Necessity of raising more
standing Force regularly paid, to prevent Free Quarter, which would be
otherwise unavoidable. For if there should be an Invasion, or if those Field
Conventicles (the true Rendevouzes of Rebellion) should join in open Rebellion,
as they did in the Year 1666, the whole Power of the Kingdom must be drawn
together; how burdensome that would be, I leave you to judge; and nothing can
prevent such a Rebellion, but some more standing Forces regularly paid, which
may not only prevent it now, by Gods blessing, but secure us from it for the
future.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
The King, like a true Father of His Country, puts you in mind of your danger,
and proposes to you the fairest, the easiest, and the most equal Remedy. His
Majesty has these Eighteen Years, in all His Kingdoms, solemnly professed His
Abhorrence of Arbitrary Government, His Ruling by the Law, and His inviolable
Care to preserve the Liberty and Property of His Subjects: Those Professions
have been fully made good, by all the Acts of His Government, since His Happy
Return. And I do, in His Majesty's Name, assure you, That He is, and shall be
as careful of your Liberties and Properties, as of any thing on Earth that is
nearest and dearest to Him; And if any entrusted by Him shall transgress, they
may certainly expect to be crushed under His just Displeasure: He will maintain
the true Religion, and the ancient Government of this Church, as now
Established by Law; He will Execute the Law against Transgressors; He will
Maintain His Judicatures; He will defend His good Subjects in all their just
Rights: Who would not then cheerfully, and thoroughly Serve and Obey so Gracious
a King? And what He now demands, shall, I hope, appear necessary and easy: It
will be some Burden, I confess, but when you consider this great Truth, That
no Country in Europe has born so little Public Burden as this, none at all
since the Year 1672. And how what has been given, has been wholly employed
for those Public Ends for which it was given, As this I do assure you shall
most exactly be.

Consider all the intolerable Burdens you lay under, whilst you groaned under
Rebellion; Call to mind the Monthly Maintenances, the Cesses, the Loans, and
that unparalled Oppression of borrowing Money from whom they pleased, without
Rules of Reason, but their own Will, which was their Law; This borrowing, was,
indeed, forcing Money, which was never Repaid. Call to mind that horrid Tyranny
of the Traiterous Usurpers, their most unsufferable Cesse of Ten thousand
pounds per Mensem, for many Years; And, at last, their Six thousand pounds per
Mensem constantly, till His Majesty's Glorious Return.

You cannot forget their Fining and Forfeiting, their Imprisoning many of the
Kings best Subjects, and the other Acts of their most unlimited and most
inhumane Tyranny, which lasted Two and twenty Years, till God broke their
Bonds, and set us free, by the Return of our Lawful and Most Gracious King.
Compare then what We suffered for not Obeying the King, and for our Rebellion,
and the Effects of that Rebellion, the Sword of merciless Traitors, whom our
Divisions only enabled to subdue us, and I hope you will clearly see how happy
we are in Loyalty.

You cannot imagine that the King intends to keep up a constant Force, while
you remember that in the Year 1666, the Forces then raised, were by His Majesty
readily disbanded when that Exigent was over, though no small Endeavors were
used for their continuance.

The Force the King designs to raise, shall not be formidable, but moderate,
such as are of absolute necessity, to which, I hope, you will give a hearty, a
ready, and an Unanimous Consent: The ways of Imposing it are left to your
selves, not doubting but you will take the expeditest way, as is hinted in the
Kings Letter; And I persuade my self, by your Unanimity, you will consider your
own Reputation, and the Honor and Security of Scotland, in this so necessary
Service to the best of Kings.


THE Dutiful LETTER Sent to His MAJESTY, from the Convention of Estates in
SCOTLAND* The 11th of JVLY, 1678.
May it please Your Sacred Majesty,
WHen we reflect upon the great Happiness of living under a King of our own
Nation and Religion, whose Predecessors have for many Ages kept us from being
Conquered by Strangers, and a Prey to one another; And how that though We have
been so Unhappy, as not to have had Your Majesty's Sacred Person amongst us,
yet Your Majesty does always, with a most Fatherly Care, provide for our
Security and Happiness; so that whilst our Neighbors have been spending their
Estates and Blood in cruel Wars, we have enjoyed a most sweet and profitable
Peace. We cannot be so far wanting to our Duty, as not to embrace every
Occasion of testifying to the World, our humble and thankful Acknowledgment of
those Blessings, which we value as much, because they are Marks of Your
Majesty's Favor, as for being the Effects of Your Royal Protection.

And therefore we, Your Majesty's most Faithful and most Loyal Subjects, the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Representatives of the Shires and
Boroughs of this Your Ancient Kingdom, being Assembled in this the fullest
Convention that ever has been seen of Your Majesty's Estates, do, in a Dutiful
Return to those and the other Marks of Your Majesty's Royal Care and Kindness,
assure Your Majesty, That though Factious and Humorous Persons may seduce some
in this Nation to depart from their Duty, yet there is generally so much
Innate, National, and Unalterable Kindness and Duty, in the Hearts of the
Subjects of this Your Majesty's Ancient Kingdom, that these Errors do in most
proceed rather from a misrepresentation of Your Majesty's Inclinations, than
from any formed Resolutions of opposing Your Authority. And that the World may
know how much we trust Your Majesty's Judgment, and how entirely we believe the
Measures You take, to be the best and safest, We acknowledge it is fit we
should Enable Your Majesty to resist all Foreign Invasions, at this Time
especially, wherein all Europe has too apparent Reason to be jealous of so
Potent and Restless Neighbors. And therefore without prying into Foreign
Mysteries, (which are the proper Employment of Princes) we do, with all humble
Confidence, repose entirely upon Your Majesty's wise Conduct, being fully
resolved to contribute our Lives and Fortunes toward the maintenance of Your
Majesty's Honor and Greatness, in which our Peace and Safety are inseparably
included.

We hope Your Majesty will not think it strange, that after so inveterate and
raging a Rebellion as that was, which for so many Years wasted all Your
Majesty's Dominions, we should nor so fully and so soon return to our former
Integrity, as that some of us should not need sometimes Your Majesty's Pardon,
and all of us, at all times, Your Majesty's Assistance; But we hope that Time
and Reason will, with Your Majesty's Justice, Clemency and Prudence, reduce
this Your Ancient Kingdom, in a short time, to its former entire Loyalty: Such
as trouble our Peace becoming daily more inconsiderable in their Numbers, as
they have for a long time been, and have, in this Representative of Your
Majesty's Kingdom, appeared to be as to their Interest. And that these
Rebellious and Schismatic Principles may be rooted out by lawful and suitable
means, we have offered Your Majesty a Supply, which nothing, save the
Sincerity, Unanimity, and the Affection wherewith it was offered, could make
any way considerable. And to make the same yet more effectual for attaining so
desirable Ends, we assure Your Majesty, That we shall contribute our hearty
Endeavors for suppressing those Factious and Schismatic Humors, which if
favored, or indulged, would soon ripen into a new Rebellion, Knowing, that the
surest way to lessen our Burdens, is to remove their Cause. And as this Supply
is furnished, at this time, with respect only to the present Exigence, so this
shall not lessen our forwardness in appearing universally betwixt 60 and 16,
(Conform to the Laws of this Your Majesty's Kingdom) with great Alacrity and
Cheerfulness, when ever Your Majesty calls for our Assistance.

We hope that the Duke of Lauderdale will inform Your Majesty, with what
Respect we received and used him as Your High Commissioner; Knowing, that not
to believe what is represented, in Your Majesty's Name, by your Ministers, is
as dangerous, as to oppose Your Person in defense of Your Authority; both of
these furnishing equally Pretexts of opposing the Royal Power, when it does not
please us. His management of Affairs in this Convention, has justified Your
Majesty's Choice of him, and will (we hope) answer Your Expectation.

Having thus satisfied Your Majesty's just Desires, we hope Your Majesty, who
uses always to lessen our greatest Guilt, and to heighten the value of our
meanest Endeavors, will continue Your Care of our Concerns, Your Goodness
having left us nothing else to Grave; That enjoying the pious and free Exercise
of the Protestant Religion, as it is presently Established in its Doctrine and
Government, and the just Liberties of our Persons and Properties, in the due
Administration of the Laws and Customs of our Native Country, we may continue
to bless God for a King, who, like God, (from whom alone our Kings derive their
Power) never uses his Power, but to do good; and may be with all Cheerfulness
ready to hazard what is so preserved to us, in the defense of Your Majesty's
Royal Person and Government. And this we have ordered to be Signed by Your
Majesty's Chancellor, in Name of

Your Majesty's most Humble, Most Faithful and Most Obedient Subjects and
Servants. Rothes Cancel. I. P. D. Con.
Edinburgh, July 11. 1678.

