TWO LETTERS: The One from a DUTCH MAN TO HIS Correspondent in ENGLAND; The
Other an ANSWER From the Said CORRESPONDENT.

In which most things of Note (that relate to, or have been transacted in this
Hostility) are very fully handled.

With the present Condition of both Countries.

Printed in the Year 1673.

LETTER I;
YOurs of the 4th, Instant (which supposes me here at Hamborough, and
congratulates my arrival) came a day before me; for I left not Amsterdam so
soon by a fortnight as you imagined. Your Accounts I have slightly perused,
but shall nothing to them till our Correspondents at Bruges and Antwerp send me
theirs: nor can I stir from hence these seven Months; for (besides the business
I told you of) I must expect the Phoenix, which will not arrive till April; and
in it I hope to find as much of 1. B's effects, as will near satisfy the debt
he owed me.

Whilst I was at home (knowing the vain suspicions of the Rabble) I neither
sent nor asked you any news; but now I am here, I by no means blame the desire
you have to understand the posture of our affairs, and how they have been
managed; especially since you pretend to no further an information (were I
capable of more) than what any stranger that passes through the Country gives
his acquaintance: I say I cannot blame this request, having now the same favor
also to ask of you, for the Relations I heretofore saw, were often very false
and uncertain; nor can this freedom I hope, be any prejudice to our respective
Governors, for what may be great satisfaction and news to those in our sphere,
is none to them, who have spies (we are sure) abroad, informing them at another
rate of all occurrencies. But before I acquaint you with our misfortunes (too
well known to the world) I must beg pardon, if for my ease (my Letter being
long) I write in Dutch, which wants, I confess the comprehensive harmony of
your smooth and gentle Language.

That John de Wit was a man of parts, is held by not a few of our wise ones*
yet either his ignorance in the state of your Kingdom (which has hidden
mysteries in it not to be fathomed, I think, by foreign Politicians) or God
Almighties particular Judgment on those that glory too much in the strength of
their understanding, brought him to that dismal end, and with this misfortune
also, as to be now esteemed a fool and a Traitor by the generality of his
Contrymen.

Two irreconcilable piques he had to England: First, because from* thence he
imagined, that the Prince of Orange would have a perpetual support, and be at
length the ruin of him and his Cabal: And secondly. by reason of its strength,
its Ships, its convenient Ports, and inclination to Trade, 'twould at one time
or other ingross all negotiation to it self. These thoughts prompted him, and
the rest of them, instead of courting you in foreign Countries after the Peace,
to countenance under hand all kind of private affronts and Libels that could be
invented, to lessen you as well in our own esteem, as among our Neighbors and
Allies, and well might we and our friends think, we had been your Match in the
late War, when we often saw some of your Country men seem to yield, (by the
hanging down of their heads) that we had had the better of you.

Though out Seamen and Factors were thus a Gog, our Ambassadors with you were
sufficiently submiss and pliant, calling it the drunken mirth of some private
Subjects, and assuring your chief Ministers, that our States valued your
Monarch above all things; nor was it hard for them to believe this, seeing that
he alone forced his Christian Majesty, in the height of his Conquest, to the
peace of Aqui^grane, and was the only Defense we had against our being invaded
by him. Every body was satisfied therefore that the Great King of Fraence had
no Equal; but the Great King of England, and that he thirsted for nothing more,
than liberty of salling upon us, who had broken) as he said) our Faith with
him. He could never forgive us our underhand opposing his designs upon
Flanders, which obliged our Governors, in spite o^ all inbred animosity, to
court you unto the triple Alliance, that would have preserved us (had it
continued as 'twas once happily begun) in our old prosperous and flourishing
condition.

England was not ignorant, to be sure, how much we wanted it is assistance, and
that it could never have a fairer occasion to oblige us to do Justice (as you
termed it) to the Prince of Orange; who now was of a fit age to receive those
honors, which the merits of his Family had as 'twere entailed upon him. But
the ru^ing party, that feared nothing like this, resolved to obstruct it,
though with the utter ruin of their Country. and therefore when all
imaginable intrigues of theirs, could not make your Ki^^ desert the interest of
his flesh and blood, they privately offered his Chri^tian Majesty what
conditions he pleased, so he would but join his powerful Army, with their
Fleet, and immediately fall upon you.

Having done this, and not doubting of the acceptance of their Proposals* they
sent to our Admirals, who were cruising with several Men of War, to strike Flag
to no single Ship of yours; nor feared they any inconvenience, because yo^ had
no number abroad. This they knew would force you by degrees to a q^arrel, and
yet not without some plausibility of reason on their side* it being a thing
harsh in the general opinion of the World* that a Fleet in all its glory and
strength should do obeisance to every Cock-boat, that owned it self of the
Navy-Royal

Your King soon resented this affront, and demanded Reparation with that warmth
and vigor as was imagined, but whilst Agents were passing to and fro, h^s
Christian Majesty either distrusting us, or thinking his game surer by having
you his friend, not only refused our Conditions, but sends them to your King,
who (as he thought) out of Interest or Revenge would now join tooth and nail
with him.

Your willingness nevertheless to accomodate all things with us, was not so
pleasing, as one would imagine, to De wit and his party; because they knew that
your terms would be much worse as to their own interest than formerly; and
therefore resolving to give you no satisfaction, they buzzed in every bodies
ears, that your King had not a penny of money; That most of your Parliament
being our Pentioners, would give him none; That the whole Nation hated the
French, that not a Seaman of yours would fight; that your Non-conformists would
be up in Arms: and in fine after a thousand such lessening allegations, they
declared it to be an unpardonable folly, to value or league with a people, that
wanted both Fidelity and Power to help their Friends: all which noise spent not
it self in vain, but caused thousands to believe you could do us neither harm
nor good.

The first unlook't for accident that touched our Politico to the quick, and
made him tear his hair, was your King's postponing the Bankers* and converting
the Receipts of the Exchequer to his own use; for now contrary to all
expectation, he saw his Majesty might put out a Fleet of himself, and that your
Subjects (who love not we know an overtopping Rival) would even for their own
interest prosecute the War once a foot, let them be never so averse to it in
the beginning. But the thunder clap that gave him his mortal wound, was the
Liberty of Conscience so universally granted to the People; this brought the
Devil a thousand times into his mouth, saying that nothing but he, who owed
Holland a shame, could put it into your heads, and that shortly you would be as
united as our selves, so that ever hereafter the Kings enemies must become the
common enemy of the Nation: and I must tell you, 'twas not so in the last War.

The effects of the Toleration were soon perceived by every body; for many of
your Country men at Rotterdam, Delf, Leyden, and else where in this Land,
frighted heretofore out of England, upon the score of Religion, have now not
only Longings homewards, but are also generally looked upon by our people as so
many Spies to betray us, whereas formerly no Dutchman was thought more faithful
than they, to the wel^are and interest of this Government; nay if this be not a
wonder tell me one, that a Quaker of yours at Rotterdam, should be so
transported at the news, as to throw his Hat which had been naild at least ten
years to his head) into the fire, and to drink the Kings health with a Vive le
Roy in his mouth.

For my own part, though two descents have not, I think, washed away all my
English blood, yet upon the account of my Mothers kindred, and my own business,
who knows whether ever with convenience I can quit Holland or no, but this I
must tell you, that my two Uncles and their goodwives talk much of London, and
therefore I shall desire you to inform me what real foundation this Indulgence
has, that I may accordingly advise my scrupulous friends, for there has been no
question more ventilated at any time in these Quarters. I do not, I Will assure
you, ask this of you upon my own score, but theirs; for had my Grandmother had
so digestive or rather charitable a stomach as mine, I should have at present a
greater interest in Mark-Lane than now I am ever like to have. Yet to speak to
you with my old frankness, I am not able to conceive how a People so wedded to
Persecution, as you were thought in the general opinion of the World* can so
suddenly forget it, as not to be grasping* at it again upon every slight
pretense and humor; and thus having finished my request; let us if you please
return to our Fac-totum, who had so groslly reckoned without his Host.

He was, you may easily imagine much surprised at what had happened, yet
outwardly no man seemed less, for in that way of disguise he was esteemed a
great Master: never wanting some plausible gloss or other to lessen the dread
that sudden accidents brought along with them. For as to the stopping of the
Treasury, he pretended it the greatest advantage to us in the world, since no
private man would hereafter trust the Crown let emergencies be never so great,
and yet every Monarch must often borrow of his Subjects. And, as concerning the
Toleration, he was not ignorant, he said, of the zeal and self love of your
Clergy; who one time or other would get it repealed, and that then all
Dissenters would be ten times more disobliged and implacable than before.

These and the former Reasons strangely satisfied the multitude, yet many an
honest man cried that we had been mistaken in our measures last war, that Kings
find expedients when others little dream of them: That your Kingdom was a place
whose Maxims and Secrets were not to be guessed at; for when we thought our
selves wholly sure, and that you wanted either money or men, Allies abroad, or
Uuity at home, and the like, still some accident or other happened to deceive
and ruin us. But nothing can save them whom God infatuates; nor could this
Macchiavel keep himself (as he imagined) above board without the rash attempt
of neglecting your Friendship; and having thus made a false step, he was forced
in desperation to contrive (as they say) this following Treason.

He had for a long time kept fair with France, and was as much in the Kings
books, as a foreign Minister could well be; and this he did for a support in
case his enemies (the Prince beginning to be the Joy of the People) should be
able to contend, and if they absolutely got the better, then here should be a
sure Refuge and Asylum for him. He continued (even after the Treaty at Breda)
still in favor with that Monarch, who presently after daily more and more
showed his hatred to us: nor did the Faction fail to insinuate to the people,
as if the Prince encouraged the King to a quarrel, to become thereby his
Tributary, if he worsted us; or at least to be restored by the States to the
Dignity of his Ancestors, since an Army and a General must be in vogue in a
War; and every body knows how much the Soldiers loved and adored him.

They had been (as I should have told you before) busy to lessen also the
Princes esteem in England, when they were forced in the year 70 to let him come
over to you; for they fancied, that because his Grandfather had by the
assistance of our established Ministry (whom he protected* agrandized himself,
and so crushed the potent Arminian Faction, that they were all hated for a time
by us; therefore by the same rule; if your Church men could be put out of
conceit with him (I mean the present Prince) your People by their insinuation
and power might be easily made averse and irreconcilable to his person, let the
King be never so kind. Hereupon, to make him seem a Phanatick (which is the
grand bugbear of your Episcopal Government) they expressly ordered him never to
receive in any of your Churches kneeling, but that the Minister should bring
him the Bread and Wine, as he sat in his Pew or Seat; for we called it an
arrogant Institution of your Divines, as pretending to be wiser, forsooth, than
all the Reformed World, seeing there is not one Protestant Congregation that
ever knelt at the Communion besides your selves. Here they were again
unfortunate, and the plot vanished in sumo; for it seems your Spiritual Leaders
(had they been disgusted) have not that influence over you as we once imagined.

Our Juncto were now in no little perplexity (you may be assured) nothing being
able to hinder the increase of his Highness's esteem in all our Provinces; or
to put any stop to the French Preparations, whilst on the other side your King
called aloud for satisfaction by his Ambassadors, who gave them also many a
secret bite for their perfidious dealing with you, as he would have it.

But their private resolution was (as I said before) to give you no Reparation,
and to sink sooner than to have your Protection, assuring one another that no
Demand of France (though victorious) could be so destructive to their
particular Interest as yours; nor is this kind of self ends any news to
Christendom, since we daily see there are men in Authority that will rather
submit to the Turk himself than miss of their aims, or fall into the hand of a
Neighbor, whom they hate or envy.

'Twas therefore decreed to treat you with all possible fair promises, on
purpose to make the French jealous, or thereby at least to puzzel their
measures: and if they could by these Artifices keep you a Neuter, till Spring,
you would not have time to set out your Fleet, so that by compounding with his
Christian Majesty (who missing your assistance would be far more tractable) we
should make you contemptible to both of us, and to the whole World also.

This was the Design, but it failed, for you presently showed us you would not
be amused, and therefore began about Christmas to equippe, and when they
delayed you satisfaction, you became your own Carvers, setting on our Smyrna
Fleet, which I must tell you, seemed a happy omen to some pretenders to Wit;
and a presage to them of our future success, because you did not take them all.

'Twas now plain you were in earnest, yet there wanted not real good Patriots
(though it seems they were deceived) that cheered both themselves and people,
with a fancy that your Parliament, (which was without fail they said, to sit in
October.) would question this War, and never contribute to it; for 'twas in all
our mouths, that the whole English Nation was persuaded, that the whole
Protestant Cause lay now at stake, and that the Pope was the Contriver of this
difference.

Many also would have it advantageous to us, that the French Ships were to be
joined with you; because your own Fleet, (which you too well know we all dread)
would not be so great now, as were you left to your selves; besides, they said
that Auxiliaries sometimes by private Orders must not fight, at other times
perchance they would not fight, at best there was to be a deference and winking
at their faults, it being impossible for you to command them like your own
Subjects: nay, some envious men rejoiced, that should you now be successful*
and do all your selves, yet these Allies would certainly rob you of (at least)
half the G^ory*

Spring being now come, and the great Force both by Sea and Land almost ready
to fall upon us, the Juncto agreed to play their Cards thus, that is to say,
they would put 10 or 12 thousand men at least into Mastricht, as the place the
Enemy would first attaque, and therefore the Towns on the Rhine, being left
unprovided, they must soon become a prey to his Christian Majesty, on whom
they resolved (if the worst came to the worst) to depend, nay, rather on the
Devil, than to be at the mercy of the Prince, and his Party, into whose hands
they knew also they should at last fall, if the War were but procrastinated;
for in times of Action, Soldiers will always overtop Gownmen; besides, there
being very little hopes by force to resist two such Monarchs (which is the best
excuse the world generally makes for them) they thought fit to be thus
beforehand, that their own Conditions and Terms might be the better.

But though they determined in this manner, as to France, yet they thought fit
to try one experiment first, which would be an advantage to them, what way
soever it succeeded, viz. To put out their Fleet with all the have and privacy
imaginable to intercept yours, before you joined D'Estres; so that if you
happened to beat us, they had a fair pretense of having done their endeavors
for their Country, and then the French in our consternation might overrun us
at pleasure: But on the other side, if by surprise or chance we should
overthrow you at Sea, it would be easy to clap store of men into these Towns
which (we now say) were designed to be lost, and no hard thing in the height of
our Victory and Joy to make some agreement with the rest of our Enemies; and so
to your loss alone, all things should be here just as they were before.

It Is certain, one part of the Project was well carried, for our Fleet weighed
Anchor when few of our own News mongers thought it half ready; but what the
success was, when we came to blows, you know, I am sure as well as my self;
only this I must add, That De Ruyter, after the Fight, could not refrain saying
to this purpose, That now he saw you were invincible, and more than men; for
whether we caught you a sleep, or awake, divided, or together, we still
returned with loss: And truly, who could imagine that a little Squadron, nay
rather 6 or 7 Ships, should so long resist our whole Navy; and that your Duke
should engage with so much valor and fury, as to change Ships (when refitting
lost time) oftener than great Generals at Land have done their Horses.

We lost not above four Sail (or six as some say) but certainly we never had so
many men destroyed, and our Fleet so torn before; and therefore not a few
question whether we could have repaired, and been fit to fight again last
Summer, supposing we had had no other enemy to distract us. But the French
Inundation that presently followed, put it out of dispute; for the great
Sennacheri^ (as some of our devout women called him) having taken 24 places in
22 days, we durst not being our Ships into their usual Harbors, being fully
assured, that not a Seaman would stay in them; for besides the fear of you,
there was none but had in this public calamity concerns enough at home.

This was our case, Sir, and now were we ready to yield up every thing, when it
pleased God that Vtreicht (like another Capua) or at least the strange rains,
and ill weather, should put a stop to the Victorious French by Land, as also to
the ruin your proud triumphant Navy was drawing on us, for what could have
saved our East India Ships, having no Allies, nor Fleet of our own to protect
us, but a three months storm, which for the most part hastened them forward,
and put you into a continual disorder, not permitting you to watch your prey,
as otherwise you would have done: Nay, some on board have assured me, That had
not the wind chopped about the same day, we got into Embden; we must nevertheless
have fallen into the very midst of you.

But our tumultuous People made no other use of this respite, which God
Almighty had sent us, but to embrue their hands in the blood of the two De
Wits, after that strange and horrid manner you have heard of. I cannot
(because of the consequences of it) justify this Violence, though many an
impartial man thinks them to have been really guilty by their Treason of all
our misery; as also of contriving the Princes Death, who now by the ill success
of their Government, had got (as they ever feared) all Authority into his
hands; yet there want not others, who will have it, That the Orange Party hired
the Barber to accuse the Eldest Brother of having intentions of Poisoning His
Highness; and that the rest of the cries against them are but mere Calumnies.

For my part, I will not possitively affirm what is laid to their charge, only
this I must say, that I have many more reasons against them both, than for
them; but whether the Accusations be true or false, The Arminians have now lost
their Head, and being hereby depressed, are so full of malice and hatred, that
they care not who masters us, so those in power, share in the misery: and
therefore a villainous Minister or Preacher of theirs (when even the Catholics
of all Holland, and particularly of that Quarter, would by no means assist or
join with the French) brought them by a secret pass to the relief of Woerden;
by the taking of which, we should, as many affirm, have regained half our
Losses.

These good Actions have made many zealous Protestants much esteem our Papists
(who you know are numerous) and to reckon them very true and faithful to their
Country. But who could have thought that the House of Austria, those
super-refined Sons of Rome, should be our only Supporters against a Popish
King, whom the Pope himself has (I warrant you) blessed and congratulated for
his Zeal in advancing of the Gospel. But in earnest Sir, let me tell you, The
itch of propagating Opinions, and idle notions is (unless in your Country)
quite out of fashion in Christendom; and I believe no body thinks that France
in its intentions of Conquering us, ever thought of the Church; or that the
Emperor troubled his head about Religion, when he designed our Assistance:
this was a frequent pretense about a hundred years ago; but time and experience
has taught us all wit.

The powerful entreaties of the Spaniards (who fear the loss of Flanders) were
his Imperial Majesty's principal motive in taking up Arms, though naturally,
you may imagine, he is troubled to see the strength of one daily increase, who
has an eye upon the Empire, and hopes to succeed at the next vacancy. Nor does
the surprise of Lorrain lightly stick in Caesar's stomach, which is both a
member of the Empire, and appertains also truly to Prince Charles, whose
Protection he has long taken upon him: neither are his great Officers ignorant,
that there is much profit and advantage in helping a rich and plentiful Nation.

Brandenburgh too has his ends, you may swear* and it encourages him not a
little, that his great Master Leopold is concerned in our affairs. The
Princess Dowager of Orange has also a mighty influence over him, and it may be
you I think it strange if she had rather have him our Patron, than her
Grandchild; for she cannot forget (as her back-friends say) that he is Son to
your Princess Royal, whose great Birth she could never brook, but envy. If we
prosper, this Electour is to have, not only his own upon the Rhine free, which
hitherto in a manner we kept from him; but also many other by-emoluments; and
nothing encourages both Prince and Peasant like gain.

Our only hopes then at present, are in these Auxiliary Forces; and this
advantage we have already got, that they have diverted Turene, and the main of
the French Army, which would have undone us before this; and without all doubt,
had not the Bishop of Munster been by their approach obliged to retire, we had
not only lost Groningen, but with the whole Province, that of Westfriezland
also: Nevertheless he has done us mischief enough, and says, He Will teach us to
paint him in a Pontifical and Military habit, riding on a Hog but who would
have thought expressing him to be Master of the best Westphalia-Bacon, had been
so great a Crime?

The Prince, who is all in all among us, went lately, with the whole strength
he could make, toward Liege Country, in hopes of some great exploit, to
repair his ill fortune at Woerden: How he will prosper, God knows; only this I
am sure of, that our Peop'e will judge of the Conduct according to the success;
and therefore his Friends do very much pity the strange hard game he has to
play; for he must, as I said, have always good luck if he hopes to please; nor
is he wholly to disoblige you, whom he has so near a Relation to, and yet he
must remember how easy it is for his Enemies to make him suspected by the
people, who by nature are always jealous and violent. Besides, if he stands in
perpetual defiance of the late ruling Party, he will find many inconveniences by
it, both as to his own, and to the public good; but if he protects or joins
with them (for many of them have made him great promises*) the commonalty may
chance to forsake him, and think of another; and if that should happen, what
assurance or relyance can he have on them, that have always kept him under,
and perchance design this way for his final ruin and destruction?

If his condition be ticklish and ill, ours (I mean the Nations) is worse; nay,
as bad as it can almost be wished by you; for there is scarce any Village that
fears not to be burnt, or at least pillaged before morning by the Enemy. Our
sluices and damms are most of them pulled up; our draining mills destroyed, and
that water which protected many places in the Summer, endangers them now if it
should freeze; so that Towns of consequence are in perpetual dread and terror.
Our Traffic is ceased, and little coming in, and less going out; and, which
is yet stranger, most of our Seamen are forced for a livelihood to run a
Privateering; and when they get something, they must sell it at half the worth,
seeing our very hometrade is quite gone by the loss of the Mose and Rhine,
which heretofore brought us still so much gain and profit. No wonder then if
the Poor cry for meat, when the Rich can hardly live; and what Artizan can
maintain his Family, when scarce any body will set him on work? These are
causes of Insurrections in our Cities, and perpetual tumults among the Bores;
nor have we had any comfortable news this long while; but the fond
exaggerations of our Gazetts, or sometimes the taking of a Prize from you,
which to me I confess brings little joy, since it shows you are still busy in
commerce, whilst our Merchants sit idle at home; and though perchance Sally and
Algiers may weary you this way, it is not to be done by a People whose whole
glory and advantage depends upon Negotiation.

Peace is the thing I cry for; and peradvanture God will at length hear us,
since we begin to make good use of this affliction and chastisement; for with
admiration I say it, There was never a greater change in any Country, and
mercy always attends a sorrowful and contrite people.

One thing I had almost forgot to tell you, which makes the whole world stand
amazed, and wonder how they have been thus long deceived concerning you; for
all men of all Countries have ever cried, That 'twas your Parliament that in
truth governed; your King being no body, or at most but half a Prince. This
therefore made them generally conclude you an insignificant people either to
Friend or Foe; especially seeing there must be continual application in all
business to both these Powers, which (as 'twas thought) instead of agreeing,
strove to circumvent each other. But now the Scene is quite chaned; for since
they have seen your King raise an Army, proclaim War, set out his Fleet,
threaten Newters, assist Friends, pay every body, and all this of himself; they
confess you are a potent Nation, fit to be courted, and that the balance of
Christendom is in your hands. In short, take it upon the word of an honest
man, This unexpected way of proceeding has done you over all Europe more real
honor (and the honor of a Country is the best part of its strength) than any
thing that has happened to you in this age.

Having thus fulfilled your commands in my plain and inartificial manner, which
I am sure your goodness will pardon, though your admirable judgment cannot; I
say, having thus showed my obedience, you must excuse my longing to hear from
you, and I doubt not but you will as frankly inform me how things stand with
you. I desire no intrigues of State (as I hinted in the beginning) but such an
account, as, were I at London (and it is by your King's favor lawful) every
body there would give me.

When you write, direct your Letters to our Correspondent at Antwerp, who grows
rich by the great business that runs through his hands in these troubles: for
many Merchants of note (and now you may see how the world is changed with us)
are compelled to such shifts, being scarce able to vent one pennyworth of
Goods, without being beholden to others. Farewell, and God send us peace, which
is the incessant prayer of

Hamburgh December. 26. 1672. Your Faithful Friend and Servant, F. C.

Reader, I hope you will pardon this Translation, though it comes short of the
Dutch Original: I put it in the nearest English I could, to express the
Author's sense, and therefore take it in good part I beseech you.

LETTER II.
I Will not trouble you now with the private affairs betwixt us, since to
thank you for your excellent and most satisfactory Letter, of the 26 th. past
is task enough, and far too much, were I to do it as it deserves: but how could
I expect less, from one who had Leyden for a Mistress so many years, and (after
the death of your father) so much experience in the world, leaving then the
Muses, and your Dedication to Theo ogie, for this so profi able a Study. Yet
for all I owe you many obligations, you must pardon me if I express my mind
freely in every thing, and complain, even in the beginning, of your writing in
Dutch, which (though I understand it) shows in you methinks that aversion to
us, you ever professed against; nor can you have any pretense for this our
unusual way of corresponding, unless resolving altogether to be critical, you
prefer your Mother Tongue before one which you have acquired half by Art. This
excuse is sufficient to me, who so well know your gentle disposition, and
cannot but rejoice at the profession you make, that you have not yet lost all
your English blood; and therefore, I must again and again, repeat my
entreaties. That you would come hither, and except of the Invitation of a
Nation that exceeds (when it is confided in) even its own frank and generous
promises.

As for Holland, I pity its condition, I Will assure you; but if God Almighti'es
particular Judgment (as you your self intimate) brought De Wi^t to that
lamentable end, for glorying too much in the strength of his understanding,
what could you in Just ce otherwise expect, than some strange unparalleld
disastre, their being no Neighbor whom you have not in your vanity affronted,
and above all, England it self so kind and friendly to you.

One Maxim, I remember, you had ever in your mouths, That money was
omnipotent, and therefore abounding in it; you could not possibly need or fear
any thing; but now you see the fallacy of that opinion; and that you may want
necessaries, though your Coffers are full, which (pardon me if I yet tell you)
have been ever much emptier than you your selves pretended: and besides, none
are sooner reduced to extremity, than atrading people once out of their method
and bias.

I must acknowledge as to my particular concerns, I was extremely glad at the
Peace of Breda, and believed also you would remember the danger you risqued in
that War, having nothing in the least to satisfy your losses, but the Accident
at Chatham, when we were wholly unprovided; and which you know we could have
quickly redressed by a new Fleet, had not we then concluded with you. I say, I
was glad of this Peace, but little dreamed to hear complaints on our Exchange
immediately upon it; That you durst vaunt in your Gazetts to have forced
several Princes in the East Indies to forbid us their Trade; and that in the
West Indies our Colonies at Surinam were still detained, and not suffered to
come home according to our late and solemn Treaty.

Several other of your injuries and scorns were daily told me, but none moved
me inwardly more, I confess, than Bracke's his public affront (who pretending
to have broken the Chain at Shereness, and done all the other exploits in that
enterprise) did in many places in the Streights (and especially at Genoa,
Legorn and Zant) invite the Dutch Factory aboard him, clapping always in the
height of their jo^lity the English Colors under the Dutch ones, in token of
our being Conquered, and that now we must tru^kle under you; but as for your
denying to strike Sail, I was not in the least concerned, looking upon it as a
madness, and that the Devil (as your Politico, you say, confessed) owed you a
shame; otherwise you could never be incited to deny us a Right (which for its
infinite consequences, we value beyond expression) even at that very time, when
no body did or could defend you from the fury of France, but our selves.

Nothing it is true is more visible than the strange animosity and hatred, which
your fac totum (as you call him) and his friends bore us; yet I am so candid to
his Memory as to be half persuaded, that the greatest part of his Treason, was
the neglecting of the advice, which the old Prince of Orange left the State on
his Deathbed: viz. To keep friendship with England upon any terms, and That
your standing Army should ever consist for the far greatest part of mercenary
Neighbors, and not of your own Subjects and Countrymen: for what could be
expected but the surrendering of Towns as fast as summoned, when the Soldiers
minded trade more than their business, and when their Officers were both
ignorant what an Enemy was, and disheartened by the cries of their Wives and
Children? But this Council was contrary to the Designs of your democratical and
self-interested Party, who know, Soldiers of Fortune will depend on their
General, and that they should never domineer at the Helm, whilst this Great
Commander had such power.

I think no man ought to wonder at our Kings inclination and zeal, for the
establishment of his Nephew; which, let me tell you, we English look upon in a
manner as his Right; for, was it fit, do you imagine, that so mighty a Monarch
as the King of Great Britain, should marry his Daughter to that Prince, were
it not by a kind of custom of Nations (as we see in Poland, Hungary, the
Empire etc. or by the private promises of your States assured, that their
Children should enjoy the honors of their Ancestors; and if you once come to
Gratitude, what people was ever more obliged, than you by this great and
Princely Family.

I dare believe you, that your Rulers were afraid of our engrossing all trade,
since it has often with envy been repeated, that from 4 or 5 rich Merchants in
the last Century, we have now an Exchange even crowded with such, that do, or
at least are able to keep their Coach, and all things else proportionable.

Let me also add (to what I have already urged) this one advantage more we have
over you: viz. A plentiful Country by nature, so that we depend not wholly
upon Trade, whereas, you that are altogether its slaves, must by any ill
accident, undergo great molestation and disturbance. And herein also you are
extremely unfortunate, that though you know you are ever to be beholden to your
Neighbors, yet that Pride of yours which Riches create, will still make you
recalcitrate and disoblige your best and surest friends.

Your present miseries, I am sure, convince you sufficiently of your base usage
of us from time to time; and that you have now forced us (contrary to the
natural inclination of either Prince or People) to be as well your Destroyers
as Founders; and yet we would have defended you (had you but deserved it) with
the same ease from this present attaque of France, as formerly we did from the
fury of the powerful Spaniards.

England you think has some particular Mysteries in it, which often deceive
foreign Ministers; and truly I am much of your sentiment, for I never heard
more extravagancies and wronger observations in my life, than by Strangers
concerning our Government and Policy: nay they have been so wedded to their
opinion, and especially about the power of the Parliament, that all the
assurances that knowing men of our Country could give them to the contrary,
served only to confirm and harden them, and among this Sect of Politicians,
tell me I beseech you, who was more obstinate than your self?

For how often have I told you (though to little purpose) That this Great
Council, this Epitome of all England, had no life but what it received from its
Prince; That it met only when he would, and again dissolved at the least motion
of his lips; That being congregated from all parts of the Kingdom, it must
needs know our several maladies, and having humby proposed the remedy, leaves
always the fall determination to the wisdom of their Sovereign; That our
Monarchs having received from their People the greatest free Demesne and
Revenue of any Potentate in Christendom, had graciously promised thereupon
never to take any money from us without our own tendering of it, and yet it was
never known when public Necessities called (though the Royal Exchequer has
also its own Rivers of Plenty) but that this Auguste Assembly was ever more
liberal in its offerings, than our Princes could be in their Demands. In short,
Sir, you now know what the Kings of England can do, and confess that the world
at length acknowledges its error.

But why do I repeat the mistakes of you Strangers in our more difficult and
speculative matters, since you daily contradict even your external senses: for
to this very moment show me one Traveller in ten thousand, that calls London
any more than one long Street; whenas there is hardly in the World a rounder and
compacter City within its walls: and as for the Suburbs, do you but consider
whether from the Thames to Southampton-house be so contemptible a breadth; and
yet I might add to this (as they do in other places) the River, and whatsoever
lies on the other side of it.

'Twas therefore not ill observed by those among you, [who cried (as you say)
you had been always mistaken in your measures concerning us, even when you
thought your selves most sure: and doubtless De Wit himself would have been of
that opinion, had it not diametrically thwarted his Interest; and we see that
an earnest and passionate inclination to a thing, often vitiates the greatest
understanding and capacity: for how could he imagine (had he been in his
seuses) that any little pique between us and the French (which for these
several years has had no other grounds but their vain humor in over-valuing
themselves) could make us rather submit to the continual and real injuries we
sustained by you, than join with them for Reparation?

If in this our conjunction you are conquered, we shall certainly have a share
and proportion of the booty; nor will such an addition do us any harm. But, by
the way, suppose France should alone, and to its own use subjugate your Country
yet I look not, I confess, upon such an incorporation and union (though it seem
a Paradox) half so able to offend England, as were you only bona fide,
confederated against us: and we know in part by the last War, what such a
League can do.

For first, the Discipline of the French (who are so volatile by nature) will
be ten times more lax by the extent of their Dominions, than at present; and if
they should chance to have a careless, or less active Prince, they will presently
full into intestine disorder and confusion: nor was there ever since the
Creation of the World, a potent people in a Continent (which is the true Seat
for an Empire) that can show fewer marks of their bravery than they; for though
they have been always in War, and a most powerful Monarchy time out of mind,
yet have they not one foot of Land out of France it self, except what they have
got within these few years; and which in truth is not yet worth the speaking
of. In the next place, no body must imagine that the Shipping of Holland will
be the sixth part so considerable after the Conquest, as now it is; for the
domineering temper of French Governors, and the obstinate self-willed Genius
of your people (that have been so long free as they call it) are so different,
that most will rather beg than stay at home; and they that do chance to remain,
will presently change in a manner their whole course of living: and thus it
has fared with Dunkirk, which formerly bred up as able Seamen as any were in
Europe; yet now it has nothing in it considerable, though this present
excellent King be a greater Encourager of all Maritime Affairs than will sit, I
dare say, on his Throne these many and many Ages.

But all this is but a fancy, as I said before, and though false, yet as true
as some of the whimsies of your transcendent Statesmen, who were pleased to
imagine England so foolish as to think the joining with His Christian Majesty
would prejudice the Protestant Cause; and yet your selves might innocently
forsooth league with this very Monarch against us: besides, every body saw that
neither we, nor you, nor any reformed State in Christendom apprehended then the
least detriment to our Religion by it* and therefore, why I pray should it be
otherwise now?

As for the postponing the Bankers, I never doubted but it would surprise your
Grandees; and it was well reflected upon by some of you, that Kings find still
Expedients when others little dream of them: nor was yet this a far-fetch't
one, since there have been few Monarchies or States that have not done at one
time or other the very same thing; nay, were your Bank at Amsterdam called
upon, 'twill be found that in our memory it never had enough in specie to
satisfy half its credit.

And as your Wise ones erred in the thing it self, so they may also well do it
in their Conjectural consequences; for (believe me) the Crown will never want
Lenders when it really stands in need of them; nor, can any man that has thus
put out his money (except a few that may have had perchance some present
occasion) be the least inconvenienced thereby, having for security the word of
this King, the interest of his Successors, and the Reputation even of the
Kingdom it self, which will never let so many good Subjects suffer, when their
money (or what should have reimburs'd them) was spent in a necessary War for
the honor and safety of us all.

It Is the Sea, which surrounding us, keeps us from danger; and it is therefore
the Dominion of it which al our Princes have so c^refully looked after; for if
to show our Jurisdiction 'twas ever lawful to oblige your single Ships to
strike to our least Man of War, we have still the same Reason and Justice to
require it from your Fleet; since your whole Navy has no more Right in these
Seas, then any one of your Vessels when it is alone; and if number and strength
may pretend (as you say) to exemptions, that plainly declares War, and by it
you own your selves Aggressors.

This was the cause that we set on your Smirna Fleet, w^hch absolutely denied
to pay us this duty: and if five of our Frigates were not able to take 50*
Merchant Ships mounted with 20 and 30 Guns apiece, yet they sufficed, with
three more that came afterward in, to sink your Rear Admiral, and to bring
home some of the richest as Prizes, in spite of eight Men of War that conveyed
them: And pray remember, you were here again Breakers of the Peace, seeing he
that denies a Prince his usual Privileges, declares ipso facto War against
him, let them be before never so strictly leagued together.

These extravagant and accumulative injuries have at length caused a breach,
the effects of which (as was expected) you already with sorrow feel, not daring
now to put to Sea any Men of War, if there be the least probability of meeting
ours: And truly for my part, though I commend always the ingenuity and
artifice of an enemy, yet I can by no means think your late setting upon us at
Sold Bay, deserves the name of contrivance, because all Fleets must be at
Anchor if they take in necessaries; and when they are so, any enemy (the wind
blowing fair) may have this so frequent and ordinary advantage.

There Is no fence against this accident but Scouts, and ours gave us the alarm
two hours before your arrival, and you soon found what resistance our very
Vantguard could make; and had not we lost the most noble and famoms Earl of
Sandwich (whom nothing but a Fire-ship could master) this rencounter had been
to us nothing but a pass-time, in which notwithstanding you lost I dare affirm,
near double the number of what has been very publicly owned by you.

But, though you had even then a strange mist, and other happy hitts to stand
between you and utter ruin, as also afterward a three months storm (as you
justly call it) for the protection of your East India Fleet, yet I know the
proudest of you are now convinced that there is no dealing with us; and truly
when I consider our Ships, our Men, our Commanders, and above all, our great
Admiral (who has given the world such proofs of his prodigious Valor and
Patience, Virtues that at last will conquer even Fortune it self) I may without
vanity, I think, and with all the Justice maginable say, we need never fear any
thing here in England but our sins.

As for Liberty of Conscience, it is no marvel if it were De Wits nicking blow;
for doubtless no one thing ever settled a distracted Country in so much Unity as
this. His Majesty for 12 years together suffered the Laws to be often severely
executed against all Dissenters without exceptions, which had no other effect,
but to incense most of them so far against the Government, that they had no
manner of regard or tenderness for it, nay many (like sick men that vainly
expect ease by change) rejoiced at ill news, and seemed earnestly to wish our
ruin; and doubtless were not Great Britain an Island, we had been overrun
long ago. But now on the contrary, no people speak more reverently of the King
than they; nor do I know any one Sect here among us (though I am surrounded
with their Meeting Houses) that has committed the least scandal since this his
Royal Grace and Freedom.

And now whilst it is in my head, let me tell you, that if the Rotterdam Quaker
turned Hector upon notice of this Indulgence, it had such efficacy over his
Brethren here, that whilst it was but in projection they suddenly became Wits,
and ventured to jeer the Players themselves, their piquant and sworn Enemies.
For the King's Theater hapening to be fired, with many hundred pounds loss to
the single share of Mr. Heart, an Actor; One of these Spiritual Drolls being
ask't at their Assembly next day, what news was stiring? None friend, (said he)
that I know* but that the King's Meeting House is burnt; and so gave the joyful
Auditory a full account of all particulars: Nay then (replied the Demandant) we
need no longer fear those blasphemers of the Saints; for now without doubt
their Heart is broken.

But to come to your Qu^re concerning the duration of this Grace, be pleased to
understand, that though there be among our wise and learned Clergy some
Demetrius's that value their Diana, and private concerns before the Tranquillity
and Settlement of the Nation, yet these (which is the happiness of it) are so
inconsiderable in every respect, that you may assure your friends, 'twill never
be in their power to persuade his Majesty to recall his Declaration, which all
men of parts do now aknowledge to be the Bond of Peace and Unity among us.

Nor need you fear that any Congregation will be excluded, because it
frustrates the very intention of the Favor, by affrighting all Dissenters
whatsoever; for if any party be excepted, it must be because they are not
considerable enough to be apprehended by the Government; and then will the
weakest of the Tolerated take the Alarm, and so from one to another 'twill
presently infect the whole Body in general. For which Sect can assure
themselves but that from a numerous Party (since Religion also has its ebbings
and flowings) they may soon become Christ's little flock; and if so, they are
certain beforehand to find no Mercy.

Such an Exclusion also is wholly opposite to the King's Honor and Interest,
his merciful Disposition and Temper having gained him the affection of the
Non-Conformists, and is the grand thing on which they all rely; for Political
Indulgence (they say) may change with every wind, but what Nature has
established ought to be looked upon as fixed and permanent.

But how comes it to pass unless you continue overvaluing your selves, and
taking wrong informations of us, that you think we are the only Wranglers in
Christendom about Religion. I must again assure you, you have very ill
intelligence; for we now understand, as well as the rest of the World, that
true Protestant Doctrine, viz. That all Well-living Christians may be saved,
and therefore with reason defy those that persecute for Conscience, which the
Judicious also find to be the true cause of the spawning and growth of Sects.
For be pleased to know, that though we have abounded in all other opinions
imaginable, yet no man ever heard of an English Lutheran; and truly could I
have notice of such a wonder, I would (as old as I am) go 20 miles afoot to see
him.

Now I hope you do not believe that Henry the 8th's Book against that
Patriarch, did so absolutely convince the Nation, that it could never since
digest his Tenets; for, were this the cause, what would have become of us all,
had Calvin received a broadside also? No Sir, the reason is evident, to wit,
he never drew blood from the one, or made the least Law against him, whereas he
so worried the Disciples of the other with his 2 leash of Articles, that the
Doctrine became as fixed as Tyburn, the Post they were so often baited at.

Thus dealt also Queen Elizabeth and her Brother with our Anabaptists and the
then Sectaries, drawing from them that blood which might have endangered their
suffocation. Nay, in the like manner served she our Jesuits, for having caught
Campian (who, together with his companion, were the two first, as Cambden tells
us, that ever came into England) he was no sooner quartered, but from a few
wandering Scholars without Stock, without Houses, without Patrons, and
absolutely beholden to other Provinces, they became presently (even by
assistance of Parsons, who was he that escaped) not only to be a body of their
own, but Masters also of Colleges in Spain, Rome, Flanders, and where not? and
courted ever after by several great Princes of Christendom.

And now that our Papists come in my way, who have I must tell you, (for you
cannot outdo us in any thing) showed as much Loyalty here, as your own at home;
I say, now that we speak of these Papists, they also demonstrate not a little
methinks, that Religions gain force by Persecution, especially seeing Holborn
(the grand Road of those they style Martyrs) has with its inletts more of that
perswsion, than any ten Streets, pick them where you will, throughout the City.
Therefore (as a Corollary from this Theoreme) when I hear any man earnestly
talk of suppressing of Sects, and that all decency and Ecclesiastical order
will otherwise fall (fancies which his little private concerns prompt him to) I
presently advise him to get two or three Sir John's of his Party hanged, and
that I Will hang afterward if ever then we want either Tippet, Rochet, Cope,
Organ, or any other such like weighty and fundamental parts of Religion.

In short, Sir, our eyes are opened, and we find that all Opinions in power
have still used severities against their Adversaries, and therefore none ought
to blame his fellow, seeing we have all erred and strayed, and followed too
much the devices and desires of our own hearts; for thus did Henry the eight,
thus did Edward the sixth, thus did Queen Mary, thus did Queen Elizabeth, thus
did King James, thus did King Charles the first, thus did the Long Parliament,
thus did the Rump, but thus will not King Charles the Second do any more, who
knows by experience as well as inclination what a virtue Mercy is; and really
it vexes me to see even Papists themselves call us into the list, and offer to
show, that we have executed more of theirs for Religion, than they of ours;
adding as an alleviation on their side, That it is less cruelty in any man to
destroy eggs in their hatching, than a Covey that is pen-feathered, and at its
full growth: but now, as I said, our eyes are opened, and both they and you
shall find we English understand good nature, and that Non saremo sempre
Polachi, We will not always be Polanders, who (besides their innate folly
proverbially said to their charge by Italians) could yet lately quarrel with
one another even when the Turk himself was in the midst of them.

It Is your Countrymen that are, in truth, our Turks, and perchance as faithless
as they, yet this difference is betwixt you, that they have got as many
Provinces, as you have now lost, though both happened by the same means, that
is, by breaking Solemn Oaths and Promises.

One command more I am to obey you in, and then I have done; and that is in
giving you an account of the present State of the Country, which in gross I
assure you is the same as formerly, but in Affection and Concord much better;
nor has any one Prophesy or Prediction of your partial Juncto even yet happened
to us. Some Merchants of ours have lost, it is true; yet yours, though they
durst not venture out to Sea, have felt the fury at home, not only of Water,
but of Fire also; as you will find by your Letters, which (like Job's several
Messengers) have, I question not, brought you worse and worse tidings, since
the writing of your last.

Nor will your people (I Will be bound) ever hereafter boast of the gain or
advantage had by Capers, it being so like to that of our Carters and Porters,
whilst the City was on fire, who got for the present sufficient for Brandy, but
were ready to starve the following week, when not only their new but their old
employment also ceased.

God send you a good Peace, and give you grace to accept it, if it be offered,
which may perchance hinder your utter ruin; for otherwise there will be an
Army, I can assure you, of above an hundred thousand Fresh men within your
bowels next Summer, and a greater Fleet of ours than ever, blocking up your
Havens under his Royal Command, who has already twice defeated you.

I have tired you, Sir, sufficiently, though with truth, and therefore I will
now stop here, after I have assured you, that nothing shall ever lessen my
kindness and respects for you; and that upon all occasions I will be,

Your most Faithful Friend and Servant, J. G.
London, January 16. 1672/3.

