A DECLARATION BY THE KINGS MAJESTY, TO HIS SUBJECTS OF THE KINGDOMS Of
SCOTLAND, ENGLAND, and IRELAND.


EDINBVRGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty,
1650.

C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
BY THE KING
HIS Majesty taking in consideration that merciful dispensation of divine
providence, by which he has been recovered out of the snare of evil counsel,
and having attained so full persuasion amp; confidence of the loialty of his
people in Scotland, with whom he has too long stood at a distance, and of the
righteousness of their cause, as to join in one Covenant with them, and to cast
himself and his interests wholly upon God, and in all matters Civil to follow
the advice of his Parliament, and such as shall be entrusted by them, and in
all matters Ecclesiastic the advice of the General Assembly and their
Commissioners; And being sensible of his duty to God, and desirous to approve
himself to the consciences of all his good subjects, and to stop the mouths of
his and their enemies and traducers, does inreference to his former
deportments, and as to his resolutions for the future, Declare as follows.

Though his Majesty as a dutiful Son be obliged to honor the memory of his
Royal Father, and have in estimation the person of his Mother, yet does he
desire to be deeply humbled and afflicted in spirit before God, because of his
Fathers hearkening to and following evil counsels, and his opposition to the
work of Reformation and to the Solemn League and Covenant, by which so much of
the blood of the Lords People has been shed in these Kingdoms, And for the
Idolatry of his Mother; the Toleration whereof in the Kings house, as it was
matter of great stumbling to all the Protestant Churches, so could it not but
be a high provocation against him, who is a jealous God, visiting the sins of
the fathers upon the Children: And albeit his Majesty might extenuat his former
carriage and actions in following of the advice and walking in the way of those
who are opposite to the Covenant, and to the work of God, and might excuse his
delaying to give satisfaction to the just and necessary desires of the Kirk and
Kingdom of Scotland, from his education and age and evil counsel and company,
and from the strange and insolent proceedings of Sectaries against his Royal
Father, and in reference to religion and the Ancient Government in ^he Kingdom
of England, to which he has the undoubted right of Succession, Yet knowing
that he has to do with God, He does ingenuously acknowledge all his own
sins and all the sins of his Fathers House, craving pardon, and hoping for
mercy, and reconciliation, through the blood of Jesus Christ. And as be does
value the constant addresses, that were made by his People to the Throne of
Grace on his behalf when he stood in opposition to the work of God, as a
singular Testimony of long suffering patience and mercy upon the Lords part,
and loyalty upon theirs, So does he hope, and shall take it as one of the
greatest tokens of their love and affection to him and to his Government, that
they will continue in prayer and supplication to God for him, that the Lord who
spared anti preserved him to this day, notwithstanding of all his own
guiltiness, may be at peace with him, and give him to fear the Lord his God,
and to serve him with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind all the days of
his life.

And his Majesty having upon full persuasion of the Iusti^^ and equity of all
the heads and articles thereof, now sworn and subscribed the national Covenant
of the Kingdom of Scotland, and the solemn League and Covenant of the three
Kingdoms of Scotlant, England and Ireland, Does Declare that he has not sworn
and subscribed these Covenants, and entered into the Oath of God with his
people, upon any sinister intention and crooked design for taining his own
ends, but so far as humane weakness will permit in the truth and sincerity of
his heart, and that he is firmly resolved in the Lords strength to adhere
thereto, and to prosecute to the utmost of his power all the ends thereof, in
his station and calling, really, constantly and sincerely all the days of his
life: In order to which he does in the first place Profess and Declare that
he will have no enemies, but the enemies of the Covenant, and that he will have
no friends but the friends of the Covenant. And therefore as he does now detest
and abhor all Popery, Superstition and Idolatry, together with Prelacy and all
errors, heresy schism and profanenes, and resolves not to tolerate; much less
allow any of these in any part of his Majesty's Dominions, but to oppose
himself thereto, and to endeavor the extirpation thereof to the utmost of his
power; So does he as a Christian Exhort, and as a King Require that all such of
his subjects who have stood in opposition to the Solemn League and Covenant and
work of Reformation, upon a pretense of Kingly interest, or, any other pretext
whatsoever, to lay down their enmity against the Cause and people of God, and
to cease to prefer the interest of man to the interest of God, which has been
one of those things that has occasioned many troubles and calamities in these
Kingdoms, and being insisted into, will be so far from establishing of the
Kings Throne, that it will prove an Idol of Jealousy to provoke unto wrath him
who is King of Kings and Lord of Lords: The King shall alwise esteem them best
servants, and most Loyal Subjects, who serve him and seek his greatness in a
right line of subordination-unto God, giving unto God the things that are Gods,
and unto Caesar the things that are Cesares, And resolves not to love, or
countenance any, who have so little Conscience and piety, as to follow his
intrests with a prejudice to the Gospel and the Kingdom of Jesus Christ,
which he looks not upon as a duty, but as flattery, and driving of self
designs, under a pretense of maintaining Royal Authority and greatness.

II. His Majesty being convinced in conscience, of the exceeding great
sinfulness and unlawfulness of that Treaty and peace made with the blody
Irish Rebels, who treacherously shed the blood of so many of his faithful and
Loyal Subjects in Ireland, and of allowing unto them the liberty of the Popish
Religion; for the which he does from his heart desire to be deeply humbled
before the Lord; And Iikewise considerering how many breaches have been upon
their part, Does Declare the same to be void, And that his Majesty is absolved
therefrom; being truly sorry that he should have sought unto so unlawful help
for restoring of him to his Throne, and resolving for the time to come, rather
to choose affliction then sin.

III. As his Majesty did in the late Treaty with his people in this kingdom,
agree to recall and annull all Commmissions against any of his Subjects, who
did adhere to the Covenant, and Monarchical Government in any of his
kingdoms; so does he now Declare, that by commissionating of some persons by
Sea, against the people of England, he did not intend damage, or injury to
his oppressed and harmless Subjects in that kingdom, who follow their trade of
Merchandise in their lawful callings, but only the opposing and suppressing of
those who had usurped the government, and not only bar him from his just
right, but also exercise an arbitrary power over his people, in those things
which concern their persons, consciences and estates: And as since his coming
into Scotland, he has given no Commissions against any of his Subjects in
England or Ireland, so he does hereby Assure and Declare, that he will give
none to their prejudice or damage, and whatever shall be the wrongs of these
usurpers, that he will be so far from avenging these upon any who are free
thereof, by interrupting and stoping the liberty of trade and Merchandise or
otherwise, that he will seek their good, and to the utmost employ his Royal
power, that they may be protected and defended against the unjust violence of
all men whatsoever. And albeit his Majesty desires to construct well of the
intentions of those (in reference to his Majesty) who have been active in
Counsel or Arms aagainst the Covenant; Yet being convinced that it does
conduce for the honor of God, the good of his cause, and his own honor and
happiness, and for the peace and safety of these Kingdoms, that such be not
employed in places of power and trust, He does Declare, that he will not
employ, nor give Commissions to any such, until they have not only taken or
renewed the Covenant, but also have given sufficient evidences of their
integrity, carriage, and affection to the work of Reformation, and shall be
declared capable of trust by the Parl. of either kingdom respective: And his
Majesty upon the same grounds, does hereby Recall all Commissions given to any
such persons; conceiving all such persons will so much tender a good
understanding betwixt him and his Subjects, and the settling and preserving a
f^rm peace in these kingdoms, that they will not grudg nor repine at his
Majesty's resolutions and proceedings sherein, much less upon discontent act
any thing in a divided way unto the raising of new troubles; especially since
upon their pious and good deportment, there is a regress left unto them in
manner above expressed.

And as his Majesty has given satisfaction to the just and necessary desires
of the Kirk and Kingdom of Scotland, So does he hereby Assure and Declare that
he is no less willing and desirous to give satisfaction to the just and
necessary desires of his good subjects in England and Ireland; and in token
thereof, if the houses of Parliament of England sitting in freedom shall think
fit to present unto him, the propositions of peace agreed upon by both
Kingdoms, he will not only accord to the same, and such alterations there anent
as the Houses of Parliament in regard of the constitution of affairs, and the
good of his Majesty and his Kingdoms shall judge necessary, but do what is
further necessary, for prosecuting the ends of the Solemn League and Covenant,
especially in those things which concern the Reformation of the Church of
England in Doctrine, worship, discipline, and Government; that not only the
directary of worship, the Confession of Faith and Catechism, but also the
propositions and directory for Church Government accorded upon by the Synod of
Divines at Westminster may be settled, and that the Church of England may enjoy
the full liberty and freedom of all Assemblies and power of Kirk censures,
and of all the ordinances of Jesus Christ according to the rule of his own
word, and that whatsoever is commanded by the God of Heaven, may be diligently
done for the house of the God of Heaven. And what ever heretofore has been the
suggestions of some to him, to render his Matie jealous of his Parl. and of the
servants of God; yet as he has declared, that in Scotland he will hearken to
their Counsel, and follow their advice in those things that concern that
Kingdom and Kirk; So does he also Declare his firm resolution to manage the
government of the kingdom of England, by the advice of his Parl. consisting of
an House of Lords, and of an House of Com. there, and in those things that
concern Religion to prefer the counsels of the Ministers of the Gospel, to all
other Counsels whatsoever; And that all the world may see how much he tenders
the safety of his people, and how precious their blood is in his sight, and how
desirous he is to recover his Crown and Government in England by peaceable
means, as he does esteem the service of those who first engaged in the
Covenant, and have since that time faithfully followed the ends thereof, to be
duty to God, and Loyalty to him; So is he willing in regard of others, who have
been involved in these late Commotions in England against Religion and
Government, to pass an Act of Oblivion, Excepting only some few in that Nation,
who have bin chief obstructers of the work of Reformation, and chief Authors
of the change of the Government, and of the murder of his Royal Father;
Provided, that these who are to have the benefit of his Act lay down Arms, and
return to the obedience of their lawful Sovereign. The Committee of Estates of
the Kingdom, and General Assembly of the Kirk of Scotland, having declared so
fully in what concerns the Sectaries; and the present designs, resolutions, and
acting of their Army against the kingdom of Scotland, and the same Committee
and Assembly having sufficiently laid open public dangers and duties both upon
the right hand, and upon the left, It is not needful for his Majesty to add
any thing thereunto, except that in those things he does Commend and Approve
them, and that he resolves to live and die with them and his loyal subjects, in
prosecution of the ends of the Covenant.

And whereas that prevailing party in Eng. after all their strange usurpations,
and insolent actings in that land, do not only keep his Majesty from the
government of that kingdom by force of Arms, but also have now invaded the
kingdom of Scotland, who have deserved better things at their hands, and
against whom they have no just quarrel, His Matie does therefore desire and
expect that all his good subjects in Eng. who are and resolve to be faithful to
God, and to their King according to the Covenant, will lay hold upon such an
opportunity, and use their utmost endeavors to promove the Covenant and all
the ends thereof, and to recover and reestablish the ancient government of the
kingdom of Engl. (under which for many generations it did flourish in peace and
plenty at home, and in reputation abroad) and privileges of the Par. and
native and just liberty of the people. His Majesty desires to assure himself
that there does remain in these so much confidence of the duty to Religion,
their King and country, and so many sparkles of the ancient English valor,
which shined so eminently in their noble ancestors, as will put them on to
bestir themselves for breaking the yoke of those men's oppressions from off
their necks. Shall men of conscience and honor set religion, liberties and
government at so lowa rate, as not rather to undergo any hazard, before they be
thus deprived of them? will not all generous men count any death more tolerable
then to live in servitude all their days? and will not posterty blame those who
dare attempt nothing for themselves, and for their children, in so good a
cause, in such an exigent? Whereas if they gather themselves, and take courage,
putting on a resolution answer able to so noble and just an enterprise, they
shall honor God, and gain themselves the reputation of pious men, worthy
patriots, and loyal subjects, and be called the repairers of the breach, by
the present and succeeding generations; and they may certainly promise to
themselves a blessing from God upon so just and honorable undertaking for the
Lord and for his cause, for their own liberties, their native King and country,
and the unvaluable good and happiness of the posterity. Whatever has formerly
bin his Majesty's guiltines before God, and the bad success that these have
had who owned his affairs, whilst he stood in opposition to the work of God,
yet the state of the question being now altered, and his Majesty having
obtained mercy to be on Gods side, and to prefer Gods interest before his own,
he hopes that the Lord will be gracious and countenances his own cause, in the
hands of weak and sinful instruments against all enemies whatsoever. This is
all that can be said by his Matie at present to these in England and Ireland at
such a distance: And as they shall acquit themselves at this time in the active
discharge of their necessary duties so shall they be accepted before God,
endeared to his Maty and their names had in ramembrance throughout the World.

Given at our Court at Dumfermline the 16. day of August, 1650. And in the
second year of our Reign.

