His Majesty's GRACIOUS SPEECH TO Both Houses OF PARLIAMENT; On Tuesday April
5. 1664. at the Passing of TWO BILLS; The one Entitled, An Act for the
Assembling and Holding of Parliaments once in Three years, at the least; And
for the Repeal of an Act Entitled, An Act for the preventing of Inconveniences
happening by the long Intermission of Parliaments. The other, An Act for
preventing of Abatements of Writs of Error upon Judgments in the Exchequer.

C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, 1664.

CUM PRIVILEGIO.

His Majesty's Gracious SPEECH To both HOUSES of PARLIAMENT; On Tuesday April
5. 1664. at the Passing of Two Bills.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
YOu will easily believe that I have come very willingly to give My assent to
this Bill; I do thank you very heartily for your so unanimous concurrence in
it, and for desiring Me speedily to finish it: and if I understand any thing
that concerns: the Peace and Security of the Kingdom, and the welfare of My
Subjects (all which I study more then My Prerogative; indeed I consider My
Prerogative only in order to preserving the other) every good Englishman will
thank you for it; For the Act you have Repealed, could only serve to discredit
Parliaments, to make the Crown jealous of Parliaments, and Parliaments of the
Crown, and persuade neighbor Princes that England was not Governed under a
Monarch; It could never have been the occasion of frequent Parliaments. I do
promise you I will not be one hour the less without a Parliament for this Act
of Repeal, nor, I am sure, will you be the less kind to Me in Parliament. I do
again thank you for your excellent temper and respect to Me, and desire you so
to proceed, that the Session may be within the time I proposed to you last; and
I do assure you upon My Word, and I pray believe Me, That I have no other
thoughts or designs in My heart, but to make you all happy in the support of
the Religion and Laws established; and if My own wants and necessities are at
any time grievous to Me, it is only, as I apprehend I may not be able
sufficiently to provide for those, and for the Peace and Security of the
Kingdom; and therefore I am confident you and I, who agree in the End, shall
never differ in the Way.

FINIS.

