C R


HIS MAJESTY'S Gracious SPEECH TO BOTH HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT, Together with the
LORD CHANCELLOR'S Delivered In Christ Church Hall in OXFORD, The 10th of
October, 1665.

OXFORD. Printed by L^^^ard Lichfield, Printer to the University, for ^ohn ^i^l
and Christopher Barker, Printers to ^i^* Majesty. 1665.

HIS MAJESTY'S Gracious SPEECH TO BOTH HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
I am confident you all believe that if it had not been absolutely necessary to
consult with you, I would not have called you together at this time, when the
Contagion has so spread it self over so many parts of the Kingdom. I take it
for a good Omen to see so good an appearance this day, and I doubt not every
day will add to your number, and I give you all my Thanks for your compliance
so far with my desires.

The Truth is, as I entered Upon this War by your advice and encouragement, so
I do desire that you may as frequently as is possible, receive information of
the Conduct and effects of it, and that I may have the continuance of your
cheerful Supply for the carrying it on. I will not deny to you, that it has
proved more chargeable, then I could Imagine it would have been; the addition
they still made to their Fleets beyond their first purpose, made it unavoydably
necessary for Me to make proportionable preparations, which God has hitherto
blessed with Success in all encounters. And as the Enemy have used their utmost
endeavors by Calumnies and falls Suggestions to make themselves friends, and to
persuade others to assist them against Us, so I have not been wanting to
encourage those Princes who have been wronged by the Dutch, to recover their
own by force; and in order thereunto, have assisted the Bishop of Munster with
a Very great sum of ready Money, and am to continue a supply to him, who is
now in the bowels of their Country with a powerful Army.

These Issues, which I may tell you have been made with very good conduct and
husbandry (nor Indeed do I know that any thing has been spent that could have
been well and safely saved) I say, this expense will not suffer you to wonder,
that the great supply which you gave me for this war in so bountiful a
proportion, is upon the matter already spent: So that I must not only expect an
assistance from you., to carry on this war, but such an assistance as may
enable Me to defend my self and you against a more powerful Neighbor, if he
shall prefer the Friendship of the Dutch before Mine.

I told you when I entered upon this war, that I had not such a Brutall
appetite, as to make war for wars sake, I am still o^ the same mind; I have
been ready to receive any propositions that France has thought sit to offer to
that end, but hitherto nothing has been offered worthy My acceptance, nor is
the Dutch less insolent, though I know no advantage they have had, but the
continuance of the Contagion; God Almighty I hope will shortly deprive them of
that encouragement.

The Chancellor will inform you of all the Particulars.
THE LORD CHANCELLOR'S SPEECH To both Houses of PARLIAMENT.
My Lords, and you the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of
Commons,
THe King is not content, you see, to leave you to your selves, to make a state
of this War, and the success that has attended it, by your own Observations,
and the general Communication of all that has fallen out; which, in truth,
has left few Men ignorant of any thing, who have had any curiosity to inform
themselves; but, takes care that you be informed by Himself, that you may know
all that He knows, that so you may be able to give Him your Council upon the
clearest Evidence.

In order to this, it will not, I hope, be unseasonable or ungrateful to you,
to refresh your memory, by looking some years backwards, even to the time of
His Majesty's happy Restoration, that we may take the better prospect of the
Posture we are now in, and how we have come into it. What inclinations His
Majesty brought home with Him, to live in Amity with His Neighbors of Holland,
though He had received Indignities enough from them; and, in truth, had been
little less proscribed there, then He had been in England, needs no other
manifestation, then that He chose that place to imbark Himself in, when He was
pressed by the two Neighbor Kings, (from whom He had received more Civilities)
to have made use of their Ports: It cannot be denied, but that His Reception in
Holland was with great Civility and Luster, and a sufficient Evidence, That
they had a full sense of the high Honor His Majesty had vouchsafed to them, and
the departure from thence was with equal and mutual satisfaction in each other;
which made many Men the more wonder, that albeit the Ambassadors who were to
follow, had been nominated before the King left the Hague, there was so long an
interval before their arrival here, that the two Neighbor Kings, and many other
Princes, had finished their Ambassies of Congratulation, before we had heard
any more from the United Provinces.

You all remember, how long it was before the Armies were disbanded, and the
Fleets paid off; during which time His Majesty lived upon His credit, and
easily contracted a great Debt for the mere support of Himself and His
household, which was not so easily discharged afterward. There was one thing
that exceedingly surprised Him, when He found (which will be incredible to
Posterity) that a Triumphant Nation, that had made it Self terrible to
Christendom, by having fought more Battles then all the Neighbor Kingdoms and
States together had ever done in so few Years, and seemed to be in a posture
ready to fight them over again: That had so long reigned over the Ocean in
formidable Fleets, should at the time of His Majesty's happy return, as if on
the sudden all their Arms had been turned into Plough-Shares, and their swords
into Pruning hooks, not have in all the Magazins, in all the Stores, Arms
enough to put into the hands of five thousand men, nor Provisions enough to set
out ten new ships to sea; which his Majesty did not desire should be known to
his best neighbors, how little soever he suspected their affections; nor did
indeed, so much as make it known to his Parliament; but made it his first care,
without the least noise, and with all imaginable shifts to provide for the full
supply of those important Magazins and Stores, which have been ever since
replenished as they ought to be.

He had not the least imagination, that any of his neighbors would want only
affect to interrupt the happy calm that he and themselves enjoyed; and
therefore resolved, to retrench the vast expense of the Navy, under which he
found the Nation even to groan, and out of that good husbandry to provide for
more necessary disbursments: Yet, that the world might not think that he had
abandoned the Ocean, and that the memory of the glorious actions the English
had so lately performed upon it, might not vanish in an instant, after he had
provided such a Guard, as the narrow Seas never ought to be without, in the
Spring he sent a strong Fleet against the Pirates of Argiers and Tripoly (who
had grown to that strength and boldness, that they interrupted the whole trade
of Christendom) as the only Enemies He would choose to have.

It was a design of great glory, and equal expense, crowned in the end by God
Almighty with the success we could wish, and with an entire submission to the
English Flagg, and as great security to all his Majesty's Subjects, in their
Trade, as the engagement and honor of Infidels could give; and this Agreement
ratified with all formality (the like whereof had never been before) by the
Great Turk himself.

Hereupon, the King again renewed his resolution for a further retrenchment of
his Naval expense, even to the lessening the Guard in the narrow Seas, His
Merchants in all places receiving less interruption in their Trade, then they
had in any former time undergone; until he received intelligence from the
Straights, that the faithless people of Argiers, who had so lately Submitted to
him, had committed new insolences upon some of his Subjects, or rather upon
foreign persons taken by his Subjects into their protection, and which the
Turks pretended they might do, without violation of the Treaty; but his
Majesty resolving to admit none of those elucidations, lost no time in sending
a new strong Fleet into the Mediterranean, to chastise those perfidious
Pirates; and after a chargeable war made upon them, for nere, or full twelve
months; and after having taken several of their Ships from them, and upon the
matter blocking them up in their harbors, he received a second submission from
them, with better and more advantageous conditions then the former.

I must not omit one circumstance, that about this time, the Dutch, who
received much more prejudice and damage from the Turks, then the English had
done, besought his Majesty, that he would once more send a Fleet into those
Seas against those Pirates, and that it might upon all occasions join with one
they were likewise ready to send out to the same Christian end, and for the
utter extirpation of those Sea-Robbers; and within a very short time after the
English Fleet was gone, they likewise sent De Ruyter with a good fleet thither,
which was so far from any conjunction with us, that when our Ships chased any
Argier-men near them, they never offered to obstruct their flight, but quickly
made it manifest, that they rather brought money with them to buy a
dishonorable and disadvantageous Peace, then to make a war upon them.

Matters standing thus, the Kings Fleet being gone into the Straights against
the Turkish Pirates, and there remaining few ships in the narrow Seas, we began
every day to hear of depredations by the Dutch upon our Merchants in all
parts; instead of delivering up the Island of Poleroon in the East Indies, as
by the Treaty they ought to have done, they by their Naval power in those parts
hindered us from trading there, and would not suffer our ships to take in their
lading of such merchandise as the Factors had provided and made ready for their
freight, upon pretense that those Ports, where the Merchandise was ready to be
embarked, were in the dominions of some Princes whom they had declared to be
their Enemies, and so they would not suffer any traffic to be maintained with
them; and they published the like Declaration, and challenged the same
sovereignty in Africa; and by virtue thereof would not suffer our Ships to
trade upon that Coast, where we had a Tradelong before the Dutch had any
footing in those parts.

These insolences made that noise in the world, that the English Merchants
felt the effects of it in all places, till it reached the ears of the
Parliament, which in April last was twelve months presented the same to his
Majesty, and besought him that he would take some speedy and effectual course
for the redress of those wrongs dishonours and indignities, which were the
greatest obstructions of our Trade, and declared, that in the prosecution
thereof, they would with their Lives and Fortunes assist his Majesty against
all oppositions whatsoever.

My Lords and Gentlemen, You very well remember, that though his Majesty was
very well pleased with the great Zeal you showed for the advancements of Trade,
He was far from Resolving to make a War upon the warmt'h of that Declaration,
but told you, that He would examine and peruse the Particular Complaints which
had been Represented to His Parliament, and would thereupon Demand Justice and
Reparation from the States General, which Demand He Appointed His Minister
residing there to make in a short Time after; What effect that Candid Way of
Proceeding found, is enough known to the World; instead of other application,
They declared Themselves wonderfully offended with the Declaration of the
Parliament, with many Insolent Expressions suitable to the Manners of a
Commonwealth; They gave present Orders for Equipping a very Great Fleet, and
the Raising many Land-Soldiers, making Greater Preparations for War then they
had done in many Years before; They had made a Complaint to His Majesty, that
a Captain of one of the Ships which his Majesty had lent to the Royal Company,
had in his Voyage thither taken a Fort belonging to them, near Cape Verte, for
which they demanded Satisfaction; the King Assured them, That he had not the
least Commission or Authority from him for so doing; That He expected him home
very speedily, and then he should be sure to undergo that Punishment which the
nature of his Offense required, when the matter should be examined, and they
should be sure to Receive Full Reparation; This satisfied them not, but in
Great Fury, they Resolved to send forthwith a Strong Fleet to Guinney, and
granted a Commission (which they took care to publish) to the Commander in
Chief, to make War upon the English in those parts, and to do them all the
mischief they could. The King found Himself now Obliged, in what Straight
soever, to provide for the Protection of his Subjects in those parts, and for
the Support of that Trade, which I doubt is not enough taken to heart, and the
value thereof not enough understood; And in order thereunto, with great speed,
caused a Fleet to be made ready for that expedition, under the Command of His
Highness Prince Rupert, who was under Sail for the Voyage, when his Majesty
found it necessary to stop the Prince his further prosecution of it, upon good
intelligence that the Dutch had appointed their Admiral with a Fleet of fifty
Sail to convoy the other Fleet designed for Guinney, through the Channel, in
contempt of his Majesty, who had a very small Fleet in readiness; and that De
Ruyter was likewise sent out of the Straights from prosecuting the Turks, to
make War upon the English in Guinney; When at the same time they had earnestly
pressed the King upon many professions of desire to prevent a War, that Prince
Rupert's Fleet might stay in Harbor, as theirs should do, till some means
might be found for an Accommodation of all Differences; and in Truth, this very
difficult Stratagem of pretending one thing, and intending another; of
promising with all solemnity, and never resolving to perform; of swearing this
day not to do a thing, when they had served their turn by having done it
Yesterday, that no body could know, is the Highest Pinnacle of their Wisdom of
State; by which they Govern their Affairs, and Delude their Neighbors.

The winds were not favorable to this Triumphant Design, and now the King
found the Value of the Vote and Declaration of his Parliament, it was a Rich
and a Massy Vote, which in a short time he coined into 200000 ready money in
the Chamber of the City of London, with which he gave Order forthwith to make
ready more Ships, and the Duke going himself to the Fleet, by his
Indefatigable Industry, with incredible Expedition, added so many good Ships to
those under the Command of Prince Rupert, that in November he put Himself on
board the Fleet, Resolving to stop the Dutch, if the wind gave them leave to
pursue their former Resolution; which, from the Time the Duke was known to be
at Sea, they fairly declined, and were content rather to be safe in their own
Harbors, then to look to the Security of their Merchants; it was High Time now
to seize upon as many of their Ships as came in our way, to Satisfy the
Damages We had Reason to believe We should sustain from De Ruyters expedition
into Guinney, with the Commission mentioned before; but there was not the
lading of one Ship sold, or disposed of, till His Majesty received Full
Information of De Ruyters having begun the War upon the Coast of Africa, by
Seizing upon our Ships, taking our Forts, and Committing all the Acts of
Hostility which his Commission directed him unto; His Majesty likewise at the
same Time, receiving new Advertisement of their Refusal to deliliver up the
Island of Poleroon to Him, which they were Bound to by their Treaty; And will
you not wonder, after all this, at the Confidence of these Men; and more, that
any Neighbour-Prince should have that Confidence in them, as to declare, that
the King Our Master is the Aggressor, that He first began the War.

From this time the War began to be more in Earnest, and to be carried on at
another Expense; though His Royal-Highness ventured Himself in November in a
Fleet consisting of little more then fifty Ships, to stop the Dutch from
passing through the Channel; Yet, in April (which was within few days after
Your Prorogation at the end of your last Session) He went again to Sea with a
much stronger Fleet, and more Proportionate to the Great Preparations the Enemy
had made; and even after He was gone to Sea, upon great additions of strength
every day made by the Dutch, more good Ships were sent to reinforce the Fleet;
insomuch, as upon that glorious third of June, when they had the Courage to
visit our Coast, after the Duke had, in vain, called upon them at their own
Doors, and took many of their Merchants Ships in their sight, the English Fleet
consisted of very few less then 100 Sail.

The Action, and the Blessing of that day, has been celebrated in all the
Churches in England, and in the hearty Devotions of all true Englishmen; and
therefore, I shall say no more of it here, save only, That whether the Public
Joy then, even upon the Solemn Thanksgiving Day, was superior to the universal
Consternation that spread it self over the Nation before, I appeal to the
Breasts of all here present: We, who had the Honor to be near the King at that
time, observed Him to be in that Agony, that cannot be expressed; an Agony
Himself could not have long endured, even when by all the Intelligence He
received hourly from the Coast, He had reason to assure Himself of the Victory.
In that great Action, we sunk, burned and took, Eighteen good Ships of War,
whereof half were the best they had, with the loss of one single small Ship of
ours, but of many noble and gallant Persons, of too much value to be ventured
(if there had not been a greater venture) against such Trash; and whose
Memories ought ever to be preserved and extolled, and made precious to
Posterity.

No diligence was omitted, but all imaginable Expedition used in refreshing,
repairing, and setting out the Fleet again; in order to which, the King Himself
made a Journey thither, and stayed till He saw all ready and fit to sail; but
then, no entreaty, no importunity could prevail with Him to venture His Brother
again, though His Family, and all Preparations for the Voyage were still on
Board: His Majesty too well Remembered, and still felt the Impressions he had
undergone the Third of June, and having got his Brother into his Arms again,
He would not return without Him, committing the Charge of the Fleet to the
Earl of Sandwich, who had acted so Good a Part in it.

Within few days after the beginning of July, the Earl of Sandwich went again
to the Coast of Holland, with a Fleet in no Degree, Inferior to the Former, and
Rode before the Texel to Envite the Dutch to a New Engagement, They having used
all the Arts at Home to Conceal the Loss and Dishonor they had undergone; and
Pretended to be Very Ready and Solicitous for another Battle, When there was
no appearance of their Purpose to Come Out; And upon Sure Intelligence that the
East India Fleet was coming about by the North, He received Orders to go for
Norway, upon such Encouragement as was not made Good, so that he was
disappointed of the Expectation he had very reasonably carried with him
thither, and at a Season when that Climate gives little Encouragement to abide
in those Seas; I am not yet to Enlarge upon that Matter, till We hear a Be^ter
Account from some of our Friends; however, though he could not meet with their
whole Fleet, as he Endeavored to do, yet he has had the Good Fortune in two
Encounters to take Eight of their Great Ships of War, two of their Best East
India Ships, and about Twenty of their Merchants Ships, all under the
protection of their Fleet, or ought to have been; and was then by tempest, and
other Reasons, which no Wisdom of his could prevent, obliged to put into our
own Harbors.

I do not mention the Great Numbers of the Prisoners we have taken, an Army of
Prisoners, who intruth do us more harm at Land, then ever they did at Sea, and
are a Charge that never fell under our Estimate and Computation; I would not be
understood, that We had entered upon a War and never thought of Prisoners, and
Sick and Wounded men; but that the Prisoners and Wounded men should bring upon
us so Prodigious an Expense, and of which we can yet see no bottom; insomuch,
as in one Place, I think Colchester, that Charge comes to Twelve hundred pound
the Week: I say, such an Expense never came into our Computation.

The King tells you, he has enabled the Prince and Bishop of Munster to demand
Justice from those who have so notoriously Oppressed him, with such outrageous
circumstances of Insolence and Scorn, as are enough known to the World; and He
has demanded it Bravely, in such an Equipage, as has not been made for little
Money, in which he can take, as well ask satisfaction.

After all this, since there is a justice due to the worst Enemies, we must do
them this right, that they do not at all seem weary of the War; they do not
discover the least inclination to Peace. It is true, the French King has
offered his Mediation, and truly if he intends no more then a Mediation, it is
an office very worthy the most Christian King; I wish with all my heart, that
(as a Mediator) he would make equal Propositions, or that he would not so
importunately press His Majesty to consent to those he makes, upon an Instance
and Argument, that he holds himself engaged by a former Treaty (of which we
never heard till since the beginning of this War, and had some Reason to have
presumed the contrary) to assist the Dutch with Men and Money, if His Majesty
does not consent.

His Majesty, tells you, that he has not an Appetite to make War for Wars-sake,
but will be always ready to make such a Peace as may be for his Honor, and
the Interest of his Subjects; and no doubt it will be a Great Trouble and Grief
to him to find so great a Prince, toward whom he has manifested so great an
Affection, in Conjunction with his Enemies; Yet even the Apprehension of such a
War, will not Terrify him to purchase a peace by such Concessions as he would
be Ashamed to make You Aquainted with; of which Nature you will easily Believe
the Propositions hitherto made to be, when you know that the release of
Poleroon in the East Indies, and the demolishing the Fort of Cabo Corso upon
the Coast of Guinney, are two; which would be upon the matter to be content
with a very vile Trade in the East Indies, under their Control, and with none
in Guinney; and yet those are not Propositions unreasonable enough to please
the Dutch, who reproach France for interposing for Peace, instead of assisting
them in the War; boldly insisting upon the advantage the Contagion in London,
and some other parts of the Kingdom gives them; by which, they confidently say,
the King will be no longer able to maintain a Fleet against them at Sea; and as
if God Almighty had sent this Heavy Visitation upon the Kingdom on their
behalf, and to expose it to their Malice and insolence; They Load us with such
Reproaches as the Civility of no other Language will admit the Relation; the
Truth is, they have a Dialect of Rudeness so peculiar to their Language, and
their People, that it is high time for all Kings and Princes to oblige them to
some Reformation, if they intend to hold Correspondence or Commerce with them.

My Lords and Gentlemen, You see in what posture we stand with reference to our
Neighbors abroad, who are our declared Enemies, their Malice and Activity to
make others declare themselves so too; the great Preparations they make, and
even Declarations, that they will have another Battle, toward which, they
have in readiness an equal number of new, greater, and better Ships, to those
they have lost, furnished with larger and greater Artillery; so that if they
were to be manned with any other Nation but their own, they might be worthy our
apprehension: What Preparations are to be made on our part, you can best judge:
I have fully obeyed the Command that was laid upon Me, in making You this
plain, clear, true Narrative of what has passed; I have no Order to make
Reflection upon it, nor any Deduction from it: The King Himself has told You,
that the noble, unparalleled Supply You have already given Him, is, upon the
Matter spent; Spent with all the Animadversions of good Husbandry, that the
nature of the Affair will bear: What is more to be done, He leaves entirely to
your own generous understandings, being not more assured of any thing that is
to come in this World; then that the same Noble Indignation; for the honor of
the King and the Nation, that first provoked you to inflame the King Himself,
will continue the same Passion still boiling in your Loyal Breasts; that all
the World may see, which they hoped never to have seen, that never Prince and
People were so entirely united in their Affections, for their true, joint,
inseparable Honor, as their only sure infallible expedient to preserve their
distinct several Interest.

My Lords and Gentlemen, Having yet only presented you a short view of your
foreign Enemies, it may not be altogether unseasonable that you take a little
Prospect of those at home, Those unquiet and restless Spirits in your own
Bowels; upon whose Infidelity, I doubt, your Enemies abroad have more
dependence, then upon their own Fleets. I must appeal to every one of your
Observations, whether the Countenances of these Men have not appeared to you
more erected, more insolent in all Places since the beginning of this War, then
they were before: In what readiness they were, if any misfortune had befallen
the Kings Fleet (which they promised themselves) to have brought the Calamity
into your Fields, and into your Houses, is notoriously known: The horrid
Murderers of Our late Royal Master, have been received into the most secret
Councels in Holland, and other infamous prostituted Persons of our Nation, are
admitted to a share in the Conduct of their Affairs, and maintain their
Correspondence here upon liberal Allowances and Pensions: Too many of His
Majesty's Subjects, who were lent by this Crown to assist and defend this
ungrateful State against their Enemies, have been miserably wrought upon, for
the keeping a vile, mean subsistence, rather then livelihood, to renounce their
Allegiance, and become Enemies to their native Country; some of whom, have
wantonly put themselves on Board the Enemies Fleet without Command or Office,
purely out of appetite and delight to rebel against their King, and to worry
their Country; it is great pity these Men should not be taught by some
exemplary Brand, that their Allegiance is not circumscribed within the four
Seas, but that they have obligations upon them of Duty and Loyalty toward the
King, in what part soever of the World they shall inhabit.

Their Friends at home Impatient of Longer Delays for the Successes they have
promised themselves, and for the Succors which others had promised to send to
them, made no doubt of doing the business themselves, if they could but appoint
a lucky day to begin the work, and you had heard of them in all places upon the
third of the last month (their so much celebrated Third of September) if the
Great Vigilance and indefatigable Industry of the Good General, who is always
awake for the Kings Safety, and the Peace of the kingdom, had not two days
before Apprehended the Seditious Leaders, and given Advertisements for the
Securing of others in most parts of the Kingdom; by the Confessions of Many of
Whom, their Wicked Design is enough Manifested and ready for Justice; Yet some
of the Principal Persons are not yet taken, and some others got themselves
rescued after they were apprehended.

My Lords and Gentlemen, let it not I Beseech You, be said of us, what was
heretofore said of the Senate of Rome, when they were prosperous enough, and
when they had obtained greater Victories over their enemies abroad then We have
done, Excellentibus ingeniis citius defuit ars, qua civem regant, quam qua
hostem perdant. Let not those Scorpions be Kept Warm in our Bosoms till they
Sting us to Death; let not those who Hate the Government, would Destroy the
Government, be sheltred under the Shadow and Protection of the Government. It is
posssible, and God knows it is but possible, that some men who are not Friends
to this or that part of the Government (for you are not to Believe that they
always discover, what in Truth they are Most angry with) who would not buy
those Alterations they Most Desire at the Price of a Civil War; they would
bring it fairly about, wait for a Godly Parliament, and do all by their
Consent; yet those Persons must not take it ill that we cannot desire they
should ever have it in their Power to bring those Alterations to pass, by those
means they now seem to abhor; and I do heartily wish, I am sure they will not
be the worse Men, nor the wore Subjects for it, that they would a little
reflect upon what is past, remember how much they have once done, more then
they intended to have done; nay, what they heartily abhorred the thought of
doing; and they will then find the only way to preserve themselves innocent,
is to keep their Minds from being vitiated by the first Impressions, by
Jealousies, Murmurings, and Repinings, and above all, by their Conversations
with those Men, or Indulgence toward them, who would Sacrifice the Peace of the
Kingdom to their own Ambition, Pride, and even to their Humor; If you
carefully provide for the suppressing Your Enemies at home, which will put You
to little other Expense, then of Courage, Constancy and Circumspection, you
will find your Enemies abroad less exalted, and in a short time more inclined
to live in amity with You, then to make War upon you, especially when they see
you do In bello pacis gerere negotium; and that you take the carrying on the
War to Heart, as the Best, and the only Expedient to Produce a Happy and an
Honest Peace.

FINIS.

