His Majesty's GRACIOUS SPEECH To both Houses of PARLIAMENT; Together with the
L. Chancellors, In Christ-Church-Hall in Oxford, On Tuesday, October 10. 1665.

royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT

LONDON: Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, 1665.

CUM PRIVILEGIO.

HIS MAJESTY'S GRACIOUS SPEECH To both HOUSES of PARLIAMENT.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Am confident you all believe, that if it had not been absolutely necessary
to consult with you, I would not have called you together at this time, when
the Contagion has so spread it self over so many parts of the Kingdom. I take
it for a good Omen to see so good an appearance this day, and I doubt not,
every day will add to your number; and I give you all My thanks for your
compliance so far with My desires.

The truth is, as I entered upon this War by your advice and encouragement; so I
do desire, that you may as frequently as is possible, receive Information of
the Conduct, and Effects of it, and that I may have the continuance of your
cheerful Supply for the carrying it on. I will not deny to you, that it has
proved more chargeable then I could imagine it would have been: The addition
they still made to their Fleets, beyond their first purpose, made it
unavoidably necessary for me to make proportionable Preparations, which God
has hitherto blessed with success in all Encounters. And as the Enemy have
used their utmost endeavors by Calumnies and false suggestions, to make
themselves Friends, and to persuade others to assist them against Us; so I have
not been wanting to encourage those Princes who have been wronged by the Dutch,
to recover their own by force; and in order thereunto, have assisted the Bishop
of Munster with a very great sum of ready Money, and am to continue a supply to
him, who is now in the bowels of their Country with a Powerful Army.

These Issues, which I may tell you, have been made with very good Conduct and
Husbandry, (nor indeed do I know that any thing has been spent, that could
have been well and safely saved) I say, this expense will not suffer you to
wonder, that the great Supply which you gave me for this War, in so bountiful a
proportion, is upon the matter already spent: So that I must not only expect an
assistance from you, to carry on this War; but such an assistance, as may
enable Me to defend My Self and you, against a more Powerful Neighbor, if he
shall prefer the Friendship of the Dutch before mine.

I told you, when I entered upon this War, That I had not such a Brutal
appetite, as to make War for War sake. I am still of the same mind: I have been
ready to receive any Propositions that France has thought fit to offer to that
end; but hitherto nothing has been offered worthy My acceptance; nor is the
Dutch less insolent, though I know no advantage they have had, but the
continuance of the Contagion: God Almighty, I hope, will shortly deprive them
of that encouragement.

The Chancellor will inform you of all the Particulars.

THE LORD CHANCELLORS SPEECH To both Houses of PARLIAMENT.
My Lords, and you the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons:
THe King is not content, you see, to leave you to your selves to make a state
of this War, and the success that has attended it, by your own observation,
and the general communication of all that has fallen out, which in truth has
left few men ignorant of any thing, who have had any curiosity to inform
themselves; but takes care that you be informed by Himself, that you may know
all that He knows, that so you may be able to give Him your Counsel upon the
clearest evidence.

In order to this, it will not I hope be unseasonable or ungrateful to you, to
refresh your memory, by looking some years backwards, even to the time of His
Majesty's happy Restoration, that we may take the better prospect of the
posture we are now in, and how we have come into it.

What inclinations His Majesty brought home with Him, to live in Amity with His
neighbors of Holland, though He had received Indignities enough from them, and
in truth had been little less proscribed there, then He had been in England;
needs no other manifestation, then that He chose that place to imbarque Himself
in, when He was pressed by the two neighbor Kings, from whom He had received
more civilities, to have made use of their Ports. It cannot be denied, but that
His reception in Holland was with great civility and luster, and a sufficient
evidence that they had a full sense of the high Honor His Majesty had
vouchsafed to them, and the departure from thence was with equal and mutual
satisfaction in each other; which made many men the more wonder, that albeit
the Ambassadors who were to follow, had been nominated before the King left
the Hague, there was so long an Interval before their Arrival here, that the
two neighbor Kings, and many other Princes had finished their Ambassies of
Congratulation, before we had heard any more from the United Provinces.

You all remember how long it was before the Armies were disbanded, and the
Fleets paid off; during which time, His Majesty lived upon His Credit, and
easily contracted a great Debt for the meet support of himself and his
household, which was not so easily discharged afterward. There was one thing
that exceedingly surprised him, when he found (which will be incredible to
Posterity) that a triumphant Nation, that had made it self terrible to
Christendom by having fought more Battles then all the Neighbor Kingdoms and
States together had ever done in so few years, and seemed to be in a posture
ready to fight them over again; that had so long Reigned over the Ocean in
formidable Fleets; should at the time of his Majesty's happy Return, as if on
the sudden all their Arms had been turned into Plough-shares, and their Swords
into Pruning Hooks, not have in all their Magazines, in all the Stores, Arms
enough to put into the hands of Five thousand men, nor Provisions enough to set
out Ten new Ships to Sea. Which his Majesty did not desire should be known to
his best neighbors, how little soever he suspected their Affections; nor did
indeed so much as make it known to his Parliament, but made it his first care,
without the least noise, and with all imaginable shifts, to provide for the
full supply of those Important Magazines and Stores, which have been ever since
replenished as they ought to be.

He had not the least imagination that any of his Neighbors would wantonly
affect to interrupt the happy Calm that he and themselves enjoyed; and
therefore resolved to retrench the vast expense of the Navy, under which he
found the Nation even to groan; and out of that good husbandry to provide for
more necessary Disbursements: Yet that the world might not think that he had
abandoned the Ocean, and that the memory of the Glorious Actions the English
had so lately performed upon it, might not vanish in an instant, after he had
provided such a Guard as the Narrow Seas never ought to be without, in the
Spring he sent a strong Fleet against the Pirates of Algiers and Tripoly (who
had grown to that strength and boldness, that they interrupted the whole Trade
of Christendom) as the only enemies he would choose to have.

It was a Design of great Glory, and equal Expense, crowned in the end by God
Almighty, with the Success we could wish, and with an entire submission to the
English Flag, and as great security to all His Majesty's Subjects in their
Trade, as the engagement and honor of Infidels can give; and this Agreement
ratified with all formality (the like whereof had never been before) by the
Great Turk himself.

Hereupon the King again renewed his resolution for a further retrenchment of
his Naval expense, even to the lessening of the Guard in the Narrow Seas; His
Merchants in all places receiving less interruption in their Trade, then they
had in any former time undergone: until he received Intelligence from the
Straights, that the faithless people of Algiers, who had so lately submitted to
him, had committed new Insolences upon some of his Subjects, or rather upon
Foreign persons taken by his Subjects into their possession, and which the
Turks pretended they might do without violation of the Treaty: But His Majesty
resolving to admit none of those Elucidations, lost no time in sending a new
strong Fleet into the Mediterranean, to chastise those perfidious Pirates; and
after a chargeable War made upon them for near or full twelve months, and
after having taken several of their ships from them, and upon the matter
blocking them up in their harbors, He received a second submission from them
with better and more advantageous conditions then the former.

I must not omit one circumstance; That about this time, the Dutch, who
received much more prejudice and damage from the Turks then the English had
done, besought his Majesty that He would once more send a Fleet into those Seas
against those Pirates, and that it might upon all occasions join with one they
were likewise ready to send out to the same Christian end, and for the utter
extirpation of those Sea-Robbers; and within a very short time after the
English Fleet was gone, they likewise sent De Ruyter with a good Fleet thither,
which was so far from any conjunction with us, that when our ships chased any
Algier-men near them, they never offered to obstruct their flight, but quickly
made it manifest, that they rather brought money with them to buy a
dishonorable and disadvantagious Peace, then to make a War upon them.

Matters standing thus; The Kings Fleet being gone into the Straights against
the Turkish Pirates, and there remaining few ships in the Narrow Seas; we began
every day to hear of Depredations by the Dutch upon our Merchants in all parts.
Instead of delivering up the Island of Poleroon in the East Indies (as by the
Treaty they ought to have done) They by their Naval power in those parts
hindered us from Trading there, and would not suffer our Ships to take in their
Lading of such Merchandise as the Factors had provided and made ready for their
freight, upon pretense that those parts where the Merchandise was ready to be
imbarqued, were in the Dominions of some Princes whom they had declared to be
their enemies, and so they would not suffer any Traffic to be maintained with
them. And they published the like Declaration, and challenged the same
Sovereignty in Africa, and by virtue thereof would not suffer our Ships to
Trade upon that Coast, where we had a Trade long before the Dutch had any
footing in those parts.

These insolences made that noise in the world, that the English Merchants
felt the effects of it in all places, till it reached the ears of the
Parliament, which in April was twelve months, presented the same to his
Majesty, and besought him that He would take some speedy and effectual course
for the Redress of those wrongs, Dishonours, and Indignities, which were the
greatest Obstructions of our Trade; and declared, that in the prosecution
thereof they would with their Lives and Fortunes assist his Majesty against all
oppositions whatsoever.

My Lords and Gentlemen, You very well remember, that though his Majesty was
very well pleased with the great Zeal you showed for the advancement of Trade*
He was far from resolving to make a War upon the warmth of that Declaration,
but told you that He would examine and peruse the particular Complaints which
had been represented to his Parliament, and would thereupon demand justice and
reparation from the States General; which Demand he appointed his Minister
residing there, to make in a short time after. What effect that Candid way of
proceeding found, is enough known to the world. In stead of other application,
they declare themselves wonderfully offended with the Declaration of the
Paliament, with many insolent expressions suitable to the manners of a
Commonwealth; They gave present Orders for equipping a very great Fleet, and
the raising many Land-souldiers, making greater preparations for war, then they
had done in many years before. They had made a complaint to his Majesty, that a
Captain of one of the ships which his Majesty had lent to the Royal Company,
had in his voyage thither, taken a Fort belonging to them near Cape verte, for
which they demanded satisfaction. The King assured them, that he had not the
least Commission or Authority from Him for so doing; that He expected him home
very speedily, and then he should be sure to undergo that punishment which the
nature of his Offense required, when the matter should be examined, and they
should be sure to receive full Reparation. This satisfied them not, but in
great fury they resolve to send forthwith a strong Fleet to Guiny, and granted
a Commission (which they took care to publish) to the Commander in chief, to
make war upon the English in those parts, and to do them all the mischief they
could.

The King found himself now obliged, in what strait soever, to provide for the
protection of his Subjects in those parts, and for the support of that Trade,
which I doubt is not enough taken to heart, and the value thereof not enough
understood; and in order thereunto, with great speed caused a Fleet to be made
ready for that expedition, under the Command of his Highness Prince Rupert, who
was under sail for the voyage; when his Majesty found it necessary to stop the
Prince his further prosecution of it, upon good intelligence that the Dutch had
appointed their Admiral with a Fleet of fifty Sail, to convey the other Fleet
designed for Guiny through the Channel, in contempt of his Majesty, who had a
very small Fleet in readiness; and that De Ruyter was likewise sent out of the
Straights from prosecuting the Turks, to make war upon the English in Guiny,
when at the same time they had earnestly pressed the King upon many professions
of desire to prevent a war, that Prince Ruperts Fleet might stay in Harbor, as
theirs should do, till some means might be found for an accommodation of all
Differences. And in truth, this very difficult Stratagem of pretending one
thing, and intending another; of promising with all solemnity, and never
resolving to perform; of swearing this day not to do a thing, when they had
served their turn by having done it yesterday, that no body could know, is the
highest Pinnacle of their Wisdom of State, by which they govern their affairs,
and delude their neighbors.

The Winds were not favorable to this triumphant design: And now the King
found the value of the Vote, and Declaration of His Parliament, it was a Rich
and a Massy Vote, which in a short time He coined into Two hundred thousand
pounds ready money in the Chamber of the City of London; with which, he gave
Order forthwith to make ready more Ships; and the Duke going himself to the
Fleet, by His indefatigable industry, with incredible expedition, added so many
good Ships to those under the Command of Prince Rupert, that in November he put
himself on Board the Fleet, resolving to stop the Dutch, if the Wind gave them
leave to pursue their former Resolution, which from the time the Duke was known
to be at Sea, they fairly declined, and were content rather to be safe in their
own Harbors, then to look to the Security of their Merchants; It was high time
now to seize upon as many of their Ships as came in our way, to satisfy the
Damages We had reason to believe We should sustein from De Ruyters expedition
into Guiny with the Commission mentioned before: but there was not the Lading
of one Ship sold or disposed of, till his Majesty received full Information of
De Ruyters having begun the War upon the Coast of Africa, by seizing upon Our
Ships, taking Our Forts, and committing all the Acts of Hostility, which his
Commission directed him unto; His Majesty likewise at the same time receiving
new Advertisement of their refusal to deliver up the Island of Poleroone to
him, which they were bound to by their Treaty. And will you not wonder after
all this, at the Confidence of these men: and more, that any Neighbor Prince
should have that confidence in them, as to declare, that the King our Master is
the Aggressor, that he first began the War?

From this time the War began to be more in Earnest, and to be carried on at
another Expense. Though His Royal Highness ventured himself in November, in a
Fleet consisting of a little more then fifty Ships, to stop the Dutch from
passing through the Channel; Yet in April (which was within few days after your
Prorogation, and the end of your last Session) he went again to Sea with a much
stronger Fleet, and more proportionate to the great preparations the Enemy had
made; and even after he was gone to Sea, upon great additions of strength every
day made by the Dutch, more good ships were sent to reinforce the Fleet;
Insomuch, as upon that glorious Third of June, when they had the courage to
visit our Coasts, after the Duke had in vain called upon them at their own
doors, and took many of their Merchants Ships in their sight, the English Fleet
consisted of very few less then One hundred Sail. The Action, and the Blessing
of that day, has been celebrated in all the Churches in England, and in the
hearty devotions of all true Englishmen; and therefore I shall no more of it
here; save only, That whether the Public Joy then, even upon the solemn
Thanksgiving-day, was superior to the Universal consternation that spread it
self over the Nation before, I appeal to the breasts of all here present: We
who had the honor to be near the King at that time, observed him to be in that
agony that cannot be expressed, an agony himself could not have long endured,
even when by all the Intelligence he received hourly from the Coast, he had
reason to assure himself of the Victory. In that great action, we sunk, burned,
and took Eighteen good ships of War, whereof half were the best they had, with
the loss of one single small ship of Ours, but of many Noble and Gallant
persons, of too much value to be ventured (if there had not been a greater
Venture) against such trash: and whose memories ought ever to be preserved and
extolled, and made precious to posterity.

No diligence was omitted, but all imaginable expedition used in refreshing,
repairing, and setting out the Fleet again; In order to which, the King himself
made a journey thither, and stayed till he saw all ready and fit to Sail: but
then, no entreaty, no importunity, could prevail with him to venture His
Brother again; though His Family, and all preparations for the Voyage were
still on Board. His Majesty too well remembered, and still felt the impressions
he had undergone the Third of June; and having got his Brother into His arms
again, he would not return without him, committing the charge of the Fleet to
the Earl of Sandwich, who had acted so good a part in it.

Within few days after the beginning of July, the Earl of Sandwich went again
to the Coast of Holland, with a Fleet in no degree inferior to the former, and
Rode before the Texel to invite the Dutch to a new Engagement, they having used
all the Arts at home to conceal the loss and dishonor they had undergone, and
pretended to be very ready and sollicitous for another Battle, when there was
no appearance of their purpose to come out: And upon sure intelligence that the
East India Fleet was coming about by the North, he received Orders to go for
Norway, upon such encouragement as was not made good, so that he was
disappointed of the expectation he had very reasonably carried with him
thither, and at a season when that Climate gives little encouragement to abide
in those Seas. I am not yet to enlarge upon that matter, till I hear a better
account from some of our friends: however, though he could not meet with their
whole Fleet, as he endeavored to do; yet he has had the good fortune in two
Encounters to take Eight of their great Ships of War, Two of their best
East India Ships, and about Twenty of their Merchants Ships, all under the
protection of their Fleet, or ought to have been; and was then by Tempest, and
other Reasons, which no wisdom of his could prevent, obliged to put into our
own harbors.

I do not mention the great numbers of the Prisoners we have taken, an Army of
Prisoners, who, in truth, do us more harm at Land, then ever they did at Sea,
and are a Charge that never fell under our estimate and computation: I would
not be understood, that we had entered upon a War, and never thought of
Prisoners, and sick and wounded men; but, that the Prisoners, and wounded men,
should bring upon us so prodigious an expense, and of which we can yet see no
bottom; insomuch, as in one place, I think Colehester, that charge comes to
Twelve hundred pounds the week; I say, such an Expense never came into our
computation.

The King tells you, He has enabled the Prince and Bishop of Munster to demand
Justice from those who have so notoriously oppressed him with such outrageous
Circumstances of Insolence and Scorn, as are enough known to the World; and he
has demanded it bravely, in such an Equipage as has not been made for little
Money, in which he can take, as well as ask, satisfaction.

After all this, since there is a Justice due to the worst Enemies, We must do
them this right, that they do not at all seem weary of the War, they do not
discover the least inclination to Peace. It is true, the French King has
offered His Mediation: and truly, if he intends no more then a Mediation, it is
an Office very worthy The Most Christian King; I wish with all my heart, that
(as a Mediator) he would make Equal Propositions, or that he would not so
importunately press His Majesty to consent to those he makes, upon an Instance
and Argument, that he holds himself engaged by a former Treaty (of which we
never heard till since the beginning of this War, and had some reason to have
presumed the contrary) to assist the Dutch with Men and Money, if His Majesty
does not consent.

His Majesty tells you, that He has not an appetite to make War for War sake,
but will be always ready to make such a Peace as may be for his Honor, and the
Interest of His Subjects; and no doubt but it will be a great trouble and grief
to him to find so great a Prince, toward whom he has manifested so great an
affection, in conjunction with his Enemies: yet even the apprehension of such a
War will not terrify him to purchase a Peace by such Concessions as he would
be ashamed to make you acquainted with; of which nature you will easily believe
the Propositions hitherto made to be, when you know that the Release of
Poleroone in the East Indies and the demolishing the Fort of Cabo-Corso upon
the Coast of Guiny, are two, which would be upon the matter to be content with
a very vile Trade in the East Indies, under their comptroll, and with none in
Guiny. And yet these are not Propositions unreasonable enough to please the
Dutch, who reproach France for Interposing for Peace, instead of Assisting them
in the War; boldly Insisting upon the advantage the Contagion in London and
some other parts of the Kingdom gives them, by which they confidently say, the
King will be no longer able to maintain a Fleet against them at Sea; and as if
God Almighty had sent this heavy visitation upon the Kingdom on their behalf,
and to expose it to their malice and Insolence. They load us with such
reproaches, as the civility of no other Language will admit the relation; the
truth is, they have a Dialect of rudeness so peculiar to their Language and
their People, that it is high time for all Kings and Princes to oblige them to
some Reformation, if they intend to hold Correspondence or Commerce with them.

My Lords and Gentlemen, You see in what posture we stand with reference to our
Neighbors abroad, who are our declared Enemies; their malice and activity to
make others declare themselves so too; the great preparations they make, and
even Declarations that they will have another Battle, toward which they have
in readiness an equal number of new, greater, and better ships to those they
have lost, furnished with larger and greater Artillery; so that if they were to
be manned with any other Nation then their own, they might be worthy our
apprehension. What preparations are to be made on our part, you can best judge.
I have fully obeyed the Command that was laid upon me, in making you this
plain, clear, true narrative of what has passed; I have no Order to make any
reflection upon it, nor any deduction from it: The King himself has told you,
that the noble unparalleld Supply you have already given him, is upon the
matter spent, spent with all the Animadversions of good Husbandry, that the
nature of the affair would bear. What is more to be done, He leaves entirely to
your own Generous understanding; being not more assured of any thing that is to
come in this world, then that the same Noble indignation for the Honor of the
King and the Nation, that first provoked you to inflame the King himself, will
continue the same passion still boiling in your Loyal Breasts, that all the
world may see, which they hoped never to have seen, that never Prince and
People were so entirely united in their Affections, for their true, joint,
inseparable Honor, as the only sure infallible Expedient to preserve their
distinct several Interest.

My Lords and Gentlemen, You have great reason to be weary; yet having only
presented you a short view of your Foreign Enemies, it may not be altogether
unseasonable that you take a little prospect of those at home, those unquiet,
restless Spirits in your own Bowels, upon whose Infidelity I doubt your Enemies
abroad have more dependence then upon their own Fleets. I must appeal to every
one of your Observations, whether the countenances of those men have not
appeared to you more erected, more insolent in all places since the beginning
of this war, then they were before; in what readiness they were, if any
misfortune had befallen the Kings Fleet (which they promised themselves) to
have brought the Calamity into your Fields, and into your Houses, is
notoriously known. The horrid Murderers of Our late Royal Master, have been
received into the most secret Councels in Holland; and other infamous
prostituted Persons of our Nation are admitted to a share in the Conduct of
their affairs, and maintain their Correspondence here upon liberal allowances
and Pensions. Too many of His Majesty's Subjects, who were lent by this Crown
to assist and defend this ungrateful State against their enemies, have been
miserably wrought upon, for the keeping a vile, mean Subsistence, rather then
Livelihood, to renounce their Allegiance, and become enemies to their Native
Country: Some of whom have wantonly put themselves on Board the Enemies Fleet,
without Command or Office, purely out of appetite and delight to rebel against
their King, and to worry their Country: It is great pity these men should not
be taught by some exemplary brand, that their Allegiance is not circumscribed
within the four Seas; but that they have Obligations upon them of Duty and
Loyalty toward the King, in what part soever of the world they shall inhabit.

Their Friends at home, impatient of longer delays for the successes they had
promised themselves, and for the Succors which others had promised to send to
them, made no doubt of doing the business themselves, if they could appoint but
a lucky day to begin the work; and you had heard of them in all places upon the
third of the last month, their so much celebrated Third of September, if the
great vigilance and indefatigable industry of the Good General, who is always
watchful for the Kings Safety, and the Peace of the Kingdom, had not two days
before apprehended the Seditious Leaders, and given Advertisements for the
securing others in most parts of the Kingdom; by the Confessions of many of
whom, their wicked Design is enough manifested and ready for Justice: Yet some
of the Principal Persons are not yet taken, and some others got themselves
rescued after they were apprehended.

My Lords and Gentlemen, Let it not, I beseech you, be said of us, what was
heretofore said of the Senate of Rome when they were prosperous enough, and
when they had obtained greater Victories over their enemies abroad then we have
done, Excellentibus ingeniis citius defuit ars, qua Civem regant, quam qua
hostem perdant; Let not these Scorpions be kept warm in our bosoms till they
sting us to death. Let not those who hate the Government, would destroy the
Government, be sheltred under the Shadow and Protection of the Government. It
is possible, and God knows it is but possible, that some men who are not
friends to this or that part of the Government (for you are not to believe that
they always discover what they are in truth most angry with) who would not buy
these Alterations they most desire, at the price of a Civil War; they would
bring it fairly about, wait for a Godly Parliament, and do all by their
consent; Yet those persons must not take it ill that we cannot desire they
should ever have it in their Power to bring these Alterations to pass by those
means they now seem to abhor: And I do heartily wish, I am sure they will not
be the worse men, nor the worse Subjects for it, that they would a little
reflect upon what is past, remember how much they have once done, more then
they intended to have done, nay, what they did heartily abhor the thought of
doing; and they will then find the only way to preserve themselves innocent, is
to keep their minds from being vitiated by the first impressions, by
Jealousies, Murmurings and Repinings; and above all, by the conversation with
those men, or indulgence toward them, who would sacrifice the peace of the
Kingdom to their own Ambition, Pride, and even to their Humor. If you
carefully provide for the suppressing your enemies at home, which will put you
to little other expense then of Courage, Constancy and Circumspection; You will
find your enemies abroad less exalted, and in a short time more inclined to
live in Amity with you, then to make War upon you, especially when they see you
do in bello pacis gerere negotium, and that you take the carrying on the War to
heart, as the best and the only expedient to produce a happy and an honest
Peace.

FINIS.

