His Majesty's DECLARATION TO All His loving SUBJECTS, December 26. 1662.

Published by the Advice of His Privy Council.

C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT ^ONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

LONDON: Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, 1662.

CVM PRIVILEGIO.

His Majesty's DECLARATION TO All His loving SUBJECTS, December 26. 1662.
CHARLES R.

AS it has pleased Almighty God so wonderfully to restore Us to the Throne of
Our Ancestors, and Our Subjects to happy Peace and Tranquillity, without the
least Bloodshed by the Military Sword; so having still earnestly wished that
both might be secured and maintained with the least effusion possible of the
same by the Sword of Justice, as desiring much rather to cure the ill
Intentions of the Disaffected by Our Clemency, then to punish the Effects of
them by Rigor of Law:

We cannot but express Our great grief and trouble, That the Unpardonable, as
well as Incurable Malignity of some should have carried them anew to such
Traitorous practices against Our Person and Government, as have necessitated Us
to make fresh Examples by the death of any more of Our Subjects. But as the
Publickness of their Trial in the ordinary course of Law, has by their
Conviction sufficiently satisfied the world of the Enormity of their Crimes, so
We have thought fit at the same time that We are forced to punish, to endeavor
as much as in Us lies, the preventing all occasions of the like for the future
by this Declaration; Wherein Our principal aim is, to apply proper Antidotes to
all those Venomous Insinuations, by which (as We are certainly informed) some
of Our Subjects of Inveterate and Unalterable ill Principles, do daily
endeavor to poison the affections of Our good People, by misleading their
Understandings, and that principally by Four sorts of most false and malicious
Scandals, which We do look upon as the Grounds of those Traitorous Attempts.

The First, by suggesting unto them, That having attained Our ends in
re-establishing Our Regal Authority, and gaining the Power into Our own hands
by a specious Condescension to a general Act of Indemnity, We intend nothing
less then the Observation of it; but on the contrary by degrees to subject the
Persons and Estates of all such who stood in need of that Law to future
revenge, and to give them up to the spoil of those, who had lost their Fortunes
in Our Service.

Secondly, That upon pretense of Plots and practices against Us, We intend to
introduce a Military way of Government in this Kingdom.

Thirdly, That having made use of such Solemn Promises from Breda, and in
several Declarations since, of ease and liberty to tender Consciences, instead
of performing any part of them; We have added streighter fetters then ever, and
new rocks of scandal to the scrupulous, by the Act of Uniformity.

Fourthly and lastly, We find it as artificially as maliciously divulged
throughout the whole Kingdom, That at the same time We deny a sitting liberty
to those other Sects of our Subjects, whose Consciences will not allow them to
conform to the Religion established by Law; We are highly indulgent to Papists,
not only in exempting them from the penalties of the Law, but even to such a
degree of Countenance and Encouragement, as may even endanger the Protestant
Religion.

Upon occasion of all which wicked and malicious suggestions, although We are
confident that the innate Loyalty and good Affections of the generality of Our
People, strengthened by a due sense of the late Calamities brought upon them by
the same Arts, will hinder seeds of so detestable a nature from taking root,
and bringing forth the fruits aimed at by the sowers of them: Yet We think that
in Our Fatherly care to prevent any mis-leading of those, who are so dear to
Us, We owe unto them and to Our selves this Publication of Our steadfast
Resolutions in all these particulars.

As to the first Point, concerning the Act of Indemnity; Certainly there can
be no greater evidence, that the passing it proceeded from the Clemency of Our
Nature, as well as from the present Conjuncture of that Parliament wherein it
was first framed, then that We have been pleased to make it Our especial care
to have it confirmed by a New Act in this, a Parliament composed of Members so
full of Affections to Our Person, and of Zeal for the Public good, as We
could never have cause to apprehend their Exacting from Us a Confirmation of
any thing that had been before Extorted, or had at present been judged by Us
prejudicial to either; and therefore as We not only consented unto, but most
earnestly desired the passing that Act at first, and confirming it since, as
being no less conformable to Our nature, then conducible to a happy Settlement:
so We do hereby most solemnly renew unto all Our Subjects concerned in it, this
Engagement, on the Word of a King, That it shall never be in the power of any
Person or Interest whatsoever, to make Us decline from the Religious Observance
of it; it having been always a constant Profession of Ours, That We do and
shall ever think Our Royal Dignity and Greatness much more happily, and
securely founded on Our own Clemency and Our Subjects Loves, then in their
Fears, and Our Power.

Which most sincere Profession of Ours may suffice also to expose the
wickedness and falsehood of the other malice concerning the design of
introducing a way of Government by Military power.

It is true, that We should not think We discharged rightly what We owe to the
Public Peace, and to the Freedom and Security of Parliaments, as well as to
the Safety of Our Person, if whilst We daily discover such multitudes of
distempered Minds, and such dangerous Practices issuing from them, We should
for want of sufficient Guards put it in the power of those Rebellious Spirits
to undertake probably at any time, what they have at several times so madly
attempted for the ruin and destruction of us; all. Of which certainly, besides
the present occasion of new Precaution as well as new Severity, We suppose all
our good Subjects need not a livelier nor more moving instance, than what their
memories can furnish them with, from the desperate undertaking of Venner and
his Crew, which (as mad as it was) We leave to all the world to judge, of how
dangerous a Consequence it might have been, without that little strength
remaining of those Forces, which (to give Our People a testimony of Our
founding all Our security rather in their Affections then in any military
Power) We had so frankly disbanded, and which afterward by advice of Our
Council, merely upon motives of the Public Safety, We consented to increase
to that moderate Proportion, which was indeed absolutely necessary, and has
since been sufficiently proved to be so, by the security which We owe to them
from the late dangerous practices.

But the reasons of such Precautions once ceasing, We are very sure, that what
Guards soever may be found necessary for Us to continue, as in former times,
for the Dignity and Honor of Our Crown; the sole Strength and Security We
shall ever confide in, shall be the Hearts and Affections of Our Subjects,
indeared and confirmed to Us by Our Gracious and steady manner of Government,
according to the ancient known Laws of the Land; there being not any one of Our
Subjects, who does more from his heart abhor, then We Our Selves, all sort of
Military and Arbitrary Rule.

As for the Third concerning the Nonperformance of Our Promises, We remember
well the very words of those from Breda;

Viz. We do Declare a Liberty to Tender Consciences, and that no man shall be
disquieted or called in question for differences of Opinion in matters of
Religion, which do not disturb the Peace of the Kingdom; and that We shall be
ready to consent to such an Act of Parliament, as upon mature deliberation
shall be offered to Us for the full granting that Indulgence.

We remember well the Confirmations We have made of them since upon several
occasions in Parliament; and as all these things are still fresh in Our memory,
so are We still firm in the resolution of performing them to the full. But it
must not be wondered at, (since that Parliament, to which those Promises were
made in relation to an Act, never thought fit to offer Us any to that purpose)
that being so zealous as We are (and by the grace of God shall ever be) for the
maintenance of the true Protestant Religion, finding it so shaken (not to say
overthrown) as We did, We should give its establishment the precedence before
matters of Indulgence to Dissenters from it. But that once done, (as We hope
it is sufficiently by the Bill of Uniformity) We are glad to lay hold on this
occasion to renew unto all Our Subjects concerned in those Promises of
Indulgence by a true tenderness of Conscience, this assurance:

That as in the first place We have been Zealous to settle the Uniformity of
the Church of England, in Discipline, Ceremony and Government, and shall ever
constantly maintain it:

So as for what concerns the Penalties upon those who (living peaceably) do not
conform thereunto through scruple and tenderness of misguided Conscience, but
modestly and without scandal perform their devotions in their own way, We shall
make it Our special Care so far forth as in Us lies, without invading the
Freedom of Parliament, to incline their Wisdom at this next approaching
Sessions, to concur with Us in the making some such Act for that purpose, as
may enable Us to exercise with a more universal satisfaction, that Power of
Dispensing, which We conceive to be inherent in Us. Nor can We doubt of their
cheerful cooperating with Us in a thing wherein We do conceive Our selves so
far engaged, both in Honor, and in what We owe to the Peace of Our Dominions,
which We profess we can never think secure, whilst there shall be a color left
to the malicious and disaffected to inflame the minds of so many multitudes
upon the score of Conscience, with despair of ever obtaining any effect of Our
Promises for their Ease.

In the last place, as to that most pernicious and injurious Scandal, so
artificially spread and fomented, of Our Favor to Papists; as it is but a
repetition of the same detestable Arts, by which all the late calamities have
been brought upon this Kingdom in the time of our Royal Father of Blessed
Memory, (who, though the most Pious and Zealous Protestant that, ever Reigned
in this Nation, could never wash off the stains cast upon him by that malice,
but by his Martyrdom.) We conceive all Our Subjects should be sufficiently
prepared against that poison by memory of those disasters; especially since
nothing is more evident, then that the wicked Authors of this scandal are such
as seek to involve all good Protestants under the odious name of Papists, or
Popishly affected: Yet we cannot but say upon this occasion, that Our
Education, and course of Life in the true Protestant Religion has been such,
and Our Constancy in the Profession of it so eminent in Our most desperate
Condition abroad among Roman Catholic Princes, when as the appearance of
receding from it had been the likeliest way in all humane forecast, to have
procured Us the most powerful Assistances of Our Re-establishment, that should
any of Our Subjects give but the least admission of that scandal into their
beliefs, We should look upon it as the most impardonable offense that they can
be guilty of toward Us. It Is true, that as We shall always according to
Justice retain, so We think it may become Us to avow to the World a due sense
We have of the greatest part of Our Roman Catholic Subjects of this Kingdom,
having deserved well from Our Royal Father of Blessed Memory, and from Us, and
even from the Protestant Religion it self, in adhering to Us with their Lives
and Fortunes for the maintenance of Our Crown in the Religion established,
against those who under the name of zealous Protestants, employed both Fire and
Sword to overthrow them both. We shall with as much freedom profess unto the
world, that it is not in Our Intention to exclude Our Roman Catholic Subjects,
who have so demeaned themselves, from all share in the benefit of such an Act,
as in pursuance of Our Promises, the wisdom of Our Parliament shall think fit
to offer unto Us for the ease of tender Consciences. It might appear no less
then Injustice, that those who deserved well, and continued to do so, should be
denied some part of that mercy, which We have obliged Our Self to afford to ten
times the number of such who have not done so. Besides, such are the Capital
Laws in force against them, as though justified in their rigor by the times
wherein they were made, We profess it would be grievous unto Us to consent to
the Execution of them, by putting any of Our Subjects to death for their
Opinions in matter of Religion only. But at the same time that We Declare Our
little liking of those Sanguinary ones, and Our gracious Intentions already
expressed to such of Our Roman Catholic Subjects as shall live peaceably,
modestly, and without scandal; We would have them all know, that if for doing
what their Duties and Loyalties obliged them to, or from Our acknowledgement of
their well-deserving, they shall have the presumption to hope for a Toleration
of their Profession, or a taking away either those marks of distinction, or of
Our Displeasure, which in a well-governed Kingdom ought always to be set upon
Dissenters from the Religion of the State, or to obtain the least Remission in
the Strictness of those Laws, which either are, or shall be made to hinder the
spreading of their Doctrine, to the prejudice of the true Protestant Religion;
or that upon Our expressing (according to Christian Charity) Our dislike of
Bloodshed for Religion only, Priests shall take the boldness to appear and avow
themselves to the offense and scandal of good Protestants, and of the Laws in
force against them; they shall quickly find, We know as well to be severe, when
Wisdom requires, as Indulgent when Charity and sense of Merit challenge it
from Us.

With this We have thought fit to arm Our good Subjects minds against the
practices of Our ill ones, by a true knowledge of Our own; of which now rightly
persuaded, We make no question, but that whosoever they be from whom they can
derive the spreading or fomenting of any of those wicked suggestions, they will
look upon them with detestation, as the most dangerous Enemies of our Crown,
and of the Peace and Happiness of the Nation; And that what We have here
published, will happily prepare them all to a cheerful expectation of the
approaching Sessions of Parliament, an Assembly so eminent in their Loyalty,
and their Zeal for the Peace and Prosperity of Our Kingdoms, that having
already made those happy Settlements for the maintenance of the Religion
established, and of our just Rights, their full concurrence with Us, can no way
be doubted in the performance of all Our Promises, and to the effecting all
those Gracious Intentions which (God knows) Our heart is full of, for the
Plenty, Prosperity, and universal satisfaction of the Nation.

In order to which, although it be foreign to the main scope of this Our
Declaration, which is principally to prevent the mischeifs airned at by the
scandals therein mentioned, and that wherein We reserve the enlargement of Our
self till the opening of the next Sessions of Parliament, yet We cannot
forbear hinting here unto Our good Subjects Four particulars, wherein We think
to give them the most important marks of Our Care. First, In punishing by
severe Laws that licentiousness and impiety, which since the dissolution of
Government, We find to Our great grief, has overspread the Nation. Secondly,
As well by Sumptuary Laws, as by Our own Example of Frugality, to restrain the
excess in men's expenses, which is grown so general and so exorbitant, beyond
all bounds, either of their qualities or fortunes. Thirdly, So to perfect what
We have already industriously begun in the retrenching of all Our own ordinary
and extraordinary Charges in Navy, Garrisons, Household, and all their
dependants, as to bring them within the compass of Our settled Revenue, that
thereby Our Subjects may have little cause to apprehend Our frequent pressing
them for new Assistances. And lastly, so to improve the good Consequences of
these Three particulars to the advancement of Trade, that all Our Subjects
finding (as well as other Nations envying) the advantage this has of them in
that prime foundation of Plenty, they may all with minds happily composed by
Our Clemency and Indulgence (instead of taking up thoughts of deserting their
Professions, or Transplanting) apply themselves comfortably, and with redoubled
industry to their several Vocations, in such manner as the private Interest of
every one in particular may encourage him to contribute cheerfully to the
general Prosperity.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, this Twenty sixth day of December, in the
Fourteenth year of Our Reign.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the KINGS
most Excellent Majesty, 1662.


