His Majesty's LETTER TO His Parliament in SCOTLAND, Assembled October 19. 1669.

Together with THE SPEECH OF His Grace the Earl of Lauderdaill, HIS Majesty's
High-Commissioner;

AS ALSO, The Answer OF THE PARLIAMENT of SCOTLAND TO His Majesty's Gracious
LETTER.

Published by His Majesty's Command.

In the SAVOY, Printed by Tho: Newcomb, 1669.

His Majesty's LETTER TO His Parliament in SCOTLAND, Assembled October 19. 1669.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
WE do often reflect, with thankfulness and joy, upon the goodness of Almighty
God, for restoring Us to Our Kingdoms, and them to their former Liberty, and
Peace: and We acknowledge it a further instance of Gods Goodness, that as he
has filled Our heart with kindness toward Our Subjects of that Our Ancient
Kingdom, and with a Constant Zeal to promote what We judge conducible to their
welfare; so, he has blessed Us with returns from them of Love, Loyalty and ready
Compliance with Our Pleasure on all Occasions, most suitable thereunto: of
which Our late Parliament has given signal proofs, as well as Our other good
Subjects. And this gives Us Confidence, that the earnest desire We have to
render this Island more happy than ever it was in times past, by settling
amongst all Our good Subjects within the same, a mutual affection that may
endure to all Posterity, shall meet with a free Concurrence from you Our
Parliament, whom We have called together chiefly for this end.

The bringing of these two Kingdoms of Scotland and England, to as close and
strict an Union as is posible, is the means that We propose, for the
effectuating thereof: which as it is the highest, and noblest design We can
have, for witnessing Our Royal Affection to them both, so the accomplishment of
it will raise Our Satisfaction, almost, as high as Our Wishes. For by the Union
of the hearts and hands of Our People, not only Our Throne shall be
strengthened, and they have Peace and Love settled amongst them for ever, but We
shall have the Glory of Accomplishing what Our Royal Grandfather King James, of
ever blessed Memory, attempted as the greatest thing he could devise, and
wherein He, who was a Competent Judge, placed the Happiness of the Crown and
Kingdoms, and wherein he meant to have gloried as the chiefest action of His
Life.

We have fully instructed Our Commissioner with Our intentions as to this
Subject, and concerning such other matters as seem to Us to be useful for the
Constant peace and welfare of the Church and State in that Our Kingdom. You are
to give him full Credit, and He will acquaint Us with all Matters; and what is
farther necessary for Us to do, will be speedily performed. So We bid you
heartily farewell.

THE SPEECH OF HIS GRACE THE Earl of Lauderdaill, His Majesty's
High-Commissioner For the PARLIAMENT OF SCOTLAND: Delivered in Parliament The
Ninteenth day of October, 1669.

Published by His Majesty's Command.

In the SAVOY, Printed by Tho: Newcomb, 1669.

THE SPEECH OF His Grace the Earl of LAUDERDAILL, His Majesty's
High-Commissioner for the Parliament of Scotland.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
BY the Authority of the King, and His special Command you are here assembled
in His high Court of Parliament. You have heard His royal Intentions under His
own hand, with the chief Reasons of His calling you together. You have heard
His most gracious Expressions of His kindness to His Subjects in this His
ancient Kingdom, and His Confidence of you their Representatives; And I shall
as shortly as I can acquaint you with what I have further in command from my
Master to say in His name at the opening of this His Parliament. And first I am
to assure you of His Majesty's constant and unalterable Zeal, for maintaining
and defending the true reformed Protestant Religion in this His Kingdom, for
which he will constantly lay out His whole Power and Authority, as also for
discouraging and punishing all Atheism and Profanities, and all that is
contrary to true Religion and Godliness. I am further particularly commanded to
assure you, That with no less Zeal and Constancy He will maintain and defend
the ancient Government by Archbishops and Bishops, as now it is happily
settled, as a sure fence for the true reformed Protestant Religion, A
Government most suitable to Monarchy; and well may I call it Ancient, for
whoever will look into Antiquity shall find Episcopal Government has continued
in the whole Catholic Church both East and West, even from the most Primitive
and Apostolic Times: I shall not insist on the sad Calamities and Confusions
which the violent and rebellious endeavors to overturn this Government
produced in this Kingdom; His Majesty's gracious Act of Pardon and Oblivion
forbids the ripping up those sores which His own royal hand has cured, and
long may they be buried in Oblivion: Yet sure I am, the reflections on those
dismal days ought to raise no less Zeal in the Parliament, and in all good
Subjects for the maintaining of that Government as now it is happily settled:
For, in His Majesty's name and by His special command I do assure you, He will
employ His utmost power in the maintenance of that Government, and will protect
the persons of my Lords the Archbishops and Bishops, and of the Loyal, Orthodox
and peaceable Clergy in the exercise of their functions: He will not endure
those numerous and unlawful Conventicles which tend to Sedition and Schism,
which have been too frequent in some few Shires of this Kingdom: Good Laws
have been made; and in prosecution of those Laws, the Lords of His Majesty's
Privy Council have shown their care for suppressing those seditious Assemblies;
Yea, and of late His Majesty has graciously indulged the planting of some who
were esteemed peaceable men, in vacant Churches (though they came not up to the
rules established.) It will be expected that they walk worthy of so great a
favor: But if after this removal of the very pretense of unlawful Conventicles
any factious people shall in contempt of His Majesty's Laws; yea, and of His
indulgence also, seditiously Assemble themselves under pretense of Religious
Worship, His Majesty does Require His Parliament, and all in Authority under
Him, vigorously to suppress such Meetings, and to bring the pretended
Preachers, and the Ringleaders of such unlawful Assemblies, to condign and
exemplary punishment.

In the next Place, I am commanded to let you know, That I am sufficiently
Instructed to give His Majesty's Royal Assent to such Laws as shall be prepared
in this Parliament, for the constant Peace and welfare of this Church, and of
the Kingdom in all its Relations: But the chief Occasion of calling this
Parliament, is the prosecution of that great and glorious Design of bringing
His Kingdoms of Scotland and England to a stricter and nearer Union. This
Design was begun by His Royal Grandfather of blessed Memory, who went so far on
toward this great Work, that in the first year of His Reign over Great
Britain, King James named Commissioners for this Kingdom, who by Act of
Parliament were authorized to Treat and Consult with Commissioners for the
Kingdom of England, concerning such an Union: And in pursuance of their Treaty,
Acts were made for the Repealing of Hostile Laws, and the utter abolition of
all memory of Hostility between the two Nations: And in the Seventh year of His
Reign, it was, by the Judges of all the Courts of Westminster Hall in England,
solemnly adjudged, in the Case of the Post-nati, that those who after the
Descent of the Crown of England to King James, were born in Scotland, were no
Aliens in England, and consequently were capable, not only of Land, but of all
other Immunities, as if they had been born in England, so much was done in King
James his time. And the occasions of His Majesty's Resolutions to prosecute
this great Work, were these, Complaints having been made to His Majesty, That
since the 25th day of March, in the Twelfth year of His Reign, new duties were
imposed in England, upon diverse Commodities of the growth, production, and
manufacture of Scotland, and incapacities laid upon the Subjects of Scotland:
It pleased the King to appoint diverse Meetings upon this Matter, though without
Success: whereupon the late Parliament of this Kingdom imposed, in their third
Session Ann. 1663. great Duties upon the Commodities of the growth, production
or manufacture of England, which by His Majesty's Command were suspended, and
have not been exacted, though the Duties in England still continue; and upon
His Majesty's recommendation to the Parliament of England, an Act was lately
made for settling freedom and intercourse of Trade between the two Kingdoms:
Whereupon Commissioners were nominated and appointed by His Majesty for both
Kingdoms to Treat upon that Affair, who had many Meetings, but produced no
effect, unless it were a conviction of the Difficulty, if not impossibility of
settling it in any other way, then by a nearer and more complete Union of the
two Kingdoms. His Majesty is fully persuaded that nothing can tend more to the
good and security of both Nations, than such an Union. And finding that in His
Royal Grandfathers time, so great an advance was made toward this Union, and
that the continuance under the same Obedience for near 70. years, having
begotten the same common Friends and common Enemies to both Nations, and taken
off a great part of those Difficulties, which at the first (notwithstanding the
Union in Obedience to One Sovereign) stood in the way. His Majesty well hopes,
that what is yet wanting to the perfecting of it, may be now accomplished, And
therefore, in His Majesty's Name, I do most heartily recommend this great work
unto you; and I doubt not, but you will speedily send such an humble Answer to
His Majesty's most gracious Letter, as may witness how well grounded that
Confidence is, which His Majesty has expressed of you. This day the Parliament
of England meets, and the King will both Himself, and by His Lord Keeper make
the like Proposals (as to the Union) unto both Houses: And I am confident, that
Loyal Parliament, who have all along given such ample Testimonies of their Duty
and Affection to His Majesty, will upon this Occasion make a suitable Return to
His Proposals. What is farther to be proposed upon this Matter, shall be
offered at your next days Meeting: and the King doubts not but that after the
meeting of Commissioners for both Kingdoms, those things will be tendered to
your consideration, in order to the Union, as shall tend to the Honor of His
Majesty, and the common good of all His Subjects. These things I was commanded,
before I came away from His Majesty to acquaint you with, and I have since,
upon another Occasion, received an order in writing, bearing date the 7th of
this Month; by which I am again commanded, amply to declare His Majesty's
unchangable Resolution to maintain Episcopal Government in the Church. So
having begun and ended with this Declaration, I hope both the groundless
Jealousies, on the one hand, and the vain and idle hopes on the other shall be
at an end.

FINIS.
The Answer OF THE PARLIAMENT of SCOTLAND, TO His Majesty's Gracious Letter.
Most Sacred SOVEREIGN;
THE Goodness of God, in Restoring YOUR MAJESTY to Your Government, and thereby
this your Ancient Kingdom to its former Liberty and Peace; Has been, and will
ever, with all humble Duty and Thankfulness, be Acknowledged, as the Greatest
Blessing we are Capable of in this World. And, the Many Singular and Renewed
Testimonies this Kingdom has since Met with, of Your Fatherly Care, Kindness,
and Zeal, to Promove its Welfare and Happiness in all its Concerns* Have so
Engaged the Hearts and Affections of Your Subjects, That We can with Confidence
Assure Your Majesty of a Cheerful Concurrence from this Kingdom in Every Thing
may Tend to Your Majesty's Honor, or the Good of Your People.

We do, with the Like Duty and Thankfulness, Acknowledge Your Majesty's Grace
and Goodness, in Your Desires to render this Island more happy then ever it was
in former Times, by Settling among Your good Subjects within the same, such a
Mutual Affection, as may endure to all Posterity. And, since the Bringing of
Your Two Kingdoms of Scotland and England to as Close and Strict an Union as
is possible, is the Mean Your Majesty Proposes; For Effectuating thereof, We
shall be Ready to Give Our Hearty-Concurrence therein: And, in Order thereunto
are willing that Commissioners be Appointed for this Kingdom, to Treat with
such as shall be Employed for the Kingdom of England, upon the Grounds and
Conditions of this Union: Reserving always to the Parliament, To whom the
Resolution of these Commissioners are to be Returned, the Consideration
thereof, and the Allowing or Disallowing of the same, as They shall judge fit.
And, in Confidence of Your Majesty's most Excellent Judgment, and Great
Affection in all things Relating to the Happiness of Your People, whereof this
Kingdom has already had so many Signal Proofs; We do Freely and Heartily offer
to Your Majesty the Nomination of the Persons to Treat for this Kingdom, with
the Appointing of their Number, Quorum, Time and Place of their Meeting; And,
upon signification of Your Majesty's Pleasure therein, We shall give such
Commissions and Orders for Promoveing of the Treaty, as (Reserving the Full
Determination of all to the Parliament, as aforesaid) shall Witness Our
Cheerful Compliance with Your Majesty's Desires.

The Earl of Lauderdail, whom Your Majesty, to the Great Satisfaction of Your
People, and Interest of Your Service, has been pleased to Authorize as Your
Commissioner, Has, in Your Majesty's Name Renewed to Us the Assurances of Your
Majesty's Care and Respect, to the good of this Your Ancient Kingdom; For which
We do Humbly Return to Your Majesty the Offer of Our Lives and Fortunes, for
the advancement of your Majesty's Honor and Greatness, and maintenance of Your
Royal Authority and Government: And in every thing shall be proposed by him, We
shall not only give Credit as to Your Commissioner, but also such Cheerful and
ready Obedience, as may Evidence to the World the Loyalty of Our Hearts: And in
Testimony hereof, These Presents are by Warrant, and in Name of Your
Parliament, Signed by

Most Sacred SOVEREIGN, YOUR MAJESTY'S Most Faithful, Most Obedient, and Most
Humble Subject and Servant, ROTHES, CANCEL. in Praesentia Dominorum
Parliamenti.
Edinbourgh, 22 October. 1669.
FINIS.

