C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION Declaring His Majesty's grace and favor toward all Commanders
and Seamen in relation to Prizes and Prize-goods, seized and taken since the
month of January 1642. until the Twenty ninth of May, 1660.
CHARLES R.

THe Kings most Excellent Majesty having taken into His most Gracious and
Princely consideration the humble Petition of several Captains and Officers of
His Majesty's Fleets, on the behalf of themselves and others the Commanders,
Officers, and Mariners employed in Sea-service since the year 1642. Whereby His
Majesty is given to understand, that diverse of the Petitioners now are, and
have been sued, molested, and imprisoned concerning several Prizes and
Prize-goods by them heretofore seized and taken since the month of January
1642; and before the Twenty ninth of May 1660; upon pretense or color of some
clause or words in a late Act of Parliament, Entitled, An Act for the
prosecution of such as are accomptable for Prize-goods, contrary (as they
conceive) to the Grate and Favor extended as well toward them as other His
Majesty's Subjects in and by His Majesty's most Gracious Act of Free and
General Pardon, Indemnity and Oblivion; and that unless some timely remedy be
applied, such prosecutions are still likely to be made and continued against
them, and other Commanders and Mariners, who have likewise acted in the Fleets
within the times aforesaid, although in truth they never were Treasurers,
Receivers, Farmers, or Collectors of such Prize-goods, nor accomptable for any
money or other duties, grown due or contracted upon the sale or disposition
thereof, nor Sub-collectors, Vnder-treasurers, Commissioners, Sub-commissioners
of Prize-goods, or any their Casheriers, Officers, Deputies, or Receivers nor
Contractors for the same after any adjudication thereof, to the great unsetling
of the minds of many thousands of His Majesty's Loyal and useful Subjects, who
did apprehend themselves pardoned and in peace by His Majesty's said Gracious
Act of Free Pardon, Indemnity and Oblivion: And His Majesty thereupon deeply
resenting the condition of the Petitioners (and other his good Subjects, on
whose behalf they have made their Address as aforesaid, in relation to the
premises) and being fully satisfied of their dutiful affections unto His
Majesty's Royal Person and Government, for their relief therein, and for their
future encouragement to persevere in His Majesty's service, is most graciously
pleased to publish and declare, And His most Excellent Majesty (by and with the
advice and consent of His Privy Council) has, and hereby does publish and
declare His Royal Will and Pleasure, and accordingly require and command, That
all and singular Process and Proceedings whatsoever, which vefore this time
have been, now are, or may be at any time hereafter had, sued forth, or
prosecuted in any of His Majesty's Courts at Westminster, or in the High Court
of Admiralty of England, or elsewhere, within any of His Majesty's Dominions,
against any person or persons whatsoever, who have been employed in
Sea-service, at any time or times, since the month of January in the year of
our Lord 1642. and before the Twenty ninth of May 1660. (as Admirals,
Vice-Admirals, Captains of ships, Officers or Mariners, not having been within
the times aforesaid, appointed Treasurers, Receivers, Farmers, or Collectors of
Prize-goods; nor such who are accomptable for any sum or sums of money, or
other duties grown due or contracted upon the sale or disposition of any such
Prize-goods, nor that have been Sub-collectors, Vnder-treasurers,
Commissioners, Sub-commissionners of Prize-goods, or any their Casheires,
Officers, Deputies, or Receivers, for or by reason of any Ships, Plate, Jewels,
Bullion, Money, or other things whatsoever, seized or taken by them, or any of
them, for, or as Prize or Prize-goods within the times aforesaid) be forthwith
and for ever hereafter disallowed, stayed, and discharged; And that from
henceforth they the said Admirals, Vice-Admirals, Captains of ships, Officers,
Mariners, or any of them (not so appointed or employed in any of the said
Offices or places, or accomptable as aforesaid) shall not, nor may by virtue
force or color of any Process or Proceedings whatsoever in any of His
Majesty's said Courts, or elsewhere, be in any wise arrested, disquieted,
questioned, or troubled, either in their persons, lands, or goods, for or by
reason of any Prizes or Prize-goods, by them, or any of them, so as aforesaid,
seized or taken within the time aforesaid; And that all and every of them that
now are, or lately have been sued, molested or troubled, for or concerning any
such Prizes or Prize-goods, whether they or any of them are now in Prison, or
at large upon Bail, or otherwise be forthwith set at liberty, and the
Securities, Bails or Cautions, by them, or any of them, or any others for them,
or any of them, therefore given or entered into, or to be given or entered into,
be forthwith delivered up, vacated, and discharged; And all and every the said
persons clearly and absolutely discharged from any attendance in or about the
premises. And His Majesty does hereby require and command His High Chancellor,
and High Treasurer of England, the Justices of the one Bench, and the other,
the Barons of His Majesty's Exchaquer, and His Attorney General for the time
being, and all other His Majesty's Officers and Ministers whatsoever, to whom
it does, shall, or may appertain, in their respective places and trusts, to
cause this His Royal Proclamation in all things, for the ease and benefit of
His said loving-Subjects (to whom this His Grace and Favor is extended) to be
duly observed and performed. And to the end this His Majesty's pleasure and
commandment may be duly and effectually performed and observed in the
premises, His Majesty does likewise will and command, That in all and every
His Majesty's Courts at Westminster, where any such proceedings against any of
His Majesty's said Subjects have been, are, or shall be had or prosecuted for
or by reason of any such Prizes or Prize-goods, His Majesty's Attorney General
for the time being, do immediately at the request or requests of the party or
parties concerned, and without expecting any further or other Warrant from His
Majesty, cause a Nolle Prosequi to be thereupon entered and such other
discharges thereof made and given on His Majesty's behalf, as the nature of the
cause shall require; And in like manner His Majesty does also require and
command that the Judge or Judges of the High Court of Admiralty of England for
the time being, and His Majesty's Advocate, and such other of His Majesty's
Council, as His Majesty has already nominated and appointed, or shall
particularly nominate and appoint in this behalf, by Warrant under his Sign
Manual, to sue in His Majesty's name, and to His Majesty's use in the said
Court of Admiralty, or elsewhere, any of the persons aforesaid, to whom this
His Majesty's Grace and Royal Favor is extended in the premises, and all and
singular other His Majesty's Officers and Ministers whatsoever, to whom it
shall or may appertain, That they and every of them do forthwith surcease all
further prosecution of all and every Suit or Suits, or other proceedings
whatsoever against the said persons (not being so appointed or employed in any
of the said Offices or places, or accomptable as aforesaid) for any the matters
aforesaid, upon pain of His Majesty's high displeasure, and such further
punishments as His Majesty may justly inflict upon them, if they or any of them
shall presume to break or neglect this His Royal Commandment. And for the
future Quiet and Indemnity of His Majesty's said loving Subjects, to whom this
His Majesty's Grace and Favor is thus extended; His Majesty does by these
Presents notify and declare, That His Majesty is and will be ready and willing
to grant His Free and Gracious Pardon, under His Majesty's Great Seal of
England, for all and every the matters and things aforesaid, unto such of them
as shall make their humble Petitions unto His Majesty for the same.

Given at Our Court at Hampton Court, the Fourteenth day of July, 1662. in the
Fourteenth year of Our Reign.
London, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty. 1662.


