By the King.
C R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION, Commanding the immediate Return of all His Majesty's Subjects
who have gone into the Service of the French King as Soldiers, since the late
Treaty of Peace with the States General of the United Provinces; and
Prohibiting all His Majesty's Subjects to enter into the said Service for the
time to come.
CHARLES R.

WHereas His Majesty has been Informed, That diverse of His Subjects have since
the late Peace Concluded between His Majesty and the States General of the
United Provinces, and contrary to His late Royal Proclamation, taken Arms
under, and now are in the Service of the French King as Soldiers: His Majesty
therefore for Redress thereof, and to prevent the like for the future, Does by
this His Royal Proclamation (with the Advice of His Privy Council) Require and
Command all and every His Subjects, who have since the said late Peace gone
beyond Sea to Serve as Soldiers under the said French King, forthwith to quit
the said Service, and to return to their respective Homes: And both hereby also
strictly Prohibit and Forbid them, and all other His Subjects whatsoever, for
the time to come, from going beyond the Seas to Serve as Soldiers under the
said King, or in His Wars. To all which His Majesty does Enjoin, and shall
expect all due Obedience and Conformity; And does hereby also further Publish
and Declare, That the Offenders to the contrary, shall not only incur His
Majesty's High Displeasure, but be proceeded against (for their Contempt)
according to the utmost Severities of Law.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Nineteenth day of May, 1675. In the Seven
and twentieth year of Our Reign.
LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers
to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1675.


