C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION Declaring a former Proclamation of the Fourteenth of May last
to be void: And for the better Ordering the Transportation of Clothes, and
other Woollen Manufactures into Germany and the Low Countries for the future.
CHARLES R.

WHereas We by Our Proclamation of the Fourteenth of May last, upon Information
of much decay in the Trade of Cloth, and other woollen Manufactures of this
Kingdom, and that great quantities of woollen Clothes did then lie dead on the
hands of many poor Clothiers, Did of Our Princely Clemency and tender
Compassion of the necessities of Our poor Subjects, by the Advice of Our Privy
Council, and with the free consent of the Company of Merchants-Adventurers of
England, give free Liberty and License to all Our loving Subjects, from the
Twentieth day of the said Month of May, until the Five and twentieth of
December following, to Transport and carry out of this Kingdom, all woollen
Manufactures whatsoever, to any Port or place beyond the Seas, lying within the
Limits and Bounds of the said Merchants-Adventurers Patent, Except the
Mart-Towns of Dordrecht and Hamburgh. And whereas thereby We also Declared,
That by that Our License We would not be thought to have a light esteem of the
Services of that Company, either to Our self, or the Crown of England in former
times, nor of their usefulness toward the Advance and Increase of the Trade of
this Kingdom: And therefore We did also Declare the said Liberty to be intended
no more but as a temporary Dispensation, and not at all to lessen the Authority
of their Charters, as to the Government of that Society, either at home or
abroad. And now there having an Essay and Trial been made, whether the laying
open of that Trade would so increase the Vent of the woollen Manufactures of
this Our Kingdom, as to relieve both the Growers of Wool, and Clothiers within
the same: And We being now certified by the Petition of the Clothiers
themselves, as also of the general complaint of all Our Clothing Counties in
this Our Kingdom, that this Liberty has not produced the promised and desired
effects:

We therefore of Our Princely Care and Providence for the conservation and
restoration of the Trade of Cloth, and all other woollen Manufactures now
made, or hereafter to be made within this Our Kingdom, wherein the same is so
highly concerned, have thought it fit, with Advice of Our Privy Council, timely
to provide and apply some effectual remedy to the many dangerous disorders and
incroachment within this Fellowship, and upon this Trade: And to that end, by
Advice aforesaid, We do hereby declare Our said Proclamation of the Fourteenth
of May last, and the Licenses and Liberties thereby granted for a temporary
Essay and Trial, to be expired, determined, and void: And therefore We do
hereby strictly Will and Command, That no person or persons, Subject or
Subjects of Our Realm of England, shall from henceforth Ship, Transport, Carry
or Convey, or cause to be Shipped, Transported, Carried, or Conveyed, either
from Our City or Port of London, or from any other City, Town, Port, Haven or
Creek of Our Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon
Tweed, any woollen Cloth, either white Clothes, colored Clothes, dressed and
died out of the whites, Clothes called Spanish Clothes, mixed, or of one color,
or any Baies, Kersies, Perpetuanoes, or any Stockins or other woollen
Commodities whatsoever, now made, or hereafter to be made within Our Realm
aforesaid, unto any the Cities, Towns, Ports, or other places within the
Countries of Germany, or the Seventeen Provinces of the Netherlands, Saving
only such person or persons as are or shall be free of, admitted and continued
as Member of the said Fellowship of Merchant-Adventurers of England, and none
others: And that no Freemen of the said Fellowship shall Ship, Transport, Carry
or Convey, or cause to be Shipped, Transported, Carried or Conveyed, any
Clothes or woollen Manufactures made within Our Realm, Dominion, and Town of
Berwick aforesaid, without special License of the said Fellowship, into any the
parts of Germany, or the Seventeen Provinces of the Netherlands, or unto the
Town of Calais, or the Marches thereof, save only to the public Marts, Staples
and Residences declared by the said Fellowship within the parts aforesaid
beyond the Seas, for the time being, or to one of them. And to the end that
this Trade may be the better improved in an orderly and well governed way, Our
Will and Pleasure is, That the said Fellowship of Merchants-Adventurers of
England shall from henceforth from time to time admit and receive into the
Freedom of their said Fellowship, all and every such Our Subjects as shall at
any time hereafter desire and demand the same, paying Thirteen pounds six
shillings eight pence as a Fine to the said Fellowship, for their Entry, Incom
and Admittance thereunto, (That is to say) such as are of London, to be mere
Merchants, and exercised in that profession, and no Shopkeepers, except giving
over their Shops. And such as are of the Out-ports, if bred in Merchandise,
though Shopkeepers; Provided that every such person, both of London and of the
Out-ports aforesaid, do demand their said Freedom, and be actually admitted
into the same within one year next ensuing the date hereof. And that their Sons
and Servants shall at their several Admissions and making Free, be admitted for
the sum of Six pounds thirteen shillings and four pence, according to the
Statute of the Twelfth of Henry the Seventh. And Our further Will and Pleasure
is, That no person or persons not qualified as aforesaid, shall presume to
Trade in any the abovementioned Commodities into any the Foreign parts before
named, upon pain of Our high displeasure; for that We, in case We shall
perceive that any person or persons shall neglect to take hold of this Our
Grace hereby offered them to be admitted into the said Fellowship, and shall
yet continue to Trade disorderly into the parts of Germany, or the Seventeen
Provinces of the Netherlands, and out of the Mart and Staple Towns of the said
Fellowship of Merchants-Adventurers therein for the time being, We shall not
only have cause for the future, utterly to deny and exclude them of this Grace,
but will require a strict account of such persons for their contempt or neglect
of this Our Royal Command herein, and will take such course as shall ^e fitting
for their punishment, and for the future restraint of such disorders. And to
the end that the Ch^rters and Government of the said Fellowship may be the
better put in execution, and to the intent that al^ Offenders against the same
may be discovered and brought to Justice, and such punishment inflicted upon
them for such their Offenses, as by their said Charters, Orders and
Constitutions ought to be inflicted in such as wilfully and contemptuously
transgress against Our Charters, and this Our Proclamation in pursuance of the
same; We do by and with the Advice of Our Privy Council, hereby Will and
Command, as well the Judges of Our High Court of Admiralty, as the Marshal and
Underofficers of the same, as also Our Commissioners or Farmers of Our Customs
for the time being, and the Searchers of Our Customs in all Our Ports of
England, and the several Officers of what kind so ever, belonging to, and
attending the Service of Our Customs outward: As also all Our Admirals,
Vice Admiral, Commanders, Captains and Officers whatsoever, of any of Our
Royal Ships, or any of Our C^stles, Blockhouses, and Forts respectively, and
all other Our Officers and Ministers in their severa^ places, to be aiding and
assisting unto the said Fellowship and Company of Merchants-Adventurers of
England, and all such as they shall employ in all matters and things tending to
the supportation of the Government of the said Fellowship and Company, and
regulation of their Trade, and for the p^eservation of the Privileges,
Jurisdictions, and Franchises by Our Royal Predecessors to them gran^ed, and by
Our self to them confirmed by Our Letters Patents.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, April the 8th, in the Fifteeth year of Our
Reign, 1663.
London, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent MAJESTY, 1663.


