A PROCLAMATION Against PAPISTS.
CHARLES, by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith,
To Our Lion King at Arms, and his brethren Heralds, Macers, Pursevants or
Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally
specially constitute, Greeting;
Forasmuch as We and Our Royal Ancestors, have always made it Our chief Care
to preserve Religion in its purity, and to see the Almighty God (from whom
alone We derive Our Power) Worshipped in Our Dominions, with that profound
Submission and Reverence, which is due to His Great and Holy Name, knowing that
Sincerity in Religion is the surest Foundation of Obedience to Us, and
Unanimity in it, is the firmest Band of Peace and Concord among Our Subjects:
And We having of late found, that the Bloody, as well as Idolatrous Principles
of the Papists, have incited these of that Profession, to contrive Plots
against Our Royal Person, and Alterations in the Government of Our Kingdoms, to
the Subversion of the Protestant Religion, which is (through God's infinite
Goodness) established by Law, and of the Civil Rights and Prerogatives of Our
Crown, endeavoring to enslave Us, Our Subjects and Our Consciences, to the
Pope and See of Rome, notwithstanding of the great Clemency shown by Us to
them, since God Restored Us to Our Government, under which they have abundantly
tasted of the Fruits of that Peace, which We have procured to Our Subjects by
Our Royal Care: And yet We being ever unwilling to punish such as may be
reclaimed, or to surprise even such as are irreclameable, Have therefore, with
Advice of Our Privy Council, thought fit, hereby to Command all Jesuits and
other Priests, or Trafficking Papists, to Depart forth of this Our Kingdom,
betwixt and the first day of March next; with Certification, that all such
Jesuits, Priests, and Trafficking Papists, as shall be found within this Our
Kingdom after that day, shall be proceeded against Criminally, conform to the
120. Act of the 12, Parl. of K. James the 6. Whereby they, and such as Ressett
them, are declared guilty of, and made liable to the pains of Treason; and that
We will put the Laws in Execution, which are made by Us and Our Predecessors,
against Sayers and Hearers of Mass. And to the end, that Our Faithful and
Orthodox Subjects, may be secured against the dreadful Effects of such blind
and bloody Zeal, as concludes nothing a Crime which may enlarge that Sect, or
advance that Profession. We do hereby Command and Charge all Papists, of what
quality soever, within this Our Kingdom, To deliver up (upon Oath) their Arms
of all sorts to the Sheriffs, Stewarts, Lords of Regality, and Magistrates of
Burghs, within whose Jurisdiction they live, and that betwixt and the
respective days following, viz. These on the South side of the Water of Esk,
betwixt and the twenty day of February; and these on the North side of the said
Water, betwixt and the twenty day of March next: Certifying them, if they shall
be found to have any Arms, after the days foresaid respective, they shall be
proceeded against with all Rigor, as Contemners of Our Authority: Ordaining
hereby our said Sheriffs, and other Magistrates foresaid, to search for Arms
suspect to be undelivered, belonging to Papists in any houses or places
suspected, and to seize upon and secure the same; As also in their several
Bounds to search for, take, and apprehend, all such Jesuits, Priests, and
Trafficking Papists, as shall be found therein after the day foresaid, and to
commit them to the next convenient and sure Prison, therein to remain, till
they receive due punishment according to Law, as it is appointed by the 8. Act
of the 1. Session of Our 1. Parliament: And to return to Our Council an Exact
Account of their Diligence in the Premises, betwixt and the days following,
viz. These on the South Side of the said Water of Esk, betwixt and the first
Thursday of March; and these on the North side of the said Water of Esk,
betwixt and the first Thursday of April next, as they will be answerable at
their highest peril. And further, We do hereby Command all the Judges, in Our
respective Judicatures, that they suffer none to bear any public Office, nor
be admitted Procurator, Notar, or Member of Court, as also that the Officers of
our standing Forces and Militia, permit none to bear Arms under Us, unless they
profess the True Reformed Protestant Religion, established within this Our
Realm, conform to the 5. Act of the 1. Parl. of King James the 6. And we hereby
disscharge all Our Nobility, and others, to send their Children abroad with
Pedagogues or Governors to be bred in Foreign Kingdoms, unless they have
Testimonials from the Bishop of the Diocese, and that at their Return, the
said Children go to the Bishop, and give him an Account of the Confession of
their Faith; discharging their Parents, if they turn Papists, to entertain or
furnish them after their perversion, unless with as much as may bring them home
under the pains and penalties expressed in the 71 Act of the 6. Parl. of K. James
the 6. And in the first Act of the 16. Parl. of K. James the 6. viz. Every Earl
contraveening, five thousand pounds Scots; Every Lord, five thousand Merks;
Every Baron, three thousand Merks; And for preventing of which Errors in the
rising Generations, We Ordain the Lords of Our Privy Council to take from
Popish Parents and Tutors, all their children or pupills, and to commit their
Education to such well affected and Religious Friends, as We or they shall
name, conform to the 9. Act of the 1. Session of Our first Parliament: And to
the end all Our good Subjects may unanimously join, not only in Hearing the
Word of GOD, but in participating His Holy Sacraments, We do hereby revive that
excellent Statute, made by Our Royal Grandfather, in the 17. Act of His 16.
Parl. whereby it is Statute and Ordained, That all the Subjects of this Realm
shall communicate once every year; And that if any shall abstain upon any
pretense or excuse whatsoever, they being by their Pastors thereto required,
that they shall pay the penalties mentioned in the said Act, viz. Every Earl so
often as he contraveens, one thousand pounds Scots; Every Lord, one thousand
Merks; Every Baron, five hundred pounds; Every Freeholder, three hundred
Merks; Every Yeoman, forty pounds; and every Burgess according as We and Our
Privy Council shall modifie: Requiring hereby all Our Judges and Magistrates in
their respective Jurisdictions, to put the foresaid Act in Execution against
all persons, of what profession soever, conform to the Words as well as the
meaning of the Act it self; and which We the rather do at this time, because
many of the Romish Church do delude and abuse Our people, under the profession
of some one or other of those who refuse to conform to the worship in this
Reformed Church, as it is presently established by Law: And We being desirous
that the Papists within this Our Realm, may be either Convinced or Convicted,
do require and Command them betwixt and the twenty day of March next, to appear
before the Archbishops or Bishops of their respective Diocesses, and give
satisfaction to them after conference, and obtain Testimonials thereupon; and
in case they failzie to appear^ and give satisfaction as said is, The
Archbishops or Bishops are hereby Ordained to take up lists of the whole
Papists within their Bounds, and to mark particularly who of them are
Excommunicate, and who not, (who of them having been bred up in the true
Reformed Religion, or having professed the same) have made Defection, and to
report the said Lists to Our Council, betwixt and the first Thursday of April
next; with Certification to such Papists as shall not give Satisfaction as said
is, Letters shall be direct against them to compear before Our privy Council,
to produce Testimonials of their Satisfaction, under the pain of Rebellion.
(...) they failzie they shall be denounced Our Rebels, and not only their
^^veable Goods, but the Liferent of whatsoever their Lands, Rooms, possessions,
and others belonging to them, shall pertain to us as Escheat, and (...)
intrometted with, and disponed upon as We shall think good, We being fully
resolved, to proceed to greater Degrees of Rigor against such as being bred up
in the true reformed Religion, or having professed the same, have suffered
themselves to be deluded by, or have thrown themselves into that dangerous
Heresy: And we do declare, that neither the said Papists who shall be
denounced in manner, and for the cause foresaid, shall enjoy their Lands,
Rents, or Revenues, either by themselves directly, or by any others covertly,
or indirectly for their behoove; But that the ^^me shall be intrometted with
for Our Use; and appoints the Rolls of all Excommunicate Papists to be printed,
divulged, and affixed upon the Session-house of Edinburgh, and other public
places of Judgment, Discharging hereby all the Judges of the respective
Judicatures, to permit any contained in that List, to pursue or bear witness in
any Cause or Process, till they be reconciled to the Church, and produce a
Testimonial thereof as aforesaid, conform to the 45. Act of the 1. Parl. and
the third Act of the 20. Parl. of King James the sixth. OUR WILL is therefore,
and We Charge you strictly, and Command, that incontinent, these Our Letters
seen, ye pass to the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and the Market Crosses of the
head Burghes of the respective Shires of this Kingdom; and thereat, by open
Proclamation, make publication of the Pre^isses: And We Ordain these presents
to be printed, that none pretend Ignorance.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the twenty third day of ^anuary 1679. and
of Our Reign the thirtieth Year. Al Gibson, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD save the KING.
Reprinted at London according to the Original Printed at Edinburgh; and are to
be sold by Andrew Forrester, next door to the Mitre Tavern in Kings-street,
Westminster, 1679.


