CR
DIEV^ET^MON^DROIT
HONI^SOIT^QVI^MAL^Y^PENSE
royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION Concerning Building, in, and about London and Westminster.
CHARLES R.

THe Kings Majesty finding, That the Orders and Proclamations heretofore
published by His late Royal Father, and Grandfather, and in the time of Queen
Elizabeth, concerning Building in and about the Cities of London and
Westminster, and the Parts adjacent, during the time of the late Confusions,
have not been at all, or very little observed or pursued: His Majesty therefore
out of the abundant Care which he has of the Honor and Safety of the said
Cities of London and Westminster, is resolved to revive and put in Execution
the effects of the same Orders and Proclamations, especially perceiving the
manifold Inconveniences daily growing by increase of New-Buildings in the
Cities of London and Westminster, and the Suburbs and Liberties of the same;
whereby the People increasing to so great Numbers, are not well to be Governed
by the wonted Officers; the price of Uictuals is much Inhanced, the health of
His Subjects inhabiting in the Cities and Places aforesaid, or repairing
thither, much endangered; and many other good Towns and Boroughs un-peopled,
and in their Trades much decayed: And also taking notice of the frequent Fires
chiefly occasioned by Timber-Buildings, and considering the general Commodity
which would grow to the said Cities, and the Liberties, and Suburbs of the
same, if Building with Brick and Stone there, were more used, whereby Timber
also would be greatly preserved and spared, which is now in all parts much
wasted and grown very scant. And His Majesty likewise considering, how much it
would Grace and Beautify the said Cities (being the Principle Places of this
Kingdom, for the Entertainment and Resort of Foreign Princes and their
Ambassadors, which from time to time do come into this Realm) if an Uniformity
were kept in the said Buildings, and the Houses were Builded with Brick and
Stone, which is both more Durable and Safe against Fire; and also by experience
is found to be of little more, if not less charge then the Building with
Timber. The Kings Majesty does therefore straightly Prohibit and forbid all
persons whatsoever, that they, nor any of them shall, or do at any time after
the Publishing of this Proclamation, Build, Erect, or Set up, or Cause to be
Builded, Erected, or Set up within the Cities of London or Westminster, or the
Suburbs thereof, or within the distance of two Miles, to be taken from any of
the Gates of the said City of London, any manner of Buildings, be they dwelling
Houses, Stables, Shops, Sheds, or any other Building whatsoever, except it be
upon the foundation of a former dwelling House, Stable, Shop, Stall, Shed, or
other like Building respectively, or in or upon some Inner-Court or Yard of a
dwelling House, only for an enlargement of the said dwelling House, for one
only habitation as it was before. And His Majesty does further straightly
Prohibit and forbid all persons whatsoever, that they, nor any of them, shall
or do at any time after the publishing of this Proclamation, Build, Rebuild,
Erect, or Set up, or Cause to be Builded, Rebuilded, Erected, or Set up, upon
any old Foundation, any House, Habitation, or Shop, or whole Story of any
Building within the said Cities of London and Westminster, or the Liberties or
Suburbs of the same, or within two Miles, to be taken from any of the Gates of
the said City of London, except the said House, Habitation, Shop, or Story, so
to be Builded as is aforesaid, be wholly Built of Brick, or of Brick and Stone;
Nor shall they in any such Building or other repairing of their said Houses,
make or put out any Iutties, Out-windows, Trussing over, or Overchanging Walls
or Windows, or any Post or Pillars to support the same toward the Street or
Streets (other then Windows commonly called Ballconies) upon pain that all and
every person and persons offending in the Premises or any of them, shall incur
His Majesty's High Displeasure; and such pains, penalties, and imprisonments,
as by the Laws of this Realm can or may be inflicted upon the Offenders therein
for their contempt and disobedience in that behalf: And His Majesty is
nevertheless Graciously pleased, that for encouragement of such as shall be
conformable, and for a moderate course to be held for the ease and benefit of
such as shall Build with Brick, as aforesaid, It shall and may be lawful for
them to make the Doors and Windows of every such Building of Wood or Timber,
for saving of room, and conveniencie of Shops; and likewise, that every person
that shall Erect any house, as aforesaid, shall be allowed one or more
Ballconies, so as they do Build the Walls upright from the Foundation to the
top, without Iutties, Out-windows, or Trussing over, or over-hanging as
aforesaid: And His Majesty does straightly forbid all Carpenters, Laborers, and
Workmen whatsoever, that they or any of them, do attempt or do any Labor or
Work in or about the Building, or setting up of any Houses within the said
Cities and Places aforesaid, contrary to this His Highness Proclamation, upon
pain of such punishment and imprisonment as by the Laws of this Realm may or
can be inflicted upon them in that behalf: And His Majesty does also command
the Lord Major, and Aldermen of London, and all His Majesty's Justices of
Peace, and all others having Authority within the said Cities, or the Limits,
or Places aforesaid, That they and every of them respectively do cause this His
Majesty's Commandment, to be straightly observed, and duly executed according
to the Tenor and true meaning thereof without delay. Provided always
nevertheless, and His Majesty's Pleasure is, That such part of this His
Highness Proclamation, as concerns Building with Brick or Stone, shall not
extend to any Houses, Habitations, Shops, or Stories of Buildings, which from
and after the publishing of this Proclamation shall be Builded or Erected, in,
or upon London Bridge: And to the end His Majesty's Will and Pleasure herein
may be the better observed, He further commands, that the Surveyor of His
Majesty's Works, for the time being, do take care that this His Majesty's
Proclamation be in all things duly pursued and put in effectual execution; And
to that end, to revive the former Orders and Proclamations in this behalf, and
the Commissions, Articles, and Instructions which were heretofore made forth,
and issued thereupon for his better Direction and Information, touching his
proceedings herein: And also touching the proportions and scantling of Bricks,
which his Majesty's Pleasure is, shall be observed, as was formerly directed
and used, whereby the Buildings may be more substantial, and not so slight as
of late, and at present they have been in most Places within the said Cities
and Limits aforesaid.

Given at Our Court at Whitehal, the Sixteenth day of August, 1661. In the
Thirteenth year of Our Reign. God save the KING.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the KING'S
most Excellent Majesty, 1661.

At the KING'S Printing House in Black-Fryars.


