C2 R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
His Majesty's MOST GRACIOUS SPEECH To both Houses of PARLIAMENT, At the
Opening of the PARLIAMENT at Oxford, Monday the 21st of March, 168^.
Published by His Majesty's Command.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
THe unwarrantable Proceedings of the last House of Commons, were the Occasion
of My parting with the last Parliament. For I, who will never use Arbitrary
Government My Self, am resolved not to suffer it in others. I am unwilling to
mention Particulars, because I am desirous to forget Faults: But who-ever shall
calmly consider what Offers I have formerly made, and what Assurances I renewed
to the last Parliament, how I recommended nothing so much to them, as the
Alliance I had made for Preservation of the general Peace in Christendom, and
the further Examination of the Popish Plot, and how I desired their Advice and
Assistance concerning the Preservation of Tangi^r; and shall then reflect upon
the strange unsuitable Returns made to such Propositions; by Men that were
called together to Consult, perhaps may wonder more, that I had patience so
long, than that at last I grew weary of their Proceedings.

I have thought it necessary to say thus much to you, That I may not have any
new Occasion given Me to remember more of the late Miscarriages. It is as much
My Interest, and shall be as much My Care as yours, to preserve the Liberty of
the Subject, because the Crown can never be safe when that is in danger. And I
would have you likewise be convinced, that neither your Liberties nor
Properties can subsist long, when the just Rights and Prerogatives of the Crown
are invaded, or the Honor of the Government brought low, and into
Disreputation.

I let you see by My calling this Parliament so soon, that no Irregularities in
Parliaments shall make Me out of Love with them; and by this Means offer you
another Opportunity of providing for Our Security here, by giving that
Countenance and Protection to Our Neighbors and Allies, which you cannot but
know they expect from Us, and extremely stand in need of at this instant; and
at the same time give one Evidence more, that I have not neglected My part, to
give that general Satisfaction and Security, which, by the Blessing of God, may
be attained, if you, on your parts, bring suitable Dispositions toward it: And
that the just Care you ought to have of Religion, be not so managed and
improved into unnecessary Fears, as to be made a pretense for changing the
Foundations of the Government.

I hope the Example of the ill Success of former Heats, will dispose you to a
better Temper, and not so much to Inveigh against what is past, as to Consider
what is best to be done in the present Conjuncture.

The further Prosecution of the Plot, the Trial of the Lords in the Tower, the
Providing a more speedy Conviction for Recusants; and, if it be practicable,
the Ridding Our selves quite of all of that Party, that have any considerable
Authority and Interest amongst Them, are Things, though of the highest
Importance, that hardly need to be recommended to you, they are so obvious to
every man's Consideration, and so necessary for Our Security. But I must needs
desire you not to lay so much weight upon any one Expedient against Popery, as
to determine, that all other are ineffectual: And among all Your Cares for
Religion, remember, that without the Safety and Dignity of the Monarchy,
neither Religion nor Property can be preserved.

What I have formerly, and so often declared touching the Succession, I cannot
depart from. But to remove all reasonable Fears that may arise from the
Possibility of a Popish Successor's coming to the Crown, if means can be found,
that, in such a Case, the Administration of the Government may remain in
Protestant Hands; I shall be ready to hearken to any such Expedient, by which
the Religion might be preserved, and the Monarchy not destroyed.

I must therefore earnestly recommend to you, to provide for the Religion and
the Government together, with regard to one another, because they support each
other: And let Us be united at home, that We may recover the Esteem and
Consideration We used to have abroad.

I conclude with this One Advice to you, That the Rules and Measures of all
your Votes may be the known and established Laws of the Land, which neither
can, nor ought to be departed from, nor changed, but by Act of Parliament: And
I may tho more reasonably require, That you make the Laws of the Land your
Rule, because I am resolved they shall be Mine.

LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill, Thomas Newcomb, and Henry Hills,
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1680/1.


