Envy and Folly DETECTED: By Way of a REPLY, TO A Scandalous Pamphlet, lately
Published by ROBERT BRIDGEMAN (a Grocer in London) entitled, Folly and Envy
Detected, etc. Being a Vindication of the True Christian Quakers.

Also something to a Paper Signed by J. Vaughton, J. Field, Chapter Marshall, W.
Bingly, And Others, being in Number 24. And pretended Quakers, lately published
in the City Mercury, etc. To which is added Nineteen Queries to R. B. and his
24 Brethren, etc.

By G. C. and E. N. Lovers of all Men.

2 Pet. 2. 1. But there were False Prophets among the People, even as there
shall be False Teachers among you, who privily shall bring in Damnable
Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves
swift destruction.

Prove. 12. 22. Lying Lips are an Abomination to the Lord: but they that deal
truly are his delight.

Prove. 17. 15. He that justifies the Wicked, and he that condemns the Just:
even they both are an Abomination to the Lord.

LONDON, Printed for Sarah Howkins, 1695.

Advertisement.
Since the aforegoing was at the Press, we have seen a silly Pamphlet published
by H. Gouldney an Apostate Quaker, who endeavors to cover and cloak Error and
Blasphemy, with other Antichristian Practices, that no Protestant Society will
tolerate, etc. To which Pamphlet, for the present, let him take the following
words for an Answer, etc. Proverbs 27th. Verse 22d. Though thou should bray
a Fool in a Mortar among wheat with a Pestil, yet will not his Foolishness
depart from him.

Christian Reader,
I Desire thee to lay aside prejudice, and observe R. Bridgman is offended at
the Christian Confession of D. S. in the Body of his Pamphlet, calling it
Malapart Pragmatical style, (Pope like) without the Consent of the Church: Who
this D. S. is may not be easy to judge; however, I do not find D. S. do join
with any enraged Enemy, or Adversary, nor is he malicious against any that have
laid down their Lives in defense of the Blessed Truth, but for the clearing of
all such, and that none should be led aside by such who cover and cloak gross
Errors. And yet R. B. in his fifth Page is offended with D. S. and here he
says, he villifies some, or a part of the same Society, and that with denying
Him that was born of the Virgin Mary, to be the Christ the Savior of the
World; it is evident that this R. B. is of the same stamp with his Brethren in
Pensilvania, or at leastwise a Cloaker of those gross Errors, as Samuel
Jennings, Coock and Loyd, and the rest of that Faction and yet this R. B. has
the Confidence in Page the ninth, where he cites the Yearly Meeting Paper,
(Mark) if there be any gross Errors, etc. held by any Professing the Truth in
America, such Parsons ought to be admonished, etc. And yet I have not heard of
any Paper of Condemnation, that S. Jennings, and the rest of those of that
Faction has given forth since their Admonition, nor R. B. nor his Twenty four
Brethren against them, but makes a great outcry they are wronged, and
scandalized, but they will not let us know in what, but it is the Duty of all
true Christians to clear themselves from Errors, and not to Cloak such damnable
Errors that no Protestant Society in Christendom would tolerate, as is made
manifest in Print already, and there testified against by the Christian
Quakers, and R. B. seems to be offended with D. S. for desiring any to pray to
God to turn them from their Errors, how Unchristian this R. B. shows himself
(is well to be noted) it is wonderful to me to see R. B's stock of Confidence
in cloaking his Brethrens gross Errors, and in charging D. S. upon no better
Proof than a perhaps, etc. when he must if he be ingenuous, confess S. Jennings
and many more are proved Guilty of such gross Errors, that no Protestant
Society would tolerate; but the main drift of R. B. is to blind the Innocent,
and cover the guilty; p. 7th. R. B. makes bold to tell his Reader, there is no
instance produced wherein G. Whitehead has been either weak or wicked, which to
cover and cloak many gross Errors must be. Either he would make the world
believe he had not read G. Whiteheads Writings of Contention, or else he
justifies all what G. Whitehead has writ, or else cloakes and covers it: See G.
Whitehead's Book, Judgment fixed, and see what Names he gives to those that
testify against gross Errors; not becoming any Christian of Christ's making,
and also R. B. in his seventh Page is offended with D. S. for saying, Light and
Darkness are Beings, and thus says R. B. which as much bespeaks his Skill in
Philosophy, as the other does his Titled to Christianity: finding R. B. having
so little Skill in Philosophy makes me save Paper on that head, and whereas R.
B. seems to be offended at D. S. for his saying, if please God to put it into
the Hearts of the Governors to burn all the Contentious Books, and then says
he, no need of Emendation, etc. I understand D. S. means such Books that
contain such damnable Doctrine, as tend to the destroying the Christian Faith,
and instead of R. B. and his Twenty four Brethren writing Emendations, they
endeavor to cloak all those gross Errors, then R. B. goes on, and why must
they be burnt, the Matter it seems is distateful, but it is evident gross
Errors are not distateful to R. B. if they were, he would not hugg them as he
does: then he goes on, and calls all that testify against gross Errors,
Apostats, and unruly Spirits, that like not to have their Fruits made manifest,
and their Rebellion against the Light rebuked; and they that would have Books
burnt, next step would have the Authors burnt, but this is R. B. wanting
Charity, to condemn gross Errors that does not follow, that they would condemn
the Authors to be burnt: at his way of arguing all the Protestant Societies
that have condemned and testified against the Errors of the Church of Rome
(would burn their Bodies) and should the Christian Quakers tell R. B. and his
Twenty four Brethren, that those persecuting Quakers in Pensilvania; that
Fined, and Imprisoned our Christian Friends in that Province, next step would
burn their Bodies; our thoughts are that R. B. and his Twenty four Brethren
would say we were very uncharitable. And now I shall return some of R. B's. own
words upon him, in Page the ninth, but this D. S. ( who in a Malapert
Pragmatical style, would be deemed the the Representative of the true Christian
Quakers, is for Censuring and Excommunicating (Pope-like) without Consent of
the Church, etc. I appeal to all sober People, how R. B. do fret himself with
the honest Confession of D. S. But I perceive if D. S. his Book had been
Licensed by the Second days meeting, or by R. B. and his Twenty four Brethren,
it would have met with much more favor, than now it has; as if nothing but
what is tolerated by a certain Faction of some few pretended Quakers (whether
that be not more like the Pope and his Council.) That except we will believe as
the Church believes, that is, receive such gross Errors, and damnable Doctrines
as no Protestant Society would tolerate, we must be called Apostates, and
unruly Spirits: the next thing that makes us admire is, how those pretended
Quakers as R. B. and his Twenty four Brethren come to assume that Power to
themselves; as the Title of a Church above the Christian Quaker, and nothing
must pass current except it come from some of their Meetings, or tolerated by
them; but we have observed some men will overvalue themselves, and to have no
Charity toward them that deserve it; also R. B. seems greatly concerned for D.
S. mentioning Josiah Coal, J. Audland for their adoring G. Fox, it seems R. B.
do espouse all the gross Errors, and his Twenty four Brethren; But the
Christian Quaker utterly disowns all Error, and cannot ascribe that Honor to a
mortal man, which is due to our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the
Savior of the world; R. B. would have done well to have told his Reader in
what Book or Books those blasphemous Titles given to G. Fox had been
vindicated, I preceive R. B. and his Twenty four Brethren are Vindicators of
those Adorations given to G. Fox, and herein is the true Christian Quaker
distinguished from the Apostate, the one denies all Error, and the Apostate
cloak and cover them. Then R. B. goes on and says, I need say the less to them
(meaning Books) but what Books he tells not his Reader what those Books are,
and R. B. confesses there may be some unsound Expressions in G. F. Writings,
therefore he must grant it wants Emendations, and grants they were not well
guarded, he have made a sort of a blind Confession, and by this, R. B. have a
little Arraigned G. Fox as well as D. S. and F. Bugg; and now we will let the
Reader understand what Authority the Holy Scriptures have with these men, see
G. F's Book Eutituled, An Encouragement to all the Women's Meetings in the
World, in page 42. see Concerning Jeptha's Daughter, see p. 43. and was not
Micah's Mother a Virtuous Woman, read Judge. the 17th. and see what she said to
her Son, the Text tells us, the Woman gave Two hundred Shekles of silver to the
Founder, to make a graven Image, and a molten Image; pray what Encouragement is
this for a Woman's Meeting, and what use of Scripture these men do make, see in
page 23. page 24. now Old Ely was not against the Assemblies of the Women, who
Assembled by Troops, as you may see 1 Samuel 2. 21, 22. read the Text, and there
ye will find Ely's Sons committed whoredom with the Women, what may we think
after-Ages will say of such Interpreters of Scripture, doubtless this Book ( i.
e. G. F's) come out by the Authority of the 2d. days Meeting, or else G. Fox
must be as R. B. say Pope-like, to impose, in page the 10th, R. B. goes on, but
I would fain know why it must be deemed by D. S. such weakness in G. Fox, to
set his Name to the Book called the Battle Door, etc. Here R. B. covers and
cloakes all the Errors, that the Christian Eighty pounds, Note.
Quakers deny, for there can be no Union between Truth and Error, we for our
own parts went to the: Jews and spoke with the Jew that received Eighty pounds
in milled Money, paid by G. R. besides the Dozen bottles of Wine given by M. F.
(as he did affirm for their doing the chief part of it) and what a Cheat was
this to the Ignorant, to make them believe, as if it had been revealed to G.
Fox: away with such deceit: in the next place R. B. Envies D. S. as he thinks,
for favoring Is. P. But it was well known, that Is. P. was ready to retract in
his Lifetime what he see was an Error, in his 13. page he thinks D. S. have
made a great slip of his Pen, if he be a true Believer, he was not come to bear
the Image of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, but R. B. have showed but
little Skill in Divinity; and therefore, had need to learn, and not to teach:
in page 14. R. B. would make the World believe D. S. was but little acquainted
with the Christian Quakers Faith, which is attended with Christian Charity, and
teaches to exercise a Conscience void of offense both toward God and toward
Man; pray observe what a flourish R. B. have made, it plainly appears that he
cannot be of the Faith of the true Christian Quakers, because he cloaks and
covers all those that have given ill Names, for merely dissenting about
Circumstantial things, that was imposed on us, calling us Dogs, Devils,
Incarnate Apostates, unruly Spirits, with much more. Robert Bridgman, in his
Postscript mentions D. S. Postscript, here he desires all those that are
living, whose former or latter Writings are defective to write Emendations upon
them, as well as on those that are dead. But R. B. is much concerned with D. S.
saying he should be glad if God would put it into the hearts of the Governors
of the Nation to condemn them to be burnt, that is to say, all such Books that
did contain gross Errors; we do not find R. B. nor his Twenty four Brethren,
are willing to write Explanations and Emendations, and have deceitfully Titled
themselves Christian Quakers, because the Government should take no notice of
them, and we can testify these few pretended Quakers, have been very forward
to appeal to every Government, when they thought it would make for their
Interest. So we have with brevity taken notice of what is material; the main
end of R. B. is to condemn the Christian Quakers Confession, and to cover the
Guilty, and in his Advertisement he would have People believe, his Pamphlet may
serve as an Answer to G. W's reply, but it must be to such as believe as the
Church believes, and must take nothing for truth, but what such as he and his
Twenty four Brethren have stamped; but Robert Bridgman, and his Twenty four
Brethren, was not willing to tell their Reader, those that had a hand in the
yearly Meeting Paper left out part of G. Keith's words, in page 7th. viz. not
excluding the Man Christ Jesus his Death, Sufferings, etc. and Intercession,
etc. from being jointly concerned in our Salvation; as also telling you, that
the Faith of him, as he died for us, etc. is necessary to our Christianity and
Salvation.

Now all this was left out in the 7th. page, so by this you may see, they would
Exclude the Man Christ Jesus being jointly concerned in our Salvation, and yet
R. B. has the Confidence in his 9th. page, after the citing about Eight lines
out of the yearly Meeting Paper, does this look like endeavoring to cover any
such gross Errors; certainly he that can see with his own Eyes, will see the
Tendency of what R. B. and his Twenty four Brethren has said, is to cloak and
cover gross Errors; yea, and Doctrine of Devils. R. B. in his 6th. page,
whereupon no better Proof than a Perhaps; or for ought he knows, blames D. S.
and then he goes on, may I not with the same sort of reason argue against him,
that perhaps or for ought I know, it may be undeniably proved upon him, that he
is a Thief, or a Murderer; we perceive this grosser R. B. do not understand
Common Sense, for what can be undeniably proved upon a Thief, or a Murderer, is
not for ought I know, but there is so much Nonsense, that we need not take much
pains to refute him, (for undeniably is not a perhaps, or for ought I know) we
would have the Reader well observe, that R. B. in his Eighth page, where he
makes his Complaint against D. S. how distasteful their Errors are, and says
he, the next step would have the Authors burnt, least there should be any more
such Books; 'its evident he would have more erroneous Books writ, and have
People believe them as Truths, and if they will not believe them, then they are
called unruly Spirits, Apostates, etc. Had not R. B. and the Twenty four his
Brethren been Cloakers of gross Errors, they had no need to have made such a
great Outcry of their being scandalized, calling it a malicious Libel; and
then to cheat the People, calls themselves Christian Quakers: If they had been
such as they have Titled themselves, they would not have been offended with D.
S. in writing to clear the true Christian Quakers; but this have been evident,
that Sam. Jennings have Preached, and prayed in public Meetings, who have been
proved Guilty of gross Errors; and yet, we have not heard of any Paper of
Condemnation he have given forth, nor Robert Bridgman, nor his Twenty four
Brethren, (against him and the rest Guilty of the like Errors) and for the sake
of the Innocent, we have set down some as may be seen more at large, in the
Plea of the Innocent T. F. said that he owned no Man Christ Jesus, as Mediator
in Heaven without him, but the Grace of God within him, page 11th. and in the
same page, He argued against our beloved Friend G. Keith, That Christ was only
a Spirit in Heaven, and had nothing of the Body of man in Heaven; and at
another Meeting he said, he had not learned that Lesson, whether it was the
Godhead or something else, that Christ took of the Virgin, that was nailed to
the Cross, Excluding the Man Christ Jesus his Death, Resurrection, Ascension,
and Meditation for us in Heaven. J. Wilsford said at a Meeting, That Christ was
no Mediator for Drunkards, nor wicked Persons: but for his own own Disciples,
contrary to the express Testimony, Isa. 53. 12. Psalm. 68. and the same Person
at a Meeting in West-Jersey said, in Prayer, Lord that we may not dote on the
Body, to neglect the Life. And in page 12th. Some denying God's Presence in all
his Creatures, another Preaches, that Christ cures men's Souls perfectly at
once; and makes them free from all sin; and when we are perfect we are Kings,
and are not to pray to God for our selves, and at J. Goodsons, S. Jennings,
accused G. Keith, and so did J. Simcock for preaching Faith in Christ without
us, calling it the Professors Faith, and the Faith of all Christendom, that did
not Profit. And Tho. Ducket said, he could not determine, whether that Body
that was Crucified, was in Heaven or not: (What a Preacher here is) and Sam.
Jennings said, to do Gods business, we needed Gods Wisdom and Power, but to do
our own as men, we needed it not; Page 13th. W. Walker said in a public
Meeting, That a man might speak unsound words in the Life, and at another time
he bid wait, that the Scepter might depart from Judah, and that Shilo might
come, (and stamped it in the name of the Spirit) in Page the 14th. H. Willis,
openly declared himself an Unbeliever of Christ, coming without us to Judge the
quick and the Dead, (which is a great Article of the Christian Faith) had not
R. B. and his Twenty four Brethren been Connivers and Cloakers of these, and
many more gross Errors that could be charged, and proved from their Books in
Print, they would never been offended with D. S's. Christian Testimony, and
Confession. And for a Conclusion let that be a sign between you, and the true
Christian Quaker, as G. White has offered in his Reply, to come forth and give
a public Meeting; for as the Scripture says of making Books there is no end;
and let the Reader know, that the Christian Quakers disowns all those Errors
that are here mentioned, with all the rest that are manifest in Print, so shall
we conclude and Subscribe our selves as in Truth, we are well Wishers to all
men.

G. C.
E. N.
Berks the 18th. of the 10th. Month, 1694.
POSTSCRIPT.
WE Refer our Reader (to a Treatise) Titled, The Christian Faith of the People
of God, called Quakers in Rode Island, (in which may be seen what the true
Christian Quakers Faith is, and that they are not ashamed to Confess it to the
whole World.

Also 19. Queries by way of a further Reply, to a Paper published by J.
Vaughton, J. Feilde, Chapter Marshal, Will. Bingly, and others; being in number
Twenty four, and also to their Brother R. B. which make their number to be
Twenty five. Seeing thou R. B. and thy Twenty four Brethren have taken upon you
the Guilt of those Errors, and horrid Blasphemies of your Brethren charged on
them by F. Bugg. we have here added these following Queries, desiring you to
answer them, or abandon the Name of Christian Quaker, that you would seem to
take on you, which cannot be allowed you by any rational Man, while you cover
and cloak such vile Errors, etc.

Q. 1. How dared you espouse those gross Errors of Tho Fitzwater, R. Young, and
T. Lloyd, viz. O God that died in us, and laid down thy Life in us, and took it
up again; and that when Christ ascended he was separated from his Body, that
Faith in Christ without us, as he died for our sins, and rose again, was not
necessary to our Salvation.

Q. 2. Had it not been better for you, rather to have given out a Christian
Testimony against them, for their said Blasphemous Expressions, and against S.
Jennings and others Persecutions of G. Keith, T. Budd, etc.

Q. 3. Why do you not answer F. Buggs first Charge, who says the Quakers
denied him, Who was born of the Virgin Mary, who suffered Death upon the Cross
at Jerusalem, who rose again the Third day, and ascended into Heaven, in the
sight of the Galileans to be Christ the Savior of the World. Seeing D. S.
clears the true Christian Quakers of this gross Charge, it lies at your Door
to clear your selves thereof if you are able.

Q. 4. Why do you not answer his second Charge, who say, They deny the
Scriptures, by speaking contemptuously of them, etc. D. S. have also cleared
the Christian Quakers thereof, therefore it lies at your Door, to clear your
selves and others of your Brethren if you can.

Q. 5. Why do you not answer F. B's third Charge, who says, Their Teachers are
Deceivers of the People, Favorers of Blasphemy, and of differing Faith from
the Apostles, Primitive Christians, and Blessed Martyrs and Excusers of
Idolatry, and that their Doctrine tends to overthrow the Christian Faith. D. S.
have cleared his Christian Friends of this gross Charge, therefore you are left
to answer for your Selves and Brethren.

Q. 6. Why do not you answer F. Buggs Charge against you, who accuses the
Quakers for teaching, That the Name of Jesus Christ, do not properly belong to
the Body that suffered upon the Cross at Jerusalem, etc, D. S. condemns this
Error on behalf of the Christian Quakers, but you having taken it upon your
selves, by blaming D. S. for so doing it lies now at your Door.

Q. 7. Why do not you answer the ten Queries, published by R. Hannay: your
Champion T. Elwood, having not done it.

Q. 8. Whether thou R. Bridgman, and thy Twenty four Brethren does intend to
follow the Footsteps of your Apostate Brethren in Pensilvania, the Twenty eight
false Judges, in condemning and denying of G. Keith, and his Christian Friends;
for, or because of their Christian Doctrine and Principles.

Q. 9. Seeing some of you Twenty four Subscribers have confessed, that you had
not read the Little Book signed by D. S. how dared you to Sign a Paper against
it barely on Trust, is not this believing as the Church believes Rome, like,
etc.

Q. 10. Is it not greater Presumption in you to publish a Paper in order to
make the Body of the Christian Quakers equally Guilty of those grand Errors
with your selves; than for D. S. to clear the Body, and only blame the Guilty.

Q. 11. Whether you do approve (and intend to follow that Antichristian
Practice) of your Brethrens denying The Christian Quakers, their Right of
burying their Dead, as we hear was lately done in Southwark, by some of your
Apostate Brethren, James Braithwait and others, etc.

Q. 12. Wherefore did you Twenty four Apostate Quakers, be so bold as to call
the Sheet signed by D. S. a Libel, and yet does not undertake to prove one
Paragraph to be such, doubtless some of you have Confidence enough to make
Truth seem to be a Lie, and Darkness Light, if your Master the D -- l had but
furnished you his Craft so to do. --

Q. 13. Seeing thou R. B. have confessed in private, that thou have quibled,
(in thy Scandalous Pamphlet) had it not been rather more like a Christian, for
thee, and also for thy Twenty four Brethren, to have confessed your own and
Brethrens Errors, endeavoring to forsake the same; desiring God's Forgiveness
for Christ's sake, than to continue to cover and cloak such damnable Errors, as
no Protestant Society will tolerate.

Q. 14. Is not R. B. guilty of Envy, and Outrage against D. S. For confessing
and disowning those gross Errors, again R. B. in his Twelve and thirteenth
Pages would insinuate, that he is very Charitable to D. S. in that he, viz. D.
S. do give cause to charge him, as questioning a future Existance, or Being
from D. S' s. charitable saying of Is. Pennington, if that worthy Man were in
being, etc. now its evident D. S. could not mean any other Being but in this
Life, unless this R. B. S. Divinity allow of Retraction, or Recantation in the
Life immortal, which is erroneous, for although there be a future Being, yet no
Being for Retraction, etc. R. B. says, That he may positively charge D. S. that
he denies a future Existance, is not this positively Unchristian in R. B. and
may not we by the same rule Charge him to hold a Purgatory, etc.

Q. 15. Art not thou R. Bridgman Guilty of Envy, for falsely charging (in thy
Fifeteenth page) D. S. as wanting Christianity, because he confessed G. Whitehead
was a contentious Scribler, and Guilty of giving base and scurrilous Language,
on no other Evidence says R. B. but that of F. B. but to prove this Envy and
Folly of R. B's, let the Reader see for himself, the filthy Language of (R.
B's. Elder) G. Whitehead given in his Book Judgment fixed, also see the
Billings-gate Rhethorick, in a Book called The Accuser of of the Brethren, etc.
allow R. B. his Concession ( viz. G. Whitehead to be an Elder) ought he not
therefore to be reproved, warned and admonished, for persisting in Evil, or
covering of Error and false Doctrine? was not the Judges of Susannah Elders?
read the History and see what Elders those was.

Q. 16. Art not thou R. B. Guilty of Envy and Folly, as well as Lying and
Prevertion, for affirming that Blasphemy against Jesus of Nazareth, is a Sin
that is not to be forgiven; pray let us know in thy next, the Chapter and Verse
in thy Scripture, where Sin against the Son of man is not to be forgiven, etc.
we know there is a Text that says, The Sin against the Holy Ghost is not to be
forgiven, Ergo R. B. mendax est.

Q. 17. R. B. Art not thou Guilty of Envy and Madness, to cover and cloak those
Divine Attributes, or Blasphemous Titles given to G. F. (by J. C. and J. A.) to
satisfy the unprejudiced Reader we shall cite the Attributes given to G. F.
(by J. C. and J. A) that he may see for himself what the Apostate Quaker is for
covering and excusing, and what the true Christian Quaker is for denying, viz.
all Blasphemy, and Error, be it of what kind soever?

Dear George Fox, whose Being and Habitation is in the Power of the highest, in
which thou rules and governs in Righteousness, and thy Kingdom is established
in Peace, and the increase thereof is without end, etc.

Dear and precious one, in whom my Life is bound up, my Strength is in thee, by
thy Breathings I am nourished, by thee my Strength is renewed, Blessed art thou
for evermore, -- Blessed are all that enjoy, -- Life and Strength come from
thee, Holy one, -- reach unto me, that I may be strengthened to stand in the
mighty Power, and dread of the Lord, -- daily do I find thy Presence, -- I
cannot reign, but in thy dread for evermore, -- reach through all in thy mighty
Power to him, -- pray for us all, that in thy Power we may abide for evermore,
-- I am thine, begotten, and nourished by thee, -- and in thy Power am I
preserved, -- Glory unto thee, Holy one, for ever. --

Now behold what Confidence this R. B. has to cover and excuse his great
Scholar, G. F. whom he says, had some knowledge of the Hebrew tongue, which is
here granted; but however, he had not understanding of the Latin, therefore he
could not understand tu nos and vos, but by Tradition, and some body paid
enough for his understanding in the Hebrew, (Witness the Eighty pounds, and
Dozen Bottles of Wine, as mentioned in the former part hereof) we presume this
cannot be an Argument of any good Breeding in R. B. to cover such vile and
gross Wickedness; as he does both in his great Scholar, G. F. and J. C. and J.
A. who were manifest to be but weak and ignorant Disciples, in giving the
aforesaid Adorations.

Q. 18. R. Bridgman, is it not great Folly and Ignorance in thee, to quarrel
with D. S. in thy Thirteenth page, ( i. e. D. S's.) Exhorting every Believer in
Christ, and follower of him to bear his Image, etc. may not this quarrelsome
Spirit of R. B. be as well offended with holy David, for exhorting the Saints
to praise the Lord, etc. may not we according to his Sophistical way of
arguing, say to him, as if any were Saints, and did not praise the Lord, etc.
and are not the Preachers as Guilty of a slip with their Tongues, as thou would
represent D. S. to be with his Pen, for bidding People fear the Lord, as if
they could believe in the Lord, and did not fear him? is not this sort of
arguing against R. B. as good as his is against D. S? away with such Nonsense
and Ignorance as R B. has published, which tends only to his shame and
disgrace.

Q. 18. Is not R. B. and his Twenty four Brethren guilty of Envy and Folly, for
finding fault that no Name is to the Answer of F. Bugg, but the two Letters D.
S. why may not any Man set two Letters to any thing he writes, seeing some of
your Brethren have given so many Presidents for it, Witness G. F. W. P. J. P.
and many others; and was it any greater Evil for D. S. to be set to that
Christian Testimony, and Confession, than it was for G. P. to be set to a late
silly Pamphlet, Titled, Just Measures in an Epistle of Love and Peace, etc.
which is supposed should have been W. P. and its like it might have been so,
had not the Author then lain absconded, etc. R. B. the Light which thee, and
thy Twenty four Brethren, makes a formal Profession of discovers your Deeds, to
be Deeds of Darkness, by your covering and cloaking those Errors, that are
naked and bare to the World, etc.

Observe Reader the reason why the pretended Quaker persecutes and reviles the
true Christian Quaker is, because they disown the aforesaid Errors with all the
rest, etc. so thinking it not worth while to contend with a contentious
Faction, seeing they have a great many poor innocent Souls to work to help to
maintain their Chest, it being easy for them to publish Lying Pamphlets to
defame others, having a national stock to maintain their Wickedness, in so
doing, and if they please to put an end to the present Controversy, in which
T. Elood, R. Bridgman, and their 24 Brethren with others, have involved
themselves therein, let them come forth to a public Meeting, according to the
request of G. White in his Reply, and G. Keith in his Epistle to Friends, and
joined to his Answer to Tho. Elwood's scandalous Book, etc. and for Conclusion
let them give a Months notice in the London Gazette, and let it be fairly
disputed out; so from all Lying and Slandering, with Blasphemy and Error,
together with all manner of Abominations,

Libera nos Domine. G. C.
E. N.

A Seasonable Caution unto all People, unto whom this may come: Or a Letter to
a Friend.
THAT none for want of a Right understanding judge the True Christian Quakers
guilty of gross Errors, and damnable Doctrine, because a few pretended Quakers,
have cloaked, covered and connived at such things, which the Christian Quakers
utterly disown, and bear Testimony against both by word and writing, as may be
seen in a late Treatise, by D. S. and is a late Reply to Twenty four pretended
Quakers in the City-Mercury (by G. W.) And since that the Christian Quakers
have given notice in the City Mercury, that none should go under a mistake, and
likewise there is one Robert Bridgman, that has published a late Pamphlet in
favor of all those (...) Errors, and damnable Doctrines, w^ has been charged
against them by F. B. in new Rome, and diverse others, which the Christian
Quakers disown, as may be seen in D. S. little Book, and G. W's Reply to the
Twenty four Subscribers, in a Paper with their Names to it; and also the
Christian Quakers are ready ^o give an Account of their Faith as they are ^ng
Witnesses of it, from a living Experience (not Historically) and do testify
against all that do seek to cover, and cloak gross Errors, and which speak
Contemptuously of the Holy Scriptures, and put bad Interpretations upon them,
as may be seen in a Book Entitled, An Encouragement to all the Women's Meetings
in the World. And this may let my Reader understand, there is herewith
published a Reply to Robert Bridgman, by G. C. and E. N. in behalf of the
Christian Quakers, with some of those gross Errors there noted, which Robert
Bridgman and his Twenty four Brethren are Cloakers, and so are Deemed equal
Guilty: These few Lines was written by o^e who believe, and have Faith in the
Blood of of the Man Christ Jesus, as he came outwardly, and shed his most
precious Blood; and as he is come by his spiritual appearance in the Heart,
both being jointly concerned in our Salvation, ^elieving he arose from the Dead
the third Day, and ascended into Heaven, and is there in the glorified Nature
of man, and also that he shall come again without us, to Judge the World, and
with Ten thousand of his Saints.

Reader, The Christian Quakers may be thus distinguished, they neither cover,
cloak not connive at any Errors; and (...) make an Outcry of being scandalized
(...)ged, and not let the World know for what, a^ the Twenty four Subscribers,
and R. Bridgman have done; for my part I know not in what they are wronged in,
except they count that being a wrong, for the Christian Quaker, to deny all
Error and False Doctrine, which they, it is manifest, seek to cover and cloak,
as F. B. have cited out of ^ur own Books in New Rome, etc.

So Subscribes thine in all real Service,


