A LETTER FROM THE CHANCELLOR OF MARYLAND, TO Col. Henry Meese, Merchant in
LONDON: Concerning the late Troubles in MARYLAND.
Colonel Meese,
YOAKELY being now ready to Sail, I thought it fit to acknowledge the receipt of
your Letters this year; I have only that before me which you writ by Mr.
Ambrose Sanderson, and shall for your sake, his Functions, and his own, serve
him in any thing I may; The rest of your Letters I have left at home, so must
defer my answer till the next Ship.

I find by the Masters of the Ships, that the Imprisonment of Capt. Josias
Fendal, and Capt. John Coode, has made so great a noise at London; and
therefore I thought it necessary to give you an account of it, as having been
formerly an Inhabitant of Maryland, and an Eyewitness of the carriage of
Capt. Fendal, in the years 1659, and 1660. when he Perfidiously broke his Oath
and Trust, being Governor of this Province; cancelled his Commission from the
then Lord Proprietor, and took a new one from the Assembly. For that offense he
was only Fined, and declared incapable of ever bearing any Office in this
Province, as you may remember, and that has gaul'd him ever since; and to get
into Office, he now sets all his Wits to work, inciting the People in Charles's
County to Mutiny and Sedition; and Tampering with some of the Justices of Peace
in St. Mary's County: First, telling the People they were Fools to pay any
Taxes, (though laid by Act of Assembly;) that there was Wars in England between
the King and the Parliament; and that now nothing was Treason, a man might say
any thing: And then to the Justices, hinting how easy a matter it was to
overturn the Government here, by seizing the Lord Proprietor, the Chancellor,
Secretary, and Colonel Darnal, all the rest (as he said) signifying nothing.
The Justice of Peace told him, he had no Commission, and that it would be
downright Rebellion; He went from him, and revealed this discourse to another
Justice, who discovered this whole matter to my Lord. Shortly after this, Capt.
John Coode falls upon a time, at a Feast, into discourse with a Papist, who was
Suing a Friend of his for a piece of Land; and said, That he need not trouble
himself for a piece of Land, for that no Papist in Maryland should be Owner of
any Land at all in this Province within three Months; for that he had ten
thousand Men at his Command; and he could make it High Water, or Low Water,
when he pleased.

After this, Coode was observed to make Visits to Fendal, which he never used
to do before, and they both went over into Virginia; and within few days after
their return from thence, a Bo(...) designed for Carolina from Maryland, was
forced in by bad weather to a House in Virginia, where the Owner of the Boat
heard that Fendal and Coode had been thereabouts; and that the whole discourse
there was, that Fendal intended to raise Mutiny in Maryland, and that he and
Coode would carry their Families into Virginia. This being Sworn to, and at
that very instant Information being given, that one of Capt. Coode's Servants
reported, that his Master intended to remove his Family on the Thursday
following into Virginia; made my Lord think it high time to look to the
Security and Peace of the Province, and therefore sent Colonel Darnal with
about ten Men, to bring Coode and Fendal before him and the Council; Colonel
Darnal came to Coodes when it was light, and the Servants using to go to work
opened the door, at which Colonel Darnal entered alone, leaving his Men
without, and coming into Mr. Coode's Chamber, told him he was his Prisoner;
Coode at first laid his hand upon his Sword, but at last yielded; after which
Col. Darnal went over the River, and took Capt. Fendal also, and brought them
before my Lord and Council. And the next day after, Mrs. Coode did Hector my
Lord at a rate I never heard from a Woman before; by which you may conclude
she was not run mad with the fright of her Husbands being pulled out of his
Bed, as we are told her Son Slye falsely reports at London.

Three or four days after I saw her at St. Mary's, and then I did suspect she
would not continue long in her Wits, knowing she had been Mad a while upon the
death of her eldest Son, about the year 1659 and had heard she sometimes fell
into the like Fits since.

After this, my Lord took Bail for Coode within five days, but Fendal was kept
till my Lord had secured Lieutenant George Godfrey, who laid a Plot to unhorse
his Captain, and carry the Troop to the rescue of Fendal, instead of searching
for the Indians, that had Murdered some of our Planters, and were daily
expected to fall into Charles County, in great numbers; as they afterward did
in less than three VVeeks.

My Lord intends to send over their Trials, that the World may see with how
much Favor the Court proceeded, and to stop the Mouth of Calumny; So that I
shall not trouble you now any further, but ere I make an end, must present my
own and my Wife's service to your Second-self, as you style her; and so
subscribe my self, Sir,

From Patuxent Riverside, this 29th. December, 1681. Your humble Servant
PHILIP CALVERT.

LONDON: Printed for A. Banks, 1682.


