DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION Against DUELS.
CHARLES R.

WHereas it is become too frequent, especially with Persons of Quality, under a
vain pretense of Honor, to take upon them to be the Revengers of their private
Quarrels by Duel, and single Combat, which ought not to be, upon any pretense
or provocation whatsoever; We considering that the Sin of Murder is detestable
before GOD, and this way of prosecuting satisfaction, Scandalous to Christian
Religion, and the manifest Violation of Our Laws and Authority, out of Our
Pious Care to prevent unChristian and rash effusion of Blood, do by this Our
Royal Proclamation strictly Charge and Command all Our Loving Subjects of what
Quality soever, That they do not either by themselves, or by others, by
Message, Word, Writing, or other ways or means Challenge, or cause to be
Challenged, any person or persons to Fight in Combat, or single Duel, nor
carry, accept, or conceal any such Challenge or Appointment, nor actually Fight
any such Duel with any of Our Subjects or others, or as a Second, or otherwise
accompany or become Assistant therein. And We do hereby, to the intent that all
persons may take care to prevent the Dangers they may incur by acting or
assisting in any such Duel, Declare Our Royal Pleasure, That We will not Grant
Our Pardon to any person or persons that shall Fight, or be any way aiding or
concerned in any such Duel where any person shall be slain, or die of his
Wounds received therein, but will leave all such persons to the utmost rigor
and severity of the Laws: And further, That We will not suffer or endure any
person or persons to be or remain in Our Court, who shall presume to intercede
in the behalf of any person or persons that shall Offend contrary to this Our
Proclamation. And for the better avoiding all such Duels, We do hereby straightly
Charge and Command all person and persons whatsoever who shall receive or know
of any Challenge sent or delivered as aforesaid, That they do forthwith give
notice thereof to some of Our Privy Council, or otherwise to some Justice of
Peace near the place where such Offense shall be committed, upon pain of Our
highest Displeasure, and being left to be proceeded against according to the
strictest rigout and severity of the Laws.

Given at our Court at Whitehall the Ninth day of March 1679/80. In the Two and
thirtieth year of Our Reign.
London, Printed by John Bill, Thomas Newcomb, and Henry Hills, Printers to the
Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1679/80.


