CR
DIEV^ET^MON^DROIT
HONI^SOIT^QVI^MAL^Y^PENSE^
royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION Concerning the Granting of Licenses for Selling and Retailing
of Wines.
CHARLES R.

WHereas by Our Royal Proclamation (dated the Nineteenth day of March, in the
Thirteenth year of Our Reign) publishing a late Act of Parliament, entitled,
An Act for the better Ordering and Selling Wines by Retail, among other things,
it was declared in pursuance of the said Act, That by Our Letters Patents under
Our Great Seal of England, We had Commissionated certain persons of Trust
therein named, to be Our Agents for the Licencing such persons as they should
think fit, to Sell and Utter Wine by Retail, and required all Our Loving
Subjects within Our Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town and Port of
Berwick upon Twede, who are therein concerned, to take notice of the said Act,
and duly observe the fame, and to address themselves to Our said Agents, and
receive from them such License and Dispensation for Selling and Uttering Wine
by Retail, as they should agree, by virtue of the said Act and Our Commission
of Agency: And yet notwithstanding the said Act, and Our Proclamation
thereupon, all the said Retailers of Wine remain still unlicenced, whereby they
are become liable to the great Penalties and Forfeitures in the said Act
imposed, which may bring upon them much Damage, Loss, and Molestation. Now
therefore, We out of Our Princely Grace and Favor, being most desirous to keep
such Loss and Damage from falling upon Our said Loving Subjects, have thought
fit by this Our Royal Proclamation, to will and require all and every Our said
Loving Subjects, who are Retailers of any Wine or Wines within Our said Kingdom
of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town and Port of Berwick upon Twede, that
they and every of them, do appear and address themselves unto Our Trusty and
Welbeloved Sir Maurice Berkley Knight and Baronet, Sir John Colleton Knight and
Baronet, and others Our present Commissioners and Agents, and such others (or
any two or more of them) as We shall appoint to be Our Agents for Granting
Licenses for Retailing Wine at their Office in Blackfriars, London, at the
several and respective time and times herein after limited and appointed, then
and there to Contract with Our said Agents, at such Rates, Rents, and Prices,
as they shall agree for License and Dispensation for Retailing Wines; and to
perfect such their respective Contracts, and give such good and sufficient
Security for Payment of their respective Rents, and performance of Covenants,
as Our said Agents shall like and approve. And We hereby further declare, and
Our Royal will and pleasure is, That all and every person and persons who are
Retailers of Wine, or desire to have License and Dispensation to Retail Wine
within Our said Dominions, and dwelling within Fifty miles of London, shall,
and do appear before Our said Agents at their said Office, and shall and do
agree, contract, and give good Security for payment of the Rents and
performance of Covenants as aforesaid, at or before the Twentieth day of
October next ensuing. And all and every the person or persons who are Retailers
of Wine, or that desire to have License and Dispensation to Retail Wine as
aforesaid, dwelling within One hundred miles of London, shall, and do also
appear, agree, contract, and give good Security for payment and performance of
their Covenants as aforesaid, at or before the Thirtieth of October next
ensuing. And all and every person or persons who are Retailers of Wine, or
others, that desire to have License and Dispensation to Retail Wine as
aforesaid, dwelling within One hundred and fifty miles of London, shall and do
appear, agree, contract, and give good Security for payment and performance of
their Covenants as aforesaid, at or before the Tenth day of November next
ensuing. And all and every person or persons who are Retailers of Wine, or
others, that desire License and Dispensation to Retail Wine, dwelling within
Two hundred miles of London, shall, and do appear, agree, contract, and give
good Security for payment and performance of Covenants as aforesaid, at or
before the Twentieth of November next ensuing. And all and every person or
persons who are Retailers of Wine, or that desire to have License and
Dispensation to Retail Wine as aforesaid, dwelling above Two hundred miles from
London, shall, and do appear, agree, contract, and give good Security for
payment and performance of Covenants as aforesaid, at or before the Thirtieth
of November next ensuing. And We hereby straightly charge and command, and Our
Royal will and pleasure is, That all and every Retailer or Retailers of Wine or
Wines, within Our said Dominions, do agree and contract with Our said Agents
for License and Dispensation for Retailing and Uttering Wines as aforesaid,
within the respective time and times in this Our Royal Proclamation set and
limited, and that such Contract and Agreement commence from Michaelmas next
ensuing the date hereof. And We hereby declare, That if any person or persons
in any City, Town-Corporate, or other place or places, shall presume to Utter
or Retail any Wine or Wines whatsoever, without making such Contract and
Agreement, and giving Security for payment for License and Dispensation to
commence as aforesaid, and within the said respective time herein limited, are,
and shall be liable to the Penalties and forfeitures in the said Act set and
imposed upon all such who Utter and Retail Wine without License, as in the said
Act is appointed, and are to be forthwith proceeded against as the said Act
directs, any former or other Patent, License, or Usage whatsoever, in any
wise to the contrary notwithstanding. And We do further straightly charge and
command all Sheriffs, Majors, Bailiffs, Constables, and all other Our Officers
whatsoever, to be aiding and assisting unto Our said Agents for the exact
obeying and putting in execution of this Our Proclamation. And We do hereby
further declare to all Our Loving Subjects, That it will be good and acceptable
service to Us in any of Our said Subjects, to prosecute such Offenders who
shall presume to Sell or Retail any Wines without Licenses as aforesaid,
contrary to the true intent and meaning of the said Act, in such manner as is
thereby appointed; for which they shall receive the Reward and Advantage
thereby proposed, being the Moiety of Five pounds for each offense so committed.

Given at Our Court at Whitehal, the Twenty seventh day of September, 1661. in
the Thirteenth year of Our Reign. God save the KING.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the KING'S
most Excellent Majesty, 1661.

At the KING'S Printing House in Black-Fryars.


