C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION COMMANDING All Jesuits and Popish Priests To depart this
KINGDOM.
CHARLES R.

WHereas Our Loyal Subjects the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament
assembled, by their humble Petition have represented to Us, That
notwithstanding Our unquestionable Affection and Zeal to the true Protestant
Religion, manifested in Our constant Profession and Practice, against all
Temptations whatsoever; Yet by the great resort of Jesuits and Romish Priests
into this Kingdom, Our good Subjects generally were much affected with
Jealousy and Apprehension, that the Popish Religion might much increase in
this Kingdom (Which We have most piously desired may be prevented) and so the
Peace both in Church and State may be insensibly disturbed, to the great danger
of both. The two Houses of Parliament were therefore humble Suitors to Us to
issue out Our Proclamation to command all Jesuits, and all English, Irish, and
Scottish Priests, and all such other Priests as have taken Orders from the Sea
of Rome, or by Authority thereof (except such foreign Jesuits or Priests as
by Contract of Marriage are to attend the Persons of either of the Queens, or
by the Laws of Nations to attend foreign Ambassadors) to depart this Kingdom
by a day, under pain of having the penalties of the Laws inflicted upon them.
And We having seriously considered and weighed the said humble Representation
and Petition of Our said Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, and the
great Affection and Duty with which the same was presented unto Us, and
accepting with much contentment their great care for the preservation of the
true Religion established in this Kingdom; Have therefore resolved to publish
this Our Admonition and Commandment, and do hereby require, charge, and command
all Jesuits, and all English, Irish, and Scottish Priests, and all such other
Priests as have taken Orders from the Sea of Rome, or by the Authority or
pretended Authority thereof, Who are not under any restraint by Imprisonment,
That they do before the fourteenth day of May next depart out of this Our
Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales, upon pain of having the Penalties of
Our said Laws inflicted upon them. And for their better means to depart
accordingly, We do hereby Declare and Publish Our further Pleasure, That if at
any time before the said fourteenth day of May next, they or any of them shall
resort to any Port-Town of Our said Kingdom of England or Dominion of Wales,
and there declare himself to the Magistrate of the Town, or other Officers of
any Port, that he is a Priest, and that he is there to take Shipping for his
passage, they shall suffer him or them quietly to depart, and shall see them
shipped and sent away for foreign Parts, and give them their furtherance for
their departure. And to the end this Our Proclamation may be the better
observed and obeyed, We do hereby strictly charge and command all Our
Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, Commissioners, Justices of the Peace, Mayors,
Sheriffs, Bailiffs, and all other Our Officers whatsoever, that they be
circumspect and vigilant each of them in their several charges from and after
the said fourteenth day of May, in searching for, and discovering all such
Jesuits and Priests as aforesaid, as shall presume to remain in this Our Realm
of England or Dominion of Wales, contrary to Our Laws, and Our Royal Pleasure
and Command herein declared. Provided always, and Our intention is (which We do
hereby declare) That this Our Proclamation do not extend to Priests that do or
shall from time to time attend upon the Persons of Our Dearest Consort the
Queen, or of the Queen Our Dear Mother, according to the Treaties of their
several Marriages, the names of which Priests shall be set down and signified
by them under their Great Seals respectively, and such signification enrolled
in Our Court of King's Bench. And because there may be some Priests imprisoned
within this Our Realm yet unknown to Us, We do will and command all Sheriffs,
Bailiffs, and Keepers of Prisons, within twenty days after the publication of
this Our Proclamation, to advertise Our Privy Council, or some of them, of the
names of all such Priests that are in their Custody, and by whom, and for what
cause they were committed, to the end that thereupon We may give order for
their Transportation, as the Case shall require.

Given at Our Court at White Hall, the Ninth day of April, in the year of our
Lord 1663. And of Our Reign the Fifteenth.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent MAJESTY, 1663.


