royal blazon or coat of arms C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT


By the King.

A PROCLAMATION Concerning the Act for the Revenue on Fire-hearths and Stoves.
CHARLES R.

WHereas by a late Act of Parliament begun the Eighth of May, One thousand six
hundred sxty and one, Entitled, An Act for establishing an Additional Revenue
upon His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, for the better support of His and
their Crown and dignity, there is given to us, Our Heirs and Successors Two
shillings upon ebery Fire-hearth or Stove; And whereas in the said Act there is
a Provision that an account be made of all the said Fire-hearths and Stoves, by
every owner and occupier of such Hearth and Stove within six days after notice
given to them by the respective Constables, Headborows and other Officers, who
were to receive the said Account from the Occupiers of every House, Edifire,
Lodging and Chamber before the last of May, One thousand six hundred sixty and
two, and to deliver the said Account at the next Quarter Sessions after the
said last day of May, which cannot now be observed by reasson the time
appointed was elapsed before the publication of the said Act, or that notice
could come to the said Constables. Now to the end that there may be no failer
in the prosecution, and that this important business which is for the supply of
those public charges wherein the safety and peace of this Kingdom is
concerned, may not be deferred or delayed; We have thought fit by this our
Proclamation to require and Command all Justices of the Peace, within their
several Limits, that they forthwith require all Constables, headborows,
Tythingmen etc. whom it may concern, and whom this Act directs thereunto, that
they put the said Act in execution so timely, as that Certificate may be made
to the next Quarter Sessions after Midsomer next. And we likewise require all
Sheriffs, Justices of Peace or any other person or persons, who by virtue of
this Act is required to do or perform any other thing or thing required in this
Act, to pursue and fallow the directions of this Act, in order to the execution
of the same; And all Our Officers and Ministers in what place or Authority
soeber are to be aiding and assisting to all such persons, as are employed
therein, And thereof we expect they give us a due Account.

Given at Our Court at Hampton Court, this 9th. day of June, 1662. in the
Fourteenth year of Our Reign.
God save the King.
London, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty. 1662.


