By The King.
A PROCLAMATION Declaring His Majesty's Pleasure to Settle and Establish a Free
Port at His City of Tanger in Africa.
CHARLES R.

AS We Cannot but know that the welfare and prosperity of Our good Subjects
depends very much upon the safety and improvement of Trade, and have therefore
made it a great part of Our Princely Care and Study to find out ways and means
for the advancement and security of their general Traffic and Commerce; So We
Cannot but hope that these Our just ends and purposes (which We had chiefly in
Our prospect) will be very much Promoted by gaining the City of Tanger in
Africa as an accession unto Our Dominions.

It being not unreasonable to believe, that by means of this Our City of Tanger
a way may be opened to Trades not yet used, and such as could not heretofore
with any safety be at tempted: wherein if the success should not answer Our
desires, yet certainly many of those Trades which are now frequented, will
hereafter be carried on with much more ease and security to Our Merchants, when
they shall have a good Port in the entry of the Mediterranean to befriend them
To the end therefore that all fit encouragement may be given to make use of the
advantages of this Port.

We have thought fit to declare, and do hereby Declare and Publish Our Royal
Will and Pleasure, That Our City of Tanger is and shall be Port free to all
Merchants, as well Foreigners as others, with their Ships and Vessels, Except
such Ships and Vessels which shall come from beyond the Cape of Good Hope,
commonly called Capo de bon esperanza; And except Ships coming from any of Our
English Plantations, for and during such Time, and upon such Terms, Articles,
and Conditions as are herein after expressed, (That is to say)

I. First it shall lawful for all Our good Subjects, and the Subjects of any
other Nation in amity with Us (except before excepted) to come freely into Our
Port at Tanger, with their Ships, Vessels, and Merchandises, and to land the
same, or any part thereof, and lay them up in such Warehouses or other places
as they shall think fit.

II. All persons coming into Our said Port with any Ships, or Merchandises,
shall Enter, or cause to be Entered in the Registry there to be kept for that
purpose, all the Goods, Wares, Merchandises and Commodities by them landed, and
shall pay, or cause to be paid for every Hundred pounds worth of Goods so
landed, according to the Rates and Values of Merchandises set down in the Book
of Rates established in England, Five shillings for the Entry thereof, and no
other Duty or Payment whatsoever.

III. If any person shall refuse or neglect to make entry of his Goods so
Imported and Landed, or shall not make Entry without fraud or deceit; The
person so refusing or neglecting to make Entry, or making short Entry, shall
lose and forfeit the Ship or Vessel, together with all the Goods so Imported,
and be utterly incapable of any of the Privileges or Benefits herein before or
after mentioned.

IV. It shall be lawful for all persons to Export or Sell upon the place, the
Goods so Imported, at his and their will and pleasure, without paying any
further or other Imposition or Duty whatsoever.

V. All persons Exporting any Goods from Our said Port and City of Tanger, into
any part of Our Kingdoms of England or Ireland, shall be obliged to Export the
same in English Shipping, and with English Mariners.

VI. This Liberty and Freedom of Our Port at Tanger shall continue from the
Nine and twentieth day of September 1662. for and during the full time and term
of Five years from thenceforth next coming; In all which time there shall be no
further or greater improvement of Our Customs within Our said Port. And We do
also Declare, That when those Five years shall be elapsed, We shall not make
any new or greater Imposition upon the Trade of that Port, without first giving
public notice thereof after the expiration of Five years, by the space of Two
years before any such new or greater Imposition shall take effect.

Given at Our Court Whitehall, this sixteenth day of November, in the
Fourteenth year of Our Reign.
God Save The King.
London, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, 1662.


