royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT
By the King. A PROCLAMATION Concerning Wine-Licenses.
CHARLES R.

WHereas by Our Royal Proclamation bearing date at our Court of White Hall, the
Twentieth day of September in the Thirteenth year of Our Reign, Published in
pursuance of a late Act of Parliament, Entitled, An Act for the better
Ordering and Selling of Wines by Retail, (amongst other things) We did Will and
Require all and every Our loving Subjects who were Retailers of any Wine or
Wines within our Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town and Port of
Berwick upon Twede, to appear and Address themselves unto Our trusty and
well-beloved Sir Maurice Berkley Knight and Baronet, Sir John Colleton, and
others Our then Commissioners and Agents, and such others, or any two or more
of them as We should appoint to be Our Agents for Granting Licenses for
Retailing Wine, at their Office in Blackfryers, London, at the time and times
therein limited and appointed: And whereas We afterward thought fit to revoke
Our former Commission issued to the aforesaid persons for the Granting of
Licenses, or Dispensations for selling of Wine by Retail, And to appoint Our
Right Trusty and Right well-beloved Cousin, John Earl of Bath, first Gentleman
of Our Bedchamber, Edmond Wyndham Esquire, one of the Gentlemen of Our Privy
Chamber in Ordinary, and others, to be Our Commissioners and Agents for
granting Licenses for Retailing Wines; And therefore did by Our Proclamation
bearing date at Our Court at White Hall the Nineteenth day of May in the
Fourteenth year of Our Reign, will and require all Our loving Subjects who were
Retailers of any Wine or Wines within Our Kingdom of England, Dominion of
Wales, and Town and Port of Berwick upon Twede, That they and every of them
should appear and Address themselves unto Our said Right Trusty and Right
Wel-beloved Cousin John Earl of Bath, and Edmond Wyndham Esquire, and such
others (or any two or more of them) as We had then appointed to be Our
Commissioners or Agents for the granting Licenses for Retailing of Wines, at
their Office in the Old Palace-Yard at Westminster, at the time and times
therein limited and appointed. And whereas since the publishing of Our
Proclamations aforesaid, We have been graciously pleased, out of Our Princely
care and great love and affection to Our most entirely beloved Brother James
Duke of York, for and toward the maintenance and support of him the said Duke,
his State and Dignity, (amongst other things) to Grant and Assign unto him, and
the Heirs males of his Body, all and every the Power and Powers, Authority and
Authorities of giving License to any person or persons to Sell or Utter by
Retail all, every, or any kind of Wine or Wines whatsoever, with all Rents, Sum
or Sums of Money, Revenues, Profits and Emoluments whatsoever, that shall or
may arise from the same; which were further settled by a late Act of Parliament,
Entitled, An Act for settling the Profits of the Post Office, and Power of
granting Wine-Licenses, on his Royal Highness the Duke of York, and the Heirs
males of his Body. And whereas it is in and by the said Act Enacted and
Declared, That all and every person or persons which from time to time shall be
by the said Duke of York and the Heirs males of his Body appointed, authorized,
or deputed Agent or Agents, Commissioner or Commissioners, to treat and
contract for giving of Licenses for the Selling and Uttering Wines by Retail,
shall have the full and sole Power and Authority to treat and contract for the
same, in as full and ample manner as Our Agents or Commissioners might have
done by virtue of the first recited Act. In pursuance whereof, Our most
entirely beloved Brother Jam^s Duke of York, has under his Hand and Seal
authorized and deputed Sir Richard Braham Knight and Baronet, Sir Nicholas
Armorer, and Sir George Smith, Knights, Stephen Fox, Richard Mason, and
Nicholas Oudart, Esquires, to be his Agents and Commissioners for granting of
Licenses for selling of all manner of Wines by Retail: We do therefore hereby
strictly charge and command all Our Subjects who are Retailers of any Wine or
Wines within Our Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, or Town and Port of
Berwick upon Twede, That they and every of them do appear and Address
themselves unto the aforesaid Sir Richard Braham, Sir Nicholas Armorer, Sir
George Smith, Stephen Fox, Richard Mason, and Nicholas Oudart, or any two or
more of them at their Office in the Old Palace-Yard at Westminster, and at any
such other place or places in London or elsewhere, as they from time to time
shall think fit and appoint, at the several time and times herein after limited
and appointed, then and there to Contract with the said Agents or Commissioners
at such Rates and Prices as they shall agree for License and Dispensation for
Retailing of Wines, and to perfect such their respective Contracts, and give
such sufficient Security for payment of their respective Rents, and performance
of Covenants, as the said Agents or Commissioners, or their Assigns shall like
and approve, at such warrantable Rates as by the said Acts are appointed; And
likewise such as have formerly contracted with any of Our Agents aforesaid, to
pay unto them all such Arrears of Rents as they have so contracted for. And We
do further hereby Declare, and Our Royal will and pleasure is, That all and
every person and persons who are Retailers of Wine, or that shall desire to
have Licenses and Dispensation to Retail Wine within Our said Dominions, and
dwelling within One hundred Miles of Our City of London, shall, and do appear
before the said Agents or Commissioners at their Office aforesaid, And shall,
and do agree, contract, and give good Security for payment of their Rents, and
performance of Covenants, and likewise for payment of their Arrears of Rent, at
or before the Nine and twentieth day of September next: And all other persons
living at a greater distance, at or before the Tenth day of October next. And
We do hereby Declare, That if any person or persons whatsoever in any City,
Town Corporate, or other place or places whatsoever, shall by virtue or color
of any Letters Patent, Grant, Contract, or Authority whatsoever not warranted
by the Acts aforesaid, presume to Utter or Retail any Wine or Wines whatsoever,
without making such Contract and Agreement, and giving Security for payment for
License and Dispensation to commence as aforesaid, and within the said
respective time herein limited; they and every of them are and shall be liable
to the Penalties and Forfeitures in the said Act set and imposed upon all such
who Utter and Retail Wine without License, as in the said Acts is appointed,
and are to be proceeded against as the said Act directs. And We do further
straightly charge and command all Sheriffs, Mayors, Bailiffs, Constables, and all
other Our Officers whatsoever, to be aiding and assisting unto the said Agents
or Commissioners of Our said Dear Brother, for the exact obeying and putting in
execution of this Our Proclamation. And We do hereby further Declare to all Our
loving Subjects, That it will be good and acceptable service to Us in any of
Our said Subjects, to prosecute such Offenders, who shall presume to Sell or
Retail any Wines without License as aforesaid, contrary to the true intent and
meaning of the said Acts, in such manner as by Law is appointed, for which they
shall receive the reward and advantage thereby proposed, being the Moiety of
Five pounds for each Offense so committed.

Given at Our Court at White Hall this Five and Twentieth day of August, 1663.
In the Fifteenth year of Our Reign.
God save the King.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent MAJESTY, 1663.


