By the King.
A PROCLAMATION. Containing His Majesty's gracious Pardon and Indemnity.
CHARLES R.

CHARLES the Second, by the Grace of GOD, King of Scotland, England, France and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. To all and sundry Our good Subjects whom
these presents do or may concern, Greeting: The just Resentments We have of the
rebellious courses taken by some in that Our Ancient Kingdom of Scotland, by
poisoning Our People with Principles inconsistent with true Piety, and all
humane Society, as well as with Our Royal Government; and of the humorous
Factions of others, who (under pretext of re-presenting Grievances (...) Us)
have most unjustly, both in Scotland and England; Defamed Our Judicatures of
Scotland, and thereby weakened Our Authority, therein represented; All which,
did not hinder Us from endeavoring to quiet the one by Our late Proclamation;
and the other by a public Hearing and Debate: And being most desirous to cover
all the Imperfections of Our Subjects, and to remove the Fears and Jealousies,
whence they proceed; We have therefore, by Our Royal Authority, and the
undoubted Prerogative of Our Crown, thought fit (with the advice of our Privy
Council) to Indemnifie, Remit and Pardon (with the Exceptions after specified)
all such as have been at Field, or House-conventicles; all such as are guilty
of irregular administration of the Sacraments, and other Schismatic Disorders;
all such as have been engaged in the Rebellion, 1666. Or the late Rebellion
this present Year of God, 1679 All such as have Spoken, Written, Printed,
Published, or dispersed any traitorous Speeches, infamous L^bels, or Pasquils;
all such as have misrepresented any of Our Judicatures, Servants, or Subjects,
or have advised any thing contrary to Our Laws; all such as have maleversed in
any Public Station, or Trust: and generally, all such as are liable to any
pursuit, for any Cause, or Occasion, relating to any public Administration, by
Contrivances, Actings, Oppositions, or otherways preceding the date hereof.
Declaring the generality of these Presents, to be as effectual to all intents
and purposes, as if every Circumstance of every the foresaid Delinquencies, or
Mis-demeanours were particularly and specially here inserted; and as if every
of the Persons that might be challenged and pursued for the same, had a
Remission under Our great Seal, or an Act of Indemnity past in his Favors.
Discharging any of Our Officers, or Subjects, to pursue any Person or Persons
upon any such accounts, either ad vindictam publicam vel privatam, or to
upbraid them therewith. And Comanding all Our Judges to interpret this Our
Remission and Indemnity, with all possible latitude and ^avor, as they will be
answerable to Us upon their highest perils, Excepting such as are already
forefaulted by our Parliaments, or Our Criminal Court, fined by Our Privy
Council; and such who being fined by Inferior Judicatures, have paid, or
transacted for their fines, in so far as concerns their respected fines, so
imposed: Excepting also, all such Heretors and Ministers, who have been in the
late Rebellion, or were contrivers thereof, and such Heretors as have
contributed thereto, by Levies of Men and Money; and excepting likewise such as
obeyed not Our, and Our Councils Proclamation, in assisting Our Host; to be
pursued for that their Delinquency, according to Law; and such persons as have
threatened, or abused any of the Orthodox Clergy, or any of Our good Subjects
for assisting Us, in suppressing the late Rebellion; and that, since Our
Proclamation, dated the twenty-ninth day of June, last past: Which Indemnity We
do grant to those who were engaged in the late Rebellion, provided that they
shall appear before such as our Privy Council shall nominate, betwixt and the
dyets following, viz. these that are within this Kingdom, betwixt and the
eighteenth day of September, and these that are forth thereof, betwixt and the
thirteenth of November next to come, and enact themselves, never to carry Arms
against Us, or our Authority, and with express condition, that if ever they
shall be at any Field conventicle, or shall do any violence to any of Our
Orthodox Clergy, this Our Indemnity shall not be useful to such Transgressors
any manner of way; as it shall not be to any for private Crimes, such as
Murders, Assassinations, Thefts, Adulteries, the fines and denunciations
thereof, and such like as never use to be comprehended under general Acts of
Indemnity; and particularly the Execrable Murder of the late Archbishop of
St. Andrews: Nor to such as were appointed to be carried to the Plantations, by
our Letter, dated the twenty ninth day of June last, tho their lives be by this
Our Royal Proclamation also, secured unto them, in manner, and upon the
conditions abovementioned. But lest the hope of Impunity should embolden the
malicious to future disorders; We do hereby Command Our Privy Council, and all
Our other Judicatoures, to pursue and punish with all the severity that Law can
allow, all such as shall hereafter threaten or abuse the Orthodox Clergy,
murmr against Our Judicatures, or Officers, as shall make, publish, print, or
disperse Lybels, or Pasquils; these being the Forerunners of all Rebellions;
and which, by defaming Authority, do disappoint all its just and necessary
Methods. And to the end, all our good Subjects may have notice of this Our
Royal Will and Pleasure, We do hereby Command Our Lion King at Arms, and his
Brethren Heralds, Macers, Pursevants, and Messengers at Arms, to make timous
Intimation hereof, at the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and other Places needful.

Given at Our Court, at Windsor-Castle, the Twenty-seventh day of July, one
thousand, six hundred, seventy and nine. And of our Reign, the Threttieth-one
Year. By His MAJESTY'S Command, LAUDERDALE.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno Dom. 1679. And Reprinted at London.


