HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT

royal blazon or coat of armsBy the King.
A PROCLAMATION Commanding all Papists, or reputed Papists, forthwith to Depart
from the Cities of London and Westminster, and from within Ten Miles of the
same.
CHARLES R.

WHereas the Papists, notwithstanding several Acts of Parliament to the
contrary, do presume, upon the Expiration of His Majesty's Royal Proclamation
bearing date the third day of December last, Commanding their Departure and
Absence for Six Months, to Repair at this present to the Cities of London and
Westminster in great Numbers: The Kings most Excellent Majesty is therefore
graciously pleased to Revive and Continue His said former Proclamation, and
does by this His Royal Proclamation strictly Charge and Command all Papists,
and Persons reputed Papists, and such as have been so within Six Months last
past, That they and every of them do forthwith Depart from the said Cities of
London and Westminster, and from all Places within the distance of Ten Miles of
the same, and that they or any of them do not presume to Return again upon any
pretense whatsoever, within the space of Six Months from the date of these
Presents; And lest they or any of them should do the contrary, upon pretense of
any License formerly granted by any of the Lords or others of His Majesty's
Privy Council, His Majesty does hereby Declare, That he has caused all
Licenses of that nature formerly granted by any of the Lords or others of His
Privy Council, to be revoked. And His Majesty does hereby further straightly
Charge and Command all and every Justice of the Peace, Constable, and others
His Officers and Ministers of Justice within His said Cities, or either of
them, and within Ten Miles of the same, That they do make strict Search and
Enquiry for, and with all rigor proceed against all and every Person and
Persons who shall be found within the said Cities of London and Westminster,
and within Ten Miles of the same, during the said space of Six Months, contrary
to the effect of any of the Statutes, and the Purport of this His Majesty's
Proclamation. Provided that nothing herein contained shall be construed to
extend to any Person or Persons, who being formerly of the Popish Religion,
have fully Conformed to the Protestant Religion in such manner as is by Law
appointed, nor from the time of their respective Conformity, to such as shall
hereafter in like manner Conform themselves.

Given at Our Court at Newmarket the Fourth day of October 1680. In the Two and
thirtieth year of Our Reign.
God save the King.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill, Thomas Newcomb, and Henry Hills, Printers to the
Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1680.


