By the King.
A PROCLAMATION Commanding all Papists, or Reputed Papists, forthwith to depart
from the Cities of London and Westminster, and from within Ten miles of the
same.
CHARLES R.

WHereas notwithstanding the several Acts of Parliament, and His Majesty's late
Royal Proclamation to the contrary, there is at this time a very great resort
of Papists, and Persons justly reputed Papists, to and about the Cities of
London and Westminster, and Places thereunto adjacent; The Kings most Excellent
Majesty (at the humble Request of the Commons now in Parliament Assembled) Does
by this His Royal Proclamation strictly Chgarge and Command all Papists, and
Persons reputed Papists, and such as have been so within Six months last past,
That they and every of them do forthwith depart from the said Cities of London
and Westminster, and from all Places within the distance of Ten miles of the
same; And that they or any of them do not presume to return again upon any
pretense whatsoever, within the space of Six months from the Date of these
Presents. And lest they or any of them should do the contrary, upon pretense of
any License formerly granted by any of the Lords, or others of His Majesty's
Privy Council, His Majesty does hereby Declare, That he has caused all
Licenses of that nature formerly granted by any of the Lords, or others of His
Privy Council, to be revoked. And His Majesty does hereby further straightly
Charge and Command all and every Justices of the Peace, Constables, and others
His Officers and Ministers of Justice within His said Cities, and either of
them, and within Ten miles of the same, That they do make strict Search and
Enquiry for, and with all vigor proceed against all and every Person or
Persons who shall be found within the said Cities of London and Westminster,
and within Ten miles of the same, during the said space of Six months, contrary
to the effect of any of the said Statutes, and the purport of this His
Majesty's Proclamation.

Provided, That nothing herein contained shall be construed to extend to any
Person or Persons who being formerly of the Popish Religion, have fully
Conformed to the Protestant Religion, in such manner as is by Law appointed,
nor from the time of their respective Conformity, to such as shall hereafter in
like manner Conform themselves.

Given at our Court at Whitehall the Fourth day of May 1679. In the One and
thirtieth year of Our Reign.
God save the King.
London, Printed by John Bill, Thomas Newcomb, and Henry Hills, Printers to the
Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1679.


