C R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION Against the deceitful Winding and Folding of Woolls.
CHARLES R.

WHereas in the Parliament holden in the Seven and twentieth year of the Reign
or Our most Noble Progenitor, Edward the Third, late King of England, it is
Enacted and Ordained (amongst other things) That all Wooll-Packers, Workers and
Winders of Wool, should be Sworn, and take a Corporal Oath before the Mayor of
the Staple for the time being, truly and justly to Wind, Work, and Pack all the
Woolls within the Realm, without fraud or deceit: By force of which Statute,
the Fellowship of Wooll-Winders, otherwise called Wooll-men, and all persons
using or exercising that Craft or Mystery, are bound justly and truly to Wind
and Pack all such Woolls as they meddle with throughout the Realm, to the
public good and commodity of the whole Realm: By force of which Law, and other
Statutes made for the good and due Winding and Packing of Woolls, and by the
good Ordinances made by the said Fellowship, the said Woolls have been ever
since justly and truly Wound and Packed, until now of late diverse and many
persons contrary to the same Statute, taking upon them to be Wool-Winders in
many places of this Realm, neither being Sworn, nor expert in Winding and
Folding of Woolls; of which some be Glovers, Tailors, Weavers, Cordwayners,
Barbers, Husbandmen, and other Artificers who have gone about, and daily do go
about throughout the Realm in many places, practicing themselves in Winding and
Folding of the said Woolls, by the procurement and means of the Owners and
Breeders of the said Woolls, and do Wind up and deceitfully put into the said
Fleeces of Wool, Sand, Stones, Dust, Pitch, Tarr, Clay, Iron, Lead,
Double-marks, Shorelocks, Dung, Lambs-wooll, Clockets, Locks, Hinder-shanks,
Tails, Washlocks, Cummer, and many other deceiveable things, not only to the
great slander of this Realm, and the embasement and diminution of that ancient
Staple-Trade, but to the great loss and prejudice of His Majesty's Subjects
using the Craft and Feat of Cloth-making within this Realm, and to the great
abuse and deceit of Merchants, and other buyers of the same: Complaints whereof
have been with all humble earnestness represented unto the Kings Majesty by the
Company and Fellowship of Wooll-men, alias Wooll-Packers of the City of London,
Suppliants for remedy and relief in that behalf. Therefore for reformation and
redress thereof, the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by the Advice of His Privy
Council, straightly Charge and Commands, That no manner of person or persons
whatsoever he or they be, at any time hereafter go about, or take upon him or
them to Wind, Fold, or Pack any manner of Woolls in any Country or County
within this Realm, where Woolls are either bred, wrought, had or used, for any
Merchant of the Staple, Breeder, Clothier or Buyers, before be or they shall be
admitted and allowed by the Master and Wardens of the Company and Fellowship of
the Wool-men of the City of London, or one them for the time being; to the
intent that he and they shall be expert, and have knowledge in the said Craft
or Mystery, for true Winding and Folding of Woolls: And that every person and
persons so allowed and admitted for an able and lawful Workman or Workmen in
form aforesaid, shall have a Testimonial or Certificate of his allowance and
admittance under the Seal of the Mayor of the Staple of Westminster for the
time being: And that none of the said persons so allowed and admitted, or that
shall go about or take upon him to Wind or Fold any Woolls, before he or they
have taken a Corporal Oath before the said Mayor for the time being, That he or
they shall truly and justly without deceit, Wind and Fold all and singular such
Wool or Woolls as he or they shall take upon him or them to Wind or Fold, and
shall not commit, use or practice any deceit or guile therein; upon pain that
every person which shall take upon him to Wind and Fold any manner of Wools,
being not admitted sworn as is aforesaid, or which shall commit, us;e or
practice any deceit or guile therein against this Our Proclamation, or against
any the Laws and Statutes in that behalf made and provided, shall suffer
Imprisonment Ten days, and to be set upon the Pillory in the next Market Town,
with a Fleece of Wool hanging about his neck, according to the tenor of
several Proclamations heretofore set forth; one in the Fifth year of the Reign
of Our most Noble Predecessor King Edward the Sixth; And one other Proclamation
set out by Queen Elizabeth, bearing date the Tenth day of August, in the Fourth
year of Her Reign; And one other set forth in the Second year of the Reign of
Our Royal Grandfather King James, and bearing date the Eighteenth day of June
in the said year.

And His Majesty further straightly Charge and Commands, That no Grower,
Breeder, Brogger or Gatherer of any Woolls in any His Highness Countries or
Counties within this Realm, shall at any time hereafter set on work any
Wooll-Folder, or Wooll-Winder, to Fold or Wind his or their Wool or Woolls,
unless the said Wooll-Folder, or Wooll-Winder bring with him or them a
Testimonial or Certificate under the Seal of the said Mayor of the Staple at
Westminster for the time being, testifying him or them to be Sworn and admitted
for an able Workman to Fold and Wind Woolls in manner and form as is aforesaid,
upon the like pain as is above expressed.

And further, where by an Act made in the Three and twentieth year of the Reign
of Our most Noble Predecessor, King Henry the Eighth of famous memory yet
standing in force, It was Enacted, That no manner of person do Wind, or cause
to be Wound any Fleece of Wool not being sufficiently rivered or washed, nor
Wind, or cause to be Wound within any Fleece, any deceivable things
particularly mentioned in the same Act, or any other thing where by the Fleece
may be the more weighty, to the deceit and loss of the Buyer, upon pain the
Seller of any such deceitful Woolls to forfeit for every such Fleece six pence:
His Majesty has been certainly informed, That notwithstanding the said good
Act and Statute, much deceit is used in Washing, Winding, Folding and Packing
of Woolls, and that for the most part, of unskilful person, contrary to the
said Act and Statute: His Majesty therefore minding to have the said Clauses of
the said Statute, and all Acts and Statutes touthing, or in any wise concerning
the avoiding of the said deceits, or made and provided for the true and lawful
Winding, Folding, and Packing of the said Wools by expert and skilful persons,
shall be from henceforth duly observed and put in execution, and the Offenders
against the same to be corrected and punished according to the effect and true
meaning thereof, Does straightly Charge and Command all and every His Subjects
whatsoever, to whom it shall and may appertain, to observe the true meaning of
the said Acts, and yield punctual obedience to the said Laws, upon pain of
forfeiture of the penalties therein contained, and as they will avoid His
Highness further displeasure. And further, His Majesty by the Advice aforesaid,
straightly Charge and Commands all and every Justices of Peace, Mayors,
Sheriffs, Bailiffs, and all other His Highness Officers and Ministers
whatsoever, to whom it may appertain, within their several Liberties and
Precincts, That they, and every of them, cause every such Offender and
Offenders to be punished for every such Offense and Offenses above mentioned,
in such sort as is above limited, appointed and declared. And that every and
whatsoever Justice of Peace, Mayor, Sheriff, Bailiff, or other Officer do
refuse, or do not punish, or cause to be punished, every such person or
persons, so to him or them presented, according to this present Ordinance, his
or their faults being duly proved, shall be Fined to the Kings Majesty
according to such demerits; And further, shall incur His Highness displeasure.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Fifth day of February, 1663. in the
Sixteenth year of Our Reign. GOD SAVE THE KING.
London, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the KINGS
most excellent Majesty. 1663.


