Charles R.

MOst Reverend Father in God, We Greet you well: Whereas by an Act made by this
present Parliament, in the fourteenth year of Our Reign, for Granting unto Us
the Duty of two shillings upon every Fire-Hearth, Stove, etc. Entitled, An Act
for establishing an additional Revenue upon His Majesty, His Heirs, and
Successors, for the better Support of His, and their Crown and Dignity. It is
provided and enacted, That if the Churchwardens and Overseers of the poor of
any Parish, together with the Minister of the same, or any two of them (whereof
the Minister to be one) shall in Writing under their Hands, yearly certify
their belief, that the House wherein any person does inhabit, is not of greater
value than twenty shillings per annum, upon the full improved Rent. And that
neither the person so inhabiting, nor any other using the same Message, has,
uses, or occupies any Lands or Tenements of their own, or others, of the
yearly value of twenty shillings per annum, nor has any Lands, Tenements,
Goods, or Chattels of the value of ten pounds in their own possession, or in
the possession of any other in trust for them; That then upon such Certificate
made in such case to the two next Justices of the Peace, and allowed by them
(for which Certificate and Allowance, no Fee shall be paid) the person in whose
behalf such Certificate is made, shall not be returned by the Constable or
other Officer. And the said House is thereby discharged of, and from all the
Duties by the said Act imposed.

And whereas We are informed, That either through the ignorance of some persons
in the Law in this behalf, or by partiality and favor, great number of undue
Certificates are from time to time signed in all places of the Kingdom, by the
respective Ministers, Vicars, and Curates of the places, and the Churchwardens
and Overseers of the poor of the same, for persons not qualified, as the Law
above recited does require, to the great diminishing and detriment of Our said
Revenue. Now to the end that some better care may be taken for the future in
this matter; Our Will and Pleasure is, And We have thought fit hereby, to
require you forthwith to write to the Right Reverend Fathers in God the Bishops
of the several Dioceses within your Province of Canterbury, to direct them, and
recommend it to their care, to take effectual Order strictly to charge all
Ministers, Parsons, Vicars, Curates, and Churchwardens within their respective
Dioceses, to use all possible circumspection in the signing of any
Certificates, and that they be well assured, that the persons for whom they do
certify, are in all respects qualified as the Law directs. And that they do
not certify for any other persons whatsoever: And you are also to take care,
That the same charge be given to all Ministers, Parsons, Vicars, and Curates
within your immediate Diocese of Canterbury. Given at our Court at Whitehall
this fourth day of November, in the six and twentieth Year of our Reign, 1674.

To Our Right Trusty and Right Entirely Beloved Cousin and Counselor, the most
Reverend Father in God, Gilbert Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate and
Metropolitan of all England. By His Majesty's Command, Danby.

The Archbishop of CANTERBURY His Letter to each Bishop in His Province.
My very Good Lord,
THe enclosed contains a true Copy of His Majesty's Commands directed unto Me,
to be Communicated to the Rest of my Brethren my Lords the Bishops of this
Province of Canterbury, and by them and Me to be put in speedy Execution within
Our Respective Jurisdictions. Upon Perusal thereof Your Lordship will be
sufficiently informed of the Nature of the Business therein intended: And I
doubt not but accordingly You will take Care that all Means possible be used to
give punctual Satisfaction to His Majesty's Desire and Commands in each
Particular: At least that your Lordship by your Chancellor, Archdeacon,
Commissary, and other Inferior Officers, will give such Intimation to the
Clergy, and other Persons within your Diocese there in concerned, as is thereby
required; To the End that all Occasion of Complaint in such Cases may cease,
And that they may proceed therein with such Circumspection and Integrity, as by
Law they ought; And by this Notice prevent that Trouble to themselves which
will unavoidably ensue if they proceed in the contrary Practice for the future.
I bid your Lordship heartily farewell, And am

My Lord, Your Lordships Affectionate Friend and Brother, GILBERT Cant.
Lambeth-House November. 12. 1674.
November 17. 1674.
FOr the more speedy Notice and Execution of His Majesty's Pleasure; Order and
leave is given by the Archbishop of Canterbury, That these Letters be Printed.

LONDON, Printed Anno Dom. 1674.


