A MESSAGE Sent from the KING of SCOTS, And the Duke of YORK's Court in
Flanders; To the Lord Douglas, and Colonel BROWN; To be communicated to the
rest of the Nobility and Gentry in the Scottish Nation.

WITH Proposals and Overtures, for the composing of all Differences, the
submitting to Counsel, and the preventing of a Universal Desolation.

Printed at Aberdeen, by David Stranghan; And Translated out of the Original,
for general satisfaction.

A Message from the King of Scots, and the Duke of Yorks Court in Flanders.
Right Honorable,
Upon a serious reflect and discovery of the various Impostures in several
parts, I cannot but suspect the integrity of your procedure, and deplore the
sadness of your Condition, with as much regret of spirit as I do my own: But
seeing we have bin prostrated to the powerful indications of the displeasure of
the most High, since many are apt to recriminate, and boast of the prosperity
of their Cause; which if they did but look back to the source, and search the
very principles; and then see, if ever any cause had like success; and whether
it be a just reproach to your Enemies, that the judgments of God have begun
with them, whilst you know not yet where they may determine.

My Lord, Be pleased to look Northwards upon your Countrymen the Scots, who
(being instigated by the crafty Cardinal Richlieu, to di^urb the groth of the
incomparable Church of England, and so consequently the tranquillity of a
Nation, whose Expedition at the Isle of R^ gave e^rour to the French) made
Reformation their pretense, to gratify their own avarice, introduce
themselves, and a more then Babylonish Tyranny, imposing upon the Church and
State, beyond all impudence or example. I say (my Lord) look upon what they
have gotten, by deceiving their Brethren, selling their King, betraying their
Lord and Master his Son; and by all their perfidie, become only a conquered
Nation for their Disloyalty, and an infamy as unparalled, as their Treason and
Ingratitude. But behold (Sir) the Scean being changed, and sundry Models and
Chimaeras blown away, nothing remaining of them but empty Coffins; but which is
yet less empty then the heads of those Politians, which so lately seemed to
fill it. As for the product and success in the several Intervals, we shall not
blot paper with a recital of such Interludes; for it is not the various
Dispensations and providencens in your journey to that Holy Land of purchases
and profits, which can serve as an appeal for the justification of your
proceedings.

In a word (my Lord) it is the height of all impertinency to conceive, that a
few Subjects who fall into an exorbitabitant contradiction to their own good,
can ever constitute a well-ordered Government for the Thousands of true English
men that are not clad in Red; let me therefore entreat you, to embrace a just
Right to challenge submission to the precepts of Loyalty, and to endeavor the
investing of a Lawful Authority and to recover and protect a Civil Government,
according to the good old Laws of the Land: For if the essential end of Rulers
be the common peace, and their Laws oblieging as they become relative: restore
us then to those under which we lived with so much happiness and tranquillity,
as no age in the World, no Government under Heaven could pretend, or ever did
enjoy the like. And now (my Lord) if after the greatest of injustice, and
impiety on your parts, you have prosecuted that with the extremest madness,
which you esteemed criminal in your Enemies, viz. For any, To arrogate the
supreme power to a single person condemn men without Law, (witness the Marquess
of Montross, and others) execute, and prescribe them with as little, violate
Authority, dispense with your solemn Oaths; in sum, to mingle Earth and
Heaven, as many have done by their unarbitrary proceedings: All which actions
do abundantly declare the Hypocrisy of some, and the Justification of others,
pronouncing the Assertors of Regal Government the only honest which have
appeared upon the stage, in Characters as plain, that he which runs may read,
whilst there are some that would persecute them even to death. My Lord, When I
compare these things together, I cannot but acknowledge it the very finger of
God, mirabile in oculis nostris; and it is that which induces me, to beseech
you to re-enter into your self, to abandon all false principles, to withdraw
your self from Seducers, to repent of what you have done, and to rise and
promote the public Interest.

And whereas many object, that the King is not to be trusted: judge not of
others by your selves; Did ever any man observe the least inclination of
revenge in his Breast? Has he not besides the innate propensity of his own
nature to gentleness, the strict Injunctions of a dying Father, to forgive all
men, even the greatest of Offenders? Yes I dare pronounce it with confidence,
and avouch it with all assurance, that there is not an Individual amongst you,
throughout England, Scotland, and Ireland, whose Crimes are the most crimson,
whom He will not be most ready to pardon, and graciously receive upon their
repentance; nor any thing that can be desired of Him, to which He would not
cheerfully accommode, for the stopping of that torrent of blood, and extreme
confusion, which has hitherto run, and is yet imminent over several places. Do
but reason a little with your self, and consider sadl^, whether a young Prince,
mortified by so many afflictions, discip^in'd by much experience, and
instructed by the miscarriages of others, be not the most excellently qualified
to govern and reduce a people, who have so successelesly tried so many
Governments, and various Changes?

As to the Objection that He has lived among Papists, is vi^iously inclined,
and has a wicked Counsel about Him: What can be said more austerely? Have not
many the Foreheads to declare, He has lived amongst Papists to his prejudice,
who have proscribed him from Protestants, persecuted Him from place to place,
as a Partridge on the Mountains? Whilst the Catholic King was an Allie to
England, many there were that had nothing to do with Parists; it was then no
crime: God is not mocked, away with this respect of persons: where is it you
would have him to be? The Hollander dares not afford him harbor lest the
English refuse him theirs: The French may not give him bread, for fear of
offending others; and unless he should go to the Indies, or the Turk, where can
he be safe from revenge? But suppose him in a Papist Country, constrained
thereto by incharity to his Soul as well as Body; Would he have condescended to
a toleration of Papists. He needed not to have wanted the assistance of the
most puissant Princes of Christendom to restore Him, of whom He has refused
such Conditions, as in prudence He might have condescended to, and the people
would have gladly received; So that we may easily divine, who they are that
transact and truck with the Jesuit, although at a far distant, and how firm and
near He is to the Church of England, from the least wavering in his Faith. But
since there is a toleration of Religions, without exception; do not think it a
sin in Him, to gratify those that shall most oblige Him.

And further (my Lord) give me leave to introduce this assertion, That for his
Virtues and Morality, I provoke the most refined Family amongst you, to produce
a Relation of more piety and moderation; show me a Fratetnity more spotless in
their honor, and freer from the exorbitances of Youth, than the King and his
two Brothers, so conspicuous to all the World for their Temperance,
Magnanimity, Constancy, and Understanding; a Friendship and Humility
unparalled, and rarely to be found amongst the severest persons, scarcely in
a private Family.

It is the malice of a very black Soul, and a virulent Renegado (of whom to be
recommended were the utmost Infamy) that has interprered some complyances, to
which persons in distress are sometimes engaged, with those whom they converse
withal, to the disadvantage of a Prince.

My Lord, I have but a word to add; and desire, that it may incline you to
accept of your best Interest, and prevent that dreadful ruin which the
Obstinacy of many does threaten. Is it not as perspicuous as the Sun, that it
lies in the power of the people to summon a Free-Parliament, and such Patriots
and Representatives, to reform and nominate his Counsel, introduce themselves,
receive what composition they can desire, have all the security that mortal men
can imagine, and the greatest Princes of Europe to engage in the performance?
This were becoming worthy-men, and honorable indeed; this is ingenuous
self-denial: And it is no disgrace to reform a mistake; but to persist in it
lies the shame.

Does not bleeding England, Scotland, and Ireland require this? Does not the
Laws of God command it? If so: you cannot, you must not defer it. For what can
you pretend that will not then drop into your Bosoms? The humble man will have
repose, the aspiring and ambitious honors: The Merchants will be secure,
Trades immediately recover, Aliances will be confirmed, the Laws reflourish,
render Consciences considered, present Purchasers satisfied; the Soldier paid,
maintained, and provided for; the Seaman honorably employed: and what is above
all this, Christianity and Charity will revive again amongst Hs, Mercy and
Truth will meet together; Righteousness and Peace shall kiss each other.

On the contrary, consider (I beseech you) the confusion which must of
necessity befall Us if ye persist in your Obstinacy. For whilst there is no
Order in the Church, no Government established, and that every man is abandoned
to his own deceitful heart: whilst Learning is decried, and the Ministry
reproached, what can ye expect, but the most direful expressions of the wrath
of God, a universal desolation, and desperate Enthusiasme, with other miseries
that attend and follow the coming in of Satan's crafty Emisaries, and impure
Gnostics: besides, a universal animosity in the very Bowels of your Nations;
the Patent against the Children, and the Children against the Parents,
berraying one another to the death: So that the words which our Blessed Savior
has himself pronounced, does exemplify the condition your once flourishing
Kingdoms are reduced unto: A Kingdom divided cannot stand. The truth of which,
does not a little reflect upon him, who had rather be a sufferer with the
afflicted, than enjoy the pleasures of sin which some possess for a season.
Subscribing,

Brussels, November, 6. 1659. My Lord, Your Lordships very humble servant, C.
CULPEPPER.

For the Right Honorable, the Lord Douglas, to be transmitted to col. Brown,
and the rest of the Nobility and Gentry in the ScottishNation.
FINIS.

