By the King.
A PROCLAMATION Commanding the immediate Return of all His Majesty's Subjects
who are in any Foreign Seminaries, and Forbidding Relief be sent to them.
CHARLES R.

WHereas by a Statute made in the Seven and Twentieth year of the Reign of the
late Queen Elizabeth, it is (amongst other things) Enacted, That if any of the
Subjects of this Kingdom (not being a Jesuit, Seminary Priest, or other such
Priest, Deacon, or Religious or Ecclesiastical person, ordained, or Professed
by any Authority or Jurisdiction derived, challenged or pretended from the Sea
of Rome) shall be of, or brought up in any College of Jesuits, or Seminary
Erected or Ordained in paris beyond the Seas, and shall not within Six months
next after Proclamation in that behalf to be made in the City of London, under
the Great Seal of England, return into this Kingdom, and thereupon within Two
days after such return, before the Bishop of the Diocese, or Two Justices of
the Peace of the County where he shall arrive, submit himself to the Kings
Majesty and his Laws, and take the Oath of Supremacy, That then every such
person (which shall otherwise return, come into or be in this Realm) for such
offense of returning, or being in this Realm without Submission as aforesaid,
shall be adjudged a Traitor and Suffer, Lose and Forfeit as in case of High
Treason. And whereas by diverse other Statutes of this Realm, great Penalties
are inflicted as well upon the Persons bred up in Foreign Seminaries, as upon
their Parents, Guardians, and Friends who shall send them thither, or shall
send any Relief or Maintenance to them there; And whereas his Majesty has been
informed, That many of His Subjects of this Kingdom do live in, and are daily
conveyed into Foreign Seminaries, where they are brought up and Educated in
Romish Superstition, to the great Detriment of this Kingdom: His Majesty does
therefore by this His Royal Proclamation (with the Advice of His Privy Council)
straightly Charge and Command all His Subjects of this Kingdom, who are in any
Foreign Seminaries, That they do with all speed return into this His Kingdom;
and does likewise Command and Require their respective Parents, and Guardians,
to take the most effectual Care for such their Return. And his Majesty is
hereby Graciously pleased to promise His Royal Pardon for their Offense in
going into Foreign Seminaries, to such of His Subjects as being now there,
shall in Obedience to this His Royal Proclamation, make their speedy Return;
and also to their parents, Guardians, and Friends, for sending them thither, if
they shall procure their speedy Return. And His Majesty does hereby straightly
Prohibit and Forbid all and every His Subjects of this His Kingdom whatsoever,
for the time to come, from going to, or residing in any of the said Seminaries:
And does likewise Prohibit and Forbid all and every His Subjects to send any
Relief or Maintenace to any of His Subjects or others, who now are, or shall
hereafter be or reside in any Foreign Seminary. To all which His Majesty does
expect all due Obedience, Letting the Offenders to the contrary know, That they
shall not only incur His high Displeasure, but be proceeded against (for their
respective Offenses) according to the utmost Severities of Law.

Given at Our Court at Whithall, the Eighth day of January 1678. In the
Thirtieth year of Our Reign.
God save the King.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill, Christopher Barker, Thomas Newcomb, and Henry
Hills, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1678


