His Majesty's Most Gracious SPEECH, Together with the LORD CHANCELLORS, To the
Two HOUSES of PARLIAMENT, AT THEIR Prorogation, On Monday the Nineteenth of
May, 1662.

DIEV^ET MON^DROIT
HONI^SOIT^QVI^MAL^Y PENSE^
C R


LONDON: Printed, by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the KINGS
most Excellent Majesty. 1662.

CUM PRIVILEGIO.

His Majesty's Most Gracious SPEECH To His Two HOUSES of PARLIAMENT, On Monday
the Nineteenth of May, 1662.
My Lords, and you Gentlemen of the House of Commons,

I Think there have been very few Sessions of Parliament, in which there have
been so many Bills, as I have Passed this day: I am confident, never so many
Private Bills, which I hope you will not draw into example. It is true, these
late ill times have driven men into great streights, and may have obliged them
to make Conveyances colourably, to avoid inconveniences, and yet not afterward
to be avoided; and men have gotten estates by new and greater Frauds then have
been heretofore practiced; and therefore in this Conjuncture, extraordinary
Remedies may be necessary, which has induced Me to comply with your Advice, in
Passing these Bills; but I pray let this be very rarely done hereafter: The
good old Rules of the Law are the best security; and let not men have too much
cause to fear, that the Settlements they make of their Estates, shall be too
easily unsettled when they are dead by the Power of Parliaments.

My Lords and Gentlemen,

You have so much obliged Me, not only in the Matter of those Bills which
concern My Revenue, but in the manner of Passing them, with so great affection
and kindness to Me, that I know not how to thank you enough. I do assure you,
and I pray assure your friends in the Country, that I will apply all you have
given Me, to the utmost improvement of the peace and happiness of the Kingdom,
and will, with the best Advice and good Husbandry I can, bring My expenses
within a narrower compass. Now I am speaking to you of My Own good Husbandry, I
must tell you, that will not be enough; I cannot but observe to you, That the
whole Nation seems to Me a little corrupted in their excess of living. Sure all
men spend much more in their Clothes, in their Diet, in all their Expenses,
then they have used to do. I hope it has only been the excess of joy, after
so long sufferings, that has transported us to these other Excesses; but let
us take heed that the continuance of them does not indeed corrupt our natures.
I do believe I have been faulty that way My Self; I promise you, I will reform,
and if you will join with Me in your several capacities, we shall by our
examples do more good, both in City and Country, then any new Laws would do. I
tell you again, I will do My part, and I will tell some of you, if you do not
do yours. I hope the Laws I have Passed this day will produce some Reformation
with reference to the multitude of Beggars and poor people which infest the
Kingdom; great severity must be used to those who love idleness, and refuse to
work, and great care and charity toward those who are willing to work. I do
very heartily recommend the execution of those good Laws to your utmost
diligence, and I am sure I need not put you in mind so to settle the Militia,
that all Seditious Insurrections may not only be prevented, to which the
minds of too many are inclined, but that the people may be without reasonable
apprehension of such insecurity. You will easily believe, that it is very
necessary for the Public Justice of the Kingdom, and even for the preservation
of the reverence due to Parliaments, that I make this a Session; and it will be
worthy of your Wisdoms when you come together again, to provide that there be
not so great clamor against the multitude of Protections.

I will say no more, but renew My hearty Thanks to you all, and refer the rest
to the Chancellor.

His Majesty's Speech being ended, the Lord Chancellor began as follows.
THE LORD CHANCELLORS SPEECH.
My Lords, and you the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons,

IT is now little more then a year that the King first called you to attend Him
here, at the opening of the Parliament; then you may remember He told you, That
he thought there were not many of you, who were not particularly known to Him;
That there were very few of whom He had not heard so much good, that he was (He
said) as sure as He could be of any thing that was to come, that you would all
concur with Him, and that He should concur with you in all things, which might
advance the Peace, Plenty, and Prosperity of the Nation. His Majesty said he
should be exceedingly deceived else.

It was a Princely Declaration, and a rare confidence, which could flow from no
other fountain, but the sincerity and purity of His own Conscience, which
admitting no other designs or thoughts into His Royal Breast, but such as must
tend to the unquestionable Prosperity and Greatness of His People, could not
but be assured of your full concurrence and cooperation with Him. It was a
happy and a blessed Omen, which at the instant struck a terror into the hearts
of those, who promised themselves some advantages from the differences and
divisions in your Councels, and hoped from thence to create new troubles and
molestations in the Kingdom; and, God be thanked, the King has been so far
from being exceedingly deceived, that he does acknowledge He has been
exceedingly complied with, exceedingly gratified in all He has desired, and He
hopes He has not in the least degree disappointed your expectation.

Mr. Speaker, and you Gentlemen of the House of Commons,

You have, like the richest and the noblest Soil, a Soil manured and enriched
by the bountiful hearts of the best Subjects in the world, yielded the King two
full Harvests in one year; and therefore it is but good husbandry to lie fallow
for some time: You have not only supplied the Crown to a good degree for
discharging many Debts and Pressures, under which it even groaned, and enabled
it to struggle with the present streights and necessities, debts not
contracted, and necessities not run into by improvidence and excess; you may,
when you please, receive such an account, as will clear all such reproaches;
but you have wisely, very wisely provided such a constant growing Revenue, as
may with Gods blessing preserve the Crown from those scandalous wants and
necessities, as have heretofore exposed it and the Kingdom to those dismal
miseries, from which they are but even now buoyed up; for whatsoever other
humane causes may be assigned, according to the several fancies and
imaginations of men, of our late miserable distractions, they cannot be so
reasonably imputed to any one cause, as to the extreme poverty of the Crown:
The want of Power could never have appeared, if it had not been for the want of
Money.

You have, my Lords and Gentlemen, worthily provided for the vindication and
manifestation of the one by the Bill of the Militia, and for the supply of the
other by the Act for the Additional Revenue; and I am confident, both the
present and succeeding ages will bless God, and celebrate your Memories for
those two Bills, as the foundation of their peace, quiet and security, how
froward and indisposed soever many are at present, who f^nding such
obstructions laid in their way to Mutiny and Sedition, use all the artifice
they can to persuade the People, that you have not been sollicitous enough for
their Liberty, nor tenacious enough for their profit, and wickedly labor to
lessen that reverence toward you, which sure was never more due to any
Parliament.

It was a very natural and an ingenious animadversion and reflection, which the
late incomparable Lord Viscount of St. Albans made upon that old Fable of the
Giants, who were first overthrown in the War against the Gods, when the Earth,
their Mother, in revenge thereof, brought forth Fame; which he said, is the
same, when Princes and Monarchs have suppressed actual and open Rebellion, then
the Malignity of the People, the Mother of Rebellion, does bring forth Libels,
Slanders, and Taxation of the State, which, he says, is of the same kind with
Rebellion, but more feminine. And without doubt this Seditious Daughter of the
Earth, this spirit of Libelling, was never more pregnant then it is now; nor
King, nor Parliament, nor Church, nor State, ever more exposed to those
Flagella linguae, those strokes of the tongue, from which God Almighty can only
preserve the most innocent and most excellent persons; as if repining and
murmuring were the peculiar exercise of the Nation, to keep it in health; as if
England had so much of the Merchant, Nunquam habendi fructu foelix, semper
autem quaerendi cupiditate miserrima.

Men are in no degree disposed to imitate, or remember the general excellent
temper of the time of Queen Elizabeth, the blessed condescension and
resignation of the people then to the Crown, the awful reverence they then had
to the Government, and to the Governors, both in Church and State. This good
and happy spirit was in a time beyond our memory, but they remember; as if it
were but yesterday, how few Subsidies Parliaments then gave to that Queen, how
small supplies the Crown then had from the people, and wonder that the same
measures should not still fill the Coffers, and give the same reputation, and
make the same noise in Christendom.

But (my Lords and Gentlemen) how bold soever some unquiet spirits are with
you, upon this Argument, you are much superior to those reproaches. You know
well, and you can make others know, without breaking the Act of Indemnity, how
the Crown has been since used, how our Sovereign Lord the King found it at His
blessed Return to it; you can tell the World, that as soon as He came hither,
besides the infinite that He forgave, He gave more, more Money to the people,
then He has since received from them; That at least two parts of three, that
they have since given Him, have issued for the disbanding Armies never raised
by Him, and for payment of Fleets never sent out by Him, and of Debts never
incurred by Him. You will put them in mind of the vast disparity between the
former times, and these in which we live, and consequently of the disproportion
in the expense the Crown is now at, for the protection and benefit of the
Subject, to what it formerly under-went. How great a difference there is in the
present greatness and power of the two Crowns, and what they were then
possessed of, is evident to all men; and if the greatness and power of the
Crown of England be not in some proportion improved too, it may be liable to
inconveniences it will not undergo alone. How our Neighbors and our Rivals,
who court one and the same Mistress, Trade and Commerce, with all the World,
are advanced in Shipping, Power, and an immoderate Desire to engross the whole
Traffic of the Universe, is notorious enough; and this unruly appetite will
not be restrained, or disappointed, nor the Trade of this Nation supported and
maintained, with the same Fleets and Forces which were maintained in the happy
times of Q. Elizabeth. Not to speak of the Naval power of the Turks, who in
stead of sculking abroad in poor single Ships as they were wont to do, domineer
now on the Ocean in strong Fleets, make Naval Fights, and have brought some
Christians to a better Correspondence, and another kind of Commerce and
Traffic with them, then was expected, insomuch as they apprehend no Enemy
upon the Sea, but what they find in the King of Englands Ships, which has
indeed brought no small damage upon them, with no small charge to the King, but
a great reputation to the Nation.

My Lords and Gentlemen, You may with a very good Conscience assure your
selves, and your friends and neighbors, that the Charge the Crown is now at by
Sea and Land, for the Peace and Security, and Wealth and Honor of the Nation,
amounts to no less then Eight hundred thousand pounds a year; all which did not
cost the Crown before these troubles, Fourscore thousand pounds the year; and
therefore they will never blame you for any Supply you have given, or Addition
you have made to the Revenue of the Crown; and whosoever unskilfully murmures
at the Expense of Dunkirk, and the other new Acquisitions, which ought to be
looked upon as Jewels of an immense magnitude in the Royal Diadem, do not
enough remember what we have lost by Dunkirk, and should always do, if it were
in an Enemies hands; nor duly consider the vast advantages those other
Dominions are like, by Gods blessing, in a short time, to bring to the Trade,
Navigation, Wealth and Honor of the King and Kingdom. His Majesty has enough
expressed His desire to live in a perfect Peace and Amity with all His
Neighbors; nor is it an ill ingredient toward the firmness and stability of
that Peace and Amity, which His Royal Ancestors have held and maintained with
them, that He has some advantages in case of a War, which they were without.

It was a right ground of confidence, such an one as seldom deceives men, that
the great Lawmakers, the wise Solon, had, when he concluded, that Reverence and
Obedience would be yielded to his Laws, because he had taken the pains to make
his Citizens know, and understand, that it was more for their profit to obey
Law and Justice, then to contemn and break it. The extravagant times of
License, which I hope we have almost outlived, have so far corrupted the
minds, and even the nature of too many, that they do not return with that
alacrity they ought to do, into the Road and Paths of Order and Government,
from which they have so long been led astray; nor, it may be, is there pains
enough taken, to make them understand the profit, benefit, and ease, which
always attends a cheerful obedience and submission to Laws and Government. I
am persuaded, a little pains and kindness and condescension in the wise,
toward the weak, half the diligence and dexterity in conversation and example,
which has been used to cnrrupt the people in their Loyalty and Understanding,
will quickly reduce them to their Primitive temper, which is, to be the best
Neighbors, and the best Friends, and the best Subjects of the World: And I
make no question, but the great Piety and Devotion, the Moderation, Wisdom,
Charity, and Hospitality of my Lords the Bishops, in their several Diocesses,
will in a short time recover the poor misled people: And though the
frowardness and pride of some of their Teachers may not be yet enough subdued,
though some of the Clergy still repeat their old Errors, for which they have
been glad to receive Pardon, and do in truth discredit all their other
Doctrine, with the absence of any visible Repentance for what mischief they
have formerly done; yet I hope the Laity will soon return into the bosom of
their dear Mother the Church, and easily discern the Fraud and Imposture of
their Seducers; and that all diligence and dexterity will be used, seriously
and heartily to reconcile both Clergy and Laity, by all means which may prove
effectual.

You have (my Lords and Gentlemen) like wise Patriots, upon your observation,
That the most signal indulgence and condescentions, the temporary suspension of
the rigor of former Laws, has not produced that effect which was expected,
that the humors and spirits of men are too rough and boisterous for those soft
remedies, you have prepared sharper Laws and Penalties, to contend with those
refractory persons, and to break that stubbornness which will not bend to
gentler applications: And it is great reason, that they upon whom clemency
cannot prevail, should feel that severity they have provoked. You have done
your parts like good Physicians, made wholesome Prescriptions for the
constitution of your Patients, well knowing that the Application of these
Remedies, the execution of these sharp Laws depends upon the wisdom of the most
discerning, generous, and merciful Prince, who having had more experience of
the nature, and humor of mankind, then any Prince living, can best
distinguish between the Tenderness of Conscience, and the Pride of Conscience,
between the real Effects of Conscience, and the wicked Pretenses to Conscience;
who having fought with Beasts at Ephesus, knows how to guard Himself and the
Kingdom from the assaults and violence of a strong, malicious, corrupted
Understanding, and Will; and how to secure Himself and the Kingdom from the
feeble Traps and Nets of deluded Fancies, and Imaginations: In a word, a Prince
of so excellent a Nature, and so tender a Conscience Himself, that He has the
highest compassion for all errors of that kind, and will never suffer the Weak
to undergo the punishment ordained for the Wicked, and knows, and understands
better then any man, that excellent rule of Quintilian, Est aliquid quod non
oportet, etiamsi licet, and aliud est jura spectare, aliud justitiam.

My Lords and Gentlemen,

Machiavel, who, they say, is an Author much studied of late in this Kingdom,
to extol his own excellent judgment and insight in History; in which indeed he
was a Master, would persuade men to believe, that the true reason, why so many
unexpected accidents and mischiefs fall out, to the destruction of States and
Empires, is, because their Governors have not observed the same mischiefs
heretofore in story, and from whence they proceeded, and what progress they
made, which he says, if they had done, they might easily have preserved
themselves from ruin, and prevented the inconveniences which have fallen out. I
am sure you are all good Historians, and need only to resort to the Records of
your own memories. Remember how your peace has been formerly disturbed, by
what contrivance and artifices the people have been Alarmed, with unreasonable
and unnatural Fears and Jealousies, and what dismal effects those Fears and
Jealousies have produced. Remember how near Monarchy has been dissolved, and
the Law subverted under pretense of reforming and supporting Government, Law,
and Justice. And remember how many honest persons were misled by not
discerning Consequences, who would as soon have renounced their part in Heaven,
as have concurred in the first unwarrantable action, if they had suspected what
did follow: And if we suffer the same enemy to break in upon us at the same
Avenues, if we suffer our Peace to be blown up by the same Trains and
Machinations, we shall be held very ill Historians, and worse Politicians.

There is an Enemy amongst us, of whom I doubt we are not jealous enough, and
toward whom we cannot be too vigilant, and in truth, in comparison of whom we
may reasonably undervalue all other Enemies; that is, the Republicans, the
Commonwealths-men, who are every day calling in aid of the Law, that they may
overthrow and abolish the Law, which they know to be their irreconcilable
enemy. Indeed, my Lords and Gentlemen, there is a vey great party of those men
in every Faction of Religion, who truly have no Religion, but as the pretense
serves to advance that Faction. You cannot be too sollicitous, too inquisitive
after these men, who are restless in their Councels, and wonderfully punctual
and industrious in their Correspondences, which they maintain abroad as well as
at home: And you cannot doubt they have encouragement enough from abroad; few
of our neighbors love us so exceedingly well, but that they would be glad to
see us entangled in Domestique broyls. These men are worthy of your care and
diligence, in your speedy settling the Militia, which the King has even now so
particularly recommended to you.

I shall conclude with only putting you in mind, that there was scarce ever a
more dangerous Sedition in the Republique of Rome, then in a time of full
Peace, when the Citizens were sullen, when there was no noise but in whispers,
when men neglected their Trades, and stayed idle in their own houses, as if
they cared not which way the world went, from whence alone their neighbors the
Etrurians were encouraged to make a War upon them. Novum seditionis genus (says
Livy) silentium otiumque inter cives. Never any Nation under Heaven, has less
cause of sullenness then we, never more of joy and thanksgiving: We all know
that God Almighty loves a cheerful giver, and we may as well know that he loves
a cheerful receiver; besides all other stupendous blessings conferred upon us,
he has given us the most cheerful Giver, that ever people has been blessed
with; a King that has with all imaginable cheerfulness given us all we have
asked of Him, all He has to give; who would not take or retain any thing we
give to Him, but for our own sakes; that by receiving and retaining it, He may
give it to us again, in more abundance, in abundance of Peace, and Plenty, and
Honor, and all the Comforts which can make a Nation happy.

This time has made a glorious addition to our happiness, which ought
proportionably to increase our cheerfulness; we wanted only one blessing, the
arrival of our Queen, whom God has now safely brought to us; a Queen of such a
rare perfection in Body and Mind, of such great endowments of Wisdom, Virtue,
and Piety, that we may reasonably promise our selves from Her, all the
happiness we are capable of, and a Succession of Princes to govern us, till the
end of the world; and there cannot be a more transcendent instance of the Kings
love, and passion for His people, then that He has staid these four days to
take His leave of you; and, that He might give you this days work, all these
good Laws, has denied Himself so long the enjoying the greatest comfort He is
assured of in this world.

If there be not the most Universal Joy in the Reception of these Blessings; if
there be not an Universal contentedness and satisfaction in the hearts of all
men; and if that Contentedness and Satisfaction do not break out, and is not
visible in the looks, and thoughts, and words, and actions of the whole Nation,
to the inflaming the hearts of the other Nations under His Majesty's obedience
by our example, we are guilty of an Ingratitude that is worthy to deprive us of
all we enjoy, and to disappoint us of all we pray for. And therefore I do most
humbly beseech you, My Lords and Gentlemen, That as there is a most noble
cheerfulness and alacrity visible in you; and has shed it self over all your
countenances; so that you will think it worthy of your pains, to infuse the
same good spirit into City and Country, that they may all express that joy and
delight in the blessings they are possessed of, and cheerfully endeavor to
improve those blessings, by their cheerful enjoying them, that God may continue
those blessings to us, and the Kings comfort may be increased, by the comfort
He sees we have in Him, and in what He has done for us; and as all Princes may
take a pattern from him to Govern, and make their Subjects happy; so that all
Subjects may learn from us, how to obey, and make that happiness lasting to
them, by an eminent and innocent alacrity in their acknowledgment.

I am by the Kings express Command, to add one particular which His Majesty
meant, but forgot to say Himself. You cannot but observe that His Majesty has
not Passed the Bill that concerns the Earl of Derby, which you cannot imagine
proceeds from His Majesty's want of care of, and kindness to that Noble Family,
which has served him so faithfully, and suffered so much for so doing; but all
parties having referred the Matter to His Majesty, he doubts not but to make a
better end for that Noble Earl then he would attain if the Bill had passed.

I shall only add the Kings commands for the Prorogation of this Parliament
till the Eighteenth day of February, and this Parliament is Prorogued till the
Eighteenth day of February next.

LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the KINGS
most Excellent Majesty. 1662.


