HIS MAJESTY'S Most Gracious and Royal COMMISSION, For the Relief of Poor
Distressed PRISONERS.

Published by Authority.

printer's or publisher's device Royal Oak


LONDON, Printed for M. D. and are to be sold by Nathaniel Webb, at the Royal
Oak, in St. Paul's Churchyard, near the little North-door of St. Paul's Church.
M.DC.LX.IV.

His Majesty's Most Gracious and Royal COMMISSION, For the Relief of Poor
Distressed PRISONERS.
CHARLES the Second, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
To Our Right Trustly and Right Well beloved, the most Reverend Father in God,
the Archbishop of Canterbury, now and for the time being; The Right Reverend
Father in God, the Lord Bishop of London, now and for the time being; The
Reverend Father in God, the Lord Bishop of Winchester, now and for the time
being; and the Lord Bishop of Rochester, now and for the time being. To Our
Trustly and Well-beloved, the Lord Mayor of Our City of London, now and for the
time being; The Judges, and other Our Justices, as well for the Pleas, before
Us to be Holden, as of the Common Pleas, assigned, or to be assigned for the
time being; The Chief Baron, and other the Barons of Our Excheequer, now and
for the time being; The Chancellor of Our Duchy of Lancaster, for the time
being; The Masters of Our Requests, for the time being; Our Sergeants at Law,
Attorney General, and Solicitor General, for the time being; The Attorney of
Our Duchy of Lancaster, for the time being; The Almoner of Our Household, for
the time being; The Master of the Rolls of Our Court of Chancery, now and for
the time being; The Dean, and Resident Cannons of Our Cathedral Church of St.
Paul, in Our City of London, for the time being; The Dean, and Resident Cannons
of Our Collegiate Church of St. Peter, in Westminster, for the time being; The
Master of Our Savoy for the time being; The Chancellor and Chancellors, for the
time being, of every the Archbishops and Bishops aforesaid; The Archdeacons
of London, Essex and Middlesex, for the time being; The Masters of Our Court of
Chancery, now and for the time being; The Recorder of Our said City of London,
now and for the time being; The Lieutenant of Our Tower of London, now and for
the time being; All and every of the Justices of the Peace, now and for the
time being; All and every of the Justices of the Peace, now being, or which
hereafter shall be Resident or dwelling within Our said City of London, and
Suburbs thereof; And in the Counties of Middlesex, Surrey and Kent, within five
miles of the City of London; And all and every the Advocates, toward the Court
of Canterbury, of the Arches of London, now and for the time being; And all and
every the Advocates of the said Court, for the time being, or which hereafter
shall be; All and every the Masters and Governors, especially appointed by the
Mayor and Commonalty of the said City, for the Receipt, Order, Disposition and
Government of the Rents, Revenues and Profits of the Houses of the Poor of
Christ, and Sr. Thomas the Apostle, now and for the time being; And the Masters
and Governors thereunto appointed, now and for the time being; And all and
every the Masters and Wardens, now and for the time being, of the Company of
Mercers, Drapers, Goldsmiths, Grocers, Cloath-workers, Merchant-taylors,
Ironmongers, Haberdashers, Fish mongers, Salters, Skinners and Vintners of Our
City of London, now and for the time being, and to every of them, Greeting:
Whereas the late Queen ELIZABETH, upon the lamentable Petitions, Complaints
and Supplications of diverse her loving Subjects, being Prisoners in the Kings
Bench, and in the Fleet, did by her Commission under the Great Seal of England,
bearing Date the Twentieth day of April, in the Eight and Twentieth Year of Her
Reign, Authorize certain Commissioners therein named, for the Ordering and
Compounding of the Controversies and Causes, between the said distressed
Prisoners and their Creditors, and such others, by whom they were detained
Prisoners, or in Execution; And to do diverse other things, in the said
Commission expressed, which Commission continued in force from the Date
thereof, until the Decease of the said Queen ELIZABETH. And Whereas Our late
Dear, and most Royal Grandfather, King James, of Happy Memory, being informed
that certain Clauses contained in the said Commission, had seemed unto some to
be derogatory to the Common Laws of this Our Realm of England; And also, for
that by color of the said Commission, (which was intended for the Charitable
Relief of Poor, Miserable and Distressed Persons) sundry refractory and
obstinate Debtors, which rather wanted Will than Means to satisfy their just
Debts, took occasion to molest and trouble their Creditors; Our said
Grandfather, out of His Princely Care and Vigilance, to prevent all occasions
of Inconveniency to his Loving Subjects, especially such as tended to the
breach of His Laws, Did for many years forbear the Renewing of the said
Commission: And finding that as his forbearance wrought a good effect, by
discouraging of obstinate and wilful Debtors, that sought nothing more, than
Evasions to avoid the Payment of their just Debts; so also, that for want of
that, or some other like charitable Course, for the Relief of such as were
truly and indeed Poor, Distressed and Miserable, and wanted Means to satisfy
their Creditors, It had been occasion to pester and fill His Prisons with the
Bodies of such Persons, whose Punishment could no way avail their Creditors,
but rather was a hindrance to the satisfaction of their Debts: For that during
the time of their Restraint, they were no ways able to go about, or attend
their lawful Business, but must of force consume themselves, and that little
they had, miserably, and in Prison. And upon due consideration had of the
Premises, Our said Royal Grandfather, by His Commission under the Great Seal
of England, bearing Date the Eleventh day of November, in the Sixteenth Year of
His Reign of England, by the Advice of the then Lord Chancellor of England,
and also of diverse of His Principal Judges of His Courts at Westminster, Did
Authorize the Commissioners therein named, to proceed according to the Tenor
of the said Commission, for the Relief of the said poor Prisoners, in the
aforesaid Prisons. And afterward Our said Royal Grandfather, being informed
that His said Commission had not taken that good effect which was expected,
Renewed the said Commission, and thereby prescribed and directed such a
moderate Course, as that neither the Insolence of wilful and obstinate Debtore,
should be thereby encouraged to the derogation of His Laws, nor yet His Grace
and Clemency be wanting unto such, to whom it should be meet to extend the
same. And whereas Our said Grandfather, upon the Humble Suit and Petition of
His loving Subjects, His distressed Prisoners in the Prison of the Marshalsea,
and other Prisons, in and about the Cities of London and Westminster, and other
Places near adjoining to the same, whose Case was as much to be Commiserated
and lamented, as the said Prisoners of the said Kings Bench and the Fleet, did
by one other His Commission, sealed with the Great Seal of England, bearing
Date the Tenth day of July, in the Two and Twentieth Year of His Reign,
Authorize certain Commissioners therein named, for the Ordering and Compounding
of the Causes of the distressed Prisoners and their Creditors, in the Prisons,
and within the Places therein, and hereafter in these Presents mentioned and
expressed, as thereby may more at large appear. And whereas Our Royal Father of
Blessed Memory, by two several Commissions, under the Great Seal of England,
the one bearing Date at Canterbury, the Sixth day of June, in the Fourth Year
of His Reign; And the other bearing Date at Westminster, the One and Thirtieth
day of December, in the Sixth Year of His Reign, Authorized diverse
Commissioners therein expressed, to the same, or like purpose as aforesaid, as
thereby also more at large may appear. Which Commissions, upon the Death of Our
said Royal Father, of Blessed Memory, determined. And Whereas Our Loving
Subjects, the Poor Distressed Prisoners, in Our Prisons within Our Cities of
London and Westminster, and Suburbs of the same Cities, have by their Humble
Petition besought Us, That We would be Graciously pleased to Renew the said
former Commissions, heretofore Granted by Our said Royal Predecessors. Know ye
therefore, That We taking the same into Our Princely Consideration, and minding
the Welfare and Relief of the said poor distressed Prisoners, Have (by, and
with the Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council) of Our especial Grace,
certain Knowledge and mere Motion) Made, Constituted and Appointed, And by
these Presents do Make, Constitute and Appoint You to be Our Commissioners; And
do hereby Give and Grant to You, or any Three, or more of You, full Power and
Authority, at all and every time and times, from henceforth, so often as to
You, or any Three, or more of You (as is aforesaid) shall seem convenient and
needful, to assemble and meet together, in some convenient place, in, or near
the City of London, as to You, or any Three, or more of You, shall seem fit for
the Execution of this Our Commission: And before such Your Meeting, by Warrant
under Your Hands, or the Hands of any Three, or more of You, as is aforesaid,
upon reasonable warning (and at the Charges of the Prisoners) To call before
You, as well such person or persons, sufficiently instructed for, and on the
behalf of such distressed Prisoners, as now, or hereafter shall happen to be
Imprisoned, in Our Prisons of Our Kings Bench, Fleet, Marshalseas, White Lion,
Clink, New Prison, the Compter in Wood-street, the Compter in the Poultrey,
Ludgate, Newgate, Gate House, St. Katherines, White-Chappel, Bringhurst and
Finchbury, and all other Prisons, near or about London, or any of them, by
reason of, or for any Action or Actions of Debt, Actions upon the Case,
Trespass, Detinue Trover, or other personal Action, Judgments, Execution or
Executions whatsoever. And also the Creditors, and such others as have, or
ought to have the benefit of the Actions, Suits, Judgments or Executions, for
which they are detained in Prison; and the Executors, Administrators and
Attorney of every of them, and all other persons whatsoever, to whom it shall
appertain, or some persons indifferently Authorized and Instructed, for, and on
their behalf, whom We do hereby Command to Appear before You, upon such Your
Warrants, either in their own persons, or by some other, sufficiently
Instructed and Authorized on their behalf; And at such Your Meetings, to
receive the Supplications and Complaints of the said poor distressed Prisoners,
and by all ways and means, to inform your selves as well of the due Debt,
Damages and Duty, for which such Actions, Suits, Plaints, Judgments or
Executions, is, or shall be prosecuted, obtained or gotten; As of the certain
Estate and Ability of the Prisoners, how to pay and discharge the some; And
thereupon, by all good and lawful ways and means, to treat with the Creditors,
or other Persons, which have, or shall have the Benefit of such Actions, Suits,
Judgments or Executions, and to make Compositions and Agreements with them;
Wherein Our Pleasure is, That some of the Judges of the Court, by, or from
which the said Prisoner or Prisoners shall be Committed, shall be privy or
consenting to the conclusion of such Compositions and Agreements. And in Cases
where no Conclusion or Composition can be made, after Examination thereof, to
certify the truth of the same, unto Us and Our Privy Council, To the end such
speedy course may be taken therein, as shall effectually tend to the Relief and
Release of the Prisoners Grieved, according to Justice and Equity. And that
such of You Our said Commissioners, as shall go about such Compositions, shall
do Your best endeavors, That the poor Prisoners by Your means and mediations,
may be Relieved, and have such reasonable Years, Days and Times of Payment for
such their Debts and Damages, as they shall not be presently able to satisfy;
and with such security for payment thereof, as in Equity and good Conscience,
(having respect to the Ability of the Prisoner) and the Charge of Wife and
Children, and other Incidents to pious Cases considered as by You shall be
thought fit; Straightly chargeing and commanding You, and every of You, That
for the better Expedition and further Attemplishment of Our Charitable Intent
and Will, in remedying of the grievous Distresses of Our said poor Subjects,
and distressed Prisoners, You, or some Three or more of You, as is aforesaid,
do from time to time, and as often as it shall be needful, assemble Your selves
together, in some such convenient place as is aforesaid, as You tender Our
Pleasure. Provided nevertheless, and Our Will and Pleasure is, That You Our
said Commissioners, or any of You, shall not proceed to the Execution of this
Our Commission, for, or touching any such Matter or Cause, as is before
mentioned: Wherein You shall be occasioned to call, or cause any person
resident, abiding or remaining in any place, being above Ten Miles from Our
Cities of London and Westminster, to give Attendance upon You, only within, or
during the time of the Terms, or within Seven Days before the beginning, or
Ten Days after the end of every Term. And if any such Creditor or Creditors,
or other person or persons, for whose Debts, Costs or Damages, such distressed
Prisoner or Prisoners, shall remain in Prison as aforesaid, Shall Refuse upon
the said Precepts or Warrants to Appear before You; or appearing, to refuse to
Attend the Commissioners further pleasure, or to send some other person or
persons, sufficiently Authorized and Instructed, to Treat and Conclude with You
as aforesaid, Upon due consideration of the nature and quality of such Refusal
and Contempt, You shall and may, take such order for punishment of the same,
and for procuring such persons Appearance, as to You shall be thought meet. And
that You, or any such Three or more of You, shall and do use all lawful ways
and means, to cause such Creditors, or other person or persons, to yield to
take, and to perform such moderate and reasonable Compositions and Agreements,
as by You, or any Three or more of You, shall be thought meet and set down. And
for that Our meaning is to be ayding and assisting with Our Grace and Favor to
the Misery and Calamity of such as are truly poor and distressed, and not to
such as lie in Prison, rather of wilfulness and obstinacy, and out of a
resolution to retain large and ample Estates to themselves, by hindering their
Just and Honest Creditors of their due Debts and reasonable Damages; Therefore
We do hereby straightly Charge and Command You, and every of You, That in all
Your proceedings, by Virtue of this ^ommission, You be very circumspect and
careful, to try and find out such wilful and obstinate persons, and in no wise
suffer them, or any of them, to partake of Our Grace and Mercy, which hereby We
intend to them, that are, and shall be willing, with their own Estates, Bona
Fide, and without fraud, so far forth as it will extend to satisfy their Just
Debts and Damages, for which they shall be so detained in Prison; so as care be
had of Themselves, their Wives and Children; And unto such poor and miserable
persons, as have not wherewithal to satisfy their Debts, but shall be
constrained miserably to perish in Prison, except in pity they shall be
relieved. And that You, or any Three or more of You, where just and necessary
cause shall be found, do call before You any Prisoner or Prisoners, now
detained in any of the said Prisons; And if the Iaylor or Keeper of the said
Prison (where such Prisoner shall be) shall not, or will not, upon the Warrant
of You, or any Three or more of You, give the said Prisoner Liberty, with his
Keeper, to Attend accordingly, That then, and in every such case, You, or any
Three or more of You, shall from time to time, (and as often as occasion shall
be) make Certificate of the Refusal of such Iaylor or Iaylors, to the Lord
Chancellor, or L^d Keeper of Our Great Seal, for the time being, Who
thereupon, and upon security given, by such Prisoner or Prisoners, either to
pay his Debts, or to render his Body within a certain time, may, as he shall
see cause, Issue Habeas Corpusses, at then Charge of such Prisoner or Prisoners
as shall procure such Certificate, To the end the said Prisoner or Prisoners
may the better attend the prosecution of his Cause, and effectually pay his
Debts, or make Composition for the same; And to the end You Our Commissioners
may the more readily and eauly executy this Our Commission amongst other Our
weighty affairs, Our Will and Pleasure is, Toat this Our Commission shall
continue in force. And We do hereby Authorize You Our said Commissioners, or
any Three or more of You to proceed in the Execution thereof, and of all and
every matter and thing therein contained, from time to time, as often as You,
or any Three or more of You shall think convenient; Albeit the same Commission
be not from time to time continued by adjournment. And lastly, To the end this
Our Commission, may be the better put in Execution, We have Made, Constituted
and Appointed Our Trusty and Well-beloved John Knight Gent. His sufficient
Deputy or Deputies to be Register to Our said Commissioners, and to be from
time to time attending, ayding and assisting unto them and every of them in and
about the Premises, and to Act and do all such matters and things, and have and
receive such fees and allowances as by Our said Commissioners, or any Three or
more of them shall be thought fit and necessary in that behalf. In Witness,
etc. Witness

FINIS.
printer's or publisher's device Royal Oak



