CR
DIEV^ET MON^DROIT
HONI ^ SOIT ^ QVI ^ MAL ^ Y PENSE
royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION Concerning the President and Council of Wales, and Marches of
the same.
CHARLES R.

WHereas the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice of His Privy
Council, for many weighty Considerations has been graciously pleased to
establish and continue His Honorable Council in the Dominion and Principality
of Wales, and Marches of the same, in the same manner and form as His Royal
Progenitors, Kings and Queens of this Realm have heretofore used for the good
Government, ease, and benefit of the Inhabitants of those parts. His Majesty
therefore by the Advice of His said Privy Council, does hereby publish and
declare, That His Majesty's President and Council established in the said
Dominion and Principality of Wales, and Marches of the same, have full power
and authority to hear and determine all such Causes and Complaints as are
comprehended in His Majesty's Instructions, delivered unto His Majesty's
President of that Council: As also, that His Majesty's Loving Subjects within
the Dominion and Principality of Wales, and Marches thereof, as heretofore used
and accustomed, may freely repair unto the said President and Council for
Relief and Justice in their lawful and necessary Suits. And His Majesty's
further will and pleasure is, That the Authority and Proceedings of His said
President and Council, be duly and fully acknowledged and obeyed: To which
purpose, His Majesty does hereby straightly charge and command all Majors,
Sheriffs, Under-Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Sergeants, and all other inferior Officers
and Ministers of Justice, within the Jurisdiction of the said Court, to serve,
execute, and obey all Precepts, Process, and Letters of Justice of His said
President and Council, and in all points and places within the said
Principality and Marches thereof, to be attendant to them. And furthermore,
That all His Loving Subjects within the said Dominion and Principality of
Wales, and Marches thereof, as heretofore used and accustomed, do yield their
obedience, and submit themselves unto the Orders, Precepts, Commands, and
Decrees of the said President and Council accordingly, as they will answer the
contrary at their utmost peril.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Twenty eighth day of September, 1661. in
the Thirteenth Year of Our Reign. God save the KING.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the KING'S
most Excellent Majesty, 1661.

At the KING'S Printing House in Black-Fryars.


