CR
DIEV^ET MON^DROIT
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION, Against Exportation, and Buying and Selling of Gold and Silver
at higher rates then in Our Mint: As also against Culling, Washing, or
otherwise Diminishing Our Current MONEYS
CHARLES R.

WHereas We are well informed, and do visibly perceive a present scarcity of
Moneys throughout the circuit of Our whole Dominions, occasioned by the late
illegal and promiscuous buying and selling of all sorts of Gold and Silver at
higher rates then ever We or any of Our Royal Progenitors have allowed in Our
Mint, which therefore is exported, whereby no Gold or Silver can be brought
thither, but to the loss of such as bring the same, which ('it is probable) no
man will do: And so in consequence a great decay or utter ruin of the general
Stock of Moneys (both for present and future times) must necessarily follow, if
this mischief be not speedily prevented by a severe and strict observance of
those many and wholesome Statutes, Laws, and Proclamations (both ancient and
modern) made and Ordained by Our Royal Predecessors and Progenitors in that
behalf. And We finding, and humbly acknowledging it has pleased Almighty God
to bless Our Kingdoms with a plenteous and rich Dowry of native and homebred
Commodities, both by Sea and Land, above some of Our Neighbors, the
Exportation and Product whereof may bring great Treasure, both of Gold and
Silver into Our several Kingdoms, which so brought in, should there remain a
perpetual Stock not to go forth again, but be preserved as well for making and
maintaining of just and honorable Wars Offensive or Defensive, as for adorning
and furnishing Our Dominions in time of Peace, and strengthening the same with
Reputation; which follows such Princes as are esteemed rich in Treasure: And
considering the makers and Ordainers of the aforesaid Statutes, Laws and
Proclamations, had prudently and providently foreseen, that if no Gold or
Silver should be suffered (directly or indirectly) to be Exported out of this
Nation, it must necessarily follow, that the Foreign Commodities, which are for
the most part but delicacies, superfluities, or trifles (which in it self is a
thing intolerable) could not possibly be Imported in greater quantities, then
the native Commodities of Our Dominions might at least balance and answer in
Commerce, because no other means was left to satisfy or supply the Overplus by
Our own Gold or Silver; and by continuance of such course, these Nations might
have been secure, and certain never to have run behinde-hand, or become
indebted, and yet still remain in great possibility to increase in Wealth and
Treasure, even as it ever happens to Prudent single Persons, whereof the
Public is the compact. Upon these and many other weighty considerations, We,
with the Advice of Our Privy Council, are resolved to follow the safe and solid
ways of Our Royal Progenitors, for the good of all Our loving Subjects: And We
do therefore publish and declare Our Royal Will and Pleasure to be, and We do
hereby straightly Command and Charge, That no person or persons, Alien or
Denizen, or other Subject of what estate or quality soever, do at any time
hereafter (without Our special License already granted, or hereafter to be
obtained) transport, carry, or convey, or attempt, consent, assist, or
endeavor to export, carry, or convey out of Our Dominions, and Gold or Silver,
in Plate, Jewels, Coin, Uessels, Goldsmiths work, Bullion in mass o^ otherwise
whatsoever, upon pain of Our heavy Indignation and displeasure, and such
further punishment, as by the Laws of this Realm may be inflicted on them for
such their offense. And to the end that none of Our loving Subjects may
hereafter be deceived, or deceive themselves through ignorance of the many and
good Laws and Statutes in this behalf made by Our Royal Ancestors, and now in
force, We have thought it fit and requisite to insert the particular branches
thereof in this Our Proclamation (That is to say) The Statute made at York in
the ninth year of King Edward the third, called, The Statute of Money, First,
Sixth, and Ninth Chapters, whereby it is provided, that from thenceforth none
should carry any Sterling out of the Realm of England, nor Silver in Plate, nor
Uessel of Gold or Silver, upon pain of forfeiture of the same Money, Plate or
Uessel: And that the Mayor and Bailiffs in every Port, where Merchants and
Ships be, should take an Oath of the Masters and Merchants of Ships going and
coming again, that they should do no fraud against the provision of that Law in
any point, and that good and straight Ward should be made in all places upon
the Seacoasts, in Havens, and elsewhere, where any arrival should be, by good
and lawful men thereto sworn, that in the Kings Name they should make diligent
search, that no man, of what estate or condition soever, should carry out of
the Realm Sterling Money, Silver in coin, either of Gold, or Silver, or Plate,
nor Uessel of Gold or Silver without the Kings License, as by the same Statute
(amongst other things) more fully does appear: and one other Statute made in
the Fifth year of King Richard the second, the second Chapter, whereby it was
assented and accorded, That no manner of People, upon pain of as much as they
might forfeit, should privily or apertly send or bring, or do to be sent or
brought out of this Realm, any Gold or Silver in Money, Bullion, Plate or
Uessel, but in certain Cases in the same Statute mentioned, as by the same
Statute likewise (amongst other things) more fully does appear. And one other
Statute made in the second year of King Henry the fourth, the fifth Chapter;
whereby the King, to obvent the subtilty of them the would do fraud or deceit
to him, contrary to the said Statutue made in the fifth year of King Richard
the second, did Ordain and Establish, That if from thenceforth any Searcher of
the King might find Gold or Silver in Coin or in Mass, in the keeping of any
that should be passing, or upon his passage, in any ship or Uessel for to go
out of any Port, Haven or Creek of the Realm, without the Kings special
License, that Gold or Silver should be forfeited to the King (saving his
reasonable expenses) as by the same Statute more at large it does and may
appear: And so much of one Statute made in the second year of King Henry the
sixth, the sixth Chapter, whereby it is Ordained and Established, That no Gold
nor Silver should be carried out of the Realm contrary to the form of the
Statutes before made (except in certain cases therein expressed) upon pain of
forfeiture of the value of the sum of money so carried out of the Realm, as by
the same statute, amongst other things, at large appears: And one other
statute made in the five and twentieth year of King Edward the third, the
twelfth Chapter, whereby it was accorded, That it should be lawful for every
man to exchange gold for silver, so that no man hold the same as exchanged, nor
take any profit for making of such exchange, upon pain of forfeiture of the
money so exchanged (except the Kings Exchangers.) And one other Statute made in
the fifth year of King Edward the sixth, the nineteenth Chapter, whereby it was
Enacted, That if any person or persons after the first day of April then next
following, should exchange any coined Gold, coined Silver, or money, giving,
receiving, or paying any more in value, benefit, profit, or advantage for it,
then the same then was or should be declared by the Kings Proclamation, to be
current for within this Realm, and other his Dominions, That then all the said
coined Gold, Silver, and money so exchanged, and every part and parcel thereof
should be forfeit, and the parties so offending should suffer Imprisonment for
the space of one whole year, and make Fine at the Kings pleasure: And one other
part of the said Statute made in the said second year of King Henry the sixth,
the sixth Chapter, whereby it was Ordained and established, That the Merchants
Aliens should find Surety in the Chancery, every Company for them of their
Company, that none of them should bring out of the Realm no Gold nor Silver
against the form of the said Statute, upon pain of the forfeiture of the same
Gold or Silver, or the value of the same. Which said Laws and Statutes have
also been confirmed and strengthened by sundry Orders and Proclamations of
Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King Charles Our Royal Father of blessed
memory, whereby this Nation has flourished for many hundred of years, famous
for her constant Sterling Standard, and renowned for her plenteous stock of
Moneys, and magnificence in Plate, until these late distracted times, wherein
the great Solemnities and Reverence due to the Laws of God and man, have been
so miserably trodden down, contemned and violated. And We do Publish, Charge and
Command, as well Our Lord Treasurer of England, Chancellor of Our Exchequer, and
Warden of the Cinque Ports, and his Deputies, and all other Our Judges, Barons
of the Exchequer, Justices of Peace, Officers and Ministers (and more
especially Our Officers of Our Mint) Customers, Comptrollers, and Searchers and
their Deputies, and Waiters in all and every of Our Ports, and all other
Officers and Ministers to whom it may appertain, and to all Our Subjects in
general, that all and every the Statutes and Proclamations aforesaid, and all
and every Branch and Clause thereof, so as aforesaid, respectively made against
the Exportation of Gold or Silver, in coin or Bullion, Jewels, Plate or
Uessels, and buying and selling of all sorts of Gold or Silver above the Rates
appointed in Our Mint, or other things therein contained; as also against
Culling, Washing, or otherwise Diminishing Our current Moneys, be straightly
kept, duly observed, and diligently and carefully prosecuted and put in
execution, upon pain not only of the Penalties and Forfeitures in the said
Statutes or any of them contained, but also of Our high Indignation and
Displeasure.

And We do further by these Presents straightly Command and Charge all
Merchants and their Factors, Masters of Ships, Mariners, Passengers, and all
other Our loving Subjects whatsoever, that shall have any notice of Gold or
Silver in coin, Jewels, Plate, Uessels, Bullion or otherwise whatsoever, which
shall be hereafter Exported (without Our special License) or Shipped for
Exportation (reasonable Charges for the Uoyage only excepted) or shall be
gathered or got together by change or otherwise, with intention to Export, or
put into the hands of such as shall Export it, That they forthwith reveal the
same to Our Treasurer of England, Our Under-Treasurer, or other Our Officers
before mentioned for the time being; for which their Service, every Searcher,
or other person that shall discover or seize any Gold or Silver in Coin,
Jewels, Plate, in Mass or otherwise, in any Ship, Uessel, or Plate intended to
be Exported, shall have and receive in reward, the one half of the Gold or
Silver, or the value thereof, being seized and recovered to Our use: And on the
other part, if they shall not discover the same as aforesaid, they shall incur
and receive such condign punishment, as by the Laws of this Our Realm, and Our
Prerogative Royal may be inflicted on them.

And whereas there is daily a great consumption of the heavy current Silver,
Coyns and Bullion of the Kingdom, in making Gold and Silver Wire, Gold and
Silver Thread, Spangles, Ones, Purles and Lace, etc. also by the slight and
deceitful adulterate making these aforesaid Manufactures of course Silver,
under Sterling, to the great damage and abuse of the Wearers of Gold and Silver
Lace, and likewise a vast expense and waste of Gold in all sort of Gildings,
whereby many irregularities and abuses are daily practiced therein, to the
great waste of the Gold of Our Kingdom, We do intend, and shall in due time
take such strict course, as shall reduce the makers of these Manufactures into
such order, that all these abuses formerly put upon Our Subjects, shall for the
future be prevented, and these Manufactures of Gold and Silver dusely regulated
and assayed according to the Laws and Statutes of Our Kingdom.

And We further Will and Command, That this Our Proclamation be set up and
fixed openly to be read in all and every of Our Custom-houses in this Our
Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Tenth day of June, in the Thirteenth year
of Our Reign, 1661. GOD SAVE THE KING.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the KING'S
most Excellent MAJESTY, 1661.

At the KING'S Printing House in Blackfriars.


