royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT


By the King.

A PROCLAMATION For Prising of WINES.
CHARLES R.

WHereas by the Statute made in the Eight and Twentieth year of the Reign of
King Henry the Eighth, for Prising of Wines, it is provided, That the Lord
Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, Lord President of the Kings most honorable
Council, Lord Privy Seal, and the Lord Chief Justices of each Bench, or Five,
or Four, or Three of them, shall have Power and Authority by their Discretion
to set the Prices of all kinds of Wines, as in the said Statute is expressed;
By virtue whereof it is Ordered, That Canary Wines be sold in Gross, at Thirty
six pounds the Pipe, and Twelve pence the Pint by Retail; That Tents and
Malagaes be sold in Gross, at Thirty pounds the Butt, and Ten pence the Pint by
Retail; That Alicants, Sherries and Muscadels, be sold in Gross, at Seven and
twenty pounds the Butt, and Nine pence the Pint by Retail; And that Rhenish
Wines be sold in Gross, at Nine pounds the Aulm, and Eighteen pence the Quart
by Retail; And according to those Rates (and no higher) in proportion for
greater or lesser quantities, either in Gross or by Retail; And that none
presume to sell at higher prices during the year next ensuing, to be accounted
from the first day of February, in the year of our Lord God One thousand six
hundred seventy nine. Now that all cause of excuse from such as inhabit in
remote parts of this Realm, and that such as shall be found Delinquents
therein, may acknowledge their own wilfulness to be the cause of the danger and
penalty they fall into after Advertisement, His Majesty's Will and Pleasure is,
and by the Advice of His Privy Council, according to one other Statute in that
behalf made in the Fourth year of the Reign of His most Noble Progenitor King
Edward the Third, by this His Royal Proclamation does Publish and Declare, That
for one year next following, to be accounted as aforesaid, Canary Wines be not
sold in Gross, at above Thirty six pounds the Pipe, and Twelve pence the Pint
by Retail; And that Tents and Malagaes be not sold in Gross, at above Thirty
pounds the Butt, and Ten pence the Pint by Retail; And that Allicants, Sherries
and Muscadels, be not sold in Gross, at above Seven and twenty pounds the Butt,
and Nine pence the Pint by Retail; And that Rhenish Wines be not sold in Gross,
at above Nine pounds the Aulm, and Eighteen pence the Quart by Retail, and
according to those Rates (and no higher) in proportion for greater or lesser
quantities, either in Gross or by Retail. Which Rates and Prices His Majesty's
Pleasure, is shall be duly observed in all His Ports and other Places within
this Realm, where Wines are Landed, or within Ten Miles of those Ports and
Places. And it is His Majesty's Pleasure, That in those Places where Wines by
Land-carriage shall be conveyed more than Ten Miles from the next Port, the
several sorts of Wines aforesaid, shall and may be sold according to the Rates
aforesaid, with an Allowance not exceeding Five pounds the Ton, and One penny
the Quart, for the Carriage thereof every Thirty Miles, and according to that
proportion, and not at greater Rates; Strictly Charging and Commanding such of
His Majesty's Subjects, and others whom it may concern, That none of them,
during the time aforesaid, presume to sell any of the said Wines in Gross, or
by Retail, at higher Rates then by this His Majesty's Proclamation are
appointed, under the Forfeitures and Penalties mentioned in the said Statutes,
and other the Laws and Statutes of this Realm Ordained in that behalf, and such
further Pains and Penalties as by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm can or
may be Inflicted upon Wilful Contemners of His Majesty's Royal Command and
Proclamation; Requiring and Commanding all Mayors, Sheriffs Justices of Peace,
Customers, Comptrollers, and other Officers of His Majesty's Ports, and all
others whom it shall concern, diligently to observe, take notice of, and attend
the Execution of His Royal Pleasure, and to give Information to the Lords and
others of the Privy Council, of the Delinquents, that they may be Prosecuted
against, and receive Punishment according to their Demerits.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Three and twentieth day of January 1679.
In the One and thirtieth year of Our Reign.
God save the King.
London, Printed by John Bill, Thomas Newcomb, and Henry Hills, Printers to the
Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1679/80


