CR
DIEV^ET MON^DROIT
HONI^SOIT^QVI^MAL^Y PENSE^

By the King.
A PROCLAMATION For Prizing of WINES.
CHARLES R.

WHereas by the Statute made in the Twenty eighth year of the Reign of King
Henry the Eight, for Prizing of Wines: It is provided, That the Lord
Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, Lord President of the Kings most Honorable Council,
Lord Privy Seal, and the Lord Chief Justices of either Bench, or Five, four, or
three of them, shall have Power and Authority by their discretion, to set the
prices of all kinds of Wines, as in the said Statute is expressed; by virtue
whereof, the Lord Chancellor, the Lord Treasurer, the Lord Keeper of the Privy
Seal, the Lord Chief Justice of His Majesty's Bench, and the Lord Chief Justice
of the Common Pleas, the Tenth day of December last, did order, That no Canary
Wines, Allegant, Muscadels, Sacks and Malagoes, should be sold in gross for
more then Twenty nine pounds the Butt or Pipe, and at Eighteen pence the Quart
by retail. And that no French Wines should be sold in gross for more then
Twenty three pounds the Tun, and Eight pence the Quart by retail. And that no
Rhenish Wines should be sold in gross for more then Six pounds the Ame, and
Twelve pence the Quart by retail, and so according to these Proportions for
greater or lesser quantities, either in gross or by retail. And that none
presume to sell at higher prices during the next year ensuing, to be accounted
from the First day of this instant February, whereof the Clerk of the Crown was
to take notice, and to see the same proclaimed the then next Term in the
Chancery, according to the said Statute, and accordingly there has been
Proclamation made the First day of this present Hillary Term, being the Three
and twentieth day of January last. Now that all cause of excuse may be removed
from such as inhabit in remote parts of this Realm, and that such as shall be
found Delinquents herein, may acknowledge their own wilfulness the cause of the
danger and penalty they fall into after double advertisement; His Majesty's
Will and Pleasure is, and by the Advice of the said Lords, and the rest of His
Privy Council, according to one other Statute in that behalf, made in the
Fourth year of the Reign of His most Noble Progenitor, King Edward the Third,
by this His Royal Proclamation, does publish and declare, That for one year
next following to be accounted as aforesaid, Canary Wines, Allegant, Muscadels,
Sacks and Mallagoes, be not sold in gross at above Twenty nine pounds the Butt
or Pipe, and at Eighteen pence the Quart by retail. And that French Wines be
not sold in gross at above Twenty three pound the Tun, and Eight pence the
Quart by retail. And that Rhenish Wines be not sold in gross at above Six pound
the Ame, and Twelve pence the Quart by retail, and according to these
Proportions, for greater or lesser quantities, either in gross or by retail;
which Rates and Prizes His Majesty's pleasure is shall be duly observed in all
His Ports, and other places within this Realm where Wines are Landed, and
within Ten miles of those Ports and places. And it is His Majesty's pleasure,
That in places where Wines by Land-carriage shall be conveyed, more then Ten
miles from the next Port, the several sorts of Wines aforesaid, shall, and may
be sold according to the Rates aforesaid, with an allowance, not exceeding Four
pounds the Tun, and one penny the Quart for the carriage thereof upon Land every
Thirty miles, and according to that proportion, and not at greater Rates;
straightly charging and commanding such of His Subjects, and others, whom it
shall concern, That none of them, during the time aforesaid, presume to sell
any of any of the said Wines in gross or by retail, at higher Rates then by
this His Majesty's Proclamation are appointed, under the Forfeitures and
Penalties mentioned in the said Statute, and other the Laws and Statutes of
this Realm, ordained in that behalf; and such further Pains and Penalties as by
the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, can, or may be inflicted upon wilful
Contemners of His Majesty's Royal Command and Proclamation; Requiring and
commanding all Majors, Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, Bailiffs, Customers,
Comptrollers, and other Officers of His Majesty's Ports, and all others whom it
shall concern, diligently to attend the execution of this His Royal Pleasure,
and to give Information to the Lords, and others of the Privy Council, of the
Delinquents, that they may be proceeded against, and receive punishment
according to their demerits.

Given at Our Court at Whitehal, the Fourth day of February, in the Fourteenth
year of Our Reign. God save the King.
London, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the KINGS
most Excellent Majesty. 1661.


