C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
BY THE KING.
A PROCLAMATION, For recalling Private Commissions, or Letters of Marque.
CHARLES REX,

WHereas by His Majesty's Authority, for just and urgent causes Him moving,
private Commissions or Letters of Marque have been granted to some of His
Subjects, for the apprehending, taking and seizing of the Ships and Goods
belonging to the States of the United Provinces, and the Inhabitants there, but
the same did not extend, nor were intended to be any ways prejudicial to His
Majesty's Friends or Allies: Nevertheless, His Majesty has received diverse
Advertisements and Complaints from Foreign Ministers, That by color of the
said Private Commissions or Letters of Marque, the Ships and Goods of the
Subjects of His Majesty's Friends and Allies, have been and are frequently
taken and seized, to their great vexation and damage; Wherein His Majesty does
not deem it enough that they may have reparation in ordinary course of Justice,
but for preventing all occasions of the like for the future, and to the end
when any other shall be hereafter Granted, care may be taken for the better
regulation and governing of them, Does by this His Proclamation (by the Advice
of His Privy Council) Declare and Publish His Will and Pleasure to be, That
from and after the Fourteenth Day of February now next coming, All Private
Commissions or Letters of Marque whatsoever, granted to any who have thereupon
set forth any Ship or Vessel out of the Realms of England or Ireland, shall
cease and determine, and by that time be delivered up and vacated, and from
thenceforth His Majesty does hereby recall and revoke, and declare the same to
be void and determined to all intents and purposes. And His Majesty does
straightly Charge and Command, That the said Commissions or Letters of Marque,
be brought and delivered into the respective Courts of Admiralty, from whence
the same issued, by the time aforesaid, there to be vacated: Hereby further
Declaring and Publishing, That from and after the said Fourteenth day of
February, all Actings and Proceedings by pretext of the said Commissions or
Letters of Marque, shall be taken to be as without any warrant or authority,
and at the perils of the parties who shall act by color thereof, and as if no
such Commissions had been.

Given at Our Court at Oxford the 5th Day of January, 1665. in the Seventeenth
Year of Our Reign.
OXFORD: Printed by Leonard Lichfeild Printer to the University, For John Bill,
and Christopher Barker, Printers to His Majesty, Anno Dom. 1665.


