By the King.
A PROCLAMATION For Prising of WINES.
CHARLES R.

WHereas by the Stature made in the Twenty eighth year of the Reign of King
Henry the Eighth, for Prising of Wines, It is provided, That the Lord
Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, Lord President of the Kings most Honorable
Council, Lord Privy Seal, and the Lord Chief Justices of each Bench, or Five,
or Four, or Three of them, shall have Power and Authority by their Discretion
to set the Prices of all kind of Wines, as in the said Statute is expressed; By
virtue whereof, the Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, and the Lord Chief
Justices of each Bench, have Ordered, That Canary Wines be sold in Gross, at
Thirty six pounds the Pipe, Twelve pence the Pint by Retail; Tents and Malagaes
in Gross, at Thirty pounds the Butt, and Ten pence the Pint by Retail; That
Allicants, Sherries and Muscadels, be sold in Gross, at Twenty seven pounds,
and Nine pence the Pint by Retail; That French Wines be sold in Gross, at
Thirty six pounds the Tun, and Twelve Pence the Quart by Retail; And that
Rhenish Wines be sold in Gross, at Nine pounds the Aulm, and Eighteen pence the
Quart by Retail: And according to these Rates (and no higher) in proportion for
greater or lesser quantities, either in Gross or by Retail; and that none
presume to sell at higher Prices during the year next ensuing, to be accounted
from the First day of February, in the year of Our Lord God 1676. Now that all
cause of excuse from such as Inhabit in remote parts of this Realm, and that
such as shall be found Delinquents therein, may acknowledge their own
wilfulness to be the cause of the danger and Penalty they fall into after
advertisement, His Majesty's Will and Pleasure is, and by the Advice of the
said Lords, and the rest of the Privy Council, according to one other Statute
in that behalf made, in the Fourth year of the Reign of His most Noble
Progenitor King Edward the Third, by this His Royal Proclamation does Publish
and Declare, That for One year next following, to be accounted as aforesaid,
Canary Wines be not sold in Gross, at above Thirty six pounds the Pipe, and
Twelve pence the Pint by Retail; And that Tents and Malagaes be not sold in
Gross, at above Thirty pounds the Butt, and Ten pence the Pint by Retail; And
that Allicants, Sherries and Muscadels be not sold in Gross, at above Twenty
seven pounds at Butt, and Nine pence the Pint by Retail; And that French Wines
be not sold in Gross, at above Thirty six pounds the Tun, and Twelve pence the
Quart by Retail; And that Rhenish Wines be not sold in Gross, at above Nine
pounds the Aulm, and Eighteen pence the Quart by Retail; And according to those
Rates (and no higher) in proportion for greater or lesser quantities, either in
Gross or by Retail. Which Rates and Prices His Majesty's Pleasure is, shall be
duly observed in all His Ports and other places within this Realm where Wines
are Landed, or within Ten Miles of those Ports and places. And it is His
Majesty's Pleasure, That in Those places where Wines by Land-Carriage shall be
conveyed more then Ten Miles from the next Port, the several sorts of Wines
aforesaid shall and may be sold according to the Rates aforesaid, with an
allowance not exceeding four pounds the Tun; and One penny the Quart for the
Carriage thereof every Thirty Miles, and according to that proportion, and not
at greater Rates; Strictly Charging and Commanding such of His Majesty's
Subject, and others whom it may concern, That none of them (during the time
aforesaid) presume to sell any of the said Wines in Gross, or by Retail, at
higher Rates than by this His Majesty's Proclamation are appointed, under the
Forfeitures and Penalties mentioned in the said Statutes, and other the Laws
and Statutes of this Realm Orvained in that behalf, and such further Pains and
Penalties as by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm can or may be inflicted
upon wilful Contemners of His Majesty's Royal Command and Proclamation;
Requiring and Commanding all Mayors, Sheriffs Justices of the Peace, Customers,
Comptrollers, and other Officers of His Majesty's Ports, and all others Whom it
shall concern, diligently to observe, take notice of, and attend the Execution
of this His Royal Pleasure, and to give Information to the Lords and others of
the Privy Council, of the Delinquents, that they may be proceed against, and
receive punishment according to their demerits.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Seventeenth day of January, 1676/7. in the
Eight and twentieth year of Our Reign.
God save the King.
LONDON, ^


