DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION For Publishing the Peace between His Majesty, AND THE FRENCH
KING.
CHARLES R.

WHereas a Peace has been Treated and Concluded at Breda, betwixt His Majesty
and the French King, and the Ratifications thereof exchanged, and Publication
thereof there made the Fourteenth day of this instant August: In conformity
thereunto His Majesty has thought fit hereby to Command, That the same be
Published throughout all His Majesty's Dominions.

And His Majesty does Declare, That all Ships, or other Moveable Goods
whatsoever, which shall appear to be taken from the Subjects of the French
King, after the Twenty sixth of this instant August, in the Neighboring Seas;
That is to say, In the Channel, the Seas between England and Ireland, as also
in the North Seas and the Baltic; After the Twenty fourth of September next
ensuing, from the said Neighboring Seas to Cape Saint Vincent; After the Two
and twentieth of October next, from the said Cape Saint Vincent to the
Equinoctial Line, as well in the Ocean as in the Mediterranean, and elsewhere:
And lastly, After the Fourteenth of February next ensuing, on the other side of
the aforesaid Line throughout the whole World, without any exception, or
distinction of time or place, or without any form of Process, shall
immediately, and without damage, be restored to the Owners, according to the
said Treaty. And hereof His Majesty Wills and Commands all His Subjects to
take notice, and to conform themselves thereunto.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the 24th day of August, In the Nineteenth year
of Our Reign.
In the SAVOY, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker,
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1667.


