By the King.
A PROCLAMATION For Prising of WINES.
CHARLES R.

WHereas by the Statute made in the Eight and twentieth year of the Reign of
King Henry the Eighth, for Prising of Wines, It is provided, That the Lord
Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, Lord President of the Kings most Honorable
Council, Lord Privy Seal, and the Lords Chief Justices of either Bench, or
Five, or Four, or Three of them, shall have Power and Authority by their
Discretion to set the Prices of all kinds of Wines, as in the said Statute is
expressed; By virtue whereof, the Lord Chancellor, the Lord Treasurer, the Lord
Privy Seal, the Lord Chief Justice Rainesford, and the Lord Chief Justice
North, the Nineteenth day of December last, did Order, That Canary Wines be
sold in Gross, at Thirty six pounds the Pipe, and Twelve pence the Pint by
Retail; Tents and Malagaes be sold in Gross at Thirty pounds the Butt, and Ten
pence the Pint by Retail; That Allecants, Sherries and Muscadels, be sold in
Gross, at Twenty seven pounds the Butt, and Nine pence the Pint by Retail; That
French Wines be sold in Gross, at Thirty six pounds the Tun, and Twelve pence
the Quart by Retail; And that Rhenish Wines be sold in Gross, at Nine pounds
the Aulm, and Eighteen pence the Quart by Retail: And according to these Rates
(and no higher) in proportion for greater or lesser quantities, either in Gross
or by Retail; and that none presume to sell at higher Prices during the year
next ensuing, to be accounted from the First day of February next, Now that all
cause of excuse may be taken away, that such from such as shall be found
Delinquents therein, may acknowledge their own wilfulness to be the cause of
the danger and penalty they fall into after the Advertisement, The Kings most
Excellent Majesty, according to one other Statute in that behalf made, in the
Fourth year of the Reign of King Edward the Third, by this His Royal
Proclamation does Publish and Declare, That for One year next following, to be
accounted as aforesaid, Canary Wines be not sold in Gross, at above Thirty six
pounds the Pipe, and Twelve pence the Pint by Retail; That Tents and Malagaes
be not sold in Gross, at above Thirty pounds the Butt, and Ten pence the Pint
by Retail; And that Alicants, Sherries, and Muscadels, be not sold in Gross, at
above Twenty seven pounds the Butt, and Nine pence the Pint by Retail; That
French Wines be sold in Gross, at above Thirty six pounds the Tun, and Twelve
pence the Quart by Retail; And that Rhenish Wines be not sold in Gross, at
above Nine Pounds the Aulm, and Eighteen pence the Quart by Retail; And
according to these Rates (and no higher) in proportion for greater or lesser
quantities, either in Gross or Retail. Which Rates and Prices His Majesty's
Pleasure is, shall be duly observed in all His Ports, and other Places. And it
is His Majesty's Pleasure, That in those Places where Wines by Land-carriage
shall and may be sold according to the Rates aforesaid, with an allowance not
exceeding Four pounds the Tun, and One penny the Quart for the Carriage thereof
every Thirty Miles, and according to that proportion, and not at greater Rates;
Strictly Charging and Commanding such of His Subjects, and others whom it may
concern, That none of them, during the time aforesaid, presume to sell any of
the said Wines in Gross, or by Retail, at higher Rates than by this His
Majesty's Proclamation are appointed, under the Forfeitures and Penalties
mentioned in the said Statute, and other the Laws and Statutes of this Realm
Orbained in that behalf; And such other Pains and Penalties as by the Laws and
Statutes of this Realm can or may be Inflicted upon Wilful Contemners of His
Majesty's Royal Command and Proclamation; Requiring and Commanding all Mayors,
Sheriffs Justices of the Peace, Customers, Comptrollers, and other Officers of
His Majesty's Ports, and all others whom it shall concern, diligently to
observe and attend the Execution of this His Royal Pleasure, and to give
Information to the Lords and others of the Privy Council, of the Delinquents,
that they may be proceed against, and receive Punishment according to their
Demerits.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Twelfth day of January, 1677/8. In the
Nine and twentieth year of Our Reign.
God save the King.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill, Christopher Barker, Thomas Newcomb, and Henry
Hills, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1677/8.


