C R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION For Commanding the Magistrates, and Officers of His Majesty's
Customs in all the Ports of His Dominions, to give notice to all His Majesty's
Subjects whom it may concern, that they may have Passes for their Ships from
His Majesty's respective High Admirals, or Commissioners for Executing that
Office.
CHARLES R.

WHereas by Treaty of Peace concluded between the Kings most Excellent Majesty
and the Government of Argiers, the Tenth day of April 1682. It is Agreed, That
after Fifteen months from the Date of the said Treaty, all Merchants Ships or
Vessels of His Majesty's Subjects shall be obliged to produce a Pass, under the
Hand and Seal of the Lord High Admirals, or the Commissioners for Executing
that Office, of His Majesty's respective Dominions: And whereas the said Term
of Fifteen months is now near expiring, His Majesty therefore has thought fit,
with the Advice of His Privy Council, to Publish His Royal Proclamation, and
does hereby strictly Charge and Command all Magistrates, and Officers of the
Customs in all and every the Ports of His Dominions, to give notice thereof to
all His Majesty's Subjects whatever therein concerned, and that they may have
Passes for their several Ships upon demanding the same from His Majesty's
respective Lord High Admirals, or Commissioners for Executing that Office for
the time being, according to the Rules prescribed and used in granting the same.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Thirteenth day of April 1683. in the Five
and thirtieth year of Our Reign.
LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill deceased: And by Henry Hills, and
Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1683.


