By the King.
A PROCLAMATION For Discovery of Robberies and Burglaries, and for a Reward to
the Discoverers.
CHARLES R.

WHereas Robberies upon the Highways, and Burglaries have been more frequently
committed of late, then heretofore, and more audaciously in the open Streets,
and other ways, and places, in, and about the Cities of London and Westminster,
and Parts adjacent; sometimes near to His Majesty's Royal Presence, and Palace,
and to His Courts of Justice, in affront to Government: Therefore for the
better Suppression and Prevention thereof, and Apprehension of Offenders, The
Kings most Excellent Majesty (by and with the Advice of His Privy Council) does
hereby straightly Charge and Command all Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, Majors,
Bailiffs, Constables, Head-burroughs, Tythingmen, and other Officers and
Ministers to whom it does or shall appertain, to take care, That the Statute of
Winchester, made in the Thirteenth year of the Reign of King Edward the First,
for Hue and Cries, and fresh Suit to be made after Felons and Robbers, from
Town to Town, and from Country to Country, be duly observed with all
diligence. For which purpose, and to the end His People, for avoiding the
Penalties to the contrary, may use their utmost endeavors for Apprehending the
Offenders, His Majesty has thought fit hereby to make known and publish, That
by the said Statute of Winchester, the Inhabitants of the Country where the
Robberies are done, are to be answerable for the Robbery, and also for the
damage to the parties robbed, if the Offenders be not apprehended within the
space of Forty days; And by other Laws and Statutes for deterring Offenders,
they are deprived of the benefit of Clergy, in case of Robberies on the
Highways, and Burglaries, and the party robbed, for his encouragement to make
resistance, is not to forfeit any thing, if he kill the Robber. And for the
more effectual Discovery and Prosecution of the said Offenders, His said
Majesty is graciously pleased, and hereby does promise to Pardon all such
person and persons who have been Partakers, or guilty in committing any
Robberies on the Highway, Burglaries, or other Thefts, that shall within One
year, from the date of this Proclamation, discover his, or their
Fellow-Offenders, or any of them, so as to cause them to be apprehended. And
furthermore, His said Majesty is graciously pleased, and does hereby declare,
That such person or persons, as well the said Partakers guilty of the Offenses,
as all and every other person and persons, who shall at any time, within One
year, now next ensuing, as to Offenses already done and past, and for the
future within One year after the Offenses committed, discover to any Justice of
Peace, or any other Officer of Justice, any person that has committed, or
shall commit any Robbery on the Highway, or Burglary, and shall apprehend, or
cause to be apprehended such Offender, shall within Fifteen days after
Conviction of such Offender so apprehended upon such Discovery, have a Reward
of Ten pounds for every such Offender so apprehended and convicted. And all and
every Sheriff and Sheriffs of the respective Counties or Sheriff-wicks, where
such Conviction shall be had, are hereby required upon the Certificate of the
Judge, or under the hand of Two or more Justices of the Peace, before whom such
Conviction shall be had, to pay unto such person or persons who shall discover
and apprehend such Offender, or upon whose Discovery such Offenders shall be
apprehended, the said Reward of Ten pounds, within the time aforesaid, for
every Offender so apprehended and convicted, out of the Public Moneys received
by him in that County, which shall be allowed unto him upon his account in His
Majesty's Exchequer: And for allowance whereof, this Proclamation shall be a
sufficient Warrant.

Given at His Majesty's Court at Whitehal the Thirtieth day of December, in the
Thirteenth year of His Majesty's Reign.
God save the King.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the KING'S
most Excellent Majesty. 1661.


