By the King, A PROCLAMATION, For Observation of the Thirtieth Day of January,
as a Day of Fast and Humiliation, according to the late Act of Parliament for
that purpose.
CHARLES R.

Whereas in Our late Parliament held at Westminster, in the Twelfth year of Our
Reign, The Lords and Commons therein Assembled did show and declare unto Us,
That the Execrable Murder of Our Royal Father CHARLES the First, of ever
Blessed and Glorious Memory, has been committed by a Party of wretched Men,
desperately wicked and hardened in their Impiety, who having first plot^ed and
contrived to the ruin and destruction of this Excellent Monarchy, and with it
the true Reformed Protestant Religion, which had been so long Protected by it,
and Flourished under it, found it necessary in order to the carrying on of
their pernicious and traitorous Designs, to throw down all the Bulwarks and
Fences of Law, and to subvert the very being and constitution of Parliament,
That so they might at last make their way open for any further Attempts upon
His Person: And for the more easy effecting thereof, they did then first (...)
some part of the then Army into a compliance, and then kept the rest in
subjection to them, partly for hope of Pr^^erment, and chiefly for fear of
losing their Employments and Arrears, until by these and other more odious Arts
and Devices they had fully strengthened themselves both in Power and Faction;
Which being done, they did Declare against all manner of Treaty with the Person
of Our Royal Father, even then when a Treaty by Advice of both Houses of
Parliament was in being, and did Remonstrate against the Houses of Parliament
for such Proceedings, and seized upon the Person of Our Royal Father, while the
Commissioners were returned to the Houses of Parliament with His Answer; And
when His Concessions had been Voted a ground for Peace, seize upon the House of
Commons, Seclude and Imprison some Members, force out others, And there being
left but a small remnant of their own creatures (not a tenth part of the whole)
did seek to shelter themselves by this weak pretense, under the name and
authority of a Parliament, and in that name labored to prosecute what was yet
behind, and unfinished of their long intended Treason and Conspiracy: To that
purpose they prepared an Ordinance for creating a prodigious and unheared of
Tribunal, which they called, An High Court of Justice, for Trial of His
Majesty, Our most Dear Father; And having easily procured it to pass their
House of Commons, as it then stood molded, ventured to send it up from thence
to the Peers, then sitting, who totally rejected it; Whereupon their rage and
fury increasing, they presumed ^o pass it alone as an Act of the Commons, and
in the name of the Commons of England; and having gained the pretense of (...)
by the power of their (...) making, pursued it with all possible force and
cruelty, until at last upon the Thirtieth day of January, (...) thousand six
hundred forty and eight, His Sacred Majesty, Our late Dear Father, was brought
unto a Scaffold, and there publicly murdered before the Gates of His own
Royal Place. And because by this horrid Action, the Protestant Religion has
received the greatest wound and reproach, and the people of England, the most
insupportable shame and infamy that it is possible for the Enemies of God and
the King to bring upon them, whilst the Fanatic rage of a few miscreants (who
were as far from being true Protestants, as they were from being true Subjects)
stands impured by Our Adversaries to the whole Nation. They the said Lords and
Commons in Parliament Assembled, did therefore renounce, abominate, and protest
against that Impious Fact, the execrable Murder and unparalled Treason
committed against the Sacred Person and Life of Our most Royal Father, and did
beseech Us that it might be Declared; And it is by the said (...) Declared,
That by the undoubted Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, neither the Peers of
the Realm, nor the Commons, nor both together in Parliament, nor the People
collectively or representatively, nor any other persons whatsoever, ever had,
has or ought to have any coercive power over the Persons of the Kings of this
Realm. And for the better vindication of themselves to posterity, and is a
lasting Monument of their otherwise inexpressible detestation and abhorrency of
that villainous and abominable Fact, They did further beseech Us that it might
be Enacted; And it is thereby Enacted, That every Thirtieth day of January
(unless it should fall out to be on the Lords Day, and then the next day
following) should be for ever thereafter set apart to be kept and observed in
all Our Churches and Chapels of our Kingdoms of England and Ireland, Dominion
of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, and the Isles of (...) and ^^^nsey,
and all other Our Dominions, as an Anniversary Day of Fasting and Humiliation,
to implore the Mercy of God (...) next or the guilt of that Sacred and Innocent
Blood, nor those other sins by which God was provoked to deliver in both them
and their King into the hands of cruel and unreasonable men, might at any time
after be visited upon them or their Posterity, as by the said Act amongst other
things at large appears. We being very sensible of the Pious and good
intentions of Our said (...) and Loyal Subjects; and holding Our Self obliged
to do Our utmost endeavor that a work so much tending to the honor and
acknowledgment of the infinite Mercies of Our good and gracious God, who has
been pleased not only to restore Us to the Throne of Our Ancestors, from which
We were long detained, and Our said good Subjects to their Rights and
Liberties, and the Nation to Peace, after a bloody and unnatural War, and
tending to a due acknowledgment of the sins which provoked the Justice of God
so far as justly to deliver up these Nations to the many and deplorable
Calamities which proceeded from, and ensued that horrid and bloody murder of
Our most Dear Father, Do strictly Command and Enjoin all Our loving Subjects,
of what degree, quality or condition soever, solemnly and humbly to conform
themselves, and give obedience to the said Act of Parliament, and to set apart,
and observe the Thirtieth day of January this present year, and so from time to
time every Thirtieth day of January every year, as a day of Fasting and
Humiliation for the purposes in the said Act of Parliament mentioned: And to
that end We Command all Archbishops, Bishops, Persons, Vicars, Ministers, and
other Ecclesiastical Persons in their several Charges, according to their
several Duties to take care hereof, and to cause this our Proclamation to be
yearly read in all Churches and Chapels the Sunday before the said Fast is to
be observed. And We strictly Command all persons whatsoever, for the better
observation of the said Day, to abstain from all servile Works and Business on
that Day, and meekly and orderly to repair to the Public place for Divine
Worship, to beseech God for his Mercy, and to humble themselves in his sight,
according to the good intention of the said Act. And We declare, That such
persons as shall be faulty herein, shall be esteemed by Us, Contemners and
Infringers of Our Laws and Commands, and Profane persons, who wilfully shut
their eyes, both against the Judgments and Mercies of Almighty God.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Twenty fifth Day of January, in the
Twelfth Year of Our Reign, One thousand six hundred and sixty.
GOD SAVE THE KING.
LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers
to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1674.


