By the King. A PROCLAMATION Declaring the Confirmation of the Treaties, and
continuance of the Amity and Commerce between the Crowns of ENGLAND and
PORTVGAL.
CHARLES R.

WHEREAS at Our happy arrival in this Kingdom, We found Our good Subjects in a
full Possession of a Free Trade with Portugal, and of many Privileges and
Immunities granted to this Nation, by some Treaties made with those who were
possessed of the Power here. And the Ambassador of the King of Portugal has
applied himself to Us for renewing and confirming the said Treaties; To which
end and purpose, We appointed several of the Lords of Our Privy Council to
treat with him, who have made a good Progress therein; But the said Ambassador
not being able to attend the Conclusion of the said Treaty (which cannot be
speedily finished) but necessitated to return home, by which, many of Our
Subjects may apprehend that there is some Obstruction in that Alliance and
Trade. We have thought fit to Publish and Declare to all Our loving Subjects,
That they may without any Fear or Apprehension, continue their Trade and
Concern in Portugal and the Dominions thereof, according to the late Treaties;
and that We are well assured, that they shall enjoy all the Privileges and
Immunities granted to them by the said Treaties; Albeit, we have not yet
proceeded so far as to a full Ratification thereof, the said Ambassador
undertaking to Us for the observation of the same in Portugal.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Sixth day of October, in the Twelfth year
of Our Reign, 1660.
GOD SAVE THE KING.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, 1660.


