By the King.
A PROCLAMATION, FOR A Gereral Fast throughout the Realm of England.
CHARLES R.

THe Kings most Excellent Majesty taking into His Pious and Princely
consideration, that great and immoderate Rains and Waters have lately fallen in
the Land, whereupon it may be feared, scarcity, and famine, and sickness and
diseases will ensue, if Almighty God of his great Clemency be not mercifully
pleased to avert those Judgments and Punishments, which our many and manifold
sins and provocations have justly deserved: And his Majesty having assembled
His high Court of Parliament (the Representative Body of this Kingdom) which is
now sitting, and being thereto moved by the Petition of both the Houses of
Lords and Commons in Parliament, and out of His own Religious disposition
readily inclined, has resolved, and hereby does Command a general and public
Fast to be kept throughout this whole Kingdom, in such manner as hereafter is
directed and prescribed, that so both Prince and People, even the whole
Kingdom, as one man, may send up their Prayers and Supplications to Almighty
God, to divert those Judgments which the sins of this Land have worthily
deserved, and to continue the blessed change of wheather now begun, and to
offer up to him their hearty and unfeigned thanks for this, and other abundant
mercies formerly vouchsafed unto them, and to beseech his blessing upon that
great Assembly of this Nation, and to prosper their actions and endeavors.

And to the end so Religious an Exercise may be performed with all Decency and
Uniformity, His Majesty has resolved upon a Grave and Religious Form of
Solemnizing thereof, which His Royal Pleasure He does hereby Publish and
Declare to all His loving Subjects, And does Straightly Charge and Command,
that on Wednesday next being the Twelfth day of this instant June, this Fast be
Religiously and Solemnly observed and celebrated in the Cities of London and
Westminster, Borough of Southwarke, and other Places adjacent, wherein His
Majesty in his Royal Person and with His Royal Family and Household, will give
Example to the rest of His People; And that on Wednesday the Nineteenth day of
the same Month of June, the like be kept and duly observed throughout the rest
of This whole Realm of England and Dominion of Wales; And for the more Orderly
Solemnizing thereof without confusion, His Majesty by the Advice of His
Reverend Bishops has Directed to be Composed, Printed and Published, the Form
of such Prayers and Public Exhortations as He thinks fit to be used in all
Churches and places at these Public Meetings, and He has given Charge to His
Bishops to Disperse the same throughout the whole Kingdom. All which His
Majesty both expressly Charge and Command shall be Reverendly and Decently
performed, by all His loving Subjects, as they tender the favor of Almighty
God, and would avoid His just Indignation against this Land, and upon pain of
such punishments as His Majesty can justly inflict upon all such as shall
contemn or neglect so Religious a Work.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Seventh day of June, in the Thirteenth
year of Our Reign, 1661.
GOD SAVE THE KING.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Baker, Printers to the KING'S
most Excellent MAJESTY, 1661.

At the KINGS Printing House in Blackfriars.


