CR

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION For making Current His MAJESTY'S Farthings and Halfpence of
Copper, And Forbidding all others to be Used.
CHARLES R.

WHereas of late years several Persons and Corporations, upon pretense that
there wanted small moneys to be current in low and ordinary payments amongst
the poorer sort, have presumed to cause certain pieces of Brass, Copper, and
other Base Metals to be stamped with their private stamps; and then imposed
those pieces upon Our poor Subjects for Pence, Halfpence, or Farthings, as the
makers thereof were pleased to call them, whereby Our Subjects have been
greatly defrauded, and Our Royal Authority and the Laws of Our Kingdom
violated. And whereas We, for prevention of the like abuses for the time to
come, Did not only direct a severe Prosecution of the Offenders, But did
likewise Command the Officers of Our Mint to cause many Thousands of pounds of
good sterling Silver to be Coined into Single pence, and Two-pences, that so
there might be good money current amongst the poorest of Our Subjects, and
fitted for their smaller Traffic and Commerce; hoping by one or both these
means, to have totally suppressed the unlawful Practices of these Offenders;
Since which time We have found by experience, That the mischief has still
increased, Partly by having Our small Silver moneys bought in and hoarded up,
that so there might be a scarcity thereof in common payments: But chiefly by
the vast Gain and profit which these Stampers make to themselves, and for which
they choose to run any hazards of Law, rather then quit the hopes of their
private lucre: We therefore taking the premises into Our Princely
consideration, and believing that Our Subjects would not easily be wrought upon
to accept the Farthings and Halfpence of these private Stampers, if there were
not some kind of necessity for such small Coins to be made for Public use,
which cannot well be done in Silver, nor safely in any other Metal, unless the
intrinsic value of the Coin be equal, or near to that value for which it is
made current: Have thought fit, by Advice of Our Privy Council, to cause
certain Farthings and Halfpence of Copper to be Stamped at Our Mint, according
to such form, and with such Impression as We have directed: And We have given
special Charge to Our Officers there, That they cause such Halfpence and
Farthings so to be Coined, to contain as much Copper in weight, as shall be of
the true intrinsic value and worth of an Halfpenny or Farthing respectively,
the charges of Coining and uttering being only deducted. And We do further by
this Our Royal Proclamation Declare, Publish, and Authorize the said Halfpence
and Farthings of Copper so Coined, and to be Coined, to be current money; and
that the same from and after this instant 16th day of August, shall pass and be
received in all Payments, Bargains, and Exchanges to be had or made between Our
Subjects, which shall be under the value of Six pence, and not otherwise, nor
in any other manner. And if any Person or Persons, Bodies Politic or
Corporate, shall after the First day of September next, presume to make, vend,
or utter any Pence, Halfpence, Farthings, or other pieces of Brass, Copper, or
other Base Metal, other then the Halfpence and Farthings by this Our Royal
Proclamation Authorized and allowed; or shall offer to counterfeit any of Our
Halfpence or Farthings, We shall hold all such Offenders utterly inexcusable,
and shall cause their Contempt of Our Laws and Government to be chastised with
Exemplary Severity.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the 16th day of August, in the 24th year of
Our Reign. 1672.
In the SAVOY Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker,
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1672.


