C2 R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION Declaring the Parliament shall be Prorogued until the First day
of October next.
CHARLES R.

WHereas this present Parliament was Prorogued from the First day of this
instant August, unto the Nine and twentieth day of the same Month, And whereas
His Majesty did Issue His Proclamation of the Second day of this Month,
Signifying His Royal Pleasure, That both Houses should not only meet upon the
said Nine and twentieth day of August, but should continue then to Sit, for the
Dispatch of diverse weighty Affairs which should then be Proposed and Debated;
His Majesty now taking into His Consideration, that the State of Affairs abroad
is much changed since that His Proclamation, Has therefore thought fit (with
the Advice of His Privy Council) to Publish and Declare, And His Majesty does
hereby Publish and Declare His Royal Pleasure, That the Two Houses of
Parliament shall upon the said Nine and twentieth of August be further
Prorogued to the First day of October next, And that they shall then continue
to Sit for the Dispatch of diverse weighty Matters which shall be then Propsed
and Debated.

And His Majesty being desirous, in respect of the Importance of those Affairs,
to have on the said First of October, a full Assembly of the Members of both
Houses of Parliament, Does hereby Require and Command all and every the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal of this Realm, and the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses
of the House of Commons, to give their Attendance at Westminster on the said
First day of October next; letting them know, that He will not at the said Nine
and twentieth day of August instant expect the Attendance of any, but only such
as being in or about the Cities of London or Westminster, may Attend the making
of the said Prorogation: And His Majesty does expect a ready Conformity to this
His Royal Will and Pleasure.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Eighth day of August 1678. And in the
Thirtieth year of Our Reign.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill, Christopher Barker, Thomas Newcomb, and Henry
Hills, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1678.


