Licensed October. 9. 1673.

Roger L'Estrange.

Cambridge JESTS, OR WITTY ALARUMS FOR Melancholy Spirits.

By a Lover of Ha, Ha, He.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Lowndes, and are to be sold at his Shop over
against Exeter-House in the Strand. MDCLXXIV.

CAMBRIDGE JESTS.
1.
A Young Lady having of a long time had a desire to have her Picture drawn by
an excellent Limner, sent for him, and told him, That for as much as she had
heard he was an excellent Artist, she desired he would draw her to the life, as
she was, a Maid, and exactly of the same stature. The Painter having used the
utmost of his Art to resemble her Features to the life, brought home the Piece;
in the which she could find no fault, except that he had drawn her a little
less than she was. Oh Madam, said he, Posterity would never believe my Draught,
had I made you any taller; for it is very rare in this Age, to find a Maid so
bigg.

2.
'Twas in the Rebellious Times of Oliver, that a Phanatical Soldier came drunk
into Kings College Chapel at Cambridge and going to the place where Prayers
used to be read, he began to rail against the King, the Bishops, and
particularly the two Universities, calling them the two Eyes of the Devil;
adding moreover, that as his party had ruined the Walls of one, meaning that of
Oxford, so they would deface the other of Cambridge. Nay then, replied a
Scholar, I perceive Cambridge will be defaced when the Devil is blind,

3.
A Gentleman that had occasion to rise early the next Morning, bid his Footman
wake him at six a Clock, the little lad over vigilant, awaked at four, and came
and pulled his Master; Well how now, said his Master, what is it a clock? Four,
replied the youth; And why Sirrah, said he, have you awaked me so soon? Oh Sir,
said he, I came to tell you that you had two hours more to sleep.

4.
A Student in the University, sent one day to his Fellow Collegian, desiring to
borrow such a certain Book, the other unwilling to lend it, sent back word,
That he had resolved never to let that Book go out of his Chamber, but if he
pleased he might come and read as long as he would; not long after having
himself occasion for a pair of Bellows, he sent to borrow them of the other, to
whom he had formerly denied his Book; but received this witty denial, for said
the other to the Messenger, I use not to lend out my Bellows, but if he please
to come here, he may blow as long as he will.

5.
Some Gentlemen meeting their Friend that was in mourning for his Mother, upon
a Horse whose Saddle was of Green Velvet, began to laugh at him for the
disagreeableness of his Mourning Habit with the Green Saddle. Why Gentlemen,
said he, you know I mourn for my Mother, and therefore wear these Black
Garments; but the Maere that brought forth my Horse is yet living, and till she
die, there is no reason that he should mourn.

6.
An old Miser in France, that grudged his Servants their Victuals, causing them
to mingle three times as much Water with their Wine, seeing one of his servants
feed heartily, What, said he, will your Grinders never be at rest? How can
they, replied the Servant, as long as they have so much Water?

7.
A Bishop rising up in Arms against his Prince, was overthrown and taken as he
was clad in his Armor, and by the Kings Commands clapped up. The Pope hearing of
it, complained to the King of breach of the Church Privileges, that one of her
Sons was imprisoned: Hereupon the King sends back the Messenger with the
Bishops Armor, desiring the Pope to send him word, Whether those were the
Garments of any of his Sons?

8.
Pope Julius the Third when he was made Pope, gave his Hat unto a young
Favorite of his, with great scandal, whereupon a Cardinal that used to be free
with him, said, What did your Holiness see in that young man, to make him
Cardinal? Julius answered, What did you see in me to make me Pope?

9.
A notorious Rogue being brought to the Bar, and knowing his Case to be
desperate, cried out aloud, I charge you in the Kings name to seize and take
away that man (meaning the Judge) in the red Gown, for I go in danger of my
life because of him.

10.
Amongst some Women that were chatting of their Husbands, Truly, said one, my
Husband is the liquorishest Man in the World, for I had a little Pot of Honey
sent me by a Cousin out of Hampshire, and I can no sooner turn my Breech but his
Nose is in it.

11.
Another good Wife having drunk a little too largely in the Morning, fell
asleep in the Church, and began to snore so loud that her next Neighbor jogged
her. Oh pray give the Cup to my Gossip there, said she, for I cannot drink one
drop more.

12.
A Country Fellow being set upon by a Mastiff, killed him with his Pitchfork,
the owner of the Dog demanded satisfaction, and brought him before the Justice:
But still the Clown pleaded he did it in his own defense. Nevertheless you
ought, said the Justice, to have struck him with the other end of your Staff.
Truly so I would, said the Peasant, had he run at me with his Tail.

13.
Francis the First of France, often used for his pleasure to go disguised;
walking thus one day in the company of the Cardinal of Bourbon, he met with a
Peasant with a new pair of Shoes upon his Arm; so he called to him, and said,
What did they cost thee? the Peasant said, Guess; the King said, I think some
five Sols; said the Peasant. You have lied but one Carlois. What Villain, said
the Cardinal, thou art dead; it is the King: To which the Peasant replied, The
Devil take him, of me, or you that knew so much.

14.
One having occasion to rise early, bid his Man look out and see if it were
day; the man replied, It was dark; Why then Fool, said he, it is no wonder if
thou can not see, take a Candle and hold out of the Window.

15.
A Soldier quartering in New Market, often observed a young Country Wench
that sold Pigs every Market day; whereupon he went to her one day, and desired
to see some Pigs; having seen several, he said at last, He would have one that
was alive, so she showed him one that she had in a Bag. Well, Sweet heart, said
he, I live hard by and must go show the Pig to my Captain, if he like it, you
shall have three shillings for it, in the mean time I will leave the price with
you. Thus having got the Pig tied up in the Bag, he went to his Lodging, and
put a Dog into the Bag instead of it, and returning quickly to the Damosel,
said, Truly his Captain did not like the Pig; and therefore she took the Bag
without looking into it, and gave him his Money. Not long after came a French
Monsieur in haste to buy a Pig, but not liking those that were dead, would have
a live one. Sir, said she, I have one of the same bigness alive, the price is
so much. Well, here is your money, said he, but how shall I carry it? Why for a
groat you shall have Poke and all. Poke, what is d'at? said the Frenchman. It Is
a Bag Sir, said she, that it is tied up in. Oh de Bag, is dat de Poke? well
here is a groat. Thus away he goes with his Bargain home, but when he comes to
look in the Poke, O de Diable; says he, is dis de Pig? de Dible take me, if I
do buy de Pig in de Poke agin.

16.
A Tailor that was ever accustomed to steal some of the Cloth his Customer
brought, when he came one day to make himself a Suit, stole half a yard; his
Wife perceiving it, asked the reason; Oh, said he, it is to keep my hands in
use, least at any time I should forget it.

17.
A Scholar that fancied himself to sing well, notwithstanding he had a very
hoarse voice; having often observed that a poor woman was used to cry when she
heard him sing, asked her at last the reason. Truly Sir, said she, when through
poverty I had sold all my goods, and had nothing left but a poor Ass, at last I
lost my Ass, and I never hear you sing, but you put me in mind of it.

18.
A Cook leaving his Master, who was very miserable and sparing in his Diet;
when his Master asked him the reason, Truly Sir, said he, I am afraid that if I
stay here long, I should forget my Trade.

19.
One seeing a bare-legg'd Fellow run on an errand, said, Do you hear friend,
when those Stockings are worn out, I will give you a new pair. I thank you Sir,
replied the other, these Stockings have lasted me a great while; I have also a
pair of Breeches of the same Stuff, that never had but one hole in them, and
that is at your service too.

20.
A Gentleman passing by, a poor man asked alms of him; whereupon the Gentleman
asked him what he lived upon? Sir, said he, I can make no answer to that; but
had you asked me what I die of? I should have told you of hunger.

21.
A drunken Hector being brought before a Justice of Peace upon the account of
Swearing, was commanded to deposite his Fine, which was two shillings:
thereupon plucking out a Half-Crown, said, Pray what should I have paid had I
cursed? the Justice told him Six pence: Then, quoth he, a pox take you all for
a company of Knaves and Fools, and there is Half a Crown for you; I will never
stand changing of Money.

22.
A Gentleman meeting the Kings Jester, asked, What news? Why Sir, replied he,
There are forty thousand men risen to day. I pray to what end, said the other,
and what do they intend? Why to go to bed again at night, said he.

23.
A Gentleman playing a Game at Tables in a Chamber in Fleet Street, four
stories high, had so ordered his Game, that no chance of the Dice could lose it
but one; yet it so happened that that chance came; whereupon he grew so
passionate, that bringing down the Tables into the Street, he made a stop, and
asking the next Gentleman that came if he understood the Game, the Gentleman
said he did; Then pray Sir, said he, what do you think could lose me the Game?
then pausing a little, I think there is nothing but such a chance. Why then,
said the passionate Gamester, God dam me, if I have not thrown it.

23.
One asked, Why men sooner gave to poor people that begged, than to Scholars?
It Is, said one, because they think they may sooner come to be poor, than to be
Scholars.

24.
A Courtier having begged a rich Landed Fool of the King, made him wait upon
him; so the Fool coming one day with his Master to a Gentleman's House, where
the Picture of a Fool was wrought in a rich Suit of Arras Hangings, cut out the
Fool with his knife; and being accused for it, You have more reason, said he,
to commend, and give me thanks for it; for had my Master seen the Picture of a
Fool in your Hangings, he would have begged them of the King.

25.
A Countreyman coming to Paris with his Ass loaded, the Beast stuck in a d^rty
place of the Road; wherefore the Peasant struck him with a stick to make him
rise: till at last a Courtier passing by, said, How now Villain, art thou not
ashamed to abuse thy Beast so? If thou strikest him again, I will give thee a
hundred blows with the same Cudgel. The poor man ignorant what to do, pulled
off his Hat till the Gentleman was past, and then began to beat his Beast worse
than before; saying, How now mine Ass, who would have thought that thou had
had friends at Court?

26.
A French Peasant passing by a Ditch with his Cart full of Onions, the Cart
overturned, and the Onions fell into the Water; then seeing there was no
remedy, Morebleau, said he, here wants nothing but salt to make good pottage.

27.
A Stranger being much necessitated, as he walked into the City, to do that no
one could do for him; and being in a place far from any of his acquaintances,
and void of convenience for that purpose, went into an Upholsters Shop, and
asked the Man to show him a Close-Stool, which being done, he asked if he had
no better; Yes Sir, we have, said he, of all colored Velvet: Go then, said he,
and fetch two or three; in the mean time he let down his Breeches and sat
down; the Upholsterer seeing him in that posture, asked him, What he did? I am
trying it, said he, and pulling up his Breeches, I will have none of them, they
are all too low.

28.
An Apprentice of London being brought before the Chamberlain by his Master,
for the sin of incontinency, even with his own Mistress; the Chamberlain
thereupon gave him many Christian Exhortations, and at last mentioned and
pressed the Chastity of Joseph, when his Mistress tempted him with the like
crime of incontinency. I Sir, said the Apprentice, but if Joseph's Mistress had
been as handsome as mine is, he could not have forborne.

29.
It happened in Chancery, when the Council of the Parties set forth the
boundary of the Land in question, by the Plot, and the Council of one part,
said, We lie on this side, my Lrod; and the Council of the other part, said, We
lie on this side; the Lord Chancellor stood up and said, If you lie on both
sides, whom will you have me believe?

30.
It happened that an old and a young Gentleman courted a young Lady, and both
one day met at her House together; the young one being much troubled at the
sight of his Rival, said mocking, Pray Sir, how old are you? To which the old
man answered, 'Twere hard for me to tell you exactly my age, because I never
reckoned it, but I am very certain that an Ass of twenty is older than a man of
forty.

31.
A young Horseman being mounted, was carried away by his Horse, his Friends
fearing the Horse would throw him, called to him to stay him; How should I stay
him, said he, seeing I have no spurs?

32.
A prudent Gentleman in the beginning of the Rebellious Times, as he lay on his
Deathbed, was asked how he would be buried? he answered, With my face
downward, for within a while this England will be turned upside down, and then
I shall lie right.

33.
Sir Nicholas Bacon being appointed Judge for the Northern Circuit, was by a
Malefactor mightily importuned to save his life; but when nothing he could say
did avail, he desired his mercy on the account of kindred: Pretheee, said my
Lord Judge, how comes that in? Why, if it please you, my Lord, your name is
Bacon, and mine is Hog, and those two have ever been so near related, that they
cannot be separated. I but, replied Judge Bacon, you and I cannot be kindred,
except you be hanged; for Hog is not Bacon, until it be hanged.

34.
One seeing the Rump in Council, Oh strange, said he, what fine men be these, I
could willingly work for such as long as I live. What Trade are you pray? said
another; Why truly, replied he, I am a Cord-winder.

35.
Two coming to an Inn, they bid the Hostler give their Horses some Oats;
presently one going down, saw the Hostler robbing the Horses, for which chiding
him, he returned to his Companion, that had trusted too much upon the Hostlers
fidelity: What, said his Companion, have the Horses dined already? Yes, I
believe yours has, replied he, for as I went down just now, I saw the Hostler
taking away.

36
A Gentleman passing by with a very short Cloak, his Friend said to him, Sir,
your Cloak is too short; You Are mistaken, said he, 'twill be long enough before
I get another.

37.
A Countreyman newly come up to London, to sell some Apples, a Collier called
after him to buy some, the poor man, seeing the Colliar, on a sudden set down
his Basket, and ran away crying, I defy the Devil, I defy thee, take them all.

38.
A Gentleman in the Rebellious Times, as he was in his Chamber amongst his
Friends making merry, there came a Musket Bullet through the Window, and
glancing against a Marble Chimney-piece, hit him on the head without farther
damage, then fell at his feet, the Gentleman turning the flatted Bullet with
his fingers, Gentlemen, said he, those that had a mind to flatter me, were wont
to say that I had a good Headpiece in my younger days; but if I do not flatter
my self, I think I have a good Headpiece in my old age, for it is Musket proof.

39.
A Gentleman having lost his sight, his Friends often asked how he could be so
merry; Why, before, said he, I used to go alone, but now I have always company.

40.
Two Innkeepers falling out one day who should entertain a Lord and his
Retinue, that was to pass that way; he that was less happy in the occasion,
stood at his Door, saying to those that passed by, See that envious man,
pointing to the other, ho is willing that every thing he has, should eat me
up; for example, his Cat this morning eat me two pound of Butter. The other to
justify himself, brought out a pair of Scales in the middle of the Street,
weighed his Cat, and said, See good people, what an envious and lying man this
is, the Cat does not weigh a pound and an half with all that is in her, and yet
he says she has eat this morning two pound of his Butter.

41.
A Gentleman, none of the wisest, seeing a House very stately built, told the
Porter it was much of the Italian Mode, and asked whether it were made in
England? the Porter seeing his simplicity, said, No Sir, it was made in Venice,
and brought hither by two Merchants.

42.
A Gentleman complaining to his Friend that he had lost an honest woman,
forasmuch as his Wife was dead. Nay, had she been honest, said the other, she
would never have left you.

43.
A Lord, as he was traveling on the Road, his Coach-horses tired, and forced
him to take up Inn, where being impatient of staying, his Fool said to him, Let
us go, if it please your Lordship, before in the Coach, and the Horses may come
after.

44.
Pace the bitter Fool, was not suffered to come at the Queen, because of his
bitter humor, yet at last some pressed the Queen that he should come to her,
undertaking for him that he should keep compass; so he was brought to her, and
the Queen said, Come on Pace, now we shall hear of our faults. Says Pace, I do
not use to talk of that, which all the Town talks of.

45.
One rode furiously among some Quakers that stood in a yard, hearing the
Speaker from the top of the Barn, and being rebuked by a Brother, Why should
not my Horse, said he, have to do here at the meeting, as well as the rest of
the Asses.

46.
Some merry Companions having been at an Ordinary all day, when by much drink
they began to be mad, began at last to jeer one another concerning their
Mistrisses, whereat one struck the other a box in the ear, and all expected
some bloody event; but the injured person demanded what the other meant,
whether he were in jest or in earnest; In earnest, said the other, whose Collar
had carried him beyond the bounds of Friendship. The other more considerate and
loath to quarrel with his Friend, It Is well you are, said he, for I like not
such jesting.

47.
Several persons of several Callings, being invited to a Feast, it happened
that amongst the rest, there came an old Grammarian, not altogether arrayed
after the mode, nor clothed so well, as many other young Gallants that were
there; this gave occasion when the Wine had made every man's tongue free to
speak his mind, that a young Spark, to put a jest upon the old Grammarian,
said, Pray Sir, since I know you to be well skilled in Genealogy, who was the
Father of Peleus? to which he answered, Tell me first if you can, who was yours?

48.
In the time of Peace, when the Gown only found employment, and Arms, as
useless, were laid aside, a stout Soldier that had formerly done his Prince
great service, but was forgotten, finding it a difficult thing to be admitted
to the Kings presence, whereby he might make himself known to him, stuck
feathers in his hair, nose, and ears, and danced about the Court in a most
antic fashion, till at last the strangeness of the sight, brought the King
himself to be Spectator: Then this Mimick throwing off this disguise, Sir, said
he, I thus arrive at your Majesty's notice in the fashion of a Fool, but can do
you service in the place of a wise man.

49.
An old Knight coming to Court, requested a favor of the King, but received a
Denial of his Petition: wherefore knowing that his age was great, and his hairs
gray, and thinking they were the cause why he did not succeed; he colored his
Beard black, and put on a Peruque, and like a young man came again, and
petitioned the King concerning the same business; his Majesty perceiving the
deceit, said to him, I would be very glad to gratify you in your desire, but
it is not long since I denied it to your Father, and 'twere unjust to grant the
Son what I denied him.

50.
In the flourishing time of Greece, when young Alexander made the World shake,
and the War began to be waged against the Persian Monarchy, the timorous Spies
told one of Alexander's Captains, That the Enemies, beside all their other
Military Preparations, brought so many Archers against him, as would darken the
sky, and exclude the light of the Sun; at which news nothing daunted, It Is good
news for us, said he, that are in a hot country; for we shall fight in the
shade.

51.
In Naples a City of Italy, there happened in a great Siege it endured, that
the Governor made a severe Order, That every man should be put to death, that
being above such an age, did not wear a Sword; but not long after, as he was
riding through the Street, to see how well his Order was put in execution, he
espied a Gentleman without a Sword, and commanded him to be brought before him,
then was the Order read, and he condemned to die the death appointed, which was
to be hanged on the next Sign Post. The Gentleman, after he had pleaded several
things in his own behalf, but could avail nothing; nevertheless desired this
favor, that he might not die so ignominiously, but that the next Gentleman
that passed, might run him through with his Sword: the request being
reasonable, was granted, and the execution prorogued till the next came. Now it
happened that a young Gallant was coming from a Gameing House that way, that
having lost all, so much as the blade of his Sword, which was good Merchandise
at that time, did not dare, in regard of the severe Order, to go home, until a
wooden one was fitted to the handle: This Gentleman was stopped, and the dying
man's case laid open; but this ingenious person, knowing his own insufficiency,
What, said he, must I be a common Executioner? Must I stain my hands in blood
without passion? and be a reproach to all men? Nevertheless this argument
availed nothing, and kill him he must: then putting off his Cloak, he began a
Prayer to this effect, Thou who see all the transactions here below, judge I
pray thee, and vindicate the cause of those that suffer wrong; in especial
manner grant that if this man here ought not to die, this Sword may be turned
into wood. Then drawing it forth, it appeared to be wood; wherefore the dying
Gentleman was released immediately with abundance of joy, and the Wooden Sword
was carried with great solemnity, and hung up in the Cathedral Church, as a
true link to the Chain of Popish Miracles.

52.
In these late times every discourse being of preparations of War, and
proceedings against the Dutch, amongst many other questions, one was so
curious, as to ask one in the company why the Dutch were called Butter-boxes?
It Is, replied the other merrily, because they are spread over the whole world.

53.
A Seaman being extremely dry in the middle of the Fight, was drinking to
another out of a Bottle of Brandy, when at the instant a Bullet coming through
a Port-hole, killed him as he was drinking; wherefore falling down dead, and
the Bottle breaking, A pox light on you, said the other, for a Rogue, to spill
all the Brandy.

54.
There were at Newberry some She Annabaptists, that took upon them to have
Revelations, and therein to see such glorious things as could not be related
nor imagined by others; drawing by such means many poor simple people to be of
their Religion, in hopes of seeing the like glorious Visions. One amongst the
rest told the holy Brotherhood, that she had a Revelation to be taken up into
Heaven on such a night, the rest resolving to take their solemn leave of her,
at the time appointed, all went out with her into the Fields, to see her
glorious Ascension; the night happened to be a Moon-shiny night, and as they
expected, when some Angel should come to fetch her in a Fiery Chariot, a Cloud
covers the face of the Moon, whereupon they began to cry, Behold he comes in
the clouds; but immediately their hopes vanished with the Cloud.

55.
Another Quaker, being Apprentice to a Tradesman in the City of London, became
at last, after he had received the Documents of his Mistress, so Phanatical,
that he would give new names to all things in the Shop; for being a
Habberdasher of Small Ware, if any one came for a Shuttle-cock, he called it a
Flying Cock; if for a Ruler, he called it a Measure of Righteousness; if for
Needles, those he called the Camels impossibility; if for Ribbons, those he
named the Devils Colors; insomuch that he rendered himself incapable of
Trading. One day above the rest, when his Master had invited many Guests to
dinner, he went into the Room, and taking a Stool, carried it to the upper end
of the Table, and sat down thereon covered. His Master much astonished at his
new impudence, especially before so much company, asked him the reason; Why,
said he, I am the Servant of the Living God, and have more right to the
creatures than you.

56.
A Valiant Captain, that had lost his Leg formerly in the Wars, was
nevertheless for his great prudence and courage, made Captain of a Ship, and
being in the midst of an Engagement, a Cannon Bullet took off his wooden
supporter, so that he fell down; the Seamen, forasmuch as few knew he had a
wooden leg, called out for the Surgeon: The Surgeon, a pox on you all, said
he, a Carpenter, a Carpenter.

57.
A severe Schoolmaster having one morning, whipped one of his Boys, saw him as
soon as he came to his place, write something in his Table Book; wherefore
commanding him to bring the Book, and looking therein, he saw that the Lad had
writ down every time he had been whipped at School; wherefore commending him for
so doing, as if the writing them down, should put the faults fresh in his
memory, and make him eschew them; he gave him half a Crown to buy him a
Commonplace Book. The Youth bought a Commonplace Book, and the next day
brought it to School; his Master seeing it, called him out for his Lesson, and
notwithstanding the Boy did very well, whipped him. Pray Sir, said he, let me
know my fault, for I perceive nothing in my self worthy of this punishment? O,
said he, if I do not take this course, you will never fill your Commonplace
Book.

58.
A Citizen of London going along the Streets very hastily, came at last where a
great stop was made by Carts, and other Gentlemen talking together, who knew
him; one of them said to him, seeing him in a passion that he could not pass
suddenly; Others, Sir, have past by, and there was room enough; but it may be
your horns are wider than theirs.

59.
A Valiant Captain, when some of his timorous companions, to hinder the joining
of the Battle, told him their enemies were three times as many as they. Are
they so, said he, no whit dismayed, then I am very glad; for there are enough
to be killed, enough to be taken prisoners, and enough to run away.

60.
One who had always been very jocose in his life time, when he lay on his
Deathbed, his chief Clerk came and desired he would leave him a Legacy: Here,
said he, giving him a Key, in such a Drawer, there is that will make thee
drink; not many hours after he died, and the youth greedily opening the Box,
found naught there but two red Herrings.

61.
A merry Gentleman riding on the Road, saw a Boy foul his Breeches: Why Sirrah,
said he, are you not ashamed to make a fool in your Breeches. Alas Sir, said
he, you make a worse of your Doublet, to button up such an Ass in it.

62.
It Is reported of a certain debaucht person, that he was wont very devoutly, to
say his prayers always in the morning, and then at his departure out of his
House, he would cry, Now Devil do thy worst.

63.
Sir Roger Williams hearing a Spaniard foolishly brag of his Country Sallats,
gave him this answer, You have indeed good Sauce in Spain, but we in England
have dainty Beeves, Veals, and Muttons; and as God made Beasts to live on
Grass, so he made Men to live on Beasts.

64.
When the Trojans sent Ambassadors to Tiberius, to condole the death of his
Father Augustus, a long time after he was dead; the Emperor considering the
unseasonableness of it, requited them accordingly, saying, And I am sorry for
your heaviness, having lost so valiant a Knight as Hector; who was slain above
a thousand years before.

65.
A certain Papist searching to know perfectly concerning the Mass, found at the
end of St. Paul's Epistle, Missa est, and bragged he had found the Mass in the
Bible. Another reading John 1.4. Invenimus Messiam, made the same conclusion.

66.
The Standers by comforting a natural that lay on his Deathbed, told him, That
four proper fellows should carry his Body to the Church; yea, quoth he, but I
had by half rather go thither my self.

67.
Galateus, Duke of Millain, being told of a certain Lawyer, who by his quick
and crafty wit, could draw a fair Glove on a foul hand, thereby multiplying
Suits and wronging the innocent, sent for him, and said, Sir, I owe my Baker
Five hundred pounds, and have no mind to pay him; will you undertake to defend
me, and free me from the Debt? he answered, He would. The Duke therefore first
reproved him sharply for his deceit and wrong dealing, then caused him to be
hanged.

68.
Two good Wives having now well warmed their knees by the fire, and their noses
over a pot and a tossed, fell into a hot dispute concerning their Brewers: Mother
Damnable said her Ale was the best in England, because it was so; and Mother
Louse said her Brewer brewed the best stale Beer in the world.

69.
A Fool as he wandered by the River side, at last clim'd up an Osier, and there
seated himself; not long after one passing by that knew him, asked him, What
he did there? Only gather a few Nuts, says he.

70.
A Boy going through the Streets with a Peck Loaf upon his head, where was a
great concourse of People, hit a Gentleman unawares with the corner of the Loaf
over the face; Why how now you rude Rascal, said the Gentleman, cannot you
see? Spare your breath, replied the youth, I am as well bred as your self.

71.
A poor but witty lad, brought up to the University, and admitted in a
College, could not go to the price of a new pair of Shoes; but when his old
ones were worn out at the toes, had them capt with Leather; whereupon his
Companions began to jeer him for so doing: Why, said he, must they not be
capt, are they not fellows?

72.
A young Man having raised a Maids belly, and the bulk now evidently
manifesting the fact, his Friends and Relations came purposely together to
reprove him; and every one had a saying at him, though in general every one
said, they wondered he should do so and so. Why, what a wondering, said the
young man, do you make, that I should get her with child, is not that usual,
therefore no cause of wonder; but you might have wondered indeed, had she got
me with child.

73.
A Country Peasant had often observed, that there appeared not so many Stars
in the West as in the East; at which the Philosopher much concerned, often made
it his business to walk out at night in the Fields; diligently observing the
West, to see if he could find out the reason: At last he saw a Meteor fall, by
and by another, then two or three together: Nay then, said he, I shall cease to
wonder that there be fewer Stars in the West than in the East, since so many
fall every night.

74.
A Fool fearing to be beaten, went away privately, and hid himself behind some
bushes in the Garden; but when they began to search for him and could not find
him, he peeps over the bush, and cries, You don't see me, you cannot see me.

75.
A Stranger passing through the Temple, had a Piss-pot discharged upon his
head; not long after he meets with a friend, Pray what place call you that?
says he, It Is an Inn of Court, replied the other. And what do they do there?
Why they study the Law. I believe rather, quoth he, they study Physic, they
cast so much water; and Rakehells they are I am sure, for they throw the stools
out of the windows too.

76.
A great Courtier seeing his Jester stumble, Why how now, can you not stand?
says he: Yes, replied he, I can, and stumble and rise again too; but have a
care, for if you fall, perhaps you may never rise.

77.
A Gentleman passing through Cambridge on a foundred Horse, saw a Scholar of
his acquaintance coming to meet him; striving therefore to spare him the
trouble, he whips his Horse, crying, Up Bacon. His Friend asks him the reason
why he called him Bacon? Because, said he, he is Very-lame. Now my Lord Bacon's
Title was Verulam.

78.
Some merry Companions being at a Singing Club, amongst many other Songs and
Catches sung at last that of New Oysters, New Oysters, New Oysters, New, etc.
Whereupon one that stood by, laughed to hear his Friend cry Oysters. His Friend
asked him how he would cry Oysters? Why, replied he, I would cry, O yes, O
yes, O yes, that is, O yes ter.

79.
King James having seen two Plays performed by the Scholars of both
Universities, One of Cambridge, where one named Sleep, acted so well, that the
King commanded him to stop, for fear he should burst with laughter. The other
at Oxford, where one Wake acted so bad, that the King slept the best part of
the Play. His Majesty was pleased to say of them both, that as in Cambridge,
Sleep made him wake, so in Oxford, Wake only made him sleep.

80.
A poor Boy knowing what esteem Learning had in the World, begged under color
of being a poor Scholar; a Gentleman passing by, took pity on him, and asked
him in Latin what his Friends were? whether they were alive? and the like; but
still he cries in the same tongue, Pray Sir pity a poor Scholar. Why you
Rascal, quoth the Gentleman, do you say you are a Scholar, and you understand
not one word of Latin? It Is true, said the Boy, I understand no Latin, and
scarce can read English; and that is the reason I desire you to give something
to a very poor Scholar.

81.
Were I a Prince, says a Country Boy; Why what then? answered hi^ Companion:
Oh then I would eat my Belly full of Bacon, and swing upon a Gate a^^ day long.

82.
Walking through the City in a great throng, a Person of Quality accidentall^
lost his Watch out of his Pocket, of which he complained to his Friend; Alas
Sir* said the other, who can help it, time wi^^ away.

83.
A learned Gentlewoman put two Questions to a young Scholar; the first was, Why
the Infinitive was next to the Optative? of which he said, Because w^ never
mak^ an end of desiring

Secondly, when he had answered her so well, she bid him repeat to her a little
of his Grammar; whereupon he wittily began at Propria quae maribus.

84.
A witty Tavern Boy in the Spring time threw some dirt out aceidentally upon a
Bald-headed Gentleman, who being much incensed thereat, demanded the reason;
Because Sir, said he, since now the New year is begun, the Fields grow green,
the Trees and Plants flourish, and all things look fresh and fair; I thought
your Head was too backward, and wanted dunging.

85.
A learned Gentleman disputing concerning death, said, It was all one to live
or to die. Why do you not die then? said another; Because, replied he, it is
all one.

86.
'Twas the humor of a witty person and a great Jester to a Nobleman, to cry in
fair weather, and to laugh in foul. This seemed contrary to reason, and his
Lord asked him wherefore he did so? Why when it is fair weather, said he, I can
expect nothing but that every minute foul should come; that makes me cry. In
foul weather I always expect that the sky should clear, that makes me laugh.

87.
A virtuous Gentleman being asked by a Knave, what was Piety? What is that to
you, said he, meddle with those things that concern you.

88.
A grave Citizen in London, though not so wise as he should be, talking with
some of his Neighbors, concerning his Shop he had then newly rebuilt after the
fire; Truly, said he, I think I have contrived in to the best advantage; for it
has the Morning Sun all day long in it.

89.
'Twas at first, when the Fashion of white Freeze came up amongst the
Gentlemen, especially for Riding Suits, that a Wise-acre considering that it
was then most in fashion, a lasting and serviceable Garment, asked, If there
were no black of that color, for he had a great mind to have a Coat made of it?

90.
A proud Londoner traveling to Goatam, and meeting a poor fellow coming from
thence, thinking to show his wit, said, Well met Fool of Goatam, how far to the
place of thy nativity? True it is, said the poor man, my Country is a shame to
me, but you proud Londoner are a shame to your Country.

91.
Two men meeting in the street and quarrelling, it came so far at last that one
gave the other a kick in the breech. The people much admired the others
patience, inviting him to revenge that injury: What, says he, if an Ass kicks
me, must I go to law with him.

92.
The day proving very windy, wherein one was to perform his journey, who was
scarce ever before farther than his Street, his friends dissuaded him, saying,
The wind would be very troublesome to him. Oh, let me alone, said he, I will
ride out of the wind.

93.
One being demanded, Why learned men frequented rich men's Palaces, but rich
seldom visited the learned? answered, That the first knew what they wanted,
the later did not.

94.
One exclaiming against another that ran away in his debt, A Pox light on him,
said he, I am sure I lent him Six and forty good shillings all in Half Crowns.

95.
An impudent Strumpet seeing a poor Countreyman receive Ten pounds, seized on
him, and brought him before the Judge, swearing he would have ravished her, nay
that he did; insomuch that the poor man, who never had to do with her,
notwithstanding all his innocence, could not clear himself of the accusation;
and still she urged that he ought to marry her: so the business was put to a
public Trial, where at last, I know not by what means, it was concluded that
the man should give her Ten pounds to clear the business. The poor man, after
he had delivered her the money, made such unfeigned protestations of his
innocence, that moved the Judge to pity, and to believe that he was indeed
wronged; wherefore he said to the poor man, Go run after her quickly, and if
thou can get thy money from her, thou shall have it; thus overtaking her, he
sets upon her, but proves so weak in the matter, that she beat him heavily
within sight of all the people. Then the Judge commanded her to be brought
back, and said, Could this man ravish thee, and thou are so able to resist him?
Give him his money, and pay him all his charges; and for your wickedness I
shall command that you be well whipped.

96.
When Guineys were first coined, they were very rare in the Country, and happy
was he that could see one; one therefore that came from London, more gallant
than wise, seeing the Country people so eager to see them, Alas, said he,
throwing down one or two, these are so common at London, that you cannot
receive forty shillings, but you shall have five or six whether you will or no.

97.
One lighting a Candle, and striving to stick it in a Candlestick, it often
fell out of the Socket, at which he said in choler, That he thought the Devil
did possess the Candle. Why do you wonder, said his Companion, if it cannot
stand? Do you not see that it is lightheaded?

98.
An ingenious person being asked the interpretation of an obscure Riddle, said
nothing, which made the propounder so much the more desirous to hear his
answer. Pardon me, for why should I, said he, lose that, which as it is, yields
me so much trouble?

99.
A poor man willing to embrace any honest employment, offered his service to a
Gentleman at such a price; Why, I can buy a Fool, said be, mocking the poor
man's condition, for that rate: Do then, replied he, and you will have two.

100.
Two men scolding, the wiser went away, but the other followed after; brawling,
and condemning him for running away? Alas, said he, though you have power to
give bad words, I have not to hear them.

101.
A fine mouthed Scholar, seeing a Sparrow mute on his companions hat, said, to
put the matter in fine language, Sir, A Sparrow has untrussed a point upon your
hat.

102.
A Schoolmaster being very angry one day with one of his young Scholars for
writing his name upon the wainscote, went about to whip him; but the Boy
begging earnestly, the Master said, He Is a Fool and ever shall, that writes his
name upon the Wall: Sirrah, What say you to that? To which the Lad made answer,
He Is a Fool and ever shall, that takes a Wainscote for a Wall.

103.
One being much entreated to warm his fingers, I thank you Sir, said he, I do
not use to stand upon my hands.

104.
A young Gentleman, to save the lash, threw himself at his Masters feet; but
being afterward blamed by his Friends for so debasing himself, It Is not my
fault, said he, but his, if his ears be in his feet.

105.
A young Scholar drinking Mum with a Gentleman, the Gentleman thinking to pose
him, said, Pray how do you decline (...)? but he wittily said, (...).

106.
A witty Scholar once asked money o^ his Patron, Why, have you not often told
(...) says his Patron, that Scholars never wa^ed money? It Is true, said he, but
I a^ now a little in haste, I will talk with you that by and by. So his Patron
gave hi^ money, which having received, No^ says he, do Scholars want money?

107.
One being chid by his Friends (...) wearing his nails so long, I can ass^ you,
said he, I pare them every foot.

108.
After the sad and dismal Fire in Lond^ when nothing was left standing but
ruin^ one passing by as they were pulling dow^ a wall; Have a care, have a
care, cr^ he to the Laborers, or you will pull dow^ the foundation upon your
head.

109.
An arch youth supping among his fe^low Scholars at a Boarding-School when they
were, seeing them carve too busi^ and cut him clearly out of Common moreover
when they had done, to jeer hi^ and throw the bones at him, went privi^ behind
one of them, and lifting up his le^ like the creature that feeds upon bone^
pissed upon him.

110.
A Scholar of Cambridge in the time of the Assizes, seeing a Boy in the
Castleward throwing stones at the Gallows, ^ave a care, Sirrah, said he, you do
not (...) the mark.

111.
Some Companions talking concerning Minerals and Metals, one started the
Question at last, Why the two noblest Metals, Gold and Silver, one looked but
pale, the other so white? Because, answered another, they have both so many
that ly in wait for them.

112.
Look, look, said a Scholar to his Companion, how the Townsmen laugh at you?
And other Fools, perhaps, replied the other, laugh at them; but neither do they
mind fools, nor I them.

113.
A Tobaconist, whose wits were now grown dry with smoking, and his brains
probably consumed to ashes, when some commended this man's Tobacco, others that,
Say what you please, Gentlemen, quoth he, but a clearer Tobacco you never saw,
for I am sure it has neither leaves nor stalks.

114.
The same person probably, hear^ much swearing in a Bowling green, sai^ Fie
Gentlemen, It Is Gods great men the Bowling Green does not fall upon yo^ heads.

115.
It Is farther reported by some, th^^ the same man sitting at Supper, his C^
passed too and fro through his Arms offending his mouth with her tail; whe^^
upon in a rage Don Quixot like, he c^ off the tip of her tail most valiantly: ^
think now, Mistress Puss, I have given y^ an Ear mark. The Cat taking it ill,
for the present absents her self all that night but the next morning, knowing
her M^ster was a man that never let the Sun se^ upon his anger; she came after
her wonted manner, to express her kindness to him by standing in his way. Why
how now you troublesome Bitch, says he, are you come again? I thought I had
given you your breakfast last night?

116.
A young Boy throwing stones one day amongst a crowd of people, Have a care,
says a Gentleman, passing by, perhaps you may hit your Father.

117.
A Carpenter being at work in a Bowling Green, was asked, what he was about? I
am a making, said he, a Bench for (...) standers by, to sit upon.

118.
The first night King Charles the First came into Ragland Castle, his Majesty
desired to see the great Tower, where his Lordship used to keep his Treasure,
and spoke to Doctor Baily to fetch the Keys. He ran down to the Marquess, and
acquainted him with the Kings pleasure, who would needs bring the Keys himself
to the King. When the King saw the Marquess bringing the Keys himself, he said,
My Lord, There are some men so unreasonable, (...) to make me believe, that
your Lordship has good store of Gold yet left within this Tower; but knowing
how I have exhausted you, could never have believed it, until now I see you
will not trust the Keys with any but your self. To which the Marquess answered,
Sir, I was so far from giving your Majesty any such occasion of thought by this
tender of my duty; that I protest unto you, I was once resolved your Majesty
should have lain there, but that I was loath to commit you to the Tower.

119.
A Scholar meeting a poor ignorant Peasant on the Road, How far friend, say^
he, to Cambridge? By my faith Sir, say^ he, I do not know, but from Cambridge
t^ this Town is counted seven miles.

120.
One having sent for a Physician to his Daughter, that was desperately ill; the
Doctor being come, and having examined the Case how she was seeing her lie on
her back, advised her to lie rather on her side: Ay Sir, said her Father, I
have always told her, her bac^ was the best side to lie upon; and she would
never believe me.

121.
A certain person being asked by hi^ friend, why he wore his Stockings with the
wrong sides outward; Oh, said he being forced to wear the one so, I turn the
^ther also; that it may not be so easily perceived. But pray, why, quoth the
other, ^ you wear one with the wrong side outward* Why, because, said he, it
has a hole ^ the other side.

122.
A Crew of boon Companions, in the height of their mirth, began to be captions
and quarrel; so Thomas threw a piece of a Tobacco-pipe in John's face; but
Thomas denied it and cleared himself. Well 'twas ill done of you Thomas though,
quoth John, whoever did it.

123.
Two Scholars had made a match one night to go steal Rabbets in a Warren, the
one that was set to watch, when the Rabbets came, cried out, Ecce cuniculi
multi; at which the Coneys ran again into their Burrows. The others seeing the
short spoiled, chid him for so doing. Why who knew, says he, that they
understood Latin?

124.
One quarrelling in his Cups with his Companion at the Tavern, was so furious
and violent, that he would have beaten him immediately: and being hindered from
striking by the rest of the Company, You shall not think to escape so, said he,
in a rage, I protest I will kick you down stairs wheresoever I meet you.

125.
A Gentleman taking compassion of ^ poor fool that went up and down the Streets
almost naked in the extremity o^ Winter, gave him an old Coat; not lon^ after
one called him and gave him a ha^ penny loaf: Oh pray, quoth he, to the Donor,
let me leave my coat till I have carried home my half penny loaf, and I will
fetch my coat another time.

126.
One sent for a Physician to come to his Cousin, whose eyes were very bad and
after the Doctor had seen the Patient who was indeed in a very desperate
condition: Pray Sir, says the Gentleman, how does my Cousin? The Doctor, who was
always of a very debonaire humor and that by his facetious sayings could
comfort the weakest Patient, replied, Sir, you need not doubt of your Cosin's
health; he is well enough if he can see it.

127.
A very fat Gentleman riding through a Country Town, his Belly sticking out
before him, the people cried aloud to him, That he had mistaken, in placing his
Port-mantle before him. To which he replied, Where should I place it better
when I come amongst so many Rogues and Thiefs?

128.
One going a shooting in the hard weather, would have borrowed some money of
his friend; You have no need of money, said the other merrily, for if in any
place you have any thing to pay, you may leave your Gun to discharge the shot.

129.
When King Henry the Eighth passed by Kings-Colledge Chapel in Cambridge, that
famous Fabric built by King Henry the VI, his Jester said to him, Harry, (...)
and I built this fine Chapel.

130.
A Gentleman eating a very hot Custard, let a great fart, but to save the
shame, being before much honorable Company; It Is well, said he, you are but,
otherwise I would have batcht you out.

131.
Three men gave their Hostess Forty pounds to keep for them, with this charge,
not to deliver the money to any one single, unless they came all three
together: Not long after one came for the money, and by words and many great
signs that he came from the rest, got the money, and then went away beyond Sea.
The others hearing of this, came and demanded the reason, why she parted with
the money contrary to the charge given her; and thereupon sued her at Law for
the Forty pound; at last by the force of one Councellor the poor woman was
almost cast and forced to pay the said sum: when a Lawyer who had diligently
observed the Cause, started up and said to the Judge, The charge given to this
woman, my Lord, concerning the money, was to deliver it to these three all
together, and no otherwise; let these two bring the other with them, and their
money is ready to be paid down.

132.
A wise Judge, when a party had forged a Will, and many swore to it, that they
were the last words that came out of the deceased persons mouth; in so much
that the true heir was almost cast; But were they not put into his mouth, said
he, which words silenced all, and recovered the Estate.

133.
A certain Customer asking his Barber, Where he might have some water to wash
his hands? Yonder, said he, at the other end of the room you will find some, in
that empty Tub.

134.
One speaking of the wind, said, It was the most changeable thing in the world;
for I went, says he, up Cheapside in the morning, and it was in my back; and in
less than half an hour afterward, when I returned, I found it in my face.

135.
A Carpenter passing by with a Deal Board on his Shoulder, hit a Gentleman on
the Head with the end of it; whereupon he perceiving his fault, cried, Have a
care Sir; Why, quoth he, do you intend to hit me again.

136.
Some Gentlemen having been at Bowls, went at last to a Shooting Match, but
being unexperienced in that Art, erred much from the Mark on either side;
whereupon one that stood by, went and sat him just at the bottom of the But:
and being asked the reason, Because, said he, I am afraid if I stand any where
else they should hit me.

137.
One complained much of the Glasier, saying, he was very unreasonable to ask so
much for Soder as two pence a foot; Truly, said another, I think it is always
So dear.

138.
A proper young and handsome Gentleman fell in love with an old, rich, and
miserable Counselors only Daughter, but despairing ever to get her Fathers
consent, because of the inequality of his Estate compared with hers; he made it
his business first to make sure of her good will, and then he used this witty
Stratagem: He goes one day to her Father, and clapping five Guineys into his
hand, desired his best advice in the case he should acquaint him with, which
was, That he loved a fair and young Lady, had her consent, and nothing was
wanting but the good will of her friends; which nevertheless he feared he could
never obtain, for such certain reasons, without some subtle Stratagem: The old
man, on whom the Gold began to work, in hopes of another such Fee, puts him off
till the next day, that he might the better consider of the matter. The young
Gentleman therefore failed not to return at the time appointed, with the other
five Guineys to hasten the matter, whereupon the old Councellor told him there
was but one way, that was, He should get the Lady privately to be married to
him; and to that end he would give him a Note to a certain Priest of his
acquaintance, that should join them in Matrimony with all speed and secrecy.
Thus the young man by his subtilty outwitted the old Councellor, got a Note
under his own hand to marry his Daughter, and then brought his Wife to ask her
Fathers blessing: which Stratagem so pleased the old man, that not respecting
his Sons low condition, he gave his Daughter a large Dowry.

139.
A Clown newly come up to London, that was a rich Farmer's Son, yet but poor in
Clothes at the present, was hugely taken at the sight of a Sedan, and bargained
with the Bearers to carry him to such a place. The Sedan-men seeing this
Clown's curiosity, unhasp'd the bottom of the Sedan privately and took him ^n;
where b^ing seated, when they beg^n to hoist the Sedan, the Countreyman stood
on the ground with his legs: thus did they hurry him through all the dirty
kennels in their way, till they brought him to his Lodging This man not knowing
but others used to be carried, or rather driven after the same manner, gave
them their due hire, and when he returned into the Country again, began
amongst the rest of his news, and all the fine things he had seen at London, to
tell That he had been carried in a Sedan wherefore every one was desirous to
know how it was? Why it is, said he, like (...) Watch house, only it is covered
with leather; and were it not for the name of a Sedan, one had as good go on
foot.

140.
One meeting his Friend in the Street, where was a great stop of Coaches, that
none could pass; asked him where he was going? To the Market, replied the other
to buy some meat. Well then go by, said he, (...) you can, farewell.

141.
A Countreyman coming to London into a Booksellers Shop, to buy a Bible, the
man showed him one that had a Patch in the Cover; the Countreyman displeased at
that, would see more; whereat the Master came out, asking his man what his
Chapman would have? Sir, said his boy, he wants a Bible, and he does not like
this. Then his Master looking on it, Why Sirrah, said he, to his Apprentice,
have I but one double covered Bible in all the Shop, and you must show every
one this. O pray, said the Countreyman, let me have it by all means, if it be
double covered; for I would fain have a lasting one. And so paid down the price
most willingly.

142.
Thomas Frog and Mr. John Rain, meeting accidentally at a broad kennel in the
Street, and knowing one another, Frog was still hindering Rain, and would fain
be leaping over; but Rain striving to get over, Frog began to scold at him for
dirting his Stockings. I think these Frogs are always croaking in wet weather,
says Rain. So you must expect, said Frog again, till the Rain be over.

143.
An University Scholar being hot in discourse at the Table in the Hall, and so
loud that the Fellows heard him, the Dean sent to him to be quiet, after this
manner by the Servitor, Vir sapit qui pauca loquitur: To which he returned this
answer, Vir loquitur qui pauca sapit.

144.
A Gentleman being choked with a Honeycomb, his friends began to bemoan him.
Why make you such lamentation, said another, never man died a sweeter death.

145.
One seeing a Ladies Legs, as she lifted up her Coats a little too high, he
said to her, Madam, you have a very handsome pair of Twins. You are mistaken
Sir, said she, for I have had one between them.

146.
A Minister marrying a couple of his friends, told them afterward in
merriment, that if after they disliked, they should come to him again, and he
would un-marry them. So this Country Couple go home, and are very merry for
the first week or two; but at last, dissension arising between them, they both
came again to the Priest to be divorced. Hereupon he fetches out a great
Hatchet, and asks who had the greatest desire to leave the other first? For,
says he, I have married you till death you do depart; and therefore it is
expedient that I kill one of you.

147.
A Barber being a Tobaconist, and selling both Hair and Tobacco, accidentally
in the same ounce to his Customer; for as much as some loose Hair scattered by
chance into the Tobacco; the next time his Customer met him and complained of
his selling such bad Tobacco, that was full of Hair. Truly, replied he, I get
much by selling such pennyworths; an ounce of Hair that costs me ten shillings,
for three pence.

148.
A tall Minister told a short one scoffingly, That he looked in a Pulpit like a
Collar of Brawn in a Dish. And you, replied he, look like a Pestle in a Mortar.

149.
At a great Feast, where many Guests were present, there was served up amongst
other good Dishes, a great Turkey Pie, i^ whose sides the Cats had eat a great
hole this gave the Master occasion to be angry with his Servants for their
negligence: but one of his Guests said, Pray blame not your Servants Sir, it is
enough it has escaped the Turky-Pie-Cats so well.

150.
'Twas at the same Feast probably, that a Rice Fool was brought up to the
Table, when many of the Guests doubted what it was. One wittily said, Per risum
multum possis cognoscere stultum.

151.
Some Gentlemen quarrelling at Table, one to reprehend the other of his great
use of Tobacco and the foulness of his Mouth, called him a foul Tobacco-Pipe.
The other readily told him he was a dented Quart-pot. The strangeness of this
Metaphor stuck in his mind, and made him very urgent to know the reason;
Because, said he, you seem to have more in you than you have.

152.
A Gentleman of the Temple being newly come up to London, told his Friend, he
had brought up a Horse with him, and would sell it. What have you him at your
Chamber? said the other.

153.
A mere Scholar sent one day for Tim the S^^th to hang up two Pictures, and
asking him, when he had done, what he must have? Sir, says Tim, there are two
Ten-penny Nails, and what you please for my labor. Well there Sirrah are two
Shillings, said, the Gentleman, that is, a Groat for thy pains, and twenty
pence for thy Nails; Go thy ways.

154.
A Humorist calling for a reckoning, found there was ten pence to pay;
wherefore breaking the Glass he had in his hand against the wall, Dam you,
there is a shilling Sirrah for you; said he to the Tapster.

155.
A man being abused by many scandalous reproaches of his neighbor, as calling
him Rogue, his Wife Whore, and the like, sued him at Law; but finding after
much trouble those words would bear no Action, he was so incensed, that as he
stood in the middle of the Court, he cried aloud, My Lord, you are a Rogue,
your Wife ^s a Whore, and your Children are all Bastards.

156.
Two Boys going together to School, met with one whose name was Pontius Vrben,
a Rag of the Law, that was not well in his wits; Lets us call yonder fellow
Pontius Pilate, says one of them, and then ran away: Whereupon the man became
so furious, that the other was forced also to double his pace, and save himfelf
in the School house: Presently in came the man, and would have beaten him, but
that the Master took him off, and promised to whip him soundly: So at every
l^sh he asked him if ever he would say ag^in Pontius Pilate? To which he
answered, crying, No Sir. The next d^y at Prayers, when the Boy came to these
words in the Creed, Who suffered under Pontius Pilate, he remembered his fault,
and said, Who suffered under Pontius Urben.

157.
Other young Scholars went up into a Stee^le to get a Sparrow-Hawk's Nest, that
was in a hole of the Wall; and because it was just over a Window, but just out
of their reach, they agreed that the strongest of the two should hold out a
Board for the other to stand upon and take the Nest; this done, he that took
the Nest, called out to the other, That 'twas a brave Nest, and there were five
in it, but that he would have three: Nay, but I will have three, says he that
held the Board, or I will let you fall: and thereupon the other not consenting
to it, he let him fall. The youth, though he fell very high, when he came to
the ground, and received no damage, he ran away crying, Now you Rogue you shall
have none of them.

158.
If I were unmarried, said one, then would I wed again. Marry then, quoth the
other, you would still be in the same lock.

159.
One returning from the Market, where he had bought a new pair of Shoes, met in
his way with a poor young woman that begged on him. Truly, said he, I have no
money to give thee, but if thou will let me lie with thee, thou shall have
these Shoes. The reward, and a little good nature, made her willing to put on
the Shoes; but when he had done the work, he would have his Shoes again, and
notwithstanding her resistance took them by force; saying, Let him that rides
thee next shoe thee for me.

160.
A Countreyman was used when he clove wood, to cry Hem at every stroke, and his
Wife observing it, that then he struck with most force, bid him at night, when
they were together, cry Hem* No, said he, I must not do so now; for I intend
only to bore, not to cleave thee.

161.
Ben J^hnson, the great Poet, when the Bishop sent him from his Table an
excellent Dish of Fish, but without Drink, said, Mittitur in disco mihi piscis
ab Archiepisce
po ne ponatur, quia potus non mihi datur.
In a Dish came Fish
From the Arch BisHop
was not there,
Because there was no Beer.


162.
One having a Horse that was very hardy, and had but little stomach, though
with himself he might easily by degree bring him to live without Hay or Oats
and so subtracted daily something from his Meat, till at last the Horse died;
an^ when afterward he was carrying him o^ in a Cart to lay him in the Fields
for the Crows, and his neighbors asked him how his Horse came to die? Why,
thought, said he, to have made him live ^ nothing; and just as I brought him to
it, he died.

163.
Mr Fuller and Mr. Sparrowhawk, walking together, amongst other merry
discourse, said Fuller, What difference is there between an Owl and a
Sparrowhawk? Why, said Sparrowhawk, It Is fuller in the body, fuller in the
face, and fuller all over.

164.
A wise Barber having been to trim a Doctor at night, was offered a Candle to
light him down stairs; which having taken, and light himself down, he brought
up again, and returned thanks, and so went away in the dark.

165.
A Welshman hearing another Malefactor that was tried just before him, say,
concerning a Mare he had stolen, That he brought it up from a Colt; when he came
to be examined of a Sword he had sharked, said, That truly, by St. David, 'twas
his own; for he bred it up of a Dagger.

166.
One commended another before much company, for having very handsome Legs. Yes,
but, says the simple Rogue, I have got two pair of Stockings on.

167.
One seeing his son do untowardly, Why Sirrah, says he, did you ever see me do
so, when I was a boy?

168.
A blundering Doctor going out one night wi^h his m^n to see a fire that was in
Cambridge, on the backside of the Town; and co^^ing amongst the Crowd: Go
Thomas, said he, to his Man, see how the fire is. But his man being hindered by
those that laded water out of a Ditch, from going over the Bridge; returned to
his Master, and told him he could not get near. What, said he, you are afraid
(...) be burnt in your bed, now let me come and see.

169.
Mr. Ralph Amner of Windsor, commonly called the Bull-Sp^aker; when he was very
sick, and at the point to die* Well, said he to his friends, when I am dead,
write only this on my Tomb for my Epitaph, Here lies honest Ralph, as dead as
any man living.

170.
One said, Doctor Wilson the Music Master, when he first fell sick, looked very
thin; Can you wonder at that, said another, when Camelion like he lives by the
Air?

171.
The Gardiners place of a College being void, a certain person put in for it;
the Dean asked him if he understood Gardening? No truly, replied he, but I will
hire one to do the work. Nay then, said he, you cannot expect to have the
place; and so sent him away. But as he was going througb the Court, he calls
after him, Now it comes in my mind, says he, there is a place void, which I
think would do very well for you; and that is the Greek Professor's. Alas Sir,
said the man, I understand not that language. Oh but, replied the Dean, you may
hire one to do the work for you.

172.
When Mr. Button died, Od slife, said one, are graves become Button h^les?

173.
One praying in Paul's Cathedral, his Hat was stolen from him; of which when he
complained to the standers by, You should, said one, have watched as well as
prayed.

174.
An impotent Gentleman having married a rich young Gentlewoman, whom he could
not satisfy, gave a young lusty Gallant Fifty pounds a year to do the work:
But his Waiting-man seeing this Gallant one day with his Mistress, ran to
acquaint his Master; but he, fained as if he were in a sleep, and gave no
answer: which made him cry the more urgently, That his Marriage Bed was
defiled. When his Master saw he would not be quiet, Peace, peace, says he, I
give him Fifty pound a year for doing it* Ah, Sir, replied the man, had I known
that, I would have done it for half the money.

175.
When a Tallow-Chandler in the Neighborhood died, one said, 'Twas strange that
he who made so many weeks, could make his days no longer.

176.
A notable Strumpet having given her Footman a new Livery, 'twas his fortune as
he went on some Errand, to meet a Gentleman that knew his Lady; this Gentleman
calls after him, desiring to know of him whom he served; the Footman told him
such a Lady. A Lady, quoth the other, she is a damned Whore. So the Footman in
vindication of his Mistrisses honor, drew; but the Gentleman, more expert at
his weapon, soon disarms him, and kicks him into the kennel, and spoils all his
bravery. The Footman coming home in that pickle, tells his Lady how it came;
saying, He hoped, that since in vindication of her Ladyships honor, he had
hazarded his life, she would be pleased to give him a new Livery. Begone you
Rogue, says she, I shall have enough to do, to give you a new Livery for every
one that calls me whore.

177.
A Welchman shitting from a Bridge, Good shit, by Davy, said he, what a Devil
no plump; for he expected to hear his excrement fall in the water, but all the
while shit in his Coat-pocket.

178.
I see you do all under color, said the Glazier to the Painter, seeing him
daubing some Rails. Go your ways for a Rogue, replied he, you will never leave
picking quarrels.

179.
Three great Masters of their Trade, a Vaulter, a Barber, and a Fencer,
contended together, who was the best experienced in his Art. The Vaulter leap^
and sat a Stag in his full course, the Barber shaved a Goat running, the
Fencer in a rainy day, so brandished his Sword over his head, that no drop of
rain fell upon him. Let him judge which was the best that believes the Story.

180.
A Fool that owed a Carpenter a shrewd good turn, finding him one day in a
sleep upon a Form, took the Axe and cut off his head; then cama into the House
laughing: whereof when he was asked the reason, It is, said he, to think how
the Carpenter will look for his head when he wakes.

181.
Two Fools lying together, a great dispute arose; Who should lie in the middle
of those two, and could not be ended; till one more wise, laid a Broomstaff
between them.

182.
A Maid accused a youth for ravishing her before the Justice, This is a great
^rime; said he, indeed; and did he never ^^e with you before? If he did --
then. ^ses, if it please you Sir, said she, at least six or seven times.

183.
Some merry Companions talking of what rare pieces of Clockwork they had seen,
one said he had seen something far stranger, which was a Merchanick that pulled
out of his Pocket three little Cocks, one he called a French, the other a
Dutch, the third an English one; then taking the French one, he struck him over
the head, this made the French Cock cry out, Parley veu Francois Monsieur. The
Dutch Cock being struck in like manner, cried, Give me a little English Beer.
Here he ended his Story, whereupon the Company, and one especially, was very
desirous to know what the English Cock said? Why, replied he, it cried, Put
your Nose here, pointing to his Breech, Put your Nose here.

184.
A Physician being to examine a Lad, asked him, Why sick Persons were said to
be Patients? Because, said he, they suffer so much by the Physician.

185.
One said to his Friend, Sir you are as wise as Solomon. The other replied, And
you are as wise as Socrates. Why Socrates? Because, said he, Sciebat tantum se
nihil scire.

186.
One told his Lady of Pleasure she was very fruitful. How can that be, Sir,
said she, since I never had any children? That Is nothing, Madam, said he,
nevertheless you bear many.

187.
Two Gentlemen, a tall and a short one, woed the same Lady; and her Friends
liking both, resolved to put it to her choice which she would have: Then
viewing both well, and comparing their proportions with her desires; seeing one
short, the other tall and lusty; I will, said she, have the long one, if all
things are proportionable.

188.
One said, A Covetous Man was never satisfied. Why so? said his Friend.
Because* replied he, he thinks nothing enough. Why then, said the other, he is
satisfied with least, if nothing be enough for him.

189.
One told his Wife there was a Law coming out, That all Cuckolds should be
drowned. O pray Husband, said she, then learn to swim.

190.
One called another Bastard, that was so indeed; therefore wittily he answered,
Children and Fools tell truth,

191.
A Gentlewoman and her Maid being to ^et up some Clothes against Christmas
day, had so delayed the time to the very live, that she her self, her Maid, and
a hired Washerwoman, were all little enough to dispatch them. On the Eve
therefore, betimes in the morning, they ^ell to work; and at Breakfast, Here,
says the Mistress to her Maid, fetch a Quart of Ale. Why Mistress if you
please, said the Washerwoman, I will j^yn my penny, and we may have three
pints. And I will join mine too, if you please, said the Maid, and we will have
two Quarts. Well then, said the Mistress, bring three Quarts; we shall work the
better: so there is my Groat. Then fell these three jolly Washerwomen to tossed it
and tipple it so long, till it lay raw upon their Stomachs forsooth; and then
it came in the Maids head, that a little Brandy would do very well to take away
that rawness; and therefore offered her penny toward it: the hired Woman was
right, and offered hers. And here is my two pence, said the Mistress. Oh, said
the Maid, here is a penny too much, what shall we do? Why you and I, said the
Washerman, will put our pence a pitt^ more, and we may have half a pint. This
they fell to the Brandy, and at last truly the Mistress found her self very
sleepy, and would needs go lie on the Bed to take a little nap to refresh her
self; the Maid something drowsy, followed after: and the poor Woman in the
Kitchen, taking the advantage, stretched her self out by the fire. Thus they lay
fast till next morning, when the Maid awaking, rose and found the Woman
sleeping in the Kitchen and the fire out; then running to her Neighbors to
light some Charcoal, to kindle the fire, least her Mistress should be angry;
she found there the Roast Beef on the Spit, and great preparations for
^omething extraordinary. So she asked the Maid who dined with them that day,
that they made such great provision? Why, said she, it is Christmass-day. The
Maid astonished, ran to acquaint her Mistress, yet could scarce persuade her of
the truth, till the Bell toled to Church and took away their doubting.

192.
At a Feast, where many Citizens and their Wives were met, the chief of their
discourse being about Cuckolds; one asked the reason why the men wore the
horns, when the women only were in fault? That is, said another, because the
man is the head, and where would you have the horns grow else.

193.
A Country Schoolmaster, read inga Lesson to his Boys, concerning the Virtues
in Moral Philosophy, gave them this general Rule to know Virtues from Vices;
That Virtues consisted in the middle, and Vices were extremes: The next day
when he examined, he bid one of his Scholars give an example; and the Boy
instanced in Virginity. Why Sirrah, said he, who told you Virginity was a
Virtue? You did Sir, you said that all Virtues consisted in the middle, and so
does Virginity.

194.
A conceited person would fain know of his friend what others thought of him?
Why replied he, you appear to the wise foolish, to fools wise; what think you
of your self?

195.
A Gentleman, that had many Children, was saying one day to his friend, That
his Wife was more fertile than his Land. That may well be, said he, for if you
are a weary, or will not take pains to make her so, others will.

196.
When one talking of Sir Francis Drake's good success, related how often he
came home in safety from several long Voyages. Truly it is strange, said
another, in all that time he never was duckt,

197.
One following his Master on foot, and stroaking his Horses buttock, the Horse
kicked him over the shins; wherefore he took up a stone to throw at him: but
instead of hitting the Horse, he hit his Master over the back. This made his
Master turn about, and ask what was the matter? Alas Sir, said his man, holding
his Leg with his hand, your Horse has almost lamed me. Well then replied his
Master, I must put him away; for he kicked me but just now also over the back,
and 'twas God's mercy, he did not dash out my brains.

198.
One said that such a pocky person was very ugly and wondered that any woman
would be so mad as to accompany him. Why so? said another, he is Ven-ustus
enough.

199.
A man having been a long journey out of Town, for the more speed of his
business, rid post home; and after he was at Supper, and in Bed with his Wife,
he said to her, My Dear, you must not expect any kind caresses from me to
night; for I am so weary that I cannot stir. This caused his Wife to curse in
her heart those that had invented the post. A few days after walking with his
Wife in the yard, he spied the Cock sitting in the Sun asleep by the Henns,
without following them. Then he asked his Wife what made the Cock so dull and
sleepy by his Hens? I do not know, Husband, said she, unless he has ridden
post.

200.
A Captain having lost one eye by a Musket shot in the late Wars, the other
became distempered ever after, and often ran with water. This made a friend of
his ask him one day, Why that eye that was well, wept so much? Alas, said he,
how should it do otherwise, having lost its only brother.

201.
One told his friend merrily he was bewitched, for as much as his head was all
in one lump: And you my friend, replied the other, I am afraid are mad; for
your heart is not on the right side.

202.
A Lady going to visit a Gentlewoman of her acquaintance, took her Maid along
with her, which was very simple and ignorant; and it happened, as they came
away, that in straining complements, there escaped a fart; not a thundering
one, but a Lady's fart; born before its time. At this accident she became very
much ashamed, and to excuse her self, she put it upon the Maid, saying, Get you
hence you stinking slut. The Maid being wrongfully accused, as all the Company
knew, went about to excuse her self: but her Mistress persisting, made her hold
her tongue; and so took leave of the company. Afterward when she was out and
alone with her Maid, she said, How now impudence, how durst you contradict me?
Did you not see I did it to save my credit before the company? And that it
would have been better, they should have thought it had been you, than I. The
Maid begged pardon, saying, She did not think in the least of that. Go, go, you
are a beast, said her Mistress, and by your dullness make me suffer shame.
Whereupon the poor innocent Maid, to repair her fault, went back privately to
the House whence they came, and entered into the Room where all the Company was,
laughing still at the pleasant Dispute between the Lady and her Maid: Then
making a great reverence, she said aloud, Gentlemen and Ladies, I declare
freely, that the fart which was let here just now, I take upon my self. Which
caused the Company to redouble their laughter at the simplicity of the Maid.

203.
Some unlucky Lads in the University, bearing a spite to the Dean for his
severity toward them, went secretly one night and daubed the Rails of his
Staircase. The Dean coming down in the dark, foul'd his hands in the dung; at
which much enraged, he resolved to make examination amongst all those that were
most likely and suspected to do it: but chiefly he sent for one and laid it on
him, as being most suspected to be the Author. This the Lad utterly denies, but
the Dean and the Fellows being still more urgent upon him to confess the
matter; Truly, said he, I did it not, but if you please, I shall tell you who
had a hand in it. Here the Dean thought to have found the truth, and thereupon
asked him whose? Your Worships Sr, said the Lad; which caused him to be
dismissed with great applause for his ingenuity.

204.
A Clown bringing a Letter to a Gentleman's House, delivered it in haste to a a
great Baboon that stood at the Door in a Scarlet laced Coat; the Baboon soon
tears the Letter to pieces. The Gentleman having heard of the business, when he
met the Countreyman next, began to scold at him bitterly for not bringing him
the Letter. I will assure you, replied the Peasant, I delivered it to your Son
at the Door. My Son, says the Gentleman, you Fool, 'twas a Baboon. Truly,
answered he, I thought it was your Son, he was so like you.

205
A certain Apothecary in London, seeing a young Rustic Fellow that looked
somewhat simply on the matter; with a Hare on a stick, which he was carrying to
market to sell; said to his Companions, Sirs, 'Twill be worth our while to get
this Peasants Hare from him by some pleasant stratagem, and that shall be this,
I will ride up before, and make him believe that it is a Cat which he carries,
and will be judged by you. Thus he accosts the Fellow, saying, Friend how does
your Wife, whither carry you that Cat? How, said he, what do you take this Hare
for a Cat? A Hare, said the Gentleman, laughing, why it is a Cat, thou Fool,
can not thou distinguish between a Hare and a Cat? I will lay thee the price
of a good Hare, that it is no other then a Cat; and we will be judged by those
Gentlemen that ride by yonder tree. The Peasant recollecting himself, and
trusting his eyesight, laid the Wager; but was soon daunted, when he saw
himself condemned by his Judges: who made him believe that 'twas a Cat; and so
sent him home empty handed, whilst they went and eat the Hare, not without
great mirth and pleasure, considering the simplicity of the Clown: whose Wife
as soon as he came home, asked him what he had got for the Hare? You fool, said
he, 'twas a Cat; Lord that you and I should be so deceived. His Wife thought
him mad, and he called her fool, that at last they contended so much, that the
Neighbors came in to part them; and understanding the matter, made them
friends again, by showing plainly, that 'twas a trick of the Apothecary. His
Wife resolving to be revenged, went not long after and filled a little Barrel
with Turds, and put the thickness of three fingers of Honey on the top, which
she carried to the Apothecary, asking if he would buy her Honey, which she
would sell him very cheap: the greedy Apothecary took it at an under rate, and
the woman went away rejoicing she had returned cheat for cheat so effectually.
Not long after the matter being discovered, the Apothecary became even to this
day, a cause of mirth and laughter to as many as knew the matter: every one
asking him whether the Cat that ate the Hare, had shit the Honey.

2^6.
A Soldier, a merry fellow, finding a Louse one day on his sleeve, walking to
and fro to take the Air, took him up by the back between his fingers, and said,
I protest if I catch you again out of your quarters, you shall die; and so put
him into his Collar.

207.
A Country Farmer coming up to the Temple, to enquire for his Son, whom he had
sent thither to study the Law, found in a Note that was left in the Key hole, I
am gone to the Devil. Ah, said his Father, my dear Child, have I brought thee
up so tenderly, to come to this? and began to take it so heavily, supposing the
Law had brought him to the Devil before his time.

208.
A Maid being to dress a Rabbet for her Masters Supper, being newly come to
Town, partly out of ignorance, partly out of haste, sent it to the Table with
the ears on the head: this made the Company laugh so, that her Master could not
find in his heart to be angry* but only admon^shed her that she should not use
to send up the ears. Not long after there was a Pig to be sent to Table, and
remembering her Masters charge, she eat up the two ears.

209.
Alphonsus King of Naples, had in his Court a Fool, which used to write down in
a Book all the Follies of the great men of his time, that were at Court. The
King one day, having a Moor in his Household, he sent him to the Levant to buy
Horses with Ten thousand Ducats. This the Fool marked in his Book, esteeming it
a pure folly. In short time after, the King as he used to do, when he had a
mind to be merry, called for the Book, and found at last his own name, with the
Story of the Ten thousand Ducats. The King being somewhat moved, asked the
reason why his name was there? Because, said the Jester, you have committed a
piece of folly, to give your money to one you are never like to see again. But
if he come again, answered the King, and bring me the Horses, what folly is
that in me? Then replied the Fool, If he ever come again, I will blot out your
name, and put in his, the is so foolish to return with your money.

210.
An English Merchant trading at Amsterdam, was to sell a thousand pounds worth
of Gloves to certain Jews, and had agreed upon the price: but the Jews
recanting of the bargain, when they brought their money would have but half.
Well, said the English Merchant, then you must give me a little time to sort
them, and you shall have half; so he commanded his men to put all the
right-handed ones in one parcel, and the left in another: then when the Jews
came, he bid them take their choice, which being made, and the money paid, they
began to pack them up; but perceiving at last they were all for one hand, they
were forced to come and buy the rest at the Merchants rate.

211.
A poor Yorkshire man bringing up his Son to the University, was told he might
have very good lodging when he came there, at the Cardinals Cap Yes but, said
he, will it not make my Son a Papist?

212.
The same man being come to the University with his Son, as they were both
drinking in the Kitchen at their Inn, the youth espied a long Kettle amongst
the rest, and knowing this was the place where he was to get his Learning, Pray
father, says he, what is that Kettle for. Why, said his Father, it is such a one
as we never had in all our generation; but I suppose it is, that when they
would have two several broths, they put fish in one end, and flesh i^ the
other. The boy hearing this, makes answer to his father, O the Devil (...) you.

213.
It Is reported of King James, that when a Gentleman made as though he took a
Louse off his Arm, he gave him Twenty pounds, saying it was a Gentleman's
companion. Whereupon, to make the King merry, he said, That he would maintain a
Louse to be the nimblest and the slowest of all Animals; the strongest and the
weakest; the worst and the best. The nimblest, says he, because let me go never
so fast* it never deserts me; the slowest, because if I will pull it out of my
head and lay it down, it can never overtake me; the strongest, because if a
house fall on me, yet it is ten to one if the Louse be killed and knocked in the
head; the weakest, because I can kill it with my Thumb; the worst companion,
because it always preys upon me; and the best, because it always accompanies
me in my adversity.

214.
A simple Fellow walking in the Fields alone, came at last to a Ditch, and
making a pause, Now Robin, said he to himself, what do think, can thou
leap over this Ditch or no? In faith, replied he to himself, I cannot tell; but
if thou will Robin, I will lay thee a Crown I do. A match. And so he prepared
himself to leap, and taking a good run and the advantage of the Bank, he leaped
quite over. Ah boys, said he, there is your Crown, But now, Robin, will thou lay
another, that thou can leap back? Faith that is very difficult, nevertheless
hang it, I do. Then taking a good run, he leaps just into the middle up to the
waste in mire and water; but crawling out on the other side, Hang it, says he,
I don't much care, I have neither won nor lost.

215.
Ralph Amner, the great Bull-maker of Windsor, tumbling one day over a Form, A
pox on it, says he, I have burnt my shins.

216.
A Roguish Butcher told a Fool he would give him a farthing to leap into the
kennel, which was pretty broad after the new-fallen rain; so the Fool hopt in,
first with one foot, but the Butcher would have him leap in with both; then he
hops in with the other, yet was very loath to leap in with both. The Butcher
still urging him, at last he leaps in with both, and then would have his
farthing: But the Butcher said he would give him none. I thought so at first,
says he, and so goes his way.

217.
Tom the Barber seeing his Neighbor cut down a Pear Tree, desired him to let
him have some of it; Why what use would you put it to? said he. I would,
replied he, only make a few Box Combs.

218.
A Lawyer and a Divine being merry together, the former to jeer the latter,
said, I heard a Priest say one Sunday in his Sermon, instead of Jonas was three
days and three nights in the Whales Belly, that he was three days and three
nights in a Quails Belly. And I, said the Divine, heard one say once Instead
of the Devil was a Liar from the beginning, the Devil was a Lawyer from the
beginning.

219.
One related in a Coffee-house, how he had seen in Turkey a Hall thirty miles
^ong, and a Table therein six and thirty; which a young careless Gallant taking
for truth, related in the next Company he met: where all laughed very much at
the improbability, that a Table could be longer than the place where it stood;
and the Gentleman was much ashamed. The nex^ time therefore he met the person
of whom he heard the Story, he began to quarrel with him, for having offered to
impose such Lies and Fables, as that was concerning the Table, on Gentlemen,
that expected to hear nothing from him but the truth. Why what untruth do you
find in my relation? said he. What? replied the other; Can any thing be more
against reason, than that a Table should be six and thirty miles long, and the
Room where it stands but thirty? Alas Sir, replied the other, you did not take
all the story; for it turned in four miles at each end.

220.
Two Fools washing their feet in a Brook, had so entangled their feet, that
they knew not which was which; one would have this, the other thought 'twas
his, and they began to quarrel; but a Passenger seeing the simple contention,
struck them over their backs with his stick, and fear soon made them find their
legs.

221.
A Country Carter coming through London Streets with his Hobnail'd Shoes in a
slippery place, his heels flew up, and an Apprentice standing in his ^hop, said
to him, How now friend, you see our City stones are very proud, they scorn that
a Bumkin should tread upon them. To which he replied, As proud as they are, I
made them kiss mine Arse.

222.
When a witty Gentleman heard, how a certain Impropriator made nothing to
devour Churches, Alas, said he, it is pity so bad a Liver should have so good a
Stomach.

223.
A Clown coming to London, read on a Sign-post, Here are Horses to be let 1661.
Cuds life, says he, if there are so many Horses in one Inn, how many are there
in all the City?

224.
Amongst a company of good fellows, one thinking to impose on the rest, who
were poor Seamen, told very soberly for a truth, That as two Gentlemen were
fighting, one lost his thumb in the fray, which a Surgeon passing by
accidentally, took up and put in his Pocket: This Surgeon meeting the
Gentleman two months afterward, and hearing him complain for the loss of his
thumb, told him for so much money he would set it on as fast as ever; and did
it so perfectly, that no one could tell that ever it had been cut off. And I
doubt not, said he, but if the man were living, I would have his hand to show
for it. One of the Seamen, who had listened all the while, and was too
understanding, to be imposed upon so grossly, said, I had a thing happened to me
once in my travels much like to this; which was, Traveling into the Country
of the Cannibals, with a friend of mine, I chanced to lose him one day, and
running to and fro to seek him, I saw at last a company of Cannibals feeding on
him; this misfortune made me very pensive, but considering no time was to be
delayed, I went privily and sprinkled a powder that I had into their drink; and
they had no sooner drank it, but they presently were drunk, and disgorged their
Stomachs of what they had eaten, and fell asleep: then seeing my self pretty
secure, s^ had time to gather up the miserable morsels of my friend, then
placing them together, I powered some of the same powder on them, and restored
him to life, and his perfect shape; and if he were yet alive, he himself would
witness what I have told you. 'Ti^ very strange and improbable, quoth the
other, that after your friend was not only dead, but part of him swallowed
down, and then vomited up again; that those parts (...) chewed and half
digested, should stick together and become the same man. Oh Sir, said the
Seaman, you may easily imagi^ that, if you do but remember the thumb, the thumb.

225.
Two persons quarrelling together, one struck the other, but company coming
between, hindered the fray at that time; nevertheless he that received the
blow, threatened the other that he should never escape so; and according to his
word, the next time he had opportunity, which was a day or two after, he hit
him over the mouth: the other in cool blood, and ^ot willing to quarrel, was
willing to pass (...) away with a Jest. What, said he, cannot one touch you,
but you must hit one in the ^eth of it.

226.
A little boy sitting with his Grandmo^her by the fire in the winter time, when
^e lifted up her Coats to warm her knees, ^pied something between her legs; and
^ould fain know what it was. It is, said he, a Rabbet skin, that your Mother
^rought me from Market. What and ^ve you burnt a hole in it, Granny? said ^e.

227.
Some women talking of Cuckolds; one was so simple as to ask where their horns
^ew? another seeing her ignorance, said, ^n the nape of the neck. Truly I
thought so, said she, my Husband wears out his bands (...) much behind.

228.
The good man being out of Town, is neighbor brought home a pair of Pan^iers
he had borrowed, and lay with his wife in thanks; but he coming home
unexpectedly that night, disturbed their kind embraces, and forced his wife for
^aste, to hide her friend in one of the Panniers, as it was made fast to a
Cross-bea^ in the Room. The good man, being little in drink, as soon as he came
in he would have a Candle; his wife fearin^ this would discover her friend, was
ver^ much against it: but forced by the threa^ of her husband, at last she
light one and desired him with kind speeches an^ embraces to make haste to bed;
this kindness so inflamed her husband, that (...) would fain be at her, even
before he w^ undressed: and when at last she had helped him to bed with great
diligence, the her neighbor might not be seen when he was sitting with one leg
in one Pannier, the other in the other, cross the Beam^ Her husband said,
Sweetheart, I have been married to thee these two years, an^ yet never saw what
I had to do with; no^ I am resolved to view what hitherto I only felt. So as
he was looking on it earnestly with the Candle, and viewing it well the fellow
on the Beam, that had never seen one before, leaned and leaned still farther
and farther, to get a sight of it till at last he fell down Panniers and al^
The good man, much affrighted, cried aloud, Who is there? to which the other
replied, It Is I neighbor, am come t^ bring you home your Panniers. A pox on
^ou, says he again, you need not have brought them home in such haste.

229.
One Citizen in a scoffing manner called ^is neighbor Nicumpoope, and the
other ^aking it for some very shamful and op^robrious name, resolved not to put
it ^p, but quarrels with him. Why, I Will ^ay you forty shillings, said the
other, you ^re; and such a one shall be Judge be^ween us. The Wager being laid
in that persons hands, he sends for the man's wife ^o know whether he were a
Nicumpoope ^or no. The Wife being come, Good woman; said the Judge, you must
here speak and confess the truth for your husbands good, whether ever he saw
your commodity ^r no? Yes truly Sir, that he did, said she, this very morning,
and kissed it too.

230.
A covetous Gentleman, and one of no great wisdom, whom avarice had bereft of
right understanding, hearing his Stewards says, he had killed him a Bullock
against the Holy Days; What, said he, do you mean to undo me by such
extravagant expenses; I will have but half a one killed at a time.

231.
A Cheat and a Pick-Pocket played together at Dice, and still as the Cheat won,
the other picked his Pocket. At last said the Pick-pocket, seeing he could win
nothing by the Dice: Sir, you cheat me confoundedly. The other feeling his
Pocket empty, said, And you have picked my pocket damnably. So every man to his
own Trade.

232.
Two Welsh Gentlemen traveling, knocked very late at an Innkeepers door, Who
is there? cried the Host. Some Gentlemen, said they, that are benighted, and
desire lodging. How many? said the Host again. Why here are, said one of them,
John ap Rice ap Jones ap Hugh, and Nicholas ap Steven ap Giles ap Davy. Th^^
Gentlemen all good night, said the Innkeeper, I could have provided a bed or
two; but cannot lodge such a company.

233.
A Woman whose Husband had but one eye, hoping he could not see all her faults,
kept great familiarity with a friend; but her Husband coming home one night
unexpectedly, when they were both together, surprised and ignorant what was
best to be done, she ran in great ^aste to the door, with a candle in her ^and,
sayng, Husband I fell in a slumber ^ust now by the fire, and I dreamed you
^ould see with your other eye, and cannot beat it out of my mind; pray let me
cover the other eye with my hand and ^ry if you can perceive ought. By this
witty stratagem she gave time enough to her friend to convey himself out of the
way, and to escape her Husband.

234.
A witty, though unfortunate fellow, having tried all Trades, but thriving by
none, took the Pot for his last refuge, and set up an Alehouse, with the Sign
of the Shirt; writing under it; This is my last Shift: which brought him much
company and much profit.

235.
Another, when he could not get a License to sell Ale, by reason of his
poverty; nevertheless brewed good strong Liquor: and if any one called for Ale,
Truly Ale have I none, said he, but I have what is as good; bringing a Pot of
his own brewing. By which ingenious device he soon got money enough to buy a
License.

236.
A Frenchman and his wife lodging at an Englishman's house, both so perfect
children of their own Countries, that neither understood each other; it so fell
out, that the Frenchman's wife cried out in the night, and he ran up stairs to
call a Midwife which lay over him; this being done, he ran down to acquaint his
Landlord and Landlady with it; where standing by their Bedside shivering, for
it was in the depth of Winter. His Land-lady pitying him, said to her husband,
Pray husband, since the weather is so bitter cold, and you are here in bed with
me, that you need fear nothing; and the bed is large enough, let Monsieur come
and lie down with us till day light. So the Frenchman was permitted to lie down
on the other side of the woman. Now by that time, the good man having been
wearied by his daily labor, was fallen asleep again, the Snake began to grow
warm, and crawled up upon the woman's belly. The motion of the bed awaking her
husband, he calls out, Wife what do you do with the Frenchman, what do you do?
Why what would you have me do? said she, If I should speak to him, you know ^he
understands not one word of English.

237.
A Preacher took his Text thus, O ye fools, when will ye understand. Now my
Text, said he, is the Voice of the Crier O ^e, and fools, my beloved, are so
nearly joined to ye, that I cannot separate fools from ye, nor ye from fools.

238.
Another took his Text, Have patience with me, and I will pay you all; and
having largely and learnedly treated of the noble Virtue of Patience,
especially in forbearing our Debtors here; But of the rest, said he, when God
shall enable me.

239.
A certain Vicar, whom the Parishioners had denied his full allowance, resolved
if it were possible, to give them a rub, and coming one morning to that place
in the Psalms, where it is said, Man without understanding, is like to the
beast that perishes; he read thus, Man without understanding, is like the best
in the Parish.

240.
One taking a fly out of a Glass, after he had drank, put it in again very
carefully; and being asked the reason? Because, said he, I do not know but some
i^ this company may love it so.

241.
A prating Lawyer, in his Cups maintained, that one day was not to be kept more
than another; and if any one sneez^d, to cry God save you, to him, was
witchcraft. At last he happened himself to sneeze, whereat one in the room
said, Hold fast behind, twice or thrice. This so offended the Lawyer, that he
began to rebuke him that said it. Why, replied the other, truly I would have
said God bless your Worship, but that I feared you should take me for a Wizard.

242.
A Gentleman reprehended a certain Lawyer for tarrying so long in the Country
from his wife, saying, That in his absence, she might want due Benevolence. Why
Sir, replied the Lawyer, I shall give it her in full measure, when I return;
and put the Case any one owed you a hundred pounds, whether had you rather have
it all together, or shilling by shilling? That is very true indeed, replied the
other, one would rather have ones money all together; yet it would vex you if
your wife in your absence should want a shilling.

243.
When the Soldiers in a Camp began to be very lousy, and complained to to
their Captain they were not able to endure them. Turn your shirts, said he, and
shake them, and the lice will have a days march at least, before they can come
to your skin.

244.
One told a London Hector, he wondered he did not fear to be so much in debt?
Damn you, says he, am I in debt? I owe no man a farthing. Why Sir, replied the
other again, you know well enough, that Peruque, those Clothes, those Stockings
and Shoes, that Hat, and that Muff are not yet paid for. Yes, says he, that is
true; but he only owes, that intends to pay.

245.
A London Tailor, true but for lying, honest but for stealing, fell suddenly
very sick, and when his friends began to despair of his recovery, and that he
thought himself he should die, his Conscience began to prick him, and to bring
into his imagination all his former sins; then did he think he saw before him
all the Fiends of Hell displaying sundry colors of those Silks he had at
several times stolen; this so terrified him, that after he grew well, he bought
him a Bible, went to Church, and showed great reformation; nay the very meat
that was to be eat on Sunday, he would have dressed on Saturday; also least the
custom and frequent use he had of stealing, should at any time make him forget
his zeal, he gave his Journeyman a special charge to put the apparition in his
mind, when ever he saw him stealing any thing. Not long after, when a Doctor of
Physic sent him some Velvet to make him a Goat, and he well knowing how much
would serve, snips off half a yard: but his man espying it, said, O Master,
Master, remember the Vision. Yes, yes, said he, I do remember the Vision, but
there was not one piece of such Silk in any part of it.

246.
A Gentleman that took great delight in Hunting, came hastily one day into his
Friends Chamber, as he was employed about some other business, asking him if he
would go find a Hare? Pish, said the other, let me alone, let them go find
Hares that have lost them.

247.
One sending a Pair of Gloves to his Lady for a New Years Gift, writ on the
Paper these two witty Verses, If that from Glove you take the Letter G,
Then Glove is Love, and that I send to thee.


248.
A witty Fellow in a company, when the whole discourse was of the Female Sex,
said, That Women were born in Wiltshire, brought up in Cumberland, led their
lives in Bedfordshire, brought their husbands to Buckinghamshire, and died in
Shrewsbury.

249.
When Mr. Kitchen a great Brasier in London, died, Cuds life, says one, will
Death have his Kitchen un^ ground.

250.
A Welchman lying in an Alehou^^, h^d run up a great deal for Cheese, his
Hostess therefore demanding a Shilling; How the Devil cuds splutter an^ nails
can that be? said he. Why look here, said she, pointing to the score behind the
door. Ah, thae's brave indeed, said he, what does her think her does not know
Chalk from Cheese.

251.
Another as he traveled on the Road, and came to his Inn, he found nothing
else ready but Plaice, so he would have two; and the Host dressed them and sent
them up: then having eat all on the black side, he found himself not satisfied,
and called for two more. The man seeing his simplicity, took away the Dish,
turned the Plaice, and served them up with a little new Butter. Cuds life, says
our Taffy, has he black Plaice and white Plaice too?

252.
A Baron and a Knight walking together on a Green, a Crow lighted on a Rail by
them, making a great noise. I believe, says the Baron, Sir Knight, this Bird
saluteth you. Nay rather, said the Knight, it is to some Lord he makes such low
obeisance.

253.
One meeting Bonner, that had been once Bishop of London, said, Good morrow
Bishop quondam; whereupon he replied presently, Adieu Knave semper.

254.
Hugh Peter's preaching of Faith and Hope, after a long and tedious discourse,
forgot Charity; for he called out to a woman, that was talking with her
Neighbor, to leave babbling. Beshrew thy heart, said she, who babbles most thou
or I?

255.
The same man having newly hopt from the Stall to the Pulpit, instead of the
Priest offered up a pair of Doves for a peace offering, read, he offered up a
pair of Gloves and a piece of fringe.

256.
It Is said also of another of those fine Preachers in his days, that he thought
himself very learned and a good Divine, when he said thus in his Sermon,
Paradise is become a pair of dice, and all houses turn Alehouses; but 'twas not
so in the days of Noah, ah no. Another time he took this for his Text, My Bed
is green, only to show this fancy, Typical my, Topical Bed, and Tropical
green; So beloved you see how it stands, Typical my, Topical Bed, Tropical
green; Typical, Topical, Tropical, my Bed is green.

257.
When Tom Holland quartering in Fleet Street, had raised his Landlady's Maids
Belly, whose name was Nell Cotton, 'twas wittily said by an ingenious person,
That he gave her a yard of Holland, she gave him an ell of Cotton, and what
harm was there in all that.

258.
Some boon Companions being merry at a Tavern, every one began to commend one
sort of Wine or other; one especially stood up for Sack that 'twas a good
Cordial, and would make one fat; Nay rather, says another, 'twill make one
lean. How so? Upon a Staff.

259.
A Gentleman meeting his friend, who had a very pretty Lacquey, asked him where
he was? Alas Sir, said he, death has sent him on an errand. And what is become
of your Nag Sir, you came up on? Why he is foundred. Why then, replied the
other, he has served you right, to make you go on foot, since you made him
lame.

260
One bid his Shoemaker make one of his Boots bigger than the other, and when
he brought them home, A pox on you for a Rogue, said he, I bid you make one
bigger, and you have made one less.

261.
The same Bull-speeker talking of London, said, That truly the City was a
gallant place, but the Air was very foggy, and agreed not with him; and he did
really think, that had he lived there till this time, that he had died seven
years ago.

262.
A discreet Gentleman being asked why he would not go, when his friend desired
him, to have a man that could counterfeit the Nightingale exactly? Because,
said he, I have heard her, when she sung her self.

263.
A Welshman traveling with a Charge of Money behind him in his Cloakbag, was
met by a Thief, who bid him to deliver his Money immediately; or else he would
make that Pistol, drawing one out of its Case, to bounce through him. What, said
the Welshman, must that Pistol pounch through her? Her had better give her
money that is her Masters, and spare her life that is her own. So the Thief
without any resistance, took his Cloak-bag. But pray Sir, said the Welshman,
since her has her money, let her hear one pounce for it; for her never heard
the pounce of a Cun. The Thief, to satisfy him, discharged his Pistol, which
ecchoed in many places. Cuds splutter and nails, said the Welshman, 'twas a
gallant pounce, and there was many little pounces too; Pray let her have one
more pounce, for it is a gallant thing. So the Thief let off his other Pistol,
at which the Welshman seemed more pleased than before; and asked if he had no
more pounces? No, said the Thief, I have not one more. Then replied the
Welshman, that had long enough pleaded ignorance, Her has one Pistol: and
unless her give her her money, her shall make it pounce through her. And so
forced the Thief to restore him his Cloak-bag again.

263.
A certain bold woman came to Gratian the Emperor, and with much clamor
complained to him of her Husband; to whom the Emperor mildly said, Woman what
are these things to me? Yea, said she, for he has also spoken many things
against thee. To which the Emperor answered, Woman what is that to thee? Which
so abashed the woman, that she went away ashamed.

264.
A Boy vapouring of his Game Cock, said, It would die in the place. Nay, said a
Gentleman, standing by, Give me a Cock that will live in the place.

265.
At the Battle of Newport, the Prince of Orange having the Spanish Army before
him, and the Sea behind him; said to his Soldiers, If you will live, you must
choose one of these two things of necessity, either to eat those Spaniards, or
drink that Sea: which so increased the Soldiers appetite to war, that they eat
up the Spaniards indeed, and got a noble Victory.

266.
When amongst many Articles exhibited to King Henry by the Irish against the
Earl of Kildar, the last was, Finally, All Ireland cannot rule this Earl. Th^n;
quoth the King, The Earl shall rule all Ireland; and so made him his Deputy.

267.
A Gentleman being pricked for High Sheriff, who by reason of some
indisposition, desired to get off from that Office, his Wife enquiring into the
matter, asked a Gentleman concerning it. Alas Madam, said he, your husband is
pricked by the King, and it cannot be altered. Why Sir, said she again, does the
Kings Prick always stand.

268.
About the year 1670, there was a notable Robber hanged at Tyburn, whose name
was Brass, whereupon a witty person said, 'Twas no wonder if so many Robberies
were committed, since our walls were but clay, and our thieves of brass.

269.
King John being persuaded by a Courtier to untomb the bones of one, who in his
life time had been his great enemy. O no, said he, I would to God all my
enemies were as honorably buried.

270.
Queen Elizabeth coming to a Free School, where she had an Oration spoken to
her by one of the Boys; she afterward asked him how often he had been whipped?
To which, he wittily answered with the words of Aeneas to Queen Dido, Infandum
Regina jubes renovare dolorem.

271.
Another time having some Verses made to her extempore, by a poor Schoolboy,
and understanding his condition, she said, Make me some Verses upon this,
Pauper ubique jacet, to which he said, In thalamis Regina tuis hac nocte
jacerem,
Si verum hoc esset, pauper ubique jacet.


272.
A Papist, as their usual manner is, asked a Protestant where his Religion was
before Luther? Why in the Bible, answered he, where yours never was.

273.
Sir Walter Raleigh asking a favor of Queen Elizabeth, says the Queen, Sir
Walter, when do you intend to leave off begging? When your gracious Majesty,
replied he, shall leave off giving.

274.
When one asked his Friend to assist him in a base action, and was denied, What
am I the better, said he, for such a friend, that denies me his help? And what
am I the better, says the other, for a friend that demands such unreasonable
things?

275.
John Scot, famous through the whole world for his learning, being asked by a
young Gallant that thought to have jested on him, as he sat at Table, What
difference there was between Scot and a Sot? answered suddenly Mensa tantum,
that is, the Tables breadth; for the other sat just over against him.

276.
The same person being worthily entertained by Charolus Calvus the French King,
as he was once at Dinner with the King, there was a Dish wherein were two great
Fishes and a little one; the King having tasted it, sent it down to Scot, to
distribute it to two other Clerks that sat by him, and were two tall proper
persons; wherefore John taking the Dish, gave the little Fish to the other two,
and kept the two great ones for himself. The King observing this division,
blamed him for not having dealt equally; but he proved his distribution to be
just, after this manner; Here, said he, be two great ones and a little one,
pointing to the two great Fishes and himself, who was but little of stature;
and there is one little one and two greas ones, pointing to the little Fish and
the two tall Clerks; and what distribution can be more equal?

277.
A Scotchman presented King James with a Turnip of an extraordinary and
prodigious size; which is a Root the Scotchmen love very much. The King pleased
with the humor, gave him a hundred pounds, which another Courtier seeing, If
the King, thought he, reward a Turnip giver so liberally, what will he do to
him that offers a greater present? and thereupon presents the King with a very
excellent Race-horse, wherefore the King turning to his Nobles, said, What
shall we give this man? and when all were silent, By my soul men, said he, let
us give him the Turnip.

278.
When Metellus Nepos asked Cicero the Roman Orator, in a jeering way, who was
his Father? he replied, Thy Mother has made that question harder for thee to
answer.

279.
Marcus Livius the Roman, who was Governor of Tarentum, when Hannibal took it;
being envious to see so much honor done to Fabius Maximus, said one day openly
in the Senate, That 'twas himself, not Fabius Maximus, that was the cause of
the retaking the City of Tarentum, Fabius smiling to hear him, answered
wittily, Indeed thou speak truth, for if thou had not lost it, I had never
won it again.

280.
When Parson Bull came to visit the Chancellor Hide, Hide said smiling, Bull
where are your horns? Sir, replied he, they go always with the Hide.

281.
Pope Benedict, when the Ambass^dour of the Council of Constance, came to him,
laying his hand on his breast, he said, Hic est Arca Noae; to which they
tartly, but truly replied, In Noah's Ark there were few men but many beasts,

282.
A blind man hired a lame man, that is, one that had but one leg, and the other
a wooden one, to lead him up and down the Streets, the more to move the pity
of the beholders; and as they traveled one day, the lame man saw an Oyster lie
in the way; wherefore stooping down to reach it, the other perceived he made a
stop, and asked him what he took up? so he told him, that he had found a lovely
Oyster: Give it me, said the blind man. The other, By the right of fortune,
said, it was his, and would not deliver it. Notwithstanding the blind man
pleaded he was his Master. Then they resolved to be judged by the next they
met, which happened to be a subtle Lawyer; who after he understood the matter,
and that these two fools must wrangle for so small a matter, draws out his
knife and opens the Oyster, then eats it, and gives to each a shell.

283.
A Welshman coming late to his Inn, went to bed in the dark, and being very
dry, and finding a Bottle there on a Cup-boards head, he supposed it to be
drink, and supped it off; which was indeed Quicksilver. In the morning when he
felt the matter in the bed, for fear his Hostess should perceive he had beshit
it, he arose and departed before day.

384.
Another of the same Country, going in a dark night in London with his Arms
stretched out, to avoid dangerous objects, run with his Nose against a Post;
Cuts splutter and nails, said he, is her Nose longer than her Arms?

285.
A poor Cripple being asked by a Gentleman, why he married a blind woman?
Because, said he, we shall the better agree, when neither can hit the other in
the teeth with their infirmities.

286.
King James being often troubled with the frequent Petitions of the Scotch
Lords, when he was merrily disposed one day, he said to one Thomas German, a
notable witty person, Suppose your self King, and I as you were, how would you
behave your self toward these Petitioners? And thereupon made German sit down,
and he himself stood at his Elbow, as German used to do to him. Then came one
Scotch Lord, then another, and another, and all petitioned for something; and
German sitting in the Chair of State, said to them, I am more troubled with
these Scotch Lords, than all the Kingdom besides; what can you expect or desire
from me, when here is poor Tom German, pointing to King James at his Elbow,
that has been faithful to me and served me all along, and I never gave him any
thing yet. This so worked upon the King, that he considered all the good
services he had done him, and rewarded him nobly.

287.
A Reverend Man seeing a very choleric couple, married, and living lovingly,
asked how they did to live so peaceably and comfortably together? To whom the
man answered, When my Wives sit comes upon her, I yield to her; and when my fit
is upon me, she yields to me; and so we never strive together, but asunder.

288.
One told his friend he was mad for something he had done with less
consideration and judgment than he ought to have done; and that he ought to be
sent to Bedlam, to be cured of his Frenzy, and continued at that rate so
long, till the other wittily answered, That he wondered much why as in all
Commonwealths there was provided a Bedlam for mad men, there never was any
place allotted for fools.

289.
A Gentleman in Paris talking with a Priest concerning Religion, asked him why
they used to kiss the Cross more than any other piece of wood? and what was in
that more than any Tree else, that they did not as well kiss them? Why, said
the Priest, is not your Wife made all of the same flesh and blood, and what is
the reason you do not kiss her back side as well as her face?

290.
One having eaten Eggs for Dinner in Lent time, went afterward to the Tavern
to make up his Dinner with a Glass of Wine, but staid so long, Pint after Pint,
that when he came out into the air, the fumes of the Wine began to load his
head, and instead of going home strait, he made many reelings cross the street;
in so much that a friend of his seeing him, began to chide him for his
debauchery in the time of Abstinence; wondering he said, that then when there
was a time allotted by the Church for the Mortification of the Flesh, he would
make himself a reproach and a byword to all honest men. Alas, says he, now I
see how false those things are that we commonly take for truth How often have I
heard that an Egg and a Glass of Wine would sustain a man four and twenty
hours; and it is not two since I eat an Egg and drank a Glass of Wine, and now
you see, I cannot stand.

291.
An indifferent Poet showing a Copy of Verses to a Crooked Gentleman, to have
his judgment concerning them; after long perusal, though he were no great Poet
himself, nor had any great judgment in such things; nevertheless he told the
Poet that he disliked such and such things, and indeed that he thought they
were not well made. Why then, said the Poet, taking it in great dudgeon that he
should slight his Verses, all that I can say, if they are not well made, is
that you will be taken for the Author: for they are made more like you than me.

292.
A Country Curate having inveyed bitterly against the Vices of his
Parishioners in his Sermon, one good woman that was there went to see his
Mother, and said, That her Son had threatened them all with hell and damnation
if they did not amend their ways. Oh, said his Mother, you are mad if you
believe him; for when he was young, he was always a great liar and I never
whipped him, but for speaking untruth.

293.
A Country woman sent her Daughter to a Lady with a present of ripe Medlars
the clownish wench being come to the Lady, told her that her Mother had sent
her Ladyship some ripe Medlars that were as soft as bran; but if she did not
eat them quickly, they would not be worth one fart. This language and brutish
behavior, so angered the Gentlewoman, that she resolved to complain to her
Mother of the incivility of her Daughter; and not long after meeting her in the
Street, I thank you very much, said she, for your present, but the bearer was
so unmannerly as to say such and such obscene words. Ah, replied she, let me do
what I will I cannot mend her; and notwithstanding all the civility that ever I
taught her, she has no more manners than mine Arse.

294.
A Gentleman being passionately enamoured with a fair young woman that was
already married, was nevertheless so far driven by his passion, as to show his
love on all occasions to her; which importunity when she would endure no
longer, and that still he pressed her more and more; telling her he had
something to acquaint her with privately. She replied chastely and as a wise
woman, should do, Sir, when I was under my Parents care, I never did any thing
but what they knew and councelled me, and since at this time, I am in
subjection to my Husband, I can do or consent to nothing but what he knows;
therefore if your demands be just and honest, ask him, and he will satisfy you.

295.
A poor man having one only Son, had a mind to bind him out to a Butcher, but
being willing to get him a Master where he might best learn his Trade, he asked
his friend to whom he should bind him? Oh, said he, there is a Physician in our
Village, bind him to him; for he kills more than all beside in the Town.

296.
A great Scholar, or a mere one, as we say, that took care neither for Wife,
Children, nor any thing but his Book, was translating a Greek Book into Latin,
and at the same time one came and told him his Wife was very sick; Well I have
but three or four sentences to do, said he, and I will come. Presently came
another and said she was dying; Well I have but three lines, said he, to do,
and I come. Not long after came a third, that said she was dead; Alas, I am
sorry, said he, she was a good woman.

297.
The King of France coming into one of his great Cities, the Mayor came to make
a Speech, and began thus, When the King of Peace rode to Jerusalem; but being
dash't out of countenace, he said again, When the King of Peace rode to
Jerusalem, and so the third time; but could not proceed; then the King turning
to his Courtiers, said, We may easily imagine this man is an Ass by the
consequent.

298.
A simple Gentleman falling sick, sent to his Physician, and desired him to
bring him something that would ease his Headache, so the Physician sent him a
Clyster to purge his Stomach and allay the fumes, whose multitude had caused
that distemper; but he being ignorant how it was to be taken, bound it to his
head, that it all ran about his shoulders: not long after the Physician, who
was now at leisure; coming to see the operations of his Physic, wondered to see
him in that case; and told him at last he should have app^y'd it to the other
end. So after the Physician was gone, Did you ever see, said he to his friends,
such a simple fellow, that should cure my headache, and gives me a potion to be
applied to my backside.

299.
One beat his Wife for being very lazy; Good husdand, said she, why do you beat
me, I have done nothing. Therefore, answered he, I beat thee.

300.
King James, of happy memory, considering one day the vanity of his Courtiers
in applauding still all his actions, very seriously about noon looked up to
heaven out of a window; and demanded of those that were about him, Whether they
saw not a star near such a cloud? for, he said, he was confident he did.
Whereupon every one looking up, began to deliver their opinions thus, one said,
he saw it, and that 'twas a little bright star; another, that it twinkled very
much, etc. every one with a several addition, concluded positively as he said:
whereupon he said, How unfortunate a man am I, to have so many fools to my
Counselors; no wiser men, than right and wrong to say as I say.

301.
A Gentleman, in whose face much drinking had raised many Pimples came into a
Barbers Shop, and asked the Barber to shave him; but on this condition, That if
he shaved him and cut any of his Pimples, he would kill him; if not, he would
give him a piece of Gold. The Barber liked not those terms and plainly denied
it; but his man undertook it, and though with great difficulty, yet with as
much care he shaved him, and never cut him, and h^d the piece of Gold. Then
said the Gentleman, Now Sirrah, what would you have done, if you had cut me?
Why Sir, said he, I should have seen the blood first, and then I would have cut
your threat and pleaded it was by accident. Which words so wrought upon the
Gentleman, that ever after he shaved himself.

302.
The King going to see his new Palace, as it was building, a Courtier not
overwise, happened to be in his Retinue; and when they had been there a little
while, the Master Workman came and gave them an account of such and such
Lodgings; and every one judged something to be so and so: at last comes m^
simple Courtier, thinking to say something as well as the rest; and asks what
that black Marble was for? The Master Workman replied it was for the House of
Office. Ah, let us go away, said he, I knew it was so; for I smelt it above an
hour ago.

203.
A witty Fellow in London, took one day many Rams-Horns in his Basket, and went
up and down the City crying, New fruit, New fruit, in the Winter. This made
many people, and amongst the rest, a Lawyer, to call him to him; who seeing his
Ware, laughed at him, saying, You fool, who do you think will buy your horns? Oh
Sir, replied he, though you are provided, yet I may meet with some that are not.

304.
A simple Peasant lying on night upon the ground, and finding it very uneasy,
when he awaked in the morning, saw a feather under his head. Oh, said he, does
one feather cause me so much disease, how are they troubled that lie on whole
feather beds?

305.
Virgil the famous Poet, was much in favor, through his great learning and
judgment, with Augustus; in so much that he had his bread from him. Augustus,
one day, knowing his deep discretion, asked him privately if he could guess who
was his Father? To which he replied, Truly Sir, I do verily believe he was a
Baker. And when that Caesar asked the reason? Because, said he, you always
reward me with bread. With which answer, Augustus being well pleased, rewarded
him afterward with money.

306.
A poor Scholar in France being very hungry, came into a Shop where Petits
Pates were sold, and aked what he should give the Man to let him eat his Belly
full? He told him he should give him Twenty pence. The Scholar told him he
would give Fifteen; and the Man took him at his word. So the Scholar sat down,
and eat the first Oven full; which contained four dozen. The Man seeing that,
asked if he would not drink a Glass of Wine? Oh no, not yet, replied he, I do
not use to drink, till the third Oven full. So the poor fellow was glad to let
him go with what he had eaten, without paying a farthing; for fear he should
have undone him.

307.
Pope Alexander being accustomed highly to commend the Institution of the
Single Life of Priests, and to blame their using of Concubines, was wont to
say, God has forbidden us to get Children, and the Devil has given us Nephews.

308.
Pope Boniface being told by one of his Court, that there was a Pilgrim of the
Country of Bavaria, come to Rome, of purpose to visit the Religious Places of
the City; who did altogether resemble him both in person and in countenance.
Boniface having caused him to be sent for to his presence, demanded of him, If
his Mother had ever been at Rome? The Pilgrim perceiving himself touched with
supposition of Bastardy, answered, Holy Father, My Mother was never in this
Country, but my Father has been here many times.

309.
Some good Companions being very merry together, fell into a Discourse
concerning Beards; and some pretended to conjecture others qualities and
conditions by their Beards: at last, in continuance of the discourse, one who
had a red Beard and hair much of the same color, was very desirous to know
what they thought ofhim? Why I should guess, said another, by your Cow-colour'd
beard, that you are a Calf.

310.
A Gentleman going one night to the House of Office, bid his Footman bring the
candle and light him; which being done, when the Gentleman had done what he
came to do, he pulled out a Letter out of his pocket, and was going to tear it:
Whereupon the Footman desired to have it, and he would give him some other
paper: Why, what would you do with it? said his Master. Oh, Sir, said he, my
Mother in the Country would fain have me send her some Letters, and I cannot
write; so I would send her that.

311.
A Gentleman being at a Feast amongst much company, where every one had his
Lacquey waiting on him, called his Footboy to change his Trencher, on which
there was a whole Chick; the Youth taking it away, had no sooner set it down,
but he perceived the other Lacqueys to cast an eye at it, for they took away
nothing but bones; so fearing lest they should steal it away he brings it on a
Trencher to his Master, desiring he would let it stand by him; for there were
so many greedy guts, that he feared they would steal it. His Master seeing his
simplicity, repeated the story to the company, which caused very great mirth.

312.
A Felon being to be hanged in a Countrey-Town, word was sent to the Carpenter
to make a Gibbet; but he neglected to do it, and the day of execution was
deferred, which caused the Judge to be very angry who sent for the Carpenter,
asking, why he had not done it. Why, Sir, replied he, I have done two or three
already, and never was paid for them; but had I known it had been for your
Worship. I would have left all other business to have done it.

313.
Some Hogards being together, and talking of the King, one said, If he were
King, he would eat fat every day; the other, that he would have now shoes every
month; the third, that he would be carried upon a Cart-load of Hay, with his
belly upward, all day long; the fourth being demanded what he would do; Oh,
says he, you have wished for all the best things already, and left me nothing
worth desiring.

314.
A Country Farmer's Wife having lent her Man a Mare to ride to the Wood, the
Mare th^ew him, and ran away to the Wood her self, where the Wolf's eat her:
His Mistress brought him before the Justice to make him pay for the Mare. So he
goes to a Lawyer to know what he should do; the Lawyer not being at home, his
Wife desired the Man to stay. But at last, when he was tired with expecting
him, he told her he could stay no longer; but, if she pleased, he would tell
her his business. Sir, said she, I do not much know these kind of matters; but
if you please to tell it, I am willing to hear it. Then beginning to tell his
story, he so entangled himself, that she could not understand him, and desired
him to speak more plain. Why then, Madam, said he, suppose you were a Mare, I
saddle, I bridle, I girt you, I get up upon you; you kick, you fart, you play
the devil, throw me off, and run away to the Wood, and the Wolf eat you; must I
pay for you. No surely, replied she* Why then, Madam, said he, my case is good.

315.
A woman going to Mass to present her Tapers, fixed one to Saint Michael, and
another to the Devil that was at his feet. The Clerk seeing that, came and told
her she had done amiss, in offering that Candle to the Devil, No matter, said
she, it is good to have friends every where, for we know not where we shall go.

316.
One accusing another before a Judge, said, He was a debauched person, a rogue,
and a thief. Do you here, said the Judge, how he says you are a debauched
person, a rogue, and a thief? How so, replied he, pray, Sir, did not he speak
to you?

317.
A drunken young Heir, that sold all his Lands to maintain his lust, when by
much eating and drinking he fell into a distemper, sent for the Physician to
have his advice, who perceiving his disease to arise from abundance of ill
humors, caused him to be let blood; and about an hour after the Chyrurgeon had
been here, he came to see the blood, to judge by it; and looking upon it, Sir,
said ^e, your blood is very green. Alas, replied the Youth, how can it be
otherwise? I have eaten all my Meadows and Cornfieldsd.

318.
It Is usual in Spain to have Crosses at the end of, or near every Town; so a
Spaniard traveling, when night came on, espied a Cross, but when he came up to
it, there was no Town near it; and having traveled two Leagues farther with
much pain and trouble, at last he saw a Gibbet, and presently came to a Town:
Well, said he, henceforward I shall sooner believe in a Gibbet, then the Cross.

319.
A Fisherman having brought to shore great store of Soles, gave notice by the
Crier to the Town, that such Fish were come in, and were to be sold at such a
place: Some bought of them, others said they stank, some said this, and some
that. A Gentleman that had bought some, gave order to his Maid to dress them;
which, as she was doing, the Cat eat one; which so incensed the Maid, that she
took a great stick and knocked her in the head. Her Master coming in, asked
her, why she had done it? and when he knew and perceived there was no remedy,
he took the Cat and threw it out into the street among the people, saying, See,
there is a Cat that is dead with eating a Sole. The people alarmed with this,
supposing the Cat to be poisoned, ran to the Fisherman, and threw all his Fish
about the street, and carri^d him before the Judge, for intending to poison the
Town. The poor man, ignorant of the cause of this dysaster, still pleaded his
Fish were new and sound. The Judge, to know the certainty of the matter, sent
for the Gentleman, who rel^ted the story with much mirth. But the poor
Fisherman went away sorrowing for his loss.

320.
A Spaniard and a Gascoign coming both in together to an Inn, in France, found
nothing ready but a piece of Mutton and a Partridge; so one would have the
Partridge, and another would have it, and began to quarrel. The Hostess desired
they would be pleased to eat it together but the Bragadocio Spaniard, whose
head was building Castles in the Air, said, It should be reserved till the
morning, and he that dreamed the best dream, should eat it for his breakfast.
So eating the Mutton for their supper, they went to bed. The Spaniard could not
sleep one wink, for thinking what he should dream. The Gascoign having observed
where the Partridge was set, arose in the night, and eat it. The next morning
when both were up, the Spaniard fearing the other might say his dream, which he
thought was the best, said very hastily, that he dreamed the rarest dream in
the world, That he saw the Heavens open, and that a Quire of Angels carried him
up with Music to Heaven. Then said the Gascoign, I dreamed, that I saw you
carried up to Heaven; and thinking you would never come down again, I rose and
eat the Partridge; for I knew you would have no need of meat in Heaven.

321.
Two Gascoigns came to Paris, to live their by the sleight of their hand,
knavery, stealth, and such like endowments, as their poor Country had
furnished them with; but being both apprehended, one, who had been branded
before, was hanged on a Gibbet, the other was whipped at the foot of it. The
latter having escaped so well, returned back to his own Country; and after he
was welcomed home by his friends, many inquired what was become of his Friend
and Companion. Oh, says he, he has made true the saying, That no body is a
Prophet in his own Country. How so? said they. Because, replied he, he is
married. And when they asked, To whom? He answered, To one of a high quality,
and that he danced at his Wedding.

322.
A Welchman being condemned to be hanged, when he was brought to the place of
execution, and was ready to be turned off, the Hangman asked him if he had
ought to say. Yes, said he, I would willingly speak to some of my Country, if
any be here. Then the Hangman called out to know if any such were there, he
should hold up his hand. It happened one was there, to whom the Hangman said.
That poor man would speak with him. So when he drew near, he asked, if he knew
such persons in Wales. The other replied, He did. Then, said he, you know my
father and mother, who, I know, will be much grieved at my misfortune: but
pray, to comfort them, tell them, I die a good Christian, and am certainly
informed that I shall go to heaven; and I hope they will follow me thither the
same way.

323.
A Gentleman coming into London out of the Country, as he came by New Chapel,
his Horse threw him; which a young Gentlewoman seeing, fell a laughing. The
Gentleman being angry that she je^red him, said, Pray wonder not at this,
Madam, my Horse always stumbles when he sees a Whore. To which she answer^d
merrily, Have a care then, Sir, for if you ride into the City, you will break
your neck.

324.
Three drunkards having been late a drinking, and knowing what a peal their
Wives would ring them when they came home, laid a wager among themselves of
ten pounds a man, that they would all obey what their Wives first commanded
them and would do it. So coming to the first man's house, his Wife had prepared
a good staff for him, and as soon as he came home, sell upon him; he stepping
back, trod upon an earthen dish, and broke it. Ay you Rogue, said his Wife,
do, go, break all. So he up with his staff, and broke the windows, and all the
pots, till at last she beat him out of doors. Then they went to the Second's
house, his Wife was of the same temper, and fell upon him, that striving for
haste to get away, he let a Fart: Ay, go shit, you drunken Rogue, said his
Wife, go. So he down with his breeches and Shit in the room. Then they went to
the third^s house, where the Good Man being pretty well in drink, he stumbled
over the threshold: Ay, you drunken Rogue, said his Wife, go, break your neck,
do. A pox on you for a Whore, said he, you have made me lose my wager.

325.
A certain Papist, that never carried Beads about him, was asked the reason by
his friend, who accused him of his being Irreligious. Oh, said he, I have a
Wi^e, who is so lean, that in stead of Beads, I can count the bones in her
back, and say my proyers so often Yes, but, said the other, when you have gone
as low as you can, do you then kiss.

326.
A Curate in the Country had made the poor people believe he was a Conjurer,
and a great Diviner; a Lord therefore sent one day for him, and questioned if
he could Divine; so he plainly confessed he could not, but that the vulgar
people had reported it only of him. Nay, replied the Lord, that will not
serve, either you must tell me four things that I shall ask you, or resolve to
be dispossessed of all your Preferment as a Cheat, a Deluder, and Impostor.
Thus when there was no hope of escape, he desired him to propose his questions,
and to give him two days to consider on them. The Lord gave him that time, and
said, First, you must tell me where the middle of the world is. Secondly, what
I am worth. Then what I think, Lastly, what I believe. The Curate went away
much perplexed what to answer; but in his way a subtle Joyner of his
acquaintance met him, and by much persuasions got out of him the cause of his
melancholy. Well, said he, troub^e not your self; lend me your robes, and I
will clear you of this matter. So the day being come, the Joyner invests
himse^f with the Curates Gown, and goes away betimes in the morning to the
Lord, that was not yet stirring; nevertheless the Lord wiling to hear his
answers, got up: Well, said he, what do you think of the questions? where is
the middle of the world? Why, replied he, if you please to go out with me into
the fields, I shall show you, for it is hard by. Is it possible? says the Lord.
So out they both went, and the Joyner having drawn a Circle to color the
matter, and some strange figures, at last stuck down his stick, and said, Just
there is the middle. But how shall I know? replied the Lord. Why if you please
to measure it, said he, and it wants but one hands-breadth, I will forfeit my
life. Well, said the Lord, what am I worth, all my debts paid? Why, answered
he, our Savior was sold but for thirty pence, and if I say you are worth but
nine and twenty, I think I do you no great wrong. Then the Lord asked him, what
he thought. You think, replied he, more, I am sure, on your profit then on
mine. Lastly, he asked, what he believed. Why you believe, said the Joyner,
that I am the Curate, but I am only a poor Joyner. Which caused the Lord to
dismiss him with a reward of his ingenuity, laughing heartily at his witty
answers.

327.
Three Soldiers talking together, were overheard by a Courtier to say thus; one
said, Had he a thousand pounds he should be happier then the King; The other
said, Were he a Captain under the King, he should be happier then he; The last,
That had he one nights lodging with the Queen, he should be the happiest man in
the world. The Courtier related this to his ^ing, and the King for
divertisement sent for these three the next day before him, and bid them upon
pain of death confess, and tell what they said the night before, at such a
time. The first fearing the King's anger, said That he had indeed rashly said,
That if he had a thousand pounds, he should be as happy as the King. So the
King commanded that a thousand pound should be given him. The second desired
his Majesty's pardon for his bold saying, That had he a Captain's command under
him, he should be as happy as he. Then the King conferred that Office upon him.
The third fell down on his knees, begging pardon from the King, forasmuch as he
had said, That if he lay one night with the Queen, he should be the happiest
man in the world. Well, said the King, that is not in my power to grant; but if
thou can get here consent, thou have mine. So he brought him before his
Queen, and told his petition. But the Queen, to show that our desires ought to
be placed on suitable objects, caused him to be well whipped.

328.
A Spaniard and a Frenchman contending about Religion; Why quoth the Spaniard,
will you contend with us for Religion? there are more Saints that have been
Canonized in Spain, then there be hairs on my beard. And there are more in
France, said the Frenchman, then I have hairs on my beard and my head. Then,
said the Spaniard, let this decide it, I will pull a hair off your beard for
every Saint I name, and you shall pull one off mine for every Saint you name.
So the Frenchman began, and pulled one off the Spaniard's beard, crying, St.
Denis. Then the Spaniard doing the like, said, St. Ignace. The Frenchman
pulling another, said, St. Martin. The Spaniard, St. Xavier. The Frenchman, St.
Louis. The Spaniard, St. Terese. The Frenchman, St. Clotilde. The Spaniard, St.
Isidore. The Frenchman, St. Bun. The Spaniard plucking two at once, said, St.
Cosine and St. Damian. The Frenchman resolving to be revenged, took a whole
Mustache, and pulled it off, saying, The eleven thousand Virgins. Upon this the
dispute ended, the Spaniard not being able to endure, or parallel so great a
number.

329.
A Sergeant coming to seize upon the goods of a poor woman for her Husbands
debt, would be put off by no complaints of the poor woman, and was so
unreasonable, as to take the very kettle off the fire, that stood upon a
Trevet. The woman seeing that, took up the Trevet with the Tongs, and clapped it
upon his head, which burned him deeply, and marked him for a Rogue.

330.
A Cordelier and a Jacobin mee^ing at the same Inn, the next morning the
Jacobin paid his reckoning; but the Cordelier supposing to have come off every
where with Retribuet Dominus, was forced by the Master of the house, who was a
Protestant, to pay for what he had had. Then he desired the Jacobin to lend him
so much. But he said, he had no more then would just bear his charges; so that
the Cordelier was forced to pawn his Books. The next day they went out
together, both being to go the same way; and it so fell out, that in their
p^ssage they came to a pl^sh of water; the poor Cordelier put off his Sandals,
and holding up his Gown, began to go through. The Jacobin that was rich, and
well dressed, could not tell what to do. At last the Cordelier asked what he
would give him to carry him over? The other replied, That he would redeem his
Books, and pay for him at the next Inn. So the Cordelier took him on his back,
and as he came into the middle. But have you money to defray our charges? said
he. Yes, that I have, answered the Jacobin; and to show it was true, clapped one
hand in his pocket to make it chink. The Cordelier having this opportunity and
advantage, and resolving to be revenged on him, let him fall into the middle,
and went away laughing on the other side, saying, You have made me transgress
my Orders, for I am never to carry money about me.

331.
A witty Gentleman, and a lover of mirth, being invited by his friend to
dinner, and a dish of Partridges being set before him, he went to take one; but
the claws of it were so entangled with the claws of another, that he could not
easily get them assunder: Nay, said he, if you fight all day, and are resolved
to do so, I shall never part you; and so took them both to his plate.

332.
A young Boy having a Godfather that was a Physician, would by a^l means be of
that profession, notwithstanding he never learned Latin, or any other Language
then his own. His Godfather therefore to instruct him speedily, and to make a
short cut of the business, told him, That a good way to judge the cause of a
persons sickness, was, to look up and down the chamber, what fragments of
victuals he could spy, and then ask if the sick person had not eaten such and
such a thing; whereby people should much admire his great judgment. The Youth
instructed with such and the like principles, goes out a hopeful Quack, and the
first sick gowty person he came to, he pried up and down the chamber, and at
last saw a Saddle; so when he came to the party, and found him much swelled;
Alas, Sir, said he, it is no marvel you are so swelled, you have eaten a great
deal too much Horseflesh.

333.
One having called a Maid, Whore, that was so indeed, nevertheless, because he
could not prove her so, she brought him before the Justice; nevertheless he
absolved himself with a witty equivocations* for the Justice that knew him very
well, said, Sir, this Maid accuses you for calling her Whore I called her
Whore, replied he, it is true. But now I say she is an honest Maid, I lied. So
the Justice laughing at his subtilty, dismissed him.

334.
A Sergeant coming to a Lord, and behaving himself very rudely, said, when the
others asked how he dared be so bold, That he cared for no body. Why, replied
they, do thou not know that he is ab^e to give thee a thousand stripes.
That Is nothing, said he; for if he scratches, I can bite. The Lord afterward
calling him to him, demanded the cause that made him threaten him, since he had
given him no reason to be angry, and said, That to take away all fear of his
scratching him, he would have his nails cut; and then commanded his man to cut
them presently. Now, said he, it is reason you should be hindered likewise of
biting me; and therefore commanded his men to pull out all his teeth.

335.
A Country Peasant having been at Confession with his Curate, and that had
told him, that he had eaten Eggs that Lent, and was reproved, for as much as
Eggs made Chickens; Chickens, Cocks; and Cocks, Capons: not long after, when
the Curate sent to him for a dozen Eggs to set under a Hen, he sent to him a
dozen boiled hard. The Curate ignorant of that, set them under his Hen, but at
three weeks end, when he saw no Chickens, he broke one Egg, and found it hard,
then he broke another, and so all, one by one, finding them to be boiled. This
made him go in great haste to the Peasant, to know the reason why he had thus
imposed upon him. But the Peasant told him, he did not know what he meant. Why
you fool, quoth the Curate, did you ever think that Chickens could be hatched
out of hard Eggs? Why so you told me, Sir, quoth he, last Lent; for when I
confessed to you that I had eaten Eggs, you chid me, saying, Eggs made
Chickens, Chickens grew to be Cocks, and Cocks were made Capons: now if boiled
Eggs which I eat, would ever have been Cocks and Capons, how did I know but the
boiled Eggs under your Hen would come to be so too?

339.
A certain old man, a poor Labourer of the Country, seeing the Archbishop of
Cologn to ride through the fields, armed, and accompanied with armed Forces,
fell out in a loud laughing: Whereupon being demanded why he laughed, he
answered, Because he wondered that St. Peter, Christ's Vicar in the Church, being
exceeding poor, had left his Successor so rich and wealthy; and that his Train
should be more furnished with Men at Arms than with Churchmen. The Archbishop
desired that the fellow should have better knowledge of him in his Place and
Dignity; and told him that he was not only an Archbishop but a Duke also; and
that as a Duke he rode so accompanied with a Train of Men at Arms: but when he
was in his Church, then he was attended on as an Archbishop. Sir, said the
Labourer, I pray tell me, when my Lord Duke shall be with the Devil, what will
become of the Archbishop?

337.
The Emperor Sigismond and one of his Pages passing over a certain River at a
Foard on Horsback, when they were in the midst of the River, the Empero^s Horse
stood still and began to stale; which the Page seeing, he said to the Emperor,
Most Sacred Prince, your Horse is ill taught, and resembles you very much. The
Emperor answered not, but rode on to his Lodging, where being come, and in
pulling off his Boots, he demanded of his Page why he had likened his Horse to
him? Because, quoth the Page, the River had no need of any water, yet your
Horse in pissing there, did add water to water; and so do you, for you give
wealth and riches to them which have plenty; but to such as have none, you
given t^ any. And it is long time since I have been with you, yet I never
tasted of your liberality. The Emperor the next morning took two little Iron
Coffers, yet one was somewhat bigger, which he filled with Lead; the other with
Ducats; and bid his Page take one of them, which he would, for his long
service. The Page choosing the biggest, Now open it, said the Emperor, and see
what is within it; which he did, and found it to be Lead. Then said the
Emperor, Now thou know thy fortune, the fault was none of mine, that thy
choice was no better and that thou were not made rich; for thou have refused
thy good fortune when it was offered thee.

338.
A witty Gentlewoman, after her Husbands decease, was persuaded to live still a
Widow, in imitation, and by the example of the Turtle, which after the death
of the male, keeps continual chastity. To which she made answer, If I must
follow the conditions of the Birds, why do not you as well tell me of the Dove
and the Sparrow.

339.
Lewis the Gross King of France, taking part with Holy Earl of Maine, against
Henry King of England, in a Battle fought between them, found himself far
severed from his people. A certain English Knight seeing him, and being in hope
to make himself rich, by taking him Prisoner, laid hands upon the Reins of the
Kings Horse, with intent to stay him, and began to cry aloud, The King is
taken. The King being valiant and of a noble courage, at one blow with his
Sword overthrew the dead Knight to the ground: and seeing him fall, said, It is
not one Knight alone that can give the King the Mate.

340.
A certain bold Soldier was very importunate with a Gentleman to give him
something for the losses and damages he had received in the Wars, and showed
the wounds he had received in his visage. The Gentleman seeing him so rash and
audacious, resolved to fit him for his boasting and ostentation, saying, Take
heed thou turn not thy face another time, when thou art flying from the enemy.

341.
A certain Courtier finding the King in a good humor, as they discoursed of
Dreams, said with a good grace before all the Company, how the night before he
dreamt, That the King bestowed upon him a bag of Guineys. Whereunto the King
presently answered, Why are you so foolish as to think a Christian man ought to
believe Dreams.

342.
In the City of Constantinople a certain Christian desired to borrow of a Jew
the sum of Five hundred Ducats. The Jew lent them unto him, with condition,
that for the use of the money, he should at the end of the term give him two
ounces of his flesh, cut off in some one of his members. The day of payment
being come, the Christian repayed the Five hundred Ducats to the Jew, but
refused to give him any part of his flesh. The Jew not willing to lose his
interest, convented the Christian before Sultan Soliman, Emperor of the Turks,
who having heard the wicked demand of the one, and the answer of the other,
commanded a Razor to be brought and to be given to the Jew, to whom he said,
Because thou shall know that Justice is done thee, take there the Razor and cut
from the flesh of the Christian two ounces, which thou demandest; but take heed
thou cut neither more nor less; for if thou do, thou shall surely die. The
Jew holding that to be a thing impossible, durst not adventure, but acquitted
the Christian his Interest.

343.
The Pope, who will have the disposing of Kingdoms and Dominions and Empires,
when he consulted of taking up Arms against the Saracens, made Sanctius Brother
to the King of Spain, for his valor, hardiness, and good parts, King of Egypt;
which was immediately proclaimed. Sanctius not understanding Latin, in which
Language the Crier proclaimed him King of Egypt; and hearing the loud
Acclamations of the People, asked what they were for? who having told him that
the Pope had granted and proclaimed him King of Egypt, he said unto his
Interpreter, Stand up, and make here presently a Proclamation before all this
people, that seeing the Pope has made me King of Egypt, I make him Caliph of
Babylon.

344.
The Duke of Millain being besieged in a Castle by the Florentines; one day as
he sat at Dinner, he could not away, but fell in mislike with the taste of the
Victuals that were set before him; insomuch that he chid his Cook, and was very
angry with him. But the witty Cook willing to justify himself from blame, said
unto the Duke, My Lord, your mean is well though dressed, but the Florentines
have put your mouth out of taste.

345.
The Poet Dant demanded of a Citizen of Florence, What hour it was? who
answered him very rudely, That it was the hour, in which Horses go to be
watered. Dant suddenly replied, What do thou here then, that thou art not
gone?

346.
Before the Battle fought at Serizoles, the Marquess of Guast, assuring himself
of the Victory, gave his Jester a fair gilt Armor and a Spanish Jennet, and
promised to give him Five hundred Ducats, to the intent he should be the first
that should carry the News to his wife. But it happened that the French beat
the Emperors Army, and the Jester was taken and brought before the Lord
Anguien, who perceiving what he was asked who had furnished him in that order?
My Lord, replied he, the Marquess gave me my Horse and Arms; and should have
given me Five hundred Ducats to go and tell my Lady his Wife, the first
tidings of his Victory: but I believe he will gain the money himself, and is
posted thither in person.

347.
A Lords Fool seeing the Maids carry down much water into the Cellar to wash,
cried, Fire, Fire, at which all the Neighbors ran to help; but the Lord not
knoiwng how the matter was, searched all his House, and when all was found
safe, he thanked his good Neighbors for their kindness, and dismissed them. Not
long after the Maids began to carry down more water, and the Fool began to cry
Fire, Fire, again: so the Lord came out and asked him why he cried Fire? Why,
said he, I see them carry down so much water, and I thought there was Fire.

FINIS.
Books printed for, and sold by Samuel Lowndes at his Shop over against Exeter
House in the Strand.
DE Jure Uniformitatis Ecclesiasticae, or Three Books of the Rights belonging
to an Uniformity in Churches: In which things, the Laws of Nature, and Nations,
and of the Divine Law concerning the Ecclesiastical State with the Civil, are
unfolded. By Richard Davis, Chaplain to His Grace the Duke of Buckingham, in
Fol.

The true Prophecies of Michael Nostradamus, Physician to Henry the Second,
Francis the Second, and Charles the Ninth, Kings of France. and one of the best
Astronomers that ever were. A work full of curiosity and learning. Translated
by Theo. de Garencieres, Doctor of Physic, London. Folio.

Aerius Redivivus: Or the History of the Presbyterians, containing the
Beginning, Progress, and Successes of that active Sect. Their oppositions to
Monarchical and Episcopal Government, their Innovations in the Church, and
their Imbroilments of the Kingdoms, and Estates of Christendom, in the pursuit
of their designs from the year 1536. to the year 1647. By Peter Heylin, D. D.
And Chaplain to Charles the First and Second Monarchs of Great Britain.

The Complete Horseman, and Expert Farrier, in Two B^oks. 1. Showing the manner
of breeding good Horses, with their choice Nature, Riding and Dieting, as well
for Running as Hunting; as also directing the Groom, and Keeper, his true
Office. 2. Directing the most exact and approved manner, how to know, and cure,
all Diseases in Horses. A work containing the Secrets and best skill belonging,
either to Farrier, or Horse-Leach; the Cures placed Alphabetically; with
hundreds of Medicines never before imprinted by any Author. In Quarto.

The famous Conclave, wherein Clement the Eight was elected Pope; with the
Intrigues and Cunning Devices of that Ecclesiastical Assembly, in Quarto.

A Familiar Discourse between George a true hearted English Gentleman, and Hans
a Dutch Merchant, concerning the present Affairs of England, in Quarto.

A Short and Strange Relation of some part of the Life of Taffaletta, The Great
Conqueror and Emperor of Barbary, in Quarto.

Paul Festeau's French Grammar, being the newest and exactest Method now
extant, for the attaining to the Purity of the French Tongue. Augmented and
enriched with several choice and new Dialogues in Octav^.

PANSEIEIA. Or a View of all Religions in the World, with the several Church
Governments from the Creation, to these times; also a discovery of all known
Heresies in all Ages, and Places, and choice Observations and Reflections
throughout the whole World. Enlarged and Perfected by Alexander Ross, in Octavo.

Of Credulity and Incredulity in things Divine and Spiritual, (among other
things) a true and faithful Account is given of the Platonic Philosophy, as it
has reference to Christianity: As also the business of Witches, and
Witchcraft, fully argued and disputed by Merick Causabon, Doctor in Divinity,
and one of the Prebends of Christ Church in Canterbury, in Octavo.

The French Rogue, being a pleasant History of his life and fortune; adorned
with variety of other Adventures of no less rarity: with Epigrams suitable to
each Stratagem, in Octavo.

Cicero against Cataline, in four Invective Orations, containing the whole
manner of discovering that notorious Conspiracy, in Octavo.

Sermon Preche Devant le Roy a Whitehal. Par le Docteur Tillotson, Doyen de
Canterbury. In Octavo.

The Sinners Tears, in Meditations, and Prayers. By Tho Fettiplace, Dom. Pet.
Cantab. In Twelves.

The Gentile Sinner, or England's Brave Gentleman Charactered. In a Letter to a
Friend, as he is, and as he should be. By Clement Ellis, M. A. Fellow of Qu.
Col. Oxon.

Idea Eloquentiae, sive ut vulgo vocant Rhetoricae. De Periodis, Tropis,
Figuris Verborum, Figuris Senten^iarum, and integrae Orationis partibus
methodice differens. Ac insuper docens usum tum Periodos, tum Figuras tum
denique integram Orationem, juxta Artis Oratoriae regulas componendi. Authore
Joanne de Kerhuel. S. E. M. in Octavo.

Cambridge Jests, etc. in Duo decimo.

Private Devotions, digested into six Letanies. 1. Confession. 2. Deprecation.
3. Supplication. 4. Thanksgiving. 5. Intercession. 6. For the Sick. With
Directions and Prayers for the Lords day, Sacrament Day of Death and Judgment;
and two daily Prayers for Morning and Evening. Twenty fours.


