C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT

royal blazon or coat of armsBy the King.
A PROCLAMATION, For Discovering and Preventing the many Fraudulent Practices
of Underofficers, and others in stealing His Majesty's Customs.
CHARLES R.

WHereas the Kings Majesty's Customs and Subsidy due and payable upon Goods and
Merchandise exported and imported out of, and into the Kingdom of England,
Dominion of Wales, Port and Town of Berwick, being the greatest and most
considerable Branch of His Revenue, are not so well answered and paid as they
ought to be, by reason of sundry Fraudulent and Deceitful courses daily
practiced by diverse evil-affected persons, secretly combining with
Under-officers, Wharfingers, Lightermen, Watermen, Carmen, Porters, and others;
as also by a sort of lewd people called Smuckellors, never heard of before the
late disordered times, who make it their Trade and Profession, by many strange
and new devices to steal and defraud His Majesty of His Customs; and likewise
by another sort of Headstrong and Malicious People, who in a violent way by
open force with Clubs, Swords, and other Weapons, convey and carry away
uncustomed Goods, and oftentimes rescue Goods seized, beating, wounding, and
many ways evil-intreating the Officers attending His Majesty's Service, and
thereby giving evil example to others, who from these unlawful Courses and
Proceedings, take encouragement to oppose the Officers in executing and
performing their duty in entering into and searching of Houses, Warehouses,
and places where they may suspect or be informed of uncustomed Goods to be
housed, hidden, or any way concealed. And besides, it is conceived and
believed, That great quantities of Goods by the Laws prohibited to be exported
or imported, are by like practices, subtle and unlawful courses, frequently
exported and imported, to the great detriment as well of His Majesty as of His
loving and faithful Subjects. And whereas the Commons House of Parliament, out
of their great care of His Majesty's Revenue, have by their (...)


