By the King.
A PROCLAMATION For Preventing the Fears and Dangers that may arise from the
Concourse of Papisst, or Reputed Papists, in or near the Cities of London or
Westminster, durings this present Sitting of PARLIAMENT.
CHARLES R.

WHereas Our most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal
in this present Parliament Assembled, have besought Us, That We would be
Graciously pleased to Issue out Our Royal Proclamation, Thereby Requiring all
Papists, or reputed Papists, who now are or remain within Five Miles of Our
Cities of London and Westminster, or Our Borough of Southwark, not being
Householders, nor Attending any Peer of this Realm as a Menial Servant, to
repair to their respective Dwellings, or to depart Ten Miles from the Cities
and Borough aforesaid, and not to return during this Session of Parliament.
Provided, That it may be permitted for any Papist, or reputed Papist, to return
unto the Cities or Borough aforesaid, who shall first obtain a License
therefore under the Hands of any Sir of the Lords of Our Privy Council; And
that We would be pleased to give Order to the Quarter Sessions, That they give
in unto Us an Account of what Householders now are within the Cities or Borough
aforesaid, and Five Miles thereof, who are of that Profession; And that the
Quarter Sessions do Adjourn themselves from time to time for that purpose.
Which Address of theires We have seriously Considered, and do with much
Contentment and Satisfaction Accept; And as We have always manifested Our Zeal
for the Preservation of the True Religion Established in this Kingdom, and to
hinder the Growth and Increase of the Papish Religion, so We are now ready upon
this Occasion to prevent all Fears and Dangers that may arise by the Concourse
of persons of that Profession, in or near Our Cities of London or Westminster.
We therefore, by this Our Royal Proclamation, do straightly Command and Require
all Papists, and reputed Papists, who now are, or remain within Five Miles of
Our Cities of London and Westminster, or Borough of Southwark, not being
Householders, nor attending any Peer of this Realm, as a Menial Servant, That
they do before, or upon Monday next at the farthest, being the Nineteenth of
this instant January, repair to their respective Dwellings, or depart Ten Miles
from the Cities and Borough aforesaid: And, That they, nor any of them do
presume to return during the Sitting of Parliament, as they will answer the
contrary at their Perils. Provided always, That this Our Proclamation shall not
extend to Prohibit any Papist, or reputed Papist, from returning unto the
Cities or Borough aforesaid, who shall first obtain License therefore under
the Hands of any Sir of the Lords of Our Privy Council. And We do hereby
further Charge and Command Our Justices of the Peace, of and for Our Cities of
London and Westminster, and for Our several Counties of Middlesex, Surrey, Kent
and Essex, That at their nert Quarter Sessions to be holden for the said
respective Cities and Counties, They make diligent Enquiry within their
respective Jurisdictions, and give in unto Us an Account of what Householders
now are within the Cities or Borough aforesaid, or within Five Miles thereof,
who are of that Profession; And that they do cause the said Quarter Sessions to
be Adjourned from time to time for that purpose, as shall require.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Fourteenth day of January, in the Five and
twentieth year of Our Reign, 1673/4.
God save the King.
LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers
to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1673/4.


