C R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION For the Apprehending of certain Persons therein named, Accused
of High Treason.
CHARLES R.

WHereas it has appeared at the Trials and Arraignments of the Conspirators in
the horrid and Traitorous Conspiracy now under Prosecution, That among the
several ways and means contrived for the Murder of His Sacred Majesty, Four
Ruffians were appointed to go to Windsor, and there to Assassinate His Royal
Person; And whereas lately such Information has been given upon Oath, That
there is just cause to suspect, that Captain Lavallyan, Karney, and Thomas
Brahall Gent. being all Irishmen, and James Willson Gent. an Englishman, are
the persons that are guilty thereof, and were hired to commit that execrable
Crime; And whereas the said Capt. Lavallyan, Karney, Thomas Brahall, and James
Willson, are since fled from Justice, not daring to abide their Legal Trial;
The Kings most Excellent Majesty does by this His Royal Proclamation straightly
Charge and Command the said Captain Lavallyan, Karney, Thomas Brahall, and
James Willson, That they and every of them respectively do before the Twentieth
day of October, render themselves to the Lord Chief Justice, or some other the
Justices of the Kings Bench, who are hereby Commanded forthwith to Commit them
to safe Custody, there to remain in order to their Trials for this their
Offense. And His Majesty both also Charge and Command all and every Justices of
Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, and all other His Officers and
loving Subjects, That they and every of them do use their utmost endeavors for
the Apprehending the said Captain Lavallyan, Karney, Thomas Brahall, and James
Willson, and every of them. And His Majesty does hereby straightly Forbid and
Prohibit any of His Subjects to Conceal, Harbor, Relieve or Receive any of the
said Offenders, under the Peril of being themselves proceeded against (as by
Law they may) for the Crime of High Treason. And for a greater Encouragement of
all such as shall do their Duty herein, His Majesty does hereby Graciously
promise to such person or persons as shall Discover and Apprehend any of the
said Offenders, the Reward of One hundred pounds, which shall be respectively
paid upon the Discovery and Apprehending of the said Captain Lavallyan, Karney,
Thomas Brahall, and James Willson, or any of them. And as an Encouragement to
any of the Offenders themselves to come in and render themselves, His Majesty
does hereby further most Graciously promise, That if the said Offenders, or any
of them, shall before the Twentieth day of October aforesaid, render
themselves, and make a full Discovery of all their Accomplices, That then such
person so rendering himself, shall be Pardoned for his own Offense; but if they
shall refuse to render themselves as aforesaid, then they shall be proceeded
against according to the utmost Severity and Rigor of the Law.

Given at Our Court at Windsor the Eighth day of September 1679. In the One and
thirtieth year of Our Reign.
London, Printed by John Bill, Thomas Newcomb, and Henry Hills, Printers to the
Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1679.


