C R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION For the Discovery and Apprehending of several Persons justly
suspected to have Contrived and Acted in the Felonious Burning of Houses in and
about the City of LONDON.
CHARLES R.

WHereas due Information has been given, That Morris Gifford a Popish Priest,
Roger Clinton, Derby Molraine, alias Flower, and several other Persons of the
Romish Religion, have (out of their detestable and barbarous Malice) conspired
and agreed together to set on Fire the City of London, the Suburbs thereof, and
the Places thereunto Adjacent, and have in prosecution of such their Devilish
and Wicked Design procured diverse Mansion-Houses within the said City, Suburbs,
and Parts Adjacent, at Sundry Times, and in Diverse Places to be Set on Fire and
Burnt; The Kings most Excellent Majesty (at the humble desire of the Commons in
Parliament Assembled) Does by this His Royal Proclamation straightly Charge and
Command the said Morris Gifford, Roger Clinton, and Derby Molraine, alias
Flower (who are fled from Justice, so that at present they cannot be
apprehended to be proceeded against according to Law) that they, and every of
them do before the Tenth day of this instant Month of May, render themselves
respectively to the Lord Chief Justice, or some other of the Justices of the
Kings Bench, who are hereby Commanded forthwith to Commit them to His Majesty's
Gaol of Newgate, there to remain in safe Custody in order to their Trials for
such their Offenses. And His Majesty does also Charge and Command all and every
Justices of Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs, Constables, and other His Officers and
Loving Subjects, That they and every of them do use their utmost Endeavors for
the Apprehending as well of the said Morris Gifford, Roger Clinton, and Derby
Molraine, alias Flower, as of every other Person or Persons who shall be justly
suspected of being Guilty of the said Wicked and Detestable Crimes. And for a
greater Encouragement hereunto, His Majesty does hereby Graciously promise to
such Person or Persons as shall Discover and Apprehend any of the said
Offenders, the Reward of Fifty pounds; which shall be respectively paid upon
the Discovery and Apprehending of the said Morris Gifford, Roger Clinton, or
Derby Molraine, alias Flower, and immediately after the Discovery, Apprehending
and Conviction of any other of the said Offenders. And as an Encouragement to
any of the Offenders themselves, to Discover the rest, His Majesty does hereby
further Graciously promise, That if any of the said Offenders shall Discover
any of their Accomplices, whereby they or any of them shall be Apprehended,
that then such Discoverer shall not only be Pardoned his own Offense, but shall
in like manner receive the said Reward of Fifty pounds for each Offender so by
him Discovered, immediately upon the respective Conviction of such Offender.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Fourth day of May 1679. In the One and
thirtieth year of Our Reign.
London, Printed by John Bill, Thomas Newcomb, and Henry Hills, Printers to the
Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1679.


