C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION For the better quieting the Post-Master-General in the
execution of his Office, and for his future encouragement therein.
CHARLES R.

WHereas by Our Letters Patents under Our Great Seal of England, bearing date
the Fourteenth day of August, in the Twelfth year of our Reign, We did
constitute and appoint Henry Bishop Esquire Our Postmaster; which said Letters
Patents have since been surrendered to Us, and We have thought fit by other Our
Letters Patents under Our Great Seal of England, to constitute and appoint Our
Trusty and Welbeloved Daniel Oneale Esquire one of the Grooms of Our Bedchamber,
Our Post-Master-General, to perform and execute all and every the Powers and
Authorities in the Act of Parliament for Erecting and Establishing the Office
of Post-Master-General specified and contained: And whereas We are informed,
That notwithstanding Our former Proclamations touching the execution of the
said Post Office, many inconveniences have happened to many of Our loving
Subjects, and to the great damage of the Public Peace of Our Realms, by the
Carriage of both Foreign and Inland Letters by common Carriers, and others not
Authorized by the said Act, nor Licensed by Our Post-Master-General, whereby
many of Our loving Subjects are delayed and disappointed of their
Correspondency, and the same may be a great means of lessening the Revenue of
Our said Office, and may tend to the promoting seditious designs, to the
disturbance of the Peace of Our Realms. For prevention whereof, and the better
quieting and encouraging of Our said Post-Master-General in the execution of
his Office, and the due payment of his Rent, We have thought fit by this Our
Proclamation, further to advertise all and singular Our good Subjects of their
Duties, which is also expressed and declared in the said Act of Parliament,
That they are not to Carry or Re-carry any Letters with Speed, or by Post, and
deliver the same for hire within any of Our Dominions, or to or from any parts
beyond the Seas, without the License of Our said Post-Master-General, and
require all due obedience thereunto accordingly. And We do also strictly
prohibit and forbid all and singular person and persons whatsoever, other then
the said Daniel Oneale, his Deputies, Servants or Assigns, directly or
indirectly to do, execute, perform or intrude themselves to have any employment
in or about any thing which ought to be done by him the said Daniel Oneale, his
Deputies, Servants or Assigns, without the said Daniel Oneale his Deputation,
License or Allowance, upon pain of Our Displeasure, and such other Penalty as
may be inflicted upon the Offenders for contempt of this Our Royal Commandment,
and of the said Act of Parliament. And that the said Daniel Oneale, his
Deputies, Servants, and Assigns may the better attend the Service and Duty of
the said Office of Post-Master-General, We do hereby further declare Our Royal
Will and Pleasure to be, That the said Daniel Oneale, his Deputies, Servants
and Assigns, shall be from henceforth freed, exempted and discharged of and
from serving upon all Iuries, Inquests, Musters, or any other Public
Employments or Attendances that may any way impede, retard or prejudice the
execution of his or their Duty and Service in the said Office; and that he and
they shall have and enjoy all such Privileges as have been formerly granted by
any of Our Royal Ancestors unto the Masters of their Posts, and Servants. And
We do further expressly Will and Command by these Presents, all Mayors,
Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, Constables, Bailiffs, all Searchers of Our Ports,
and all other of Our Officers and Ministers wheresoever within their several
Jurisdictions and Offices, from time to time to make diligent search for all
Mayls and Bougets in any Ship or Vessel, and other Carriages, of all such
Disallowed and Unlicensed Carriers and Messengers, or other suspected persons
carrying Pacquets or Letters from place to place within Our said Realms and
Dominions, or coming in, or going out of the Realm, to or from any other
Kingdoms or Countries, contrary to the Tenor of the said Act of Parliament, and
the Rights and Privileges of the Post-Master-General therein declared and
established; and to seize all and every such Mayls and Pacquets of Letters
which shall be found in the hands of persons not having lawful Warrant or
Authority from Our Post-Master-General for the time being to carry the same:
And to carry the said Mayls or Pacquets of Letters to Our General Post Office
in London, or to the Deputy of Our said Post-Master-General, in any part or
place where the same shall be seized, to the end that they may be disposed with
all speed for the benefit of all such Our loving Subjects as are concerned
therein. And We do hereby also straightly Charge and Command, That all
Post-Masters within all Our Realms and Dominions, and all others relating to
the said Post Office, shall within Six Months next after the date hereof,
obtain under the Hand and Seal of the Bishop or Ordinary of the Diocese wherein
the same Post-Masters, or other persons relating to the said Office do live,
and deliver, or cause the same to be delivered to Our said Post-Master-General
or his Deputy in the Office aforesaid, a Certificate that he is Conformable to
the Discipline of the Church of England, upon pain of being put out and
discharged of his Employment and Charge. And We do further Charge and Command,
That no Post-Masters or other Officers that shall be employed in the conveying
of Letters, or distributing of the same, or any other person or persons of what
quality or condition soever they be, except by the immediate Warrant of Our
Principal Secretaries of State, shall presume to open any Letters or Pacquets
not directed unto themselves, or that they or any other persons whatsoever do
stop any Mayl in the Passage to or from London, or any other place whither the
same is consigned and directed, but shall truly and faithfully deliver the same
without any opening, concealing, or retarding the delivery thereof, upon pain
of Our high Displeasure, and such other Penalties and Forfeitures as may be
inflicted upon the Offenders herein. And We do hereby Will and Command, that
the Names of such person or persons as shall presume to act or do any thing
contrary to Our Will and Pleasure herein before Declared, be immediately
certified, with the places of their abode, to Our Principal Secretaries of
State, or one of them, to the end they may be proceeded against and punished
according to their demerits.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the 25th day of May, 1663. in the Fifteenth
year of Our Reign.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent MAJESTY, 1663.


