By the King. A PROCLAMATION For the Discovery and Apprehension of the Earl of
Bristol.
CHARLES R.

WHereas We intended to have proceeded according to Law and Justice against
George Earl of Bristol, for Crimes of a high nature by him committed against
Our Person and Government; and to the end he might be brought to answer, and to
a Legal Trial, We did give Order, and Our Officers and Ministers have used all
diligence to apprehend him; but he does conceal and lurk in secret and unknown
places, and will not submit himself to Justice, contrary to his Duty and
Allegiance: We have therefore thought f^t, by and with the Advice of Our Privy
Council, to publish the same to all Our loving Subjects, and cannot doubt of
their care and forwardness in his Discovery and Apprehension. And We do by this
Our Proclamation (whereof he ought, and shall be presumed to take notice)
enjoin and command the said Earl, with all speed, after the publication hereof,
to render himself, and appear at Our Council Board, there to receive and
undergo such Order as shall be given concerning him. And We do hereby further
straightly Charge and Command all and singular Justices of the Peace, Mayors,
Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, and other Our Officers, Ministers, and Subjects
whatsoever, to be diligent, and use their best endeavors to search for and
apprehend the said Earl, in all places whatsoever. And Our Will and Pleasure
is, That if he be apprehended, they cause him to be safely carried to the
Sheriff of that County where he shall be so apprehended; and the said Sheriff
safely to convey to the Lords of Our Privy Council, there to answer such things
as shall be objected against him, and for such further course to be taken with
him, as We by the Advice of Our Council shall direct: Whereof they and every of
them whom it may concern, are to take special care, as they will answer the
neglect thereof at their perils. And We do hereby further Publish and Declare,
That if any person or persons after the publication of this Our Proclamation,
shall directly or indirectly conceal or harbor the sai^ Earl, or shall not use
his or their best endeavor for his Discovery and Apprehension, as well by
giving due advertisement thereof to Our Officers, as by all other good means,
We will (as there is just cause) proceed against them that shall so neglect
this Our Command, with all severity.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, this 25th day of August, 1663. in the
Fifteenth year of Our Reign.
God save the King.
LONDON: Printed by John Bill and Christo^her Barker, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, 1663.


