By the King.
A PROCLAMATION For the Apprehending certain Offenders therein named, and for
the better Security of His Majesty and His Government, from Dangers arising
from Popish Recusants.
CHARLES R.

THe Kings most Excellent Majesty, upon the humble Petition, and at the Desire
of the (...) Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in Parliament Assembled, Does
by this His Royal ^tion Straightly Charge and Command George Conniers, (...)
Symonds, Charles Walsh, (...) Le Phaire, (...) Prichard, and (...) Biston,
otherwise Beeston, (late Servant to the Lady Bellasise) who stand Charged as
persons Guilty of the Damnable and Hellish Plot for the Destruction of the
Kings Royal Person, and the Subversion of His Government, and for the
Extirpation of the True Protestant Religion Established by Law within this His
Kingdom, and are fled from Justice, so that they cannot at present be
Apprehended to be proceeded against according to Law, That they and every of
them do before the Tenth day of December next ensuing, render themselves
respectively to the Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, or to some other of
the Justices of the same Court, who are hereby Commanded forthwith to Commit
the person or persons so rendering him or themselves, to His Majesty's Gaol of
Newgate, there to remain in safe Custody, in order to their Trials for the
Facts aforesaid: And His Majesty does hereby give the said Offenders to
understand, That if they shall not render themselves as aforesaid, His Majesty
has Commanded that a Bill shall be presented to His House of Peers, to be
Passed into a Law for Attainting such of them of High Treason, who shall not so
render themselves. And His Majesty does also Charge and Command all and every
Lord-Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, Justices of the Peace, Sheriffs,
Constables, and other His Majesty's Officers, and Loyal Subjects, That they and
every of them do use their utmost Endeavor for the Apprehending of the said
persons, and every of them, and for their Imprisonment, and safe Custody in
manner aforesaid. And for the greater Encouragement of such as shall Discover
and Apprehend any of the said Offenders, His Majesty does hereby Graciously
Promise to any who shall Discover and Apprehend any of the said Offenders, the
Reward of One hundred pounds, which shall be immediately paid to the person or
persons who shall Discover and Apprehend, or cause to be Apprehended, any of
the said Offenders, upon notice and proof thereof. And further, His Majesty
does hereby strictly Charge and Command all Constables, Churchwardens,
Headboroughs, Tythingmen, Borsholders, and other Parish-Officers within this
His Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, That
they and every of them do with all possible Expedition make diligent Search and
Enquiry in all Houses within their respective Parishes, Hamlets and Villages,
and there take an exact Account of the Names and Surnames of all such Persons
as are Popish Recusants, or reputed so to be, as well Householders as Lodgers
and Servants, and every of them, and to make up a present List of the Names and
Surnames, Age and Quality of all such Persons being of the Age of Sixteen years
or upwards, and forthwith to deliver such List to one of the Justices of the
Peace, dwelling in or near adjoining to the Place where such List shall be
taken; which said Justice, and such other Justice or Justices of the Peace of
the same County, City, Liberty or Place, who shall be made acquainted with such
List, are hereby required to send for the said Persons so Listed, or such of
them to whom by Law the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy may be tendered, and
to tender to them and every of them the said Oaths, and in case of a Refusal to
take the same, to require the said Person so refusing, to enter into a
Recognizance with Two or more sufficient Securities, to appear at the next
Sessions of the Peace for such County, City, Liberty or Place; and in Default
of their entering into such Recognizance, to Commit them respectively to the
common Gaol, there to remain under safe Custody until the next Quarter Sessions
of the Peace of the said County, City, Liberty or Place where such Persons so
refusing are to be proceeded against according to Law; His Majesty hereby
giving the said Justices to understand, That the better to enable them to
tender the said Oaths, His Majesty has Commanded respective Commissions to be
Issued under the Great Seal of England, directed to the several Justices of the
Peace of such Counties, Cities, Liberties or Places, to Authorize and Require
them or any two of them to Administer the said Oaths accordingly.

And moreover, His Majesty does hereby Straightly Charge and Command all and
every the said Lord-Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, and Justices of the Peace,
That they and every of them do within their respective Jurisdictions, proceed
without delay to Disarm all such Persons as shall so refuse to take the said
Oaths. And for the better Effecting thereof, His Majesty is Graciously pleased
to Declare, That if any Person shall Discover any considerable quantity of the
Arms of any Popish Recusant, or Person so reputed, he shall have as a Reward
for the same, the Sum of Ten pounds, the same to be paid unto him by the
Sheriff of the County or City where the same shall be done; which said Sum
shall be allowed unto such Sheriff upon his Account in the Exchequer. And
lastly, His Majesty does hereby further Charge and Command all and every His
Officers of or belonging to any of His Seaports, That they and every of them
do take special Care, and use their utmost Diligence for the Apprehending of
all Popish Priests, and all other Persons being His Majesty's Subjects, whom
they shall find any just Cause to suspect to be Popish Recusants, coming into
or going out of this Realm, and to carry every such Persons before some
Justices of the Peace, who are hereby Required to tender to every of them the
said Oaths, and upon Refusal thereof, to Commit the Person so refusing to the
proper Prison of that Place, and to certify their Proceedings therein to His
Majesty's Privy Council from time to time, that such further Course may be
taken for the Safety of His Majesty and His Government, as to His Majesty's
Royal Wisdom shall be thought fit.

Given at the Court at Whitehall, the Seventeenth day of November, in the
Thirtieth year of His Majesty's Reign. 1678.
GOD SAVE THE KING.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill, Christopher Barker, Thomas Newcomb, and Henry
Hills, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1678.


