C R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION For the more effectual Discovery of Jesuits, and of all Estates
belonging to them, or to any Popish Priest, College, Seminary, or other Popish
and Superstitious Foundation.
CHARLES R.

WHereas His Majesty was Graciously pleased by His Royal Proclamation dated the
Twentieth day of November 1678. to promise a Reward of Twenty pounds to any
person who should Discover and Apprehend any Popish Priest or Jesuit, as in the
said Proclamation is expressed, whereof His Majesty has found good effect, and
hopes more will follow by the due putting thereof in execution; However His
Majesty having been lately more fully Informed of the pernicious practices of
the Jesuits, and that diverse of them do still lie Lurking and Disguised within
this His Majesty's Realm of England, Contriving and carrying on their
Traitorous Plots and Designs against His Majesty's Person and Government, and
the Protestant Religion by Law Established: His Majesty is therefore Graciously
pleased by this His Royal Proclamation to add to the Reward formerly Promised,
and does hereby Promise to him or them who shall Discover and Apprehend, or
cause to be Apprehended any Jesuit, the Sum of Eighty pounds besides the former
Twenty pounds, in all One hundred pounds, which shall be immediately paid upon
the Conviction of such Jesuit. And His Majesty does hereby appoint the Lords
Commissioners of His Treasury, or the Lord High Treasurer of England, to pay
the same accordingly without delay or abatement. And His Majesty is further
Graciously pleased to Declare, That whosoever shall Discover any Estate, Real
or Personal, belonging to any Jesuit or Jesuits, or College, or Seminary of
Jesuits, or to any Popish Priest, College, Seminary, Covent, or Nunnery of
Popish and Superstitious Foundation (Except the same be issuing out, or part of
the Estate and Estates of Sir Thomas Preston, Sir John Warner, Two thousand
five hundred pounds Charge upon the Estate of Henry Nevil Esquire, and Fifteen
hundred pounds in the hands of Augustine Hungate, which are already Discovered,
and now under Examination before the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury) shall
have one full Moiety thereof. And His Majesty does hereby straightly Charge and
Command all His Judges, Justices of the Peace, Magistrates, Officers, and other
Loyal Subjects whatsoever within His Realm of England, Dominion of Wales, and
Town of Berwick upon Tweed, That they use their utmost Care and Endeavors to
Discover, Apprehend, and Commit, or cause to be Committed to safe Custody, in
order to their Trial, all Jesuits and Priests, as by His said former
Proclamation is Commanded.

Gi^en at Our Court at Whitehall the Twelfth day of November 1679. In the One
and thirtieth year of Our Reign.
London, Printed by John Bill, Thomas Newcomb, and Henry Hills, Printers to the
Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1679.


