C R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION For Suspending the Execution of a Commission of Reprizal
granted unto Sir Edmond Turner and George Carew, on behalf of themselves and
others.
CHARLES R.

WHereas We by Our Letters Patents bearing date the Nineteenth day of May, in
the Seventeenth year of Our Reign, did by Advice of Our Privy Council, give and
grant License and Authority under Our Great Seal of England, unto Sir Edmond
Turner Knight, and George Carew Esquire, their Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, for and on behalf of themselves and other persons interessed, to Equip
and set out to Sea, as many Ships and Pinnaces as they should think fit; and
therewith by force of Arms to set upon take, and apprehend any of the Ships,
Goods, and Merchandises of the States General of the United Provinces, or any
of their Subjects inhabiting within any of their Dominions or Territories, or
within any particular State within those provinces, wheresoever the same shall
be found: And that the same being so taken, should be brought into some port
within Our Realms or Dominions, and there Inventoried, and upon due proceedings
to he thereupon had in Our Court of Admiralty, should be adjudged as lawful
Prize to the said Sir Edmond Turner and George Carew: Which said Commission was
to remain in full force, until the said Sir Edmond Turner and George Carew,
their Executors, Administrators and Assigns should by virtue thereof have
seized and recovered from the said States General or their Subjects, One
hundred fifty one thousand six hundred and twelve pounds, as in and by the said
Commission, relation being thereunto had, more at large it does and may appear.

Since the granting of which said Commission, diverse great and notable
misdemeanors have been committed by the said Sir Edmond Turner and George
Carew, and their Assigns, in the execution thereof, by seizing upon the Ships
and goods belonging to the Subjects of such Princes and States as are now in
Amity and Alliance with Us, and by neglecting to proceed in Our Court of
Admiralty, as by the said Commission they ought to have done; By reason
whereof, and of several other indirect and illegal proceedings, it is found to
be very prejudicial to Our Service to permit or suffer any further execution of
the said Commission, until some further consideration can be thereof taken. We
have therefore thought fit by the Advice of Our Privy Council to Declare, and
do hereby publish Our Royal Will and Pleasure, That the said Commission, and
all and every the Powers and Authorities therein granted, shall be, and are
hereby suspended. And We do hereby straightly Charge and Command the said Sir
Edmond Turner, George Carew, and their Assigns, and every of them, and all
Captains and Officers of Ships, and all other Seamen and Mariners whatsoever,
That they or any of them do not presume to put in execution the said
Commission, or any part thereof, or to be aiding or assisting unto any person
or persons in the Premises, until Our Pleasure shall be further known, upon
pain of being proceeded against as Pirates, and prosecuted with the utmost
severity of Our Laws for presuming to break this Our Royal Command.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Tenth day of August, 1666. In the
Eighteenth year of Our Reign.
Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty, 1666.


