CR
DIEV^ET MON^DROIT
HONI^SOIT^QVI^MAL^Y^PENSE^
royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION, For the due Observation of certain Statutes made for the
suppressing of Rogues, Vagabonds, Beggars, and other idle disorderly persons,
and for Relief of the POOR.
CHARLES R.

THe Kings most Excellent Majesty being watchful for the public good of his
loving Subjects, and taking notice of the great and unusual resort of Rogues,
Uagabonds, Beggars, and other idle Persons of all Ages and Sexes, from all
parts of the Nation to the Cities of London and Westminster and the Suburbs of
the same, where they make it their trade to beg and live idly, and to get
their living by Begging, Stealing, and other wicked and lewd practices, to the
great offense of Almighty God, and to the dishonor of His Majesty's Royal
Government; And his Majesty taking it into His Princely consideration, that
this Realm is furnished with excellent Laws and Orders for redress of such
Enormities, yet through negligence of Officers, and presumption of the
Offenders, the same nevertheless do rather grow then abate. His Majesty has
therefore thought fit at this present by advice of his Privy Council, to cause
some necessary Laws formerly made for the reforming the Abuses aforesaid, to be
duly executed and observed. And for that end, whereas by the Laws of this Land
all Uagabonds, Beggars, and idle persons are to be sent to the place of their
Birth, or of their last abode, there to be relieved and kept if they be
impotent, or otherwise made to labor: His Majesty does by this Proclamation
publish and declare His Royal Pleasure and Commands, that all such Uagabonds,
Beggars and Idle persons within the Cities of London and Westminster and the
Suburbs of the same, which by Law are not there to be provided for (to the
wrong of the native poor, and a burden to the several Parishes where now they
are) but that they forthwith at their Perils depart from the same and speedily
resort to the place of their Birth or last abode, that they may be there
provided for as they ought to be. And if any such Uagabonds, Beggars, or idle
persons shall or may be found within the Cities of London and Westminster, or
in any of the Suburbs or Precincts of the same, or in the Borough of Southwark,
or in any Town near adjoining, upon the four and twentieth day of this month
of May, His Majesty straightly charge and commands, as well the Lord Mayor,
Recorder, Aldermen and Sheriffs of the said City of London, and all other
Officers of the said City, and all other His Majesty's Justices of the Peace,
Magistrates and Officers whatsoever within the City of Westminster, Borough of
Southwark, or within the County of Middlesex, to cause all such persons to be
apprehended, and openly whipped, and sent away (except such as are willing to
go to the English Plantations) And that in all things they do speedily execute,
and cause to be put in execution the Statute made in the Thirty ninth year of
Queen Elizabeth Chap. the 4 th concerning the punishment of Rogues and
Uagabonds: And to the end that all such persons may not only be settled and kept
from wandering, but also made to labor and so kept from idleness, his Majesty
does straightly charge and command all and singular Sheriffs, Justices of the
Peace, and other Officers and Ministers in the several Counties of this Realm,
and all Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Aldermen and other Magistrates, Officers
and Ministers of all other Cities and Towns Corporate, that they and every of
them within their several Limits and Jurisdictions respectively do carefully
and diligently put in due and speedy Execution the same Statute of the Thirty
ninth of Elizabeth, Chapter the Fourth, both for erecting houses of Correction,
and for punishing such Uagabonds and idle persons; as also the Statutes of the
1. Jacob. Chap. 7. made for the explanation of the said Statute made in the
Seventh year of King James Chapter Fourth, for the ordering such houses of
Correction. And to the end that not only sturdy Rogues and Uagabonds may be
duly kept from wandering and idleness, and held to labor, but that also poor
and Fatherless Children and Widows, the Aged and Impotent may be also carefully
provided for and relieved, and not permitted to wander and lie in the Streets
begging from door to door; It is His Majesty's express Charge and Command to
all Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Justices of the Peace, Magistrates, Officers
and Ministers in the several Counties of this Realm, and in all Cities and
Towns Corporate, that they diligently and carefully put in execution that
excellent Statute made in the Forty third Year of Elizabeth, Chapter the
second, concerning the Overseers of the Poor, and their duty for raising a
Stock for maintenance of the Poor, and for binding forth Children Apprentices,
which His Majesty commends in an especial manner to their Care: Their
neglecting this so great a work, in not carefully providing for poor Fatherless
Children and Infants for their teaching and instructing them, and for fitting
them for Trades and Services, and in not binding them forth Apprentices; all
which neglect is a great cause of poor childrens idleness, wandering, and
wickedness in the whole course of their lives; And to the end that convenient
Stocks may be raised in all Parishes, especially for the ends aforesaid, His
Majesty requires the several Overseers of the Poor to be diligent in raising
such Stocks according to the Power given them. And also His Majesty requires
all Mayors, Bailiffs, Justices of the Peace, Magistrates and other Officers
aforesaid, to be careful in putting in speedy and due Execution all the
Statutes concerning Tippling and Drunkenness, and concerning unlawful or
irregular Inns or Alehouses, and all other Statutes, the penalties whereof are
disposed to the use of the Poor of the several Parishes; and to cause the said
several penalties to be delivered to the Overseers of the Poor respectively for
the increase of the said Stock, to buy materials to employ the said Poor, and
also to be careful in diligent calling to account the said Overseers, and to
see the said sums so raised may be carefully employed for the good education
and instruction and binding out of such poor Infants and Fatherless Children,
and providing for relief of the Poor aforesaid, which may in probability
encourage some charitable and well disposed Persons voluntarily to contribute
and add to such Stocks by their free and weekly contributions (which they daily
bestowed on idle begging Poor) or otherwise. His Majesty therefore expects all
Mayors, Justices, Magistrates and other His Officers to whom the Execution of
the Law aforesaid is particularly concerned, that they be very careful in the
due and speedy execution of every one of them, as they will avoid His Majesty's
just indignation for their neglect of their duties in hindering this so great a
National work, and for the Contempt of His Royal Commandment: His Majesty being
resolved to have an account, both from the said Justices, and the several
Judges of Assizes in their several Circuits, of the due observation hereof,
until His Majesty shall take a further Course by the advice of His Parliament,
which he determines to do, that no poor shall be permitted to be Uagrant or
Begging, but all such as are Impotent and not able to work, may be provided
for, so as to live comfortably, and yet be kept from professed idleness, and
such as are able may have means provided to set them on work.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Ninth day of May, One thousand six
hundred sixty one, and in the Thirteenth year of His Majesty's Reign. GOD SAVE
THE KING.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the KING'S
most Excellent MAJESTY, 1661.

At the KINGS Printing House in Blackfriars.


