C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION For the prevention of Frauds and Abuses in the payment of
Excise for Beer and Ale.
CHARLES R.

WHereas by several late Acts of Parliament made for the settling of Our
Revenue, certain Rates, Duties, and Charges of Excise are granted unto Us upon
Beer, Ale, and other the Liquors in the said Acts mentioned; For the better
improvement whereof, and to the end the same may be the more equally Assessed
and Levied, and Our Revenue thereby reduced to the more certainty, We did
lately give Order that the same should be let to Farm according to the
limitations and directions of the said Acts; which accordingly is done, so as
the said Duties and Charges of Excise in all or most of the Counties and Cities
of this Our Kingdom, are now let to Farm for the Term of Three years: And
whereas We are given to understand, that diverse Brewers, and other persons
concerned in the payment of the said Duties, in or about the Cities of London
and Westminster, and other places of this Our Kingdom, which We may hope is not
so much out of disaffection to Our Government, as for making to themselves
unjust gain, by defrauding Us, and Our said Farmers of their just Duties, have
set up, and do daily make use of private and concealed Tuns, Backs, and other
Brewing-Vessels, to which the Gagers who are appointed by the said Acts of
Parliament to take account of their Beer and Ale, can have no access; And by
diverse other Frauds and Concealments, do practice and go about to diminish Our
said Revenue, and also to prejudice and under-sell such their fellow-Traders as
do duly conform to the Acts of Parliament aforesaid. And whereas since the
letting of the said Excise to Farm, the said Brewers, to prevent the discovery
of the true quantity and quality of the Beer and Ale made by them, do deny
entrance into their Brewhouses to the said Gagers, contrary to the said Acts of
Parliament, and also to their former usage of admitting the said Gagers to
search as well by night as by day; the said Brewers in the mean time Brewing
also, and Cleansing likewise oftentimes on Sundaies, to the great dishonor of
Christianity, and profanation of the Lords day; and do also oppose and
discourage the said Gagers in their Offices, not only by reviling language, but
also by force of arms and otherwise, diverse of them having lately been
assaulted, beaten and wounded in the execution of their Duty in that behalf, to
the breach of Our Peace, and manifest contempt of Our Authority. And whereas
diverse Constables and other Officers, upon the request of the said Gagers, have
refused to give them such assistance in their Services, as by the said Acts of
Excise they ought to give them: We therefore minding the speedy reformation of
the said abuses, and the maintaining and upholding of Our said Revenue by all
such just and lawful ways and means as are appointed by the said Acts of
Parliament; And to the end that Our Farmers of the said Duties in the said
respective Counties and Cities may be the better enabled to Levy and Raise the
same without opposition or disturbance, and consequently to satisfy and pay
their respective Farm-Rents reserved and payable unto Us: We have thought fit,
and do hereby publish and declare, That We expect a ready and cheerful
obedience to be given by all persons concerned in the payment of the said Rates
and Duties according to the said Acts of Parliament, and that We intend to
proceed with all severity and rigor against all such common Brewers,
Victuallers, and other persons whatsoever concerned in the payment of the said
Duties, as shall be found to have erected, set up, or used any such private or
concealed Tuns, Backs, or other Vessels, as aforesaid, for the Brewing or
Making of any Beer or Ale, or other the Liquors Exciseable, or that shall Brew,
Cleanse, or dispose of any Beer or Ale, or other the Liquors aforesaid on
Sundaies, or that at any time hereafter shall refuse or delay to permit such
Gager or Gagers as are or shall be appointed in that behalf, to enter and take
account of such Beer and Ale, and other the Liquors aforesaid, or that shall
use or offer any force, violence, or opposition to any such Gager or Gagers, or
shall use any railing or reviling speeches, whereby to terrify or affright him
or them from the execution of his or their Duty; And that all person and
persons whatsoever who shall suffer any such private Tuns or other Vessels to
be erected, set up, or used in or about his or their house or houses, by, or
for any such common Brewer, or that shall attempt or endeavor by any of the
said abuses, ways and means to diminish Our said Revenue, shall be taken and
deemed as persons disaffected to Our Government, disturbers of Our Peace, and
contemners of Our Royal Authority, and of the said Acts of Parliament, and
shall be proceeded against accordingly. And We do hereby strictly Charge and
Require all Justices of Peace, and others to whom the Hearing, Adjudging and
Determining of or concerning any Forfeitures or Offenses made and committed
against the said Acts of Excise, is entrusted, That upon any Complaint or
Information exhibited and brought before them touching any such Forfeiture or
Offense, they do forthwith proceed against the Offenders, as in and by the said
Acts is directed, as they will answer the contrary at their perils.

And We do further straightly Charge and Command all Constables, Headboroughs,
Tything-men, and other Officers, That from time to time (upon request of any of
the said Farmer or Farmers, or of their Deputies, Gagers and Officers
constituted under their respective hands and Seals) they be aiding and
assisting unto them and every of them respectively, as well in demanding and
making entrance in the nightime according to the said Acts of Parliament (if
need be) into any Brewhouse, or other place belonging to, or used by any common
Brewer, or other person concerned in the payment of the Excise aforesaid, as in
keeping Our Peace, and in Publishing and Serving such General Summons,
Precepts, and Warrants, as by virtue of the said Acts of Parliament from time
to time Our said Farmers or any of them shall send unto them: And to the end
that Our Will and Pleasure herein may be made known, We do hereby Will and
Require the several and respective Sheriffs, Mayors, Bailiffs, in the several
and respective Counties, Cities, and Towns-Corporate of this Our Realm, to
cause this Our Proclamation to be openly Read and Published in the Marketplace
of every Market Town within their several and respective Sheriffwicks and
Liberties, upon some Market Day, within Fourteen days next after their receipt
hereof, as they will answer the contrary at their perils.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Seventeenth day of December, 1662, in the
Fourteenth year of Our Reign.
London, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, 1662.


