By the King. A PROCLAMATION For the Well-ordering the making of White-Starch
within this Realm, and for Restraint of the Importation thereof from Foreign
Parts.
CHARLES R.

WHereas Our Dear and Royal Father of blessed Memory, in the Fourteenth year of
his Reign, for the remedying of many great abuses and inconveniences then
complained of, by the excessive and disorderly making of White-Starch in many
places within this Realm, by the converting and consuming great quantities of
Wheat and other Grain fit for Man's food into Starch, Did Incorporate certain
persons for the better Government of the said Starch-Trade, which said
Corporation is since dissolved and determined: And whereas like Complaints have
been made unto Us by Our loving Subjects, upon just and manifest occasions of
the said abuses and inconveniences, now again increasing by the said
disorderly making of White-Starch. For the remedying whereof, no better means
has been offered to Us, then by re-erecting a Corporation of the most discreet
persons experienced in the making of Starch, who may be enabled to make Laws
and Ordinances for the regulating the said Abuses and Inconveniences; We
therefore following the example of Our Royal Predecessors herein, by Our
Letters Patents under Our Great Seal of England, have Incorporated sundry meet
persons of the said Trade of Starch-making, with power and privileges to them
and their Successors, to make or cause to be made in one joint stock, and not
otherwise, in such convenient place or places, as shall be appointed by Us, Our
Heirs or Successors, or six of Our Privy Council, and not elsewhere, All and all
manner of White-Starch with Bran and Pollard only, or with Wheat-Corn or Grain
imported from beyond the Seas, or with musty, defective, and unwholesome Corn,
unfit for the Food of Man; and not of any wholesome Corn or Grain of the growth
of this Realm of England, and the same to put to sale at reasonable prices; and
to Rule, Order, and Govern the Members of the said Corporation; and to make
Orders and Rules for the well-ordering the said Starch-Trade thoroughout Our
Realm of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town and Port of Berwick; and to
search and try all Starch that shall be made by any Member of the said
Corporation, and all materials for the making of the same: And further Granting
by Our said Letters Patent, That no person or persons whatsoever, not being
Free of the said Corporation, should from thenceforth use the Art or Trade of
Starch-making, or make any Starch to sell within Our Realm of England, Dominion
of Wales, or Town of Berwick, except he or they have served to the said Trade
as an Apprentice for the space of seven years, or have seven years used the
said Trade as a Member of the late former Corporation of Starch-makers; And
that no White Starch shall be imported into Our said Realm of England, Dominion
of Wales, or Town of Berwick, from beyond the Seas, upon the pains and
forfeitures in that behalf in the said Letters Patents mentioned; and with
other reasonable and fitting Powers for the regulating the said Starch-Trade,
as by Our said Letters Patents more at large may appear. Now to the end Our
loving Subjects may take knowledge of Our Royal Pleasure herein, and the remedy
we have provided for the redressing and preventing the said inconveniences, by
establishing the said Corporation for the good Government of the said Trade,
and Reformation of abuses therein; We do by this Our present Proclamation,
straightly charge and command, That no person or persons whatsoever, other then
such as are or shall be Members of the said present Corporation of
Starch-makers, or shall have served as an Apprentice, or have used the said
Trade as Member of the said former Corporation, for the space of seven years,
shall presume, attempt, or go about to make any Starch, other then for his or
their private use, and not to sell, nor shall make the same of any wholesome
Wheat, Flower, or Meal fit for the food of Man, of the Growth of this Our
Realm, but of Bran and Pollard only, or of Grain to be Imported from Foreign
Parts; And that no person or persons shall make any such Starch, or cause the
same to be made in any other place or places, nor in any other manner then by
Our said Letters Patents of Incorporation is directed and appointed; And that
no person presume to sell any Starch, as a Hukster, or Hawker, from door to
door in private, or secret, or otherwise then in their own proper and open
Shops or Warehouses for any Member of the said Corporation, or on the behalf,
or by the appointment of any Member of the said Corporation; And that no
Grocer, Chapman or other person who uses to buy Starch to sell again, shall
buy, utter, sell, or otherwise vent any Starch, which they shall know to have
been made by any person not qualified to make the same, or who shall make the
same contrary to the direction of Our said Letters Patents. And We do likewise
straightly charge and command, That no person or persons, Our Natural born
Subjects, Denizens, or Strangers whatsoever, do hereafter Import, or bring, or
cause to be Imported, or brought into Our Realm of England, Dominion of Wales,
or Town of Berwick, from any the Parts beyond the Seas, any White Starch
whatsoever, upon pain of forfeiture of all such White Starch as shall be so
Imported. And Our Will and Pleasure is, and We do hereby empower and command
all and singular the Officers of Our Customs, within all and every the Ports
and Havens of Our said Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales and Town of
Berwick, That they and every of them, do stay and seize, or cause to be stayed
and seized all Foreign White Starch, which shall hereafter be Imported contrary
to Our Royal Pleasure herein Declared, and within ten days after such seizure,
or stay made, to give notice of the same to the Master, Wardens, and Assistants
of the said Corporation for the time being, or to some of them or their
Deputies, upon pain of Our Displeasure, and such other punishments as their
contempt or neglect therein shall deserve. And We do likewise straightly charge
and command, That no person or persons whatsoever, do at any time hereafter,
presume to withstand or oppose the Master, Wardens, and Assistants of the said
Corporation, for the time being, their Searchers, or Deputies in Search for
White Starch, Imported or unduely made by any Member of the said Corporation,
or other persons qualified to make the same as aforesaid, or the materials
prepared for the making thereof, contrary to the Tenor of Our said Letters
Patents, or in doing or executing any the Powers, Privileges, or Authorities
thereby given or limited unto the said Corporation, nor shall willingly
countenance, abet, conceal, maintain, or keep any person or persons offending
in any of the Premises, nor shall purposely, or intentionally let any House,
Shop, or place wherein any Starch shall be made contrary to the Tenor hereof:
And if any person or persons do, or shall at any time or times hereafter make,
or cause to be made or Imported, any White Starch, contrary to the Tenor
hereof; or shall otherwise be found to offend in any the Premises; Our Will
and Pleasure is And We do hereby Declare, that upon complaint thereof made to
Our Privy Council, or any three or more of them by any Member of the said
Corporation, such offenders shall be proceeded against, and shall suffer the
utmost punishment, which by Law may be inflicted for the contempt of Our Royal
Prerogative and Command, in a matter of such consequence touching the good
benefit of Our people. And We do likewise straightly charge and command all
Justices of the Peace, Majors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, Headboroughs,
Tithingmen, and all other Our Officers and Ministers, that they and every of
them, at all times hereafter, and from time to time within their several
Jurisdictions, be aiding and assisting to the said Corporation, their Searchers
and Deputies, and all other Our Customers, Waiters, and all other person and
persons in the due execution of all, or any the premises, when they shall be
thereunto required, And that they do not suffer any person or persons
whatsoever, within their several Precincts, not being a Member of the said
Corporation, or not having served seven years Apprenticeship, to the said
Trade, or not having used the said Trade for the space of seven years, as a
Member of the said former Corporation from and after the publication of this
Our Proclamation, to make or cause to be made directly or indirectly any White
Starch in any other manner, or in any other place or places within this Our
Realm of England, Dominion of Wales, or Port or Town of Berwick, then by such
persons, and in such manner, and in such places as are herein directed or
intended, but that they use their utmost powers and endeavors, by all lawful
means to hinder and suppress the same.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the third day of August, in the thirteenth
year of Our Reign.

LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the KING'S
Most Excellent Majesty, 1661.

At the KING'S Printing House in Black-Fryars.


