C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION For the Preservation of the Great Level of the Fens, called
Bedford Level, and of the Works made for the Dreining of the same.
CHARLES R.

WHereas the Great Level of the Fens, called Bedford Level, extending it self
into the Counties of Northampton, Norfolk, Suffolk, Lincoln, Cambridge, and
Huntington, and the Isle of Ely, or some of them, has been Dreined by Our
right Trusty and Welbeloved Cousin William Earl of Bedford, Participants and
Adventurers for Dreining of the said Great Level at their very great costs and
charges, and Ninety five thousand Acres of late Surrounded Grounds, parcel of
the said Great Level, have been assigned and set forth for the recompense of
Dreining and Maintaining the said Great Level, whereof Twelve thousand Acres
then belonging to Us, Our Heirs and Assigns, and are now enjoyed by Us and Our
Assigns, and the residue of the said Ninety five thousand Acres are enjoyed by
the said Earl, Participants, and Adventurers, the which work being of public
concernment, and great advantage, benefit, and profit to the whole Nation, an
Act was made by Us with the Advice and Consent of the Lords and Commons
assembled at Westminster, the Five and twentieth day of April, in the Twelf
year of Our Reign, Entitled, An Act for the necessary maintenance of the Work
of Dreining the Great Level of the Fens, whereby the said Earl, Participants,
and Adventurers, were enabled as well to Levy Taxes then formerly imposed upon
the said Ninety five thousand Acres, as then after to be imposed by virtue of
the said Act, and the possession of the said Ninety five thousand Acres, settled
and quieted as then it was; which said Act did expire the Nine and twentieth
day of May, which was in the Thirteenth year of Our said Reign. And whereas in
the Parliament begun at Westminster, the Eight day of May, in the said
Thirteenth year of Our Reign, one other Act entitled, An Act for confirming
and continuing an Act for the necessary maintaining of the work of Dreining the
Great Level of the Fens, the said former Act was confirmed and continued until
the First day of May instant; And whereas a Bill was preferred and prosecuted
in Our House of Commons by the said Earl, Participants, and Adventurers, for
maintaining and preservation of the said Great Level, and of all the Rivers,
Dreins, Cuts, Banks, Sasses, Sluices, Tonnels, and other works made, whereby to
prevent future Inundations, and had proceeded therein to settle and agree the
greatest part thereof, but could not in regard of shortness of time perfect the
same: And therefore both Our Houses of Parliament have severally by their Order
made the Nineteenth day of May instant, recommended to Our Princely care, the
preservation of the said Great Level, and more particularly by the Order of the
House of Peers is further recommended to Our care the works there made, and
quieting and settling of the possessions as then they were, until further Order.
And whereas some attempts have been lately made by cutting of Banks, and
forcible and unseasonable opening of Sasses and Sluices within the said Great
Level, to the endangering of the drowning of a great part thereof. We therefore
in pursuance of the said recommendation of both Our Houses of Parliament, and
much minding the public peace and safety of this Kingdom, and to give all just
and lawful countenance and encouragement to so public a work, and for support
and preservation thereof, have already for the Government and maintenance of
the said Great Level, and for laying and levying of Taxes, as well to be
hereafter set, as now in arrear upon the said Ninety five thousand Acres,
caused a Commission of Sewers to be issued under the Great Seal of England, for
that purpose. And that so famous a work may not now miscarry, We do hereby
publish and declare Our pleasure to be, That the said Commissioners do lay
Taxes and Assessments upon the said Ninety five thousand Acres only, for
support and maintenance of the works made for Dreining of the said Great Level,
and upon no other part of the said Level. And We do straightly forbid under
pain of Our displeasure, and such punishment as is due to contemners of Our
Royal Commands, all future Attempts, Disturbances, Interruptions, Entries,
Forces, Riots, Assemblies, or any other unlawful Act or Acts tending to the
disturbance of the public peace within the said Great Level, or parts
adjacent, or the interruption of the said William Earl of Bedford, Participants
and Adventurers, their Tenants and Assigns, or of Us or Our Assigns, in the
quiet possession and enjoyment of the said Ninety five thousand Acres or any
part or parcel thereof, or of, or in any of the Rivers, Dreins, Cuts, Banks,
Sasses, Sluices, Tonnels, or any other works made for Dreining of the said Great
Level, or interruption, molestation, or disturbance of any their Officers,
Agents, or Workmen, in any of their works of the said Great Level, or
collecting, or levying any Taxes, Arrear-Taxes, in order to preserve the said
Great Level, until further order. And all Our Justices of the Peace, Mayors,
Sheriffs, and other Ministers of Justice, and all other Our Officers, Military
and Civil, and all Our loving Subjects, are hereby required to be aiding and
assisting to the said Commissioners of Sewers, and such as they shall appoint,
to see Our Royal Commands hereby published, duly observed, as often as occasion
shall require, as they will avoid Our Royal displeasure.

Given at Our Court at Hampton Court, the Thirtieth day of May, 1662. In the
Fourteenth Year of Our Reign.
London, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the KINGS
most Excellent Majesty. 1662.


