By the King.
A PROCLAMATION, For the observation of the Nine and twentieth day of May
instant, as a day of Public Thanksgiving, according to the late Act of
Parliament for that purpose.
CHARLES R.

WHereas by the Act made in Our late Parliament, held at Westminster in the
Twelfth year of Our Reign, Entitled, An Act for a perpetual Anniversary
Thanksgiving on the Nine and twentieth day of May, reciting, That for as much
as Almighty God, the King of Kings, and sole disposer of all earthly Crowns and
Kingdoms, had by his all-swaying Providence and Power, miraculously
demonstrated in the view of all the World his transcendent Mercy, Love, and
Graciousness toward Us and all Our Loyal Subjects of this Our Kingdom of
England, and the Dominions thereunto annexed, by Our most wonderful, glorious,
peaceable, and joyful Restoration to the actual possession and exercise of Our
undoubted Hereditary, Sovereign and Regal Authority over them (after sundry
years forced Extermination into Foreign parts, by the most Traiterous
Conspiracies and armed Power of Usurping Tyrants, and execrable and perfideous
Traitors) and that without the least opposition or effusion of blood, through
the Unanimous, Cordial, Loyal Uotes of the Lords and Commons in the said
Parliament Assembled, and passionate desires of all other Our Subjects; which
unexpressible blessing (by Gods own most wonderful dispensation) was completed
on the Nine and twentieth day of May last past, being the most memorable
Birthday not only of Us, both as Man and Prince, but likewise as an actual
King, and of this and other Our Kingdoms, all in a great measure newborn and
raised from the dead, on this most joyful day, wherein many thousands of the
Nobility, Gentry, Gentry, Citizens, and other Our Lieges of this Our Realm,
conducted Us unto Our Royal Cities of London and Westminster, with all possible
expressions of their public joy, and Loyal affections, in far greater Triumph
then any of Our most Uictorious Predecessors, Kings of England, returned
thither from their Foreign Conquests, and both Our then Houses of Parliament,
with all dutiful and joyful demonstrations of their Allegiance publicly
received, and cordially congratulated Our most happy Arrival and Investiture in
Our Royal Throne at Our Palace at Whitehall; upon all which considerations,
that being the day which the Lord had made, and crowned with so many public
blessings, and signal deliverances, both of Us and Our People, from all Our
late most deplorable Confusions, Divisions, Wars, Devastations and Oppressions:
To the end it might be kept in perpetual remembrance in all ages to come, and
that We would with all Our Subjects of this Our Realm, and the Dominions
thereof, and Our Posterities after Us, might Annually celebrate the perpetual
memory thereof, by sacrificing their unfeigned hearty public thanks thereon to
Almighty God, with one heart and voice in a most devout and Christian manner,
for all these public benefits received and conferred on Us on that most joyful
day; It was therefore by Authority of the same Parliament Enacted, That all and
singular Ministers of Gods Word and Sacraments, in every Church, Chapel, and
other usual place of Divine Service and public Prayer, which then were, or
then after should be within this Our Realm of England, and the respective
Dominions thereof, and their Successors, should in all succeeding ages annually
Celebrate the said Twenty ninth day of May, by rendering their hearty public
Praises and Thanksgivings unto Almighty God, for all the forementioned
extraordinary Mercies, Blessings and Deliverances received, and mighty Acts
done thereon, and declare the same to all the people there assembled, and the
generations then, and yet to come, that so they might for ever praise the Lord
for the same, whose Name alone is Excellent, and his Glory above the Earth and
Heavens.

And it was further Enacted, That all and every person and persons inhabiting
within this Our Kingdom, and the Dominions thereunto belonging, should upon the
same day annually resort with diligence and devotion, to some usual Church,
Chapel, or place where such public Thanksgivings and Praises to Gods most
Divine Majesty shall be rendered, and there orderly and devoutly abide during
the said public Thanksgiving, Prayers, Preaching, singing of Psalms, and other
Service of God there to be used and ministered.

And to the end that all persons might be put in mind of their duty thereon,
and be the better prepared to discharge the same with that Piety and Devotion
as becomes them, It was further Enacted, That every Minister should give notice
to his Parishoners publicly in the Church at Morning Prayer the Lords day next
before every such Twenty ninth of May, for the due observation of the same day,
and should then likewise publicly and distinctly read the same Act to the
people, as by the same Act may more at lage appear. We being most sensible of
the great and wonderful mercies and deliverances vouchsafed by Almighty God,
mentioned in the said Act, and holding Our Self highly obliged, and being most
willing that the just tribute of praise and thanksgiving to Our great
Sovereign, the King of Heaven and Earth, be returned by Us and all Our People
for the same, according to the intent of the said Act, do straightly command
and enjoin all Our loving Subjects, of what degree, quality, or condition
soever, solemnly and cheerfully to conform themselves, and give obedience to
the said Act of Parliament, and to set apart and observe the Nine and twentieth
day of this instant May, and so from time to time every Nine and twentieth day
of May in every year, as a day of public Praise and Thanksgiving to Almighty
God for his said wonderful Mercies, Blessings, and Deliverances vouchsafed to
Us and Our People, as in the said Act is mentioned. And to that end We command
all Archbishops, Bishops, Parsons, Uicars, Ministers, and all other
Ecclesiastical persons in their several Charges, according to their several
duties, to take care thereof, and to cause this Our Proclamation to be yearly
read in all Churches and Chapels the Lords day before the said day of public
Praise and Thanksgiving is to be observed and celebrated as aforesaid. And We
strictly command all persons whatsoever, for the better observation of the said
day, to abstain from all servile works and business on that day, and cheerfully
and orderly to repair to the public place of Gods Divine Worship, for the due
performance of the Duties of that day, according to the good intentions of the
said Act.

And We declare, That such persons as shall be faulty herein, shall be esteemed
by Us, contemners and infringers of Our Laws and Commands, and as profane
persons, shutting their eyes against such evident manifestations of mercy and
goodness vouchsafed by Almighty God to Us and to Our People.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Twentieth day of May, in the Thirteenth
year of Our Reign, 1661.
GOD SAVE THE KING.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the KING'S
most Excellent MAJESTY, 1661.

At the KINGS Printing House in Blackfriars.


