C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION For the Observation of the Lords day, and for renewing a former
Proclamation against Vicious, Debauched and Profane persons.
CHARLES R.

THe Kings most Excellent Majesty considering the Pious Zeal of His
Predecessors, and this whole Church, since the time of the happy Reformation,
to the due observance of the Lords day, called Sunday, beyond any other of the
Reformed Churches abroad, as being a day to be separated from common uses, and
set apart and appropriated for the Service of God; His Majesty therefore (whose
charge under God, is to take care both of the Spiritual and Temporal State of
His People) for prevention of prophanations of that Solemn day, which he fears
may else be a growing evil, has thought fit, with the Advice of His Privy
Council, to publish this ensuing Proclamation: And to the end all His loving
Subjects may take notice of the good Laws and Statutes provided for the
Celebration thereof, by frequenting Divine Service, does hereby make known and
Declare, That by the Statute made in the First year of the Reign of the late
Queen Elizabeth, Entitled, There shall be Uniformity of Prayer and
Administration of Sacraments, All persons, having no lawful or reasonable
excuse to be absent, are required diligently to resort to their Parish Church,
Chapel, or usual place where Common Prayer and the Service of God is usually
Celebrated, upon every Sunday, and other days appointed to be kept as
Holy Days, then and there to abide orderly and soberly during the time of
Common Prayer, Preaching, or other Service of God, upon pain (besides
Ecclesiastical Censures) of forfeiting for every offense Twelve pence to the
use of the Poor of the Parish; And for the easy and speedy obtaining of the
said Penalties, by the Statute made in the Third year of the Reign of His
Majesty's late Grandfather, King James, Entitled, An Act for the discovering
and repressing of Popish Recusants, It is (amongst other things) Enacted, That
for any the offenses aforesaid, any one Justice of the Peace where the party
offending shall dwell, upon proof by Confession, or Oath of Witness, may give
Warrant to the Churchwarden of that Parish, to Levy every such Forfeiture of
Twelve pence, by Distress and Sale of the Offenders Goods. And that by the
Statute made in the First year of the Reign of His Majesty's late Father King
Charles (of blessed memory) Entitled, There shall be no Assemblies for
unlawful Pastimes on the Lords day, All meetings and Concourse of people out of
their own Parishes for any Sports and Pastimes whatsoever, and all unlawful
Exercises within their own Parishes on the said day, are Prohibited, upon
several Pains and Penalties therein specified. And that by the Statute made in
the Third year of the Reign of the laid late King Charles, Entitled, A
Restraint of diverse Abuses committed on the Lords day, All Carriers,
Waggon-men, Car-men, Wayn-men, and Drovers, are Prohibited to Travel with their
Horses, Wagons, Carts, Wayns and Cattle, and Butchers to Kill or Sell any
Victuals on the said day, under several Penalties therein specified, to be
Levied and Employed as is therein directed; Which several Branches of the
several Statutes aforesaid, His Majesty's Will and Pleasure is, and does hereby
Publish and Declare, shall be forthwith duly and Religiously put in execution.
And all His Majesty's Subjects are to take notice, That by the Law, the
resorting to Divine Service, as is before mentioned, does comprehend the entire
day, and entire Service both Morning and Evening, and does extend to all
persons of whatsoever Opinion or Profession. And moreover, His Majesty does
hereby strictly Enjoin and Command, That no person or persons shall sit, or
continue, or be permitted to sit or continue Tippling or Drinking in any Inn,
Tavern, Alehouse or Victualling-house, or sit idle, or play openly in the
Streets, Church, Churchyards, or elsewhere, during the time of Divine Service
or Sermon, on the Sunday; And that no person or persons shall on that day
Proclaim, Keep, or resort unto any Fair or Market, or expose any Wares or
Merchandises to Sale, or use or exercise any Work or Labor, of, or in his or
their ordinary Trade or Calling (Except the Dressing or Sale of Victuals in any
Inns, Victualling-houses, or Cooks Shops, for such as cannot be otherwise
provided; and for sale of Milk before or after Divine Service) upon pain of His
Majesty's highest Displeasure, and such Pains, Penalties and Forfeitures as can
or may be Inflicted upon the Offenders according to Law, and the neglect of His
Majesty's Royal Authority and Command. And His Majesty does hereby Will,
Require and Command all Mayors, Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, Bailiffs,
Constables, and all other Officers and Ministers whatsoever, in all Counties
Privileged, and other places whatsoever within this Realm, That they and every
of them in their several Offices and Places, do from time to time provide and
see to the due execution of this His Pleasure and Royal Commandment, as they
tender His Pleasure, and will answer the contrary at their utmost perils. And
whereas His Majesty upon His happy Restoration, did publish His Royal
Proclamation of the Thirtieth of May, 1660. against Vicious, Debauched and
Profane persons; and by a subsequent Proclamation directed the same to be Read
in all Churches and Chapels in England and Wales; which having been well
received and resented, and in some measure had, and, it is hoped, will yet have
more of His Majesty's wished effect amongst His people; And His Majesty
continuing a fervent desire to promote all means which tend to the suppression
of Vice, and advancement of Virtue, has therefore thought fit, by and with the
Advice of His Privy Council, That the said Proclamation shall be again Read as
formerly; and does hereby straightly Charge and Command, That each Minister in
his respective Parish or Chapel within this Realm of England, Dominion of
Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, shall once every Month, for the space
of Six Months together next ensuing, Read in their respective Congregations
the aforesaid Proclamation, and incite and stir up their respective Auditors to
observe the Duties therein enjoined, and avoid the Vices therein forbidden. And
His Majesty does also hereby strictly Charge and Command, That every of the
respective Ministers aforesaid, do carefully and effectually observe His Will
and Pleasure herein, as they tender His Favor, and will avoid His Displeasure.
And lastly, His Majesty does hereby renew His former Command, and again Require
all Mayors, Sheriffs, and Justices of the Peace to be very vigilant and strict
in discovering and punishing of such persons according to Law, as shall offend
contrary to the said Proclamation. And lastly, His Majesty's Pleasure is, and
He does hereby Charge and Command all Parsons, Vicars and Curates, That this
present Proclamation be Read and Published together with the said other
Proclamation against Vicious, Debauched and Profane persons, at the same time,
in all Churches and Chapels.

Given at the Court at Whitehall, the Two and twentieth day of August 1663. in
the Fifteenth year of His Majesty's Reign.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent MAJESTY, 1663.


