By the King.
A PROCLAMATION Of General Pardon to all Seamen, Mariners and others Employed
at Sea.
CHARLES R.

WHereas diverse Seamen, Mariners and others employed in His Majesty's service
at the Sea, and Listed on Board several Ships under His Majesty's Pay, Have
deserted that Service, and withdrawn themselves into Places obscure, whereof
some that were lately apprehended, have suffered Death according to their
demerits. His Majesty being Graciously pleased to extend His Mercy to the rest
of the Offenders, does by this His Royal Proclamation freely pardon, release,
and remit all and every the said Seamen, Mariners and others, all offenses and
crimes of this nature, and all pains of Death, and pains Corporal, and does
hereby discharge them and every of them of and from all further Prosecutions
and Enquiries in order thereunto. And His Majesty does expressly command all and
every His Magistrates, Officers, and Ministers Civil and Military, that they
presume not in any sort to call into question any Seaman, Mariner, or others,
for any matter or thing hereby pardoned or discharged. And His Majesty expects
that all Seamen, Mariners and others, who have now seen the Examples both of
His Justice and Mercy, should so demean themselves for the future in His
Majesty's Service, as not to fall into any the like offenses again; Which if
any shall presume to commit, they shall hereafter be proceeded against with all
Rigor and Severity.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the 23d day of December, in the 24th year of
Our Reign. 1672.
God save the King.
LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers
to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1672.


