C R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION For the free Exportation of Woollen Manufactures, until the
Twenty fifth day of December next.
CHARLES R.

WHereas the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by His Proclamation of the 15th of
April last, upon the considerations therein expressed, did give free liberty
and license to all and every person and persons whatsoever, from the day of the
date thereof, until the Twenty fifth day of December then next, to Transport
and carry out of this Kingdom, all Woollen Manufactures whatsoever, to any Port
or Place beyond the Seas, lying within the limits and bounds of the
Merchant-Adventurers Patent (Except the Mart-Towns of Dort and Hamburgh) And
whereas several Merchants and Clothiers in the Western, and other parts of this
Kingdom, have humbly besought His Majesty, That by reason of the great decay in
the Trade of Cloth, and other Woollen Manufactures of this Kingdom, His Majesty
would be graciously pleased to grant them Twelve months longer, for a free
Exportation of the said Manufactures; His Majesty therefore does by the Advice
of His Privy Council, hereby give free Liberty and License to all and every
person and persons whatsoever, as well Natives and Denizens, as Strangers and
Foreigners, until the Five and twentieth day of December next, to Transport
and carry out of this Kingdom all Woollen Manufactures whatsoever, to any Port
or Place beyond the Seas, lying within the limits and bounds of the said
Merchant-Adventurers Patent (Except the MartTowns of Dort and Hamburgh) Yet His
Majesty would not hereby be thought to have a light esteem of the Services of
that Company to Himself, and the Crown in former times, nor of their usefulness
toward the advance and increase of the Trade of this Kingdom; Nor does His
Majesty by this temporary dispensation intend to lessen the Authority of their
Charter, as to the Government of that Society either at home or abroad. And His
Majesty does hereby Require and Command, That during the time of this License
and Dispensation, due payment be made of all Duties for Licensing the
Exportation of White Clothes, according to former use and practice.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the 29th day of March, In the Nineteenth year
of Our Reign. 1667.
In the SAVOY, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker, His
Majesty's Printers, 1667.


