DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION For Suppressing the Printing and Publishing Unlicensed
News-Books, and Pamphlets of News.
CHARLES R.

WHereas it is of great Importance to the State, That all News Printed and
Published to the People, as well concerning Foreign, as Domestic Affairs,
should be agreeable to Truth, or at least Warranted by good Intelligence, that
the minds of His Majesty's Subjects may not be disturbed, or amused by Lies or
vain Reports, which are many times raised on purpose to Scandalize the
Government, or for other indirect Ends; And whereas of late many Evil-disposed
Persons have made it a common Practice to Print and Publish Pamphlets of News,
without License or Authority, and therein have vended to His Majesty's People,
all the idle and malicious Reports that they could Collect or Invent, contrary
to Law; The coutinuance whereof would in a short time endanger the Peace of the
Kingdom, the same manifestly tending thereto, as has been declared by all His
Majesty's Judges unanimously: His Majesty therefore considering the great
Mischief that may ensue upon such Licencious and Illegal Practices, if not
timely prevented, has thought fit by this His Royal Proclamation (with the
Advice of His Privy Council) strictly to Prohibit and Forbid all Persons
whatsoever to Print or Publish any News-Books, or Pamphlets of News not
Licensed by His Majesty's Authority. And to the intent all Offenders may know
their Danger, and desist from any further Proceedings of this kind, His Majesty
is Graciously pleased hereby to Declare, That they shall be proceeded against
according to the utmost Severity of the Law: And for that purpose, His Majesty
does hereby Will and Command all His Judges, Justices of Peace, and all other
His Officers and Ministers of Justice whatsoever, That they take effectual
Care, that all such as shall Offend in the Premises, be proceeded against, and
punished according to their Demerits.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall this 12th day of May, in the Two and thirtieth
year of Our Reign.
London, Printed by John Bill, Thomas Newcomb, and Henry Hills, Printers to the
Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1680.


