C2 R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION For the Apprehending of Colonel John Rumsey, Richard Rumbold
Maltster, Richard Nelthorp Esquire Edward Wade Gent. Richard Goodenough Gent.
Captain Walcot, William Thompson, James Burton, and William Hone Joyner.
CHARLES R.

WHereas We have received Information upon Oath, That Colonel John Rumsey,
Richard Rumbold Maltster, Richard Nelthorp Esquire Edward Wade Gent. Richard
Goodenough Gent. Captain Walcot, William Thompson, James Burton, and William
Hone Ioyner, have Traitorously Conspired together, and with diverse other
ill-affected and desperate Persons of this Our Kingdom, to compass the Death
and Destruction of Our Royal Person, and of Our Dearest Brother James Duke of
York; And to effect the same, have held several Treasonable Consultations, and
made great Provision of Arms: And being given to understand that the said
Criminals are fled, and left their Habitations to avoid the Justice of Our
Laws; We have therefore thought fit, by and with the Advice of Our Privy
Council, to Publish Our Royal Pleasure, And We do hereby strictly Charge and
Command the said Colonel John Rumsey, Richard Rumbold, Richard Nelthorp, Edward
Wade, Richard Goodenough, Captain Walcot, William Thompson, James Burton, and
William Hone, and every of them, forthwith to render themselves to some of Our
Judges or Justices of Peace, in order to their Prosecution according to Law.
And We do hereby Require and Command, as well all and singular Our Judges,
Justices of the Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs, Constables, and Headboroughs, as also
the Officers and Ministers of Our Ports, and all other Our Subjects whatsoever
within Our Realms of England, Scotland, Ireland, or Dominion of Wales, and all
other Our Dominions and Territories, to be diligent in enquiring and searching
for the said Offenders in all Places whatsoever, as well within Liberties as
without: And if they shall happen to take any of them, or that they shall
render themselves, Our further Will and Pleasure is, That they cause him or
them so Apprehended, to be safely carried before the next Justice of the Peace
to the Place where he or they shall be Arrested, whom We strictly Charge to
commit to Prison, and presently inform us, or Our Privy Council of such
Apprehension. And We do hereby further Declare and Publish, That if any Person
or Persons, after this Our Proclamation, shall directly or indirectly conceal,
harbor, keep, retain or maintain the said Offenders, or any of them, or shall
contrive or connive at any means whereby they or any of them may escape from
being Taken or Arrested, or shall not use their best endeavors for the
Apprehension of them, as well by giving due Advertisement thereof to Our
Officers, as by all other good means, We will (as there is just cause) proceed
against them that shall so neglect this Our Commandment with all Severity. And
We do also Declare, That whosoever shall Discover the said Offenders, or any of
them, either within Our Kingdoms of England, Scotland, Ireland, or Dominion of
Wales, or in any other Our Dominions and Territories, or elsewhere beyond the
Seas, and shall cause them or any of them to be Apprehended and brought in as
aforesaid, shall have a Reward of One hundred pounds for each of the said
Persons, to be paid unto him in Recompense of such his Service.

Given at Our Honor of Hampton Court, this Twenty third day of June, In the
Five and Thirtieth Year of Our Reign.
LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill Deceased: And by Henry Hill, and
Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1683.


