By the King.
A PROCLAMATION Of Grace, for the Enlargement of Prisoners called QVAKERS.
CHARLES R.

WHereas diverse of His Majesty's Subjects, commonly called Quakers, are now
prisoners in several Gaols within His Majesty's Dominions, for Offenses by them
committed against the form of a Statute made in a Sessions of Parliament, begun
and held by Prorogation at Westminster, the Fifth day of November, in the Third
year of the Reign of King James, His Majesty's late Grandfather, entitled, An
Act for the discovering and repressing of Popish Recusants; or of one other
Statute made in a Sessions of Parliament, begun and held by Prorogat on at
Westminster, the Nineteenth day of February, in the Seventh year of the Reign
of the said late King, entitled, An Act who shall take the Oath of Obedience
to the King, and by whom it shall be administered, and within what time. And
whereas the Kings most Excellent Majesty since the passing of the late Act of
General Pardon, Oblivion, and Indemnity, and the issuing forth several
Charters of Pardon, has in reference to His Royal Coronation, by a late
Proclamation, signified and declared out of His farther abundant Grace and
Clemency, that His Charters of Pardons should be extended in time unto the Nine
and twentieth day of December, now last past, being the day the late Parliament
did dissolve and determine. And His Majesty being now graciously pleased, that
His said Subjects, called Quakers, now in prison as aforesaid, should for this
time, and on so happy and blessed an opportunity and season of His Majesty's
Royal Coronation, participate of His Majesty's Mercy and Clemency, and be
forthwith discharged from their Imprisonment, without being put to the trouble
and charges of suing out particular Pardons. The Kings most Excellent Majesty
does therefore by this His Royal Proclamation, publish and declare His will and
pleasure to be, and accordingly does hereby will and command all Sheriffs,
Majors, Bailiffs, Gaolers, and other His Officers and Ministers within His
Majesty's Realm of England, Dominion of Wales, the Isles of Jersey and
Guernsey, and the Town of Berwick upon Twede, and every of them (whom the
premises shall or may concern) that they and every of them, on the publication
of this His Royal Proclamation, do set at liberty, enlarge, and discharge, all
and every person and persons, called Quakers, now in custody in any of His
Gaols or Prisons in His said Realm, or any the parts or places thereof
aforesaid, for any offense or offenses done, committed, or suffered against the
form of the Statutes aforesaid, or either of them, for not taking the Oaths
therein mentioned, or any other Oaths heretofore tendered them, or for any
Meetings contrary to the late Proclamation, or for any matter referring to
their Opinions, or scruples of Conscience, or for not finding Securities for
appearances of, and from their and every of their Imprisonments respectively,
without demanding or taking any other Fees or Duties of them, or any of them,
then for Lodging, Diet, and other necessaries: And also to set at liberty, such
other persons as are now in custody only for not taking the Oaths enjoined by
the Statutes abovementioned, or either of them, or upon any prosecution for
not taking the said Oaths, expecting for the future their Conformity and
Obedience to the Laws of the Kingdom; and for so doing, this shall be to them,
and every of them, sufficient warrant in this behalf. And His Majesty does
further declare, that He shall expect returns of Loyalty, and all due
Obedience, from all such persons whose liberty is obtained hereby, His Majesty
not intending them impunity, if they shall offend in the future: Provided
always, and His Majesty does hereby declare, That this Proclamation, or any
thing herein contained, shall not extend to discharge, or set at liberty, any
person or persons, called Quakers, now in custody for Debt, or other civil
cause commenced or depending against them, at the suit of any of His Majesty's
loving Subjects; nor for any criminal matter or offense whatsoever, wherewith
he or they are or shall be duly charged, other then is abovementioned, Any
thing in this Proclamation contained to the contrary thereof, in any wise
notwithstanding.

Given at Our Court at Whitehal, the Eleventh day of May, in the Thirteenth
year of Our Reign, 1661.
GOD SAVE THE KING.
LONDON, Printed by JOHN BILL and CHRISTOPHER BARKER, Printers to the KING's
most Excellent Majesty. 1661.

At the KING'S Printing House in Blackfriars.


