CR
DIEV^ET MON^DROIT
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION, For the Entering and putting in of Claims in Ireland, pursuant
to His Majesty's Gracious Declaration of the 30th of November 1660. and the
Instructions for execution thereof.
CHARLES R.

WHereas in pursuance of Our Gracious Declaration of the 30 th of November
last, for the Settlement of Our Kingdom of Ireland, and satisfaction of the
several Interests of Adventurers, Soldiers and other Our Subjects there. We
have appointed and Authorized Our Commissioners, and given them Instructions
for putting in execution Our said Declaration, who have accordingly made some
proceedings in that great Work, so nearly concerning the Peace and happy
Settlement of that Our Kingdom, and the growth and prosperity of Plantations
there, after a long time of Rebellion and Desolation: Nevertheless, taking
notice of the slow progress that is made in that Affair, though much of the
time allotted by Our said Declaration for perfecting the Work is elapsed, which
We do in no wise impute to Our said Commissioners: And to the end all persons
concerned may have timely notice of the danger they may incur by not putting
in, and prosecuting their Claims, We have thought fit by this Our public
Proclamation to make known and declare, That all Our Subjects, and other
persons whatsoever, any way concerned in Our said Declaration, or that Claim,
or may Claim any Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, Rents, Profits or
Advantages, by virtue of Our said Declaration, or the Instructions for
execution thereof, if they be within any of Our Dominions, and have not as yet
put in their Claims, shall make or enter, or cause to be entered and put in
their respective Claims before Our said Commissioners sitting at Dublin, or
elsewhere in Our said Kingdom of Ireland, at or before the F^fteenth day of
September next ensuing; And that such of the said persons as are out of Our
Dominions, that Claim, or may claim as aforesaid, and have not already put in
their Claims, shall make or enter, or cause to be entered and put in their
Claims in like manner, at or before the Three and twentieth of October next,
and after the said respective days and times shall be expired, no Claims shall
be received, but the parties neglecting to lay hold of the benefit of this Our
Gracious Intimation, shall be left without remedy, and debarred for ever the
Benefit, Grace, Favor and Advantage of Our said Declaration and Instructions,
without Our special Order in that behalf, upon accidents or emergencies, where
Justice shall require the same. And that none may pretend ignorance hereof, We
have caused this Our Proclamation to be Published in Our Kingdoms of England
and Ireland, and do require Our said Commissioners that they take care for the
exact and due observation thereof.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Twelfth day of July, in the Thirteenth
year of Our Reign, 1661. GOD SAVE THE KING.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the KING'S
most Excellent MAJESTY, 1661.

At the KING'S Printing House in Blackfriars.


