C2 R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION For the Discovery of the Death of John Powell, late of London,
Merchant.
CHARLES R.

WHereas there is a violent presumption that John Powell late of London
Merchant, was lately Murdered by persons unknown, The Kings most Excellent
Majesty, out of His Royal inclination to Justice, and to the intent that so
Horrible and Crying Offense may be Discovered, and the Authors of the same
severely Punished, Does by this His Royal Proclamation strictly Charge and
Command all His Judges, Justices of the Peace, Magistrates, and other His
Officers and Loyal Subjects, That they do use their utmost endeavors to find
out and discover the truth of the said supposed Murder, and the Circumstances
and Authors of the same, and to give speedy Information of what they shall find
therein, to one of His Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State; And in case it
shall be discovered that the said John Powell was Murdered, His Majesty is
Graciously pleased hereby to Promise to any person or persons who shall make
such a Discovery, whereby the Murderers, or any of them shall be Apprehended,
the sum of Two hundred pounds, which shall be immediately paid down, upon
sufficient Testimony that such Persons or Person Apprehended, are, or is Guilty
of the said Murder. And if any of the Murderers shall Discover the rest,
whereby they or any of them shall be Apprehended, such Discoverer shall not
only be Pardoned his Offense, but shall in like manner receive the like Reward
of Two hundred pounds.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Two and twentieth day of November, 1678.
In the Thirtieth year of Our Reign.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill, Christopher Barker, Thomas Newcomb, and Henry
Hills, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1678.


