C R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION For the Discovery and Apprehension of John Lockier, Timothy
Butler, Thomas Blood, commonly called Captain Blood, John Mason, and others.
CHARLES R.

WHereas We have been informed, That the said John Lockier, Timothy Butler, and
Captain Blood, with several other persons did lately in a most riotous and
Rebellious manner, at Darrington near Went-Bridge in the County of York,
violently set upon and assault the Guard entrusted with the care of Conducting
one John Mason, a Prisoner for Treason, from Our Tower of London to Our City of
York, in order to his Trial there; and they having killed and desperately
wounded several of the said Guard, and others, did Rescue and carry away the
said Mason, and do lurk in secret places, and not submit themselves to Justice;
We therefore have thought fit (with the advice of Our Privy Council) to publish
this Our Royal Proclamation, And do hereby straightly Charge and Command all and
singular Lords Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, Justices of the Peace, Mayors,
Sheriffs, Bailiffs, and other Our Officers, Ministers, and Subjects whatsoever,
to be diligent, and use their best endeavors to Search for and Apprehend the
said Lockier, Butler, Blood, and Mason, and all others who were any way
instrumental in the said Rescue or Escape, in all places whatsoever; and upon
the Apprehension of all or any the said persons, to cause them to be safely
conveyed to the Goal of the City or County where they shall be so Apprehended,
and forthwith to give notice thereof to one of Our Principal Secretaries of
State; that such further course may be taken, as We with the advice of Our
Council shall direct. And We do hereby further Declare, That One hundred pounds
Sterling shall be given and paid by Us to any person or persons, as a
recompense for their good Service, who shall Apprehend and bring in the said
Lockier, Butler, Blood, and Mason, or any of them, or any other who were their
accomplices in the said Rescue. And We do further Declare and Publish, That if
any person or persons willingly or knowingly, shall directly or indirectly
conceal or harbor the said Offenders, or any of them, or shall not upon all
lawful and just occasions, use his or their best endeavors for their discovery
and apprehension, as well by giving due advertisement thereof to Our Officers,
as by all other good means, We will (as there is just cause) proceed against
them that shall so neglect this Our Command, with all severity.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Eighth day of August 1667. In the
Nineteenth year of Our Reign.
In the SAVOY, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker,
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1667.


