C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT royal English blazon or coat of arms By the King. A
PROCLAMATION For the more Effectual Suppressing of Popery.
CHARLES R.

HIs Majesty being sensible of the great Increase of Popery within this Kingdom
of late Years, by reason of the neglect of putting in Execution those good Laws
which were provided for Suppressing the same, whereby Jesuits and Priests have
been emboldned to resort hither from Parts beyond the Seas, in great numbers,
and they and others have openly practiced to assert the most pernicious and
damnable Principles of that Religion, and to persuade and withdraw diverse of
His Majesty's good Subjects from their Obedience to His Majesty, and to
reconcile them to the Pope and See of Rome; And that notwithstanding the good
Laws made to Restrain the same, it has been the general practice of the
Papists, to send their Children and Relations into Foreign Parts, to be bred up
in Popery; By which bold and wicked Practices, and the Impunity that has
followed thereupon, His Majesty apprehends that many of His good Subjects may
be ignorant of the said Laws; And therefore has thought fit by this His Royal
Proclamation, by the Advice of His Privy Council, to Publish and make known the
Principal and most Penal of the said Laws, as well to prevent and hinder any of
His Loving Subjects from being misled into any the said Offenses through
ignorance, as to guide and encourage all persons knowing of any such Offenses,
to a Legal Prosecution of the same: The Substance of the said Laws is as
follows.

By Writing, Printing, Preaching, Teaching, Deed or Act, or by any Speech to
set forth, maintain or defend the Authority or Jurisdiction, or Power of the
Bishop of Rome, or his See, heretofore claimed, used, or usurped within this
Realm, or to attribute any such manner of Jurisdiction, Authority, or
Preeminence to the said See of Rome, or to any Bishop of the said See for the
time being, or to aid, assist and comfort any in doing the same: The First
Offense is Praemunire, the Second Offense is made High Treason, by 5 Eliz. Cap.
1.

To receive, relieve, comfort, aid, or maintain any Jesuit, Seminary Priest, or
other Priest, Deacon, or Religious or Ecclesiastical person made by any
Authority, Power, or Jurisdiction derived, challenged, or pretended from the
the Sea of Rome, being at liberty or out of hold, knowing him to be such, is
Felony without benefit of Clergy, by 27 Eliz. Cap. 2.

By the Stat. 23 Eliz. 1. It is High Treason to withdraw any of the Kings
Subjects to the Romish Religion, to the intent to withdraw them from their
Natural Obedience to the King, and it is High Treason in the persons so
willingly withdrawn; And all Aiders, Avertors and Concealers thereof knowingly,
are guilty of Misprision of Treason.

To put in practice to Absolve, Persuade or Withdraw any of His Majesty's
Subjects of this Realm of England from their Natural Obedience to His Majesty,
or to Reconcile them to the Pope or See of Rome, or to move them to promise
Obedience to any pretended Authority to the Sea of Rome, or to any other
Prince, State or Potentate, is High Treason by the Statute 3 Jac. Cap. 4.
whether done upon the Seas or beyond the Seas, or in any other Place within His
Majesty's Dominions.

To be willingly Absolved or Withdrawn in manner aforesaid, or to be willingly
Reconciled, or to promise Obedience to any such pretended Authority, Prince,
State or Potentate, or to Procure, Counsel, Aid or Maintain such Offenders,
knowing the same, is likewise made High Treason by the same Statute.

For any Person under the Obedience of the King, to pass or go, or to convey or
send, or cause to be sent or conveyed any Child or other Person out of any of
the Kings Dominions, into any the Parts beyond the Seas out of the Kings
Obedience, to the intent and purpose to enter into or be resident or trained up
in any Priory, Abbey, Nunnery, Popish University, College, or School or House
of Jesuits, Priests, or in any private Popish Family, and to be there by any
Jesuit, Seminary Priest, Friar, Monk or other Popish Person, instructed,
persuaded or strengthened in the Popish Religion, in any sort to profess the
same;

Or to convey or send, or to cause to be conveyed or sent by the hands or means
of any person whatsoever, any Sum or Sums of Money, or other thing toward the
mainteinance of any Child or other person, gone or sent, or to go or be sent
and trained and instructed, as aforesaid, or under the Name or Color of any
Charity, Benevolence, or Alms, toward the Relief of any Priory, Abbey, Nunnery,
College, School, or any Religious House whatsoever.

All persons offending, being convicted, are disabled to use any Action, Bill,
Plaint, or Information in course of Law, or to prosecute any Suit in any Court
of Equity, or to be Committee of any Ward, or Executor or Administrator to any
person, or capable of any Legacy or Deed of Gift, and forfeit all Goods and
Chattels, and all Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Rents, Annuities, Offices
and Estates of Freehold, for and during their natural lives, by the Stat. 3
Car. Cap. 2.

For the more precise knowledge of which Laws, and all other Laws made for
Suppressing the Growth of Popery, in case His Majesty's loving Subjects cannot
conveniently have the Printed Statutes, or cannot well interpret the same, they
are to resort to any of His Majesty's Judges, Justices of Peace, or other
Magistrates, who are hereby required and commanded upon all occasions, to guide
and direct them therein, it being His Majesty's Resolution, that all the said
Laws shall be strictly put in execution.

And His Majesty does hereby further Charge and Command all and every His
loving Subjects, That in case any person shall by any Discourse or Disputation,
offer to maintain the Popes Authority or Jurisdiction, or to Persuade or
Pervert them to the Popish Religion, or that they know any person guilty of any
the Offenses aforementioned, or any other Offenses against the Laws to Depress
Popery, that they do immediately reveal the same to some Magistrate, that the
Offenders may be Prosecuted and Punished according to their Demerits.

And for the better encouraging of all persons that shall do their Duty herein,
His Majesty will be Graciously pleased by His Letters of Privy Seal, to Enable
all His Judges of His several Courts at Westminster, to reward all Prosecutors
upon the said Laws or other Laws made for Suppressing the Growth of Popery,
according to their Discretions, out of such Forfeitures as shall from thence
accrue to His Majesty, over and above what is already by the said Laws or any
of them alloted to the Informer.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the One and twentieth day of December 1679. In
the One and thirtieth year of Our Reign.
GOD SAVE THE KING.
London, Printed by John Bill, Thomas Newcomb, and Henry Hills, Printers to the
Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1679.

DIEV ET MON DROIT royal English blazon or coat of arms By the King. A
PROCLAMATION For the Apprehending of Robbers or Highway-men, and for a Reward
to the Apprehenders.
CHARLES R.

WE minding to secure all Our Loving Subjects in Traveling and going about
their Lawful Occasions, do hereby Publish and Declare Our Royal Will and
Pleasure to be, And We do hereby Command all Our Officers of Justice, and other
Our Loving Subjects, That they use their utmost diligence and endeavor for the
Apprehending all Robbers or Highway-men; to the end they may be proceeded
against according to Law. And for the Encouragement of such as shall Apprehend
and such Offender or Offenders, We are Graciously pleased, and do hereby
Declare, That such person or persons who shall at any time before the Second
day of March next, Apprehend any Robber or Highway-man, and cause him to be
brought into Custody, shall within Fifteen days after his Conviction, Have a
Reward of Ten pounds for every such Offender so Apprehended and Convicted: And
all and every Sheriffs and Sheriff of the respective Counties and Sheriff wicks
where such Conviction shall be had, are, and is hereby Required, upon the
Certificate of the Judge, or Two or more Justices of the Peace before whom such
person or persons shall be Convicted of such Apprehension and Conviction, to
pay unto the person or persons who shall Apprehend such Offender or Offenders,
the Reward aforesaid, within the time aforesaid, for each and every Offender so
Apprehended and Convicted as aforesaid, out of Our Moneys received by such
Sheriff or Sheriffs in that County where such Conviction shall be, which shall
be allowed unto him or them upon His or their Accounts in the Exchequer; for
the Allowance whereof, this Proclamation shall be a sufficient Warrant. And
lastly, We do hereby Charge and Command all Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants,
Justices of the Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, and other Officers and
Persons whatsoever, to take notice of this Our Royal Proclamation, and give due
Obedience thereunto, and also to be Aiding and Assisting in all things tending
to the Execution thereof, as they tender Our Displeasure, and upon pain of
being proceeded against as Contemners of Our Royal Authority.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Fifth day of March 1679/80. In the Two and
thirtieth year of Our Reign.
God save the King.
London, Printed by John Bill, Thomas Newcomb, and Henry Hills, Printers to the
Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1679/80.

C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT royal English blazon or coat of arms At the Court at
Whitehall, April the Sixteenth, 1680.
Present, The Kings most Excellent Majesty His Highness Prince Rupert Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury Lord Chancellor Lord President Lord Privy Seal Duke of
Lauderdale Marquess of Worcester Earl of Ossory Lord Chamberlain Earl of
Bridgwater Earl of Sunderland Earl of Essex Earl of Bathe Viscount Fauconberg
Lord Bishop of London Mr. Hyde Lord Chief Justice North Mr. Chancellor of the
Exchequer Sir Leoline Jenkins Mr. Seymor Mr. Godolphin.

WHereas Information has been this day given to His Majesty in Council upon
Oath, That John Arnold Esquire one of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the
County of Monmouth, was the last night between the Hours of Nine and Ten of the
Clock in Bell Yard, near Jack-an-apes Lane end, maliciously and feloniously
assaulted, dangerously wounded, and endeavored to be assassinated by Three
Persons unknown, who are since fled (one of them being hurt in the Leg) After
which barbarous Fact, one of the said Three Persons did utter these words to
the said Mr. Arnold, Damme ye Dog, now pray for the Soul of Captain Evans;
Which Evans was a Jesuit executed in the County of Glamorgan, and who sometime
before his apprehension had threatened to Pistol the said Mr. Arnold: It is
Ordered by His Majesty in Council, That the Lord Mayor of the City of London,
and the Justices of Peace of the County of Middlesex, and City of Westminster,
do cause diligent Search to be forthwith made within their several
Jurisdictions, for the said persons, or any of them, or any that did Incite,
Encourage, or set them on to make that Attempt.

And for an Encouragement to all persons to use their utmost diligence herein,
His Majesty is pleased to promise, That there shall be the Reward of One
hundred pounds forthwith paid to any who shall Discover or Apprehend the said
Three persons, or any one of them, or any of those who did Incite them
thereunto. And if any one of the said Three Persons, being touched with Remorse
for that horrid Fact, shall discover the same, and his Accomplices, His Majesty
is Graciously pleased to promise, that he shall have his Pardon for the same,
besides the said Reward.

And for the better Notification hereof, It is further Directed, That this
Order be forthwith Printed and Published.

FRANCIS GWYN.

London, Printed by John Bill, Thomas Newcomb, and Henry Hills, Printers to the
Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1680.


