C2 R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION For the Discovery and Apprehension of Jesuits, Seminary
Priests, and others that have taken Orders from the Church and See of Rome.
CHARLES R.

HIs Majesty having been informed, That notwithstanding His former Orders and
Proclamations Requiring Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and others that have taken
Orders from the Church and See of Rome, and have not since been reconciled to
the Church of England, to depart the Kingdom: Yet nevertheless such Priests and
Jesuits continue and harbor themselves in the City of London, and Suburbs
thereof, and likewise in other parts of this Kingdom, to the manifest Contempt
of His Majesty's Royal Authority, and the Laws and Religion Established; And
notwithstanding His Majesty's Commands to have the Laws against them given in
Charge in all Counties, yet none have of late been Apprehended or Discovered.
His Majesty thereupon, of His Pious Care for the Preservation of the Protestant
Religion, and for the prevention of the endeavors of such Priests and Jesuits
who Seduce His good Subjects from the same, has resolved, That so many of the
said Priests as can be found, shall be speedily sent away and Transported into
the parts beyond the Seas; And to that end does (with the Advice of His Privy
Council) by this His Royal Proclamation Require, and strictly Charge and
Command the Justices of the Peace of the several Counties and Cities of this
Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, at the
next Quarter, or other General Sessions to be held for the said Counties and
Cities respectively, That they and every of them, and also all and every other
person and persons whatsoever, do use their utmost endeavor to Discover and
Apprehend such person or persons as they or any of them shall either know, or
be credibly informed is, or are Priests or Jesuits, or have taken Orders from
the Church or See of Rome as aforesaid, and that they cause them, and every of
them, to be brought before the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, or one of
His Principal Secretaries of State, who are to Commit them into safe Custody,
in order to their Transportation. And that such Discoveries may be the better
encouraged, and more effectually pursued, His Majesty has given Order to the
Lord High Treasurer of England, to cause speedy Payment to be made unto every
person who shall make Discovery of any Priest or Jesuit, of the sum of Five
pounds for every Priest or Jesuit so discovered, who shall be thereupon
Apprehended and brought to the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, or one of
His Principal Secretaries of State; And moreover, the Charges of sending them
up, shall be, and are hereby Directed and Appointed to be born and paid by the
respective Sheriffs of the Counties through which they are to pass, who shall
have the same allowed unto them upon Passing their Accounts in the Exchequer.

Given at Our Palace of Hampton Court, the Tenth day of June 1674. in the Six
and twentieth year of Our Reign.
LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers
to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1674.


