C2 R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION For the apprehending of Aron Smith.
CHARLES R.

WHereas by an Order of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament
assembled, made the Twenty first day of May last, it was Ordered, That the
Sergeant at Arms attending the House of Peers, should take into his custody
Aron Smith, and him bring to the Bar of the said House, there to answer for
Speaking certain dangerous and seditious words against the Being of this
present Parliament; But he the said Aron Smith absconding himself in secret and
unknown places, could not be apprehended, notwithstanding the utmost endeavors
of the said Sergeant and his Deputies used for that purpose; whereupon the said
Lords Spiritual and Temporal have humbly besought His Majesty, to issue out His
Royal Proclamation for seizing and apprehending the person of the said Aron
Smith, when and wheresoever he shall be found, and bringing him before the said
House of Peers (if the Parliament shall be then sitting,) or otherwise that he
be kept in safe custody, till he shall appear before the said House to answer
for his said Offense, His Majesty is graciously pleased (in compliance with the
said humble desires of His House of Peers) by this His Royal Proclamation,
strictly to charge and command all Mayors, Justices of Peace, and other His
Majesty's Officers and loving Subjects whatsoever, that they and every of them
do within their several and respective Precincts and Places, use their utmost
and most effectual endeavors for the apprehending the person of the said Aron
Smith; and that such of them as shall happen to apprehend and take the said
Aron Smith, do him bring, or cause to be brought before the said House of Peers
(if the Parliament at the time of such his apprehension shall be sitting) or
(in case the Parliament shall nor then be sitting) before one of His Majesty's
Principal Secretaries of State, to the intent the said Aron Smith may be
secured in order to his appearance before the said House of Peers to answer for
his said Offense; And hereunto His Majesty does require His said Officers, and
other His loving Subjects, to yield their ready obedience, as they will answer
the contrary at their peril.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the First day of June 1677, in the Nine and
twentieth year of Our Reign.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill, Christopher Barker, Thomas Newcomb, and Henry
Hills, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1677.


