C R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION Touching the Charitable Collections for Relief of the Poor
Distressed by the late Dismal FIRE in the City of LONDON.
CHARLES R.

WHereas by Our Proclamation of the Thirteenth day of September, in the
Eighteenth year of Our Reign, for a General Fast and Humiliation in reference
to that Conflagration, We did earnestly recommend the distressed estate of
those who had been undone by that Fire, to the Charity of all good and well
disposed Christians, Requiring Collections to that purpose to be made in all
Churches and Chapels, and the Moneys Collected to be faithfully and entirely
returned up to London to the Lord Mayor of that City, or as he should appoint,
to be distributed amongst poor Sufferers by that Fire: And whereas We are
informed by the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the said City, That the Collections
intended by that Proclamation, have not been so made or answered as they ought
to have been, but in many places omitted and not made at all, and from many
parts no Returns at all made: And although many Cities, Towns and places have
expressed their forward sense and compassion of the deplorable estate of the
same Our poor Subjects, by Liberal Contributions, yet the Receipt in the whole
falls short of what has been Collected at other times upon like Losses in
small Towns and Villages; which does manifest the remiss execution of Our said
Proclamation. Therefore, to the end Collections may be made in places where
they were omitted, although the time prefixed for making such Collections by
the said former Proclamation be elapsed, and that just and regular Accounts may
be taken, made, and published for general satisfaction, of all the Moneys
Collected, and to be Collected, and of the issuing and distribution thereof to
and for the said Charitable uses and intents; We are graciously pleased, and by
Advice of Our Privy Council, Do hereby strictly Charge and Command, upon pain
of Our high Displeasure, and such other Penalties as may by Law be inflicted
upon them, That where the said Collections according to the Tenor of Our former
Proclamation, have been omitted, All Ministers, Parsons, Vicars or Curates,
shall cause the same to be made in their respective Churches or Chapels on
some Lords day forthwith after receipt hereof: And that all the present
Ministers, Parsons, Vicars or Curates, and Churchwardens, and all Officials,
Registers, Officers of all Parishes and places within Our Realm, where any of
the said Collections have been, or shall be made; And all Officials, Registers,
and other Officers concerned, who have received any Moneys for the uses
aforesaid, shall before the First day of February now next ensuing, deliver, or
send in to the High-Constables of the respective Hundreds to which such
Parishes and Places do belong, a true and perfect Certificate in writing under
their hands, and under the hands of the late Churchwardens who were in Office
at the time of the said Collections made, of the Total sum of Money Collected,
Given, or Contributed in every the said Parishes or Places, and to whom the
same was delivered or paid over to be returned or sent up to the Lord Mayor of
London, and how much thereof (if any) is resting unpaid, and by whom, and in
whose hands or charge the same is still remaining. And that all Churchwardens,
and others who have Collected or Received, and not paid, or shall Collect or
Receive, or otherwise have in their hands or charge any of the said Moneys,
shall before the said First day of February, pay the same to the said
respective High-Constables of the Hundreds or Divisions wherein they live; and
the said High-Constables shall and are hereby Required and Commanded to receive
the said Moneys, and send out their Warrants to the said Ministers,
Churchwardens, and others, to bring in the said Certificate, and to pay the
said Money accordingly. And that the said High-Constables shall forthwith after
the said day, send or deliver the said Certificates, together with what
Parishes or Places have not certified, unto the Sollicitors appointed in the
several Counties by the Lords Commissioners of Our Treasury for the Eleven
months Assessment, from the Six and twentieth day of January, One thousand six
hundred sixty and seven: And that the said Sollicitors shall and are hereby
Required and Commanded without delay to transmit the same Certificates to the
Chamberlain of the City of London for the time being, for and to the end a
perfect Account may be thereupon stated and made up of the said Receipts; and
in the said Certificates to return the names of the Parishes and Places that
have neglected their duty: And also that the said High-Constables shall with
all expedition after receipt of the said Moneys from the several Persons,
Parishes and Places within their Constableries, pay over the same to the
General-Receivers of the said Eleven months Assessment in their several
Counties respectively; and the said General-Receivers shall also forthwith
after the receipt of the Moneys from the said High-Constables, remit and pay
the same to the Chamberlain of the City of London for the time being: And in
case they cannot find ways safety to remit the same as aforesaid, That they
give notice thereof to the Chamberlain aforesaid, that care may be taken for
the speedy bringing it into the hands of the said Chamberlain, to be disposed
and employed for Relief and Succor of the said Distressed Poor, as is intended
and directed by Our Former Proclamation. And that all persons concerned may
take notice of this Our Royal Pleasure and Command, It is Our further Will and
Pleasure, That the Sheriffs of Our respective Counties and Cities do cause this
our Proclamation to be so distributed, as that it may be Read in all Churches
and Chapels on the Lordsday, which will be the Third Lord's Day in the month
of November next ensuing.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Twenty sixth day of September, 1668.
In the SAVOY, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker,
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1668.


