THE HARMONY OF Natural and Positive Divine Laws.

Chrysostom. ad Demetrium. (...); Quod praeceptis non creditur, ex inertia ad
implenda quae praecepta sunt, venit. (...). Deo parere, non liberate tantum,
sed and regno praestantius est. Philo Lib. de Regno. LONDON, Printed for Walter
Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1682.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
FOrtune, though beyond my merit, and beside my expectation so propitious, as
to give me, not only the liberty of reading the Original Manuscript of this
Compendious Treatise, but also a right of adjudging it, either to perpetual
Darkness in my Cabinet, or to public Light, as I should think convenient: has
yet been so reserved, or sullen, as to deny me the knowledge of the Author's
Name and Quality; as if it were favor great enough, that she entrusted me to
dispose of another Treasure, without understanding from whom she had received
it; or as if she designed to make Trial of my Faith, whether I would lay claim
to what seemed to want an owner. But this her Caprichio, as it has not
deterred me from divulging, so ought it not to discourage you, Candid Reader,
from seriously perusing this Manual. For it is an ancient and wise saying of a
Philosopher, Non tam quis dixerit refert, quam quid dictum sit: and if the Book
be good enough to commend it self, what can it concern you or me to be
inquisitive who Composed it? if not; certainly no Name, how much soever
celebrated, can defend it from neglect and Contempt. Besides, when we remain
ignorant upon whom to fix the blame of our Frustrations, commonly that
Ignorance turns to our advantage, by mitigating our Resentments, and keeping
our displeasure from transgressing the limits of Humanity and Moderation.

This I speak, neither out of dislike of that Natural Curiosity by which all
Men are led to search into things concealed, nor from vain hope to restrain you
from using the liberty of Conjecturing, that is equally common to all: but only
from good Manners, which forbid us to pry into the Secrets of another, chiefly
of him who judges the Communication of them to be unsafe to himself, and no way
useful to us. If therefore our Author, duly conscious to himself of Human
Frailty, and diffident of his own Learning and judgment, fears to come upon the
Stage in this Censorious Age, wherein the Illiterate blush not to condemn the
Knowing: we are at once to acknowledge his Modesty, and commend his Prudence,
not to envy him the Privacy he affects. And this is enough for me to say, and
for you to know concerning him.

As for my self; If I, from good will to all Mankind, desire to make Common to
that benefit, which seems have been at first intended to be enclosed and kept
peculiar: I neither invade the Authors propriety, nor abuse the freedom
permitted to me, but charitably dispense to many the Wealth I might have kept
entirely to my self. And this too, following the Writers example, I choose to
do unknown; that my Charity may be exempt from all suspicion of Ostentation,
and that I may prevent all thanks of those that take it in good part. So that
in fine, all I ask of you is, that you would freely enjoy the pleasure of his
Studies, and of my benevolence, without thinking your self obliged to either,
without perturbing the quiet we both hope from our beloved obscurity. This,
Good Reader, you cannot with Equity deny to Men, who leaving to Censure the
Liberty wherein chiefly it delights, do by concealing the more expose
themselves.

It remains only, that I add a short Advertisement concerning the Book it self,
of the good reception whereof by the Learned and the Judicious, I am not a
little Solicitous, and from whose Fate I may learn how rightly to estimate the
small Judgment I have in Discourses of this kind. Permit me therefore to inform
you, That it was Written by the Author to no other end, but to confirm his
Faith by inquiring into the Reasonableness and Purity of it, and to augment his
Piety toward God. In a Word, That he might offer to the Divine Majesty, not the
Sacrifice of Fools, but (...), Worship consentaneous to right Reason: as
appears from the laudible Profession he makes in the Fifth Article of the
Second Chapter of the First Part; and from the plainness and simplicity of the
Style, such as serious Men use, when they commit to Writing their Collections
and Remarks for their own private use; and (what is yet more convincing) from
the Scope of the whole Disquisition. The Design then you will (I presume)
acknowledge to be good, worthy a Philosopher and a Christian. And if he has
pursued it so far as to satisfy his own Reason, why may not I hope from the
same Cause the like good effect also in the Minds of others? From this, and
only this hope it is, that I permit this Compendium of Natural and Positive
Divine Laws to see the Public Light. If my hope be by wiser Heads found to
stand upon an infirm Basis; the charity of my intention may at least excuse, if
not expiate the Error of my understanding.

THE CONTENTS OF THE FIRST PART.
CHAP. I. Of Right and Law in general. Page 1. II. God's Right to Sovereign
Dominion over all things in the World. 10 III. Of the Precepts of the Sons of
Noah, in general. 18. IV. Of Extraneous Worshipor Idolatry 21 V. Of Malediction
of the Most Holy Name, or Blasphemy. 28 VI. Of shedding Blood, or Homicide. 32
VII. Of uncovering Nakedness, or unlawful Copulation. 40 VIII. Of Theft or
Rapine. 54 IX. Of Judgments, or the Administration of Justice in Courts of
Judicature; and of Civil Obedience. 65 X. Prints of the Six precedent Natural
Precepts, found in the Book of Job. 73 XI. Of not eating any member of an
Animal alive. 76
OF THE SECOND PART.
CHAP. I. The Preface to the Decalogue Explained. Page 81 II. The First Precept
Explicated 96 III. The Second Precept Explicated 111 IV. The Third Precept
Explicated 143 V. The Fourth Precept Explicated 148 VI. The Fifth Precept
Explicated 172 VII. The Sixth Precept Explicated 181 VIII. The Seventh Precept
Explicated 185 IX. The Eighth Precept Explicated 187 X. The Ninth Precept
Explicated 189 XI. The Tenth Precept Explicated 193 XII. Evangelic Precepts
reduced to those of the Decalogue. 200
APPENDIX,
Containing a short History of the Jews TALMUD. 209
THE CONCORDANCE OF Natural and Positive Divine LAWS.
PART I.
Containing a Brief Explication of the Precepts of the Sons of Noah, And
Reduction of them to the Dictates of right Reason.
CHAP. I.
Of Right and Law in General.
WHat is by the ancient Wise Men of Greece, Article. 1. Right defined, and
as well Philosophers as Legislators, called sometimes (...), sometimes (...),
sometimes (...); by the Latins, Ius; and by the English, RIGHT; may not
unfitly be defined to be the Rule, Measure, and Index of what is Lawful, and
what Unlawful.

This is considered in a twofold sense, first as it is Obligative or binding,
2. distinguished into Preceptive and Concessive.
and then it is called also Preceptive or Commanded: or secondly as it is only
Permissive, and then it is named also Concessive. In the former sense it takes
place in those things that are commanded or forbidden, as to give every man his
due, not to swear falsely, etc. In the later, it is found in those things
whereof the use is neither commanded nor forbidden, but yet notwithstanding
permitted; as in the act of Buying, Selling, Manumission, in the conditions of
Contractors used to be added to their Contracts, and in others of that kind.

But both these kinds of Right belong, either to all Mankind universally, 3.
What is Right Natural, and What Divine.
that is, to all Nations, or not to all. That which belongs to all Mankind, or
all Nations, is again distinguished into Natural and Divine. The Natural is
that which is manifest from the light of man's natural reason, or the right use
of his faculty of understanding and inferring; elegantly defined by Tertullian
(Lib. de corona Militis) to be Lex communis in publico Mundi and naturalibus
tabulis Scripta; and called by the two best of all the Greek Historians,
Thucidides (Lib. 4.) and Polibius (Lib. 2.) (...), communia hominum jura; and
by Iurisconsults, Ius Gentium Primaevum. The Divine, that which has been
ordained and declared by Divine Oracles, committed to writing in the Holy
Bible. And this, as well as the Natural, deserves to be acknowledged to be Ius
Gentium Universal, seu omnium Commune. Because all the Laws of Nature, are the
Laws of God Himself; because his Positive or Written Laws are no other but
Sanctions or Explications of His Unwritten or Natural: and because whatsoever
is Obligatory in either Natural or Divine Universal Right, either from the
Nature of the thing it self, or rather from the auctority of the Author of
Nature, is by all men held to be immutable. Whence that Maxim so often
asserted by Philosophers, Theologues, Jurisconsults; Iura Naturalia esse
immutabilia. Which cannot be truly said of Right Permissive, whether Natural or
Divine, extending to all Mankind. For that this is variously mutable, according
to the judgment of Governors, is manifest to every man of common sense, even
from the name Permissive, and from daily experience, which teaches that
Permissive Right admits Obrogations, Abrogations, Temperaments, and
Limitations, i. e. Mutations. Whereas the Obligatory, though it admit indeed of
Increments or Additions (namely such by which it may be either more firmly, or
more decently observed) yet admits no Mutations, by which its force or virtue
may be in the least diminished.

From the Additions of Obligatory Right, 4. What is right Positive or Civil.
and the Mutations of Permissive, there has risen up that other Right, which
being of less extent, belongs not to all Nations, or to Mankind Universally,
but only to some parts of it, and is wont rightly enough (as being put or
founded, whether by God, or by men) to be called Positive, and sometimes also
Civil, and an additament of right reason natural.

5. Civil right either peculiar to one Nation, or common to many Nations.
This Positive Right may with good reason be distinguished into that which is
proper and singular to some one Nation or People coalescent into a Society;
(such long ago was that Patria potestas among the Romans, and that which was in
use at Athens, mentioned by Demosthenes (in Orat. contra Aristocratem) and that
which is common to many Nations. Which is again distinguished into that, to the
observation whereof more Nations than one are at once, equally, and in common
obliged: and that under which many Nations live, not at the same time, equally,
and from any common Obligation, but singly and by accident. Of this triple
Species of Positive Right the first may conveniently be termed Right simply
Civil, as pertinent to some one City or Commonwealth: The Second, Common Right
of many Nations, because of the communion of obligation: The third, Civil or
Domestic Right of some or many Nations, because the Obligation under which
they are, is only domestic and civil to each of them singly, not common to
all. For example, the twelve Tables brought from Athens to Rome obtained to be
of equal force in both Nations, the Attic and the Roman: But from no communion
of Obligation or Conjunction of Peoples. The Right of those Tables therefore
might much more commodiously have been called, the Civil Right of these
Nations, than simply the Right of Both, because this later phrase indicates a
Communion. 6. Right common to many Nations subdivided into Imperative and
Intervenient.
But as for the Common Right of more than one Nation founded upon communion of
Obligation; this likewise is to be parted into two branches: viz. that which is
Imperative to many Nations or Peoples, and that which is Intervenient. By
Imperative, we mean that Right of Nations, which is or ought to be observed by
many Nations or Peoples, otherwise subject to diverse Governments and Sovereign
Powers, from an Obligation common indeed to every one of them, and equal, but
derived from the Command either of God or of Man. Such was the Right of the
Dolopes, Magnetes, Phthiotae, Thessali, and other peoples of Graecia, who by a
common Obligation received from the Command of Acrisius King of the Argives,
were under the jurisdiction of the Great Amphictyonic Council at Athens. Such
also was the singular Right of War by God prescribed not only to the Hebrews,
but to the Canaanites too, with whom they were to make War. For both Nations
were obliged though diversimode, by the Authority of the Imperant. And when
diverse Nations convene in like manner into the same Right, by the Authority and
Command of the Pope of Rome, that is to be called an Imperative Right of those
Nations. But we call the Intervenient Right of Nations, that which arises, not
from an Empire common to many, but from intervenient pact or use of Customs,
and is wont to be called Ius Gentium Secundarium. Heads of this Right are
remarkable in the Right of demanding satisfaction for injury, of proclaiming
War, of Embassies, of Captives, of Hostages, of Leagues, of Commerces, and
other like things usually intervenient among diverse Nations. For what Right
soever, in these things, is made up of the Additions that have come to the
Universal Obligative Right of Nations, and of the Mutations that have come to
the Universal Permissive Right, among diverse Nations; all that, and not more,
deserves the name of either Imperative or Intervenient. The rest, it is evident,
retains the name of the Universal or most ancient Right of Nations. The
Caesarian Right also, which is so much insisted upon in the abovementioned
Heads of Intervenient Right, when they come to be discussed by Jurisconsults,
so far forth as it agrees with the Universal Right of Nations, whether Natural
or Divine, is also to be put under the same name: But so far as the Heads and
some Decrees of it, which are not of Universal Right, are made use of from the
consent of some Nations, with whom they are in force; it is most fitly to be
denoted by the Title of Right Intervenient among those Nations. And in fine, so
far as the same Caesarean Right is by some single Nations received into their
Forum or Court of Judicature; it is to be named the Civil Right of some
Nations, or their Domestic Right.

From this consideration of the nature, various notions, 7. Right distinguished
from Law.
and differences of Right, we may easily be able to distinguish betwixt those
two things, which many learned Writers confound, using the words Right and Law
promiscuously. For from the Premises it may be collected, that Right
consists in liberty of doing or not doing: But Law obliges to do, or not to
do, and therefore Right and Law differ as Liberty and Obligation, which about
the same thing are inconsistent.

Hence we may define Natural Right, 8. Natural Right, and
to be the Liberty, which every man has of using, according to his own will
and pleasure, his power to the conservation of his Nature; and (by consequence)
of doing all things that he shall judge to be conducive thereunto:
Understanding by Liberty (what that word properly signifies) Absence of
external impediments.

And Natural Law, 9. Natural Law defined.
to be a Precept, or General Rule excogitated by reason, by which every man is
prohibited to do that which he shall judge to tend to his hurt, harm, or wrong.

By Nature all Wise men understand the Order, 10. That all the Laws of Nature
are the Laws of God.
Method and Economy instituted and established by God from the beginning or
Creation, for Government and Conservation of the World. All the Laws of Nature
therefore are the Laws of God: And that which is called Natural, and Moral, is
also Divine Law: as well because Reason, which is the very Law of Nature, is
given by God to every man for a rule of his Actions; as because the Precepts of
living, which are thence derived, are the very same that are promulged by the
Divine Majesty for Laws of the Kingdom of Heaven, by our most blessed Lord
Jesus Christ, and by the Holy Prophets, and Apostles; nor is there in Truth any
one Branch of Natural or Moral Law, which may not be plainly and fully
confirmed by the Divine Laws delivered in Holy Scripture: as will soon appear
to any man who shall attentively read and consider what our Master Hobbs has
with singular judgment written in the 4 th. Chapter of his Book de Cive: where
he confirms all the Laws of Nature by comparing them singly with Divine
Precepts given in the Old and New Testament. Whoever therefore desires clearly
to understand the Reasonableness, Equity, Justice, and Utility of Moral Laws,
and the true Causes of the Obligation under which he is to observe them, in
order to his Felicity, as well in this life, as in that which is to come; ought
most seriously and profoundly to consider the Divine Laws or Precepts recorded
in that Collection of Sacred Writings called the Bible. Which I, though of
Learning inferior to so Noble an undertaking, and subject by the Nature of my
Profession and Studies to various Distractions every day, yet resolve with my
self to attempt, according to the Module of my weak understanding, not for
Information of Others, but for my own private satisfaction.

CHAP. II.
God's Sovereign Right to Dominion over all things in the World.
THat God is by highest Right Sovereign Lord, 1. God's Right to the absolute
Monarchy of the World.
and Monarch of the Universe, having in himself most absolute power both of
Legislation, and of Jurisdiction; is sufficiently manifest even from this, That
He is sole Author and Creator of the World and all things therein Contained,
and does by His most wise Providence perpetually Conserve and Sustain them. And
that He only can relax or remit the Obligation under which His Subjects are to
observe the Laws by Him given for their Regimen; and to whom He pleases pardon
the Violation of them: is no less manifest from His very Supremacy. So that it
belongs not to the right of any Mortal Ruler, either to command what God
forbids, or to forbid what God commands. The reason is, because, as in Natural
causes, the Inferior have no force against the efficacy of the Superior; so it
is in Moral also. Upon which reason St. Austin seems to have fixed his most
discerning Eye, when teaching that the Commands of Kings and Emperors, so far
as they contradict any Divine Command, cannot impose an Obligation to
Obedience; advances to his conclusion by the degrees of this Climax or Scale.
If the Curator commands somewhat, it is not to be done if the Proconsul
forbids. Herein we contemn not the Power, but choose to obey the Higher. Again
if the Proconsul bid one thing, and the Emperor injoin the contrary, without
doubt you must give obedience to the Emperor. Therefore if the Emperor exact
one thing and God another; what is to be done? God is certainly the greater
Power: give us leave, O Emperor, to obey Him. From the same reason that most
wise Emperor, Marcus Aurelius also said, the Magistrates judge private men;
Princes the Magistrates, and God the Princes: And Seneca the Tragedian,
Quicquid a vobis minor extimescit,
Major hoc vobis Dominus minatur:
Omne sub regno graviore regnum est.
For his sense is, Deum esse supra omnes summates hominum, Regum timendorum in
proprios greges,
Reges in ipsos imperium est Iovis.


This Monarchy of God is double, 2. His Dominion over men Natural, and Civil.
Natural and Civil. By the Natural, is to be understood the absolute Dominion
which from the Creation he has exercised, and at this day does exercise over
all men Naturally or by right of His Omnipotency. By the Civil I understand
that which in the Holy Scriptures is most frequently named The Kingdom of God,
and which is most properly called Kingdom, because constituted by consent of
the Hebrew Nation, who by express pact or covenant chose God to be their King:
He promising to give them possession of the land of Canaan, and they promising
to obey him in all things. But this Kingdom being by Divine Justice, for the
disobedience and many rebellions of that perverse people, long since extinct,
they now remain in the same state of subjection with all other Nations, namely
under the Natural Empire of the Universal Monarch God.

But (what is worthy our more serious remark and consideration) tho the
Commonwealth of the Hebrews, 3. The Stability of His Positive Divine Laws given
to the Jews; and Universal extent of the same.
the form of whose Government may be most properly called a Theocraty (for, the
Supreme Ruler and President was, not Moses, but Almighty God Himself) has
been, so many Ages past, dissolved: yet the most excellent Positive Divine
Laws, principally those comprehended in the Decalogue, upon which that Empire
was founded, have lost nothing of their Sanction and Original force, but still
continue Sacred and Obligatory, not only to the posterity of the Hebrews, but
also to all the Sons of Men of what Nation soever. Which the Learned Cunaeus
has ( de rep. Hebraeor. cap. 1.) with singular judgment observed in words of
this sense. The Laws of other Nations, inventions of humane Wit, are enforced
only by penalties, which by time, or through the sloth of Governors, lose
their terror: but the Jewish Ordinances, being the decrees of the Eternal God,
not weakened by either continuance of time, or softness of the Judges, remain
still the same; and when the Ax and the Scourge are no longer feared, men's
minds are nevertheless kept in awe by Religion. And as the Stability of these
Laws given by Moses, whom God had consituted His Representative and Vicegerent
in the promulgation of them, to the People of Israel, is by Cunaeus rightly
referred to the Eternity and Immutability of the Divine decrees: so is it
Lawful for us to assert the Universal Extent of them from this reason, that the
Divine Law of the Decalogue is an Explication of the Law Natural written in the
mind of every individual man from the beginning; though we must at the same
time acknowledge, that the very giving the same in Precept to the Jews, added a
new Sanction and Obligation to the former; so that the Jew doing the contrary,
not only offended in doing an act simply vicious, but also in doing an act
strictly for bidden; because (as St. Paul speaks Romans 11. 23.) by the
transgression of the Law he dishonors God.

That this different Obligation of Laws Natural and Divine may be yet more
clearly understood, 4. The difference betwixt Law natural and positive Divine,
as to their Obligation.
we observe, that the determining of human actions arises, either from their
own Nature; as to Honor and Worship God, is due; to lie, unlawful of it self:
or from the Positive Divine Law. Those of the former sort are referred to the
Law Natural: Those of the Latter are such as have been prescribed by God, some
to single persons, namely to Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, and other servants
of God: among all People, to Israel alone God prescribed many Positive Laws
pertaining to their Religion, which was the same with their Polity. To all
mankind, some things were commanded for a time; as the observation of the
Sabbath, presently after the Creation, as many of the most Learned think; the
Law of not eating blood, or the strangled, after the flood: Others to last for
ever, as the institutions of Christ, concerning Excommunication, Baptism, the
Supper, etc. if there be any more of that kind. So that one and the same
vicious action is more or less offensive to God, according to the determination
of it to be so by Positive Law, or by mere light of reason, i. e. by Law
Natural. Because though both Laws be Divine, yet the Obligation of the former
is double, of the later single.

Having thus, 5. The importance of the Premises, and design of the subsequent
Discourse.
Briefly indeed, but plainly asserted Gods Right to the Monarchy of the whole
World; distinguished His Natural Dominion from His Civil; defined what is Law
Natural, what Positive Divine; and shown the difference betwixt that and this,
as to their Obligation: it seems to me, that I have not only prevented all such
erroneous conceptions, which otherwise might arise, either from Ambiguity of
the words, Right, Dominion, Government, Law, and Obligation; or from Confusion
of various Notions of single things: But also laid the Corner Stone as it were,
of the little structure I propose to my self to erect, in order to the stronger
defense of my mind against allurements to do evil, i. e. to violate any of
God's Laws. For in this illaborate exercise of my pen, I have no other end or
design but this; to investigate and examine the perfect Concordance betwixt the
Laws of Nature, and Positive Divine Laws, principally those of the Decalogue;
to the end that being at length fully convinced of the double Obligation
incumbent on me not to transgress any one of the latter sort, I may in the
little remnant of my days do my best devoir to live more inoffensively both
toward God, and toward Men. For certainly who is thoroughly conscious of the
justice, equity, and decency of Religious Duties, will be so much the more
solicitous to perform them: because the more the understanding is illuminate by
the rays of Truth and Evidence, by so much the less prone it is to be imposed
upon by the specious pretexts of Passions, and by consequence the more apt to
direct its Handmaid the Will in the right way to Felicity; which consists in
the Knowledge, Love, and Veneration of God.

As for Method; the work in which my thoughts are at present versed, will be in
bulk so little, 6. The Method and Heads of the same.
I need not be over curious what Form to give it; the Materials so few, I need
not be solicitous in what Order to range them to the best advantage. Without
affectation therefore of ornament from either of those two things, and without
farther amusing my self with variety of distinctions (many times of more
subtilty than use) I will content my self with tracing, as faithfully as I can,
the footsteps of Time, or (to speak a little more plainly) reciting and
considering the various Moral Laws, whether merely Traditional, or Written,
given by God, first to Noah and his little Family, when soon after the Deluge
they began to replenish the Earth with Inhabitants; and then to Moses, when he
constituted and established the most Admirable Commonwealth of the Hebrews, in
the same order in which they are said to have been delivered; and briefly
comparing them singly with the Laws of Nature; it being (as I just now professed)
my chief scope in this Disquisition, to find the Concordance betwixt these and
those.

CHAP. III.
Of the Precepts of the Sons of Noah in general.
I Begin from the Moral Laws, Article 1. Three Preliminaries concerning these
Precepts.
which, according to the Tradition of the Talumdic Masters, were given to Noah
and his Sons soon after the Flood, and which are thence named Praecepta
Noachidarum. Which before I recite, three things not altogether unworthy to be
noted, for our more facile understanding of their authority and extent, are to
be Premised. The first, that by the Patronymie Noachidae, the Rabbis
unanimously understand all Nations besides the Hebrews, who affect rather to be
called Abrahamidae, from the Father of all the Faithful, Abraham. The second,
that the same Rabbis, firmly believing, and confidently teaching, that there
has been no Age wherein these Precepts have not obtained; therefore take them
for the Natural and Common Right of all men. Whence we may receive a glimps of
Light whereby to discern, both what they thought of the Religion of the
Ancients before the Law, and upon what condition it was lawful for Strangers to
reside in the Land of Israel, after the Law. For, while the Hebrews were sui
juris, i e. lived under no Laws but those of their own Republic, within their
territory no dwelling was permitted to any Idolatrous Gentile. But the
Stranger, who in the presence of three men, had taken upon himself the seven
Precepts of the Sons of Noah, and promised to observe them, was held to be
Proselytus Domicilii; and though he were neither Circumcised, nor Baptized, might
nevertheless, as a Sojourner, dwell among the Hebrews. The third, that though in
the Mishna or Collection of ancient Traditions made by Rabbi Iehuda, surnamed
Hakadosh, the Saint (who lived under the three Antonins, Pius, Marcus, and
Commodus, and finished his Syntagme of the Mishna in the Year 120. from the
destruction of the Temple, but of the Christian Era 190.) there be no memory
of these Precepts: yet in the Babylonian Gemara or [(...)] Complement, composed
by Rab. Ase, about 400 years after the former, they are not only mentioned, but
with sacred respect commended to Posterity; so that even our Prince of
Antiquaries Mr. Seldom, thought it a task well worthy his diligence, and
admirable Learning, to explicate and comment upon them in his seven Books de
Iure Naturali and Gentium; though he had found the Masters themselves embroiled
in a kind of Civil War about the number of them, some accounting but six,
others seven, others eight, and others again adding two or three more. As
appears from the Gemara it self, where ( ad titul. Sanhedrin. c. 7. sect. 5.)
is found this list of the Precepts. 2, Various opinions of the Rabbines
concerning the number of these Precepts.
Traditur a Rabbinis, septem Praecepta imperata esse Noachidis; de Iudiciis, de
Maledictione Numinis, de Cultu Extraneo, de Revelatione Turpitudinum, de
Sanguinis effusione, de Rapina seu furto, de Membro animalis viventis. R.
Chanina dixit etiam, de Sanguine viventis: R. Chidka etiam, de Castratione; R.
Simeon etiam, de Magia; R. Eliezer etiam, de Heterogeneorum animalium
admissione, arborumque insitione. And from Rabbi Moses ben Maimon (vulgarly
Maimonides and Rambam) who says, that the six former were delivered to Adam;
that of abstaining from any member of a living Creature, to Noah; that of
Circumcision, to Father Abraham; in Halak Melakim, c. 9. But the Major part of
these Learned Commentators upon the Mishna give their suffrages to no more than
seven. Of those therefore, supposing them to be Genuine and Universal, I choose
to speak in this Treatise: preferring these two that belong to Religion or
Divine Worship, to the rest which concern the mutual Offices or Duties of Men.

CHAP. IV. The first Precept.
Of Extraneous Worship or Idolatry.
BY Extraneous Worship, Article 1: What was understood to be Extraneous Worship
by the Egyptians; and what by the Hebrews.
the Ancient Egyptians seem to have understood and detested only whatsoever
[(...)] their Parents had not taught them; as may be collected from that
Prayer, or Apology rather, used by them at funerals, translated from the
Egyptian tongue into the Greek by Euphantus, and from him transmitted to
Posterity by Porphyrius in Lib. de Abstinentia 4. sect. 10. For in this
Apology, one of the Overseers of the Obsequies, personating the defunct, and
speaking in his or her name, pronounces among many other these words, (...):
Ego enim Deos, quos mihi parents commonstrarunt, pie colui quamdiu in hoc
saeculo vixi. But the Hebrews thereby understood, that the Worship of any
Creature whatsoever, as well of Angels, and bodies Celestial or Terrestrial, as
of Images or Idols, was strictly prohibited. For, to acknowledge and worship
one God, and him the true God, was to them, as it is now to us Christians, the
fundament of Religion. This difference betwixt the Egyptian and Hebraick
Religion, even Tacitus treating of the Jews (Hist. l. 5.) clearly enough
observes in these words; Corpora condere, quam cremare, e more Aegyptio;
eademque cura; and de Infernis persuasio. Coelestium contra: Aegyptii pleraque
animalia, effigiesque compositas venerantur; Judaei mente sola, unumque Numen
intelligunt; profanos, qui Deum imagines mortalibus materiis in species hominum
effingant; Summum illud and aeternum, neque mutabile, neque interiturum. Itaque
nulla simulacra urbibus suis, nedum templis sunt.

From the times of Abraham, 3. That the interdict of Idolatry given to the
Hebrews, seems to have respect to the manifold Idolatry of the Egyptians.
Idolatry was held by the Hebrews to be of all crimes the greatest, and to be
fled from as the worst of plagues: but that which is interdicted in the
Decalogue and other Laws, seems to have respect to the manifold Idolatry of the
Egyptians. In the parts of lower Egypt, the highest honor and veneration was
given to a sort of Buck-Goats with long shaggy hair, called Seirim: and the
Israelites placed there, were grown so mad with this Mendesian (...), that they
needed a special interdict to restrain them. Which they received in this form (
Lev. c. 17. v. 7.) They shall no more offer their Sacrifices [Pilosis] unto
Devils, after whom they have gone a whoring. Where not only our Translators,
but Maimonides (in More Neboch. part 1. cap. 36.) by (...) sive (...),
understand Devils appearing to their Votaries in the shape of Hee-Goats with
long hair. The same Rabbi (Doct. Perplex. lib. 3. cap. 46. page 480.) says
moreover; Of the Zabians there have been some, who worshipped Demons, and
believed them to have the form of Male-Goats, and thence called them also
Seirim, i. e. Goats. Which foolish and ridiculous opinion was in Moses's time
diffused far and wide; as appears from the above recited Prohibition, non
sacrificabunt ultra sacrificia sua Lasseirim, hircis, i. e. Daemonibus ita
appellatis: and was the true cause why the eating of such Goats was Piacular
among the Zabians, by which name he understands chiefly the Mendesii, People of
a Province in Lower Egypt.

To enumerate all the various kinds of Idolatry used by the Egyptians in the
time of the Israelites servitude under them, 3. Egyptian Polytheism, contagious
to the Hebrews; and therefore obviated by one general interdict.
would require a large Volume. For not contented to adore all the Host of
Heaven, by an Idolatry common to them with many other Nations; they were then
grown so impiously devout, that they formed to themselves Deities of all sorts
of Animals, four-footed Beasts, Fowls, Fishes, Serpents, Insects, not excepting
Plants, Trees, and Herbs. So that it was not without reason that Moses,
solicitous to extirpate the relics of Idolatry out of the hearts of the
infected Israelites, at once, and by one Universal Antidote; gave them this
Command ( Deuteronomy. c. 12. v. 2. and 3.) You shall utterly destroy all the places
wherein the Nations which ye shall possess, served their Gods, upon the high
Mountains, and upon Hills, and under every green Tree. And you shall overthrow
their Altars, and break their Pillars, and burn their Groves with fire, and hew
down the graven Images of their Gods, and destroy the names of them out of that
place. Yea more, he made it unlawful for them either to enter into a League of
what kind soever with any people serving Idols intra solum Israeliticum; or to
have conversation, or commerce with them. ( Exodus cap. 34. ver. 15. and Deuteronomy.
cap. 7. ver. 2.)

Before the Law, 4. The setting up of Pillars, Statues, etc. Why forbidden by
Moses to the Hebrews; though not unlawful to the Stranger, unless used to
Idolatry.
Jacob the Patriarch erected [(...), cippum, statum] a pillar, ( Genesis 35. 14.)
and Moses, before the Tabernacle was built, raised an Altar, and twelve Titles
( Exodus 24. 4.) But lest from these conspicuous examples occasion might be
given to Idolatry, the Law forbid such things also. ( Levit. 26. 1.)

But these Laws, peculiar to the Israelites, did not per se oblige a Noachid or
stranger; to whom living without the Hebrew Territory, it was lawful to raise
such Pillars, Altars, Monuments, etc. at his pleasure; provided he did it not
in Cultum Extraneum: within the Promised Land, lest from such example
encouragement might be taken for Idolatry, it was no more permitted to the
Stranger, than to an Israelite, either to set up a Statue, or plant a Grove, or
make Images, or do any other thing of that kind, no not merely for ornament
sake; as Mr. Seldom has truly observed ( De Iure Naturali and Gentium lib. 2.
c. 6.) The Rabbis hold a Humane Image protuberant to be unlawful: but not that
which is made in plano, flat, or in concavo, in a hollow. Of Caelestial bodies
neither prominent, nor plane made for ornament, were lawful; but made for
teaching or learning, as in Diagrams Astronomical, and the like, they were
permitted. Other figures, as well an Israelite, as a Noachid might form as they
pleased.

Of the same respect is that interdict ( Deuteronomy. 5. The Mosaic Law concerning
Idols, explicated.
7. 26.) Non inferes quidpiam ex idolo in domum tuam, Thou shall not bring (as
our Translation renders it) an abomination into thy house: which the Jewish
Masters thus interpret. To have, use and enjoy an image made only for ornament,
was Lawful, the same being part of domestic furniture: but one made by a
Gentile for worship sake, was not to be admitted into promiscuous use with
other utensils; nor was it permitted, either to possess, or to sell Victims,
Oblations, Vessels, instruments consecrated to idolatrous uses. Nor was any
thing, whose use had been interdicted, to be retained; but either burned, or
broken in pieces, and thrown into the Air, River or Sea: nay the very ashes or
coals thereof were an abomination. But an Idol it self, if melted or broken in
pieces and applied to common uses by a Gentile, before it came into the
possession of an Israelite, might be kept, and among other utensils commodious
to life used: because the liquation, comminution, and application thereof to
common uses by the Gentile, was a manifest Resecration or Solution of the
Religion of it: and the Idol being once resecrate, all furniture and utensils
belonging to it, are so too. But whatsoever has not been made by Man, as a
Mountain, Fountain, River, four-footed Beast, and other Terrestrial things, the
works of Nature, though worshipped as an Idol; the use and possession thereof was
not prohibited. A Grove or Tree planted by a Gentile for Worship, or only to
shadow, or adorn an Idol was so abominable, that to an Israelite, it was
unlawful either to shelter himself from heat, cold, rain or wind under the
boughs of it; or to pass through it, if there were any other way; or to eat the
Eggs or Young of Birds building their nest in the branches of it; to bring home
the wood for building, instruments of agriculture, or fuel, or to eat any
bread or meat dressed with fire made of the wood; or to wear cloth woven with a
shuttle of the wood; or to make use of the ashes. And yet the use of herbs
growing there, was not unlawful; because the soil it self was unpoluted. Now of
all these things, whatever was unlawful to an Israelite to do, or possess; the
same was equally unlawful to a Proselyte of the House. And this is a Summary of
the most learned Rabbis exposition of this first Precept against Extraneous
Worship or Idolatry.

CHAP. V. The second Precept.
Of Malediction of the Most Holy Name, or Blasphemy.
SO agreeable is this Interdict to the Law of Nature or Light of Reason,
Article 1. Blasphemy forbidden among the Egyptians,
that even the old Egyptians themselves, though overspread with the Leprosy of
Polytheism, acknowledged themselves under a most strict Obligation punctually
to observe it: as may be inferred from hence, that Hermippus, in the life of
Pythagoras, whose doctrines were all derived from Egypt, among many other
Statutes of that Sect concerning the Soul's purification, etc. sets down this
for one; (...), to abstain from all Blasphemy.

To the Israelites God expressly gives the same. ( Lev. 22. 32.) Keep my
Commandments and do them; 2. What was blasphemy to the Hebrews.
I am the Lord; ye shall not profane my Holy Name, that I may be sanctified in
the midst of the Children of Israel. Now among the Hebrews, a more diligent
observation of the Law is called Sanctification of the Divine Name: and on the
contrary, to perpetrate any thing against the Law, is called Profanation of
it; as Mr. Seldom has out of the Princes of their Rabbis judiciously
remarked, de Iure Nature. and Gent. lib. 2. cap. 10. The more notable Interdicts
of Idolatry, Homicide, Unlawful Coition, were not to be violated, though to avoid
the danger of imminent Death: for of a less danger no account is made. In time
of public persecution, life was not to be redeemed by violation of any Law. At
another time, it was sufficient to violation of the Law, to obey the person
impellent by menaces of Death, rather than to be killed; at least if the act
turned to the emolument of the impellent: as where work was to be done for him
upon the Sabbath, or if ten or more Hebrews were not present. To a sick man it
was lawful to eat things prohibited, to deliver himself from death. Farther, a
sin against more established customs or manners and humane society, though not
against the Law, is a Profanation of the Holy Name. Nor is such Profanation
in any case observed to have been fully remitted to any man before the very
moment of death; according to that of Isai. cap. 22. ver. 14. This iniquity
shall not be purged from you till ye die. This (...), Pollution or Profanation
of the Divine Name, seems to be called (...) by the Apostle, ( Romans 2. 24.) but
is not that which is interdicted to the Noachid here in this second Precept;
and Naaman the Syrian cleans'd from the Leprosy (2. of Kings c. 5. v. 18.) is
brought for an Example. The difference is clearly shown by Mr. Seldom (de Iur.
Not. and Gent. lib. 2. cap. 11.) whose words therefore I here faithfully
translate.

The Blasphemy or Malediction by this Precept forbidden, 3. Blasphemy and
Idolatry, equal crimes and always to be punished by Excision.
is that most Horrible Wickedness [(...).] Execration of the Divine Name, when
any reproach and audacious contumely is openly and maliciously thrown forth
against God; such as was cast forth by those most impious miscreants, the son
of Shelomith (Levit. 24.) and Rabshakeh's ( Kings 2. chapter 18. v. 30.) Also when
the Divine Majesty is understood to be knowingly and proudly denied, from the
consequence of any Act or Profession: as when any man, not from Ignorance, but
out of Malapertness and Pride, professes and endeavors to persuade others,
that Idolatry is to be embraced; this man, though he has himself worshipped no
Idol, denies God by consequence, and is to be held a Blasphemer. And against
this most execrable impiety is turned the edge of that Sacred Law ( Numb. 15.
30.) But the Soul that does ought presumptuously, or [(...)] with an high hand,
whether he be born in the Land, or a Stranger [ex Proselytis, tam Domicilii
quam Justiciae] the same reproacheth the Lord; and that Soul shall be cut off
from among his People. Upon which Law Maimonides commenting ( More Neboch. pa.
3. c. 41.) says; No man so sins, but he into whose Soul another opinion,
that is repugnant to the Law, has crept. The Scripture there speaks also de
Cultu Extraneo, because that is opposite to the very foundation of the Law. So
that a Balsphemer is equal to an Idolater, both denying the fundamental
Principle of all Religion. Other sins committed from error, or ignorance, or
force of concupiscence or pravity of manners, were to be expiated by certain
Sacrifices, or corrected by other sorts of punishments: Idolatry and Blasphemy
always to be punished by Excision or cutting off, to be inflicted by Divine
Vengeance; but Blasphemy also by stoning, (Levit. 24. 16.) And these
explications of the Hebrew Doctors seem to me sufficient to evince the equal
Obligation of these two Precepts concerning Divine Worship, and common to the
Noachides with the Israelites. I proceed therefore to the rest, which concern
the mutual offices of Men.

CHAP. VI. The third Precept.
Of Spilling Blood or Homicide.
THat this Precept also was contained in the Moral Discipline of the Ol^
Egyptians, Arti. 1. Homicide prohibited to the Egyptians and other Gentiles, by
Law Natural: and after to the Israelites, by the Mosaic.
is evident from the precedent Apology of the Overseer of the Obsequie^ in
Sacred use among them, in which he^ in the name of the defuntct, makes thi^
profession, (...)* Of other men I have killed none. And to (...) Noachid
belongs that of Genesis 9. 5. I wi^^ require your blood of your lives. Which is to
be understood of incruent or bloodless Homicide also of what kind soever. Some
interpret it of Suicide or Self-murder. Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall
his blood be shed: not by judgment pronounced in Court, but by Natural Right of
Talion, or like for like. And this Interdict is renewed in the Decalogue, Thou
shall do no Murder; and elsewhere more than once in the Mosaic body of the Law.

Philo the Jew ( de Leg. special. Praecept. 6. 2. Exposing of Infants, and
procuring of Abortion also Interdicted.
and 7.) says, the Exposing of Infants is among many Nations, by reason of
their native inhumanity, a vulgar impeity. To the Hebrews it was expressly
forbidden, either to extingusih a Foetus in the Womb, or to expose Children.
And Tacitus could say, ( Hist. lib. 5.) Augendae multitudini consulitur. Nam
and necare quenquam ex gnatis nefas. Egyptians also, if we believe the Records
of Diodorus the Sicilian, the best of Antiquaries, ( lib. 1. p. 51.) were
obliged to nourish all their Infants, for increase of Mankind, which highly
conduces to the Felicity of their Country.

Voluntary or wilful Murder was, 3. Punishment of wilful Murder in the
Commonwealth of the Hebrews.
ex fo^ensi sententia, to be punished by the Sword: but Philo Iudaeus (de Leg.
special. p. 617.) says, the Murderer was to be suspended or hanged upon a
Gibbet. He that kills any Man, says Moses (Levit. 24. 21.) shall be put to
Death. Ye shall have one manner of Law, as well for the Stranger (or Proselyte,
of Justice, not of the House) as for one born in your own Country. For so the
Masters understand this Text: And as for the punishment of this sort of
Homicide; they have some differences betwixt the Gentiles living within the
Territories of the Israelites, and the Natives and Proselytes ritely
circumcised. Again Moses says ( Numb. 35. 21.) the Revenger of blood shall
slay the Murderer, when he meets him [without any place of Refuge.] Now the
Right of the Revenger of blood, in the Territories of the Israelites, belonged
no less to the Gentiles and Proselytes of the House, than to the Hebrews
themselves, but whether it obtained among the Noachides before the Law, or
among the Egyptians, is uncertain: but that Name seems to derive it self, not
so much from the Mosaic Constitution, as from a Custom more Ancient. However,
most certain it is, that the Revenger of Blood was the next Heir of the Slain.

Homicide by chance, 4. Right of Asyle, in casual Homicide.
or error, had right of Sanctuary. Of which Right, or Cities of Refuge, the
Sacred Law has ordained many things ( Numb. 35.) and the Masters deliver many
necessary to the Interpretation of the Law. To a Gentile, the Privilege of
Sanctuary did not appertain; he was Obnoxious to the Revenger of blood: nor to
a Proselyte of the House, in the casual slaughter of one Circumcised; but he
enjoyed the Right of Asyle, when he had by chance slain another of his own kind
or quality; as Mr, Seldom has curiously collected ( de Iur. Not. and Gent. l.
4. ^. 2.) Who in the next Chapter proceeds to the Interpretation of diverse
other Niceties concerning this Precept, from the Commentraries of the Jewish
Masters of greatest estimation and authority.

Thou shall not stand against the blood of thy Neighbor, 5. How far an
Aggressor was to be resisted by a by-stander, in defense of the assaulted.
says Moses (Levit. 19. 16.) that is, thou shall not stand Idle, when danger
of Death is imminent over one of thy own Kind, Stock or Nation; but shall help
to deliver him. The force of an Aggressor with purpose to kill, also of a
Buggerer, of an Adulterer, of an Intestuous Person, was to be hindered, though
with loss of life, that they might not commit sin. And such Wicked Force was
also ^o be punished by Private Force; if it could ^e done, by blows (not
Mortal) or by ^utting off a Member; if not, rather than fail, even by killing.
If an Israelite shall have delivered an Israelite, or his goods, into the Power
of a Gentile, whether by fraud or by force: it was Lawful either to slay him,
or to give him up into the power of a Gentile, that he might not betray or
deliver up others in like manner. To kill an Israelite a Prevaricator (i. e. a
Worshipper of Idols, or a Sinner in Contempt of the Divine Majesty) as also an
Epicurean (i. e. an Apostate denying the Holy Law and the Prophesies) it was
Lawful to any other Israelite to kill him, either in Public with the Sword, or
by Stratagem. For by his Prevarication and Apostasy, he is deprived of the
Title and Privilege of a Neighbor, i. e. he has ceased to be an Israelite.
By fraud to Circumvent a Gentile an Idolater, to his destruction, was not
Lawful: and yet notwithstanding the Law does not command to deliver him from
imminent death, seeing he is not a Neighbor.

Other kinds of Homicide there were, 6. Homicide, in what cases permited, and
whence arose the Right of Zealots.
permitted to private men. A Thief in the Night breaking into a House
Inhabited, might be impunely slain. Which is also in the Platonic Laws, and in
those of the twelve Tables. In Childbirth, it was Lawful, for the Mothers
preservation, to extinguish the Foetus in her Womb: but not vice versa. For
Worshipping the Calf, three Thousand were slain, not Twenty-three Thousand as
the Vulgar. From the notorious Example of Phinehas the Son of Eleazar (Numb.
25. 11.) was derived Ius Zelotarum, the Right of Zelots, by which it was lawful
for private Men led by Pious Zeal, whenever an Israelite, openly and before
at least ten Israelites, violated the Sanctity of the Divine Majesty, Temple,
or Nation, to punish the wickedness in the same moment by beating, wounding,
and even by slaying the Offender persevering in his sin. By this received Right
of Zelots, Mattathias (Macchab. lib. 1. cap. 2. v. 24.) killed a Jew going to
sacrifice after the Grecian rite: and our Lord Jesus Christ himself, as a
private Person, by whipping drove out Money Changers and Buyers and Sellers
Violating the Sanctity of the Temple, without reprehension; because they had
profanely made the House of Prayer a Den of Thieves: and his Disciples referred
this fact of their Lord to Zeal of thy House. Under pretext of the same Right,
the Jews in their Assembly ran upon our Lord Himself as guilty of Blasphemy,
and smote him on the Face with their hands: and a Servant of the High Priest
struck him presently, because he seemed, by an irreverent answer, to have
violated the Sanctity of the High Priest. In fine, under the same pretext, St.
Stephen was stoned to death, and a Conspiracy undertaken against St. Paul; and
at length in the Jewish War sprang up from the same root a power of horrid
Villainies and dire Mischiefs.

From this Universal Interdict of Homicide, 7. That the Law de Anathemate gave
the Hebrews no right to devote their children or servants to death: and
therefore that the Daughter of Iephtha was made, not a victim, but a Nun.
what we read of Abraham's readiness to immolate his Son Isaac, seems very much
to derogate: and some there are, who think it to have been lawful to the
Hebrews, from the Sacred Law de Anathemate, of a thing vowed or devoted, by
voluntary Consecration, to devote to death their Sons and Servants whom they
had in their power; and they affirm, that Iephtha offered up his devoted
Daughter in Sacrifice. Yea Josephus (Antiq. l. 5. c. 9.) professes himself to
be of this opinion: but has been clearly convicted of Error therein by his
Rival in the search of the Jewish Antiquities, our incomparable Seldom; who (
de Iur. Not. and Gent. lib. 4. cap. 11.) from Rabbi Kimchi's commentaries, and
the very words of the Sacred Text, concludes most rationally, that Iephtha, in
accomplishment of his Vow, built a house for his Daughter in a solitary place,
and brought her into it; where she remained during life secluded from the Sons
of Men, and from all secular affairs; and it was a Statute in Israel, that the
Daughters of Israel should yearly visit her, to condole her perpetual
Virginity. The Father indeed is said to have deplored the cruelty of his Vow,
and rent his Garments for sorrow: but not because he thought himself thereby
bound to immolate her, but because he had cut off all hope of Issue from her.
So that she seems to have been rather the first Nun in the World, not an
Example of a Right granted, by the Law de Anathemate, to the Jews of
consecrating or devoting their Children to death. For Humane slaughter was by
no Right of the Hebrews permitted, unless in case of legitimate punishment, and
of just War: and then too the very Act of Killing was in it self reputed so
hateful and impure, that it required solemn lustration of the Actor, by virtue
of this Command ( Numb. 31. 19.) Whoever has killed any Man [Malefactor justly
condemned, or Enemy in War] and whoever has touched a dead body, let him be
purified, as well ye as your captives.

CHAP. VII. The fourth Precept.
Of Uncovering Nakedness, or Unlawful Copulation.
OF Matrimony both the Original, 1. Incest, Adultery Sodomy, and Bestiality,
interdicted by the Law of Nature.
and the necessity are derived from the very Creation. Male and Female created
He them; and God Blessed them, and said to them, be fruitful, and multiply, and
replenish the Earth. Which was repeated to the Sons of Noah soon after the
Deluge. From Natural Right, was interdicted Coition with Mother, with
Stepmother, with Another Wife, with a Sister of the same Venture, with a Male,
with a Beast says Mr. Seldom (de Iure Not. and Gent. lib. 5. cap. 1.) To the
Children of Adam indeed it was of absolute necessity not to observe the fourth
branch of this Natural Interdict, because the Males had no other Females, with
whom to conjoin themselves, besides their Uterine Sisters: but all the rest
have at all times been unlawful. 2. Before the Mosaic Law, marriage of the
Brother with the Germane, not with the Uterine Sister, permitted: and why.
Nevertheless, after Mankind had been sufficiently multiplied, even till the
Law was given, the Germane Sister, i. e. of the Paternal blood only, was not
interdicted to the Brother. Abraham says of Sarah, in truth she is my Sister.
For she is Daughter of my Father, though not of my Mother; and she became my
Wife. And thence they collect, (that I may repeat the words of Clement of
Alexandria, Stromat. 2.) (...); That Uterine Sisters ought not to be taken for
Wives. Also Solon the Athenian permitted the Marriage of Sisters begotten by
the same Father, not those born of the same Mother; as Philo Iudaeus (de Spec.
leg. p. 602.) delivers. And he had reason, more perhaps than he or any man else
then understood. For if the curious Observations of Dr. Harvey, De Graaf,
Swammerdam, and other Anatomists of this our Age be true (as doubtless they
are) the Father contributes much less to the generation of the Foetus, than the
Mother does. He gives only fecundity to the Egg, in and of which pre-existent
in her Ovary the Foetus is formed: she gives the seminal matter, the Augmenting
Nourishment, the cherishing Warmth, and the secure Closet in which it is
conserved and brought to perfection. And therefore the Consanguinity betwixt
Brothers and Sisters of the same Womb seems to be Naturally greater than
betwixt those born of diverse Mothers, but of the same Father: and by
consequence, the Interdict of Marriage to those, is founded upon more of
Natural Right. But this reason being occult to Solon, I am inclined to think,
that in making this Law against Marriage of Brother and Sister Uterine, either
he followed the example of the Hebrews, or had respect to this Proverbial
saying, the Mother's is still the surest side. 3. Lacedemonian Law permitting
marriage with Uterine Sisters, not with Germane.
To which the Lacedemonian Lawgiver seems to have given no belief at all. For
he on the contrary (as Philo the most Learned Jew has recorded in the place
just now cited) (...), permitted marriage to Vternine Brother and Sister, not
to those of the same Father: persuaded perhaps, that the Seminal Principle
derived from the Father is more Energetick, than that proceeding from the
Mother, in the Work of Forming Organizing, 4. Marriage with both Uterine and
Germane Sister, lawful among the Egyptiane,
Augmenting, and Perfecting the Faetus. But among the Egyptians, by a
constitution or custom different from all these here mentioned, it was free to
the Brother to marry the Sister either of the whole or the half blood, Elder or
Younger, or Equal; for sometimes Brother and Sister are born Twins. And this
license in process of time descended also to the Grecians. For the Example
drawn form Isis, obtained among the Macedonians. Arsinoe had Ptolomeus (thence
named) Philadelphus, both Brother and Husband. Yea, to honest this incestuous
use by yet more illustrious Examples, they say, the Gods themselves affected
such Marriages, as most Divine; (...). Sic and Deorum sacra Connubia confecta
sunt, says Theocritus (Idyll. 18. v. 130.) and Ovid (Metam. l. 9. v. 498.)

-- Dii nempe suas habuere sorores;
Vt Saturnus Opim junctam sibi sanguine duxit;
Oceanus Tethyn, Iunonem Rector Olympi.
So that even from hence we may understand, that the Deities of the West were
traduced from Egypt. Hence also we understand, why Philadelphus and Arsinoe, by
a kind of second Marriage [(...)] of Deification, obtain the Title (...), of
Brother and Sister Gods, in Coins and Marbles.

Among the Persians, 5. and Persians.
from the late example of Cambyses, the like Marriages were introduced; as
Herodian (l. 3. c. 31.) has transmitted to Posterity.

Antiochus Soter languishing with Love of Stratonice his Stepmother, obtained
her, even by his Fathers consent, for his Wife; by an example sufficiently
rare: as Lucian (de Dea Syria) observes. But this Matrimony was not unlawful by
the Right of the East, rather than by that of Greece. In a word all kind of
Incest, Adultery, yea [(...)] Sodomy it self were by some of the Ancients, and
those too Renowned for Wisdom, accounted among things indifferent. Concerning
which Sextus Empiricus (l. 3. c. 24.) deserves above all others to be consulted.

As for the Hebrew Constitutions concerning Matrimony, 6. Marriages interdicted
to the Israelites.
the various degrees of Consanguinity, in which it was interdicted to the
Israelites to Marry, are either expressly set down by the Writer of the Books of
Moses in the eighteenth Chapter of Levit. or may be from thence by easy and
familiar reasoning inferred; as the Prohibition of Wedlock with the own
Daughter may be by an argument a majori ad minus, inferred from the Interdict
of contracting Matrimony with the Wifes Niece, etc.

The Custom of Marrying the Wife of the Brother deceased without issue, 7. The
Right of Marrying with the Brothers Widow, most ancient, and confirmed by Moses.
seems to be of remotest Antiquity. For Judah the Patriarch said to his son Onan
(who died before the entrance of the Israelites into Egypt) go in unto thy
Brothers Wife, and [jure Leviri] marry her, and raise up Seed to thy Brother
(Genesis 38. 8.) And this Right Moses long after by a singular Law confirmed (
Deuteronomy. 25. 5.) Which our Immortal Seldom occasionally considering ( Vxor. Ebr.
l. 1. c. 13.) observes, that some of the Masters hotly contend, that the cause
and mystery of this Marriage of the surviving Brother with the Relict of the
Brother defunct, is to be fetched from the opinion of a Metempsychosis or
Transmigration of the Soul: which though commonly fathered upon Pythagoras, was
of much higher Antiquity, and born in Egypt. Where also this jus Leviri
obtained, 8. The same used by the Egyptians.
from their antique Laws derived down to the times of the Emperor Zeno. Who (
in Iustiniani Cod. l. 5. tit. 6. leg. 8.) says; The Egyptians therefore by
matrimony conjoined to themselves the Widows of their Brethren, because they
were said to remain Virgins after the former Husband's death; for they thought,
that when the Man and Wife had not conjoined bodies, the marriage seemed not
contracted, according to the mind of some Lawmakers. From the reason then,
which the Egyptians render of this Law, it appears plainly, that among them the
Nuptial Contract was not perfect without carnal knowledge. Nor was it indeed
otherwise among the Hebrews before the Law: but after, from the Civil Right of
that Nation, Consent alone sufficed to contracting Matrimony.

Before the Law, 9. The Hebrew Women unmarried, free to humble themselves to
whom they pleased before the Law.
Women unmarried among the Hebrews might freely permit the use of their Bodies
to whom they pleased: and of the Egyptians Sextus Empiricus (Pyrrhon. l. 3. c.
24. p. 152.) says, (...); the same was esteemed Honorable by many of the
Egyptians. This the Law expressly prohibits ( Deuteronomy. 23. 17.) There shall be no
Whore of the Daughters of Israel.

Before the Law, 10. The Right of Divorce instituted by Moses.
the Matrimonial pact remained firm and stable, so long as both Parties
continued in consent: but was, either Party renouncing, dissolved. Among the
Athenians, the man had jus ejiciendi Vxorem, and the Woman jus relinquendi
Maritum; as Pollux (l. 3. c. 3. sect. 5.) records. The Law of Moses introduced
the [(...)] Bill of divorce, that the matter might be brought before the Judges
the [(...)] Wifes dereliction or leaving of the Husband, was long after induced
by Salome, Sister of Herod the Great, in favor of her Sex; as Josephus (Antiq.
lib. 15. cap. 11.)

Before the Law, 11. Polygamy permitted to the Hebrews both before and after
the Law.
Lamech, Abraham, Jacob, Esau, enjoyed the pleasure of variety in many Wives:
which was permitted also by the Law. Elkanah had two, David more, Solomon Seven
Hundred Princesses, besides Three Hundred Concubines, though it were forbidden to
the King to multiply Wives, beyond the number (say the Masters) of Eighteen.
Just so many Wives Rehoboam had (2 Chronicles. c. 11. v. 21.) and Josephus ( Antiq.
l. 8. c. 3.) calls them Legitimate Wives. Of this License of Polygamy among the
Hebrews, Maimonides ( in Halach Ishoth c. 14.) has this Memoir. It is lawful
to Marry many Wives, even a Hundred, either all at one time, or one after
another; nor has the Wife married before, any power of hind'ring the Husband
herein: provided he be of Estate sufficient to maintain them all in Food and
Raiment, according to their Degree and Quality; and of strength of body
sufficient to pay to each one her conjugal debt, i. e. once in a week at least
to each, nor to run upon the score above a month with any one. Concerning the
Economy of these Ancient Polygamists, and how they preserved peace and quiet
in their Families, or Seraglio's rather; Epiphanius (Haeres. 80.) has this
brief Remark; Tametsi quidam e Patribus duas and tres Vxores habuerunt, non
tamen in una domo Vxores fuerunt. They kept them in several houses, or several
apartments at least, to prevent jealousy. By the Law of Moses, the High Priest
was obliged to take a Wife in her Virginity, ( Levit 21. 13.) and because a
Wife, in the singular number, the Masters, thence conclude, that he ought to
have but one.

Besides that singular Law ( Deuteronomy. 21. 10.) 12. The Hebrews not permitted to
lie, or marry with Gentiles not Proselytes.
by which Liberty was indulged to an Hebrew Soldier of lying once before
Marriage with a Captive Gentile; the Hebrews had no Right at all given them,
either of Coition, or Matrimony with Strangers, not yet admitted into Judaism:
nor was the same right granted to all Proselytes of Marriage with Hebrews.
After Circumcision was instituted among the Hebrews, before their entrance into
Egypt, the Sons of Jacob say to Sichem (Genesis 34. 14.) We cannot do this thing,
to give our Sister to one that is Uncircumcised: for that were a reproach to
us. Of the Gentiles, Moses says, Thou shall not Contract Assinity with them:
thy Daughter thou shall not give to his Son, nor shall thou take his Daughter
unto thy Son (Deuteronomy. 7. 3.) Which Law extends, not only to the Seven Nations
there named, but also to all Uncircumcised Nations whatsoever. Of the
Circumcised, the Law Enrolled ( Deuteronomy 23. 7.) decrees far otherwise. Now the
Egyptians were Circumcised, so were the Idumeans by Esau (called also Edom) and
the Ishmaelites by their Father Ishmael, whom Abraham himself Circumcised. With
the Nephews and Nieces therefore of Proselytes of Egyptians or Idumeans, it was
permitted to the Israelites to Marry: and Solomon's Nuptial Contract with an
Egyptian Proselyte, Daughter of King Pharaoh, was Legitimate.

By the Mosaic Law ( Deuteronomy. 23. 1. and 2.) 13. Eunuchs and Bastards excluded
from Matrimony with Israelites.
neither Eunuch, nor Bastard might enter into the Congregation of the Lord. The
Marriages of such therefore were Interdicted, even to the Tenth Generation. Of
Eunuchs, because they were unfit for Generation: of Bastards, because of the
Infamy of their Birth, the Ignominy of the Parents sin descending to their
Posterity. Nevertheless the Manzers or Bastards were not Prohibited to Contract
Matrimony with either Proselytes of Justice, or Libertines. If a Maidservant,
being a Proselyte, were joined to a Manzer, the Son born of her of Servile
Condition, was, by Manumission, accounted a Libertine: and by such Emendation
of his Birth, both he and his Posterity put off the Ignominious name of
Bastard, and enjoyed equal Right with Proselytes.

An Ingenuous (i. e. a Freeborn) Gentile 14. The Right of Proselytes and
Libertines.
admitted into Judaism, was called a Proselyte of Justice; a Servant, in the
very Act of his admission made Free, was called a Libertine: the same Civil
Regeneration, and blotting out of former Cognation; the same Participation of
the Iudaic Right and Name; the same retention of Peregrinity in their
Posterity, were common to both. Also to both Proselytes and Libertines,
Marriages with either Foreigners, or Servants, were no less unlawful, than to
Natives; among themselves, of whatsoever Nation, they might freely Inter-Marry:
nor did the diversely Interdicted Marriages with the aforesaid Nations belong to
them, but to the Originaries only. When a Gentile was made a Proselyte; or a
Servant, a Libertine; all his former Consanguinity ceased, and was ipso facto
utterly extinguished: so that his Marriage with his Sister or Mother was not
Incestuous. Among the Sons of a Female Proselyte was no Fraternity, unless both
were as well Conceived as Born in Sanctity, i. e. after her Conversion and
Admission into Judaism. Thamar (the Masters say) was David's Daughter Conceived
of Maacha, a Captive and yet a Gentile; and Amnon was his Son by his Wife
Ahinoam: Thamar then was Germane Sister to Amnon in respect of Blood, but not
by Right of Regeneration. She therefore says to Amnon Ravishing her, Nay my
Brother, do not Force me; for no such thing ought to be done in Israel. -- but
speak rather to the King for he will not withhold me from thee. And she spoke
with understanding. For the Consanguinity that was betwixt her and Amnon, being
by her Mother's Proselytism taken away, the Marriage was lawful.

A Handmaid received into Judaism, 15. The Maidservant not permitted to Marry,
before she was made absolutely Free by Redemption or Manumission:
her servitude retained, was not Ritely capable of Matrimonial Right; as Mr.
Seldom ( de Iur. Not, and Gent. l. 5. c. 17.) and Josephus (Antiq. l. 4. c. 8.)
but to one Manumitted, i. e. made Free, as having obtained entire Freedom,
Marriage was permitted. With a Handmaid partly a Libertine, the whole Price of
her Liberty not yet Paid, Espousals were neither void, nor of full force. (
Levit. 19. 20.) Whosoever lies carnally with a Woman that is a Bondmaid
betrothed to an Husband, and not at all Redeemed, nor Freedom given her; she
shall be Scourged: they shall not be put to death, because she was not Free.
Death therefore, the Vltimum Supplicium, was not to be inflicted upon her, as
in the case of Adultery, because Matrimony with a Maid not perfectly Redeemed,
or made Free, was not absolute.

A Proselyte Manservant, 16. Nor the Manservant; until the Christians gave
them jus Conjugii.
his servitude retained, was not participant of Civil Right ( extra Sacra:) nor
was there among such, either any respect of Cognation, or any Legitimation of
Espousals. The Maidservant joined by the Master to the Manservant, ut in
fructu prolem haberet; was not his Wife, but his Contubernali^, Chamber or
Bedfellow: and this Contubernium or Bed-fellowship was dissolved by the same
Master at his Pleasure; nor was there, as to this matter, any thing of
difference betwixt such Servants, and Beasts inured to labor in Carriage or
Tillage. But the more Humane and Mild Doctrine of Christianity at length
remitted this extreme rigor of the Jewish Law, and introduced the Right de
Servorum Conjugio, by Canon Law, or Right Pontifical. By which also Marriage is
Interdicted even to the Seventh Degree of Consanguinity ( Cause. 25. q. 2. and
3.) according to the Names of Cognations, in the Cesarean Law, to which
Inheritances and Guardianships are ascribed. But in the Council of Lateran,
Anno Dom. 1215. It was Decreed ( cap. 50.) That Prohibition of Matrimony exceed
not the Fourth Degree of Consanguinity and Affinity. And in England (by Statute
32. of Hen. 8. c. 38.) the Levitical Constitutions concerning degrees of
Kindred to be excluded from Contract Matrimonial, are restored.

CHAP. VIII. The fifth Precept.
Concerning Theft and Rapine.
IF by this Precept, Article 1. Theft Interdicted among the Egyptians, whose
Singular Law concerning Robbery is recited.
not only the taking away, whether Privily or by Open Force, from another any
thing that is Rightfully his, but also the interring upon another any Loss or
Detriment whatever, contrary to Right and the common Faith of Mankind, be (as
certainly it is) Interdicted: then am I well assured, that the Egyptians of Old
were under an Obligation to observe it. For, reflecting upon the Apology made
by the Overseer of the Solemn Funeral Rites used among them, in the name of the
Defunct, more than once abovementioned; I therein find these words; (...),
neque eos deposito defraudavi, nor have I defrauded them of any thing committed
to my trust. And that Theft, which properly is Clandestine Stealing, was among
them unlawful, is sufficiently manifest, even from the Memorable Example of the
Thief in Herodotus ( lib. 2. c. 22.) who plundering King Rhampsmites's
Treasury, and being at length caught in a Snare or Trap by the Neck, chose
rather to have his Head cut off, than to be detected. As for Robbery indeed,
they had a Singular Law, yet extant in the most Faithful Monuments of Diodorus
Siculus (lib. 1. p. 50.) which was this: He gave Command, that they who would
addict themselves to Robbery, should profess their Names [(...)] before the
Prince of Thieves, and solemnly promise to bring to him so soon as they could,
whatever they had Stolen; and that the Persons robbed should likewise send to
him in a written Bill or Ticket a particular account of the things they had
lost, with mention also of the place where, and of the Day and Hour when they
were taken from them. By which Means the Goods being easily found, the Loser
recovered what was his own, Paying the Fourth part of the Real Value thereof.
For since it seems Impossible, that all men should abstain from Stealing, the
Maker of this Law found out a way, by which the whole thing Stolen might be
Redeemed for a small part of the Price of it.

By Virtue of this Natural Interdict, 2. Theft, of what kind soever, forbidden
also to the Sons of Noah, by Law Natural: and
as the Talmudists (Gem. Bab. tit. Sanhed. c. 7.) affirm; Every one of the Sons
of Noah was Obnoxious to Punishment, if he had stolen any thing from Gentile or
Israelite, either Clancularly or Openly, Goods or Persons; or detained Wages
from an Hireling, or done ought of that kind.

In the Mosaic Law, 3. By the Mosaic, to the Hebrews.
Theft is simply forbidden more than once; in the Decalogue, (...), Thou shall
not Steal: as of Goods, so of Men, as well Servants, as Free. ( Exodus 21. 16.)
He that steals a Man, and sells him, or if he be found in his hand, he
shall surely be put to death. Which was Interdicted also by the Roman Law ( F.
F. de furtis 37. 60.) The defraudation of Wages is particularly Prohibited. (
Deuteronomy. 24. 14.)

Other Thefts there are of that kind, 4. Fraudulent removing of ancient
Landmarks, Theft.
which are called Not Manifest: such as the Deceitful removing the Boundaries
or Marks of Fields. ( Deuteronomy. 27. 17.) Let him be accursed, that removes his
Neighbors Landmark, namely the Bounds which your Fathers have put in thy
Inheritance. Which is understood of the Limits or Boundaries set in the First
distribution of the Holy Land: as also of the limits of the Nations confining
thereupon, without just cause of War. Whence that of Josephus ( Antiq. l. 4. c.
8. p. 123.) Terminos Terrae movere non liceat, neque propriae, neque alienae
quibuscum nobis pax est. Sed cavendum ne auferatur, quod velut Dei calculus in
aeternum figitur.

Among the Egyptians, 5. Punishment of various frauds among the Egyptians.
Fraudulent Practices were severely punished, whether they were of Public or
Private Wrong. Witness Diodorus Siculus (l. 1. p. 50.) The Law Commanded, says
he, That both the Hands should be cut off [(...)] of those that adulterated
Money, or [(...)] substituted new Weights, or [(...)] counterfeited Seals, or
[(...)] Scribes that wrote Forged Tables or Instruments, or [(...)] took away
any thing from written Records or Deeds, or obtruded false Bonds. To the end
that every Offender might suffer punishment in that part of his Body, with
which he had offended against the Law, and by an irreparable loss deter others
from committing the like Crime. 6. All fraud, even in words, unlawful to the
Hebrews.


To the Hebrews it was forbidden, not only to use false Weights and Measures,
but even to use any fraud of words in Contracts, or to lie to another wrong. (
Lev. 19. 11.) Ye shall not steal, neither deal falsely, neither lie one to
another. Upon which Text the Masters commenting, pronounce, that though an
Israelite accounted not a Gentile for his Neighbor, yet by the Natural
Interdict of Theft, Gentiles were not to be any ways defrauded in Negotiations.
Nefas est, say they, quenquam decipere in emptione and venditione, aut in
consensum art pellicere: quod pariter obtinet in Gentilibus atque in
Israelitis.

Nevertheless, 7. The difference betwixt the Right of an Hebrew, and of a
Gentile, as to pilfering things of small Value.
in the Violation of this Interdict, the Babylonic Gemara (tit. Sanhed.) makes
the Right of Foreiners different from that of Natives. If a Labourer working in
a Vineyard or Oliveyard, eat of the Fruit thereof, at any other time than that
wherein he labored there, he was guilty of theft, though he were a Noachid: but
with an Israelite the Case was otherwise, he might eat at any time. And this
difference arises from the Mosaic Right ( Deuteronomy. 23. 24.) When thou come into
thy Neighbor's Vineyard, thou may eat Grapes thy fill, at thine own
pleasure, but thou shall not put any into thy Vessel. And so of the standing
Corn. By which Law there was given to the Israelites, not a license of
Stealing, but Iuris Modus, a Measure or Rule how far the Right extended.
Another Example of this difference may be from the Value of the thing taken
away by Stealth, which is not Taxed by Moses. By the Institute of their
Ancestors, an Hebrew was not liable to an Action of Theft, if he filched from
another, what was in Value less than a Prota (which is the smallest Piece of
Money, the Eighth Part of an (...), weighing half a Grain of Pure Silver;) but a
Noachid was guilty of Theft, if he took away by stealth any thing of less Value
than a Prota; and for so small a Trifle was to be punished with the Sword; from
this Natural Interdict, not from the Civil Law of the Hebrews, which in such
Cases required neither Atonement of the Divine Majesty, nor Compensation of
the Neighbor. But Capital Punishment was, in the Dominion of the Hebrews,
inflicted upon Gentiles for almost every light Offense.

Satisfaction for damage sustained, 8. Satisfaction for damage, always to be
made, by the Mosaic Law; and to whom.
was always to be made, either by restitution of the very thing that had been
taken away, or by payment of the Price thereof and a Fifth part more, to the
Heirs of the Person that sustained the damage, if he himself were dead; if he
had no Heir, to the Lord, and in His Right to the Priest. ( Numb. 27. 8.) An
Israelite could not want an Heir; and therefore this Law is to be understood to
concern only the Proselyte, who had no Kindred, nor Heir, unless one born after
his Regeneration; nor had the Occupant any Right to the Goods that had been by
stealth taken from a Proselyte deceased without Heir.

Restitution of things lost (says Mr. Seldom, 9. The Law of restoring things
lost, explicated.
de Iur. Not. and Gent. l. 6. c. 4.) depended, not upon this Natural Interdict
of Theft, but upon that Mosaic Law in Deuteronomy. 22. 2. To an Israelite it was
lawful to retain a thing that a Gentile had by chance lost; as left, and not
yet Occupied: but on the contre-part, 'twas not lawful to a Gentile to retain
what he had found of an Israelites. To deceive a Gentile in reckoning, was
unlawful: but if a Gentile in casting up accounts, through error pretermitted
any thing, the Israelite had the same Right to make his advantage of the
mistake, that he had to retain what he had found of the others, and so might
refuse afterward to pay it; as Maimonides ( Galiz. Waib. c. 11.) Also any thing
lost by an Israelite, if he despaired to find it, became the Finders own, as if
it had been left of purpose: or if he could not so describe the Signs or Marks
of the thing lost, as that it might be thence known, that it ought to be
restored; 'twas then to be presumed, that the Owner had despaired to find it. (
ibid. c. 14.)

In Mutual Commerce to impose upon another by an unequal Price, 10. An unequal
Price, unlawful.
was unlawful by that Mosaic Law in Levit. 25. 14. Which is understood (says
Mr. Seldom l. 6. c. 5.) of Goods Moveable, as the Law of Redemption is of Lands
and Houses. Nor does the same belong to a Gentile: but if a Gentile had brought
damage to an Israelite by an unequal price, he was by Judgment of Court to
refund. From the received Interpretation of the Law, if the price were by a
Sixth part less than the true Valor of the thing, nothing was to be refunded:
if greater by a Sixth part, the Buyer might require his Money to be restored,
the Seller his Ware.

The Punishment of Theft was Capital, 11. Punishment of Theft Capital, not from
the Law of the Hebrews, but from that given to the Sons of Noah.
from Ius Noachidarum, not from that of the Hebrews, which required ( Exodus 22.
1.) Five-fold, Fourfold, or Double restitution to be made. If the Person
convict were not able to give the satisfaction required, he was by Sentence
pronounced in Court, adjudged to servitude of the Actor or Plaintiff, until his
Service should equal the Price of the Theft: but the restitution Double,
Quadruple, or Quintuple, was to be expected from his more Prosperous Fortune
after his Servitude. Nor was a Woman sold for her Theft. Neither was a Man
convict of Theft adjudged in Servitude to a Proselyte, whether of Justice or of
the House, much less to a Gentile, but only to an Hebrew; who was Obliged to
give Food, Raiment, and a House, not only to him, but to his Wife and Children
too: who notwithstanding were not the Masters Servants, but when the Husbands
and Fathers Servitude was ended, went away with him. And all this by Virtue of
that Law in Exodus 21. 3. To an Hebrew Servant Adjudged by Sentence of Court,
who had by a lawful Wife fulfilled the Command of Multiplication, it was
permitted to have Carnal Conversation with a Maidservant that was a Canaanite,
that the Master might be enriched by the Children born of her: provided he were
not kept apart from his Legitimate Wife and Children, and that but one
Maidservant were Conjoined to one Manservant, not to two or more.

Other causes of Servitude there were also among the Hebrews. 21: The Mosaic
Interdict of Theft deduced from Law Natural.
If thy Brother Compelled by Poverty, shall sell himself to thee, etc. ( Levit.
25. 39.) If any shall have sold his Daughter for a Servant, etc. ( Exodus 21.
7.) These Addictions or Sales were not permitted but in Case of extreme
Poverty, when the Seller had nothing left, not so much as a Garment, and that
his life was to be sustained by the Price agreed on. This selling of a Daughter
is understood only of a Minor; nor without hope of her Marriage to the Emptor,
or to his Son: without Espousals, she obtained her Liberty Gratis, when first
the Signs of Puberty appeared upon her. Also an Hebrew was made a Servant
Privately; that by his Addiction or Sale he might not lose his Dignity together
with his Liberty. Now from this Permission of an Israelite reduced to extreme
want, to sell himself or his Child for Sustenance, lest he should die of
Hunger, it is sufficiently manifest, that from the very Law of Nature obtaining
among the Hebrews, it was not Lawful to steal for even the greatest necessity.

To exercise Usury was more than once forbidden by the Hebrew Law: 13. Usury
unlawful to the Hebrews among themselves; lawful to the Gentiles.
and the Lender upon Usury was compelled, by sentence of Court, to restore to
the Debtor; what he had received for the Loan of Money, as a thing taken away by
stealth, ( Deuteronomy. 23. 20.) To a Stranger thou may lend upon Usury; to thy
Brother thou shall not lend upon Usury. To steal the Goods of a Gentile, was no
less unlawful, than to steal from an Israelite: but to take Usury of a Gentile
was permitted; of which the Contract arises from the Consent as well of the
Receiver, as of the Giver. For neither from Natural Right was it unlawful to
lend upon Usury.

By the Statutes of their Forefathers 14. Gain from Games, unlawful to an
Hebrew.
(as Mr. Seldom de Iure Not. and Gent. lib. 6. c. 11. delivers) an Hebrew was
guilty of Theft, who made any Gain to himself by Playing at Dice, Cockal,
Tables, or committing Wild or Tame Beasts, or Fowls to fight together, to make
sport for the Spectators. For they judged no Gain to be honest, that arose from
a Contract depending upon Fortune. But it was not Theft, if a Jew contending
with a Gentile won the Prize or Wager: though that also, as a thing Inutile or
Unprofitable to Humane Society were prohibited. By the same Ancient Right, he
also was a Thief, who so bred up and taught Doves or other Birds, or Beasts
Wild or Tame, as that they should fly or go abroad, and alluring or decoying
others of the same kind, bring them home, to the gain of their Owner: nor was
it lawful to go a Fowling after Pigeons in a place inhabited, or within Four
Miles thereof: because Pigeons were reckoned among the Goods of other Men, and
were nourished by the Owners, either for Sacrifices, or for food. Nor was it
lawful for any man to build a Dove-House in his Field, unless he had Ground of
his own lying round about it, of Fifty Cubits extent every way.

CHAP. IX. The sixth Precept.
Of Judgments, or Administration of Justice in Courts of Judicature; and of
Civil Obedience.
FRom this Natural Precept, the Masters (says Maimonides, Artic. 1. The
administration of Justice by Judges, prescribed, first by Natural Law, and
after by the Mosaic.
Hal. Melak. c. 9.) acknowledge that the Rulers ought to Constitute Judges and
Prefects in every City and Town, both to judge all Causes pertaining to the Six
Precepts of the Sons of Noah, and to admonish the People of their observation
of them. And so indeed the Mosaic Law also at length commanded ( Deuteronomy. 16. 18.)
Judges and Officers shall thou make thee in all thy gates, etc. In many other
places also, Juridical Prefectures are commanded to be constituted, according
as the Civil Societies of Men require.

Many and memorable things indeed has that most Excellent Interpreter of
Eastern Antiquities, 2. Courts Iuridical not constituted before Moses.
Mr. Seldom, written of the Councils or Assemblies of the Ancient Hebrews, in
that interval of time that preceded the giving of the Holy Law on Mount Sinai:
But to me (I confess) it does not from thence appear, that any one of the
Patriarchs, before Moses, exercised Jurisdiction in Foro, in Court; much less
constituted Juridical Prefectures in Cities and Towns. The Family of the
Hebrews, descending from Sem to Abraham, lived in Mesopotamia: nor is it
constant from the Scripture, whether it were at that time sui Iuris, or under
the Laws of the Neighbor Nations. The Grandchildren of Abraham were tossed to
and fro in continual Peregrination, until at length they sat down in Egypt;
where they were so far from living by Laws and Customs of their own, that they
groaned long under a most cruel Servitude. Commonwealth of Hebrews there was
none. Tribunal or Court of Judicature they had none, till after their
deliverance from the Egyptian Bondage. Then, and not till then it was, that the
People of God being greatly multiplied, and divided into Twelve Tribes, the
Precept concerning Judgments was given in Mara; Exodus 18. 25.

Among the Traditions of the Masters we find mentioned often, 3. The contrary
not evident from the Traditions of the Rabbis; nor from the Scripture.
the House of Judgment of Methusalem; also of Sem, and Eber: which yet are not
to be taken for Juridical Prefectures, but for Schools. Witness Maimonides
(More Neboch. part. 2. c. 39.) Who says; The Wise Men speak of the Prophets
that were before Moses, the House of Judgment of Eber, the House of Judgment of
Methusalem, that is, the School of Methusalem. All [those] were Prophets, and
taught Men after the manner of Preachers, or Doctors. Nor is it otherwise said
of Abraham, (Genesis 18. 19.) I know him, that he will command his Children and
Household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do Justice and
Judgment, etc. For this was a thing Oeconomical, not Political. Soon after the
Deluge, God Proclaimed this Edict; ( Genesis 9. 6.) He that sheddeth Man's blood,
by Man shall his blood be shed: not by judgment of any Court of those times,
but by Natural Right of Talion. Cum Lex haec lata est (says the Incomparable
Hugo Grotius, in locum) nondum constituta erant Iudicia: aucto humano genere,
and in gentes distributo, merito solis judicibus permissum fuit jus illud
primaevum. From these places of Genesis therefore truly interpreted, no pretext
can be drawn to excuse their error, who dream of I know not what Public
Tribunals or Courts of Judicature constituted before Moses. Neither can any be
drawn from either of these two Examples following.

Simeon and Levi, 4. Nor from the Example of Simeon and Levi, and of Judah in
the cause of Thamar.
in revenge of the Rape committed upon their Sister Dinah, by Sichem the
Hivite, slew him and his Father and all the Males of the City. But this was
done by War, not from any Sentence of a Judicial Court; nor is this revenge of
a private Injury to be brought for an Example here, where the question is
concerning Public Judgments.

It was told Judah, Thamar thy Daughter in Law has played the Harlot, and is
with Child [per fornicationes] by whoredom. And Judah said, bring her forth,
that she may be burnt. But this saying of Judah, rashly pronounced, and in heat
of anger, is by no means to be accepted for a Iuridical Sentence. For by the
Law of Moses (Levit. 21. 9.) the Priests Daughter was for Fornication (the
Masters understand Adultery, not Stuprum, Whoredom) to be burnt alive. But
Thamar was neither Priests Daughter, nor Wife, but a Widow expecting to be
Married to the Brother of her Husband deceased; and this Law was not then made.
Others think, that there was such a Law peculiar to this Family, to which Judah
had respect: which is in truth repugnant to the Ius Noachidarum, by which it
was accounted no Crime for an unmarried Woman, to humble her self to whom she
pleased. Of which Right Maimonides being conscious, and speaking of this our
Thamar, says; Ante Legem datam, coitus cum Scorto erat sicut coitus hominis
cum Vxore sua; hoc est, licitus erat, nec homini fugiendus, [ velut delictum]
etc. Thamar then, by virtue of this ancient Right then obtaining, was not to be
held guilty. Whence other Interpreters understand the Combustion or Burning
mentioned in the Text, to signify, not burning to death, but a Stigmatizing or
Marking in the Forehead with an hot Iron, by which she might be known to be an
Harlot. Again, when Thamar was brought forth (not ad poenam, as the vulgar
Latin) the whole matter being detected, Judah non cessavit eam cognoscere, that
is, he took his Daughter in Law to be his Wife; such Marriages being not
unlawful before the Mosaic Law. This place is (I acknowledge) Translated by the
Seventy Seniors thus; (...), non adjecti ultra cognoscere eam; vel, ultra non
cognovit eam: but the Hebrew verb (...) signifying as well cessare, as
adjicere; I am inclined to prefer the foremr Interpretation, and the more
inclined, because the Genealogy of King David and of our Savior Christ is
deduced from one of the Male Twins she brought forth at that birth.

These Examples therefore not sufficing to prove that for which they have been
alleged by some Interpreters, 5. The Right of a Gentile in the Commonwealth
of the Hebrews, as to Judgments in foro.
otherwise of Profound Erudition and Solid Judgment, and it remaining still
difficult to demonstrate, that there were any such things in the World, as
Courts of Judicature more ancient than those erected by Moses: let us enquire
what was the Ius Noachidarum in the Commonwealth of the Israelites, as to
Judgment. They that preside over the Tribunals of the Israelites (says
Maimonides in Hal. Melak^ c. 10.) ought to appoint Judges for the Proselytes of
the House, to hear and determine their causes according to the Rights of the
Sons of Noah: lest humane Society should suffer any thing of detriment: and
that they might constitute these Judges, either by electing them out of the
Proselytes themselves, or from among the Hebrews, at their pleasure. In another
place ( viz. c. 9.) he says, a Noachid is put to death by the Sentence of one
Judge, and upon the Testimony of one Witness; and that without Premonition and
the Testimony of Neighbors: but not upon the Testimony of a Woman. Nor was it
lawful to a Woman to give judgment upon them, [nor upon the Hebrews.]

On the other side, by the Civil Right of the Hebrews, three Judges at least
were to hear and determine Causes Pecuniary, and Twenty-three to judge of
Causes Capital, not without Plurality of Witnesses, and Premonition. By the
received Right of the Sons of Noah, the Violation of these Seven Precepts was
punished in a Proselyte of the House, with death inflicted by a Sword: but an
Israelite, by his own Right, was not to be punished with death, for Violation
of the three latter. No Gentile that was under Age of discretion, or Blind, or
Deaf, or Mad, was punished; because such were not reputed Sons of the Precepts,
i. e. capable to observe them. A Noachid that was a Blasphemer, or an Idolater,
or an Adulterer with the Wife of a Noachid, and after that made a Proselyte of
Justice, was not to be called into Judgment, but was free: but if he had slain
an Israelite, or committed Adultery with the Wife of an Israelite, and were
after made a Proselyte of Justice; he was to be punished, with the Sword, for
Homicide; with a Halter, for Adultery; that is with the punishments of the
Israelites. By the virtue of Proselytism, which was Regeneration by the Hebrew
Law, Crimes committed against Equals, yea also against God Himself, were purged
away: those committed against an Israelite, not. All which nice differences
betwixt the primitive Right of the Sons of Noah, and the Civil Right of the
Israelites, punctually observed by Judges in hearing and determining causes, in
Foro; have been with vast labor collected out of the Monuments of the Masters,
and with exact Faith and Judgment recited by Seldom the Great in lib. 7. de
Iure Not. and Gent. to whom I owe the Knowledge of them, with many other
remarkable things of good use toward the Interpretation of diverse difficult
Places in Holy Scripture.

CHAP. X.
Prints of the Six precedent Precepts observable in the Book of Job.
THe same most Excellent Antiquary, to add the more of Credit and Authority to
the Six foregoing Precepts of the Sons of Noah, has also observed manifest
Prints of them in the Book of Job, a man (as St. Austin, de Civit. Dei, l. 18.
c. 47.) of admirable Sanctity and Patience; who was neither Native, nor
Proselyte of the People of Israel, but an Idumean by Descent and Birth, and
died there; and by consequence could not be Obliged to keep the Laws of Moses,
of which perhaps, nay most probably, he never so much as heard. For this Just
Man is said ( Job 1. 5.) to have offered up Victims, in the name of his Sons;
not according to the Form and Rites ordained in the Mosaic Law, by which it was
Enacted, under the penalty of Excision, that all Sacrifices should be Immolated
at the Door of the Tabernacle: Whence some Learned Men infer, that he lived
before the Law was given. Others affirm, that there never was any such Man, and
the Book that bears that name, is not a true History, but a Parable, or Poem
(for the Original is written in Verse) concerning Providence Divine. Which of
these two Opinions is to be preferred, I pretend not now to enquire. Certain it
is however, that this Book contains many remarkable things pertaining to
Natural Law, principally these following.

Of Idolatry. (Chap. 31. v. 26.) If I beheld the Sun when it shined, or the
Moon walking in brightness: and my heart has been secretly enticed, or my
mouth kissed my hand: this also were an Iniquity to be punished by the Judge:
for I should have denied the God that is above.

Of Blasphemy. (Chap. 1. v. 5.) In the Morning he Offered Burnt-Offerings
according to the number of them all. For Job said, it may be that my Sons have
sinned, and cursed God in their hearts.

Of Homicide. (Chap. 31. v. 29.) If I rejoiced at the destruction of him that
hated me, or lift up my self when evil found him. Neither have I suffered my
Mouth to sin, by wishing a curse to his Soul. If the Men of my Tabernacle said
not, Oh that we had of his flesh! we cannot be satisfied.

Of Adultery. (Chap. 31. v. 9.) If my heart has been deceived by a Woman, or
if I have laid wait at my Neighbors door: then let my Wife grind unto another,
and let others bow down upon her; or, as the Vulgar Latin, Scortum alterius sit
Vxor mea. To turn about a Mill, was among the ancient Services of Women.

Of Theft, or the unlawful laying hands upon the Goods of another. (Chap. 31.
v. 7.) If any blot have cleaved to my hands: then let me saw, and let another
eat; yea, let my Offspring be rooted out.

Of Judgments he speaks in Chap. 29. from v. 7. to the end, where he relates,
that Himself had in the days of his Prosperity sat on the Tribunal, and been a
Prince among the Judges of his Nation.

Most evident it is then, that all these Precepts of the Sons of Noah obtained
among, and were Sacred to the Idumeans, who lived not under the Laws of Moses.

CHAP. XI. The seventh Precept.
Of not eating any Member of an Animal alive.
THis Precept was added after the Flood, Article 1. Eating of Blood
Interdicted, first to Noah, and after to the Israelites.
according to the Traditions of the Rabbines; who say, that the eating of
Flesh, which had been Interdicted to Adam, was permitted to Noah: and
understand this Interdict to be comprehended in that of not eating Blood. God
at first said to Adam (Genesis 1. 29.) I have given you every Herb bearing Seed,
and every Tree, in which is the Fruit of a Tree yiedling Seed: to you it shall
be for Meat. After he said to Noah (Genesis 9. 3.) Every moving thing that lives
shall be meat for you; even as the green Herb have I given you all things: but
Flesh with the Life thereof, which is the Blood thereof shall you not eat.
(...), at carnem in sanguine animae non comedetis: where by (...) anima, we are
to understand the Life. The eating of Blood is, by the Levitical Law, forbidden
in the same form with the Immolation of a Son to Moloch. (Levit. 20. 3.) I will
set my face against him that eats blood. 2. The reason of this Interdict.
Nor is this manner of speaking to be found in any third Precept: which
Maimonides well observes ( in More Nebochim part 3. c. 46. page 484.) because
the eating of blood gave occasion to the Worship of Devils, and he fetches the
reason of the Interdict from Idolaters who thought blood to be the meat of
Demons. Hence also it is commanded ( Levit. 17. 10.) that the blood of Victims
be sprinkled upon the Altar; and moreover that it be covered with dust, or
sprinkled upon the Ground as water. Some of the Zabii used to eat the blood;
some others, who reckoned this to inhumanity, at the killing of a Beast
reserved the blood, and put it into a Vessel or Trench, and then sitting down
in a Circle about it, eat up the flesh, and pleased themselves with an opinion,
that their Demons fed upon the blood, and that this manner of sitting at the
same Table with their Gods, would endear them to a nearer tie of Conversation
and Familiarity; and promising to themselves also, that these Spirits would
insinuate themselves in dreams, and render them capable of Prophesy and
Predicting things to come. Now in reference to these absurd and Idolatrous ways
of the Amorites it was, that God expressly forbad his People to eat blood, for
so some of the Zabians did; and to prevent their imitation of others who
reserved it in a Vessel, he commanded that the blood should be spilt upon the
ground like water. And with the same respect to the Zabian Rites it seems to
be, that it was also forbidden ( Exodus 23. 19. and Deuteronomy. 14. 21.) to any man of
Israel, to Sees a Kid or Lamb in his Mothers milk, as our many-Tongued Mr.
Gregory (in Posthum.) has Learnedly asserted.

The Law in another place ( viz. Deuteronomy. 14. 21.) says, 3. The Law against
eating of any thing that died of it self, and of any Member torn off from an
Animal alive: and the reason thereof.
Ye shall not eat [morticinum ullum] of any thing that dies of it self. Thou
shall give it unto the Stranger that is within thy gates, that he may eat it:
or thou may sell it unto an Alien. Whence some collect, that the eating of
blood was not forbidden to either Proselytes of the House, or the Sons of Noah;
but only of flesh torn from an Animal alive; as the Stones of a Lamb cut out.
Maimonides (More Neboch. part 3. cap. 48. page 496.) brings these reasons of
the Interdict: both because that is a sign of Cruelty, and because the Kings of
the Gentiles in that age were wont so to do, upon the account of Idolatry;
namely they cut some Member from a living Creature, and eat it presently.

Nor is this so strange a thing, 4. Examples of such cruelty and carnage in
Bacchanals.
since Clem. Alexandrinus (in Protreptico, p. 9.) commemorates the same
execrable cruelty and Bestial Carnage to have been practiced in Bacchanals:
Bacchi orgiis celebrant Dionysium Maenolem, crudarum carnium esu sacram
insaniam agentes, and caesarum carnium divulsionem peragunt, coronati
Serpentibus. Nay more inhumanity yet has been Solemnly practiced in the
furious Devotion of the Adorers of the same drunken Diety. Prophyry (de
Abstinentia l. 3. sect. 55.) says; In Chio sacrificabant Baccho [(...)] crudis
gaudenti, hominem membratim discerpentes. Idem in Tenedo obtinuit. Well
therefore do they speak who call Idolatry Madness in the last degree.

Jobus Ludolfus (in Historia Aethiopica lib. 3. cap. 1. number. 51.) says of the
Habessins, A Sanguine vero and suffocatis abstinent, non vigore Legis Mosaicae,
sed Statuti Apostolici in Ecclesia Orientali semper, in Occidentali vero per
mutla secula observati, and in Conciliis nonnullis repetiti: nosque
reprehendunt, quod id in desuetudinem passi fuerimus venire.

To these Seven Natural Precepts, given (as has been said) first to Mankind in
general, and after revived in Mara (according to the doctrine of the
Talmudists) in the recension and explication of which according to the sense of
the most Learned Interpreters of the Hebrew Antiquities, I have hitherto
exercised my unequal Pen; Some have subjoined another, of Honoring Parents.
But of this, though equally Natural with the former, and among Moral Precepts
principal, I defer to speak, until the Thread of the Method I have prescribed to
my self in this disquisition, shall have brought me to the first Precept in the
Second Table of the Decalogue: both because some of the Masters do not reckon
it in the number of the Primitive and Genuine Precepts of the Sons of Noah, but
affirm that it was not given until the Israelites were encamped in Marah; and
because I would prevent repetition of the same things in diverse places. Nor
does any thing more, concerning the Seven Precepts precedent, occur to my mind
at this time, that seems of moment enough to excuse me, if by insisting
thereupon I should longer defer to put a Period to this First Part of my
present Province.

The End of the First Part.
THE CONCORDANCE OF Natural and Positive Divine LAWS. PART II.
Containing a Short Explication of the Laws of the DECALOGUE, and Reduction of
Evangelick Precepts to them.
CHAP. I.
The Preface to the DECALOGUE explicated.
FRom Primitive Laws merely Traditional, Article 1. The Mosaic Law, of all
written Laws the most ancient.
or such as were delivered down from Generation to Generation, not in Writing,
but only by voice or word of mouth, and seem to have constituted the most
ancient Right of Mankind; we come now to the most ancient of Written Laws, such
as were committed to Writing, and consecrated to the Memory and Observation of
Posterity. Of this sort, the Mosaic Laws certainly are, as the best, so also
the First of all known in the World. The Grecians indeed, ambitious of the
honor of being reputed Founders of Government, by making good Laws for the
regulation of Humane Societies; among many other benefits, wherewith they boast
themselves to have obliged other Nations, put Legislation in the head of the
Account. Lycurgus, Draco, Solon, and other ancient Sages, are great Names they
glory in. But their Glory is altogether vain. For all the pretensions and brags
of that arrogant Nation in this kind, have been long since refuted and silenced
by the Jew Flavius Josephus, in his Apology against Apion, full of admirable
Learning. There he shows, that the Greek Legislators, compared to Moses, are
but of Yesterday: for at what time their Father Homer lived, they knew not the
name of Laws, nor is it extant in all his Poems; only the People had in their
Mouth certain common sayings and sentences, whereby they were governed; to
supply the defects whereof, the unwritten Edicts of Princes were upon occasion
added. And he had reason. For the truth is, Moses, Senior to Homer by many
Ages, was the first Writer and Publisher of Laws, teaching the People what was
right or wrong, just or unjust, and by what Decrees the Commonwealth was to be
established, which the Most High God had commanded to settle in Palestine.
Before the time of this Moses, no Written Laws were known in the World. For
although Mankind lived not altogether without Laws before, yet were not those
Laws consecrated and kept in any Public Records or Monuments. Of this sort
were the afore-recited Seven Precepts given to the Sons of Noah, concerning
certain Rules of Righteousness necessary to humane life. Wherefore they were of
so large extent, that whosoever knew them not, those the Israelites were
commanded to destroy by War, and deprive them of all Communion with Mankind:
and justly; for they that had received no Law, seemed worse than Beasts; and
(as Aristotle has Divinely spoken) Injustice strengthened with Arms and Power,
is most cruel and intolerable

It must then be acknowledged, 2. Moses, the Wisest of all Lawgivers.
that of all Legislators Moses was the most Ancient: nor can it be with truth
denied, that he was also the Wisest. For he ordained such a kind of Government,
which cannot be so significantly styled, either Monarchy, or Oligarchy, or
Democracy, as Theocracy; that is, a Commonwealth whose Ruler and President is
God alone: openly professing, that all affairs were managed by Divine Judgment
and Authority. And of this he gave a full demonstration, in as much as although
he saw all matters depending upon him, and had all the People at his Devotion;
yet upon so fair an invitation he sought no Power, no Wealth, no Honor for
himself. A thing whereby he showed himself more than Man. Then he ordered that
the Magistrates should not be Lords and Masters, but Keepers of the Laws, and
Ministers. An excellent Constitution this. For seeing that even the best Men
are sometimes transported by passion, the Laws alone are they that speak with
all Persons in one and the same Impartial Voice: which may well be conceived to
be the sense of that fine saying of Aristotle, The Law is a Mind without
Affection. To these Two undeniable Arguments of admirable Wisdom in Moses, may
be added a Third no less considerable, viz. the Eternal Stability of his Laws:
whereto to add, wherefrom to take ought away, was a most high offense. So that,
neither Old Laws were abolished, nor new brought in; but the observation of the
first was with rigor exacted of all, even in the declination of that
Commonwealth. Which was not so in other Commonwealths, most of which have
been ruined by Law-making. The reason of this diversity cannot be abstruse to
him that considers, that the Laws of other Nations were the inventions of
humane Wit, and enforced only by penalties, that by time, or remissness of
Rulers, lose their Terror: but those of the Jews, being the Decrees of the
Eternal God, not enervated by continuance of time, or softness of Judges,
remain still the same; men's minds being still kept in awe by Religion, as I
have in the former part of this discourse intimated. Now if in these Three
things (to which I might here subjoin others, if I thought it necessary) the
excellent Wisdom and Prudence of Moses be not clearly visible; I know not what
is so.

Of these Mosaic Laws, 3. The Writers design and method in the e^suing
explication of the Decalogue.
upon which by Divine Wisdom both the Polity and the Religion of the Holy
Nation are so established, as to be, not only connex'd, but made one and the
same thing; some are Moral, others Ceremonial. The Moral (which only belong to
my present Province) are comprehended in that Sacred Systeme called the
DECALOGUE, or Ten Commandments, in which the whole duty of Man, as well toward
God as toward Men, is prescribed. These Ten Precepts therefore I intend (the
Omnipotent Author of them assisting me) seriously and according to the best of
my weak understanding, to consider, one by one, in the same order in which they
are delivered in the Twentieth Chapter of Exodus. And that neither want of
skill in the Hebrew Language, and in the Idiotisms or proper modes of speaking
used by Esdras (or whoever else was) the Writer of the Pentateuch; nor the
slenderness of my judgment, may lead me into errors, in the interpretation of
the Sacred Text: I am resolved to resign up my self entirely to the conduct and
manuduction of the most celebrated Interpreters of the Holy Scripture, and
among them principally of the Illustrious Hugo Grotius (a Man no less admirable
for the singular felicity of his judgment in difficult questions, than for the
Immensity of his Erudition) in his Explication of the Decalogue, as it is
extant in the Greek version of the Seventy Seniors; choosing rather to tread in
his very footsteps, than to deviate from the right way, in an argument of so
great moment. Not that I think it necessary to recite whatsoever he has
congested of this Subject in that part of his Theological writings, wherein are
delivered many curious Criticisms concerning the various significations and
uses of as well Greek as Hebrew Words and Phrases, that belong chiefly to the
cognizance of Philologers: but that I design from thence to select only such
things that seem requisite to my right understanding of the sense of all and
singular the Precepts, that I am now about to consider. In pursuance therefore
of this design I begin from.

The Preface to the Decalogue.
(...), And the Lord spoke. Here by the Lord, 4. Why God is here called The
Lord.
is meant the God of Gods. And the reason why the Greek Interpreters chose
rather to use the word [(...)] Lord, than [(...)] God, seems to be this; that
writing to the Greeks amongst whom, are to be numbered the Egyptian Kings of
the Macedonian blood, by the Hebrews called Kings of Graecia; and that among
the Graecians also they who were reputed wiser than the rest, as the
Platonicks, of which order were the Ptolomies Kings, used to give the
appellation [(...)] of God also to those whom they call [(...)] Demons, and
sometimes, in imitation of the Hebrews, [(...)] Angels: they thought themselves
religiously concerned openly to testify, that they spoke of that God only, who
by supreme Right ruled and commanded all those that they honored by the name of
Gods: as among Mortal Kings, the King of the Persians was called [(...)] the
King of Kings; and even at this day the King of the Habessins in Ethiopia
writes himself [ Negusa nagast Zaitjopja] King of the Kings of Ethiopia, with
respect to some petty Kings subject to him, or his Viceroys, who also are
honored with the Title of Negus, King; as the most Learned Iobus Ludolfus
observes (in Hist. Aethiop. l. 2. c. 1. Printed at Francfurt this present year
1681.)

But although the Lord, 5. That the Law was given, not immediately by God
Himself, but by an Angel in the Name of God.
that is, the Highest God, be here said to speak these words that follow; yet
ought we to hold for certain, that He spoke them not by Himself, or
Immediately, but by an Angel sent as an Ambassador, acting in the Name of the
Most High God: which ought to be understood also of other the like Visions,
that have happened to Holy Men in old times. For it was an Angel that spoke to
Moses and the People in Sinah; if we believe the Writer of the Acts of the
Apostles ( chap. 7. v. 38.) And so thought the Grave Josephus also, when (
Antiq. l. 15.) he said, Cum nos dogmatum potissima, and Sanctissimam Legum
partem per Angelos a Deo acceperimus.

They err greatly, who here by Angel understand the Second Substance of God, or
Second Person in the Trinity. For God spoke indeed in various and manifold
manners to the Fathers of old; but in the last times He began to speak to us by
His Son, ( Hebr. 1. 1.) The Law was given by Angels by the ministry of [
Internuncii] an Ambassador or Mediator (namely of Moses) that it might be of
force, until the promised Seed should come ( Galat. 3. 19.) And the Writer to
the Hebrews prefers the Gospel to the Law from this, that the Gospel was given
by our Lord Jesus Himself, the Law only by Angels. ( Heb. 2. 2.)

In which places Angels are named in the Plural Number, 6. Why the Angel that
pronounced the Law, said, I am the Lord, etc.
though St. Stephen says Angel in the Singular; because such is the manner of
Visions of that kind, that there is One Angel sustaining the Person and Name of
God, and others present with him as Apparitors, or Ministers. As in Genesis 18.
and Luke 2. 13. conferred with 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16. and with Matthew. 13. 39. 41. 49.
As therefore the Angel that pronounced the Law, says, I Jehovah, so also do
other Angels, that have been likewise sent from God, as Ambassadors, to
transact affairs of great Importance, speak in the first Person, just as the
Crier of a Court pronounces the words of the Judge; as St. Austin ( l. 2. de
Trinitate c. 2.) makes the Comparison. So Moses (Exodus 3. 15.) says, that the
God Jehovah spoke to him in the Bush: and he that then spoke to Moses, had
newly said, I who am, which is an explication of the word Jehovah, i. e.
Existens, or Being; for Being without Beginning, without End, and without
Dependence, is Proper to God alone. But St. Stephen ( Acts 7. 30.) says, that
an Angel of the Lord appeared to Moses in a Flame of Fire in a Bush: and that
from the Authority of Moses himself. ( Exodus 3. 2.) Of which St. Athanasius
(Orat. 6.) says; Et vocavit Dominus Mosem exrubo, dicens: Ego sum Deus Patris
tui: Deus Abraham, Deus Isaac, and Deus Jacob: at Angelus ille non erat Deus
Abraham, sed in Angelo loquebatur Deus; and qui conspiciebatur, erat Angelus,
etc. Of the same judgment was the Author of the Responses to the Orthodox
Christians, when he said; Angelorum, qui Dei loco visi aut locuti sunt
hominibus, Dei vocabulo nominati sunt, ut ille qui Jacobo, quique Mosi est
locutus. Etiam homines Dii vocantur. Vtrisque ob Officium ipsis injunctum datum
est, and Dei vicem and nomen obtinere. Expleto autem officio, desinunt vocari
Dii, qui tantum operae alicujus causa id nomen acceperunt. We must acknowledge
then, that the words recited in this place of Exodus, were pronounced by an
Angel in the Name of God: but we are not obliged to believe the same of those
that are in Deuteronomy. 5. For they were the words of Moses by memory rehearsing the
former, and indeed with such liberty, that he transposeth some words, changes
some for others of the same signification, omitteth others, and adds new for
interpretation sake. For Deuteronomy, or, (as Philo speaks) Epinomis, is
nothing else but the Law and History summarily repeated, in favor of those who
were not present at the promulgation of the Law, and at the transactions of
that time.

(...); All these Sermons, saying. 7. Why the Writer of the Law says, all
these Words.
These very words; that no Man of Posterity might think; that ought had been
added or taken away. In Deuteronomy 5. are not found these words so express:
and therefore it suffices, that there the sense of the Reciter is signified,
as we just now siad.

(...); 8. God's peculiar Right to the Title of Supreme Lord of the Israelites.
I am the Lord thy God who has brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of
the house of Servitude. By the Hebrew word (...) which the Septuagint have
interpreted (...), Empire is signified. The same word is attributed sometimes
also to Angels, as in Psalm 82. v. 2. and sometimes to eminent Magistrates, as
in Exodus 21. 6. and 22. 26. so that in Psalm 82. 1. and 131. 1. it is a great
doubt among the most Learned of the Hebrew Doctors, whether Angels or
Magistrates are to be understood. But whenever the Plural is conjoined with
the Singular [(...)] by apposition, but [(...)] defective, no doubt is to be
made, but that He alone is to be understood, who with Highest and most absolute
Empire presides over all both Angels and Magistrates. But to that word, the
Possessive Case is wont to be added, whereby it is signified, that to this Most
High God, besides the Sovereign Right He has of most absolute Dominion over
all Angels and Men, there belongs also a certain peculiar Right of Dominion
over some particular Men or Nation, by virtue of not common benefits conferred
upon them. For such is the nature of benefits, that it always gives to him who
has conferred a benefit, somewhat of new Right over him that has received it.
And this is the cause, why here no mention is made of God's Creation of Mankind
in the beginning, but of those things that properly belonged to the Posterity
of Jacob, nor of all those neither, but only of the most recent, the memory
whereof sticks more firmly and efficaciously in the minds of Men. Compare with
this, the cause of keeping the Law, which Fathers are commanded to deliver down
to their Children, in Deuteronomy. 26. 10. and following verses.

Now what is said in this place, 9. The Preface to a Law ought to be brief and
full of Authority.
is not Law, but a Preface to the Law, Seneca indeed approves not of a Law with
a Prologue, because a Law is made, not to persuade, but to command. But
Zaleucus, Charondas, Plato, Philo, and some other Philosophers were of another
Opinion. Certainly the middle way is the best; let the Prologue be brief and
grave, such as carries the Face of Authority, not of disputation.

The Number Ten is to almost all Nations the end of numbering; 10. Why God, in
these Precept, chose the number Ten.
for the numbers that follow, are distinguished by compound names, either by
the sound, as Vndecim, Duodecim, Eleven, Twelve; or by signification, as an
Hundred, a Thousand, etc. and certainly the most ancient way of Numeration was
by the Fingers, of which Man has Ten. For which reason, also in these
Precepts, which were above all other things to be imprinted upon the receivers
memory, God was pleased to choose this number, wherein that all diversities of
numbers, all Analogies, all Geometrical Figures relating to numbers, are found;
Philo largely shows in his Enarration of the Ten Precepts. And Martianus
Capella, where he says; Decas vero ultra omnes habenda, quae omnes numeros
diversae virtutis ac perfectionis intra se habet. Nor was it from any other
reason, that the Pythagoreans, and after them the Peripateticks referred all
kinds of things into Ten Classes, vulgarly called Categories: or that not only
in the Law, but also before it, Tenths were devoted to God; as may be collected
from the History of Camillus written by Livy and Plutarch, and from Herodotus,
who speaks of that Custom as most ancient.

The Place wherein the Law was given, 11. Why the Law was given in the
Wilderness.
also exacts our notice. It was given in a Wilderness barren and desolate; with
design, that the People remote from the contagion of Cities, and purged by
hardship and sore afflictions, and by Miracles taught not to depend upon things
created, might be well prepared for that Commonwealth which God was about to
found and establish.

Nor ought we without a remark, 12. Why it is here said, Thy, in the singular
number.
to pass by the Particle [(...)] Thy God. Which not only here in the Preface,
but in the Precepts ensuing, is used; intimating, that the Law commanding and
forbidding speaks to every individual Man in the number of Unity; to the end,
that it may declare, that here the condition of the Prince, and of the lowest
Hebrew of the vulgar, is one and the same, none, High or Low, being exempted
from the Obligation thereof.

CHAP. II. The First Precept explicated.
(...). Thou shall not have other Gods beside me.
IN the words, Article 1. Why it is here said, Other Gods beside me.
Other Gods beside me, seems to be a Pleonasm, or redundance of speech. For it
had been sufficient even to men of common sense, to have said, other Gods. But
the like speech occurs also in 1 Corinthians. 8. 4. and 1 Corinthians. 3. 1. and the
meaning is, that other Gods are neither to be substituted in the place of the
True God, nor to be assumed to him, which many did, as in 1 Kings 17. 33.

Here by Gods are to be understood, 2. Gods distinguished into two Classes.
not only Angels and Judges or other Magistrates of eminent Dignity, who are
(as we have already hinted in the Preface) sometimes in the Scripture honored
with the Title of Gods, while they execute their Office; but also all those
whom the Gentiles, though without just cause, called by that name; [(...)] who
are called Gods (1 Corinthians. 8. 5.) So some are called Prophets, who boast and
Magnify themselves for such, ( Ier. 28. 1.) let us therefore consider, first
the false Gods of the ancient Gentiles, and then those that are not without
cause called Gods.

That the first things which men worshipped as Gods, 3. The Celestial
Luminaries, the first false Gods.
were the Celestial Fires or Luminaries; is the opinion of the most Learned and
Judicious of the Hebrew Masters, Abenesdras, Moses Maimonides, and others. And
this opinion is highly favored, both by the Tradition of Abraham, who is said
to have abandoned his Native Country, and traveled into a strange Land,
merely out of detestation of this kind of Idolatry; and from the History of Job
taken from times most ancient ( Chap. 31. v. 26. 27. 28.) Whereto may be added
that of Deuteronomy. (Chap. 4. v. 19. and Chap. 17. v. 3.) Now that the Sun, Moon, and
other Lights of Heaven are false Gods, is most evident, not only from hence,
that no great goods or benefits come from them to Mankind; but also from this,
that they neither understand Men's adoration and prayers, nor have the liberty
of doing good more to one Man than to another: which two things are conjunctim
required to fill up the true signification of the name God, (Heb. 11. 6.) No
sooner had Men made to themselves Gods of the Stars, 4. Kings and Queens
deified after death, the Second false Gods.
but they began to make also Stars of Men, and to Worship them with Divine
Honors. Kings and Queens (that there might be Deities forsooth of both Sexes)
were after their decease, what by the cunning and pride of their Posterity,
what by the adulation of the Learned of those darker times, Deified and Adored;
and that too under the names of eminent Stars. And from this Antique Custom St.
Chrysostom (ad 12. cap. Secundae ad Corinth.) derives the Worship of Idols: Sic
enim Idolorum cultus primum obtinuerunt, cum homines supra meritum in
admirationem venirent. That Divine Honors were by the Syrians attributed to
Azael and Aderus their Kings, Josephus relates: and Athenaeus affirms, that
this Custom came first out of Egypt. But the most ancient memoir of the thing
is found in Sanchuniathon, who has recorded for truth, that [(...)] Kronos
King of the Phenicians was by them consecrated into that Star, which the
Greeks, taught by the Phenicians, called from his name (...), and the Latins
Saturnus. And he is the same to whom, by way of excellency named (...) i. e.
The King, the Phenicians used to sacrifice their children: a most inhuman and
execrable custom, that from them descended down to the Tyrians (a Colony of
theirs) and from them to the Carthaginians and other peoples of Africa. Thus
was Astarte also consecrated into the planet Venus; and not long after among
the Egyptians, Osiris was stellified into the Sun, Isis into the Moon. Thus was
Hammon translated into Aries, the Ram; Derceto into Piscis, the Fish. But of
the Moors, a People of Mauritania, St. Cyprian says; manifest Reges colunt,
nec ullo velamento hoc nomen obtexunt.

From the deification of Stars, 5. Whence it was that Brutes came to be
worshipped as Gods.
and stellification of Men, in process of time they proceeded to yet a higher
degree of madness, Idolizing of Brute Animals. For, either because the
Asterisms or Constellations of Stars had been before, by the curious observers
of them, formed into the figures of diverse Animals, from some similitude they
fancied in One or more Stars; or because some Animals were believed to have, I
know not what, secret Natural Cognation with certain Asterism, and to receive a
more vigorous influence and virtue from them; or perhaps for both these causes:
therefore were those Animals supposed to have somewhat of Divine in their
Natures, and accordingly numbered among Deities by the Egyptians, who adored
them as such. Hence an Ox was called Apis, with relation to Luna, or Lunus
rather (for a great part of the East called that Planet by a Masculine name;)
the Phoenix (though probably there never was any such Bird in rerum natura) was
worshipped as a favorite of the Sun; as also were the Lizard, Lion, Dragon,
Falcon, for the same reason; the Bird Ibis, out of respect to Mercury; the Dog,
in respect to Sirius, the Dog Star: and in like manner other Animals also,
betwixt which and the Asterisms (to which notwithstanding the Chaldeans gave
Figures different from those the Persians imagined, and the Indians different
from those that either of those two Nations had fancied) they conceived any
resemblance of shape, or cognation of Nature to be. They proceeded yet farther.
Without any respect at all to Celestial Bodies, they honored as Gods all such
living Creatures that were highly useful and profitable unto men; such as are
reckoned up by Diodorus Siculus cited by Eusebius (in praeparat. Evang.) by
Pliny (l. 8. c. 27.) Philo (ad Praecept. Secun.) and Porphyry (de abstinentia
l. 4.) Now of all these Brutal Deities of the Egyptians, we need say no more
than what we said just now of the Host of Heaven, to prove them to be false
Gods; viz. that they neither understand the prayers, nor have power to do good
to one man more than to another of their stupid adorers, as wanting the
faculties of reason and election.

The same cannot be said of Angels, 6. Honor due to good Angels, and what.
who are able, both to hear and understand prayers addressed to them, and from
a certain liberty of mind to confer benefits upon those whom they are commanded
to favor and assist. He therefore that honors them with due respect and
reverence, also he that hopes to obtain some eminent benefit by their help and
assistance; does not sin against this Law: but he does, who attributes to them
the things that are proper to the Most High God. For the word God in this
Precept, is to be understood in sensu summitatis, i. e. as signifying the God
of Gods. Examples will illustrate the thing. They sinned not who as often as
Angels appeared to them, showed great veneration of them by falling down upon
their faces, as in Ioshuah (c. 5. v. 14.) since as much of honor as that comes
to, was given also to Prophets, without sin; as to him that was thought to be
Samuel (1 Samuel 28. 15.) to Eliah (2 Kings 1. 13.) to Daniel (2. 46.) Who
forbids Offerings and Sacrifices, does not forbid a sign of simple reverence.
Nor did the Angel in the Revelation refuse that honor, because there was ought
of unlawful in it, but because he would show that the Apostle was equal to him,
both being Ministers of Christ, now head of the Angels, (see Coloss. 1. 16.
18.) and that an Apostolic Legation designed for Men's salvation, was in no
part inferior to an Angelick: and Equals are not wont to usurp such signs of
submission one of the other. Nor is this explication of that place new, but
delivered down to us by St. Ambrose and Gregory the Great. Nor do I think that
Man would sin, who should beseech an Angel appearing to him, to recommend him
before God; to the proof of which Point Maimonides brings what is in Job (33.
23.) with whom Philo consents, often calling Angels [(...)] Mediators. But in
both exhibiting signs of reverence to Angels, and in imploring their
commendation, it highly concerns us to see, that he that appears to us under
the form or shape of an Angel, be not an evil Demon come to delude and seduce
us; a cheat not seldom practiced by the Prince of Impostors Satan, as St. Paul
observes (2 Corinthians. 11. 14.) and Porphyry (de Abstinentia l. 2.) in these
words; aliorum Deorum velut vultum induti, nostra imprudentia fruuntur; and
Iamblicus (de Myster. Egypt. l. 3. c. 32, and l. 4. c. 17.) Nor is it
difficult to discern betwixt good and evil Angels appearing to us. For those
that endeavor to seduce Men from the Worship of the True God, or pretend
themselves to be Equal to Him; are most certainly Emissaries [(...)] of the
Devil, and to be resisted.

True it is nevertheless, 7. Signs of honor proper to God, not to be exhibited
to good Angels.
that there are many signs of honor that cannot be exhibited even to good
Angels, without manifest violation of this Holy Precept. First if those signs
of singular veneration be exhibited to them, which the consent of Nations has
made proper to Divine Worship, as Sacrifices, Oblations, Incense, expressly
declined by the Angel that appeared to Manoah, (Judge. 13. 16.) and mentioned in
Daniel (2. 46.) Secondly if we solemnly Vow or Swear by them, or beg of them
those things, which by God's Command ought to be petitioned for from God alone,
or now under the new Covenant from God and Christ, such are Remission of Sins,
the Holy Spirit, Eternal Life. For this is, as Philo rightly observes, Aequalia
dare inaequalibus, qui non est inferiorum honos, sed superioris depressio; nor
is it less than crimen laesae Majestatis summae, High Treason against the
Divine Majesty, to give His Honor to His Ministers.

To petition Superiors, 8. Civil Veneration of Kings, not unlawful.
principally Kings and Princes, who are Presidents of human Peace, and
Conservators of every private Man's Right and Propriety, for such things as are
in their power to grant; is not against this Law. Nor are we by the same
forbidden to honor them by kneeling or prostrating our bodies in their
presence, where Custom of the Place or Nation requires those signs of respect
and reverence; for this is Civil, not Divine Honor. Nathan prostrated himself
before David, only as he was King (1 Kings 1. 23.) and the Writer of
Illustrious Lives says (in Conon.) necesse est, si in conspectum veneris,
venerari te regem, quod (...) illi vocant. The Greeks instead of that word
often put (...), procumbere, to lie down flat upon the ground, in token of
Submission and Veneration. Livy speaking of certain Ambassadors of the
Carthaginians, says; More adorantium (accepto credo ritu ex ea regione ex qua
oriundi erant) procubuerunt. He means from the Phenicians, Neighbors of the
Hebrews, whose Custom of yenerating their Kings in this manner Euripides ( in
Phoeniss.) thus expresses; (...)
(...).
Supplex te, Rex, venerans genibus
Patrio advolvor de more tuis.
But if this prostration of the body be in any Nation used only in Divine
Worship; then is the case quite altered, and to use it in honor of the King
himself, will be unlawful. For this very reason the Grecians, who were not
accustomed to prostrate themselves unless in Sacris, refused to venerate the
King of the Persians in that manner: and some Macedonians, though eminent in the
Army and Court of Alexander the Great, could not either by flattery or terror
be brought to profane the Religious gesture of Procumbency, by using it before
him even when he affected to be thought a God. Particularly Callisthenes and
Polypercon: the former of whom, in the close of his free Oration to Alexander,
feared not to say; non pudet Patriae, nec desidero, ad quem modum Rex mihi
colendus sit discere, the other openly derided one of the Persians that, from
veneration of the same Mighty King, lay with their Faces upon the ground,
jeeringly advising him, ut vehementius caput quateret ad terram, as Curtius
(lib. 8. cap. 5.) relates. There were times when the Christians thought it not
alien from their Religion, to humble themselves by such prostration before the
Statues and Images of Emperors. But after Julian had commanded, that Images of
false Gods should be added to his own Images, the more Prudent of the
Christians held themselves obliged in conscience to suffer the worst of
torments, rather than to fall down before them; as Gregorius Nazianzenus has
recorded. And hither may we refer that of Tertullian to Scapula; Colimus ergo
Imperatorem sic, quomodo and nobis licet, and ipsi expedit, ut hominem a Deo
secundum, and quicquid est a Deo consecutum, and solo Deo minorem.

Hitherto we have inquired, what Gods are falsely and without just cause so
called; and who are sometimes not without cause named Gods; and how far these
of the latter sort may, without offense of the Most High God, be honored. It
remains only, that we enquire, what is the Grand Scope or Principal Design of
this first Precept.

The most Learned Jew, Philo, and the Christians following him, 9. Extirpation
of Polytheism, the principal design of this Precept.
rightly call this Precept [(...)] of the Empire of One, or also [(...)] the
destruction of a multitude of Gods. For no doubt is to be made, but that the
chief purpose of this Law is to extirpate Polytheism; and that too, as
Maimonides wisely observes, not for God's sake (for what benefit can he receive
from humane worship?) but for Man's, whose felicity consists only in this;
that he be advanced from things sensible to that Insensible God, from things
subject to decay and destruction, or such as had a beginning, to that Eternal
Ens. Nor is any thing so useful, as the belief of one God, to conjoin and bind
Men together in Peace and Mutual Amity. Whence that memorable Sentence of the
Greek Author of the Book ( de Monarchia l. 1.) Amatorium vehementissimum, and
vinculum insolubile benevolentiae atque amoris, cultus unius Dei. Whereto he
adds, for confirmation, or that he might inculcate the same as a Maxim of
perpetual truth, and universal too; Causa concordiae and summa and maxima, de
uno Deo persuasio, a quo velut font procedit amicitia firma and insolubilis
hominibus inter se. To this great verity Tacitus seems to have had respect,
when speaking of the Religion of the Jews, he says; Honor Sacerdotii
firmamentum potentiae assumitur. For if the honor of the Priesthood be the
Grand Sanction of the Power and Authority of the Civil Magistrate in all
Commonwealths (as is confessed by that common Axiom, sublato sacerdotio tollitur
simul and Lex) and Religion be the Basis upon which the honor of the
Priesthood stands (which is by all Men acknowledged) and the persuasion of One
God be the firmest fundament of Religion (which cannot be denied) then it will
of necessity follow, that the persuasion of One God, is the firmament of
Empire, because the strongest ligament whereby the minds of Men are combined
and disposed to live, both in obedience to Governors, and in peace and mutual
amity among themselves. Admirable therefore is the Goodness shown by God to the
Israelites, in this: that having selected them before all other Nations to be
his peculiar People, and being now about to constitute a new form of Government
or Republic, wherein Himself was to preside: He gave them this first Precept,
as the fundamental Law upon which the stability of their Empire, and their
Felicity was to depend; and to which the Light of Nature or Right Reason would
oblige them to assent. For the Agnition of One, Eternal, Infinite, Omnipotent
God, is to a considering Man, without much difficulty of thoughts, inferrible
from any one of these subsequent reasonings.

1. He that from any natural effect whatever, 10. The Unity of God, manifest by
the Light of Nature.
which he has seen, shall reason to the next cause thereof, and thence proceed
to the next cause of that cause, and then immerge himself profoundly into the
order of causes; will at length find (with the Philosophers of clearest
understanding) that there is one first Mover, i. e. one Eternal Cause of all
things, which all Men call God: and this without all cogitation of his own
fortune, the solicitude whereof both begets fear of evil to come, and averts
the mind from the inquisition of natural causes, and at the same time gives
occasion of imagining many Gods.

2. God is necessarily, or by Himself; and whatsoever is so, is considered, not
as it is in genere, but in actu; and in actu things are single. Now if you
suppose more than one God, you shall find in singulis nothing, wherefore they
should be necessarily or by themselves; nothing wherefore two should be
believed to be rather than Three, or Ten rather than Five. Add, that the
multiplication of singular things of the same kind is from the fecundity of
Causes, according to which more or fewer things are bred out of them: but of
God there is neither original, nor any cause. And then again in diverse
singulars, there are certain singular proprieties, by which they are
distinguished among themselves; which to suppose in God, who by his Nature
necessarily is, is not necessary.

3. Nor can you any where find signs of more than One God. For this Whole
University makes One World; in the World is but one Sun; in Man also but One
mind governs.

4. If there were Two or more Gods; acting and willing freely; they might will
contrary things at the same time, and consequently one might hinder the other
from doing what he would; but to imagine it possible for God to be hindered
from doing what He wills, is to imagine Him not to be God. Evident therefore
and necessary it is, that there is but One God. Evident it is also, that the
Israelites were under a double obligation to obey this Precept: One from God's
express Command; the other, from the Light of Nature, which alone is sufficient
to teach Men, both that there is but One God properly so called, and that to
Him alone all Divine Worship is due.

CHAP. III. The Second Precept explicated.
(...), etc. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, etc.
IN Greek Writers the word (...) is often used to signify [(...)] an apparition
or ostent: Article 1. In what sense the word Idol is always used in holy
Scripture.
but in the Sacred Books we no where find it used in that signification, but
always of the same with [(...)] graven, and (...), an Image, or Effigies; and
therefore St. Ierom translates it sometimes Idolum, sometimes Sculptile, then
Imago, and in other places Simulacrum. So the Calf made in Horeb is by St. Luke
(Act. 7. 41.) called an Idol, and they that worshipped it are by St. Paul (1 Corinthians. 10. 7.) called [(...)] Idolaters. And the Greek word (...) answers
exactly to the Hebrew (...), whereby is signified Worship alien from the Law:
not that an Idol signifies any thing of evil per se, as some think; but
because, after the Law, there was no more evident sign of distinction betwixt
the Pious and the Superstitious, than this, that all these had graven Images,
those had none. And therefore though the Greek version renders not word for word,
yet the sense is plainly enough expressed.

Nor did the [(...)] worshippers of many Gods only make and set up Images to
them, 2. That Idolatry was founded upon an opinion that Images Magically
consecrate were animated by Demons, and therefore vocal.
but thought also that by Magical rites some certain Ethereal Spirit was
brought down into those Images; as may be seen, both in the Dialogue of
Trismegistus (whoever he was that imposed that mighty name upon himself) with
Asclepius, and in Maimonides in many places of his Book entitled Ductor
dubitantium, as also in Abenesdras upon this Precept. The same is noted by
Tertullian (l. de Idololatria) in these words, Rapere ad se Daemonia and omnem
Spiritum immundum per consecrationis obligamentum; and ( in l. de spectaculis)
he says, that Demons operate in Images: and Minutius Felix, Isti impuri
Spiritus sub statuis and imaginibus consecratis delitescunt. That such were the
Images which in Jacob's History are named Teraphim, is the opinion of
Abenesdras, Maimonides, and Kimchi: though the word it self be of good and bad
signification indifferently, and is sometimes (as in Judge. 17. 5. and Hosea 3.
5.) taken for Cherubins. Such also was the Gamaheu or little Image that Nero
had, or at least was willing Men should believe he had, by the suggestions
whereof, he pretended to be premonished of things to come, as Suetonius
relates. That many Images, telesmatically made forsooth, and erected have been
vocal, yea, and Oraculous too; many grave Writers have made no scruple to
affirm; and Maimonides (part 3. cap. 29. Ductor dubitant.) tells us, That he
had read two Books of speaking Images. These Authors perhaps had from others
heard of such Statues, and believed what they had heard to be true: but to me
(I freely profess) it seems more probable, that either they gave credit too
easily to fabulous relations, or that the relators themselves had been imposed
upon by frauds and impostures of Heathen Priests speaking in, and pronouncing
enigmatick Oracles from the hollow of Statues, to delude the Credulous, and at
the same time propagate the honor of the False Gods represented by those
Idols; than that evil Demons should as it were animate a Statue, and cause it
to express articulate Sounds, without vocal Organs. And as for Memnon's Statue
or Colossus made of black Marble, set up in that magnificent Temple of Serapis
in Thebes, and for the Music it made upon the striking of the beams of the Sun
upon it, so much celebrated by ancient Writers as well Latin as Greek;
certainly it was merely a piece of Art, a kind of pneumatic Machine contrived
by the Theban Priests, Men of not vulgar skill in Astronomy and all other
Philosophical Sciences. Athanasius Kircher (I remember) in his Oedipus
Aegyptiacus (Tom. 2.) according to his usual credulity, conceives it was a
Telesme, or made by Talismanic Art; and that the Devil was conjured within the
hollow of it, to perform that Effect, because it continued Musical for so long
a time, namely to the days of Apollonius Tyaneus, which from the first Erection
of it was about Eleven hundred Years. But yet he shows, that such a Musical
Statue may be made by Mathematical and Natural contrivance upon the ground of
Rarefaction; saying, Magnam enim vim in natura rerum, rarefactionem obtinere,
nemo ignorant; and subnecting various other pneumatical devices among the
Egyptians in their Temples.

But whether it were the Devil or the Priest that spoke in those Consecrated
Statues; 3. Teraphim used chiefly for Divination.
or whether the vulgar, in all Ages easy to be gulled by Men of more Learning
and cunning, were only deluded into a belief that they spoke: certain it is
however, that the opinion of some Spirit or other included within them, so far
advanced their Reputation, that they were now no longer looked upon as
Representations of Gods, but as real Gods themselves, and accordingly Worshipped
and Consulted about future Events. From this Opinion it was, that Laban (in
Genesis 31. 30.) expostulating with Jacob about the Teraphim or Images that
Rachel had secretly taken from him, says, Wherefore have thou stolen my Gods?
That these Teraphim were framed by Astrologers, for Divination sake, and that
they might Predict things to come; is the judgment of Rabbi Kimchi: and that
they were also made of Human Form, so as to be the more capable of Celestial
Influence, is observed to us by Rabbi Abraham Ben-Ezra, the greatest Theologue
and Astrologue of the Jews. Who adds, That Rachel stole the Images from her
Father Laban for this reason alone, lest from the inspection of them he might
learn what way Jacob had taken in his flight, and so pursue him. And St. Austin
(quaestion 94. in Genes.) grants that Laban consulted these Idols for
Divination; saying, Quod Laban dicit, quare furatus es deos meos, hinc est
illud fortasse quod and augurari se dixerat. Capite enim praecedenti, ad
Jacobum dixit, Auguratus sum, (not as our Translation, I have learned by
experience) quod benedixerit mihi Deus propter te. So Mr. Seldom (De Diis Syris
syntagm. 1. c. 2.) assures us, the Ancients Interpret Nichasti; and the Hebrews
understand that place ( ver. 27.) of fore-knowing or conjecturing. But whether
or no these Teraphim were worshipped as Gods, though they were called so, is an
old Controversy among the Masters, as appears from R. Simeon Ben-joachi (in
libro Zohar fol. 94.)

As for the dismal manner how these Teraphim were made, 4. Teraphim, how made
and
Mr. Seldom (from R. Elias in Thisbi) describes it thus: They killed a
Firstborn Son, twisted or wrung off his Head from his Body, then Embalmed it
with Salt and Aromatic Powders, and wrote upon a thin Plate of Gold the Name
of an Unclean Spirit; which Plate being put under the Embalmed Head, they
placed it in a niche of the Wall, burning Candles, and adoring before it. And
with such Teraphim as these Laban used to Divine. If this be a true
Description, I wonder why the Author of it, and Onkelos too, in this place of
Genesis Translate Teraphim by Tzilmenaia; when Tzilmenaia signify Figures,
Effigies or Images; and a dead Man's Head is neither of these.

Of Micha also we read ( Judge. 17. 5.) That he had a Temple of Gods, and made
an Ephod and Teraphim, and Consecrated one of his Sons, (that is, filled his
hand with Sacrifices;) which ancient Rite used in the initiation of Priests, we
find mentioned in Exodus (29. 24.) and Levit. (8. 27.) and he became his Priest.
Upon which Text Mr. Seldom, according to his wonted sagacity, well observes,
That this Micah did ill to mix the Worship of the True God, with that of Idols
and Demons; for doubtless he Consecrated the Ephod and Levite to the True God,
but the Teraphim, the Molten, and the Graven Image to Demons: from which the
Danites soon after obtained an Oracle, as if it had been from God Himself; as
appears in the Chapter following. Nor did the Idolaters give credit to the
Ephod, which they referred to God; or to the Teraphim of Demons, singly or
apart: and therefore they foolishly and impiously thought, that both together
were to be Consulted, both to be Worshipped, and conciliated by the same Divine
Worship. It seems by the History, That the Molten Image, and the Graven Image
of Micah were the Gods to whom the Teraphim were Consecrated. But yet the
Teraphim also, in respect to their egregious use in Divination, were held to be
Gods. Hence arises somewhat of Light to us for our clearer discerning of what
is meant by that darksome place in Hosea (3. 4.) For the Children of Israel
shall abide many days without a King, and without a Prince, and without
Sacrifice, and without an Image, and without an Ephod, and Teraphim. For the
Sacrifice and Ephod are referred to Divine Worship of the True God; the Statue
or Image and Teraphim, to Idolatry: according to R. Kimchi's interpretation,
who ( in Radice) says, Absque sacrificio, respicit Deum Verum; absque
[matzebah] statua, cultum alienum sive numina Gentium; and absque Epho, item
Deum verum; and Teraphim, cultum alienum.

As to the matter whereof these [(...)] Puppets or Idolillo's were made; 5. Of
what Materials
the most antique of Eastern Nations, the Zabii, or Chaldeans (out of whose
Books R. Moses the Egyptian transcribed many Remarkable Memoirs) made them of
Gold sometimes, sometimes of Silver, according to the rate of their fortunes.
These they Dedicated to the Moon, those to the Sun: and they built Temples or
Houses to receive them, as he, (More Nebochim. l. 3. c. 30.) Records; Et
posuerunt in eis imagines and dixerunt quod splendour potentiorum Stellarum
diffundebatur super illas imagines, and loquebantur cum hominibus, and
annunciabant eis utilia. Which quadrates exactly with their Doctrine who teach,
That the Teraphim were always made according to the Precepts of Astrology, and
to certain positions of the Stars, (as those which the Greeks call (...)) and
to the Figures, imagined to be in Heaven, that they might be, not only [
Mechavi] Annunciantes, Fortune Tellers, but also [(...)] Averrunci dii, drivers
away of Evil. Nor do the (...) indeed, as to the Astrological reason, differ
from the Teraphim, unless in this, That these were designed to Predict things
to come, but those to drive away Evils; and the makers of the Talismans were
named (...). Much nearer to the nature of the Teraphim do those Images come,
that were believed both to give Oracles, and to protect from Evil: not only
from their having been Astrologically formed and erected, but [(...)
Daemoniorum] from the coming of Demons into them: and we are told by Michael
Psellus, that Demons are said [(...)] to make their intrada's or entrances,
when being invocated by their Adorers or Conjurers, they enter into Statues or
Images Consecrated to them. Of this sort of Images the most ancient Memory is
found mentioned by that Hermes Trismegistus in his Dialogue with Asclepius.
Such was that wooden Seal by Apuleius called (...), and by him under a secret
name worshipped; of which Magical Practice being accused, he wrote an Elegant
Apology. The same is to be thought of that Head of a Statue, which Gerebert
Archbishop first of Rhemes, and after of Ravenna, and at last Pope, by the
name of Sylvester the Second, taught by the Saracens of Spain, to the satiety
of Humane Curiosity, made into an Oracle for his own use; as our William of
Malsbury (de gestis Regum Angliae, lib. 2. cap. 10.) relates. This Head, says
William, would never speak, but when interrogated; and then it failed not to
speak Truth, either affirmatively, or negatively. For instance, when Gerebert
asked, Shall I be Apostolic? the Head would Answer, Thou shall. Shall I dye
before I have sung Mass in Jerusalem? No. But by this Answer, the Pope (as is
well observed by Seldom, de Diis Syris. l. 1. c. 2.) was deceived, as to the
time of his Death: for he understood it of the City Jerusalem; but the Oracle
meant a Church so called in Rome; in which, immediately after his Holiness had
upon the Sunday called Statio ad Jerusalem, celebrated Mass, he ended his Life
miserably. That the like Head was made of Brass, and to the same purpose too,
by our Countryman Roger Bacon of Oxford, a Minorite (a Man of greater Learning
than the gloomy Age wherein he lived, could well bear) is confidently reported
by the vulgar; not without injury to his admirable skill in all parts of the
Mathematics, which his Works now extant show to have been profound and pure,
and of which the most Renowned University of Oxon has, in their late History
and Antiquities, given an honorable Testimony. Nor have our Annals any the
least Ground, upon which this scandalous Fiction could be raised.

Of what matter the Image of the Great Diana of the Ephesians was made, 6. What
were the Silver Shrines of Diana of the Ephesians.
is left to conjecture; no less uncertain than the Founder of her Magnificent
Temple in that City: but that the [(...)] Silver Shrines made there by
Demetrius a Silver Smith, and other Crafts-men, not for, but of Diana, and
mentioned in Acts 19. 24. were little Chapels representing the Form of the
Ephesian Temple, with the Image of Diana Enshrined; has been affirmed by the
Great Erasmus, and sufficiently proved by our most Learned Mr. Gregory, (in
Posthum. c. 11.) And to this agree the Heathen Rites of those times. For
Ammianus Marcellinus (in Iuliano, l. 22. numb. 12.) relates, that Asclepiades
the Philosopher was wont to carry about with him whithersoever he went, a
little silver Image of the Celestial Goddess, or Urania: and Dion ((...) lib.
40. fol. 81.) says of the Roman Ensign, (...), That it was a little Temple,
and in that, the Figure of an Eagle set in Gold. Now that which moved Demetrius
and other Workmen of the like occupation to stir up the Beast of many Heads to
raise a Tumult against St. Paul, was not zeal for the honor of Diana, as they
cunningly pretended, but fear lest their Trade should be ruined. For at this
time there was a solemn confluence of all the Lesser Asians, to the [(...)]
Holy Games celebrated at Ephesus, to the honor of other Gods, but of Diana in
Chief. And it must have cut off the stream of profit from the Craftsmen, if the
People had been convinced of the absurdity of their Devotion by St. Paul's
Doctrine, that these Enshrined Idolillos of Diana so much bought up by Bigots,
were no Gods, because made with hands. In the Prophecy of Amos (5. 27.) is
mentioned [(...)] the Tabernacle of Moloch, which probably was an Image of
Saturn in a Shrine, like these of Diana here described. For that Moloch was
Saturn, Seldom has rendered indubitable: and that the Egyptians Worshipped him
under the name of Rephan, is evident from the Coptick Table of the Planets
explicated by Athan. Kircher in Prodrom. Coptic. c. 5. page 147.

But of what Materials soever the Idols of the Ancient Gentiles were made, 7.
Why graven Images of Animals were by God interdicted to the Hebrews.
still the Worshipers of them seem to have been possessed with an Opinion, That
there was [(...)] some Numen or Divine Power latent in them. And this Opinion
had been so diffused through all the Oriental Nations, before the Law; that God
thought it necessary to the peace and felicity of the Hebrew Commonwealth now
to be established, by this Precept to interdict all Graven Images of any Animal
whatsoever, such being thought, by reason of their hollowness and secret
recesses, more capable of Demons, than others. For we are to understand, that
to the Hebrews, as it was expressly forbidden to Worship any such Image, so was
the mere making of any not permitted; lest from the shape or form of the Image,
the Israelites might perhaps take occasion to believe, as the Heathens did,
That such Images were (to use the Phrase of the false Trismegistus, in Dialog.
cum Asclepio) animatae sensu, and spiritu plenae; or ( as Iamblicus calls them)
(...), Divino Consortio simulacra plena. Where that Consortium or (...) is of
Angels or Demons, whom they Conjured into the Images, by certain Magical Rites
and Sacrifices. Nay more; God strictly commanded that all such Statues and
Images should be destroyed and utterly abolished, Exodus 34. 13. Numb. 33. 52.
Deuteronomy. 7. 5. Hence it was, That when Pilate had nayl'd up certain Shields or
Bucklers in the Holy Temple, the Jews were unquiet and mutinous, until he had
caused them to be taken away; because there were in them [(...)] the
Countenances or Faces of some of the Caesar's embossed or prominent, perhaps in
messo relievo. Hence also Herod having set up certain Trophies, was in danger
of being outraged by the fury of the Jews, until by exposing them uncovered, he
showed, that no Images lay concealed under them. In like manner the Golden
Eagle set up by the same Herod over the Gate of the Temple, was thrown down, as
repugnant to the Holy Law; as Josephus (Antiq. l. 17.) relates. Nor was this
Law unknown to Tacitus, who speaking of the Jews, says, Nulla simulacra
urbibus, nedum templis sunt. And he was in the right; for even Dion could tell
his Readers, That to have Graven Images or Statues, not only in their Temple
but in any other place whatsoever, was to the Jews unlawful. To endeavor to
exempt himself from the obligation of this Law, while the Sanctity of it
continued, was criminal to any Man, from the Prince to the meanest of the
Vulgar: God reserving to himself alone, the Power of exception, as being the
Lawmakers.

He by his right commanded Cherubins, 8. That God reserved to himself a right
of exception to this Law; from the Instances of the Cherubims and of the Brazen
Serpent Erected by His Command.
winged Images with Human countenances, to be set up in the Sanctum Sanctorum
of the Temple in that very place, into which none but the High Priest, nor he
but once in the Year, upon the day of Solemn and general Expiation, was
permitted to enter: as well knowing, that there was nothing of Divine in them;
and designing, that by them should be signified, either (as Philo thinks) that
the actions of God in rewarding Good Men, and in Punishing the Disobedient, are
winged and swift; or (as Maimonides and others conjecture) that God uses the
most ready and expedite Ministry of Angels to execute all His Commands. Of this
His Prerogative Royal* He again made use, when He gave order, That the Brazen
Serpent should be Erected in the Wilderness for the healing of the People
bitten by Fiery Serpents; and therefore Tertullian (de Idololatria) says,
Extraordinario praecepto Serpentis similitudinem induxit. That the Fiery
Serpents by which the mutinous Israelites were bitten, were ex genere
Chersydrorum, a kind of Water Serpents, grown more venenous by heat and thirst,
and so truly Seraphim, i. e. ardentes, and exurentes; and that they were not
bred in the place called Phunon, where the Brazen Serpent was Erected, but
brought thither vi quadam (...), by Divine Power, to punish the Contumacious
people; has been amply proved by the Many-tongued Bochartus, (in Hierozoici
part posteriori. l. 3. c. 13.) to whom we owe all the knowledge we have
acquired of the various kinds of Animals mentioned in the Holy Bible. As for
Solomon's adding the Images of Oxen and Lions, to the Brazen Laver; either he
did it by secret intimation or suggestion from God; or (as Josephus judges, and
other Learned Jews) it was his first step toward the Idolatry to which after he
arrived.

When we said that Graven Images of Animals were by this Law forbidden, 9.
Images of the Stars, also interdicted by this precept; and that to prevent
Polytheism. and
we comprehend also Images of the Caelestial Luminaries, because they too have
their Motions; not Animal indeed, but Regular and Periodick. For, that not the
Celestial Orbs, but the Stars and Planets are moved in Caelo Liquido, in the
Ethereal spaces or Firmament; is the most ancient Opinion of the Hebrews, as
the Gemara teaches at the beginning of Genesis, saying, Orbs fixi, sed sidera
mobilia. And they expressed in Figure, either the form of some single Planet,
as of the Sun, Moon, Saturn, (called the Star of your God Remphan, or Rephan,
in Act. 7. 43,) Lucifer, Jupiter, etc. or some whole Constellation made up of
many Stars, and by men fancied to resemble a Man, or brute Animal, or Serpent,
or other Living Creature. Wherefore Images of this kind also fall under the
interdiction of this Law. It appears nevertheless, that the Images and Figures
here interdicted, are in the number of things in their own Nature neither good
nor evil, but indifferent, and consequently not unlawful; and which are
prohibited only for caution of some Evil that may arise from the abuse of them.
And that very many things interdicted in the Mosaic Law, are indeed by their
own nature, or per se [(...)] indifferent; but directly opposed by God to the
Institutes of the Egyptians, Phoenicians, Arabians, to the end that the
Hebrews might be kept the more remote from Polytheism or the Worship of many
Gods; is prudently observed by Maimonides.

But besides this Caution, 10. to admonish men, That the Invisible God cannot
be represented by Images.
there is another excellent use of this interdict of Images, viz. to admonish
men that God is most remote from our sight and other senses. The Invisible God
is not to be Worshipped by Images, Symbols or Representations. Ye saw not, says
Moses, any similitude in the day wherein the Lord spoke unto you in Horeb out
of the midst of the fire, lest perhaps being deceived ye might make to your
selves any graven Image. And Seneca (Not. Quaest. 8. 30.) could say of God;
Effugit oculos, cogitatione visendus est. Also Antiphanes the Philosopher;
(...), i. e. God is not seen by Eyes, He is like to no man; whence no man can
know him by an Effigies. And that this was the reason of this Law, is intimated
both by Philo, when ( de-Legatione) he said; Eum qui inaspicuus est, in
simulacro aut fictili opere ostendere, nefas: and by Diodorus Siculus, when he
said of Moses, Imaginem statuit nullam, quod non crederet Deum homini esse
similem: And by Tacitus, Iudaei mente sola unumque numen intelligunt. Prophanos
qui Deum imagines mortalibus materiis in speciem hominum effingunt. For the
same reason Halicarnensis and Plutarch Affirm, That Numa caused all Images to
be removed out of the Roman Roman Temples; Quod non sanctum ratus, assimulare
meliora pejoribus, neque ad Deum accedi aliter posse quam cogitatu. And Varro
has left upon Record, That the Romans for more than One hundred and seventy
Years from the building of their City, Worshipped the Gods sine simulacro:
adding, that if that wise Custom had been continued, to his days, the Gods
would have been observed more Religiously; and alleging the Example of the
Jewish Nation to attest that his Sentence; and at length concluding, That they
who first set up Images of Gods for the People, took away fear from their
Cities, and put Error in the place of it.

What therefore shall we say of Pictures or Forms of Animals made in flats, 11.
What Pictures fall under this interdict.
or cut in hollows; are they also by this Precept forbidden, or not? Certainly
this place cannot be interpreted to condemn them. That not all Pictures were
Prohibited, may with good reason, and assurance too, be inferred from the
Ensigns of the Hebrews bearing a Man, a Lion, a Bull, an Eagle, etc. Some
Pictures are indeed forbidden, but in other places; namely all those which
Idolaters used in their Superstitious and detestable Worship. Levit. 26. 1. To
which may be adjoined the Figures cut or engraven upon Metals, and believed to
be of Power, after their Consecration with certain Magical Words and
Ceremonies, to defend Men and Cities from Invasion of Enemies, Scorpions,
Lions, Serpents, and other hurtful Animals, commemorated copiously by
Maimonides (Ductor Dubitant. part. 3. cap. 37.) Which Opinion the Graecians
following, called such Magical Figures [(...) or (...)] perfect Works: whence
comes the corrupt word of the Arabians Talisman signifying the same thing.
Others call them (as we have before hinted) (...), Principles, or (...),
Traditions of Elements. Of these frequent Examples occur in the
Constantinopolitan History, in the posthume Works of Scaliger, in Gaffarel, and
in our Mr. Gregory's opuscula.

That we may come now to the Christians; they have believed themselves to be
obliged, 12. That the Christians have not thought themselves indeterminately
obliged by this Law.
neither by other Laws of the Hebrews indeterminately, nor by that of having no
Graven Images of living Creatures. For such Images and Statues both of Emperors
and of private Men renowned for Learning and Wisdom, have been in most Cities
extant among them, and are so at this day, without danger of Idolatry; and
therefore without offense. And as for Figures painted or engraven; since these
were not without difference interdicted even to the Hebrews, they have used
them more freely, as the Figure of a Shepherd in a Cup or Chalice mentioned in
Tertullian assures us. Nay, they abstained not from the Figure of our Savior
Christ, after the Emperors became Christians: witness, these Three ancient
Verses, written by Prudentius: Christus purpureum gemmanti textus in auro
Signabat labarum, clypeorum insignia Christus
Scripserat, ardebat summis crux addita crist is.
Christ's Figure of bright Gold on Purple born,
Did the Imperial standard long adorn:
Drawn upon shields, for Arms his picture stood;
And on their crests was raised a Cross of Blood.


The same excellent Poet ( in passione Cassiani) has transmitted to Posterity,
that in the Monuments of Martyrs was expressed in Figures, the manner of their
Martyrdom, and what they had so gloriously suffered. Long it was
notwithstanding before Pictures were admitted into Churches, as appears from
the Eliberin Canon, and from that so celebrated fact of Epiphanius. Longer
before Statues and Prominent Images were admitted, nor then without much
dispute and opposition; not because they were prohibited by the Law, but only
because they were thought to give occasion to Error; which Reason was indeed,
while Paganism remained, of no little moment.

(...), 13. What is here signified by Adoration of Images.
Thou shall not adore them. So abundant was the Goodness and Favor of God
toward the Israelites, that not thinking it sufficient to provide for their
defense against the false Opinions, and impious Customs of that Age, for the
time they were to live in the Society of their own People; he having a longer
prospect, was pleased to superad cautions for those of their Nation, who should
in future times travel abroad and reside among strangers. For there, since they
could not hinder the making, and superstitious use of Graven Images of Animals
or Stars; another preservative was requisite to prevent their Infection by the
contagion of some evil and absurd Opinion and Institute: and the most powerful
Antidote against all Contagion of that kind, was to prohibit to them the
imitation of all such Gestures, by which that Error was nourished. The Hebrew
Word here by the Septuagint translated (...), is sufficiently general;
signifying an Act, not of the Mind, but of the Body, whether done by bowing
down the Head only, or by inclining the whole Body, or by bending the knees, or
by sitting upon the Hams, or (which is a sign of the greatest honor) by
falling prostrate upon the Ground. And yet notwithstanding the Greek
Interpreters had reason on their side, when they rendr'd it by (...), adorare,
to adore. For, as among the Peoples of the East, Veneration was shown by
various Forms of bending the Body; so among the Greeks, and some other Nations,
Veneration was generally signified by putting the Hand to the Mouth; which
properly is (...) [ in utero fero, and Suavior] whence (...), which is,
osculor, I Kiss.

Nor does the Latin Word adorare own any other signification, being in truth
derived, not from orare, to pray or entreat, but ab ore quod manus admoveatur
ori, from putting the hand to the Mouth, or kissing the Hand. Which was not
unknown to St. Jerome, who ( in Apologia contra Ruffinum) says, Qui adorant,
solent de osculari manum: nor to Apuleius, who interprets adoratio,
adveneratio, to be, a putting the Hand to the Mouth, or kissing the Hand, in
token of singular Honor and Veneration. What in an old Epigram is, Ingressus
scenam populum Saltator adorat; is the same with that in Phaedrus, jactat basia
tibicen. How ancient this manner of Veneration is, may be learned from that
Expression of Job (31. 26) If my Mouth has kissed my Hand, i. e. If I have
offended by extraneous Worship. But what has happened to many other Words, that
they remain not in the sense of their Original; nay that in process of time,
and by long use, the adoptive sense comes at length to prevail over the
Genuine; the same has been the fate of this Greek word (...). It began to be
used for any Gesture whatever testifying Reverence. And therefore what the
Interpreter of St. Matthew (8. 2.) calls (...), adorare; the same in St. Luke
(5. 12.) is (...), to fall upon the face; and in St. Mark (5. 22.) (...), to
fall at the Feet. sometimes for perspicuity of the sense, one is explicated by
the other added, as in St. Matt. (2. 11.) (...), falling down they worshipped:
and ( Act. 10. 25.) (...), falling upon his Face he shall worship God. Hence it
came, that an External thing being referred to an Internal, that word is
sometimes, though not often indeed, to signify an act of the mind also, as the
words (...), Sacrifice; (...), Oblation; and many other made by time Ambiguous.
But in this place doubtless is signified, every act whereby Honor is wont to
be demonstrated to Superiors. For as the Hebrews are in Exodus (23. 13.)
forbidden to use the Names of false Gods, though in common talk: so here they
are forbid to give any sign of Honor to Images, Quocunque tandem animo id
fieret, as Moses de Cotzi (praecepto vetante 19.) prudently notes.

But that by this interdict of bowing the Body to, 14. Different Opinions of
Christians about honor exhibited to Saints before their Images and Pictures.
or before Images, Strangers-born, how pious soever, are of right obliged; the
Hebrews themselves deny, alleging the example of Naaman the Syrian.

Nor did the ancient Christians believe themselves to be thereby obliged
indistinctly, but only so far as there was in the Testimony of Honor exhibited
before an Image, a Veneration of a false God, which is, per se and omni modo
evil: which may be understood from the forecited place in Job, from that in the
Acts (10. 25.) and from the well known History of Nazianzen. But in places of
Prayer, whether it were lawful to bow their Bodies, in sign of Honor, before
the Images of Christ, or of Saints, which the Greeks call (...), i. e. a sign
of Love and Reverence toward men eminent and honorable for Sanctimony; was a
question long disputed and not without Seditions in the East. To Germany and
France, this seemed not to be free from Evil, or an appearance at least of
Evil: as appears from the Synods of Francfurt, and Paris, which were held in
the times of Charles the Great and his Children. But yet it is to be remarked,
that in those Synods the Greeks were more harshly treated, because the Western
Bishops Interpreted the sentence of the Greeks expressed in the Second Nicen
Synod, in a harder or more rigid Sense, than it was intended, or than the words
could well bear: being deceived by the Acts of that Nicen Synod, translated
into Latin so unfaithfully, as that sometimes they exhibited a sense contrary
to the Greek; which may be observed, as in other places, so chiefly in those
things which Constantine Bishop of Constantia in Cyprus had spoken about
Images. The Errors of which Translation, so far as they concern this question,
have been particularly detected, and by comparing the Latin with the Greek
Copy Corrected by the incomparable Hugo Grotius (ad Exodus cap. 20.) of whom I
borrowed much, and the best of what is here said. But to end this digression;
that there was somewhat of danger in this Honor exhibited to the Images of
Saints; St. Augustine in his time observed, when speaking of the Christians, he
says, Novi multos esse Sepulchrorum and Picturarum adoratores. At this day the
Greeks prefer Pictures to Images, as thinking that in those is less of danger.
The Armenians abstained from both. And as for the Habessines, the most Learned
Iobus Ludolfus (Hist. Ethiopic. Lib. 3. cap. 5. number. 82.) speaking of the
singular Honor and Veneration they have for the Blessed Virgin Mother, says,
Eam tanto prosequuntur affectu, ut parum illis videatur, quidquid Ecclesia
Romana in ejus honorem excogitavit: tantum nullas ei statuas erigunt, Picturis
contenti. So that being in all things true Iacobites, they follow the example
of the Greeks, who judged Pictures of Saints more innocent than Images. Of the
Muscovites, who yet boast themselves to be the only true Christians in the
world, since they only are baptized, whereas others are but sprinkled; Olearius
assures us, That they Universally give their Saints and their Images the Honor
due to God alone; and that the Vulgar among them place all Religion in the
Honors and Veneration they exhibit to Images, teaching their Children to stand
with profound respect, and to say their Prayers before those Images for which
the Parents have most Devotion. Herein therefore they have degenerated from the
Greek Christians, from whom they pre^end to have derived their Faith, Doctrine,
and Sacred Rites.

'(...), 15. The true sense of the Word Idolatry.
Nor Worship them. If by this Law God permitted not the Honor that was wont to
be given to Eminent Men, to be exhibited, I do not now say to, but before
Images, or in places where they stood; He thought it more unfit for his People
to be permitted to do before Images any of those things, which the Custom of
Nations had made proper to the honor of a Divine Numen, whether true, or only
believed to be such. Here the Hebrew Word (...) is indeed of ample
signification, but when spoken with relation to any thing, is wont to be, by
the Greeks translated as well by (...), to serve, as by (...), to obey; and
sometimes also by (...), to Minister unto. But because, when the same is used
of things Divine, the same Interpreters render the sense of it by (...), thence
sprung up that difference, with the Latin Christians, more than the Greek use.
Otherwise, if propriety be considered, there is no more in the Word (...), than
in the Word (...); as appears from Psalm. 2. 11. compared with 1 Thessalonians. 1. 9. in
both which places, what is meant by (...), is the same that in Heb, 9. 4. is
meant by (...). But where the Writer Treats of things Divine whether truly
such, or only thought to be such; there the Hebrew Word here used, is wont to
signify particularly those things, which by received Custom through all the
East, and that which after was diffused through all Graecia, and wider too,
were used in Divine Worship, whether true or false; namely, Sacrifices,
Oblations, and Incense. For these properly are the things, which whenever
they are used in honor of any but the true God, the Hellenists or Jews
speaking Greek, and as well the Apostles themselves, as Apostolic Writers,
following the Hellenists, express by '(...), the Worship or Service of Idols.
And in this Apostolic sense, Idolatry is, as Tertullian describes it, Quicquid
ultra humani honoris modum ad instar divinae sublimitatis attollitur.

Now both the Rites of which we have just now spoken, 16. Private Men among
Christians ought not to pull down Idols
and all bowing before Images are prohibited to the Hebrews, because the
Precept of throwing down and breaking Images, in Countries not within their
Jurisdiction or Dominion had no place; as the Hebrew Doctors rightly observe.
With whom agrees that in the LX. Canon of the Eliberin Council; Si quis Idola
fregerit, and ibidem fuerit occisus, quatenus in Evangelio non scriptum est,
neque invenitur sub Apostolis unquam sactum, placuit in numero Martyrum eum non
recipi. Of the same judgment was St. Austin, who (2. Contra literas Petiliani)
says, Non enim auferenda Idola de terra, quod tanto ante futurum praedictum
est, posset quisquam jubere privatus: And the African Synod under Honorius and
the younger Theodosius, which Petitions the Emperors to take away the relics
of Idols through all Africa.

(...); For I am the Lord thy God, a jealous God. This clause belongs, not
only to this second Precept; but also, and principally to the First: to the
Second, so far as that is inservient to the First. By (...) is signified, The
Supreme Lord; I who have Sovereign Right and Empire over thee. The other,
(...), is for (...), which signifies Strong, Mighty, Potent; appositely,
because mention of Revenge immediately follows in the next Comma. (...), is
properly impatient of a Rival, as appears in the Law concerning the Jealous
Husband ( Numb. 5.)

17. That God revenges Idolatry only to the third and fourth Generation: and
that by delivering up the Posterity of Idolaters into miserable Servitude.
(...), Visiting the iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children. The Hebrew word
here Interpreted by (...), reddens, or rendering, signifies visiting, as our
Translation rightly has it; and is usually taken in the sense of vindicating:
and accordingly by the Greeks very often expounded by (...), to Revenge. But
here is not treated of all Sins, but of that Sin in particular which is
committed about false gods; as appears from the antecedents and the
consequents. This sin therefore, as committed against his Divine Majesty, God
Revenges, not only in those who have Committed it, but also in their Posterity;
namely, by delivering them up into miserable Servitude: which He, by the right
of his Supreme Dominion over all Men, can do without any the least injustice.
To give Authority to this Explication, we bring that place in Levit. (26. 39.)
And they that are left of you, shall pine away in their iniquities in your
Enemies Lands; and also in the iniquities of their Fathers shall they pine away
with them. We bring also the example of Zion, (Lam. 5. 6.) We have given the
hand to the Egyptians, and to the Assyrians, to be satisfied with bread. Our
Fathers have sinned, and are not, and we have born their Iniquities, etc.

(...), To the third and fourth Generation. Even to the Grand-childrens
Grandchildren. This is a proverbial speech; used also by Plato, (...), he
transmits Revenge to the Fourth Generation: And by the Poets.

Et nati natorum, and qui nascentur ab illis.

(...), Of those that hate me. 18. Who are properly said to hate God.
Because properly the Evil touches the Posterity, the Punishment the Parents.
St. Chrysostom (Homilia 29. ad 9. Genes.) Nulla poena plus adfert doloris, quam
si quis ex se natos sui causa in malis esse videat. And Tertullian: Duritia
populi ad talia remedia compulerat, ut vel posteritati suae prospicientes legi
divinae obedirent. In Sacred Writ they are said to hate God; particularly, who
Worship false Gods: so that Maimonides denies, that that kind of speech is
found in any other sense.

(...), 19. Why God is here said to show mercy unto Thousands.
And showing mercy unto Thousands. God spoke in the plural Number, not to a
Thousand, but to Thousands; showing how much larger God is in doing good, and
conferring benefits, than in punishing. This is what the Hebrews mean when they
say, That the Angel Michael [the Minister of God's Wrath and Vengeance] flies
with but one Wing; Gabriel [The Minister of His Mercy, Love, and Blessing] with
two.

(...), 20. Who are by God called Pious, and who Righteous Men.
To those that love me. To those that Worship me, and that are therefore called
Pious.

(...), And keep my Precepts. Who are attent to observe all my Commandments,
but chiefly those which pertain to the exclusion and extinction of Idolatry and
all wicked Superstitions: and who are therefore called Righteous or Just.

CHAP. IV. The Third Precept explicated.
(...) Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God, etc.
IN the Hebrew, Article 1. Why it is here said, the Name of the Lord, not my
Name.
thou shall not bear or carry, namely in thy Mouth; which is the same with,
Thou shall not take, viz. into thy Mouth. Here also is, of the Lord; because by
that Title the tremend Majesty of God is best understood. We may en passant
observe, that here the manner of speech is changed. For according to the way of
speaking used in the former Precepts, it should have been My Name; but to the
Hebrews this is frequent, to put a Noun for a Pronoun; as in Exodus 23. 18, 19.
Genes. 2. 20. Numb. 10. 29. and many other places, where the like Translation
from the first person to the third occurs.

2. Perjury interdicted chiefly by this Precept: and
(...), In vain, or (as Aquila) rashly, or (as Philo) to testify a Lie. But to
omit all other interpretations of these Words, we have the sense of them
compendiously expressed in St. Matthew (5. 33.) Thou shall not forswear thy self:
nor is it to be doubted, but our Savior Christ in this place urged the very
Words of the Law, where the Syrian has put words that signify, Thou shall not
Lie in thy Oath or Swearing. Only this is to be accurately noted, That in this
place is treated, not of an Oath taken for Testimony, of which the Ninth
Precept was particularly given; but of an Oath Promissory, which the words
following immediately in the same verse of St. Matthew sufficiently declare,
(...), Thou shall perform unto the Lord thy Oaths; (taken most certainly from
Numb. 30. 2.) (...), to forswear, taken in its proper sense, is (as has been
critically observed by Chrysippus) to make void what thou have sworn, or not to
stand to what thou have by Oath promised. The weight or hainousness of this
execrable Crime, Philo wisely shows, where he says; That he who commits it,
does either not believe, that God takes care of humane Affairs (which is an
Abnegation of Gods Providence, and the Fountain of all Injustice,) or if he
does believe that, he makes God less than any honest Man, whom none that
designs to assert a Lie, would dare to call in for a Witness of what he knows
to be false. Abenesdras adds, That in other sins somewhat of commodity, profit,
or pleasure is looked upon, whereby Men may be tempted and carried away; but in
this oftentimes there is not the least commodity or emolument: that other
Crimes cannot always be committed, this always.

(...); 3. Threatened to be severely punished by God Himself.
For the Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes the Name of the Lord his
God in vain. Here according to the Greek custom, two Negatives are put for one
in the Hebrew: and (...) signifies, to pass by one as innocent. So that the
sense is, God will not leave him unpunished: which is a Figure called [(...)]
an Extenuation, such as is used in the Gospel of St. Matthew (12. 31.)
Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men; that is, shall
be severely punished; and in many other places of Scripture. And this sin is
even by the Light of Nature so heinous and detestable, that the Heathens
themselves believed, that it was always severely punished by God. Hesiod said,
Et juramentum, clades mortalibus unde
Adveniunt, quoties fallaci pectore jurant.
Dire miseries pursue those men, that dare,
Themselves with heart fallacious to forswear.
In Herodotus this Oracle is related.

At juramento quaedam est sine nomine proles,
Trunca manus and trunca pedes: tamen impete magno
Advenit, atque omnem vastat stirpemque domumque.
From Perjury a nameless issue springs
With maimed hand and foot; which yet still brings
Revenge with mighty force; and does at last,
Both the whole Race and Family devast.
And the sweet-tongu'd Tibullus could say; Ah miser! Et si quis primo perjuria
celat,
Sera tamen tacitis poena venit pedibus.
Ah wretch! though one his Perjury conceal,
Vengeance with silent feet will on him steal.


And he had reason; 4. The Sanctity of an Oath.
for an Oath is a religious Affirmation, as Cicero defines it: (...), a
Testimony of God upon a doubtful matter, as Philo: (...), an affirmation with
an assumption of God for witness, as Clement of Alexandria: (...), the
strongest Seal of Human Faith, as Dionysius Halicarnensis: (...), the last and
most certain pledge of Faith, as Procopius. Wherefore the Ancients, even wehre
a specious excuse might be brought, held themselves religiously obliged to
fulfill whatsoever they had by Oath promised. Concerning the sanction of an
Oath or Vow, consult Judges 20. 1. 1 Samuel 14. 24, 26, 27. Joshua 19. 15. Psalm.
21. 2, 6, 7, 8.

Now the reason why God threatens to 5. Why God threatens to revenge Perjury
by Punishments inflicted by Himself.
send from Himself dire Punishments upon those who either worship False Gods,
or violate His most Holy Name by Perjury, seems to be this; to let them know,
that though men may perhaps be ignorant of, or neglect to vindicate these
Crimes, yet they shall never escape the certain hand of Divine Vengeance in the
end; which many times indeed is slow in lifting up, but always first or last
strikes sure and home.

CHAP. V. The Fourth Precept explicated.
(...), Remember the Sabbath day, etc.
IN Deuteronomy it is [(...)] Observe the Sabbath day; and in the Hebrew is the
like difference: in the latter place Moses expounds what is meant by Remember
in the former, namely attend to the Sabbath.

(...), to sanctify it; Article 1. The precept of keeping holy the Sabbath,
distinguished from the precept of resting from Labor upon the Sabbath; as by
the causes, so also by the times.
viz. by a glad and grateful recordation of the Worlds Creation by God. For
most true is the Sentence of Rabbi Judah Barbesathel, and R. Ephraim in Keli
Iacar, that in these words one thing is Commanded, and another in the
following. The keeping holy of the Sabbath day, has for its true cause the
Creation of the World: the Rest from Labor, the Egyptian servitude. That
extends to all mankind: this to the Hebrews only, Exodus 31. 13. Which is the
Judgment also of Irenaeus (Lib. 4. c. 30.) and of Eusebius (1 Histor. c. 4.)
And thus may we best explicate that of Genesis 2. God blessed the Seventh day
and Sanctified it; which the Hebrew Masters will have to be spoken by [(...)]
anticpation, as if Moses should say, that this Cessation of God from His work
of Creation was the cause, why after in the time of Moses the Celebration or
Sanctification of the Seventh day was ordained. But the righter interpretation
is that, which distinguishes the precept of keeping holy the Sabbath, from the
precept of resting from Labor, as by the causes, so also by the times. And to
this difference Moses himself seems to have had respect, when in Duternomy to
these words, Observe the Sabbath day to sanctify it, he adds, as the Lord thy
God has Commanded three; namly long ago from the very beginning of the World,
as Grotius conceives; or, as Seldom, from the time when the Israelites were
encamped in Mara (a part of the Wilderness so called from the brackish
bitterness of the Waters) where the observation of the Sabbath was first
instituted, about forty days before that institution was renewed in the
Decalogue. For he refers the first word of this Precept ( Remember) to the
first Sabbath there instituted. And true it is, that the first Sabbath was
celebrated by the Israelites in their tenth Mansion or encamping in Alush, part
of the desert of Sin. They came from Elim into the desert of Sin upon the
Fifteenth day of the Second Month from their beginning to march. Six days Manna
was gathered, and one the Seventh the People Sabbatized. So that the first
observation of the Sabbath fell upon the 22. day of the same Month; which being
the Second Month from their Exit out of Egypt, was after named Iiar (for the
names of the Hebrew Months were then unborn) and that 22. day of this Month
answers to the 23. of May in the Julian year. The Seder Olam makes this Month
Hollow, i. e. of but Twenty nine days; not Full, i. e. of Thirty days. Whence
in computing the feriae or Holy days of these Months, there has risen up a
discrepancy of one day betwixt that Chronicon, and the Talmudist's. But that
alternate distinction of Months, as our most Excellent Chronologist Sir John
Marsham (in Chronic. Canon. page* 184.) observes, does not well agree with the
antic Chronology of the Hebrews.

How then shall we reconcile these two 2. The different interpretations of
Grotius and Seldom, of the word Remember, reconciled.
different opinions concerning the respect of the word Remember, the one
asserted by Grotius, the other by Seldom? By granting, that the Precept de
observando Sabbato, in commemoration of the Egyptian Servitude, was first
given to the Israelites in Mara, and a little after renewed at the promulgation
of the Decalogue, as pertinent particularly and only to them; and consequently
that so far Seldom is in the right: but that the institution of the Sabbath in
grateful memory of the Worlds Creation by God, wherein all Mankind were equally
concerned, was as ancient as the World it self, and extended to all Nations
universally; and therefore Grotius, who seems to have considered this general
institution and the cause of it, is so far in the right too. For,

That some knowledge and veneration of 3. Testimonies of the Sabbath observed
anciently by Gentiles also.
the Sabbath was by Tradition of highest antiquity derived to other Nations
beside the Hebrews, and remained among them for some ages; Clemens Alexandrinus
(Stromat. l. 5.) and Eusebius (in Praepar. Evang.) have clearly shown, as by
other Testimonies, so particularly by the Verses of Hesiod, where [(...)] the
Seventh day is called Holy. And in Josephus, Philo, Theophilus, and Lucan, are
places that manifestly attest the same long-lived Tradition.

And upon this account it was, 4. Why the primitive Christians held their
Assemblies upon the Sabbath day.
that the Primitive Christians, who believed that by Christ all things were
reduced to the same State wherein they had been constituted from the beginning,
Piously celebrated the Sabbath, and therein held their Solemn Assemblies, in
which the Law was publicly read and expounded, as appears from that of the
Acts 15. 21. Which Custom flourished until it was antiquated by the Laodicen
Synod, which judged it more convenient and profitable to Christians, that
instead of the Law, the Gospels should be upon that day read to the People
assembled. So Sacred in those more Pure and Pious times was the memory of the
Sabbath originally instituted, that Men might with glad and grateful hearts
acknowledge and celebrate with Praises the Infinite Wisdom, Power, and Goodness
of God shown in the Creation of the Universe; that they equaled the Sanctity
thereof to that of the Lord's day consecrated to the perpetual remembrance of
that greatest Seal of our Faith, and pledge of our hopes, the Resurrection of
our Redeemer from the dead. Hence Balsamo most appositely said; (...), i. e. By
the Holy Fathers the Sabbath days were held in all respects equal to the Lords
days. Hence also Gregorius Nyssenus calls these two days Brethren, as worthy of
equal Veneration and Solemnity: and the Ancient Book of the Constitutions of
Clement (l. 7. c. 24.) gives this in Precept; Diem Sabbatti and diem Dominicam
festas habete, quoniam illa Creationis, altera Resurrections memoriae dicata
est. Nor was it from any other cause, That by the most ancient Church was
introduced the Custom of not fasting upon the Sabbath, because it was a day of
joy and gladness: as appears from the Epistle of St. Ignatius ad Philippenses,
where he says, Si quis aut Dominica aut Sabbato jejunet, excepto uno Sabbato,
is Christum occidit. The same may be inferred from that memorable place in
Tertullian (advers. Marcionem) meminerat enim and ille hoc privilegium donatum
Sabbato a primordio, quo dies ipse compertus est; veniam jejunii dico. Where we
cannot but observe, that this Custom is deduced from the beginning of the
World. From the same reason it came, that Constantine the Emperor, permitting
to Christians the free use of their Worship, at the same time forbad their
being compelled to appear before any Tribunal or Court of Judicature upon the
Sabbath, no less than upon the Lords day: which Edict is yet extant in Eusebius.

These things being known are sufficient 5 The Lords day not Surrogated into
the place of the Sabbath.
to refute those who think that [(...)] the Lord's day was surrogated into the
place of the Sabbath; of which mention is no where made by Christ, no where by
any of the Apostles. And St. Paul, when ( Colossi. 2. 16) he says, that the
Christians are not to be condemned for their Sabbaths and New Moons; shows
plainly, that they are free from that Law of resting from labor, which liberty
would signify nothing, if, the Law remaining, the day were changed. That the
Christians therefore appointed and held their Assemblies upon that day, wherein
their Lord had risen from the dead; was not from any Precept either of God, or
of the Apostles, but they did it by virtue of the liberty granted to them, and
by voluntary consent among themselves. And to violate such Consent, after it
has passed into a Custom, is not the part of men living in Society. But this
Custom obliged not to rest from labor, farther than was necessary to the
holding their Assemblies.

Having thus briefly shown the difference 6. why the Greeks and Latins use the
word Sabbata, not Sabbatum.
betwixt the Precept instituting a Sabbath in memory of the Creation, which was
from the beginning given to Adam and his whole Posterity; and the Precept given
particularly to the Hebrews, both in Marah, and soon after at the promulgation
of the Decalogue, whereby they were obliged to celebrate the Sabbath, by
resting from daily labors, in remembrance of their redemption from the
Egyptian servitude; and assigned to each its proper cause and time: it will
not perhaps be impertinent, if we subjoin a line or two concerning the Word
Sabbata here used in the plural number. This Word among the Greeks is listed in
the Catalogue of those, which though pronounced in the number of Multitude, are
yet notwithstanding often contented with the signification of Unity. And so is
it often found in the Greek Pentateuch; so also in Mat. 12. 1, 5, 10, 11, 12.
and c. 28. 1. in Mark 1. 21. and 2. 23, 24. in Luke 4. 16. On the contrary St.
John every where speaks it in the singular, as do also the Greek Interpreters
of the other books extra Pentateuchum. The Latins often expressed it, as here,
in the plural. So Horace, Sunt h^die tricesima Sabbata; and Iuvenal, Quidam
sortiti metuentem Sabbata Patrem.

(...), Six days shall thou work, 7. Labor upon Six days of the Week, not
commanded, but only permitted.
and do all thy works. Here now begins that Constitution which is not common to
all Mankind, but proper to the Hebrews. And what is here spoken in the
Imperative, and in the Future, which is often taken from the Imperative has
not the force of a Command, but the sense only of suffering or permitting. For
lest the Modes might be too much multiplied, it has seemed good to almost all
Nations to express the sense of Permitting, as also of Praying, with the same
sound, with which they express the sense of Commanding: as, for Example,
sequere Italian ventis, in Virgil; and ubi nos laverimus, si voles, lavato, in
Terence; and (...), Ure haec cremaque membra, in an old Greek Tragedy. By (...)
here are signified all sorts of Work, by Cicero (de ligibus l. 2.) called
famula opera; Ferii jurgia amovento, eaque in famulis operibus patratis
habento: and by Tertullian, Humana opera quotidiana, whatsoever men commonly do
in their ordinary vocations or daily business.

(...); But on the Seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God. 8. Why God
fixed the Sabbath upon the Seventh day.
The Seventh day is Dedicated to God from the beginning. And wisely do
Maimonides and other Hebrew Masters distinguish the Cause why rest or quiet was
commanded, from the cause why it was commanded upon this Day. The former cause
is expressed in Deuteronomy plainly to be, because the Israelites lately freed
from the Egyptian slavery by Divine help, ought to remember and consider how
hard and grievous Servitude is, and therefore to treat their Servants and
others subject to their Command with humanity and clemency; as Dido in Virgil,
Non ignara mali miseries succurrere disco. The latter is declared in this
place, where it is signified, that when any day might have been taken for rest
or vacation for Labor, this was chosen by God, because from the beginning it
had been dedicated to joy, and the grateful commemoration of the Worlds
Creation by Him; and because upon the same day God had finished all things, and
ceased from Creating, whence the Seventh day derived the Name Sabbath.

(...), Thou shall not do every work therein. 9. Why he by many words
inculcated this Precept.
God by many Words inculcates this Precept concerning the Sabbath, that by the
perpetual observation thereof might be impressed upon the minds of all, a firm
knowledge that this World was not from Eternity, but made by God, which is a
strong inducement to the Veneration of the Omnipotent Creator, as on the
contrary, the belief of the Worlds Eternity, is the way to Impiety and
downright Atheism.

(...); Thy Son and thy Daughter. 10. Who are to be understood here by Thy Son
and thy Daughter.
He understands those, who by reason of their Minority have not yet attained to
knowledge of the Law; whom their Parents ought to restrain from working upon
the Sabbath. For they that are of more advanced Age and understanding, are by
the Law bound for themselves; as likewise in the Law of Circumcision.

(...); Thy Manservant and thy Maidservant. 11. Humanity of Masters toward
Servants here intimated.
This is [(...)] a kind and courteous way of speaking, much used by the Greeks
to their Servants, and in imitation of them by the Latins, who with like
softness and humanity called their Menservants, Pueros, as has been of old
noted by Servius upon that of Virgil, Claudite jam rivos pueri. Hence the names
of Ancient Menservants, Marcipor, Quintipor, etc. So Epicurus called his
Servants Friends, as Seneca (Epist. 107.) observes, who in imitation of him,
says of them ( Epist. 47.) Servi sunt? imo homines. Servi sunt? imo
contubernales. Servi sunt? imo humiles amici. Servi sunt? imo conservi, si
cogitaveris tantundem in utrosque licere fortunae. Than which he could have
said nothing more becoming his great prudence and erudition. Hence also were
Masters called Patres-familias, and Mistrisses Matres-familias, that by the
very Name they might be admonished of humanity. And this Precept obliges
Masters, not only not to enjoin labors to their Servants of either Sex, but
not to suffer them to work upon the Sabbath.

(...); Thy Ox, 12. Some goodness and mercy to be exercised also toward Brutes,
by this Precept.
and thy Ass, and every Beast of thine. Observable here is the great Clemency
of God, who by this Law requires some goodness and mercy to be exercised even
to brute Animals, that he might remove Men the farther from cruelty toward each
other: and to confirm this mild Precept, the like is given in Deuteron. 5. 4.
The same reason is urged by Porphyry [(...)] of Abstinence from eating of the
flesh of Animals. Hence also was the slaughter of a Plowing Ox prohibited by a
Law common to the Phrygians, Cyprians, Atticks, Peloponesians, and Romans, as
we find Recorded by Varro, Pliny, Columella, Porphyry, Aelian, Vegetius and
others. The Athenians made a Decree, that a Mule should be fed at the Public
Cost, which worn out by Labor and Age, used to accompany other Mules drawing
burdens: and banished a Boy for putting out the Eyes of little Birds, taking it
for a sign of a mischievous and cruel disposition in him. (...) are, besides
Oxen, Asses, and Mules, which also were used to the Yoke. (...), Beasts, as
well Dogs as other quadrupeds. But these words are by the Greek Interpreters
Translated hither from Deuteron. 5. for in the Hebrew is found only one general
Name, signifying all mute Animals whatsoever: which the Greeks render sometimes
by (...), Beasts; sometimes by (...), Four-footed Living Creatures, and
sometimes (from the sense of the place) (...), wild Beasts.

(...): And the stranger that is within thy Gates. 13. Who is here meant by The
Stranger that is within thy gates.
Of Proselytes there are (as we have often hinted in the former part of this
disquisition) two sorts; some, who subjected themselves to the whole Mosaic
Law, that they might be participant of the right of Marriages and Honors among
the Holy People: others, who though of foreign blood, were notwithstanding
permitted to dwell among the Hebrews, so long as they Worshipped one God, and
observed the perpetual and common Laws of all Nations, together with the
additional Laws interdicting incestuous Copulation, and eating of Blood; of
both which we have spoken profess'dly in the Precepts of the Sons of Noah. Now
it is of this latter kind of Proselytes (as Abenesdras notes) that the Precept
here speaks, such as had not admitted the Seal of Circumcision, and whom St.
Luke (Act. 17. 4.) rightly enough calls [(...)] devout Greeks, because the
Hebrews used to call all Gentiles Greeks.

14. Why the Stranger was by this Law obliged to abstain from Labor upon the
Sabbath.
Here it may be inquired, Why such a stranger or Proselyte, though not obliged
by other Laws of Moses, as appears from Deuter. (4. 2.) was yet bound to keep
this of resting from Labors upon the Sabbath. The reason is this; if while the
Hebrews rested, strangers had been permitted promiscuously to work and dispatch
their businesses; they would have diverted the stream of gain and profit from
the Natives; which was repugnant to Justice and Equity. (...) is to the Latins
Incola, a Sojourner, one that fixes his Seat in a Soil not Native to him. Thus
in the Gospel of St. Luke (24. 18.) (...), thou art a Peregrine or Stranger.

(...); For in Six days the Lord made Heaven, 15. Why God made the Universe in
Six days.
and Earth, and the Sea, and all things that are in them. A brief description
of the Universe, as in Acts. 4. 24. At first the Earth was rude and without
Form, (...), mud, to the Phaenicians, intermixed and overwhelmed with waters,
which is called (...), the abyss or bottomless Gulf. Of these God made the
Earth dry Land, gathered together the Seas, and distinguished the Air into two
Parts, the Superior or Aetherial, wherein he placed the Stars; and the
Inferior, which surrounds the Terraqueous Globe: then to this lower Air, to
the Earth, and to the Waters he added their proper Animals; and particularly to
the Earth he affixed Herbs, Trees, etc. and in fine, He made Man: And all in
Six days, though He could have made them in one Moment, that He might by His
Example, teach Men to act with counsel and deliberation, and [(...)] to hasten
slowly.

(...); And he rested upon the Seventh day. 16. What is to be understood by His
resting upon the Seventh day,
The sense is taken from Genes. 2. 2. By (...), requievit, is signified, not
that God was weary with working, whereof the Divine Nature is incapable; but
that He ceased from Creating, or put an end to all His Works: converting
Himself to the survey and contemplation of the most beautiful World He had
newly raised and made out of Nothing; as Philo excellently observes. From Gods
Example the Hebrews also were commanded to devote this day to pious
Contemplation, and the learning and commemorating Sacred things. Of which pious
Custom there remains an ancient Testimony in 2 Kings, 4. 23. and the number
Seven was called (...), more anciently (...), from (...), Worshipping.

17. How the true Seventh or Sabbatical day was first made known to the Hebrews.
Concerning this Seventh day, by Philo (Lib. de vita Mosis) called [(...)] The
Worlds Birth day, various are the Opinions of the Jewish Masters. Some think
that the Septenary period of days was first Instituted by Adam, and began from
the six days of the Creation. Others affirm, That Seth found out the way of
computing the flux of time by Weeks, Months, and Years. But however disputable
this Question be, highly probable it is, That Philo hit the white of Truth,
when he observed, that the true Seventh or Sabbatical Day came first to be
known to the Hebrews from the Miraculous cessation of Manna to rain upon that
Day: whence 'twas easy for them to understand, what day in the weekly Circle
of Seven Days ought to be reckoned the Seventh from the Creation, which was
altogether unknown to them before.

The same most Learned and wise Jew, 18. The honor of the number Seven,
derived from the Egyptian Mathematicians.
treating [(...)] Of the Making of the World, and of the Number Seven, says,
That this Number has been held of singular honor by the more Illustrious of
the Greeks and Barbarians; who were versed in Mathematick Studies. And
certainly the Egyptians were the most Ancient Masters of the Mathematics, by
whom, both Pythagoras and Plato being taught, have very subtly Philosophiz'd
concerning the power and dignity of the Septenary Number in general, which the
Greeks call (...). This Number (says A. Gellius from old Varro) makes in
Heaven the Septentriones or Charle's wain, and lesser Constellation of the same
Name; also the Pleiades, and the Seven Planets. Nor does the Zodiac want
Characters of that noble Number. For in the seventh sign is made the Solstice
from Winter, or the shortest Day in the year, and again, from the Summer
Solstice in the seventh Sign is made the Winter Solstice. Both Equinoxes are
confined to a Seventh Sign. Whence in the Sacred Rites of Osiris, a little
before the Winter Solstice, Plutarch tells us (in Iside. page 372.) the
Egyptians used to lead a Cow Seven times about the Temple, because the Course
of the Sun from Solstice to Solstice is finished in the Seventh Month. And they
affirm, That all the great dangers of the Life and Fortunes of Men, which the
Chaldeans call Climactericks, happen in Septenaries: of which abstruse Argument
Clemens Alexandrinus (Stromat. l. 6. page 685.) and Macrobius (in Somn.
Scipionis) have written copiously, and with no less assurance, than if they had
certainly known that there are such Climacterical Mutations of human Life. In
Sacred things also, in Purifications, Invocations, and other religious Rites,
the Septenary Number has been esteemed of singular virtue and solemn
observation. Whence Apuleius describing the manner and ceremonies of his
preparation for the Worship of Isis (Metamorphos. l. 9. Initio) says, Me,
purificandi studio, marino lavacro trado, septies submerso fluctibus capite;
quod eum numerum praecipue Religioni aptissimum divinus ille Pythagoras
prodidit. And Virgil (Aeneid. 6. verse. 645.) testifies that invocations also
were to be Seven times repeated.

-- Longa cum vest Sacerdos
Obloquitur numeris Septem discrimina vocum.
Of the Septenary Number of Days, 19. The Septenary number of days observed by
Gentiles in their Feasts
they observe, That the monthly Course of the Moon is performed in four times
Seven, i. e. in Twenty eight days; that the Birth of Infants depends very much
upon the power of this Number: and they observe the first Seven days, the
Fourth week, and the Seventh; as A. Gellius. And from the Scholiast upon
Aristophanes we learn (in Plut. p. 107.) that by the Athenians some certain
days of every Month, besides other Feasts or Holy Days, were Consecrated to
some Gods particularly; as the New Mood, and the Seventh to Apollo, The Fourth
to Mercury, the Eighth to Theseus. The same was long before taught by Hesiod in
this distich: Primum prima, quarta, and septima dies sacra est:
Hac enim Apollinem auri-ensem genuit Latona.


In the Mosaic Rites also the Septenary Number is solemnly respected. 20. The
Number Seven of solemn respect in the Mosaic Rites and in other Mysteries.
In the Consecration of the Altar, Oil is Seven times sprinkled upon it: in
Seven days the Consecration of Priests is Consummated: in the Expiation of Sin
committed through ignorance, the blood of the Bullock is sprinkled by the
Priest Seven times before the Mercy-seat ( Levit. 16. 15.) A woman that has
brough forth a Male Child, is unclean Seven days: She that has brought forth a
Female, is unclean twice Seven. A man unclean by touching a dead Corpse, is
expiated upon the Seventh day. In the purification of a Leprous Man, Seven
aspersions, and Seven days are Ordained: and accordingly Naaman washed himself
Seven times in Jordan. Job offered for his friends Seven Bulls, and as many
Rams. Balaam built Seven Altars, and prepared Seven Bullocks, and Seven Rams.
Seven Priests sounding Trumpets went Seven times round about Jericho, and on
the Seventh day the Walls thereof fell down. Just so many Priests sounded with
Trumpets before the Ark, and an equal number of Bulls and Rams were offered in
Sacrifice. Ezechias also offered Seven Bulls, Seven Rams, Seven Lambs, and
Seven Hee-goats (2 Chronicles. 29. 21.) In Ezechiel (39. 9.) Arms and Weapons are
commanded to be burnt with fire Seven years: and the Land purged in Seven
months; and ( Chapt. 43. 25.) the Altar is in Seven days expiated. Daniel
numbers the times by Hebdomadas. In the Apocalypse, the Book is sealed with
Seven Seals, the Lamb has Seven horns, Seven Eyes, which are the Seven spirits
of God; and to the Seven Angels are given Seven Trumpets, and Seven Phials. In
a Word, in Mysteries this Number as the most perfect; has always been
preferred to all other.

But the most celebrated, 21. The weekly Circle of Days, derived by the
Egyptian Astrologers from the Seven Planets.
and to our present enquiry the most pertinent, is the Septenary Cycle or round
of days, or the Seventh day in the weekly periods of days perpetually
recurrent; such as is the Sabbath of the Jews. The Egyptians, the most ancient
computers of times, are reported by Authors of good Credit, to have derived the
weekly Circle of days from the number of the Planets, and to have propagated
that account of time, together with their Astrological Discipline. For
Herodotus recounting the noble Inventions of that mighty Nation, says ( in
Lib. 2. c. 82.) Alia etiam ab Egyptiis inventa sunt: quis Mensis, and quis Dies
cujusque sit Deorum: and quo quis die genitus, qualia sortietur, and quam
mortem obiet, and qualis existet. Quibus rebus usi sunt ii qui e Graecis in
poesi versabantur. Where Dies Deorum are the days of the Week, denominate from
the VII Planets: for in the Genethliac Art of the Egyptians, they obtain the
name of Gods, and every Planet has his peculiar Holy Day assigned to him: and
therefore Dio Cassius the Greek Historian ( lib. 36. page 37.) said truly, Quod
vero dies assignantur Septem Planetis, id certe inventum est Egyptiorum.

But in the denomination of the Seven days, 22. Bede's reason why in the
planetary denomination of the Seven days of the week, the natural order of the
Planets was not observed.
they have not observed the order of the Planets, that is in the series of the
celestial Orbs. Whereof various Writers have excogitated various causes. Of
all these, the reason given by our Venerable Bede seems to be the most simple,
and therefore the best. The Gentiles (says he, de Tempor. ratione cap. 6.)
though that they by good right consecrated the first day to the Sun, because it
is the greatest Luminary; the second to the Moon, because it is the second
Luminary. Then by an ordinate alternation, they made the first Planet from the
Sun, Mars, president of the third day, the first from the Moon, Mercury, Lord
of the fourth; the second from the Sun, Jupiter, ruler of the fifth; the Second
from the Moon, Venus, Lady of the sixth; and the third from the Sun, Saturn,
governor of the Seventh.

Now because this Saturn was by Astrologers imagined to be a sad, 23. Why
Saturn was made Lord of the Seventh day.
ill-natured, and malignant planet; therefore the Seventh day, in which he
ruled, has been accounted a black and unlucky day (forsooth) and unfit for
business and the performing of any work, and so set apart for leisure and rest.
Nor have Orpheus and Hesiod doubted to propagate this precarious and
superstitious Doctrine. To which Tacitus, writing of the Jews, seems to have
respect in these lines: Septimo die otium placuisse ferunt; quia is finem
Laborum tulerit. Alii honorem eum Saturno haberi; seu quod e septem sideribus
(queis mortales reguntur) altissimo orb, and praecipua potentia, stella
Saturni feratur; ac pleraque coelestium vim suam and cursum per septenos
numeros conficiant.

But whatever was the reason that induced the Egyptians to assign the Seventh
day to Saturn, 24. The Antiquity of the planetary denomination of the Seven
days: and conclusion of this chapter.
we have none to doubt but that this Planetary denomination of the days, though
not received into use by the Grecians till many Ages after, is originally of
remotest antiquity, equal to that of Astrology it self, and to the age of
Mercury the first, who taught the Egyptians the art of computing the year and
times. For beside the auctority of Herodotus and Dio Cassius above cited, we
have that of Plato also; who (in Phaedro) introduces Socrates speaking of the
Egyptian Theuth, i. e. Mercury; these words, (...), etc. that is, That he first
invented numbers and computation, and Geometry and Astronomy, and the Games of
Cockle-blanck and Dice. Nor are there wanting some of the Rabbis themselves,
who have granted that this denomination of the days was in use among the
Gentiles before the Decalogue was given. And Chaeremon in Porphyry (de
Abstinentia) affirms, that the Egyptian Priests, in their purifications
observed the Seventh days. We may therefore acquiesce in this persuasion, that
the weekly Cycle of days was taken from Mathematick discipline, and from the
most secret treasury of Egyptian Antiquity: but that the sacred observation of
every Seventh day, and the Feast of the Hebdomadical Sabbath, constituted by
this Mosaic Law, in memory of the Egyptian servitude, was now first received
into the Religion of the Hebrews; as also that this their Sabbath was by the
miracle of Manna ceasing to rain down upon that day, fixed upon the true Seventh
day from the Creation, which God had from the beginning sanctified. Nor is it
to be doubted but that this Precept of keeping holy the Sabbath day, was
peculiar to the Israelites. For God himself was pleased to say ( Exodus 31. 13.)
it is a Sign betwixt me and you in your Generations; that ye may know that I am
the Lord who sanctify you. Ye shall therefore keep the Sabbath; for to you it
is holy. Nor will the Masters allow it to have pertained to the Gentiles. Some
exempt even Proselytes of the House from the obligation of this Precept; but
how that exemption can be brought to consist with those words of the Law
[(...)] and the stranger that is within thy Gates, I see not.

CHAP. VI. The Fifth Precept explicated.
(...) etc. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, etc.
Article 1. That this Precept was anciently observed by the Egyptians, the
Pythagoreans, and
THat this Precept (among those that are as it were imprinted upon the mind of
man by Nature, and Legible by the light of right reason, not the least) was
first given to the Israelites in Marah; we have the Authority of the Babylonian
Gemara, where ( in titulo Sanhedrin. cap. 7. sect. 5.) we read; December praecepta
acceperunt Israelitae, in Mara: Septem quae Noachidarum fuere; jam vero adjecta
sunt Iudicia, Sabbatum, and parentum honos. That it obtained among the
Egyptians also, and was by them placed next after the Precept of divine
Worship; is evident from the funeral Apology used among them, wherein the
Libitinarius personating the defunct, says, (...), that is, I have ever
honored those who begat my body. And that the same was taught also in the
School of Pythagoras, who learned all his Doctrines from the Egyptian Priests;
is equally manifest from the Golden Verses, where immediately after the precept
of Worshipping the Godsfollows, (...), and honor thy Parents.

But long before the days of Pythagoras was this Law placed in the Temple of
Ceres Eleusinia, 2. the Athenians.
if we may confide in the testimony of Porphyry, who (from Hermippus) in De
Abstinentia, p. 1. and 399. says, as St. Ierom has translated the place
(Iovinian. l. 2. p. 528. Xenocrates Philosophus de Triptolemi legibus apud
Athenienses tria tantum praecepta in templo Eleusinae residere scribit:
honorandos Parents, venerandos Deos, carnibus non vescendum. And Socrates in
Xenophon. (Memorabil. l. 2. p. 743.) says, Civitas ingratitudinis alterius
rotionem non habet, neque datur actio in eam: verum si quis Parents non
honorarit, and actio adversus eum scribitur, and Magistratum capessere non
permittitur. For, in the [(...)] inquisition made into the manners and life of
those who were to be admitted to Magistracy, they were interrogated first, if
they were descended for three generations at least on both sides from Athenian
Citizens? and Secondly, if they had duly honored their Parents? Because he
that is impious toward his Parents, cannot be judged pious toward his Country.
Nor toward God neither, says Menander in this distick, Qui patrem incilat,
voce maledicit patri:
At in hoc se parat at ipsi maledicat Deo.


To return to the Egyptians; 3. Honor and reverence given by the Egyptians
even to the dead bodies of their Parents.
doubtless the Sons among them showed all Signs of filial respect and honor to
their Fathers while they lived, since they piously venerated them even after
their decease, and paid a kind of religious reverence to their dead bodies, to
that end preserved by precious Embalmments; as if death could not cancel their
bonds of gratitude, nor fate extinguish their Sentiments of natural piety.
Whence that honorable testimony given of them by the Prince of Antiquaries,
Diodorus the Sicilian (lib. 1. page 58.) Sanctissime receptum est inter
Egyptios, ut appareant Parents aut Majores, ad eternam habitationem
translatos, impensius honorasse. Whereto he adds, that it was Lawful for them,
in case of necessity to pawn the dead bodies of their Parents: but those who
redeemed them not, were punished with highest infamy and contempt during life,
and after death with privation of Sepulture.

Nor were the Egyptians the only Nation that taught and urged obedience and
honor to Parents, 4. Other Nations also honored Parents.
from the dictates of Nature. For the grave Plutarch (de Philadelphia) says,
Omnes dicunt atque canunt, primum ac praecipuum honorem post Deos, Parentibus
destinasse and Naturam, and Naturae legem. Nor is there is the whole World any
People so Barbarous and Savage, but by mere natural instinct they understand,
that honor and reverence are due to Parents.

Wisely therefore did Philo Iudaeus account this Precept now confirmed at the
5. Excellency and usefulness of this Law.
promulgation of the Decalogue, the last of the first Table, and placed in
confinio utriusque His reason this; Natura Parentum videtur esse confinium
immortalis and mortalis essentiae. Immortal, because a Father by begetting
resembles God the Genitor of all things: and in the violation of it he puts the
highest inhumanity, most detestable to God and man; feritatis primas ferunt,
qui Parents negligunt. And in truth this Law is the cement of human society.
For he that loves and reveres his Parents, will requite their care with good
education of his Children, love his Brethren and Sisters as branches of the
same Stock with himself, cherish and assist all his kindred as descendent from
the same progenitors: whence flows that whole Series of consanguinity and
natural relation; and whence was the most ancient Original of Nations, Cities,
and Towns, when Tribes and numerous Families conjoined themselves into
Societies under the Government of their Heads. After this, when men convened
from many places, they began by common consent to constitute Kings and
Governors, by the example of Parents, to whom the ancients therefore gave the
most proper and obliging name of Fathers. For which reason in the Roman Laws,
and in those of other nations, the crime of Majesty, which we call High
Treason, is put before all other crimes, as most pernicious to the peace and
safety of the Commonwealth: and for the same reason is this Precept of
Honoring Parents put before the rest that respect human society.

Here God has been pleased to name (and certainly as He is the Author of
Nature, 6. The right of Mothers to honor and reverence from their Children.
and maker of all Children in the Mothers Womb, so is He the most equal Judge)
the Mother as well as the Father. Whereas the Laws of this kind made by Men,
provide almost for Fathers only; as the Persian Law commemorated by Aristotle,
and the Roman described in the Digests and Institutions, mentioned first by
Epictetus, then by Simplicius, and Philo (de legatione) And though ( in
collisu) the right of the Father be the better, by reason of the prevalency of
his Sex, for which God gave the Husband dominion over the Wife: yet certainly
obedience and reverence, which are here signified by the word Honor, are from
Children due to both. In the same word is comprehended also the duty of
Thankfulness and a grateful requital, as much as in Children lies; for indeed
a full requital can never be made to Parents for the great blessing of
existence and life given by them to Children; as both Aristotle and Philo have
observed: quomodo enim ab aliquibus genitus eos vicissim generare possit? And
as God was pleased, for man's imitation, to impress upon mute Animals visible
characters of almost all virtues, of justice, clemency, chastity, fidelity,
friendship, etc. not of all in all, but of each in particular species: so has
He given for an example of filial love and piety, to men the Storks which
sustain and nourish their Parents, when they are grown old and weak.

For this also is comprehended in the first word of this Precept [(...)]
Honor, 7. Children by this Law obliged to relieve their Parents in want.
which in its chief sense signifies to nourish, as appears from the 1 Timothy
5. 3. Honor Widows that are Widows indeed, i. e. relieve their wants, and
contribute to their maintenance. And so the Hebrews interpret that text in
Numbers 22. 17. I will promote thee unto very great honor. So Cicero
(Officior. 1.) treating of duties to Kindred and near relations, says,
Necessaria praesidia vitae debentur his maxim. And Hierocles, (...): i. e. We
shall highly honor Parents, if we most readily serve them with the Ministry of
our body, and the help of money.

Here I cannot but take notice of a strange distinction made betwixt Sons and
Daughters, by the Egyptians in their Law of nourishing Parents laboring of old
age or poverty, and recorded by Herodotus (l. 2. 35.) Nulla est necessitas
filiis alendi parents, nolentibus: sed filiabus summa, etiamsi nolint. Sons
are under no necessity to feed and sustain their Parents, against their own
will: but Daughters are most strictly bound to nourish them, though against
their will. An odd Law this, to impose the burden upon the weaker Sex, and
exempt the stronger; and the more admirable to me, because no reason is added
to it by Herodotus, nor can I fix my conjecture upon any that is probable.

(...), That it may be well with thee. This is here added out of Deuteronomy,
for explication sake; or perhaps ascribed on the margin from that place in
Epist. to the Ephesians, 6. 1. 3. many such additional clauses being found in
the Scripture.

(...), That thou may live long. 8. Longaevity, the reward of filial
reverence.
Here Abenesdras notes, that God is wont, when He forbids any thing, to annex
the penalty; where He commands, the reward, as in this place. But St. Paul in
the just now cited place to the Ephesians, notes this more, that this is the
first Commandment with promise. The Law in direct words promises only temporal
felicity, as St. Ierom observes ( l. 2. Commentar. in Epist. ad Galat. and 1.
Dialog. contra Pelagium,) and St. Austin (de Civit. Dei l. 10. cap. 15.) And of
temporal felicity the principal part is long life. Which is generally promised
to those that keep the Law, as in Levit. 18. 5. and 25. 18. and in Deuter. 6.
17. 18. and in Ezech. 20. 11. some expound the Hebrew words, That they may
prolong thy days, namely thy Parents by their favor and prayers to God. But I
fear lest this interpretation be too Subtle, and adhere rather to the Seventy
and other Interpreters, who take the Hebrew word, though of an active form, in
a passive sense; viz. That thy days may be prolonged. To Absalom violating this
precept, his days were cut off or shortened.

(...), Upon the Earth, or in the Land. Life in exile, is not life, but a long
death. Therefore God promises to obsequious and dutiful Children a long life,
and that too at home in their own Country. And Ezechiel enumerating the causes
of deserved exile, puts the contempt of Parents in the head of the Catologue;
chap. 27.

(...), The good Land. This also has been added from Deuteronomy. 8. 7. but
deservedly. For that Land was in those days truly good and singularly fertile,
abounding with Milk, Honey, and Corn, and other Fruits; and the only Land that
produced Balsam, which it continued to do in good plenty down to the days of
Pliny, who therefore praised it, and does even at this time though in less
quantity.

(...), Which the Lord thy God will give thee. 9. The Penalty added to this Law.
The present for the future, as (...), who will come, Matthew. 3. 2. It must be
something great and highly estimable, that God confers as a donative upon the
posterity of those whom he loved above all others, and to whom he promised to
give it. But as God promises great blessings to those that observe this
Precept: so on the contrary He threatens grievous punishment to those that
contemn and revile their Parents, namely death by decree of the Judge, if the
matter be by sufficient testimonies proved against them, Exodus 21. 15. 17.) and
if the matter be not brought to public notice, divine wrath ( Deuteronomy. 27. 16.)
than which nothing is more dreadful, and from which Good Lord deliver us.

CHAP. VII. The Sixth Precept explicated.
(...), Thou shall not commit Adultery.
IN the Hebrew this Precept is placed next after that against Murder, and the
Greek Copies also now keep the same order in the rehearsal of the Decalogue in
Deuteronomy. But lest any should think this transposition of these two Precepts
a thing recent, I must observe, that Philo in his time read them, as we now do;
and that he gives this reason for it [(...)] that among unjust facts Adultery
is the greatest. And again after he has with admirable eloquence described the
many evil consequents of this crime, he says, Merito Deo and hominibus exosa
res adulterium inter crimina ordinem ducit, meaning the crimes that are
injurious to men. Nor did the ancient Christians read them otherwise, following
the Greek Codes; as appears from Tertullian (de pudicitia) who says, Eo
amplius praemittens, Non maechaberis, adjungit, non occides. Oneravit utique
maechiam, quam homicidio anteponit, etc. Wherefore whenever the Ancients bring
in these Precepts in another order, they bring them out of Deuteronomy, not out
of this place of Exodus. Let us then, since we may do so without injury to the
diligence of the Masorets, follow the Greek Edition, which we have taken into
our hands, and which may be defended not only by its antiquity, but also by
this probable reason, That many of the Hebrew Women preferred Chastity to life;
and that in the judgment of Aristotle, the crimes that proceed from the desire
of pleasure, are more heinous than those that come from anger.

Abenesdras thinks, that by the word (...), he has committed Adultery, all
unlawful Venery; and simple Fornication is signified: but we find, that among
the Hebrews that word is everywhere taken only in the sense of Adultery, and
so translated in this and other places, by the Greek, Latin and other
Interpreters. True it is indeed, that in the Mosaic Law there is an interdict,
that there should be no Whores in the People of Israel; and that Incests, and
Marriages with strange Women that worshipped false Gods, and the Portenta
Veneris or unnatural lusts, are also strictly prohibited. But there was nothing
of necessity that in so brief a Decalogue all the crimes that were afterward to
be interdicted, should be mentioned, when it was enough that those were touched
upon, that might most hurt either piety, or human society. So there is no
mention made of wounds inflicted, but of murder, which of all kinds of violence
offered to the bodies of men is the greatest. In these words therefore is
properly comprehended both the Wife that yields the use of her body to any
other man besides her Husband, and the man that polutes another Wife. Both are
condemned to suffer death, Levit. 20. 10. Which punishment the Christian
Emperors, Constans and Constantius long after introduced into the Roman Empire,
as appears from the Theodosian Code. Nor is this capital punishment to be
thought more severe than Equity requires, if we well consider that
Commonwealths arise from, and are conserved by marriages, that their very
foundations are shook by Adultery, that conjugal love is converted into mutual
hatred, that inheritances are alienated to a spurious issue, while the right
Heir is supplanted; that whole houses are filled with reproaches and feuds,
which descend to posterity; and not seldom break forth into public miseries
and destruction. Of these dire mischiefs, and a hundred other (too many to be
here in this brief and desultory discourse particularly mentioned) sad and
tragical examples occur in almost all Histories, whether ancient or modern: and
the consideration of them made Epicurus, in the Moral Sentences ascribed to
him, to say, What evil does it not draw upon a man, to desire to have to do
with a Woman, whose company is interdicted to him by the Laws? Doubtless a wise
man must be deterred from admitting such a design into his thoughts, if not by
the manifest injustice thereof, yet at least by the great solicitude of mind
requisite to obviate the many and great dangers that threaten him in the
pursuit of it: it being found true by daily experience, that those who attempt
to enjoy forbidden Women, are frequently rewarded with wounds, death,
imprisonment, exile, and other grievous punishments. Whence it comes, that for
a pleasure which is but short, little, and not necessary to nature, and which
might have been either otherwise enjoyed or wholly omitted, men too often
expose themselves to very great pain, danger, or at best, late and bitter
repentance.

CHAP. VIII. The Seventh Precept explicated.
(...), Thou shall not Kill.
THat in the Books of our time this Precept has been unduly placed after that
against Theft, Article. 1. Murder a Crime against God, Nature, and Civil Laws.
Philo, Tertullian, and others clearly show. Philo says truly, That he who
commits Homicide, is guilty also of Sacrilege, in that he violates the Image
of God: and then he most hainously sins against Society, to which all Men are
born, and which cannot consist, if Innocence be not safe from Violence. Since
Nature has instituted a certain Cognation betwixt us, it is a genuine
consequence, says Florentinus most wisely, that for one man to lie in wait for
the blood of another, is a high Crime against the Law of Nature. Then again, he
that assumes to himself that power over the Life of another, how nocent soever,
which the Law attributes only to the Judge, violates the Civil Laws. So that
Homicide is a Crime against the Majesty of God, against the Law of Nature, and
against the Laws of Humane Society, or Civil Government.

But by the Verb [(...)] to Kill, is here signified, 2. Exempts from this Law.
not every act by which the Life of another is taken away, but the unlawful
Act, which is wont to be the sense of the Hebrew word, [(...)] He has
Murdered. What therefore is done in defense of Life or Chastity, is exempt from
this Law, by that of Exodus 22. 2. and Deuteronomy. 22. 26. So are other Killings that
the Law permits, as the Killing of him that attempts to seduce to the Worship
of strange Gods, Deuteronomy. 25. 6, 7, 8. And the Killing of an Homicide is permitted
to the Revenger of Blood, who was the next of Kin to the person slain. The same
is to be said also of those who have received from God a special mandate to
Kill some Peoples or Men. For there is no injury in what God commands, who has
by highest right most Absolute Dominion of the Life and Death of all Men, even
without cause Given. Of the Right of Zealots, derived from the Example of
Phineas the Son of Eleazar (Numb. 25. 11.) we have formerly spoken in Art. 6.
of Chap. 6. of the former part of this Disquisition.

CHAP. IX. The Eighth Precept explained.
(...). Thou shall not Steal.
UNder the Name of Theft is comprehended all subduction or taking away of the
Goods of another, Article. 1. Theft, injurious to private Men, and hurtful to
the Public.
whether it be done by force, or by fraud. Society, to which (as was just now
said) all Men are born, cannot subsist, unless every Man's Possessions be in
safety. He therefore that either by open Violence, or by privy Stealing, takes
any thing from a private Man; at the same time both wrongs him, by invading his
Propriety; and hurts the Commonwealth, by dissolving the common Ligament or
bond of it, which is the safety of every Man's private Right or Propriety. Nor
is it to be doubted, but he that indulges to himself that license, would, if he
could, invade all things of all Men, and by open Force make the Commonwealth
his own. For Injustice strengthened by Power, becomes Tyranny. Therefore,

2. The necessity and utility of this interdict.
The Seeds of so great and pernicious an evil were to be early oppressed, and
the diligence of all Men to be excited to Labors, by Faith made to them, that
they should quietly keep, possess and enjoy whatsoever they by their honest
Pains, Art, and Industry acquired. To admit Theft, says Paul the learned Roman
Lawyer, is prohibited by Law Natural. And Vlpian says, that Theft and Adultery
are by Nature shameful and odious. 3. Theft of a Man, capital among the Hebrews.


By the Mosaic Law, the Panishments of Theft were various, according to the
quality and valor of the things stolen, and some other Circumstances. But
Theft of the most precious thing, of a Man, which the Latins call Plagium, was
punished with Death. Exodus 21. 16. and Deuteronomy. 24. 7. Which Abenesdras, in his
Notes upon this Precept, will have to be understood only de Puero, of a Boy or
Child that cannot speak. Theft of a Man was interdicted also by the Roman Law,
F. F. de furtis 37. 60. So it is by our Law, which makes it Felony.

CHAP. X. The Ninth Precept explicated.
(...). Thou shall not speak against thy Neighbor a false Testimony.
Neighbor here is, Article 1. Who is here to be understood by Neighbor.
an Israelite of the same Country; as appears from Exodus 11. 13. and Levit. 19.
18. Where it is said, Thou shall not stand against the Blood of thy Neighbor.
Which according to the Interpretation of the Masters is, Thou shall not stand
an idle Spectator when an Israelite one of thy own Nation, is Assaulted, and
his Life in danger, but help to deliver him from the Aggressor. And to this
Neighbor is opposed [(...)] an Enemy. But in the Gospel, Neighbor is every
Man of whatsoever Nation or Country, as in St. Luke 10. 33. Where the good
Samaritan is by Christ Himself declared to be Neighbor to the Jew that was
wounded by Robbers: and before the Law of Moses, all men were Neighbors, as is
hinted in Genes. 11. 3. And they said one to another, i. e. in the Hebrew, A
Man said to his Neighbor.

The Hebrew word here Englished speak, 2. The form of Adjuration used by the
Hebrew Judges to Witnesses and to the Accused.
properly signifies to give answer to an Interrogation; and in that sense we
take it, for Witnesses were wont to be solemnly Sworn or adjured, i. e. By an
Oath Administered and taken by the most Holy Name of God, excited to give true
Testimony in the matter under enquiry before the Judge, who Administered the
Oath: and then to answer the Questions by him proposed. So are we to understand
that of Levit. 5. 1. And if a Soul sin, and [(...)] hear the Voice of
Adjuration, and is a Witness, etc. The Party Accused was also Adjured by the
Judge in the Name of God: of which ancient Custom we have an Example in Joshua
7. 19. and in Matthew. 26. 63. And the form of Interrogating and Adjuring the
Accused was, [(...)] Give Glory to God; as in the Examination of Achan by
Joshua, My Son, give Glory to the Lord God of Israel, and make Confession unto
him, and tell me now what thou have done. Hence some Learned Men with good
Reason Collect, That Achan was not without hope, That the Souls of Men survive
their Bodies, and remain after Death to Eternity. For by what other hope could
he be brought to confess himself guilty of a Crime, which he knew to be capital
without Pardon? nor could he be ignorant of the common persuasion of the
Hebrews, that by Confession and Death, full forgiveness of such Crimes might be
impetrated or obtained from God. This form of Adjuration was used by the
Prophets and Judges of the Great Sanhedrin constituted by God, as has been
rightly observed by Grotius (ad Ioannis cap. 9. verse. 24.) and in the Thalmudic
Digests ( titulo De Synedrio) Simeon one of the Senators thus spoke to King
Iannaeus; Non stas coram nobis, sed coram eo qui dixit, Fiat and factus est
Mundus. Sometimes this form indeed was expressed in other words, but the same
sense was still retained: as in 1 Kings 22. 16. [(...)] I Adjure thee to speak
to me the Truth in the Name of the Lord.

Now this Crime of bearing false Witness, which is here prohibited, 3. False
Testimony, a heinous Crime.
is also heinous and execrable in various respects. First because Verity, which
is as it were another Sun among Men, is thereby violated and brought into
Contempt. Then because the Guilty are helped and Absolved, and the Innocent
hurt and oppressed; both which are against the rules of Justice. In fine,
because a false Witness deceives and mocks the Judge, who is Gods Vicegerent;
and doubtless would do the same to God Himself also, if he were not above all
Illusion.

The Punishment appointed by the Law of Moses for a false Witness, 4. The
Punishment of a False Witness among the Hebrews.
was most apposite, namely what the Latins call poenam talionis, i. e. an Evil
equal to that which the Person against whom the false Witness gave Testimony,
might have suffered, in case the Testimony had imposed upon the Judge: so that
the Punishment might reach even to death, if the Party accused were upon Trial
for Life.

CHAP. XI. The Tenth Precept explicated.
(...). Thou shall not covet thy Neighbor's Wife, nor his House.
BY the Word (...), to desire, Article 1. What is here meant by Concupiscence,
according to the interpretation of the Hebrew Masters.
here most fitly used by the Greek Interpreters, is signified, not every sudden
motion of the Mind, or [(...)] Fantasy exciting the Mind, as Philo speaks,
but the Passion or disease of the Mind called Lust, when a Man resigns up the
conduct of his Will to that sensual desire, and pursues the Object of it; or as
the Poet pathetically expresses the Passion, Vulnus alit venis, and caeco
carpitur igne. Seneca (de ira Lib. 2. cap. 4.) calls the former, a Motion not
voluntary, a stroke of the Mind that cannot be declined by Reason: the latter
he says, arises from judgment, and is by judgment to be taken away. Of this
moreover he makes two degrees; one, that is not yet obstinate, but vincible by
reason; the other, that already Triumphs over the Understanding, and leads the
Will captive in Chains of impotent desire.

In the Old Testament also we find the 2. Acts indirectly tending to the
gratification of lusts, interdicted by this Precept.
Hebrew words here used to express Concupiscence, most frequently to denote,
not those first and indeclinable Motions alone, but the permanent study and
fixed purpose to obey, cherish, and gratify them; as in Michaea 2. Yea, more in
this place seem to be noted, the Acts by which the Wife or House etc. of
another man is indirectly coveted; such are the sowing or fomenting of discord
and animosities betwixt Husband and Wife, whence follows Divorce; promoting
Suits at Law, and other Artifices of concealed iniquity. And this to me seems
to be the reason why St. Mark (10. 19.) expounds this Precept by [(...)] ne
fraudem feceris, defraud not: which both the order of the Laws there recited
shows, and because [(...)] Thou shall not Steal, went before.

But although this may seem to be the sense of this Precept [(...)] in a
grosser Interpretation; 3. As also the simple purpose to fulfill them.
yet have Philosophers of the soundest judgment always held, that the mere
purpose in Lust or Coveting, though it never proceed to act, is sinful. Aelian
said wisely, non solum malus est, qui injuriam fecit, sed and qui facere
voluit, me quidem judice. Nay, Ovid himself, though no example of Chastity,
could say; Quae quia non licuit, non facit, illa facit
Vt jam servaris been corpus, adultera men's est.


Seneca the Father says the same thing, and with equal Elegancy; Incesta est
etiam sine stupro, quae cupit stuprum. The Son; Non immerito in numerum
peccantium refertur, quae pudicitiam timori praestitit, non sibi: and in
another place, of Crimes in general; Omnia scelera etiam ante effectum operis,
quantum culpae satis est, perfecta sunt. So Typhoninus the Lawyer Affirms, That
a Man is called an Adulterer Ex animi propositione sola, though he has never
actually corrupted any Mother of a Family. So also Porphyry (de Abstinentia
lib. 1.) Postquam factis abstinueris, abstinendum and motibus, ac maxim ipsis
animi morbis. Quid enim prodest factis absistere, si causis unde ea proeedunt
astrictus maneas.

These Philosophers then saw farther into the Nature of concupiscence, 4.
Concupiscence without effect, no Sin, according to the judgment of the Rabbis.
and required greater purity of mind, than the Jewish Masters that were in our
Savior's time, and a little before and after; who finding in the Mosaic Law no
penalty ordained for thoughts and desires of interverting the Wife or Goods and
possessions of another man, therefore deny that any sin is committed by the
Will alone, without any overt Act, unless in the case of worshipping false
Gods, because to such thoughts, Counsel, and purpose, a penalty was assigned,
and to no other. And that this was the judgment of most Rabbis, Abenesdras
notes at the beginning of the Decalogue: and Josephus certainly was of the
same, when treating of the Sacrilege designed by Antiochus, he said; non erat
paenae obnoxium consilium sine effectu. Nor would St. Paul, educated under such
Masters, have believed otherwise, had not a more exact and more Spiritual
consideration of the Law convinced him, and brought him to write ( Romans 7.
13.) that the Law being Spiritual, makes concupiscence in thought, though it
proceed no farther, sinful.

But what shall we Christians say of what our Savior prescribes to us in the
Gospel of St. Matthew (5.) that this Law, 5. But condemned by the Christians,
who are obliged to purity of mind.
which we now consider, was thereby only vindicated from an erroneous
interpretation; or that somewhat was aded unto it? The latter is more probable;
viz. that Christ prohibited not only a firm purpose and design to gratify our
lusts, but also the assent or yielding to the motions of them; which He
commands us to suppress and extinguish so soon as they are felt and perceived
within us, and to avoid all occasions that may foment them, which He teaches
very significantly, though in parable, by the casting away of Hand, Eye, and
Foot, i. e. by the loss of those things that are dear to us. Nor content to
have taught this purer Doctrine, He adds a more grievous penalty to
offenders, than any found in the old Law, namely that of Hell; whereas for such
delicts the Law of Moses prescribes no punishment at all, as the Masters
rightly observe. Certainly the ancient Christians held, that in the Gospel
somewhat more perfect is exacted, than what the Law expressly treats of.
Witness Tertullian. Nos ergo soli innocents? quid mirum, si necesse est?
Enimvero necesse est: innocentiam a Deo edocti, and perfect eam novimus, ut a
perfecto Magistro revelatam; and fideliter custodimus, ut ab incontemptibili
dispectore mandatam. Let us for example take that Precept of not lusting after
a Woman, which the Ancients thus explicate. Justin writing to Zena and Serenus,
says that [(...)] the first fume of this appetite is interdicted by Christ.
Athenagoras says; we are so far from thinking such things indifferent, that it
is not permitted to us to look upon a Woman with desire. Tertullian (de
velandis virginibus) a Christian beholds a Woman with safe Eyes: in mind he is
blind toward lust. And Minutius; ye punish wicked Acts; to us, but to think an
ill thought, is to sin. This more refined precept delivered by Christ, with
some other of like perfection, seemed so new, and so heavy withal to the Jews,
that Tryphon, the most learned and eloquent among them, doubted not to say to
Justin; Your Precepts in the Evangel I know to be so great and admirable, that
no man is I think, able to observe them: not considering what had been taught
by Christ ( Matthew. 19. 26.) With men this is impossible; to God all things are
possible. Namely Christ has obtained for those that believe in him, a more
certain faith of eternal life, and a Spirit much greater, than had ever before
been given to men: and then by His sufferings upon the Cross He gave us an
example most absolute; and that nothing is so hard at first, which may not by
exercise and a willing mind be made easy and familiar; as most of the Fathers
have noted upon that in St. Matthew (12. 30.) By this custom of repugning it
comes to pass, that those lustful motions by degrees subdued, dare no more rise
up within us. This is that noble and glorious victory by faith, of which St.
John speaks in his Epistle. c. 5. v. 45.

(...): Nor his field, nor his Manservant, 6. Not to covet any thing that
belongs to another, the Sum of all Moral Precepts.
nor his Maidservant, nor his Ox, nor his Ass, nor any Beast of his, nor any
thing that is thy Neighbors. Nor his Field, has crept hither from
Deuteronomy; and, nor any Beast of his, from the Precept of the Sabbath: for
neither is found in the Hebrew of this place. But these differences are of
little moment. Tertullian spoke all in a word, when he said, alienum non
concupisces, thou shall covet nothing that belongs to another; not the least
things ought to be excepted, lest by degrees men should go higher; nor the
greatest, because in such the virtue of justice is most resplendent. And
Aristotle being asked what was [To (...)] Just, answered, as became the Prince
of Philosophers, [To (...)] non concupiscere aliena; in which all Moral
Precepts are reduced to one.

CHAP. XII.
Evangelick Precepts conferred with those of the Decalogue.
IT was wisely observed by Philo, that the Masters of his Nation were wont to
referr to these ten Precepts of the Decalogue, which we have endeavored briefly
to explicate, whatsoever was contained in the whole Law of Moses: not that all
the Mosaic Institutes were comprehended in the words of the Ten Commandments,
but that these all pertain to certain kinds of actions, to which the rest may
be, for help of the memory, referred; as all things are by Philosophers
referred to Ten Categories or Predicaments, for more facility of teaching. This
very thing have the Christians also done, referring all Evangelic Precepts to
their respective places in the Decalogue: but they have done it much more fully
and perfectly, as being both endowed with a greater Spirit, and obliged by
their most noble faith and profession to exercise sublimer virtues.

Thus to the First head, which is [(...)] of Gods Unity and single Government,
they congruously refer, not only all those Doctrines of the Gospel that forbid
the least show or appearance of Worship exhibited to false Gods, delivered in
Acts 15. 20. and 29. in 1 Corinthians. 8. 10. in 1 John 5. 21. and particularly
expounded by Tertullian (in Apologetico) and the Ancient Canons: but also those
that Command the Unity of the Church most strictly to be observed, taught in
John 17. 3. and 21. in 1 Corinthians. 8. 6. and 12. 2. 18. 19. and 25. and in
Ephesians. 4. 5.

To the Second, which interdicteth Idols or Images, they refer all the
Evangelic; Precepts by which we are prohibited to addict our selves to, or fix
our affections upon things subject to sense, so as to prefer them before, or
equal them to God: such as are given in Matthew. 6. 24. in Ephesians. 5. 5. in
Coloss. 3. 5. in Philip. 3. 19. and in Romans 16. 17. Of which argument we may
read excellent things in St. Chrysostom, upon the fifth Chapter of the Epistle
to the Ephesians.

To the Third, of not swearing or vowing by Gods holy Name in vain, they refer
whatever we are taught in the New Testament concerning the great Reverence due
to the Divine Name, in Matthew. 6. 9. so great, that out of respect thereunto we
ought to abstain from all swearing, unless in matters highly pertaining to the
honor of God; as in Matthew. 5. 34. and James 5. 12.

To the Fourth, of keeping holy the Sabbath, they refer the Christians certain
hope of a most tranquil and happy life to come, assured by that in Hebrews 4.
from the First verse to the 11 th. Whereof a certain taste is in the mean time
given in that peace of Conscience which St. Paul so justly preferrs to all
other enjoyments in this transitory life, when ( Romans 5. 1, 2.) he says,
Being justified by faith, we have peace with God, etc.

To the Fifth, commanding honor to be given to Parents, the Christians refer
all the Evangelical Mandates of giving civil honor and obedience, within the
limits of Divine Commands, to Kings and Governors, and all that are put in
Authority under them. Such are given in Romans 13. from verse 1. to 8. in 1 Timothy
2. 1, 2, and 3. in 1 Pet. 2. 13. Of obedience to Masters, in Ephesians. 6. 3. and
Coloss. 3. 22. Of honor and obedience to Husbands, in 1 Corinthians. 11. 3. 1
Coloss. 3. 18. in 1 Pet. 3. 1, and 2. in 1 Timothy 2. 12. in Tit. 2. 9. Also to
Pastors or Ministers of the Gospel, in 1 Timothy 5. 17. in Hebr. 13. 17. and in 1
Pet. 5. 5. and to others of Eminent quality, in Romans 13. 7, and 8.

To the Sixth, by which Adultery is prohibited, are accounted the Evangelic
Interdicts against all sorts of unnatural lusts, all scortation or whoring, all
uncleanness and polution Venereal of whatsoever kind or degree: such as are
promulged in St. Matthew. 15. 19. in Mark 7. 21. in Acts 15. 20. in Romans 1. 19.
in 1 Cor. 6. 13. and 2 Cor. 12. 21. in Gal. 5. 19. in Ephesians. 5. 3. in Coloss.
3. 3. in 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3. and 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3. Also all Divorces, unless in the
case of Adultery, as in Matthew. 5. 32. and 19. 9.

To the Seventh, interdicting Homicide, are referred all animosities, anger,
hatred, and malice, the seeds of fights and murders, condemned and forbidden in
Matthew. 5. 22. 43, 44, 45. and the following comma's; in Ephesians. 4. 31. in Coloss.
3. 8. in 1 Timothy 2. 8. in James 1. 20. in 1 Ep. of John 3. 15. and in other
places of the New Testament.

To the Eighth, against Theft, are reduced those most equitable Precepts by
which Christians are, not only forbidden to infer any damage, loss or detriment
upon others, but obliged on the contrary to do good to all men, even to their
enemies, to the best of their faculties and power. Such we find in Matthew. 5.
44. in Luke 6. 35. in 1 Cor. 6. 7. and 8. in 2 Cor. 7. 2. in 2 Coloss. 3. 25.
in Ephesians. 2. in 1 Pet. 4. 18. in Romans 5. 14. in Galat. 5. 22. in 2 Thessalonians. 1. 11.

Under the Ninth by which it is made criminal to give a false Testimony, are
listed the Precepts by which we are commanded to shun all falsehood, lying, and
deceit in speech, and to be highly studious of veracity and faith in all
conversation, and transactions. Such are recorded in John 8. 44. Ephesians. 4. 24,
25, 26. 1 John 2. 21. Coloss. 3. 9. Romans 3. 4. 1 Timothy 1. 10. 1 Cor. 5. 8.

The Last prohibiting Concupiscence, is by Christians so far extended, as that
no permission is to be indulged to the motions of the mind that sead to
unlawful counsels, designs and actions; but that they ought to be checked and
extinguished, so soon as we perceive them to arise within us, as appears both
from the places already cited in 5 th. Art. of the Chapt. next precedent, and
in Mark 4. 19. Gal. 5. 24. 1 Pet. 2. 11. And this Mortification of our sensual
appetites, is what the Holy Scripture intends by crucifying, killing, and
putting off the old man; in Coloss. 3. 5. and 9. Romans 6. 6. Ephesians. 4, 22. and
what Lactantius (l. 6. c. 18.) advises when he says, Prius tamen quam
commotio illa prosiliat ad nocendum, quoad fieri potest maturius sopiatur. The
Three allurements of these sensual Motions are, Pleasure, Pride, Riches; in the
judgment of St. John (1 Epist. 2. 16, and 17.) To whom Philo consenting,
deduceth all Sins and Mischiefs [(...)] from one fountain, viz. the desire
either of Money, or of Honor, or of pleasure.

To conclude; the Sum of all the hitherto. recited Precepts, of the Mosaic
somewhat more obscurely indeed, and with many shadows intermixed; but of the
Evangelical most openly and brightly, is no more but this, that God be loved
above all things, and that every man be loved as our selves. This is the sole
scope, as of the Law and the Prophets, so also of the Gospel. Witness Psalm. 15.
Esai. 32. 15. Mich. 6. 8. Matthew. 22. 37, 38, 39, 40. Mark 12. 30, 31. Luke 10.
27. Romans 13. 8, 9, 10, and 11. 1 Cor. 8. 3. and 13. 2. Gal. 5. 14. 1 Timothy 1. 5.
1 Pet. 1. 22. Iam. 2. 8. 1 John 2. 10. and 3. 17. and 4. 7, 8, 9. and 2. 12.
20. By this Love faith is [(...)] operating, Gal. 5. 6. [(...)] and perfect,
Iam. 2. 22. Without it, and the works thereof, it is a dead Faith, Iam. 2. 20.
This Love therefore let us pray to God to give unto, and increase in us, for
His Sons sake, by the Holy Spirit. Amen.

From this Harmony of the Mosaic and Evangelic Laws, I might take occasion to
enquire also into the things in which these differ from and excel those; and
thence to show, how incomparably more noble in it self, and more agreeable to
the Spiritual Nature and proper affections of a Rational Soul, the Christian
Religion is, than the Iudaic, or any other hitherto known in the World. Which
would not be difficult to me to do, since various Arguments offer themselves to
every considering man, from the excellency of the Reward by God Himself
promised and infallibly assured to all true and sincere Professors of
Christianism, viz. eternal Life and immutable Felicity after a joyful
Resurrection: from the singular Sanctity of its Doctrine and Precepts, as well
concerning the true and most congruous Worship of God in Spirit, and from pure
Love, as concerning all the Offices of Humanity due from us to our Neighbor,
though our Enemy; the Mortification of all sensual Lusts and unjust desires,
nay the contempt of all temporal goods in comparison with eternal; from the
Divine Virtues, inculpable life, miraculous works, patient sufferings, and
certain Resurrection of Christ the Author of it: and in fine,-from the
wonderful Propagation thereof, whether we consider the infirmity, simplicity,
and obscurity of the Men that in the first times taught and diffused it, or the
mighty impediments that retracted their Hearers from embracing, or deterred
them from professing it. From all these Heads I might (I say) fully evince the
Excellency of our Religion. But because this matter is alien from my present
Theme, and principally because the same has been already treated by many
others of much greater ability than I can pretend unto, more professedly with
Philosophic subtility by Raimundus de Sebunde, with variety of Dialogues by
Ludovicus Vives, with solid erudition and charming Eloquence by Mornaeus, and
with inimitable gravity of judgment by Grotius: therefore I restrain my
unworthy Pen from profaning a verity so Sacred, and as well from its own
splendour as from the Light it has received from those Illustrious Writers, so
conspicuous; and acquiesce in the full persuasion thereof, wishing equal
conviction of mind to all Mankind.

APPENDIX. A short History of the Jews TALMVD.
Collected out of Josephus, Philo Judaeus, Bishop Walton's Prolegomena ad
Biblia Polyglotta, the Chronicus Canon of Sir John Marsham, etc.
HAving in the precedent shadow of a Book often cited the TALMVD or Pandects of
the Jews; and now presuming it to be possible, that those Papers, of how little
value soever in themselves, and however secretly kept by me in my life time,
may yet, after my Death, come into the hands of some men, who are not perhaps
so conversant in those Greek and Latin Authors who have written of the Civil
and Canonical Laws, and Traditions of that Nation, as to know from what
Original, of what Antiquity, and of how great Authority among them that Talmud
is: therefore I am inclined to hope, that the more Learned will not condemn me,
either of Vanity or Impertinence; if for Information of the less Learned, I
here add a brief History thereof, not without somewhat of diligence and Labor,
Collected from Writers of excellent Erudition and undoubted Faith.

After the Macedonians had spread their Victorious Arms over the East, and the
Hasmoneans with equally successful Courage asserted the Liberty of their
Country; there arose out of the School of Antigonus Sochaeus two mighty Sects
among the Jews: the Pharisees, so called from their Separation; and the
Sadduces, who derived their name from Sadocus their Head and Ringleader. The
former delivered to the People, many Precepts received by Tradition from their
Ancestors, which were not written in the Pentateuch among the Laws of Moses;
the Latter directly opposing the admission and sanction of those Traditions,
maintained that the Precepts recorded in the Books ascribed to their Legislator
Moses, were all of Sacred Authority, and therefore to be diligently observed;
but those taught by the Pharisees, from tradition only by word of Mouth, were
not obliging; as Josephus relates ( Antiquit. l. 13. c. 18.)

From this division of the disciples of Antigonus, in a short time it came to
pass, that the whole Nation of the Jews also was divided into Sects; of which
there is no memory in any of their monuments, before the Government of
Jonathan, who succeeded his Brother Judas Machabaeus, (whose History we have in
the Books of the Maccabees) in the year of Nabonassar 588. and of the Julian
Period 4553. At which time, as the same Josephus commemorates ( Antiquit. l.
13. c. 9.) there grew up three Sects or Heresies of the Jews, which delivered
diverse Doctrines, not of religious duties, but of human affairs, principally de
Fato; one, of the Pharisees; a Second, of the Sadduces; a Third of the Essens,
who lived an active life, different from the others. So Philo (de vita
contemplativa) distinguishes them from the Theoretics, whom he call's (...):
and so Photius (in Bibliothec. n. 104.) interpreting Philo, says; Lectae sunt
philosophantium apud Iudaeos vivendi rations, and Contemplativa, and Activa:
quorum hi Esseni, illi Therapeut ae appellantur.

These Esseni [(...)] denominated from their Sanctity, retiring from the noise
and crowds of populous Cities into solitary Villages, affected solitude; gens
sola, sine ulla faemina, sine pecunia, socia palmarum, etc. No wonder then, if
all the Four Evangelists be silent concerning them, since they lived strangers;
and unknown even to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, nor is any mention of them to
be found in the writings of any Rabbis before Zacuthius, a late writer, and
living in the year of our Lord 1502.

But the Pharisees, and their Antagonists the Sadduces made a great bustle and
noise in the Court of Jerusalem where they lived in mutual Emulation, drawing
mighty parties after them: the rich for the most part patronizing the Sadduces,
and the common people adhering to the Pharisees; as we read in Josephus
(Antiquit. l. 13. c. 18.) And in truth those [(...)] unwritten traditions
asserted by the Pharisees, grew more and more Authentic in the Schools, were
openly taught by the Rabbis by word of mouth to their disciples, and
studiously propagated as sacred verities; but not published in writing. Yet at
length, after the City of Jerusalem had been sacked and demolished by Titus,
and repaired by Hadrian in such sort, that the poor Jews retained neither their
name, nor nation, nor religion; while by the sedition of one Barchocebas,
almost all Judea was reduced to a desert, as Xiphili^ (in vita Hadriani)
reports; and while the Jews were dispersed, and in exile, prohibited to set a
foot upon their native soil; and the Schools that had been designed to promote
the Pharisaic discipline failed; one Rabbi Iehuda, whom they call Hakadosh, i.
e. the Saint, with vast Labor collecting all the Traditions, Judgments,
Opinions, and Expositions, that the Synagogues of all ages precedent had
delivered upon the whole Law; composed of them the Book of the MISHNA, and read
it publicly. And this he did, lest the Traditions of their Ancestors might
otherwise be lost and forgotten. He lived under the three Antonins, Pius,
Marcus, and Commodus, and finished this Syntagm of the Mishna, in the Reign of
the Last, and (as De Gantz computes) in the year 120. from the destruction of
the Temple, but of the Christian Era 190. This Mishna is their [(...)] Second
Law, so called to distinguish it from the first, which was written.

Of Christian writers, the first that remembers this Book of the Mishna, seems
to be the Emperor Justinian (a greater Collector of Ancient, but civil Laws and
Constitutions) who in the year of Christ 551. gave leave to the Jews to read
the Holy Scriptures publicly in their Synagogues; but interdicted the like use
of the (...) or Second Edition of their Law, the Mishna, as neither conjoined
to the Pentateuch, nor delivered down from the old Prophets, but invented by
men that had nothing of the Divine Spirit in them: as appears from Novel 146.
page 295. But since neither Origin, nor Epiphanius, nor St. Ierom (who all make
mention frequently of the Judaic traditions) takes notice of any such Book as
the Mishna; and since St. Austin (contra adversarios Legis and Prophetarum l.
2. c. 1.) says expressly, Habere, praeter Scripturas legitimas et propheticas,
Iudaeos quasdam Traditiones suas, quas non scriptas habent, sed memoriter
tenent, et alter in alterum Loquendo transfundit, quam (...) vocant: it seems
probable, that the Mishna was, either not written, or at least not well known
in the world, in the year of Christ 400. as the Modern Rabbis would have it to
have been.

Among these Maimonides (in praefat. ad Mishnam) affirms, that about 300 years
from the destruction of the Temple, Rabbi Iochanan, Head of a Synagogue in
Palestin added the GEMARA [(...)] or Complement, called the Jerusalem Gemara.
Which joined with the Mishna of Judas, makes the Jerusalem TALMUD.

And this Maimonides well deserves our belief. For his extraordinary Wisdom and
Learning are to this day so much admired by the Jews, that they commonly say of
him. a Mose usque ad Mosem nequaquam fuisse hactenus talem Mosem: and Mr.
Seldom (de Diis Syris syntagmate 2 cap. 4.) prefers him to all other Rabbis,
saying, primus Rabbinorum fuit, qui delirare desiit.

The Jews at length passing from the Subjection of the Romans to that of the
Persians, about 100 years after, Rabbi Ase in the Land of Babylon composed
another Gemara or Complement of the Mishna; which from thence was denominated
the Babylonic Gemara, and which contains many ridiculous fictions, and fables
incredible. And this, with the Mishna, makes the Babylonian Talmud, which is
now most in use; nay doctrinal to all the Jews, as if all their discipline, all
Law both Divine and Human were therein comprehended: in which notwithstanding
the Sadduces are never remembered, but under the name of Heretics or
Epicureans.

In the Mishna if self were contained, not only the Judgments, Ordinances and
Decrees of all precedent Consistories, but also a Collection of all the
Traditions which they call the Law Oral, and pretend to have been originally
received from the mouth of Moses himself. And to give more credit and authority
to these traditional Precepts, Rabbi Eliezar (in Pirke cap. 49. editionis
Vorstianae page 123.) tells us, that during the 40 days absence of Moses on the
Mount, he spent the days in reading the Scripture, and the nights in composing
the Mishna: and in the Babylonic Gemara is a formal story of the very manner
(forsooth) how Moses communicated and explained the Oral Law to Aaron and his
Sons and the Elders. The Elders (says the Pirke Aboth, i. e. capitula Patrum,
a Talmudic treatise) delivered the same to the Prophets, and the Prophets to
the men of the Great Synagogue, and they again handed it down to their
Successors. But these things being too compendiously spoken, to evince the
succession through so many ages, the more recent Rabbis have put their wit
upon the Rack to explicate the matter more particularly.

After the finishing of the Talmud, for an age or two, there is nothing but
thick darkness in the Histories of the Jews: but then they being expulsed out
of Babylon, and their Schools left empty and desolate, about the year of our
Lord 1040. a great part of the Rabbis and People came for refuge into Europe,
and chiefly into Spain: there appearing to us no Memorials of European Jews
before that time. Since that, innumerable Rabbis men of great Learning and
skill in all Sciences, nor addicting themselves and studies to the extravagant
and absurd dreams of the Talmud, as their predecessors had done; have written
copiously: and the succession of the Cabbala has been sought for in the East.
Rabbi Moses ben Maimon, vulgarly Maimonides and Rambam, born at Corduba, in the
year of Christ 1135. died at the age of 70. after he had written Commentaries
upon the Mishna; in the preface to which he gives a long series or list of
those who had propagated the Oral Law successively. Which yet appearing
imperfect and interrupt to Rabbi Abraham Zacuth of Salamanca, who wrote
Iuchasiin in the year of Christ 1502. he and his contemporany Don Isaac
Abarbinel an exiled Spaniard, and after them, David Ganz (who brought his
Chronology down to the year of Christ 1592. in his Book entitled Tzemach or
Germen Davidis) found, or made that Catalogue of the Propagators of the
Traditional Law more perfect and continued. Herein Zacuth indeed followed
Maimonides; and Ganz trod in the steps of Abarbinel: but Guitiel. Vorstius (in
observat. in Ganz, page 213.) comparing these successions each with the other;
from the diversity of computation from the interruption and gaping conjunction
thereof, argues the Catalogue to be plainly fictitious. There are nevertheless
even among our Christian Divines some, who lay hold upon that continuation of
Traditions, and use it to serve their turn: how prudently, let others judge.
For I have not undertaken curiously to examine that series and the nine classes
of Jewish Doctors: contenting my self at present with these few collections
concerning the Original and Antiquity of the Talmud.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
H. Mori Opera Theologica, and Philosophica, Fol. Three Vol. Dr. More's Reply
to the Answer to his Antidote against Idolatry. With his Appendix. Octavio. --
Remarques on Judge* Hales, of fluid Bodies, etc. Octavo. -- Exposition on the
Apocalypse. Quarto. -- Exposition on Daniel. Quarto. -- Confutation of
Astrology, against Butler. Quarto. Dr. Sherlock's Discourse of the Knowledge of
Jesus Christ. With his Defense. Octavo. -- Answer to Danson. Quarto. -- Account
of Ferguson's Common-place-Book. Quarto. Dr. Falkener's Libertas Ecclesiastica.
Octavo. -- Christian Loyalty. Octavo. -- Vindication of Liturgies. Octavo. Dr.
Fowler's Libertas Evangelica. Octavo. Mr. Scot's Christian Life. Octavo. Dr.
Worthington's great Duty of Self-Resignation. Octavo. Dr. Smith's Pourtraict of
Old Age. Octavo. Mr. Kidder's Discourse of Christian Fortitude. Oct. Mr.
Allen's Discourse of Divine Assistance. Octavo. -- Christian Justification
stated. Octavo. -- Against Ferguson, of Justification. Octav. -- Persuasive to
Peace and Unity. With a large Preface. Octavo. -- Preface to the Persuasive.
Alone. Octav. -- Against the Quakers. Octavo. -- Mystery of Iniquity unfolded
against the Papists. Octavo. -- Serious and Friendly Address to the
Nonconformists. Octavo. -- Practical Discourse of Humility. Octavo. Mr. Lamb's
stop to the Course of Separation. Octa. -- Fresh Suit against Independency.
Octavo. Mr. Hotchkis Discourse of the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness to
us, and our Sins to him. In two Parts. Octavo. Mr. Long's History of the
Donatists. Octavo. -- Character of a Separatist. Octavo. -- Against Hales, of
Schism. With Mr. Baxter's Arguments for Conformity. Octavo. -- Non-Conformists
Plea for Peace, Impleaded against Mr. Baxter. Octavo. Dr. Grove's Vindication
of the Conforming Clergy. Quarto. -- Defense of the Church, and Clergy of
England. Quarto. -- Defensio suae Responsionis ad nuperum Libellum, qui
Inscribitur Celeusma, etc. in Quarto. -- Responsio ad Celeusma, etc. Quarto.
The Spirit of Popery speaking out of the Mouths of Fanatical Protestants. Fol.
Dr. Hicks's Sermon at the Act at Oxford. Quarto. -- Before the Lord Mayor.
Peculium Dei. Quarto. -- Notion of Persecution. Quarto. Dr. Hicks, Sermon
before the Lord Mayor, Ian. 30. at Bow-Church. 1682. Dr. Sharp's Sermon before
the Lord Mayor. Quarto. -- Sermon at the Spittle, and Yorkshire Feast. Quar.
-- Sermon before the House of Commons. April 11. 1679. -- At the Election of
the Lord Mayor. 1680. Dr. William Smith's Unjust Man's Doom, and Discourse of
Partial Conformity. Octavo. -- Two Assize Sermons. Octavo. -- Two Sermons, on
the 3 d. of May, and 29 th. of May. -- Lent Sermon. Quarto. Dr. Thorp's Sermon
before the Lord Mayor. Quarto. Dr. Woodrof's Sermon before the Lord Mayor.
Quarto. Mr. Williams's Sermon before the L. Mayor. Quarto. -- Christianity
abused by the Church of Rome, and Popery showed to be a Corruption of it: Being
an Answer to a late Printed Paper given about by Papists. In a Letter to a
Gentleman. Quarto. Remarks on the Growth and Progress of Nonconformity Quarto.
Baxters vindication of the Church of England in her rites and ceremonies,
discipline and Church Orders. Mr. Lynford's Sermon. Quarto. Mr. Bryan Turner's
Sermon. Testimonium Jesus. Quarto. Mr. John Turner's Sermon of
Transubstantiation. Quarto. Dr. Butler's Sermon before the King at Windsor. Mr.
Lamb's Sermon before the King at Windsor. Mr. Brown's Visitation Sermon.
Quarto. Dr. Fowler's Sermon at the Assizes at Gloucester. Quarto. Mr. Cutlove's
two Assize Sermons at St. Edmunds-Bury. Quarto. Mr. Inet's Sermon at the
Assizes at Warwick. Quar. Mr. Edward Sermon's Sermon before the L. Mayor. Mr.
Resbury's Sermon before the Charter House Scholars. Quarto. -- Sermon at the
Funeral of Sir Allen Broderick. Mr. Needham's six Sermons at Cambridge. Octavo.
Dr. Eachard's Dialogue against Hobbs. 2 d. Part. Mr. Hallywel's Discourse of
the Excellency of Christianity. Octavo. -- True and Lively Representation of
Popery: Showing that Popery is only new-modelled Paganism. Quarto. -- Account
of Familism against the Quakers. -- Sacred Method of saving Humane Souls by
Jesus Christ. -- Discourse of the Polity, and Kingdom of Darkness. Octavo. Dr.
Goodall's Vindication of the College of Physicians. Octavo. Mr. L' Emery's
Course of Chemistry. With the Appendix. Dr. Grew's Anatomy of Trunks. With
nineteen Copper Plates. Octavo. D. Sydenhami Observationes de Morbis Acutis.
Octav. -- Epistolae duae de Morbis Epidemicis, and de Lue Venerea. Octav. --
Dissertatio Epistolaris de variolis, nenon de Affectione Hysterica and de
Hypochondriaca. Octavo. Lossii Observationes Medicae. Octavo. Mayow Tractatus.
5. E. Med. de Sal. nitro. etc. Octav. Burnetii Telluris Theoria Sacra de
Diluvio and Paradise. Quarto. Spenseri dissertat. de Urim, and Thummium.
Octavo. Speed Epigrammata Iuvenilia. Encomia, Seria, Satyrae and Iocosa.
Octavo. Lord Bacon's Essays Octavo. Gage's Survey of the West Indies. Mr.
Claget's Reply to the Mischief of Impositions. In Answer to Dr. Stillingfleet's
Sermon. Quarto. The True Englishman Humbly proposing something to rid us of
the Plot in the State, and Contentions in the Church. Quarto. A Persuasive to
Reformation and Union, as the best Security against the Designs of our Popish
Enemies. Quarto. The Roman Wonder: Being Truth confessed by Papists, etc. Being
the Jesuits Morals Condemned. Fol. Essex Freeholders Behavior, etc. Folio.
Two Sheets. The Country Club, A Poem. Quarto. Amyraldus Discourse of Divine
Dreams. Octavo. Dr. Arden's Directions about the Matter and Style of Sermons.
Twelves. Protestant Loyalty fairly drawn. In Answer to a Dialogue at Oxford
between a Tutor and Pupil, etc. And an Impartial Account of the late Addresses,
etc. Quarto. Mr. Tho. Smith's Sermon concerning the Doctrine, Unity, and
Profession of the Christian Faith. Preached before the University of Oxford.
With an Appendix concerning the Apostles Creed. Quarto. 1682. Mr. Lamb's Sermon
before the Lord Mayor, Feb. 5. 1682. Dr. Calamy's, Sermon preached before the
Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Citizens of London, at Bow-Church on the 29. of May.
1682. Prosecution no Persecution: or, the Difference between suffering for
Disobedience and Faction, in a Sermon upon Phil. 1. 29. Preached at Bury St.
Edmunds in Suffolk, on the 22. of March, 1681. by Nath. Bisbie. D. D.

