C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
To the most Reverend Father in God, William Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.
Charles R.
MOst Reverend Father in God, We greet you well.
Whereas the bold abuses, and extravagancies of Preachers in the Pulpit, have
not only by the experience of former Ages been found to tend to the dishonor
of God, the scandal of Religion, and disturbance of the Peace both of Church
and State, but have also (through the licentiousness of the late times) much
increased, to the inflaming, fomenting, and heightning of the sad distempers
and confusions that were among us. And whereas even at this present
(notwithstanding the merciful Providence of God, so signally manifested in
restoring Us to Our Crown, and Our pious care and endeavors to Govern Our
Realms in Peace and Tranquillity) the said abuses do yet continue in a very
high measure in sundry parts of this Realm, through the busy diligence of some
unquiet and factious spirits, who in stead of Preaching the pure Word of God,
and building up the people in Faith and Holiness, have made it a great part of
their business to beget in the minds of their hearers, an evil opinion of their
Governors, by insinuating fears and jealousies, to dispose them to discontent,
and to season them with such unsound and dangerous principles as may lead them
into Disobedience, Schism, and Rebellion. And whereas also sundry young
Divines, and Ministers, either out of a spirit of contention and contradiction,
or in a vain ostentation of their Learning, take upon them in their popular
Sermons to handle the deep Points of Gods Eternal Councels and Decrees, or to
meddle with the Affairs of State and Government, or to wrangle about Forms and
Gestures, and other fruitless disputes and controversies, serving rather to
amuse then profit the hearers; which is done for the most part, and with the
greatest confidence, by such persons as least understand them: We out of Our
Princely Care and Zeal for the honor of God, the advancement of Piety, Peace,
and true Religion, and for the preventing for the future, as much as lies in
Us, the many and great inconveniences and mischiefs that will unavoidably
ensue, if a timely stop be not given to these and the like growing abuses, Do,
according to the examples of several of Our Predecessors of blessed memory, by
these Our special Letters straightly Charge and Command you, to use your utmost
care and diligence, that these Directions, which upon long and serious
consideration We have thought good to give concerning Preachers, and which We
have caused to be Printed herewith sent unto you, be from henceforth duly and
strictly observed by all the Bishops within your Province. And to this end, Our
Will and Pleasure is, That you forthwith send them Copies of these Our
Directions, to be by them speedily communicated to every Parson, Vicar, Curate,
Lecturer, and Minister in every Cathedral, Collegiate, and Parish Church within
their several Dioceses: And that you earnestly require them to employ their
utmost endeavor for the due observation of the same, whereof We shall expect a
strict account, both of you, and every one of them: And these Our Letters shall
be your sufficient Warrant and Discharge in that behalf.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the 14th day of October, in the 14th year of
Our Reign, 1662. By His Majesty's Command. ED. NICHOLAS.

Directions concerning Preachers.
1.THat no Preachers in their Sermons presume to meddle with matters of State,
to model new Governments, or take upon them to declare, limit, or bound out the
Power and Authority of Sovereign Princes, or to state and determine the
differences between Princes and the people; But that upon all good occasions
they faithfully instruct the people in their bounden Duty of Subjection and
Obedience to their Governors, Superior and Subordinate of all sorts, and to
the Established Laws according to the Word of God, and the Doctrine of the
Church of England, as it is contained in the Homilies of Obedience, and the
Articles of Religion set forth by Public Authority. 2. That they be admonished
not to spend their time and study in the search of abstruse and speculative
Notions, especially in and about the deep Points of Election and Reprobation,
together with the incomprehensible manner of the concurrence of Gods Free
Grace, and man's Free Will, and such other controversies as depend thereupon:
But howsoever, that they presume not positively and doctrinally to determine
any thing concerning the same. 3. That they forbear in their Sermons ordinarily
and causelessly to enter upon the handling of any other controversies of less
moment and difficulty: But whenever they are occasioned by invitation from
the Text they Preach upon, or that in regard of the Auditory they Preach unto,
it may seem requisite or expedient so to do; That in such cases they do it with
all modesty, gravity and candor, asserting the Doctrine and Discipline of the
Church of England, from the cavils and objections of such as are Adversaries to
either, without bitterness, railing, jeering, or other unnecessary or unseemly
provocation. 4. That for the more edifying of the people in faith and godliness
(the aforesaid abuses laid aside) all Ministers and Preachers in their several
respective Cures, shall not only diligently apply themselves to Catechize the
younger sort, according as in the Book of Common Prayer is appointed; But also
shall in their ordinary Sermons insist chiefly upon Catecherical Doctrines
(wherein are contained all the necessary and undoubted Verities of Christian
Religion) declaring withal unto their Congregations what influences such
Doctrines ought to have into their lives and conversations, and stirring them
up effectually, as well by their Examples as their Doctrines, to the practice
of such Religious and Moral Duties as are the proper results of the said
Doctrines, as Self-denial, Contempt of the world, Humility; Patience, Meekness.
Temperance, Justice, Mercy, Obedience, and the like; and to a detestation and
shunning of sin, especially such sins as are so rife among us, and common to
the Age we live in; such are those usually styled the Seven deadly ones; in
short, all kind of Debauchery, Sensuality, Rebellion, Profaneness, Atheism, and
the like. And because these licentious times have corrupted Religion even in
the very roots and foundations, That where there is an afternoons exercise, it
be especially spent either in explaining some part of the Church-Catechism, or
in Preaching upon some such Text of Scripture as will properly and naturally
lead to the handling of something contained in it, or may conduce to the
Exposition of the Liturgy, and Prayers of the Church (as occasion shall be
offered) the only cause they grew into contempt amongst the people being this,
that they were not understood. That also the Minister, as often as conveniently
he can, read the Prayers himself; and when he cannot so do, he procure or
provide some fit person in Holy Orders, who may do it with that gravity,
distinctness, devotion, and reverence, as becomes so holy an action: And
whenever by reason of his infirmity, or the concurrence of other Offices, the
time may seem too short, or he unable to perform the Office of both Prayers and
Sermon at length, he rather shorten his Discourse or Sermon, then omit any
thing of the Prayers, lest he incur the Penalty of the Act for Uniformity,
requiring them to be read according as the Book directs. 5. And further Our
Will and Pleasure is, That all Ministers within their several Cures, be
enjoined publicly to read over unto the people, such Canons as are or shall be
in force, at least once, and the Thirty nine Articles twice every year, to the
end they may the better understand, and be more thoroughly acquainted with the
Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England, and not so easily drawn away
from it as formerly they have been. 6. Since Preaching was not anciently the
work of every Priest, but was restrained to the choicest persons for gravity,
prudence and learning; the Archbishops and Bishops of this Kingdom are to take
great care whom they License to Preach, and that all Grants and Licenses of
this kind heretofore made by any Chancellor, Official, Commissary, or other
Secular person (who are presumed not to be so competent Judges in matters of
this nature) be accounted void and null, unless the same shall likewise be
allowed by the Archbishop, or the Bishop of the Diocese, and that all Licenses
of Preachers hereafter to be made or granted by any Archbishop or Bishop, shall
be only during pleasure, otherwise to be void to all intents and purposes, as
if the same (...) had never been made nor granted. 7. Lastly, That for the
better observing of the Lord's Day, too much neglected of late, they shall, as
by often and serious admonitions, and sharp reproofs, endeavor to draw off
people from such idle, debauched, and profane courses as dishonor God, bring a
scandal on Religion, and contempt on the Laws and Authority Ecclesiastical and
Civil, so shall they very earnestly persuade them to frequent Divine Service on
the Lord's Day, and other Festivals appointed by the Church to be kept solemn;
And in case any person shall resort unto any Tavern, Alehouses, or use any
unlawful sports and exercises on such days, the Minister shall exhort those
which are in Authority in their several Parishes and Congregations, carefully
to look after all such offenders in any kind whatsoever, together with all
those that abet, receive or entertain them, that they may be proceeded against
according to the Laws, and quality of their offenses, that all such disorders
may for the time to come be prevented.
Given at Our Court at Whitehall, October the 14th in the 14th year of Our
Reign, 1662. By His Majesty's Command. ED. NICHOLAS.

LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the KINGS
most Excellent Majesty, 1662.

The Lord Archbishop of Canterbury's Letter to the Lords the Bishops within his
Grace's Province.
AFter my hearty Commendations. I have lately received Letters from His
Majesty, wherein He takes notice of the continuance and increase of some bold
Abuses and Extravagancies in the Church, especially in Preachers,
notwithstanding His great Indulgence used toward them: And forese^ing the
mischief and inconveniences likely to ensue thereupon, if not timely prevented
and repressed, Has out of His Princely and tender Care of the Peace of the
Church, sent withal certain Directions to be strictly observed by the Bishops
in their several Dioceses (as by the Copies thereof which I have sent here
enclosed, your Lordship will more fully understand) And for the more speedy
dispatch and ease in the Communication, has been Graciously pleased to Command
so many Copies thereof to be Printed as shall be needful, a proportionable
number whereof will be forthwith sent unto your Lordship for your Diocese. Now
as we cannot but with all thankfulness acknowledge His Majesty's Affectionate
Care and Zeal in this His providing for the good and welfare of the Church, by
all means which He finds may be conducible thereunto; So my earnest desire and
hope is, We shall not be so much wanting to our own good, as not to second
those His Majesty's Commands with the utmost of our endeavors; But that your
Lordship, when you shall have given order for the careful dispersing and
communicating those Copies, as is required, will by your diligent Inspection,
and serious Admonitions to you Clergy, as occasion shall be offered, be able in
due time to return an Account of the success in the Observation, answerable to
His Majesty's Expectation and Pious Desires in this His Injunction. And so with
my Prayers to God for a Blessing upon your Endeavors herein, I commit you to
His holy protection, and rest

Lambeth 23 October. 1662. Your Lordships Very loving Friend and Brother, W. CANT.

LONDON: Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the KING'S
most Excellent Majesty. 1662.


