C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION, Prohibiting the Importation of Cordage and Cable-Yarn from
Foreign Parts.
CHARLES R.

THe Kings most Excellent Majesty being Informed, That the Importing of Cordage
and Cable-Yarn ready Wrought, and Manufactured in Foreign parts, does not only
Endanger the Lives and Ships of many of His Majesty's Subjects, by reason the
same Cordage and Yarn is for the most part deceitfully Made, but does also tend
to the great Prejudice and Impoverishment of the Rope-makers of this His Realm,
who for want of Employment are Reduced to great Necessity: His Majesty
therefore for their better Encouragement, and the preservation of so useful an
Art and Manufacture among His own Subjects, is Graciously Pleased by this His
Royal Proclamation (with the Advice of His Privy Council) strictly to Charge,
Prohibit, and Command, That from the First day of May next, no Person or
Persons, Natives, Aliens, or others, do, or shall Import, Bring, or Convey, or
cause to be Imported, Brought, or Conveyed, into the Kingdom of England,
Dominion of Wales, or Port or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, from or out of any
part or place beyond the Seas, by way of Merchandise, or to be Sold or
Exchanged, any Cordage or Cable-Yarn whatsoever, ready Wrought, and Made in
parts beyond the Seas (other then such as shall be Made in Russia of the Hemp
of the Growth of that Country,) upon pain of Forfeiting all that by Law is
Forfeitable, and such other Punishment as by the Law, or His Majesty's
Prerogative Royal, may be inflicted upon the Contemners of His Royal Authority.
And His Majesty does further Charge and Require the Commissioners of His
Customs, Controllers, Searchers, and Officers of His Ports, and all other
Persons whatsoever, to Seize any Cordage or Yarn that shall be Imported, Sold,
or Exchanged, contrary to His Majesty's Pleasure herein Declared, and to be
Diligent and Careful in the Preventing the Importation of the Cordage and Yarn
hereby Prohibited, and the Discovery of the same, to the end the Offenders may
be duly Punished; His Majesty also Commanding all Justices of the Peace,
Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, and other Officers whatsoever, to be
Aiding and Assisting in all things Requisite for the Observation and due
Execution of this His Majesty's Royal Proclamation.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the 20th day of February, 1674. in the Seven
and twentieth year of Our Reign.
LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers
to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1674/5.


