By the King.
C R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION.
CHARLES R.

WHereas Our Loyal Subjects the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in
this present Parliament assembled, Have by their humble Petition represented to
Us their Fears and Apprehensions of the Growth and Increase of the Popish
Religion in these Our Dominions, together with the Causes thereof, and also
such Remedies as they conceive may be proper to prevent such Growing Mischiefs.

Which Petition of theirs We have Seriously Considered, and do with much
Contentment and Satisfaction, Accept and Approve the great Care of Our said
Loyal Subjects the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in Parliament
assembled, for the Preservation of the True Religion Established in this
Kingdom; To which, as We have always Adhered against all Temptations
whatsoever, so We shall still employ Our utmost Care and Zeal in the
Maintenance and Defense of it.

And We do therefore by this Our Royal Proclamation straightly Charge and
Command all Jesuits, and all English, Irish, and Scottish Priests, and all
others who have taken Orders from the Sea of Rome, or by the Authority or
pretended Authority thereof, who are not under any Restraint by Imprisonment,
other then such as by Contract of Marriage are to Attend the Person of Our
Dearest Consort the Queen, or by the Laws of Nations are to Attend Foreign
Ambassadors; That they do before the First day of May next, Depart out of this
Our Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales, upon pain of having the
Penalties of the Laws and Statutes of this Our Realm Inflicted upon them: And
for their better means to Depart accordingly, We do hereby Declare and Publish
Our further Will and Pleasure, That if at any time before the said First day of
May, they or any of them shall Resort to any Port-Town of Our said Kingdom of
England or Dominion of Wales, and there Declare himself to the Magistrate of
the Town, or other Officers of any Port, that he is a Priest, and that he is
there to take Shipping for his Passage, they shall suffer him or them quietly
to Depart, and shall see them Shipped and sent away for Foreign Parts, and give
them their Furtherance for their Departure. And to the end this Our
Proclamation may be the better Observed and Obeyed, We do hereby strictly
Charge and Command all Our Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, Commissioners,
Justices of Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, and all other Our Officers and
Ministers whatsoever, That they be Circumspect and Vigilant each of them in
their several Charges, from and after the said First day of May next, in
searching for and discovering all such Jesuits and Priests as aforesaid, as
shall presume to remain in this Our Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales,
contrary to Our Laws, and Our Royal Pleasure and Command herein Declared, that
so the Laws may be put in due Execution against them.

And for the better Discovery of all others who are Popish Recusants, or justly
suspected to be so, We do also further Require, Charge, and Command, That all
Our Judges, Barons of Our Exchequer, Justices of Peace, and Ministers of
Justice in their several places, do not only Observe Our Will and Pleasure
herein before expressed in all and every of the Premises; But also forthwith
put all other Our Laws in due Execution against all Popish Recusants, and such
as are suspected to be so, in order to their speedy Conviction, and cause the
said Laws to be publicly given in Charge at all and every their Assizes,
Gaol-deliveries, and Quarter Sessions respectively, and then and there take
order that such Popish Recusants, or persons suspected to be so, may be
speedily Presented, Indicted, and Convicted according to Law, and that due
Process of Law may from time to time be Issued out upon such Convictions.

And We do hereby Declare, That the Names of such Priests who do Attend the
Person of Our Dearest Consort the Queen, shall be set down under Her Great
Seal, and such Signification Enrolled in the Court of King's Bench: And because
there may be some Priests Imprisoned in this Our Realm, yet unknown to Us, We
do Will and Command all Sheriffs, Bailiffs, and Keepers of Prisons, within
Twenty days after publication of this Our Proclamation, to Advertise Our
Privy Council, or some of them, of the Names of all such Priests that are in
their Custody, and by whom, and for what Cause they were Committed, to the End
that thereupon We may give Order for their Transportation, as the Case shall
require.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Three and twentieth day of March, 1670/1.
In the Three and twentieth Year of Our Reign.
In the SAVOYE: Printed by the Assigns of Jo: Bill, and Chris. Barker, Printers
to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1670/1.


