The Ephesian Matron


The Cimmerian Matron


THE Ephesian and Cimmerian MATRONS, Two Notable EXAMPLES OF THE POWER OF Love
and Wit.

Scilicet expectas, ut tradat Matter honestos, Aut alios Mores, quam quos habet?

Juvenal Satyr 6. In the SAVOY: Printed for Henry Herringman at the Sign of the
Anchor in the Lower-walk of the New-Exchange. 1668.

A LETTER CONCERNING The Ephesian MATRON: To a Person of Honor.
Noble SIR,
TO let you see what absolute Sovereignty you have over me, and how little
power I have to obey, even the strongest inclinations of my own Genius, when
your commands have once told me, I must apply my self to complaisance with
Yours; I have strugled hard to master my natural aversion to Writing, and for a
day or two taken up my long discontinued Pen; choosing for my Argument, a short
Story, such, Whose Truth might supply the barrenness of my Invention, and whose
pleasantness renders both the harshness of my style, and the morosity of my
humor, the less offensive. It concerns a beautiful and good natured Creature,
whose Ad^entures have been thought so memorable, that time it self has not
been able to sink them in that Abyss of oblivion, in which, many potent
Monarchs have been swallowed up; nor have many great Scholars, and eminent
Wits, thought it beneath the dignity of their Pens, to transmit the memory of
them to posterity.

I cannot tell you the Woman's name; my Authors having been in that point
unanimously silent; but you may call her, if you please, the Wandering Greek:
for, she has visited more Countries, than* Queen Christina, (who, though now
naturalized a Roman, does yet retain much of the Goth and Vandal) and is
perfect in more Languages. After I had seen her in the Greek, Roman, German and
French habits, and observed such a natural comeliness, as made her appear
lovely and pleasant in each dress, that ingenious Foreigners had clad her in;
and been assured by some of them, that even Princes had sometimes made her a
Favorite: I had a humor also to put her into our English garb, that you might
be acquainted with her, and judge, whether that be not as becoming and
graceful as any of the rest. If I have set her forth in an equipage somewhat
too grave and solemn, according to the fashion of my own fancy, which is most
delighted with sad colors, and plain useful garments; so that she may now seem
the Mistress rather of a Philosopher than of a Courtier* it was, because I
would not have her appear altogether a stranger, and ignorant of the mode of
the time, wherein the greatest levity and licenciousness, is commonly wrapped up
in the most austere looks, and sober formality of dress; and Lasciviousness
generally usurps the long v^il of Modesty. I have not furnished her with
Jewels, and made her shine with gaudy Ornaments, bot^ because I had none of my
own, and because I think them fit only for such, who wanting native Beauty
enough to fill the beholders sight, avert him from discerning their defects, by
catching his eyes with the luster of Pearl, Diamonds and Rubies; whereas this
our Matron is so largely beholding to the bounty of Nature, that she scorns the
mean charity of Art; and you may as soon persuade her to turn Adamite, as to
make use of precious Stones. Yet I Will promise you, her Linen is fine, clean,
and white, though plain and unstarched. And because she is a Mourner, I have
accoutred her in a sable Veil: which she pulls down, as often as she has
occasion to hide her blushes; and turns up again, when she is pleased to be
more free, and discover the charms of her smiles.

Nor can I tell you precisely her Age, though I guess it to be near upon that
of the Roman Empire, which is, by some hundreds of years, elder than the
Wandering Jew. But, let not that discourage you; for she is yet youthful,
sprightly, and gamesome, and has not a wrinckle in her face; insomuch, that a
Gentleman, who surprised me, with her in my company, would not be persuaded but
she was my daughter. Besides, what is immortal (as she seems to be) must, you
know, be ever young and flourishing.

As for her Religion, I confess also, I can give you no certain account of it,
because (contrary to the custom of most of her sex) she is very reserved in
that particular. Yet, if I may have the liberty of conjecturing from some
Actions of hers, I should take her to be of old Epicurius's Faith, following
the simple dictates of mother-Nature, and living by the plain rule of her own
Inclinations; as holding it a contradiction, to be born under one Law, and to
another bound: or else a Sister of the family of Love, which scruples at no
freedom with a sanctif^^d Brother, and justifies her familiarity with fervency
of Zeal, and suggestions of the spirit. Do not you therefore conceive her to be
a Vestal, or one that resolves to pervert the purpose of Nature, and has
abjured the end of her Creation; albeit you see her in a Vault, in a lamenting
posture, and with a small Taper burning by her: For really, she is a Cyprian
Nun, consecrated to the Goddess of Pleasure* inflamed with zeal of Priapus: She
is furnished with an Altar, with Incense, and with Fire too, and wants only a
Priest to come and animate her Sacrifice.

For her Humor, you will find her in all things a perfect Woman, a little
subject to changes, seldom out of extremes; w^^^ing and smiling in a b^eath,
leaping at once out of a Charnelhouse into a Nuptial-bed; soon quitting a
violent grief for a good Husband lately deceased, for to solace in the embraces
of a new Love; this moment, in the bottom of despair, and the next in the
height of fruition; now endeavoring to destroy her self, and anon, doing her
devoir to procreate another, and give Being to posterity; too wise to refuse a
good proffer, or neglect a fair opportunity; highly sweet and obliging upon
occasion, even to a stranger, and at first enterview, full of frankness and
endearments, where she affects; forward to excuse and palliate the errors of
her friend, and admirably witty, in projecting a way to avert sudden danger
threatening him. And what would you more from a Woman?

Notwithstanding all these excellent qualities, let me not only desire, but
also conjure you, to imprison her in your private Cabinet, so that she may be
seen by no eyes but your own. Not that you need be jealous of either her
chastity or reputation; for, the one is proof against the corruptions even of
Peter Arentine himself, if he were alive and conversant with her; and she has
cunning enough of her own to preserve the other: but, for fear she meet with
affronts from the Ladies, who will never be reconciled to a Woman that is so
weak, as to betray the frailties, and lay open the secrets of her own Sex.
Besides that, she is a professed Enemy to their own darling, Platonick-Love;
and ingeniously confesses, she knows no flames, but such as arise from the
difference of Sex, and are kindled in the blood, and other luxuriant humors of
the body: and that her Amors always ^end to the propagation of somewhat more
Material, than the simple Ideas of virtue, of which our Philosophical Ladies so
much talk. Which heretical doctrine, if they once hear her preach, it is not all
the Armies in the world shall protect her from suffering the fate of Orpheus;
^or shall you, Sir, with all your good language, and other ingratiating Arts,
be able to vindicate hercause, or secure your self from the hateful brand of a
Woman-hater. As therefore you value this Ephesian's free conversation, or the
favor of Ladies, be sure you keep her to your self; but, if you will needs
show your self to be of the number of those open-breasted men, who think no
pleasure complete, until they have boas^ed of it; yet, at least, be so just to
the sacred Laws of friendship, as never to reveal who brought her into England,
only for your private recreation; and then leave her adversaries to consult
their grand Oracle Lilly, how to find out,

Most honored Sir, Your most Humble Servant.

The Ephesian MATRON.
A Certain Merchants Daughter of Ephesus, having been long gazed upon by the
admiring Youths of that populous and wealthy City, and sought in marriage by
many, whose ample Fortunes encouraged them to hope for success, answerable to
their desires, (which could not be but just and commendable, since fixed upon
an Object, whom an incomparable Beauty, an ingenious Soul, virtuous Education,
and that usual attendant of all these, an honorable Fame, had conspired to
make an extraordinary Person) This Virgin, I say, was at length espoused to a
young Gentleman, in whom nothing was wanting that could be required, to make
him accomplished and amiable, especially in her eye, who loved him with equal
ardours; and thought of no felicity, but in his mutual affections and society.
So that all men (his envious Rivals only excepted) expected the perfection of
mortal happiness to arise from so rare a union.

But, observe unconstancy of human felicity; This pair of Turtles had not long
enjoyed the pleasures of each others conversation, when Fate (seldom long
propitious to Lovers) steps in, and divides them, by the eternal divorce of
death; translating the Husband into a state of more durable delights, and
leaving the poor widdowed Lady in the arms of a distracting grief, too
excessive to fall under the description of the most tragical Pen; and indeed so
violent, as would soon have sufficed to the destruction of so delicate and
tender a Nature, as hers was, had not her resolution to see her dearest All (so
she called him) laid into his Tomb, with such Funeral Pomp, and solemn
Obsequies, as were agreeable both to his quality, and her sorrow; somewhat
conduced to her preservation. Which yet was but an accidental preservative, and
such, whose effect she could not directly aim at; all the faculties of her
wounded soul being wholly taken up with the image of her loss; and excluding
all light of comfort, but those weak and faint glimpses that arose in her
darksome imagination, from her hopes to make haste and overtake him, who was
gone before.

But alas! I speak much to the diminution of her fidelity, when I call them
Hopes; they were advanced to full Resolutions, and those made unalterable, by
the sanction of a solemn vow, to outdo the malice of death; and by a speedy
reunion of her spirit with his, in the Elyzium, to regain that content in the
other World, which the cruelty of the gods had ravished from her in this. And
according to this too rigorous Vow, she refuses all nourishment, admitting
nothing into her mouth but the cold air, and tears uncessantly distilling from
her once bright and sparkling, but now dim and blubbered eyes; and this,
notwithstanding the importunities of her Parents and Friends on one side, and
the necessities of Nature on the other, urging her to commiserate and relieve
her self. In this sad condition she continued three whole days and nights,
a^horring all objects but what her grie^ presented, and keeping her con^^^ed
remembrance perpetually upon ^he Rack, to afford her the images of he^ past
felicities, that might aggravate the resentments of her present misery: Which
yet being (as she thought) insufficient to exalt her sorrows to the height of
destroying her, she privately conveys her self in^o the Vault, whe^^ the
remains of her Husband had been newly laid, and there sits down upon the damp
earth, with her eyes fixed upon his Coffin, lest her thoughts might chance to
wander from their proper object*

It was great wonder that Nature
Might suffer any creature.
To have such sorrow, and she not ded;
Full piteons pale, and nothing red.
She said a lay, a manner souge;
Without note, withouten song;
And was this, for full well I can
Rehearse it, right thus it began.
I have of sorrow so great wone,
That joy get I never none;
Now that I se my husband bright,
Which I have loved with all my might,
Is fro me deed, and is agone*
And thus in sorrow left me alone,
Alas Death, what yeleth the,
That thou noldest have taken me?
This (you will say) was a rare demonstr^^ion of a Woman's constancy, and ought
not to be past over without admiration, and an acknowledgement, that this
virtuous Matron well deserved to wear a Garland, in that Troop of Heroi^al
Wives, who scorning to survive their better part, their Husbands, are honored
by posterity, as examples of singular faith, and conjugal amity. And I shall
also ing^nuously confess, that her love must needs be great, which transported
her to so generous a pitch of sorrow, and bravery of resolution. I presume
moreover, that your pity is already risen to that height, that are co^cerned in
her danger; and that you would most gladly run into the Vault, ^o save her from
a death so cruel, so iminent. But alas, she is resolved upon it, and your
humanity would but degenerate into a prolongation of her afflictions. For, in
life she knew no content, but in the society of her Love, whose mortal part was
now in the cold fetters of an everlasting sleep; and therefore remains holy
incapable of any the least consolation, unless from this, that she may be
hastened in her journey, to meet and embrace his beloved Ghost. If therefore
your commiseration will do any thing toward her comfort and repose, pray
exercise it in killing her, and let the kindness of your sword suddenly
prevent the lingering tortures of her famine and laments. But I know you are too
good-natured to have her die; and but to suppose her* after all this, capable
of being reconciled to life, were the only way to make her and her whole Sex
hate you. What then is to be done in order to her Rescue? Why, have but
patience a little, and you shall see how miraculously Fo^tune has contrived to
gratify you and other her friends, in her preservatio^*

It happened, that on the very same day her Husbands funeral rites were
sol^mnized, and his Corpse set into the Vault amongst his Ancestors, there was a
notorious malefactor executed, and his body left upon the Gibbet; the better to
strike terror into others, and by the example of his infamous punishment, to
raise in the hearts of all the spectators, a due^ abomination of the like
crimes. And lest any of the Villain's relations or confederates, should take
down the mangled Carcass, and convey it away to burial privily in the night;
Proclamation was made to the contrary, at command of the Magistrate; and a
guard of Soldiers consigned to watch it, with the penalty of no less than death
to such of them, as should through carelessness, drousieness, or absence, be
failing in that their duty. Now night being come, the Soldiers thinking one was
enough to attend that easy charge, fall to casting lots among themselves, who
should undertake it; and the lot falling upon one, of whose vigilance the rest
had no reason to doubt, they all withdrew themselves into a Tavern near at
hand, the better to secure themselves from the cold, and rawness of the night,
leaving that one to perform the Duty.

They were no sooner gone, when this Sentinel also, feeling himself pinched by
the cold, and confident none would hazard so dear a thing as life, in stealing
away the torn carcass of a Rogue, bethinks himself of shelter and rest: and
remembering there was a certain spacious arched Vault (the very same our Mourner
had obscured her self in) under-neath the Temple, over against which the Gibbet
was erected; he retires into it, conducted thither, doubtless by the invisible
hand of his good Angel.

Being entered into the mouth of the Vault, his eyes were instantly saluted with
the beams of a small and weak light, that shone from the farthest end of it; at
sight whereof he was surprised with a sudden fit of horror, which lessening
by degrees, (as all terrible objects are greatest, at first glance of the eye
upon them) his curiosity soon got the upper hand of his fear, and carries him
nearer and nearer, till at length by the help of that glimmering Taper, which
yet had not wholly overcome the gloomy darkness of that dismal place, he could
perceive something resembling a Woman, in a mournful dress, but with a
countenance far more mournful, sitting on the ground, with arms enfolded in the
posture of extreme sorrow, and her head carelessly drooping, as if it were
desiro^s and ready to fall upon the Coffin placed at her feet. Having a while
stood wondering at this strange and doleful spectacle, and considering with
himself, that it could not be a mere Apparition; all those stories of Ghosts,
Specter, and Devils in humane shape, being but the politic Fictions of Rulers
and Priests, to keep the vulgar honest in the dark, and by fear to deter such
from vice, who would not pursue virtue merely* for love of it: he banisheth all
apprehensions of terror, and boldly advances to the Taper. The impediment of
distance, which before permitted him but an obscure and imperfect sight of what
his wonder had directed him unto, now removed; the soldier takes a full view of
the distressed Lady, and soon finds his Sense had not been deluded by a
phantasm, and that she was a real woman, as at first glance he had apprehended
her to be. Nor could the Eclipse of her sorrow and dejection hinder, but he
might easily discern a certain charming luster irradiating the rare features of
her face, together with an awful and majestic sweetness, such as is wont to
strike respect and secret adoration into the hearts of the beholders; and being
the separable adjunct of singular beauty, cannot be concealed by the most
altering disguise of the extremest passion. Here the Divinity of her form
surprising his Soul, on one side; and the prodigious equ^page he saw her in
distracting it, on the other: the man was overwhelmed with amazement, and
wanted not much of becoming a statue. But, the light of his reason by little
and little breaking through those clouds, and di^persing them, he resumes his
courage and resolves to speak to her. Which as he was about to do, it chanced,
that lifting up her wearied head, and opening the curtains of her eyes, (which
till then had remained let down) to give them some ease by change of posture,
she percived a Man or Gho^t (for as yet she could not distinguish) standing
before her.

For her sorrow, and holy thought
Made her that, she herd him naught.
For she had welnye most her mind,
Though Pan, that men clepeth god of kind,
Were for her sorrows never so wroth.
But at the last, to sain right sothe,
She was ware of him, how he ^^ood,
Before her, and did of his hood,
And had ygret her, as best he could,
Debonairely, and nothing loud.
As Reverend Chaucer in his Dream: She startled a little at the unexpected
sight, but being wholly intent upon her sorrow, and strongly possessed with a
conceit, that the worst of evils that her nature was capable of, had already
befallen her; that if he were a Ghost, he could have no other errand to her,
but to ^nvite and hasten her to the place, whither her dearest Mate was gone
before; and if a Man, he could not be so void of humanity, as to disturb the
quiet of her innocent grief. These reflections (I say) quickly recomposed her,
so that she was able to demand an account of him of his being there. Which she
did in this manner.

Friend* said she, (and certainly, whatsoever you are, you can be no other to
me* who can have no enemy but life) would you any thing with me? If so, pray
speak it freely; I am not afraid to hear the worst tidings you can bring. Fate
has shot the most bloody and mortal of all its Arrows into me already, and all
that are to follow will be but favors. My misery, though great, has yet this
comfort* annexed to it* that it cannot possibly be greater. Lo, here, (pointing
to the Coffin) here lies my Heart, dead and cold as marble; and if I ^eem ^o be
alive, it is only because the soul of sorrow annimates me a while, till I have
prepared my self to descend a fitting Shade, to attend his, who by this time
expects me. But if on^y Chance has brought you hither, why do you not be gone?
What wrong have I ever done you, that should make you thus envy me the peace of
this solitary room, a place sacred, and pecular only to the dead? And (you
know) that for any, but Mourners, to intrude into their Dormitories, is a
profanation not e^^^ly expiated. Pray therefore, before you become further
guilty, depart, and leave me to accomplish that sacrifice, my Fidelity and Vow
oblige me to offer in this place.

To this (delivered with something of anger, and as much vehemence, as the
weakness of her half-starved body would permit) the Soldier modestly returns:
That no design at least, concerning her, but mere adventure, had led him into
that place, where he conceived nothing but horror and unwholesome damps had
resided; That the sight of a woman there, at that dead time of the night,
alone, and in that strange posture too, was sufficient to excuse his
admiration* and that to excuse his curiosity, for the satisfaction of which he
had approached her. That if therein he had, contrary to his intent, been an
occasion of disturbance to her, in the performance of those dismal Rites, her
afflicted imagination had caused her to please her self withal, (what they
were, he knew not) he was ready to ask her pardon for that his misfortune. And
as for any offense to the Manes of those, whose bodies were there deposited, he
conceived himself wholly innocent, as coming thither with no such black
purpose, as to dislodge their Relics, or violate their Sepulchers. Lastly,
that if his presence were ungrateful to her, (to whom he heartily wished a
serenity of mind, equal to the sweetness of her person) he was ready to depart,
notwithstanding the tenderness of his disposition made him have some sympathy
in her afflictions, and urged him to offer her that succor, which he was able
to afford. Which yet, he confessed, could not be great, considering the vast
disparity betwixt the meanness of his condition, and rudeness of education, on
his part; and the wise counsel, and consolatory arguments he found requisite,
on hers. However, if his diligence, yea, if his life, might be an^ way
serviceable to her, she should freely command him. And having said thus, he
remained silent.

Lo how goodly spoke this Knight,
As if it had be another wight,
And made it neither tough ne queint.
Here the Lady somewhat touched with the great humanity and gentleness of the
M^n, whom by his Arms she perceived to be a Soldier, and so had admitted some
apprehensions of a return more rough and agreeable to the manners of those of
his profession and rank, was offering to rise up, and dismiss him with thanks
due to his civility; when her macerated and languishing body, and her exhausted
spirits failing to be obedient to her soul* she sunk down ^n a swoon, and lay
speechless and ene^vated, cross her Husbands Coffin.

Which the honest Fellow perceiving, and fearing she had exp^red her very soul*
in that last great sigh that ^rake from her breast, at the instant of her fall;
he was not a little astonished: but yet he had so much reason left, as hastened
him to endeavor her recovery, by taking her up in his arms, gently reclining
her he^d, and pouring a little Win^ into her mouth, from a Bottle he had
brought with him, wherewith to fortify himself against the cold and moystness
of the weather. This so repaired her defect of spirits, that her heart and
arteries renewing their intermitted pulses, she soon came to her self again;
but so imperfectly, that though her vital Organs seemed to perform their
offices aright, yet those of voluntary motion wholly failed in theirs. Which
the Soldier observing, and concluding with himself, that the virtue of that
cordial, which infused into her in a small quantity, had so happily begun his
cure, if administ^ed in a greater dose, would not fail to finish it; he set the
bottle a second time to her mouth and forced her to take in a large draught.
The Wine, by reason of its sublety, soon dispersing through her whole body* and
rec^uiting her spirits, (consumed by immoderate grief, and long abstinence)
wrought so powerfully upon her, that she now feels her self not only revived,
but in some measure also comforted within her, (O! who can sufficiently admire
the excellency of this divine Liquor?) and her faculty of moving her self
restored; so that, erecting her self upon her legs, she turned to her
Physician, and disposing her eyes and countenance into such an aspect of
gentleness and sweetness, as intimated to him, she had no ill resentments of
the good offices his charity had done her; without other expression of
thankfulness, she sat down to repose her self upon the Coffin, the unfrequented
place affording no other seat.

The Man encouraged by the happy success of his assistance, and discreetly
taking the opportunity of that calm, which he discerned the Wine had brought
upon both her mind and spirits, began with gentle reasons (for Rhetorical
arguments he had none) to make her sensible of the extreme need she was in of
some speedy corporal refection: And not being so ceremonious, as to stay and
expect her answer, he instantly opens his Knapsack, and produces such cold and
homely Viands, as he, in cleanly manner had laid therein, for his own
provision: These he tenders to her, in the most humble and decent posture, the
incommodities of the time and place would admit of; entreating her, in
commiseration of her self, to second the good effect of the Wine, with a bit or
two of solid meat; and to dispense with the coorseness both of his diet and
service, her safety depending chiefly upon a speedy refreshment, and at the
present he was destitute of better accommodation.

Now, whether we ought to ascribe it to the sole hand of Fate, which laughs at
the vanity of men's resolutions, and by turning our hearts like rivers of water,
delights to convince us, How little that power is, we arrogant Mortals think we
have over our selves. Or, to the benign and sweetning efficacy of the Wine,
which (doubtless) is the most sovereign and present Antidote in Nature against
excess of sorrow: Or, to the force of the Soldiers Persuasions, which, though
not delivered with the advantage of smooth and courtly language, appear to have
been strong and prevalent: Or, to the secret strokes of Love, (as Philosophers
call them) which being observed always to wound deepest upon the sudden, and
as often in the depth of advers^ry, as in the height of ease and prosperity,
might (for ought we know) be, by the wanton god, i^flicted upon the Lady's
heart, and so wonderfully recompose all the confusions and disorders of her
soul, as at that very instant to tune all her faculties once more to the key of
the most sweet and harmonious of all our affe^tions. I say, to which of all
these probable causes, (or to the conspiracy of them all together) the Miracle
is to be imputed, I confess, I cannot determine; and therefore willingly
resign that nice enquiry to those Sages, who pretend to understand the secrets
of Women's hearts. But, so it fell out, that our Matron being now able to
command a Truce to her sorrow, cheerfully addressed her self to the victuals
set before her, and did eat moderately thereof: in the quiet and pleasantness
of her looks, sweetly betraying that inward agreableness and delight Nature
became sensible of, in that supply which had been too long denied her.

This our Man of War, (who, it seems by the story, was no fool) perceiving, and
understanding withal, that some s^asonable relief from reason and wise counsel
was as requisite, to the re-composure of her disordered mind, as his me^t and
drink had been, to the instauration of her infeebled body; he bethought himself
what to say, that might conduce to the mitigation of her violent sorrow. And,
though he were no Philosopher, nor Orator, his head not being altogether so
well furnished with arguments of consolation, as his Scrip and Bottle had been
with Provision; yet he had so competent a share of the light of Nature, (which,
as many wise men hold, shines always clearest in the darkness of necessity,
and sudden occasions) as directed him bluntly to tell her, That albeit moderate
humiliation of the body, and contristation of spirit, upon the decease of dear
friends and relations, were not to be disallowed, as being the effects of that
love and ^espect we bore them in our lives and pregnant testimonies of natural
affection, without which, Man degenerateth into the savageness of beasts: yet
an intemperate sorrow, and afflicting our selves beyond measure, was not only
unreasonable, but also unnatural; unreasonable, in that it does as little avail
to the good or benefit of the dead, as to the recalling them to life again;
they being in a state, which admits of no commerce with, or concernment for the
survivors. Unnatural, in that it impaireth the health of the body, and beclouds
the brightness of the understanding, both which are the chiefest treasures of
our lives, and every man is bound by the Law of Nature, to endeavor their
preservation, as much as in him lies. He added, That if she had suffered her
passion to transport her to any such extravagance, as an intent to destroy ^er
self, (as she had seemed to intimate, both by her expressions and deportment in
that place, which of it self appeared a fit Scene whereon to act such a
Tragedy) she ought with the soonest to retract it. For the greatest crime man
could commit, was Murder; and of all Murders, the most detestable was
self-Homicide, which the Creator did so abominate, as that he Had engraven upon
our very Nature, the Law of self-preservation, as if on purpose to prevent it.
And should Heaven be so merciful, as to forgive it, (which was dangerous to
presume) yet certainly the Ghost of her Husband would not; since, if he loved
her while alive, he could not be pleased with any violence she should offer to
her self, but would rather abhor the society of so great a Criminal, among the
Shades; at least, if Souls departed hence have any sense or cognizance of the
actions of Mortals upon Earth.

The pious Matron hearing this, could not refrain from interrupting her
counselor, but replied; That she must acknowledge the truth and weight of his
discourses; but yet, (and then she sighed) she had lost such a Jewel of a
Husband, as never woman lost. And therefore, if her grief were violent and
invincible, she deserved rather pity and excuse, than reprehension and
condemnation, both from gods and men. And more she would have said, but that a
fresh flood of tears running down her cheeks, robbed her lips of the freedom of
their motion.

The Soldier seeing this, and fearing a relapse, had immediate recourse to the
Antidote of the Bottle, of whose cordial juice he had so admirable experience:
and without more ado, he holds up her head with one hand, while with the other
he drencheth her with a round dose of the remaning liquor: And she had no
sooner felt the warmth and vigor of it in her stomach, but the fountains of
her tears were instantly sealed up, her forehead smoothed, and all her face
reduced to its native sweetness: Nay more, this last draught wrought so
divinely, that her mind also seemed perfectly restored to its ancient mildness
and tranquillity* and she became the most affable, compleasant, and cheerful
creature in the world, indeed as if a new Soul had been infused into her. This
great change considered, who can but fall into a rapture, in thinking of the
virtue of Wine, or forbear to repeat father Sancho's prayer, that Providence
would never suffer him to want good store of that celestial Nectar. But, our
argument is yet sad, and it imports us to be more serious. For,

Here some witty Disciple of Epicurus (arresting us in the middle of our
Narration) may take advantage to disparage the excellency and immortallity of
that noble essence, the reasonable Soul of man; and from the example of the
sovereign operation of the Wine upon this deplorable Lady, thus argue against
it.

If our inclinations and wills be so nearly dependent upon the humors and
temperament of our bodies, as to be, in a manner, the pure and natural
consequents or results from them; and that our humors and temperament be so
easily and soon variable, according to the various qualities of meats and
drinks received into our stomachs; both which seem verified in the instance of
this Ephesian Woman, who by the generous quality of the Wine, and nutritive
juice of the Meat, was, as it were, in a moment altered in her whole frame; of
a highly discontented and desperate wretch, becoming a quiet, tractable, and
good humored creature, quitting her morosity and contumacy in a murderous
resolution, for frank affability, yieldingness, and alacrity; Why should not
men believe, with his Master Epicurus, that the Soul is nothing else but a
certain composition or contexture of subtle Atoms, in such manner figured and
disposed, and natively endowed with such activity, as to animate the body, and
actuate all the members and organs of it; or, with Galen, that the Soul is but
the Harmony of Elements, concurring in the composition of the body, at first,
and in the same tenor continued afterward during life, by supplies of the most
subtle and refined parts of our nourishment? Especially, if they reflect upon
the admirable effects of Wine, which has the power to alter, not only the
temperam^nt of the body, but even that of the mind also; subduing the most
refractory and unbridled of all our passions, and raising up others as violent
in their room; in a word, so forcibly turning the needle of our affections and
inclinations from one extreme to another, and hurring them from point to point
round the whole Compass, as if it were it self a soul; at least, as it if had
the sovereignty over the best of souls.

Now if any such weak and prevaricating Epicurean shall cast this
stumbling block in our way; though we are loath to leave the Lady, now she is in
so go^d a humor, yet the honor we owe to that divine substance, which he
endeavors thus vilely to abase, obliges us to digress a while, and vouchsafe
him a short refutation.

Let him know therefore, that every individual man has two distinct Souls, the
one Rational, or Intellectual, and Incorruptible, as being of divine Original,
the breath of the Creator: The other only Sensitive, produced from the wombs of
Elements; common also to brute Animals, and therefore capable of dissolution.
This latter Soul, (or, more properly, Spirit) is the common Vinculum, Cement,
or Tie, betwixt the celestial and incorporeal nature, of the reasonable Soul,
and the terrestrial and corporeal nature of the Body: It is also the immediate
organ or instrument, by which the nobler Soul informs and acts in the
organs of the Body. Now, though we deny not, but the rational Soul, in respect
of this her alliance with the Body, is in some degree subject to the Laws of
Matter; and consequently, that the humors and temperament of the Body, have
some influence or power to alter and work upon the mind, especially in
weak-minded persons, who make no use of the arms of their reason, to encounter
and subdue the insurrections and assaults of sensual appetites: Yet cannot we
grant, that the impressions which the body makes upon the mind are such, as
suffice to question either the Immortality, or derogate from the Sovereignty of
the Soul over the Body.

Not the Immortality of it; because, as an Infant in the Mothers womb, though
sympathising with the Mother in all distempers, accidents, and symptoms that
befall her, during the time of the Child's connection to her body; is yet
capable of being, in his due season, separated from her, and emancipated from
his first state of compatibility into another of single subsistence: So the
Rational Soul, though, during its connection to the Body, subject to all
affections and sufferings thereof, is yet nevertheless capable of being
separated, in due season, from the Body, and surviving it to eternity, in a
state of ^implicity and incompatibility.

Nor the Sovereignty of it over the Body; because, as a Monarch,
notwithstanding he has sovereign and absolute power over his Subjects, may
sometimes be inclined by the sway of his servants; and yet without either
subjection of his Person, or diminution of his power: So the Soul, though
sometimes the affections of its subject, the Body, may incline or dispose it to
assent and compliance: yet does not that detract from either the excellency of
its nature, or the absoluteness of its dominion over the Body.

Besides, all those mutations of the affections, that arise from the variety of
humors, and temperament of the Body, whether caused by Diet, Wine, or
otherwise, are most ^nduely imputed to the Mind, or reasonable Soul it self,
whose essence being simple, severeth it from all essential mutations; and
indeed, extend no farther, than the Sensitive or the Brain, which is its
principal organ: So that as it does not derogate from the skill and ability of
an excellent Musician, that he cannot make good Music upon an ill and
untuneable Instrument; so likewise does it not from the dignity of the Soul,
that it cannot maintain the harmony of its Government, where the Brain is out
of tune. And this we think sufficient to evince that the mutual league or
alliance betwixt the Body and Mind is not so inseparable, but the Mind may both
continue its Sovereignty, while that league continues; and also continue its
Being, after the same league is dissolved by death.

But if the Adversary shall further urge us to inform him, What kind of
^ubstance we then conceive the Soul to be, we shall ingeniously confess, We do
not understand it. Nor are we ashamed of that ignorance, forasmuch as the
knowledge thereof is to be fetched, not from Reason or Philosophy, but from
Revelation Divine. For, seeing the substance of the Soul was not deduced or
extracted in its creation, from Matter, or Elements, as is manifest even from
the transcendency of its functions and operations: certainly it follows, that
the Laws of Matter or Elements, can in no wise comprehend its nature, or lead
to the knowledge of its substance: but leaving Philosophy to its proper
objects, we must expect it from the inspiration of the same Divinity, from
whence the substance of it was originally derived. But inspirations Divine
being very rare, our best way will be to suspend such subtle and Metaphysical
Enquiries, till death; which will soon satisfy them, and all other
difficulties of that nature. In the mean time, we beg excuse for thus long
digressing into so grave and unsuitable a Speculation, (which yet we could not
well avoid) from our Story, and for holding you upon the rack of suspense,
while your good nature makes you impatient till you are assu^ed of the Lady's
perfect recovery.

Returning to our Matron, I find my self surprised with more of wonder and
amazement, than the Soldier was when he first beheld her. Methinks I perceive
certain symptoms in her, which signify not only a change of humor, but even a
perfect metamorphosis of her person also; and so strangely is she altered, that
did not the continuance of her mourning habit (and yet she has dropped her Veil)
together with the circumstances of time and place, assure me to the contrary;
seriously I should not easily be persuaded that she is the same woman. She
appears now to have so little of the sorrowful Widow in her, that if I might
have the liberty Physiognomists take, of divining by outward signs, I should
take her for the most pleased and happy Bride in the world. Her forehead seems
not only smoothed, but dilated also to a more graceful largeness, and over-cast
with a delicate sanguine Dye. Her eyes sparkling again with luster, yet little
more then half open, with their amiable whites turned somewhat upward,
unsteady, bedewed with a Ruby moisture, and by stealth casting certain
languishing glances (such as are observed only in persons dying, and Lovers in
the ecstasy of delight) upon the Soldier. Her lips swelling with a delicious
ver-million tincture, and gently trembling; yet still preserving the decorum
and sweetness of her mouth. Her cheeks over^lowing with pleasing blushes. Her
head a little declin^ng, as when Modesty has a sec^et conflict with Desire.
She is in ^ kind of gentle disquiet, such as accompanies the impatience of the
soul, when it is eager and restless in pursu^^ of the object, whereon it has
fixed it^ chief felicity. A temperate and Balmy sweat, extilling from the pores
of her snow-white skin, helps to increase the kindly warmth of it, arising,
doubtless, from a great agitation of her spirits within, and an effusion of
them upon the outward parts, together with ^he vapors of her purest blood. In
a word, I discern in her a concourse of all those signs, which, as natural and
inseparable characters, are proper to great joy and pleasure.

What therefore should I think? To imagine that she, a woman of exempla^y
constancy, of chastity more cold and severe than the Goddess her self, who i^
said to be guardian of it; of sorrow (as your self can witness) almost
unparalled and invincible; whose tears are yet scarcely dry, still fitting in
a damp and horrid Charnel-house, at the dead time of the night, and upon the
Coffin of her Dearest All: To imagine (I say) that this Woman should be so soon
ingulphed in the delightful transports of a new Love, and that with a Fellow so
much a Stranger, so much her Inferior: This certainly is not only highly
improbable, but unpardonably scandalous; and he, doubtless, would have no easy
task to secure himself, from being torn in pieces by those of her Sex, who
should dare to entertain a thought so much conducing to their disparagement.

On the other side, the causes of suspicion are strong and manifest; for, if it
be true, (as certainly it is) that Nature, not contented only to have given Man
a tongue, wherewith to express his thoughts, has also imprinted on hi^
countenance the images of his most secret passions and intentions; and that
upon this ground Philosophers have built that most excellent of all Arts, the
Art of Knowing-Man, (the principal part of civil prudence) which teaches how
to dive into the most secret recesses, and hidden conceptions of the mind, only
by observing the Figures and Characters that her inward motions draw upon the
forehead, eyes and other parts of the face: I say, if this be true, we have
good reason to suspect* that our Matron has newly felt the power of Love's
inevitable Dart, and she now bu^ns as extremely in the fl^mes of amorous
desires of the Soldier, as she was lately f^ozen in the ice of so^^ow for her
Husband. Her looks and gestures betray her, and all the Airs of high Content
and Pleasu^e appearing in her face, will no longer permit me to doubt, but she
has lately tasted, and more then tasted, of that delight, which Lovers are
sensible of in the act of Fruition; and which being it self a kind of Ecstasy,
cannot be described, so as to be understood by any but such as feel it, nor
those, but when they feel it.

Nor need you longer remain in ^uspence: for, behold, she now throws her self
into the Soldiers Arms, she embraces him, she kisseth him, and with that
violence, that greediness, as if she were unsatisfied with the bare touches of
his lips, and longed to leave the impression of hers upon them. Nay, she takes
no care to shut them, as if that negligent posture were more natural to the
freedom of her kindness; or, as if she were in more readiness to receive that
soul, she would have him breath into her. Nor does any thing make her take off
her mouth from his, but the impatience to have her eyes so long empty of the
images of his form; and when she has feasted that sense, with giving and
receiving some fixed amorous looks, (for now they are no longer oblique glances)
she instantly returns again to her banquet of kisses, as if the pleasures of
her Eye, though high and ravishing among mutual Lovers, were yet inferior to
those of the Touch; or, as if the pleasures which each of these excellent
senses does affect the soul with, in such cases, were so great and violent, as
that she is not capable of being intent upon both at once, but is forced to
apply her self one while to one alone, another while to another, lest being
distracted betwixt them, she might lose any whit of what her passion tells her,
is requisite to consummate the fruition she aims at. In a word, (for we are
fallen upon a Subject, whose nature is not to admit of much discourse) there is
nothing of liberty, nothing of dalliance, nothing of caresses and indearment,
which this sportful Lady does not use, both to make her self grateful and
charming to her new Gallant, and to enkindle fresh ardors in him. So that if
what we see be not Venus her self, sporting with her beloved Mars; yet,
doubtless, it is one of her own daughters, in the height of solace with one of
his sons. But, here Modesty commands us to turn our backs upon this pleasant
couple; for, I perceive, he has not yet exhausted all his Ammunition, and that,
grown more sensible of the Magique of her wanton incitements, he is arming
himself for a second encounter, and stands ready to do that Ac^, which, though
the most pleasant and entrancing of all others, cannot yet be, with good
manners, named, much less looked upon in the doing, by strangers. And you, as
well as my self, know, how implacably angry the Cyprian goddess uses to be,
with such immodest curiosities, as dar^ to prye into the Mysteries of her
sacrifices, which she has therefore commanded to be offered in the dark, and
only by Couples. Let us, therefore, seasonably avert our yet innocent Eyes, and
leave these her new Votaries quietly to finish those Cytherean Rites they are
going about: especially since their Zeal is so servent, as not to scruple at
the nicety of making the Dead Husband's Coffin, the Altar, whereon to kindle
and exhale the incense they have brought. And while they are busy at their
silent devotions, let us have recourse to the Oracle of Reason, and there
consult about the powerful Cause of this great and admirable Change in our
Matron, who (you see) is no longer either Mourner, or Widow. *

To charge this sudden and prodigious Metamorphosis, upon the inherent
Mutability and Levity of Woman's Nature; though it may have somewhat of
Philosophy in it, yet cannot have much of wisdom; as importing more Reason,
than Safety. For, albeit, it be well known, that the softness and tenderness of
their Constitution is such, as renders them like wax, capable of any
impressions, and especially such as correspond with those their inclinations,
that Nature has implanted in them as goads to drive them on toward that
principal End, for which it has made them: yet, who is so rashly prodigal of
his life, as to incense that Revengeful sex, by calling in question that
Constancy in affection, which every Woman so much boasts of, and is ready to
defend even with her blood, and whereof every day produces so many notable
Examples? For my part, truly, notwithstanding I was never so happy, as to be
much in the Favor of Ladies; yet will not the honor I bear them, permit me
willingly to incur their displeasure, especially by asserting so scandalous
an Heresy: nor will I omit any opportunity to demonstrate, that the services I
desire to do them, are such as hold exact proportion with the strongest of
their Inclinations, and the highest of their Perfections. There is not an
Attribute their Excellencies challenge even in their own opinion, (which all
allow to be favorable enough,) but I am ready to give it them: nor can I doubt
the verity and weight of any thing they say, but admire and believe them as
Oracles. My Ears cannot so soon drink in their promises, as my Faith swallows
them down, for Sacr^mental and inviolable obligations. If I hear any Lady but
say, (though she use no protestations) that she either has been, or will be
constant and firm to her Servant; I am ready instantly to believe and swear,
the Heavens themselves even in their substance are more subject to Alteration,
that Nature her self can sooner change her Course, her Laws, and run into the
confusion of her primitive Chaos; than she be removed from the Object, upon
which she has placed her Love. When any Widow sighs and weeps at the funeral
of her Husband; I compassionate the Reality and Profoundness of her Grief, am
afraid she should despair, and destroy her self; and I sooner expect to see her
Husband revived, than her to entertain any the least thought of admitting
another into her bed. If I but hear the sad story of some young Virgin deprived
of her first Love; I cannot forbear to beat my breast, and cry out, Ah! what
pity it is, so fair a Flower should be lost to all Mankind, and wither for want
of a hand to gather it? For, certainly, she poor Soul, devoting the
disconsolate remainder of her days to solitude and Fidelity, will never be
brought to listen after another for a Bridegroom; no, without doubt she will
live and die a pure Virgin, and all the hopes she has, are to contemplate the
honors reserved in the Eliz^um, for such Maids as continue true to their
depared Sweet-hearts; Nor are your Venetian-locks half so good sec^rity of her
Chastity, as the memory of the vows she made to the Person, to whom she once
gave her Heart. Moreover, when I read those witty and elegant Writers, who have
exercised their Pens in illustrating Femal Glories, in erecting Galleries of
Heroical Women, and collecting Examples of their Constancy, Conjugal Love, and
other Virtues; O! how am I delighted, how am I enflamed with Emulation of that
honor and esteem those Authors have purchased to themselves thereby! And, had
my Stars been so propitious and bountiful to my Nativity, as to have inspired
me with a competent portion of Wit, I should not have conceived any Argument
either so worthy in it self, or so agreeable to my Genius, as the Commendation
of Ladies. And I shall not stick to confess to you, as my Friend, that once I
had a design in my head, to have compiled a History of the Lives of Constant
Wives and Mistresses: nor did any thing hinder my proceeding in that work, but
the discouragement I received from the vast Multitude of them; I foresaw my
whole Life would be too short but only to enumerate them, much more to give
each one her due praises. So that you may well perceive, how irreconcilable an
Antipathy I have to any such opinion, as derogates from the Honor due to the
Immutability of that delicate and sweet Sex, which the kindness of Nature made
for our Comfort, solace, and delight, and without the assistance of which we
should fall short of doing that most excellent Act, which witnesses the
perfection of our Being, which makes us immortal in spite of Death, and brings
us to some resemblance of the Divine original of all things. Let us, therefore,
search for some other Cause (besides the Levity of Woman's nature) to salve the
adventure that has befallen our Ephesian Matron.

To impute it to the force of the Wine the Soldier gave her, is to passby the
Grand and Principal Agent, and rest in what was but an Accessory at most; to
lay the whole weight of the wonder upon what seems to have had no more than a
finger in it. For, first the Quantity she drank, though sufficient to renovate
her spirits, cherish her vital warmth, and quicken the motion of her well-nigh
congealed blood; was yet too little to intoxicate her brain, and inflame her to
the height of desires so inconsistent, so repugnant to the frigid temper and
low condition it found her in. And, as to the Quality of it; though good Wine
be the Milk of Venus, and as subtle and powerful a betrayer of Chastity, as a
Nurse or Midwife, as Night, as Opportunity, yea as Gold it self, (which the
Ancients intimated in placing the Chapel of Venus behind the Temple of
Bacchus; and Aristotle, in that speaking of Wine and Drunkenness in his third
Problem, he touches upon Venery in his fourth: And is a chief reason why the
Rhenishwine Houses are so much frequented by our Gallants.) Yet does it seldom
work that effect, but where it meets with bodies predisposed to admit and
concur with its sprightly and heightning influence. For, as all Natural
Agents have their power and energy limited by the capacity of the Patients,
upon which they operate; so in particular, Wine is not so universal an inspirer
of Amorous and hot inclinations, as not sometimes to meet with resistance and
suppression, in persons of cold Temperaments, or chaste Resolutions. And,
therefore, whenever it heateth and irritateth to Courtship, it does not more
than add some sparks to that inward Fire, which, however cunningly raked up in
the ashes of apparent Modesty, was yet scorching before, and wanted not much of
breaking forth into a furious Flame. So that our Matron having not enlarged her
draughts beyond the bounds of temperance and sobriety; and being by her long
fasting, sorrow, and remaining in the cold, (all which are professed and
irreconcilable Enemies to Venus,) so debilitated, that we ought not to believe
she had much of that fuel in her veins, which the spirits of Wine enkindle,
when it produces that burning Appetite we are speaking of: It cannot consist
with reason to aggravate her facility, by transferring it wholly upon the
innocent means of her refreshment and recov^ry.

To what then may this extrraordina^y accid^nt be referred? Why, in my
judgment, to nothing so favorably and probably, as to the Author of so many
wonderful adventures, Love. For, though I will not undertake to explain the
mysterious nature of th^s Passion, which all are subject to, and none clearly
understand; and think it as well defined by him, who said, It is I know not
what, which came in I know not whence, and went away I know not how; as by
Socrates, who called it the Desire of Beauty; or, even by St. Thomas himself,
who affi^med it to be, A complacency of the Appetite in the thing which is
lovely: Yet thus much I have learned from dear experience, that it is an
imperious Passion, which, once entered upon the borde^s of the mind, instantly
becomes a Tyrant, overrunning all the faculties, subverting the Laws and
government of Reason, and demolishing all the Fortresses, that either Wisdom or
Modesty can raise against it* It is a kind of Magic, against which Nature has
given us no power of resistance; for, insinuating insensibly into the Soul,
like a mask't enemy, it suddenly surpriseth and ta^es possession of all the
strengths of it, and like a subtle poys^n, discovers not its entrance, till it
be secure of conquest. It proclaims war, and triumphs at once. It betrayeth us
with secret compl^cency, and then hurrieth us toward ruin, which is the more
inevitable, because we admit and suffer it with delight. Like the venomous
Spiders of Calabria* it destroys us with tickling, and making us dance. While
we take it for a sweet and charming harmony, it seduceth us to great and
dangerous disorders. It sco^neth the prevention of Prudence, and slighteth the
prepossession of Grief. It grows more violent by opposition; Counsels do but
heighten its fury, and dangers and difficulties, like water poured upon
wildfire, increase the flames of it; and prohibition provokes it. Being once
in love, we believe our desires cannot be noble, until they are extreme; nor
generous, u^less they be rash. The greatest, the wise^t, the most resolved
spirits, have felt the force of it; nor is Ambition it self (esteemed Lord
Paramount of all the Passions) able to contest with it, for absolute dominion
over the soul. For an example of Wisdom, reflect on Solomon, who laid-b^ all
his divine Precepts, and gave himself over to dotage upon Pharaoh's fair
daughter: and upon Appius Claudius, Decemvir of Rome, a Lawgiver, and most
austere man, who yet was transported to a mad degree of love. For one of
Ambition, we have Marcus Antonius, half-partner of the great Empire, who in the
Zenith of all his power and greatness, found the power of Cleopatra's beauty
strong enough to make him her willing captive. And for Resolution, we have the
memorable confession of Lais, That she had more Philosophers, and those Stoics
too, her servants, than men of any other sort. Divine Plato (you may remember)
confesses himself so passionately in love with his Archianassa, that forgetting
his doctrine of Idea's, he knew none but that of her face: and the grave
Stagirite sacrificed to his Herpelis, as to Ceres. But what need we these
examples, to assure the tyranny of Love over even Heroical Minds, when the
frequency of it has given occasion to men to call it the Heroical Passion:
And when the ancient Poets meant no other thing, by their fictions of the
Amors of Jupiter and other Deities, but this, that Love mastereth the greatest
and wisest men in the world. This considered, what wonder is it, if our Matron,
a weak and frail Creature, being shot at by the winged Archer (whose Arrows
have this Faculty, that they cure the Ulce^s of sorrow in a moment) and pierced
to the quick, soon yielded up her self to be led captive among those many
millions that attend his triumphant Chariot? So that if this new Affection of
hers be a Fault, certainly it is such a one as was not in her power to avoid;
and all who understand the force of such secret flames, as we may believe she
felt, will easily excuse.

Nor ought you to blame her for the Haste she made in the payment of that
Homage, which all women owe, and first or last must pay to the Inspirer of such
desires; since you know not what strong and pressing Arguments, and Motives the
adventurous Soldier used to induce her to that dispatch:

For the Soldier has ikneled so
And told her all his love, and all his woe,
And sworn so deep to her to be true,
For well or woe, and change for no new;
And as a false Lover so well can plain,
The selie Matron rewed on his pain;
And took him for husbond, and became his wife
For evermore, while that hem last life.
and since the wisest Women commonly esteem those servants most valiant and
worthy their favors, who are quickest in obtaining them: qui timide rogat,
docet negare. I am not ignorant, there are a sort of Heretics in Love, whose
prize no pleasures that come easily; and think it below their Courage to
engarrison that Fort* whose Gates are thrown open at first summons: as if
Delight were the more gr^teful and transcendent for being difficult and tedious
in acquisition. But, our Matron was none of these. She was too Wise, too
Masculine, to insist upon the nicety of a long Courtship, and thought not the
way to oblige, was by delay. No, finding her defenses weak, and the Besieger
strong; she conceived she might make the better conditions, by how much the
sooner she surrendered. Besides, Fortune had fai^ly given her an opportunity;
and P^udence would not permit her to neglect it. There have been many memorable
adventures in the World, in which, Time it self has had a principal hand: and
there are certain Fortunate and Critical Minutes wherein many things are to be
effected, that ever after are impossible. Why then should this Woman be accused
of extreme Levity, only for taking occasion by the Foretop, and, at si^st
Encontre, making sure of what, perhaps, she otherways might have lost. When you
are Hungry, and have good Meat before you; will you account it kindness in your
Host, to detain you from eating, with tedious Ceremonies, and long impertinent
discourses, till the dishes are grown cold and unsavory? What reason is there,
then, that any one should think it so heinous an offense against the modesty of
Woman-hood, that our Matron addressed her self to the satisfaction of an
appetite as Natural, (and many times as impatient of delay) as Hunger, as soon
as fortune had proffered her the means wherewithal to do it? For my part,
seriously (think others what they please) though I will not justify the Act
she did, yet I do not judge it to be the worse, because done so soon.

But, you (perhaps) may think, that I have clothed the deformity of this
Woman's fact, in too favorable and plausible a dress of Phrase; making king
that Noble and Heroique passion, Love, to be the Cause of her so easy
prostitution, which was, indeed, the mere and proper effect of a Carnal
Appetite, or base and unbrideled Lust.

To this, therefore, I say; that notwithstanding the nice distinction, which
Flattery has imagined, betwixt Love and Lust; as if one were the genuine
offspring of the Mind alone; the other the spurious issue of the Body, which
never intruded her self into the society of her Sister, without debauching and
dishonouring her Virgin and immaculate Nature: yet those unprejudicate
Enquirers, who have searched deep enough into the Origin and essence of that
desire of Conjunction in persons of different Sexes, or the Appetite of Male
and Female each to other, which is generally understood to be Love, (for, we
are not now upon the consideration of Amity, or Friendship) will not be easily
persuaded, that there is any so great dissimilitude or Disparity betwixt them,
as that they may not be deduced from one and the same principle, at least, that
they can be divided. This, I presume, will be somewhat dist^steful to the pure
and refined Disciples of the Platonique sect, who profess to be ennamoured only
on the beauties of the Soul, wholly rejecting all respects of flesh and blood,
and entirely devoting their Courtship to contemplate, and entranse themselves
in admiration of the lovely Idea's of Virtue: nor will the Ladies (made,
doubtless of a mold much finer and less sulphurous, than other courser Mortals
are,) be well pleased to hear their sweet and cleanly Flames should be aspersed
with the mixture of gross and sooty Exhalations, such as arise from ardors of
the Body. And, therefore, Truth it self, (which I prefer to all other
interests) engages me to assert this my opinion, and make it appear, that
though it be a Paradox, yet it is highly Reasonable. Which that I may do, I
ask leave to present you a Picture of Love in little, not copied from the
descriptions of other men's Phansies, but drawn to the life from the very
original of Nature, and (if I am not much mistaken) so full of true
resemblances, that who so shall attentively contemplate the same, will, I doubt
not, esteem it as a piece, not altogether unworthy to be preserved in the
Cabinet of their Memory.

Of Love in general.
MOst certain and manifest it is, that the proper object of all Appetites, is
Good, either Real, or only Apparent; and the Reason is, because the Object, in
which this Good is perceived or apprehended, is conducible to the perfection of
that thing, whose the Appetite is, or which desires it. For, Appetite or
desire always presupposes in the thing desiring, a want or Need of the thing
desired; and what is in want cannot be perfect, without receiving what it does
want So that the Agreeableness, or Profitableness, or Good, which is betwixt
the Nature of the thing wanted, or desired, and the perfection requisite in the
Nature of the thing wanting or desiring; is the Cause why it is desired, or
loved; and also the ground of that Pleasure or Delight, which is perceived in
the obtaining or Fruition of it. And this, certainly, is the Foundation of all
the Inclinations, that are to be found in Nature; and of the Love we have for
all that is truly, or seemingly Good for us. I say, Good for us; because there
is no such thing in the World, as Good Absolute; nor do we account any thing
Good, but with Respect to our selves.

Now, forasmuch as the agreeableness in the object, to the nature of the thing
desiring it, is the cause both of the Appetite's being particularly determined
to it, as that which serves to its perfection (which consists only in the
advancement of its Power into Act,) and also of that Pleasure which attends the
attainment of it: it cannot be denied, but the Appetite is accompanied or
rather ushered by a Faculty of Knowing or discerning that Agreeableness,
wheresoever it meets with it among objects, and that directs the Appetite
thereunto; since, what is not known to be Agreeable, cannot be desired. And
since those inward Motions, which men call Love and Pleasure, are but the
results of such Conceptions, as are formed in the Imagination and
Understanding, after the Appetite has been excited by the Good or Convenience
of the thing proposed to it; There must be therefore a faculty of knowing what
is Convenient, what not. And since to know a thing, is to have a Conception, or
Notion of it, correspondent to its Nature, which declares or manifests its
self only by its Qualities and Proprieties: those Qualities are the Signs or
Marks, by which the Faculty Cognitive is enabled to judge of its Good, or Evil,
and accordingly represent it to the Appetite, to be embraced or rejected. And
this, as it is the reason why Nature furnished all Animals with senses, and
Man, with both sense and Reason, by which, the Marks or Signs of Convenience in
objects, may be perceived, and so the Nature of the thing, in which they
appear, be made known to the Faculty, whose Function it is to judge of them: So
is it likewise of this, that whatsoever the senses (the observers of the marks
of Good and Evil) represent to the Imagination (which forms Conceptions of
them accordingly) for Good, Profitable, or Agreeable, is accounted Good, or
Fair, or Beautiful, and afterward desired or pursued by the Appetite. This
considered, the rule of pure Consequence teaches, that the reason why Corporal
Beauty so delights the senses, and rav^sheth the so^l, is only because it is
a Mark or Sign of that interior power or agreeableness, which is in the subject
to which it adhereth, and which our Appetite wants, in order to its
attainment of that perfection, which is required to its nature. So that, in
this Sense, we cannot much find fault with his definition of Beauty, who called
it the splendour of Goodness; nor condemn his of Love, who termed it Need, or
want. And this we conceive sufficient to adumbrate the Nature of Love in
General.

Of Love betwixt Male and Female.
TO come up closer to our Argument, therefore; I must put you in mind, that all
the Powers or Faculties, which together with their respective Appetites,
complete the Nature of Man, were conferred upon him for one of these two ends;
either for the well-being and conservation of him in his single and Individual
person; or for the conservation of him in specie, or in his kind. Those which
conduce to the well-being and conservation of him in his Person, are the
Faculties of Understanding or Reasoning of Imagination, of Memory, of Voluntary
Motion, of Life, and of Nutrition* And that which continues him in his Kind,
is the Faculty of Generation, or Procreation, by which he begets his like.

Now this Power-Generative, (for the rest belong not to our present Theme)
being not wholly in the Male, nor wholly in the Female, but divided betwixt
them, the Active part being the propriety of the Male, and the Passive of the
Female; so that the Conjunction of both Sexes is necessary to the perfection of
this Power, which consists in the actual production of their like: it is not
to be doubted, but the Appetite belonging to this Power, and by which both Male
and Female are solicited, and as it were, impelled to the Act of Generation, to
which this Faculty tends, is accompanied with a certain Knowledge of the
Goodness or Fitness in the object, upon which it is to operate, in order to the
attainment of its perfection. And this Goodness or Fitness, being not otherwise
to be known but by the ou^ward Marks, or signs of it appearing in Male and
Female, is no sooner discovered to the senses and Imagination, but the Appetite
attending that knowledge, is excited and set on work to Love and pursue that
object, in which that Fitness does appear. To speak more plainly; the Goodness
or Fitness to Generation in the Male, being nothing but the due Constitution of
him in all those Organs or Instruments, which Nature has ordained for the
performance of that Function, on his part; and likewise the Fitness in the
Female, being the due Constitution, of the Instruments, provided by Nature for
the execution of that passive power, which is on he^s; and the Marks, by which
that Fitness makes it self known, being the shape and form of the body, and all
its parts peculiar to each sex: hence it unavoidably follows, that the
Male-Beauty is only the mark of the good Constitution for the Active power in
Generation; as the Female-Beauty is only the mark of the Passive; and that the
Desire or Appetite, which arises upon the discovery of those signs, and
solliciteth either Male or Female to the Act of Conjunction, in order to the
perform^nce of the Function proper to the power Generative, is that passion we
call Love of a different sex. For, that desire, which carries toward the end,
must be introduced by a knowledge of the Fitness of the means tending thereto;
and that Fitness consisting in the due Constitution of all parts or organs
requisite to the attainment of the end, and discovering it self only by the
outward Pulchritude of the body, peculiar to each sex: it cannot be denied, but
that Fitness is the only Motive to the Appetite; nor that the Desire arising
upon the Knowledge of that Fitness, is the Love, and the only Love that can be
betwixt Male and Female, as Male and Female.

Of Love determined.
BUt beside this General Love of a different sex, which is no more but the
Appetite of Procreation Indefinite, there is yet another Love, in which the
same Appetite, though respecting diversity of sex, is yet determined to some
one particular Person; and such as are in this Passion, are properly said to be
in Love. Now the Question does concern, not the General Love betwixt Male and
Female, but this Particular or Determined Love: since this seems to be that,
which Ladys mean, when they distinguish Love from Lust.

Concerning this Personal Love, therefore, I say; that forasmuch as it cannot
be without dive^sity of Sex, and tends as violently, (if not more) to the
same end, as the general or indefinite Love does, viz. to the Act of
Procreation; and in both those respects does participate of that sensual
pleasure, which accompanies the indifferent Love: it follows, that Love of the
Sex, and Love of some one person of that Sex* make but one and the same
affection or Passion in Nature. Nor is there indeed, any other cause that makes
this Love quit its indifferency to all of that diverse Sex, and fix only upon
some one single person, but only this; that the person Loving, (or rather in
Love) apprehending that the Marks or Signs of the power Generative are more
conspicuous in the person loved, than in any other of that Sex; thereupon
imagines, that the Fruition of that person, (that is, the doing that Act,
whi^^ is necessary to continuation of the kind, with that person) will better
conduce to the satisfaction of the Appetite to Gene^ation, than the doing of it
with any other. So that this Opinion or Imagination in the person loving, is
the cause why the person loved, is courted and pu^sued with that violence of
desire, which always agitateth and disquieteth those that are in Love.

And hence it comes, that comely and proper men (as they call them) such as are
of good complexions, and well proportioned bodies, are generally in great
reputation with Women: and f^ir and Beautiful Women, in as high esteem and
honor with Men. For, it being a certain rule in Nature, that all inward powe^s
are more or less pe^fect, according ^o the more or less exact temperament and
structure of the parts of the body, upon which they depend; and that the exact
shape and constitution of the body and all its parts, are marks of the
perfection of the same powe^s: where the senses discover the Marks in a more
eminent measure, there the soul concludes to find the Powers themselves also
in as eminent a degree; and thereupon loves and pursues with proportionate
ardency, the person in whom they appear to be* For particular instance;
Comeliness and Strength of body in a Man, being signs of the goodness of the
power Generative; Women no sooner perceive those signs, but well understanding
what they signify, they cannot choose but have a greater liking, esteem and
inclination for such men, in whom they appear, than for others, in whom they do
not appear, at least so conspicuously. On the other side, sweetness of
complexon, justness of stature, and all that is comprised in the word Beauty,
being the Character which Nature has imprinted upon a Woman, by which we may
judge of the Goodness of the passive power in Generation, in such a Woman; no
sooner is this Character discerned by the eyes of men, but they instantly know
what it imports, and thereupon honor and love those Women, in whom that Mark
is seen more than others, in whom it does not show it self, in so full a
measure.

To confirm the Truth of this, besides, the Natural Reasons here alleged, we
have also the suffrage of Experience. For, what woman was ever in love with an
Eunuch, though othe^wise exceedingly handsome? Nay, what Woman is there, that
does not secretly despise any man, of whose insufficiency (whether Native, or
by Misfortune) in the power of Generation, she has had any the least notice?
on the otherside, what Man has ever continued his passion for a Woman, after
he has been once convinced of her impotency to club with him in the Act of
procreation* though she were, in all other things, the most beautiful of her
Sex? Which considered; I confess, I find my self a little inclined to suspect,
that few wives who have no Children by their Husbands, love them half so well
as they pretend: and that as few Husbands abstain from breach of wedlock, who
have reason to complain of the Barrenness of their Wives. For, though
Discretion may make them secret and ^lose in their amorous stealths, yet
(without the restraint of great virtue) desire of Issue, and experiment of
their Abilities, will go near to make them affect change.

Now, after all this, I hope it will be no longer a Paradox, that the
indefinite desire of different Sex (which is gene^^lly called Lust) and desire
of some one particular person of that different Sex (which is generally called
Love,) are one and the same Appetite to the Act of Procreation.

Nevertheless that I may not seem either ignorant of what has given occasion
to men to imagine a real difference betwixt them, or willing to innovate a
vulgar phrase, by which they express their different sentiments; I shall not
omit to observe, that when we Condemn this Appetite, we give it the
disparageing name of Lust; and when we Approve it, we cloth it in the neater
word, Love: so that Lust and Love, nevertheless, are no more but diverse Terms,
by which we express the diverse Conceptions we have of one and the same Passion.

Nor will it be a whit to my disadvantage, if I add also; that the desire of
different Sex in general, is not accompanied with that Delight of the Mind, as
the Determined or personal Love is; since, in the Former, men seek only to
please themselves, whereas in the Latter, they seek to please the Woman, whom
they love, as much as, if not more than themselves; and by how much more they
find themselves able to please their Mistresses, by so much the more are they
Delighted themselves. For, this Delight is not sensual, as being that Pleasure
or joy of the Mind, which consists in the opinion we have of our own Power or
Ability to please another, especially, the Person whom we love; and therefore
an effect rather of Charity (which is a Desire to assist another in obtaining
what he wants, or is pleased with when he has it) than of this Love betwixt
Male and Female, of which I now discourse: and so hinders not, Love and Lust to
be still one and the same thing, as I have proved it to be.

Of Platonic Love.
IT remains only, that we briefly examine the Purity of that Love* which such
profess, who distinguish themselves from the herd of sensual Inamorato's, by
the title of Platoniques: which that we may do impartially, it is requisite we
enquire first into the Original* and then the Truth o^ the Opinion, (which they
in profession at least) hold.

Plato, in his Dialogue entitled Convi^ium, or, The Banquet (the Argument
whereof is Honorable Love) brings in Socrates, a wise, grave, and continent
Philosopher, taking high delight in the society of Alcibiades, a beautiful
Youth; and loving him passionately, though virtuously, not for any sensual
respect, but only to impregnate him with that Knowledge and those Vi^tues, with
which his own Mind was pregnant, and which he perceived Alcibiades was capable
of, and which he desired to infuse into him by continual instructions and
example. And the sum of Plato's Opinion concerning this kind of Love, is this.
That a Man, whose Mind is full of Wisdom and other Virtues, is naturally
inclined to seek out, and dearly affect some beautiful person, of age and
capacity to conceive, in whom he may by frequent instructions and familiar
ways of insinuation, beget or produce the like Wisdom and Virtues: and that
the delight he receives therein is very great, as the Motive to it is very
honorable. And this is the Idea of true Platonic Love.

Now, as for the Truth of this opinion; though it be honorable to instruct the
ignorant, and sow the seeds of virtue in the minds of such as though fertile in
capacity, were yet actually barren of them before; and though it be a high
delight of the Mind to propagate knowledge, and make the wisdom of others
derive it self from the bounty of ours: yet am I not convinced, either that
there is any such strong natural inclination generally in wise and virtuous
persons, to seek and court the ignorant and prone to vice, that they may
instruct and make them like themselves; because Experience assures that few
Learned and Prudent men are so easily Communicative, as Plato represents
Socrates to have been, at least, out of mere Natural inclination; or that they
select none but beautiful and youthful persons to become their Scholars, since
Beauty of the body is not always a certain mark of singular Capacity in the
Mind to Science and Virtue; and there have been many eminent in both, who yet
were not adorned with Corporal comeliness.

In this particular, therefore, I am inclined to be of Lucian's belief, who,
though a great admirer of generous Friendship as his excellent discourse,
Entitled (...) sufficiently witnesses; does yet suspect the honesty of this
Platonique Love, in his (...), where he says plainly, Animi amorem quendam
cominiscuntur; and cum corporis pulchritudinem vereantur amare, virtutis sese
vocant amatores.

But, granting the opinion to be wholly true, as Plato delivers it; yet that
Inclination, or Desire to eradicate Ignorance and Vice, and plant Wisdom and
virtue in the Mind of another, is, indeed, nothing but Charity (which is a
generous passion, by which we are willing and desirous to assist and advance
others, as well as our selves) and has nothing in it of that Sexual Love, of
which we have now discoursed. Again, if Socrates's honorable Love, be the same
with our Charity (as evidently it is) why should it not be more honorable
Love, or greater Charity, to endeavor to give perfections of the Mind, to such
as are deficient in those of the body; than to give them to those, who seem so
much the less to desire or value their inward beauties, by how much the more
they possess of the ou^ward; since Want is always the measure of Charity?
Furthermore, though Socrates might be continent; it follows not, that therefore
all were so, who afterward adhered to this opinion: witness the Paedag^gue in
Petronius Arbiter, and many others, whose stories Modesty will not suffer me to
relate. Once more; Were all Plato^s Disciples in this particular, Continent;
yet it is not necessary their Love should be therefore Pure, or void of all
sensual respects: because (as the greatest Philosopher of our age has
excellently observed) The Continent have the passion they contain, as much, and
more than they that satiate the Appetite. But leaving Plato's opinion, let us
see how the Love which our Modern Platoniques pretend to be justifiable
thereby, do agree therewith.

First, our Platoniques are generally of different sexes; whereas Socrates and
his Darling, Alcibiades, were both Masculine. Secondly, ours are commonly both
Young, and in the Canicular or scorching years of life: but Socrates was
Ancient, and superannuated for the incitements of wanton desires. Thirdly, Ours
are generally far short of that Wisdom and those Virtues, that are requisite
to engender the like Excellencies in others. Again, Ours pretend to love,
because they would Learn, not Teach, and the Male Platonique (forsooth) is ever
admiring and extolling the content he takes in contemplating the Idea's of
those rare Virtues, which he discove^s daily in the Female while she (good
modest Soul) is as much transported with those perfections of Mind, she
discerns in Him: when indeed, those Virtues and Excellences are kept so close,
that no person else can perceive any such in either of them. Lastly, Ours,
(especially the Women) are for the most part Married to others, and so ought to
propagate Virtue, (if they have so much as to spare) rather in their Husbands
and children, than in Strangers: but, alas! those Relations are despised, in
comparison of the Noble L^ver; who alone deserves to be made wiser and better.
I could reckon up many other Differences more, but these are enough to let you
see, what vast disparity is betwixt the Platonique Love of the Ancients, and
that of Modern Puritan Lovers; and how little reason they have to usu^p either
the Example of Socrates, or authority of Plato, for their patron^ge* I hope,
therefore, the wise and virtuous will not be offended, if I take leave (without
prejudice to that noble Amity, called Friendship) to suspect that this
Platonique Passion is but an honorable pretense to conceal a sensual Appetite,
and is (in plain truth) Cousin German at least to that Love, which made our
Ephesian Matron so gentle and obliging to the Soldier. To whom I think we may
now return, without disturbing him in those pleasures, we saw him addressing
himself to reap, in the bosom of his new Mistress, when we left them to their
mutual solace..

See the vicisitudes of contrary Passions, which keep their turns in agitating
and perplexing the unsettled mind of Man! See the Unconstancy of Fortune, which
now frowns and turns her back upon the same person, whom but an hour since she
seemed to court, and indulge with the choicest of her favors! Or, see rather
the method of Fate, which entertaineth us with such a mixture of Sweet and
Bitter* as that no Pleasure is sincere; which (like Physicians) has few
Cordials without some Poison in them; and which seldom feasteth us, without
obliging us to taste of some dish of the second Course, that makes us, with
nauseousness and regrete, soon disgorge the delicious morsels of the first. For,

Returning to the So^ldier, whom not many minutes since, we left in a condition
of so much joy and pleasure, that Caesar himself, had he beheld him, could not
have fo^born to envy his felicity, and wish himself in his place; we find a
greater change in him, than he had lately wrought in the despairing Matron; and
perceive him striving more to destroy himself than he had before to preserve
Her. Fear, Anger, Rage, and Despair, have conspired to distract him. One while
he casts up his eyes, that flame with fury; beats his breast; tears his hair;
stampeth upon the ground; and uses all the gesture of a man transported to
perfect madness with sudden and violent passion. Another while, he stands
unmoved, silent, and with eyes fixed upon the earth; as if he were consulting
the infernal spirits, what to do with himself. Then suddenly starting, he rouls
about his sparkling eyes, lifts up his head, sighs as if he would crack the
Fibers of his heart, and breaks fo^th into short and incoherent, but desperate
ejaculations. He exclaims even against Heaven; he defies Fate to make him more
miserable; he reproaches Fortune with her giddiness; he curses the malevolence
of his Stars, and renounces Providence. Now he condemns himself for negligence;
then he reflects upon the innocent Woman, as the unhappy occasion of his
wretchedness; and thinking that then he had lighted upon the true and chief
cause of his Calamity, he falls to imprecate all the plagues and dire mischiefs
in nature upon the heads of her whole Sex and vomits out these blasphemies
against them.

Ah Woman, woman (says he) why did Nature make you, unless, repenting the
perfection she had given to Man, she found out you to lessen it again? For, Man
who otherwise would be more than half- Divine; only by being obnoxious to the
co^rupt temptations of Woman, is made less then half- Human. What misery ever
befell him, in which Woman had not a hand? What crime did he ever commit; to
which she did not incite him? What Tragedy has at any time been acted in the
Theater of the world, in which a Woman had not her part? What war, What
desolation, What ruin has not found its beginning in that mischievous Sex?
How many mighty Nations* flourishing Kingdoms, prosperous Commonwealths,
populous Cities, and noble Families, have owed their dest^uction* to either the
Malice or P^ide, or Lust of Woman? What are you Women, but the poison of Man's
Innocence and Peace, which Nature has gilded over with a splendid outside,
that we might swallow it down with the less suspicion? All your beauties, all
your charms are but like the apples of Sodom, which have fair and inviting
rinds, and yet within are nothing but stinking dust; you are the true Sirens,
that enchant us with the melody of your voice, and then hold us captives in the
chains of beastial slavery. You are the true Hiena's, that allure us with the
fairness of your skins; and when folly has brought us within your reach, you
leap upon us and devour us. You are the traiters to Wisdom; the impediment to
Industry; the obstacles to honor; the softners of co^urage; the perturbers of
tranquillity; the clogs to virtue, and goads that drive us to all Vice, Impiety
and Ruin. You are the Fools Paradise, the Wisemans Plague, and the grand Error
of Nature. What shall I say? I want words to express your pravity; as I did my
Reason when I set my foot into this unlucky, this fatal place.

Detestor omnes, horreo, fugeo, execror.
Sit ratio, sit natura, sit dirus furor;
Odisse placuit.
Having thus belched out this invective against poor innocent Women (who
deserved much better language at his hands) his wild imagination, (which
catches at any thing) wheels about, and he thus vomits the remainder of his
Choler upon himself.

What damned Spirit was it that conducted me into this Charnelhouse, and made
me quit my duty? Where was the care and Vigilance of my Good Angel, when he
left me to be seduced into this dismal Vault? Would I had fallen into a den of
Lions and Tigers, when I lighted upon this Woman here: then had I dyed
innocent, and without dishonor; whereas now I have contracted a guilt, whose
punishment is an infamous death, and that inevitable, unless I prevent the
stroke of Justice, and become my own Executioner. Which being the only refuge
my Disaster has left me; why am I thus slow in addressing my self unto it? why
do I waste that time, in weak and fruitless complaints, which I ought to employ
in delivering my self from the extremity of my misfortune, that is yet to
come? Dye I must by sentence of the Magistrate; why then should I defer to fall
by my own hand? To vindicate ones self from extreme, and otherwise inevitable
Calamity, by Sui-cide is not (certainly) a Crime, but an act of Heroique
Fortitude. I am resolved therefor, my sword shall prevent the ignominy of the
Gallows, and by forcing open the Gates of death, I will stop up the way to
public shame.

Caecus es^ ignis stimulatus ira
Nec Regicurat, patiturve fraenos:
Hand timet mortem; cupit ire in ipsos obvius enses.
Here* he puts a period to his desperate Harangue, and hasting to put one to
his life also, he suddenly unsheath's his sword; and beginning to set the Hilt
of it upon the ground, that he may cast himself upon the point, he is most
seasonably prevented by the pious Matron. Who being all this while ignorant of
the Cause of his Fury, had been wholly possessed with amazement at the
extravagant effects of it; so that she minded not a word of all those bitter
reproaches he had cast forth against her whole Sex; but quickly ^owsed out of
the stupifying fit of wonder, wherewith she had been invaded, by see^ng him
draw his sword; she throws her self into his arms, and partly by grasping his
hands, partly by the charms of her kisses, tea^s, and entreaties, she so far
becalms his rage, as that he seems not unwilling to prorogue at least the
execution of that self-assasination, he intended, until he had convinced her of
the necessity of it. He tells her therefore, in sho^t, that the body of a
certain notorious villain, which he had been appointed to gua^d, was taken down
from the Gibbet, an^ conveyed away; that the penalty of ^he like death,
denounced by the Governor against him and his fellows (who had transferred the
whole charge upon his care and vigilance) was certain and inevitable, unless he
killed himself, by way of prevention; that if she could have any sentiments of
kindness for so unfortunate a wretch, as this sad Accident had made him; there
was now no way left for her to express them, but by permitting him quietly to
avert the infamy of a public Execution, by a private withdrawing himself
into the other world; and that it was some content to him, in this his Agony,
that he should leave his body to be dissolved into the same dust with that of
her former Lover, of whose singular Worth, Fame has diffused so honorable a
report. And having thus hastily delivered to her the Cause of his desperate
Resolution, he begins again to free his hands of the encumbrance of hers, that
he may speedily effect it.

But, good and tender hearted Creature! her Affection was too great, to suffer
her to yield to any thing conducing to his death; and the more he strives to
disingage her breast from his, the closer she clings to him; vowing withal,
That if he wounded himself, it should be by forcing the sword first through her
body. ^o which she added, that she would not live to be so miserable, as to
lose so dear a person so soon, and in the same pl^ce, where she had been so
happy to find him unexpectedly; that, very Gratitude forbad her to consent to
the taking away his life, who had lately and miraculously prese^ved hers, and
(as she had some reason to believe) infused a new life into her; that it would
be less affliction to her, to die before him, than to survive and behold at
once the dead bodies of Two persons, each of which she had loved infinitely
above her own life; and that the death he so much dreaded from from the
Hangman, was not so unavoidable, as his Fears had made him imagine, but there
were other ways of evasion, besides self-murder, and would he but follow her
advice, she doubted not to put him upon such a course, as should procure both
his own security and her content. The Soldier, more effectually wrought upon by
this last clause, than by all else she had said; and remembering the old saying,
that Wom^n are always more subtle and ingenious at Evasions, in s^ddain
Exigences, than men: he easily promises (as who would not in his case?) to
listen to her Counsel, and pursue it also, if it appeared reasonable.

Well then, says this Good-Woman; since the body of the best and greatest of
mortals, is but a lump of Clay, after the departure of the soul, which gave it
life, sense, and motion; that all Relations are extinguished in Death, all
Piety is determined in the Grave; and that it is but Charity to use the
relics of the Dead, in case of necessity, to preserve the Living: why should
not I dispense with the Formality of posthume Respects to the putrefying Corpse
of my deceased Husband, and make use of it for the preservation of my living
Friend, with whose life my own is inseparably bound up, and whose danger*
therefore is equally mine? Come, therefore, my Dear, and let us take my
Husbands body out of his Coffin and place it upon the Gibbet, in the room of
the Malefactor, which you say has been stolen away. Death (you know) does so
change and disfigure the Countenance, as to disguise it from the knowledge of
even the most fam^liar Acquaintance. Who then can distinguish this his naked
body from the other* Besides, we will besmear his face with blood and dirt, and
rather than fail in any part of resemblance, break his Arms and L^gs, and make
the same wounds in him, the Executioner did in the Rogue's: so that his nearest
Relations shall not be able to find a difference, much less shall strangers,
who come to gaze upon such horrid spectacles, out of a savage Curiosity, and
commonly stand aloof off.

Here I cannot but cry out with Father, Chaucer, in his B^llad of the praise of
Women.

Lo what gentillesse these women have,
If we could know it for our rudeness.
How busy they be us to keep and save
Both in heal, and also in sickness,
And alwaie right sorry for our distress.
In every manner thus she we they routh,
Tthat in hem is all goodness and troth*
For of all creatures that ever were get and born,
This wot ye well, a woman was the best.
By her was recovered the bliss that we had lorne*
And through the woman we shall come to rest,
And been ^saved, if that our self lest.
Wherefore me thinks, if that we had grace,
We oughten honor women in every place.
The Soldier quickly approves the Woman's project, how to excuse him; and
having no time (for, now day was approaching) to insist upon acknowledgement
either of her great Love, or of the felicity of her Wit: he joins his strength
with hers, and removes the Husband's Corpse out of the Vault to the Gibbet,
whereon he places it* in the same posture, he had left the villains, omitting
no part of those resemblances she had suggested, as requisite to delude the
spectators. Which done, He and his incomparable Mistress secretly retire to his
obscure lodging, there to consult further, not only of their present safety,
but also how they might continue that mutual happiness, which Fortune had so
unexpectedly begun betwixt them. And while they are there deliberating, give me
leave to deliver my self of a certain Conceit I have in my head, which is,
that the witty invention this Matron lighted upon, on the sudden, and in
desperate extremity, was that which gave the first occasion to this Proverb, A
Woman's wit is always best at a dead lift.

FINIS.
THE Cimmerian MATRON, To which is added, THE MYSTERIES And MIRACLES OF LOVE.
By P. M. Gent.

Qui cavet, ne decipiatur; vix cavet, etiam cum cavet:
Etiam cum cavisse ratus est, is cautor captus est.
Plautus. In the SAVOY: Printed for Henry Herringman at the Sign of the Anchor
in the Lower-walk of the New-Exchange. 1668.

TO THE AUTHOR OF THE Ephesian Matron.
My dearest Friend,
YOu can be, I perceive, both highly obliging, and no less severe to one and
the same Person, in one and the same act. When you were pleased last Summer, to
send me your EPHESIAN MATRON, with strict Command, that I should entertain her,
as jealous Italians do their Mistresses, mew her up in my Cabinet, from sight
of the whole world: You sent a Present (I acknowledge) than which nothing could
have been more grateful; but you conjoined therewith a R^striction, than which
none could have been more rigorous. You gave me good Wine, and then gelt it
with Water; as the Spanish saying is of such, who destroy their own benefits.
Like an imperious Lord, you would have had the Lady my Tenent at your will: and
after you had made me a free Grant, you inserted a Proviso to render it void.
In a word, your Injunction to me, to restrain her from the conversation of all
others, was not only tyrannical and inhumane in it self (for, as our great
Moralist, and beloved Author, Chaucer, in the Wise of Bath's Prologue. He is to
great a Diggarde, that will werne
A man, to light a candle at his Lantern;)
but also inconsistent with both the goodness of her nature, and the freedom
of my enjoying the pleasures thereof. For,

First, the love of Liberty is no less natural to the soft and delicate Sex,
than to our harder and martial one: nor does our Magna Charta contain more
Privileges and Franchises, than theirs. Nay, their Beauty, as being the
Offspring of light (for Plato defined it to be the luster of the Soul
resplendent in the body) justifies their abhorrence of confinement. Henc^ no
Lawgivers have ever been so unreasonable, so unhumane, as to abridge Women of
their native privilege of a free and open conversation with Men. And we should
live but uncomfortably at best, if we denied them, especially while they are
young, handsome, and well dressed, to show themselves abroad in company, and
appear in frequent assemblies. Besides, as the same Wife of Bathe speaks in the
name of her whole sex, We love no man, that takes keep or charge
Where that we go; we woll be at our large.
Nor is it less difficult to put restraint upon a Lady of her sprightly and
debonaire humor, than to imprison the Sunbeams, catch the winds in a net* or
impound an Eagle (as the Aldermen of Gotham did a Cuckoo) within a hedge: and
he who is so well conceited of his vigilance, or power, as to attempt it; is
capable of being persuaded also, that he can make Glass malleable, square the
Circle, prevent the decay of beauty by Time, or repair it by the oil of Talk.
Novelty is a Loadstone to us all, especially to Women, who naturally are so
much given to Curiosity, that some Divines have held, our Great Grandmother Eve
had never longed for the forbidden fruit, had it not been forbidden. Hence that
Proverb, where Jealousy is Jailer, most break prison, which was literally
verified in the Wife of the Jailer, in Aristenatus; who though strictly watched
and locked up by the jealous Coxcomb her Husband, yet found an opportunity to
be loose, while she was in strong hold. Quisquis vectibus and seris
Custodit uxorem, cum sibi sapiens videatur Stultus est.


Again, you were not ignorant, that I am of so Charitable and Communicative a
Genius, that I hate to eat my morsels alone, though they be never so sweet and
delicious. One of my Maxims is, quo communius, eo suavius; the more delectable
I find any thing to my self, the more desirous I am to impart the same to my
Friends and Acquaintance: it being not the least of my pleasures, to
accommodate and please others.

Knowing, therefore, on one part, that the Ephesian was amiable, tempting and
witty; and on the other, that I am no Monopolizer of such Commodities, but of a
public spirit and free-hearted: You ought either not to have put her into my
hands, or not to have expected I should restrain her from showing her self to
the world. Nor am I to be so much blamed, for permitting her to go to London,
and appear openly in the New Exchange: as you are for imagining, that so fair
and polite a Creature deserved such harsh usage, as to be always confined with
me in an obscure Country Village among Fanatic Weavers and Cloth-workers.

But, you will say (I presume) as poor Malbecco said in excuse of his jealousy;
that you grounded your command of Secrecy, not upon distrust of the Matrons
virtue, but upon fear of having your judgment and honor brought into question,
if the censorious World should once come to know, who it was, that brought her
from Rome, and furnished her with so handsome an English dress. And this seems
a good Caution; but was it a prudent one? What cause had you for it? More than
one. Well then, I guess at your thoughts. You feared, lest some men might be of
so severe a brow, as to think you had forgotten the Gravity required in a
Philosopher, and one of your ripe years, while you indulged your Pen, the
liberty of touching upon an Amorous Argument, though without violation of
Modesty, and only for divertisement. You feared, lest others, less acquainted
with Books, might mistake the History for a Fiction; and you for the Author:
and thereupon take occasion to discredit both. You feared again, lest others
might pervert the sense of your Text by a false Comment, interpret what you
intended only for an innocent and facete Exercise of your Wit, to be a design
of Malice, a studied Satyr against Women. These are all the Reasons I can
imagine you could allege against my exposing to public view that good-natured
Stranger.

To let you see, then, how much you were deceived in the weight of these
Objections, suggested to you by your fear of Detraction and Scandal; and
withal briefly to Apologize for my own transgression of your Command, in
transmitting the Ephesian to the Press (for, that I own to my act:) I find my
self obliged to perpend them one by one in the balance of Equity.

In the First place, you had no reason to think Love to be so juvenile and
sooty an Argument, that you could not handle it without contracting stains upon
your Reputation. For, that Erotic passion is allowed by all learned men to be a
species of Melancholy, and in that name your very Profession gave you a just
title to inquire into the origin, nature, causes, signs, symptoms, etc.
thereof. Again, you have the authority of no less man than Marsilius Ficinus
(in praefat. ad Convivium Platonis) omnem Amorem honestum esse, and bonum,
omnesque amore dignos, qui been dicunt de amore; that all Love is honest and
good, and all those worthy to be loved, who speak well of it. Nor need you seek
long for Presidents in the case. Among Ancient Philosophers, you have Plato
((...)) Xenophon (sympos.) Theophrastus (if we may believe Athenaeus, lib. 13.
cap. 9.) Plutarch, Plotinus, Maximus Tyrius, Cadmus Milesius (who, as Langius,
in lib. 1. Epist. 24. observes out of Suidas, wrote no less than 14. Books of
Love) and Avicenna. Among the Moderns, Picus Mirandula, Marius Aequicola, both
in Italian; Kornmannus de linea Amoris lib. 3. Petrus Godefridus, in as many;
and P. Haedus. Of Physicians, you have Arnoldus de villa nova, Valleriola,
Aelian Montaltus, in their Treatises of Melancholy; Valescus de Taranta,
Gordonius, Hercules de Saxonia, Savanarola, Langius, Sennertus, Tulpius: some
of whom have written express Tractates of the nature and extent of
Love-melancholly; and others rare observations of the strange and prodigious
Effects of the same. Yea, of Divines themselves you have Examples not a few; of
which I shall put you in mind only of two, as most memorable. One is that of
Heliodorus, a reverend Bishop, who penned the famous Love-story of Theagines
and Chariclea: and when some sour Cato's of that time reprehended him for it,
chose rather (says Nicephorus, Histor. lib. 12. cap. 34.) to leave his
Bishopric, than disavow his Book. The other is of Aeneas Silvius, an ancient
Theologue; who after the 40. year of his age, as himself confesses (in
praefat. lib. 1.) composed that wanton Roman of Euryalus and Lucrecia. To these
I could have added other two eminent Divines of our own time and Nation, Mr
Burton, who wrote copiously and learnedly of Love-melancholy; and Dr. Tailer,
who thought it no diminution of his Gravity, to recount (if I remember well, in
his Art of living and dying virtuously) the very same story of the Ephesian
Matron, as an instance of Human Frail^y. Nay, I might allege the Loves of
Jacob and Rachel, of Sichem and Dinah, Juda and Thamar, Sampson and Dalilah,
David and Bersheba, Ammon and his Sister, Solomon and Pharaoh's Daughter, etc.
all mentioned in Sacred Writ. But I have been already too prolix in an Argument
so common and obvious. To conclude this first part, therefore, of your
Justification; if it were no dishonor to these grave Authors to have treated
of Love; why should you, a Natural Philosopher, and yet no old man, apprehend
it so dangerous a thing to your good name, to let the world know, you had
bestowed a few vacant hours, for your divertisement, upon the same Subject? Had
you been at that time twice as old as you are now, I, for my part, should have
liked your Characters of Love so much the be^ter: because (as the Lord John
answered the Queen in that I^alian Guazzo, lib. 4. de civili conversatione) a
grave and discreet Person is fi^test to discourse of Amorous adventures, as
having more experience, and more staid judgment, to make wholesome and useful
Remarques thereupon, for the advice and caution of greener heads.

As for your Second imaginary Objection, viz. that the Ephesian might be
thought the Minerva of your Brain, your natural Daughter, when indeed she was
only your adopted one: certainly, my dear Friend, you had laid aside your
considering-cap, when you sufferd so light a conceit to make any the least
impression upon your skull. For, every Scholar very well knows, that the Lady
being the Daughter of Petronius Arbiter, in his Satyricon, cannot therefore be
less then sixteen hundred years elder than you. Whether she was a True, or a
Romantique one; the Author having kept that in his breast, I am not able, after
so long an interval of time, to determine. But thus much I can assure those,
who doubt of her Reality; that Flavianus, apud Salisberiensem, affirms that the
Story is a true one, and that the Woman suffered death for her parricidal
wichedness and adultery, as he (in my judgment too severely) styles her fault.
This Parenthesis begets a Digression.

I say, too severely; because her Husband being newly dead of some violent
sickness, and she then a Widow, when she so graciously obliged the Soldier:
where was either her Parricide, or her Adultery? I should think, that either
the Ephesian Laws against removing the dead out of their Sepulchers, were
inhumanely strict; if her Judges were thereby obliged to account that fact in
her equivalent to Parricide: or that Flavianus had been misinformed in that
part of the Story. For, as to the other part of her Charge, her so facil and
sudden giving her self up to the Soldiers embraces; had the Laws of the place
made it capital (which I believe they did not, because I never read of any Laws
so extremely rigorous, in any of the Cities of Greece) yet she had wit enough
to evade them, by pretending Marriage to her new Lover. Here I have an
opportunity to observe to you, that though that excellent Divine, newly quoted,
Dr. Tailor, was pleased so to sweeten and extenuate the Levity of the Woman, as
to tell his Readers, that she married the Soldier in the Vault, yet I cannot
assent to him in that particular. The words of Petronius, indeed, are these;
Jacuerunt, (or, as the best Critiques read, latuerunt) una, non tantum illa
nocte, qua nuptias fecerunt, sed postero etiam ac tertio die, etc. But all who
are conversant in the Latin tongue, well understand, that nubere and nuptias
facere, is by a modest Metalepsis used, by the ancient Romans, pro (...); as
Plautus used it, Pseud. act. 1. scen. 3. and as Voscius (in Etymologic.)
judiciously holds Petronius to have used it in this place. Which I occasionally
touched upon, not as a defect of Judgment, but an excess of Charity in that
learned and pious Divine; who was willing to honest the poor woman's lapse, by
an interpretation to her most favorable, and to her Sex least offensive.

To return to my tracing of the Story it self. Jan. Dousa, in his Notes upon
this Chapter of Petronius, tells us, that the very same Novel was put into
elegant Latin verse by one Romulus, an antique Grammarian; that long after that
it was copiously wri^ten in the German language, and thence translated again
into Latin, by Fr. Modius, a Civilian, who changed the persons, new-mold^d the
Story, and published it under this Title: Ludus septem sapientum de Astrei,
regii adolescentis, educatione, periculis, etc. and that about the year of
Christ ci^. cc. it was rendered in French Rithm by Hebertus, a Clerk. To these I
could have added others also, through whose hands our Matron passed, had I not
wanted the latest Edition of Petronius by Gabbema, who has been diligent in
deriving her pedigree; and to whom I am compelled to refer you. Mean while it
is well known even to the vulgar of our Nation, that she has found a place in
the Book of the Seven Wise Masters; and is the chief Person in the Comedy
called the Widows Tears. Now it being thus credible, that the Ephesian was no
Roman, no Fairy or Child of Fancy, but a very Woman of flesh and blood, and
notoriously manifest, that she ^ath been Favorite to many learned and grave
Men, who have handed her down ((...)) from Nation to Nation, from age to age,
keeping the torch of her beauty unextinct, and giving her a perpetual Youth by
the Nepenthe of their immortal Penns: whoever shall take her for Your Daughter
(I do not say Mistress) will discover ignorance enough to render him the
subject of scorn and dirision; nor will he more easily find belief among the
sober and judicious, than if he should report you to be the Soldier, who cured
her of her Grief, by easing himself of his Love.

As for the Last Objection, your fear to fall into the displeasure of the
Ladies, who being naturally jealous of the honor of their sex, possibly might
suspect the Book to be at best but a well-disguis'd Satyr against them: I
conceive that to be already sufficiently prevented, partly by what you have, in
many places of the Book it self, said in honor of their Virtues; par^ly by my
precedent solutions of your two former Objections. For, since I have made it
apparent, that you are not the first Philosopher who has exercised his wit and
pen in consideration of their admirable power of Love, nor Author of Story of
that Amorous Adventure of the Ephesian, which Ladies are most likely to
condemn: I see no reason, why any Woman should take offense, for that you have
in chaste and unblameable language illustrated the nature of the Former, by
observing the wonderful Accidents of the Later. All causes are best known by
their effects: and in all Arguments, simple Discourses, without Examples, are
flat and unpersuasive. To me, therefore, it seems rather a virtue, than a fault
in you, that having designed to examine the forces of that Universal Tyrann,
Love; You made choice of a short and memorable Story, in which the same were
clearly Exemplified. Besides this, I can allege in your defense, what the
learned Mycillus, being reprehended for translating some of the profaner
Dialogues of Lucian, pleaded in his own; Operi suscepto serviendum fuit, you
were obliged to comply with your Province, and to prosecute the work you had
taken in hand.

If it be farther urged, that you bring in the Soldier most bitterly railing
upon, and blaspheming the whole Sex, I answer, that you could not with decency
avoid it. Because you were bound in your Narration to introduce him in that
distemper of Passion, into which his misfortune and danger had transported him.
O^herwise you could not conserve the (...) (as Aristotle properly calls it) the
Decorum of either his Person, or his passion, or the Occasion of it. For, he is
delivered to have been no accomplished and polite Courtier, nor unpassionate
Stoic, but a blunt and Choleric Fellow, a Common Soldier: and being enraged at
the stealing away of the Malefactors Carcass from the Gibbet, and reflecting
upon the obliging Lady (who, as you well observe, deserved more respect and
gratitude at his hands) as the chief cause of his negligence: it is highly
probable, that he brake forth into dire imprecations and reproaches, such
perhaps as those, in which you imagine him to have vented his furious
resentments. In Poets, all acknowledge it an Excellency, to accomodate every
person whom they introduce, with language and action agreeable to his Character
and Passion: why then should the same be a Vice in you, where you were obliged
to represent a person almost distracted with a syndrome of Remorse* Fear, Anger
and Despair; the least of which was violent enough to make him forget his late
obligations to his Mistress, and the civility due to her Sex? So that it may
with more justice be said, that the Soldier put that invective Harangue into
your Pen; than it can, that you put it into his mouth. In fine, I dare be so
far your Compurgator in the case, as to swear, that it went against your very
soul to be necessitated, by the condition of your Theme, to say any thing that
tended to the disparagement of the beautiful and delicate Sex: and however you
may suffer by the prejudice of some Ladies, to whom your Person and
Conversation are ^nknown; there are others, I am sure, who will vindicate you
from the infamy of a Woman-hater.

Now, my dearest Friend, if what you have heard me say here, in way of a short
Remonstrance of the Innocence and Candor of your Ephesian, be judged by you
sufficient to reconcile the Ladies to her, and my self to you, after my offense
committed against both, in exposing her to public censure: truly I shall think
my self no less happy in being instrumental to your vindication, than I have
thought my self unhappy in being so to your Scandal. If not, there is no way
left for me to expia^e my fault, but by involving my self also in the same
danger, to which my excess of goodnature has made you obnoxious. Having in
sport thrown you into the river, and finding you unable to bear up against the
impetuous torrent of Feminine prejudice, that is violent enough to overset a
Navy: I am resolved to leap in after, and either save you from sinking, or
perish with you. Well then, to le^ you see how far I dare to hazard my own
fame, to preserve yours; behold a Second Matron, whose Amorous Adventure very
nearly resembles that of the kind Ephesian. She in like manner falls into an
Intrigue (as they now adays call it) with a Soldier, and at first sight too:
and encountering no small difficulty in the pursuit of her love, is witty enough
both to surmount that, and conceal her stolen pleasures, by a trick that passed
for no less than a Miracle. Having found the Novel in the Comus sive
Phagesiposia Cimmeria of that witty and erudite Noble Italian, Erycius
Puteanus; and out of his elegant Latin translated into plain English; I now
bring it as a Handmaid to wait upon the Ephesian, at least, if you think it
worthy of that honor. And because I would have this Cimmerian come as near to
the Ephesian in Habit and Equipage, as she does in Manners and Fortune; I have
taken a little pains to dress her, as you did the other, li^e the Mistress of a
Philosopher. Finding it very undecent to interlace the Narration with
Philosophical Speculations, as you have done the former; because her adventure
admits no pauses or intervals, wherein the Reader ought to be diverted for
Modesty sake: I have been constrained, therefore, to put all her Garniture in
one place, at the end, where you will meet with it under the title of The
Mysteries and Miracles of Love.

Here ends the Squiers Prologue, and here after follows his Tale.
THE CIMMERIAN MATRON.
ON the Confines of Cimmeria, there, not long since lived a certain
Gentlewoman, of shape more exact than a Statue formed by all the rules of Leon
Battista Alberti; of features and complexion more sweet and delicate then those
of Venus her self; of reputation as clear and immaculate as Diana. Wife she was
to one, whom Usury had made Rich, and Riches eminent; with whom she enjoyed all
the pleasures of conjugal Love and Fidelity; not so much as dreaming of any
content but in his indulgence and embraces.

But, ah! how mutable are humane Affections! how many fa^lts does time
discover, which were before concealed! This Woman had but newly acquired the
Fame of a chaste and obsequious Wife, when Lust s^cceeding into the place of
honesty, wrought so unhappy a change in her, that now she began to nauseate the
wholesome viands of the Marriage bed, and long for strange and forbidden
delicates; insomuch, that her former humor of complacency and fondness by
degrees degenerated into a perfect abhorrence of the Person and Company of her
most uxorious Husband.

For, having by accident cast her eyes upon a young Soldier, naked, and bathing
himself; Love entered into them together with the image of the ^empting object.
[ nudus membra Pyra^mon --

She saw the man, that he was like a Knight,
And suffisaunt of person and of might,
And like to been a very Gentilman*
And well his words he beset can,
And had a noble visage for the no^es,
And formed well of brawne and of bones;
And after Venus had soche faireness,
That no man might be half so fair I guess:
And well a Lord he seemed ^or to be.
And for h^ was a stranger, some what she
Liked him the bet; as God do bote,
To some folk often new thing is sote.]
Yet be not too severe in condemning the passion of a frail Woman, You, who
know how strong and quick assaults Cupid often makes upon Forts so weakly
manned, and with what unresistable Artillery he is provided. Her Husband
observing a change in her, at first admired what should be the cause of her
discontent, and coldness toward him; using in the mean time all imaginable
caresses and endearments to sweeten her melancholy, and dispel those gloomy
clouds that had overcast her joys* After all his Courtship and Arts of Kindness
proving unsuccessful, he grew suspicious (what was indeed too true) that she
had removed her Affection from him, and fixed it upon some other person. For,
though she carefully concealed from him her flame, and often endeavored to
suppress it, even with showrs of tears, especially when 'twas newly kindled:
yet that, like wildfire, raging the more by opposition, and breaking forth in
fl^shes of discontent, she was not able so to hide it, but that he perceived
her heart was scorched: Her melancholy had quite altered the graceful and
charming Air of her face, consumed her spirits, destroyed the Roses in her
chee^s, bedimm'd the luster of her sparkling eyes, and reduced her to a
dejected and languishing condition. ^o these symptoms you may add restless
nights, broken discourses, love of solitude, sudden startings, unwilling
sighs, and all other signs, by which a wounded heart is forced to betray it
self. No wonder then, if the vigilant Usurer soon became confirmed in his
jealousy; which yet he used as much cunning to obscure from her, as she had to
conceal her passion from him. But Love is no less difficult to be resisted,
than to be disguised: and now our impatient Matron can no longer live without
the help of her Gallant.

Having therefore some knowledge of a certain wise Woman of the same Town one
of the Grand-daughte^s of Pandarus, such as the French call Messageurs d'
Amor, a Bawd of Quality, she addresses to her, and without much difficulty
eng^ges her to go Ambassadress to the Man of Arms, and negotiate wi^h him about
a fi^m League of Love, and a private inte^view upon the first fair oppo^tunity.
In this Treaty, there needed not much of Rhetoric on the part of this Oratrix,
the Soldier, (who was indeed so handsome and proper a Fellow, that Diana her
self might without any disparagement to her judgment, have preferred him to
Endymion; and wanted not wit enough to se^ve himself of so advantageous an
occasion) accepting and assenting to the conditions propo^ed with all alacrity
and gratitude imaginable. So that now nothing was wanting to the mutual
ratification o^ the amorous Ligue, but an opportunity for the two Princes (for,
such their hopes had made them) interchangeably to sign and Seal, which the
watchfulness of the jealous Husband made extremely difficult: he making it his
main business to observe, not only all the motions of her feet, and wither she
went at any time, but those also of her eyes; so that you would have thought
the beatious Io once again committed to the custody of Argus.

Among a thousand other plots and stratagems his tro^bled Imag^nation suggested
to him, toward the discovery of what he equally feared and desired to know, he
at last fixes upon this, as most hopeful, to pretend a jou^ney from home, and
by an unexpected return to surprise his wife; confident, by this artifice, he
should at length arrive at the certain knowledge both of the nature and cause
of her disease. According to this politic resolution, he prepares for a long
journey, and di^sembling a sad valediction to his dear Fidessa (who, you may
believe, as truly counterfeited sorrow as himself, and moistened her parting
kisses with artificial tears) sets forth early in the morning, in an hour long
wished for on both sides, nor unlucky to either.

No sooner was the Husband gone, than the glad Wife thinking that now the
propitious time drew near, when her desires should be crowned with solid
pleasures, and her imaginary embraces exchanged for real ones; soon gave
Commission to her Emissary, who was the very buckle and thong of Venery,
instantly to advertise her Paramore, that the Festival of Love was come, and
that the Husbands departure had opened the door to their meeting with freedom
and security. This welcome message was as speedily delivered as received, and
an Assignation made, that immediately after the wearied Sun had refigned his
Empire in the upper Hemisphere to Night, and mortals ^egan to supply his
absence with an artificial day of Candlelight; our valiant and well provided
Lover should come to the back door of his Saints Chapel, by which he should be
introduced and conducted into the Chancel, and thence to the Altar, upon which
he was to offer up his Sacrifice and pay his vows; and that done, return to his
quarters, without the least suspicion of the Neighbors. In the mean time, lest
the Incense he b^ought with him might not be sufficient to maintain the flame
of love the whole night, and his zeal cool through too much fervency at first;
the provident Matron made ready a Collation of generous Wines, Conserves, and
other restorative quelques C^oses, to help carry on the work; and set them in
order upon a little Table in her bedchamber. She contrived also her affair so
circumspectly, as to send her Chambermaid, who was indeed the Husbands
principal spy over her, to the wedding of a Neighbors Daughter, not without
reason, presuming that the wenches curiosity to pry into the pleasant rites of
the Bridal night, and her ambition to be most lucky in the superstitious sport
throwing the Brides stocking, would long enough divert her from her charge at
home. And thus far all things went on according to their wishes, nor did any
thoughts disquiet the calmer breasts of our pair of Lovers, but such as usually
arise from vehement expectation; the Soldier dreaming of nothing but Victory,
Triumph, and Spoils; and the Lady of high content in having her Fort new manned,
and making the Assailant her Captive. But, Oh, the capriciousness of Fortune!
or rather the vigilance of Jealousy!

The appointed hour being at length come, the punctual Soldier making haste to
enter upon his Duty, to guard the fair Matron from Specter and Goblins, in the
absence of her Husband; advances to the postern door of her house, as he had
been directed, but finding it shut, and hearing no noise within, he made a
halt, and very discreetly forbearing to knock, fell to posture of a diligent
Sentinel, softly walking to and fro in the narrow Alley that led to the house
from the Street, where while he was exercising his patience, it most unluckily
happened, that the no less vigilant and impatient Husband (who had concealed
himself at a Friends in the Neighborhood) returned by the same Alley, and
stealing along as sof^ly and warily as a Thief to commit Burglary, takes good
notice of the night-walker, whom he immediately concluded within himself to be
the Mars, on whom his Venus was so furiously ennamour'd; whereupon, entering his
house, and locking the door behind him, with as little noise as a Pick-lock; he
finds his wife in a dress of neat and rich night linen, like a Bride going to
bed, which adding more Fuel to his suspicion and exasperating the sense of his
wrong; he puts on the countenance of rage and terror, with enflamed and
threatening eyes staring, as Caesar's Ghost upon Brutus, upon his poor surprised
wife, who stood as still, by reason of her astonishment, as if she had been
congealed by lightning, or transformed into a Statue. For shame upon the
unexpected frustration of an evil design, does ususually produce confusion. Her
soul, conscious of infidelity hitherto only in imagination and design, began to
presage more evils, than it could have deserved, had her design succeeded i^to
Act^ the violence of her passion being favorably considered. But, could she so
soon have recollected her disordered spirits, and recovered the use of her
tongue; her Husband's fury would have restrained her, and he yet could only
breath revenge, not utter it in words. After a little pause, going into her
bedchamber, he there encounters with fresh causes of suspicion; the
dressing-Table by the bedside richly furnished with provoking delicates, clean
sheets, perfumed pillows, and above all, his spy, the Chambermaid, conjured
out of the way; confirmed in his jealousy by these convincing signs, he now
meditates upon nothing but Revenge, and how to effect it with the more security
and appearance of justice. Resolved, therefore, by cruelty to extort a
Confession, and so make her her own accuser; without speaking a word, he strips
her to her snow-white skin, and carrying her down into the Porch, there, binds
her delicate Arms to one of the Pillars: had you been so happy to have beheld
her in that deplorable posture, doubtless you would have thought you had seen
the beautiful Andromede a second time chained naked to a Rock, and one, though
perhaps not quite so chaste as she, yet, if Beauty had its due, She could not
merit any bonds, beside
Those, with which Lovers mutualy are tied;
and well worthy another Perseus to deliver, love and enjoy her. The
hardhearted Usurer, fancying to himself some satisfaction in this first Act of
the Tragedy he intended; retires to his bed (though likely to have but a
melancholy night of it, without his Consort) hoping by sleep to recompose his
troubled mind.

In the mean time, our Man of War, who had promised to himself the height of
all enjoyments, lay (Soldier like) perdue in the open Air; and when he had,
till almost midnight in vain watched his Mistresses door, which still continued
as fast shut, as the Temple of Ianus in time of peace, he returns back to the
house of his She-Officer the Bawd, whom he found half naked, and prepared to
keep one of Venus's Vigils with a Client of hers (for her Clients were often
forced to gratify her, for soliciting their Love-causes, with such Fees) whom
at that very hour she expected. Ho, Mother, says he, with what te^ious hope do
I purchase from the Lady the pleasure promised me? I have already consumed a
whole hour (longer indeed than a whole winters night) in fruitless expectation;
while she, who sought my Love, and made the Assignation, has not vouchsafed to
open the door. It Is very strange, methinks, unless having forgot both her self
and her appointment, she has buried her amor in sleep. Go thy ways, dear
Mother, and enquire the cause of my disappointment, and what commands the Lady
has for me; if to readvance, lo, I am ready for the combat; if to retreat, I
am as ready to march off with flying Colors, and deferr the encounter till
another night. Scarcely were these last words out of his mouth, when the Bawd,
incited partly by the sense of her honor (for, those of her Trade must be
punctual in their assignations) and partly by commiseration of his impatience,
hastily casting a Mantle, (a most useful garment in such cases) over her
shoulders, catches the Soldier by the hand, and conducts him back to the door;
which she opens with a Key given her by the Matron some while before, for her
private access upon occasion, and entreating him to stand close and silent for
a few minutes without, she passes on through the Wood-yard and a little Garden,
till she arrived at the walk under the Porch, where groping along, she had
almost run her head against ^he living Statue there bound to a Pillar; which
she no sooner discerned, but surpised with horror, as at sight of a Ghost or
Apparition, she stood still and gazed with affrighted eyes. The milky whiteness
of the Matrons skin to some degree, overcame the darkness of the moonless
night; nor would it suffer her to be longer unperceived; so that the Bawd soon
recovering her self out of her first consternation, boldly approaches to the
Lady; and, omitting to enquire into the cause of her being in that strange and
lamentable condition, delivers in few words the Soldiers message, even at that
time not ungrateful to the receiver; for, the Lady finding the chains of Love
more intolerable, than those of her barbarous Husband; and endowed with a Wit
no whit inferior to her Beauty; soon apprehended, that now she had an
opportunity to convert this her misfortune into a benefit, and that she ought
not to despond, nor despair of reaping the delights, which the jealousy of her
Husband had hitherto prevented. Thus rea^imated with fresh hope, she begins to
wheedle the Engineer of Lust, and pouring the oil of good language and
endearing expressions into her ears, My dearest Mother, says she, my good
Angel, I can bear this my affliction with patience, becoming the undaunted
resolution of a Lover; yea more, I can change it into a complete Felicity, if
you will but vouchsafe me your assistance; I know no way to revenge my Husbands
cruelty, but to deserve it by acting what he so much fears. Help me then to
meet and embrace my Lover, that he who has so kindly entertained my
invitation, so justly observed our appointment, may either accuse me of breach
of faith, nor want the reward due to his Fidelity. Let your courteous hands
untie the knots that hamper mine, and for a few minutes free me from these
bonds, that I may really deserve them. These charms soon wrought upon the good
nature of the Bawd, who was the very Renet of Concupiscence; so that she
readily disingaged her Daughter from the cold embraces of the Pillar.

Who being thus happily at liberty, assumes more Courage and Wit from her
adventure; and falls to persuade her deliverer to su^fer her self to be bound
with the same Cord, and to supply her room only while she hasted to her
Gallant, to give him an assurance of her constancy; she told her, there could
be no hazard in the enterprise, since her Husband was in his bed and fast
asleep, and all the world but themselves at quiet, and within two minutes she
would return and relieve her: Hereto she added such golden promises, as might
have overcome a mind much more obstinate and doubtful than the Bawds, who
boggled at no danger to oblige a friend; but accordingly shifting her Mantle
(some will have it to be only a Blanket) from her own shoulders to the Matrons,
readily yielded her self to be bound to the Pillar, in the same manner as she
had found her Predecessor. This certainly was a most pleasant Scene, well
worthy a Theater, and might make a good plot for a Tragicomedy. The Matron
leaving her Deputy thus bound and naked, yet without impeachment of her
modesty; and mounting on the wings of love, fled in an instant to her Paramour:
'Twas a bold and adventurous Act this, for a Woman so lately su^prized, so
cruelly treated, so miraculously delivered; nay, not yet delivered from danger
of greater torments* and perhaps of death; thus to throw her self into the Arms
of her Adulterer, to force, even destiny it self to give way to the
satisfaction of her desires. But Love inspires Audacity and Contempt of all
perils into the Weakest and most timorous hearts.

Hardly had the greedy Matron with silence expressed her j^y, and tasted the
first dish of Loves Banquet, Kisses, a dish that does at once satisfy and
p^ovoke the Appetite; when the Soldier, deceived by the Mantle she had
borrowed, and mistaking her for the true owner thereof, began to put her from
him, as sco^ning to use his Arms against so base and impudent an Enemy; but she
soon guessing at the cause of his aversion, by her harmonious voice, which yet
she durst not raise above a whisper, convinced him of his error, and restored
him to a due assurance, that he had the person he looked for, and no
Changeling: Whereupon, omitting all further ceremonies, he did his devoir to
verify the good opinion she had at first sight, when he was bathing himself,
conceived of his good parts; and she, on the other side (if at least there were
now any distinction of sides) did hers, to fix him in a confidence, that her
Love was true and unfeigned.

Wh^le th^se our zealous votaries to the Goddess of Pleasures, are at their
silent devotions; the silly Cuckold, (now I think we may call him so) her
Husband, who is an example of that Sentence in Seneca, that many times, by
seeking to avoid dangers we run headlong unto the midst of them, was in a
slumber, wherein his pertu^bed imagination presented to him dismal and infaust
visions: he dreamed that he saw his wife sacrificing her honor, and doing that
odious Act, that drew an indelible stain and reproach upon him and his whole
Family; having broken her bonds asunder, and mixing her self with her armed
Adulterer in closest embraces; that himself, while he was laboring to revenge
the contumelious injury, was transformed into a Satyr: The horror of this
ominous dream interrupting his slumber, and his Fancy retaining a deep
impression of those dire Phantasmes, he begins to believe his transformation to
be real, and feels his Nose, if it were not grown crooked like a Satyr's; his
Forehead, if it were not armed with Antlers; his Thighs, if they were clothed
with shaggy hair; his feet, if they were not cloven, and his Toes turned into
hoofs; then still credulous of the first part of his vision, he leaps out of
his bed, throws open the window, and calls aloud upon his wife, who was now
either out of hearing, or not at leisure to give answer to his curses and
reproaches; But alas! the Reverend Bail, her Confid^nt, heard and trembled; she
now, though too late, found the error of her kindness, and saw no way to safety
but by obstinate silence, which she with more resolution and constancy kept,
than one of Pythagoras Scholars during his novitiate, in spite of the
ingeminated exclamations of the ^nraged Malbecco, who exasperated by that
Contempt (for so he understood it) and fancying some Divine suggestions to
revenge from the Genius of the Marriage Bed, snatches up a Razor that lay in
the Window, runs down the Stairs in the dark, and flying most f^riously at the
very face of his wifes Deputy, catches her fast by her Nos^, and with one
well-guided slash cuts it quite off, then flinging the same in her face; Thou
worst of Women, says he, worthy of a greater brand of infamy, there, take that
token of my hate, and send it for a present to thy Adulterer; who perhaps will
either grow more enamored upon this change of thy form, this new-^odell'd
face; or confess thee to have a better Title to his love by thy sufferings for
his sake. Thus insulting over the miserable wretch, and triumphing in his
revenge, he returns to his thorny bed, there with sleep to ease his head, now
in truth much heavier than before: What shall I say of the poor mangled and
noseless Bawd? only this; that her fear of a worse accident, if she were known
to her Tormentor, made her undergo her pains and loss with more than a Spartan
patience: Unhappy friendship! sad Exchange! it was her lot to be drencht with
the Gall of Love, while the Matron sucked the Honey of it: her evil destiny to
be besmeared with her own blood, while the more guilty wife was anointed with
the Butter of Joy. Thus in Duels, we see, often the seconds are wounded, while
the Principals remain unhurt.

The Schismatical Nose was scarcely grown cold, when our Faustina, having
finished her first trial o^ skill with her Gladiator, and with a thousand
parting kisses dismissed him to rec^uit his spirits lost in the confl^ct,
retu^ns with the joys of a double victory to her Post. But* how short-lived a
thing is sensual delight! how evanid are all our triumphs! when she unde^stood
the sufferings of her Martyr, the Sun-shin of her content was i^ a moment
darkened with clouds of grief and d^eadful apprehensions, and all her exul^ing
^miles exchanged for tears and dejection of Mind. But Grief and Fear, are
almost as bad Counselors as Love, which our witty Matron well understanding,
and remembering withal, that Nature had furnished her whole Sex with a faculty
of quick invention, how to evade approaching danger, and to conceal faults;
re-assures her self, and sets her brain on work how to palliate this wound,
which was past her cure. She has recourse, therefore, to the Art of
Consolation, and endeavors to mi^igate the Bawds dolours ^ith an Ano^yne of
kind and commiserating language. She b^ds her not to be cast down with her
misfortune, which, carried with bravery and discretion, might turn to her
advantage, and prove a noble experiment of her Fidelity among all the
Cimmerians; that the segment of her Nose would be to Venus an offering as
grateful and propitiatory, as locks of hair to other Deities; that if i^ a
Soldier, wounds in the face were honorable witnesses of his courage and
bravery; why should not those received in the service of Venus be likewise
accounted marks of Gallantry and a daring spirit? that though the now m^rtified
Nose could not be set on again (for Tagliacotius lived a great way off
Cimmeria) yet the wound would be easily cured; and at wo^st if she were so
foolish to resolve not to live without one (a thing many a person of greater
quality had done before her) she would cause a new one to be made for her of
much more value, and better metal than the first. This last promise mollified
more than all the consolatory reasons precedent, and the Bawd (who had a Soul
so abject and Mercenary, that she would for Money have sold her eyes, and ears
too into the bargain) becom's pacified and comforted therewith; then being
loosed from the Pillar, and binding the Matron (who desired it) to the same;
she gropes out the piece of her Nose, wraps it up in a corner of her Mantle,
and away she ^rudges in quest of a Surgeon; locking the back door very
carefully after her, and reflecting upon the ill success of her obligation..

King Solomon reckoning Conies among the four sorts of Animals, that being
little, are yet exceeding wise; says of them, that being a generation not
strong, they make holes for themselves among the Rocks. The same may be said of
Women, who wanting strength to assert their faults, yet have cunning enough to
hide them; they make burrows of excuses, and run into them, when in danger to
be taken: Like Statesmen, who have for their Impress a Glass Bee-hive, with
this Motto, Nulli patet opus; they do their business in the dark, or, (as a
witty Italian expresses it) desmienten lo transparente con un vanno de cera,
they smear over their Hives with wax, so that no eye can pry into the secrets
of their workings, or be able to trace them in their amorous stealths; if you
doubt of this, you shall see it verifi^d in the fourth Act of this our
Tragicomedy, which we are now arrived at.

The Bawd being handsomely conjured away, the coast clear, and all the world at
rest; our subtle Matron, after a short meditation, has found out a way, if it
succeed, not only to dissemble her joyful Treason, but to appear still innocent
and faithful to her Husband; yea, yet farther, to invert the guilt upon him,
and bring him at last to confess himself to have been in an error. This, you will
say, is somewhat difficult: but, remember she is a woman and in Love; and then
you will conceive it to be facil. Having formed the design, she delays not to put
it in execution; Counterfeiting therefore, an appeal to the Moon (then newly
risen above the verge of the Horizon) with a voice raised by degrees from a low
whi^per to a pitch high enough to reach the poor Cuckolds ears, she invocates
her help and protection, in such verses as these.

Sister of Jove, Queen Regent of the night,
From whom the meaner Stars derive their light*
Or would be worshipped by great Juno's name,
Joves Wife, or Sister, thou art still the same.
That Sovereign Dame, who art the Deity
Of wedlock rites and femal Chastity.
Why with auspicious Omens did I pay
My Nuptial vows upon my Marriage day?
If with an unconcerned and even face
Thou do behold the Mischiefs of this place.
And you bright Planets, Heavens unerring eyes,
With which by night, he things on earth descries;
You witnesses of my pure innocence,
(Who yet, as Judges, my hard fate dispense)
Don't you grow dimm with horror, thus to see
A jealous Husbands causeless cruelty?
See, naked, bound, and mangled here I groan,
And expiate offenses not my own.
If then the virtuous you can thus torment,
For these rewards, who would be innocent?
Methinks, I now seem but my own pale Ghost;
Beauty and Fame (a Woman's soul) are lost.
Though pure from Thought, or Act, yet wretched I,
Must wear a face, that gives my heart the lie.
Why live I thus? why does this mangled shape
Confine that soul, which would so fain escape?
To die is better, and one blow to give,
Than robbed of Honor, nay and Beauty, live.
To die is best indeed; but, oh, the hands,
That should perform my freer Wills commands,
Alas, are fettered! --
For death, when courted, from us then to fly,
Forcing to live, it is then he makes us die.
Ah, cruel Man! here thou have torments found
Beyond these bonds, beyond this horrid wound.
Happy Lucre^ia, since thou could attest
Thy innocence, by piercing of thy breast;
Whilst thus expiring in thy Husbands arms,
Even in thy death could gain more powerful charms.
Thou Chaste art called, because thou could but die,
Whilst death to me does that relief deny.
Thou Goddess were severe unto thy Jove,
And Heaven could purge from his un^awful love:
If to bad Women thou so just art known,
Will thou not vindicate one honest one?
Behold with pity, and do not despise
Tears mixed with blood, which flow from mournful eyes.
Punish the jealous Man, and make him feel
The sad effects of his own cruel steel;
Show him his crime, and what it is let him know,
To Offend a Woman, and a Goddess too.
At least be just, and my late form restore
With my lost fame, or let me be no more.
Having breathed forth this supplication in a languishing tone, and made it
seem more pathetical by interposing now and then a profound sigh or two (and
indeed of all our Passions none are more easily counterfeited then Zeal and
Sorrow) on a sudden changing the key of her voice into a confused murmur, and
then to that of a civil conference, she dissembled a familiar Dialogue with the
Deity, whose aid she had newly implored: and in fine, as if her prayer had been
heard, and her petition miraculously granted, with an elevated voice she makes
an Apostrophe to her Husband, exclaiming against his improsperous tyranny in
these words. Ho, thou most barbarous of men, thou Fury in human shape; thy
bloody rage against thy chastest wife has proved thy own undoing. The mercy of
the Celestial Powers has overcome thy Cruelty, lest my virtue might suffer by
thy undeserved and base suspicions. Now shall thou be forced to confess, what
thy impiety made thee doubt of, that I am innocent, and that There is a God who
sees and notes our deeds.

I am convinced, I am convinced; it is none but Juno, Protectress of conjugal
Chastity, who compassionating my sufferings, has by Miracle restored that
amiable form of mine, which thou, distracted with jealousy, had destroyed.
Go then, desperate Villain, and sheath that bloody knife of thine in thy own
inhuman bowels; that so unworthy a wretch may no longer enjoy the happiness of
so faithful and spotless a Wife. Having obtained so signal a favor from the
immortal Gods, well may I contemn and bid defiance to the anger of a Mortal
Man, especially one so wicked, so degraded by his crimes. -- O night! more
ill^strious than the brightest day. O hour! more fortunate than that of my
birth. -- Now flow on, flow on officious Tears, but from a different passion.
But, thou, execrable H^ngman, sacrilegious Thief, hasten hither to be convinced
of my purity, and thy crime; make have, I say, that, if it be possible, thou
may make atonement for the innocent blood thou have spilt, and for the
sacrilege thou have committed, and so in time appease the wrath of an offended
Goddess.



This triumphant Harangue arriving at the ears of the poor Cornuto, her Husband
(whom disquiet of mind kept from sleep) it alarmd all his Faculties, and put
him into so great a confusion, that giving but little credit to his sense, he
lay a good while considering the probability of what he heard. At first he
thought it an Illusion (since to Nature it is much easier to make ^ man dream
impossibilities, than to effect them) and began therefore to feel if his Eyes
were open, that he might there^y be certified, whether he were awake, or not.
Then finding it to be no dream, and hearing his Wife continue her Speech, and
denouncing a deluge of dire Jud^ments against him; his rage and jealousy began
at once to give place to as vehement Fear and Remorse. Risi^g therefore hastily
from his bed, and lighting a candle, down ^e goes, resolved to make his eyes
judges of the truth of what he durst not believe upon the single testimony of
his ears. Arrived at the fatal Pillar, the scene of such prodigious accidents,
and beholding his Wifes face attentively, he found it perfect, and without the
least sign of hu^t, nay not so much as stained with a drop of blood; and her
hands still tied as he had at first left them. Whereat astonished, and
persuaded in himself, that so supernatural an event, as the restoration ^f a
Nose cut off, could not come to pass but by power Divine; he sunk down into an
abhorrence of his wic^ed fact, and of the no less abominable motive thereof,
his jealousy; dreading withal some dire punishment from the just anger of the
Gods. Then casting himself upon the pavement, in token of his sorrow and
contrition, he washes out the bloody stains thereof with penitential tears.
Which done, he kneels in adoration of so manifest a Miracle, and in humble but
fervent prayers, begs pardon first of Heaven, then of his Wife (too wise to be
inexorable) for the horrid effect of his outrageous Passion. Which when she,
good Soul, had graciously promised upon a solemn vow of reformation of Manners
on his part, transported with joy, he unties the cord, sets her at liberty,
kisses her all over, and leads her to bed, there to seal his reconciliation to
her, now a rare Example of unspotted Chastity. Thus, blessed be the God of Love!
Our witty Matron, has at once recovered three most precious things, her Nose,
her Honor, and her Husbands Love.

Not long after this happy conclusion or Catastrophe, the Bawd, well rewarded
with a purse of money for her loss and secresy, and hoping to mend her fortunes
by removing to a place of better trading; packs up her baggage, and marches
away to the Court of Comus, King of the Cimmerians: where she now lives no
small Favorite, and exercising her talent every day, in laying new designs,
and managing the close intrigues of Love betwixt Ladies and their Gallants.
Wherein long practice has made her so excellent, that if any Woman in that
Court, be she Maid, Wife, or Widow, please you; and if you commit the matter to
her contrivement and intercession: you need not doubt the success.

As for the Soldier, though my Author says no more of him, but what I have
recounted; yet, considering that he was a man of honor, a Son of Mars, it is
not to be doubted, but that he continued secret and faithful to his Venus. Nor
is it less probable that She, a gracious and obliging Mistress, continued to
love him better, than she did her Usurer, notwithstanding her remission of his
cruel usage, and readmission of him to her grace and favor. Whereupon I cannot
at any time reflect, without acknowledging the goodness of Proserpine, in
keeping her promise made to the Lady May in Chaucer; which was this, in her
answer to Pluto, who would fain restore to January, her Husband, his sight,
that he might see his Esquire, Damian, making him Cuckold in a Pear Tree.

You shall (quoth Proserpine) and well ye so?
Now by my Mothers Soul, Sir, I swear,
That I shall yeven her sufficient answer,
And all women after for her sake;
That though they ben in any gilte itake,
With face bold, they shullen hemselve excuse.
And bear hem down, that would hem accuse.
For lack of answer, non of hem fhull dien.
All had he sey a thing with both his eyes:
Yet should we women so visage it hardely,
And weep, and swear, and chide subtelly;
That men shall ben as leude as Gees.
What recketh me of your auctoritees, etc.
Explicit Historia, and sequ^utur M^steria Amoris.

THE Mysteries and Miracles OF LOVE.
SECT. I.
LOVE is a Ghest sooner entertained, than perceived; and yet sooner perceived
than known, and much easier known than understood; better understood, than
defined or described. As if it challenged only the Heart for its proper
apartment, and disdained any remove up into the Brain: as if it took delight to
be felt not shown: as if being possessed the recesses of the heart, it feared
to be ejected thence, if it once came near the Tongue. Like Holy Writ, it
admits of no Interpreter but it self: nor do we come to know it by either
praecepts or examples; but by Infusion. You may affi^m safely, that Cupid is
not only blind, but also dumb: making all parts of the body vocal, except the
tongue. Hence it is, that Lovers are more eloquent in their sighs than in their
words, as if no messengers were so fit to convey their sentiments, as their
vital breath: and like Paphian Doves, they groan forth living Epistles. Nay,
they discourse together silently by the rhetoric of their fingers, and weave
dialogues in Chaplets. By affable nods, and darted smiles, the vocal
Ambassadors of desire, they treat about their union; and read each others Soul
in glances. Their Colloquies, like those of Angels, are made by intuition: and
they express themselves also, like them, not by the Intellect, but the Will.
Oblique intuens inde nutibus --
Nutibus mutuis inducens in errorem
mentem puellae:
Et illa contra nutibus mutuis juvenis
Leandri, quod amorem non renuit, etc.
is Musaeus his description of the Eyeparly between Leander and Hero. Sometimes
fixing their wandering countenances, as upon strangers, while they openly
decline and renounce acquaintance, they become secretly familiar. Sometimes
their contracted brows threaten displeasure; but at the same time they contract
them with such sweetness, that they rather invite than discourage; and their
very frowns are obliging. Sometimes their Souls interchangeably sally forth at
their Eyes, and steal kisses at a distance; and then return home again
triumphing in their invisible thefts. Thus both sides gain, yet neither loses;
both lose and both gain. Their chief aim is, to be surprised: and yet their
chief pleasure and glory is, not to be perceived. Thus that which is so often
brought into the Theater, flies all spectators, and acts in its own person.
These Divine Confabulators, as if placed above the laws of sense, by most
certain Auguries divine each others wishes, and search each others heart
without dissecting the breast. They are a kind of Seers, that behold the
desires of their Correspondent, as it were specter; which like Catoptrical
Images, are not perceived but by the same art, that created them: or, like the
Deities of old issuing from their Statues, they inspire the person, to whom
they speak; as if two Minds met to animate one Body, and conversed together
with no less silence, than one uses to converse with it self alone. Of all our
affections, this alone knows not to be expressed; and the sacred rites thereof
(as those of the most ancient Gods of the Heathen) are performed in the dark.
Though the passion be of it self innocent, yet it is always conjoined with
secret shame: and the same blushes that betray our flame, strive to hide it.
Alterno facies sibi dat responfa rubore,
Et tener affectum prodit utrique pudor;
as that merry-conceited Arnulphus, Episcopus Lexoviensis, has well expressed
in a facete Epigram of his. Every Love has its Flammeum, as well as Hymen: and
at the Elusinean sacrifices both sexes are veild. All the Votaries of Venus, as
well as her darling Aeneas, walk surrounded with clouds; and they frequent even
public Theaters invisibly. Nay Cupid himself, not contented with a single
Veil, contrives also Ambushes for more secresy: and oftener takes in Hearts by
stratagem and surprise, than by storm. Thus He that composed an^ maintains the
World in order, left himself in confusion; dwelling in a retreat of the ancient
darkness, and primitive Chaos..

SECT. II.
HIs Mother too avoids the light ever since he was born; as being as much
ashamed of his childish treacheries, as offended with the Sun, for discovering
her in the arms of Mars. She obscures her self in a Labyrinth, and admits no
Eye to pry into her ^loset: nay, in her chiefest solaces she uses to shut her
own eyes, as being jealous lest they should discover too much of her divinity.
She is the true Sphinx, that subdues and destroys by a Riddle: more, she makes
every man a Riddle to himself, while being by contrary passions agitated, and
hurried up and down by the flux and reflux of his own violent thoughts, he at
once finds himself a Captive, and strives to be a Conqueror. And this the
capricious Lad, her Son, assists her to effect; that we poor Mortals may
believe, she was begotten betwixt the winds and waves in a Tempest. No wonder
then, if Love seem Aenigmatical and full of contradictions. It is not easily
intelligible, how the same person can at the same time both serve and be free;
have all his Faculties devoted to the pleasure of another, and yet preserve the
command of his own Will; make an absolute resignation of himself, and yet
pretend not only to Liberty, but to Dominion: and yet Love does soon reconcile
these repugnances; and bring his Subjects to govern by obedience, teaching
them, like the Freedmen of some Roman Emperors, obsequii titulo Dominis
imperare, to rule their Sovereigns will by observance of it, and alter their
counsels by obsequiousness and complacency.

Nor is it less difficult to conceive, that one can die, and instantly revive
again; yea, be alive and dead at once; or, like the Phoenix, build his own both
funeral and vital fire, out of which he reassumes a more vigorous and Youthful
Being, than what the flames consumed. Yet nothing is more frequent among
Lovers; whom the miraculous Chemistry of Love, by a most pleasant Palingenesis,
restores from their ashes to their primitive state and form.

A man would think at first, that no two things in Nature are more
incompatible, more inconsistent, more reciprocally destructive, than those two
contrary Passions, Love and Hate; the former causing sweet and agreeable
motions in the spirits, and blood, and fibers of the Heart; the later, unequal,
harsh and offensive ones: the one tending to Complacency and Union; the other
to Abhorrence and Flight: the one aiming at the Felicity, the other at the
Destruction of its Object: but upon a second and more serious consideration of
the matter, he shall find, that in the breast of even the most ardent and
refined Inamourato these two so professed Enemies are become not reconciled,
but Twins, and those too not such as Castor and Pollux, rising and setting
alternately, but like Lazarus and his Brother, growing together, so that one is
not only an individual Companion, but also an Appendix, or rather an integrant
part of his fellow. For, the Servant always wishes his Mistress less Happy
than she is, that so his affection may appear more pure, more sincere, and
determined upon her Person alone. Is she wise and discreet; He presently
reproch^s the Stars, that favored her with so strong a defense; a^ conceiving,
that if her Brain were less sound, her Heart would be more tender, and that if
she had less wit, himself would be less subject to her Contempt. Is she in
Health, He secretly invocates Jove to afflict her with Sickness, that he may
have that occasion to demonstrate his grief, his tenderness, his sympathy. Is
she Rich, He cannot forbear to wi^h her in Want, that he might endow her with
his Fortune. Is she at Liberty, He longs to see her a Captive, that he may
merit her favor by hazarding all in her redemption. Is her Fame clear and
immaculate; how glad would he be some licentious tongue would defile her
Honor, that he might wash away the stains, though with his blood. Is her Birth
and Quality n^ble; he would fain degrade her, that she might derive all her
Dignity from the Generosity of his Love. In a word, in some sort or other He
wishes her Miserable, that he may have the glory to relieve her, and that her
own Necessity may draw, rather than his Courtship and Observance invite her to
his embraces. He had rather be her Sanctuary, than her Conqueror. Now is not
here a certain Malignity mixed with Benevolence; Zeal tempered with Hate;
Inhumanity proceeding from excess of Kindness; Cruelty conjoined with the
greatest Charity? Yet such is the Constitution of Love. Cupid has no darts
headed with pure Gold. What God soever made and tippd his Shafts, served him as
the (...) (as Rivaltus calls him) the treacherous Artist did Hiero, King of
Syracuse in casting his Crown, put in a great deal of Copper among the Gold.
Which is perhaps one reason why the wounds of Lovers are so painful and apt to
fester; it being the nature of Brass ^o ulcerate and breed Cancers. I think it
therefore no blasphemy against the so much adored Divinity of Love, to affirm,
that it always has some alloy of that Devil, Malice: and that no Man love's
without Indignation. Especially when I reflect upon this, that the torments he
suffers cannot but force him even against his will to execrate his fair
Tormentor; to be angry with the Thief, that robbed him of himself; to wish that
bright flame obscured or extinct, that burns his wings, though, like the
foolish Butterfly, he at the same time ceases not to flutter about it, and (as
a Modern Wit finely expresses it) beato frui necis autore, to enjoy his
Murderer. Nor is it the poor neglected and despised Lover, that alone has
reason to complain of, and reproach his Mistress; even the most prosperous and
triumphant feels disquiet and anguish enough to cause Regret, which is a kind
of Anger. -- Dolor, querelae,
Lamentatio, lachrymae perennes,
Languor, anxietas, amaritudo,
Aut si triste magis potest quid esse,
Hos tu das comites Naeera vitae;
was the complaint of a Lover in Plautus, even after victory: and Poets
themselves, none of the severest censurers of this Heroic passion, call it
suavem amariciem, dolentiam delectabilem, hilare tormentum. Nay, old Plautus so
far condemned it, as he could not hold from crying out, Credo ego, ad homini^
carnificinam Amorem inventum esse. If Love then be so full of gall and anxiety,
who can suffer it without secret detestation? who without reflecting upon the
Author of his perturbations with displeasure and offense. Certainly the most
gentle, the most patient, the sweetest temper, when u^ged and provoked by these
inward gripes and pangs, will hardly be able to refrain from exclaiming, with
Phaedria in Terence -- O Thais, Thais! utinam esset mihi.
Pars aequa amoris tecum; ac pariter fieret,
Vt a^t hoc tibi doleret itidem, ut mihi dolet,
Aut ego istuc abs te factum nihili penderem.


What Is more common among Lovers, than thus to wish their torments transplanted
from their own into their Mistresses breast? and is not that to curse them?
which the most savage nature would not do without indignation. It was not
without good reason then, that Aristotle (2 Rhetor.) placed Love in the
Irassible part of the Soul; nor is it out of affectation of being Paradoxical,
but Zeal to Truth, that I have here asserted, That no man can Love without
indignation, which will appear somewhat more perspicuous, if we consider, that
indignation is always accompanied with either Commiseration or Irrision. For,
to do evil, is in some sort to suffer evil; and therefore some men, when they
observe any one to do evil, join to their indignation against, a Commiseration
for the doer, while others on the same occasion, mix Irrision with their
Indignation; according as they stand well or ill affected to the person doing
amiss; so that the laughter of Democritus, and the weeping of Heraclitus might
proceed from one and the same cause; and Commiseration, which is a degree of
Love, may go hand in hand with Indignation.

SECT. III.
ANother of Loves, Problems is this; that the most happy Lovers find their very
enjoyments unsatisfactory, their joys insincere. To them it is difficult, to
love; not to love, more difficult; most difficult to be possessed of what they
love. Be the Saint never so propitious, never so obliging; still the vot^ry
continues his supplications, his importunity, and not contented with all she
can grant, or he receive, he seeks for more. The miserable Mind is affl^cted no
less with the sucess, than with the vehemence of its desires; and like the
Misers, continues poor in the midst of Wealth; after a feast it rises empty,
retaining that sweet torment, suspirare and cupere. As i^ they had as little
use of their Memory, as of their Reason and Will, forgetting the shortness, the
emptiness of past enjoyments, they furiously hunt after more. Memoriae minimum
tribuit, quisquis spei plurimum. Every one puts a higher value upon his Hopes,
than upon his Seize. As their desires so afflict, that they at the same
time please and delight, so their joys are infested with such calamities, that
they excruciate. Here (if you please) let us stand a minute or two, and
consider how this can be. The passion of Joy (you know) always follows upon a
tickling of the senses by some agreeable object; and its contrary Grief, upon
the offense and grating of them: and yet Grief may sometimes be sustained with
joy; and there are, on the other side, some certain titillations that offend.
But the true reason why Joy arises for the most part from titillation, I
conceive to be this; that the pleasure of all sensation consists in the
Objects causing in the Nerves and Brain some motion, which might violate and
hurt them, in case they were not firm and tense enough to resist it; This
resistance makes upon the center of the brain an impression, which being
instituted by Nature, to signify and a^test the good constitution and strength
of the Nerves, represents the same to the Soul as a Good pertaining to her, so
far forth at least, as she is conjoined to the Body; and by that means excites
joy in her; the same reason serves also to explain, why naturally it is
pleasant to every man, to feel himself commoved to all sorts of Passions, yea
even to sadness and hatred, when those Affections arise only from the various
events represented in Theaters, or other the like subjects, wherein he is not
concerned. Which, because they can no way harm us, seem to tickle the soul by
touching her. And Pain ordinarily produces Grief, because that offense of the
sense, which is called Pain, arises from some Action so violent, as to hurt
the Nerves: of which the soul instantly becoming sensible, looks upon it as an
Evil extending to her also, and thereupon is affected with Grief; unless in
some such cases, where she is strongly diverted by expectation of a greater
Good from that Evil. As Martyrs have exulted in their torments, not that they
were insensible of them, but because their souls were possessed with a
confident hope that those short pains would produce eternal pleasures.

Upon this consideration perhaps, or some other not much different from it, it
was, that Seneca thus expostulates with his dear Lucilius, about his immoderate
sorrow for the death of their common Friend, Flaccus (Epist. 63.) Quae^is unde
lamentationes, unde immodici fletus? per lachrymas argumenta desiderij
quaerimus: and dolorem non sequimur, sed oftendimus* nemo tristis sibi est. est
aliqua and doloris ambitio. The sum whereof is this, that we find a certain
pleasure in Grieving; and that that pleasure is grounded upon Ambition (which
is nearly allied to Love) to make it known to others, how well we loved that
for which we grieve. To bring all this our present argument. You see then, that
Joy and Grief are no (...), no incompatible Passions, no such Enemies but that
sometimes at least they may dwell together in one breast. If so* why may not
the Joys of Lovers be commixt with G^ief? why may not their Fruitions be
unsatisfactory? I could fill a whole Page with the names of such, whose flames
raged more by extinction, and whose love was so far from languishing, that it
grew more strong and violent by the possession of its object. Cupid is the son
of Venus, you know: and nursed by his Mothers Milk; and our friend Chaucer
therefore wisely fixes the Epoche of Aeneas and Dido's love on the Iubile they
celebrated in the Cave, whither the tempest of Thunder and Lightning had forced
them to retreat.

And shortly fro the Tempest her to save*
This noble Queen fled into a Cave.
And with her went this Aeneas also;
I wot not, with them if there went any mo.
The Auctour makes of it no mention.
And here began the deep affection
Betwixt hem two. this was the first morrow
Of her gladness, and gi^ning of her sorrow*
The Reason is, that the Lover, apprehending no fruition total, no possession
entire, supposes some further good in the object, than what his former
enjoyment made him acquainted withal: nor does he propose to himself merely a
Continuation of the Good he has enjoyed; because whoever wishes the
continuation of a Good, considers it not as a thing present, but to come, and
consequently as a thing which yet he does not know; for no man can know what is
not. So that the wandering Love, which hunts after variety, and the Constant,
that is determined and fixed upon one individual object, are twinns of the same
birth, and have one and the same original: the latter affecting Novelty no less
than the former. Here Is all the difference; one pursues Novelty in a single
person: the other in a multitude: but both are equally insatiate. O infelicem
stultitiam! O insaniam voluntariam! what strange infelicity is this, voti
compotem voto non posse frui, to have, and at the same time to want? The
Covetuous man's curse, is to possess and not enjoy: the Lovers greater to enjoy
and not enjoy; utpote cui majora, quam quae tota simul indulgeri fas sit,
gaudia quaeruntur. The wise man ( Ecclesiasticus 30. and 20.) describing the
misery of the one, compares it to the other: (...), as the Septuagint. he
beholds his treasure with greedy eyes, and sighs, as an Eunuch embraces a
Virgin and sighs, sighs most bitterly. So our Lover sighs, and enjoys, and
still sighs. And to speak stri^tly, in this sense Hercules himself, who
deflowred fifty Virgins in a night, was but an Eunuch for all that, so we are
all, and our Ladies Virgins; we embrace and sigh; still unsatisfied, still
coveting, quod nec assequi, nec scire datur, more than the nature of the thing
can afford.

Notwithstanding this imperfection of our chiefest solace, I am so far from
accusing Nature of improvidence or unkindness, in making Love of this
composition; that on the contrary, I judge it to be an argument of her Wisdom
and Indulgence. Because our pleasure is endeared by its being incomplete; and
our appetite would soon be turned into loathing, if once satiated. (...); is a
Maxim of the Indian Gymnosophist, in his speech to Alexander the Great,
recorded by Palladius de Bragmanibus, not long since set forth by the learned
Knight Sir Edward Bisse, Clarenciux King at Arms. To this purpose it was most
elegantly said by a mode^n Wit, writing upon the same subject; huic affectui
soll^cite, prospexit Namen, dum gaudio immiscuit tremorem and sollicitudinem,
ut delicatior exiret voluptas. All desire indeed, is grounded upon want, and
want implies imperfection: yet the desire whereof we are now speaking, being
mostly an effect of fullness, has such a (...), such a complacentia annexed to
it, that few complain of it as an imperfection. Nor are there many of Plato's
mind in this particular, who (as Marsilius Ficinus in his life) thought it
enough only once to sacrifice to Nature. Most are as much pleased to possess
this desire, as to satisfy it: yea, to speak freely, the desire is it self
some satisfaction; aequali voluptate afficiunt, and quod adest jam, and quod
futurum speratur; nam dulcis desiderii dens interim mordet, and dum periculum
facis, speras; was the merry Lucians saying to his Th^omnestes in (...) And I
am apt to believe, it was upon this very motive, that Luther openly professed,
that without the consolati^ncula creaturulae he could not live contented.

SECT. IV.
YEt more Aenigmata, more perplexing Difficulties in Love. This Affe^tion,
which composeth all other commotions of the soul, which reconciles Men, wild
Beasts, and Philosophers, is yet at variance with it self; being founded upon a
discordant connection of unlike and asymbolical natures, it maintains its power
by a civil War; and, like some pictures, varies its representations according
to the different positions of the eye that speculates it, on one hand it
carries the aspect of Fear; on the other, of Magnanimity: in one posture it
appears Blind; in another, sharp-sighted; here a Fool; there Wise, etc. so that
its picture cannot be drawn in one Image: and the spectator may easi^y be
mistaken in its lines and features. To be particular.

When you see a languishing Lover, whose arms seem so tender and delicate,
that you think them fit only for embraces; who exhales nothing but odours or
sighs; who is struck down with the contraction of a brow, and wounded to the
heart with the disdainful glance of an eye: take heed notwithstanding, how you
reproach him as a soft, effeminate and pusillanimous person. For, realy he is
hardy, daring and adventurous; he repines not at the tediousness or cold of
nightly vigils; he inures himself to difficulties; like Caesar posting from
Rome into Germany, he despises the obstacles of the Alps, of frost and snow and
overflowing rivers; he exercises his fortitude with submissively undergoing
accumulated injuries; he defies dangers, nay, makes it a pleasure to create
them in his imagination, and is gratified with the encountre of adverse
accidents, as favors to his zeal^* and arguments of his devotion, he neglects
not only dress, but health; and, like Candidates for St. Peter's* chair, or the
Dukedom of Venice, thinks it adv^^tagious to look faint, pale and meagre.

Nor ought you to accuse him of Stupidity, though you observe him to suffer
Contempts and Affronts from his proud Stratonice, without just resentment. For,
he (be you well assured) is wholly transmigrated into soul, become all spirit,
retreated into that Aetherial particle of Fire, which is impassible, and can
not be touched. If this seem less credible, be pleased to consider, it is the
Religion of Love to overcome evil with good, to extinguish the fire of malice
by the brighter flame of Charity; the Philosophy of this endearing Passion, to
subdue hatred by submission and obsequiousness. Besides, our good-natured
Gallant entertains, neglects and scorn, not with insensibility, but discretion:
as well understanding, that injuries as they fade and die of themselves, when
bravely despised; so they pass into Benefits, when received with gentleness and
humanity. A flint is broken on a feather-bed.

Will you charge him with Blindness, because he discerns not the defects, the
spots of his Mistress; but takes these for stars, and those for ornaments;
and by a most (...) gilds over her faults with the title of the nearest
virtues? Herein certainly you are no equal Arbiter. You require a Censor, not a
Lover; and in the place of true affection, you expect a severe judgment. It is
a sign of ill nature in you, thus to envy him the pleasure of an error, wherein
he thinks himself more happy. Is it not lawful for him to impose upon himself
by such innocent fraud? to form in his mind a more august image of her, whom he
is resolved to contemplate and adore we account it an excellency in a Painter,
to make his pieces fairer than the Originals; and among the many praises
deservedly ascribed to our incomparable Mr. Lely, this is not the least, that
his curious pencil can at pleasure not only follow the finest lines of Nature,
butsweeten them; at once both imitate and excel the life. Why then do you
condemn the same in a Lover? it is indeed an excess in both; of Art in one; of
Affection in the other: and, in my opinion, equally commendable. Imagination is
unconfined even by Nature: and the very Extravagances thereof in love have been
approved by Venus herself, in that she infused warmth and life into Pygmalions
Eburnea. That, you will say was a fiction: yet the Mythology may serve to
justify our Inamorato. The life given to that Statue by the Goddess, was no
other than the grace and beauty of the Figure, which Appelles, in his Pictures
called the Venus; which made it live in the estimation of those times, and
admiration of posterity. Luci^n's Panthea (in (...)) likewise, it is probable,
was no other than ^n Imag^nary or Romantique Lady, made up of all the rare
idea's of Beauty, and admirable endowments of mind, whereof humane nature is
capable; for, his best Interpreters are at a loss in their conjectures, what
divine Princess that was, whose glorious perfections he designed to celebrate
under the veil of that Name: yet even learned and grave men are so highly
pleased with the description and Character, that they equally admire his Wit,
and her accomplishments, and scarcely abstain from rivalling him in both. If
such admiration then, and applause be due to Lucian's Fancy; why do you deride
that of our Inamorato, who thereby endeavors to form to himself such another
Panthea? If he deceive himself, it is to his own misfortune, not your prejudice;
yet how can we call that a misfortune, which he (the best judge in the case)
esteems a Felicity?

But all this while the Dimness, seems to be in your Understanding, not in his
sight. His eyes are not put out, but only covered with a thin vail, through
which they see more securely, more clearly; as we behold the Sun b^st through a
skreen of clouds. You are to imagine them only contracted, as those to take
aim, that they may discern more accutely and distinctly. Being fixed upon one
object, and that a bright and cha^ming one, they do not indeed so plainly
pe^ceive other things; yet not that they are weak, but because they loath them,
and will not endure to be diverted: which is not to be dim-sighted, but to see
too much. Again, if to Philosophize, be nothing but to contemplate Idea's; then
to love, is to be a Philosopher. Yea* if every man loves so much as he
understands (which was Plato's opinion) then dotage in love is an argument of
Science.

You are too blame, therefore, if you think vehemence of desire to be a sort of
Madness; or take our Lover for one Infatuated, only because his actions seem
extravagant. Alas! what you call Follies in him, are the Mysteries of a Divine
Fury, or Enthusiasm. Love inspires into the Mind a new Faculty of acting by a
more certain and compendious way, than that of Ratiocination: all his Reason,
like that art by which spiders weave their curious nets, and Bees Govern their
Commonwealth, is Instinct. His hand is not guided by the eye, when he shoots at
human hearts; but by the Divinity of his Genius: and therefore, though he never
takes aim, he never misses the mark. Impotens flammis simul and sagittis,
Iste lascivus puer ac renidens
Tela quam certo moderatur
-- arcu!
While we poor mortals regulate our affairs by Reason, which is a laborious
faculty, and obnoxious to error; it is the privilege of his Divinity, to be
carried on by a quick and most certain (...), or force, to all his ends; and,
like the Supreme Being, he is wise without deliberation or counsel. It is not
then the prerogative of Jove alone, sapere and simul amare, to be wise and to
love at once. For if wisdom be, scire quid sit optimum, then certainly a Lover
is also wise, because he knows what is best; aliud enim (as Senecca) amare
praeter optimum, nefas est. If after all this you will not allow him to be in
his wits, pray consider what subtle devices, ambushes, stratagems, and
artifices he invents and makes use of, to take in that strong and by open fo^ce
impregnable fortress of his Mistresses heart. Cast your eye upon those troops
of Virgins, that are daily led Captives, as trophies of their Lovers wit and
cunning: all which were of necessity to be deceived, before they could be
taken, and by artificial violence to be drawn to their own desires. For, they
love more, to be ingeniously beguiled, than to be loved; and the readiest way
to bring them into the circle of your embraces, is first to circumvent them
with pretty fallaces and amorous treacheries. Now he that can with neat
address, unperceived snares, and harmless frauds bring this to pass; either he
is no Fool, or I am one to think him otherwise, and so was Virgil when he said
-- quis fa^^ere possit amant^m? and Mantuan, when he said Namque dolos inspirat
am^r, fraudesque ministrat. Nay, so far is this Passion from darkening the
understanding, and casting a mist over the Eye of the Mind, that it rather
illuminates and clears it. Witness that pleasant Story in Boccace (which he
borrowed from the Greeks, and which Beroaldus has translated into Latin, and
Beblius turned into elegant verse) of Cymon and Ephigenia. This Cymon, the Son
of a Governor of Cyprus, was naturally so very a Fool, so stupid an indocil an
Ass, that his Father being ashamed of his rude and ideot-like behavior, sent
him to be kept at a remote and solitary Grange of his in the Country. Where he
walking alone, as his custom was, by chance espied a beautiful young
Gentlewom^n, Iphigenia, a Burgomasters Daughter of Cyprus, as she lay fast
asleep with her Maid, in the cool shade of a little Thicket, with no envious
cover, but a clean transparent Smock, that rather betrayed than concealed her
excellent shape and whiter skin. At this surprising vision poor simple Cymon
was astonished; he stood leaning on his staff (for his legs were now unable
alone to support his trembling body) gaping on this female Angel, unmovable,
and in a trance of wonder and amazement. Upon which Love immediately
succeeding, and in a moment with its celestial rays dispelling all the foggs
of his cold and phlegmatic brain, yea inspiring him as it were with a new and
ingenious soul; he rowzd up himself; reflected upon the misery and dishonor of
his late condition, and put on a sprightly resolution to pursue his Nymph with
Courtship and Gallantry, worthy her admirable Form, and his own noble
extraction. To this purpose he the next day followed his retreating Fairy to
the City, put on a becoming habit, and with it a graceful and obliging Mine:
and animated with hope, industriously employed himself in learning Music,
dancing, fencing, and acquiring all other good qualities requisite in a
Gentleman. So that in a very short time he was transformed from an Idiot, a
BartholmewCokes, a Clown, to a Bon Esprit, a Virtuoso, a Truwitt, in a word, to
the most accomplished Gallant of the times: nor was Iphigenia so invincible to
such assaulting perfections, as not by marriage of him to appropriate to her
self the fruits of the Miraculous Metamorphosis the vision of her Beauties had
wrought in him. Such power has the sight of a fair Lady naked to cause Love;
such power has Love to cure the Lethargy of the Soul, and awaken it into Wit
and Galantry, making a Heroes of a Sott, in fewer minutes than the Writers of
Romances can in years. I say, a Heroes; because the same Cymon proved also
famous at Arms, fought sundry combats, performed many heroical exploits, and
always had Fortune for his Second: the same flame that enlightened his
understanding, having heated his blood also, and kindled Courage and
Magnanimity in his heart.

At this you will the less wonder, if you remember what you have read in Cardan
( lib. 2. de Sap.) who there occasionally recounting many of the admirable
effects of Love, says thus. Ex vilibus generosos efficere solet, ex timidis
andaces, ex avari^ splendidos, ex agrestibus civiles, ex crudelibus mansuctos,
ex impiis religiosos, ex sordidis nitidos and cultos, ex duris misericordes, ex
mutis eloquentes, etc. If you contemn this authority, I hope you will not
dispute the Example of Sir Walter Manny in Edward the thirds time, who being
stuck full of Ladies favors, fought like a Dragon: nor that of Ferdinand King
of Spain, who (as Castilio thinks) had never conquered Granado, had not Queen
Isabella and her Ladies been present at the Siege, it cannot be expressed,
says our Author, what courage the Spanish knights derived from the ra^es of
the Ladies eyes; a handful of amorou^ Spaniards overcoming a multude of Moors.
Every true Lover is wise, just, temperate and valiant, says Agatho lib. 3. de
Aulico) who doubts not therefore, but if a Prince had an Army of such Lovers,
he might soon conquer the whole world; except he met with the like Army of
Inamorato's to oppose it. Plato then had reason, when (5. de Legibus) he would
have women follow the Camp, to be both Spectators and Encouragers of noble
Actions: it being his opinion, ( in convivio) that Mars himself borrowed most
of his valor from his love of Venus.

SECT. V.
HAving beheld this Proteus, Love, in some of those various shapes, wherein it
usually appears; you are (I presume) thereupon inclined to think it may be no
less unconstant to its Object, than it seems to be to it self. To obviate this
scandalous mistake, therefore, I find my self obliged in the next place to
evince, that the Judgments of Love are, like those of Fate, unalterable and
perpetual; that it is constant and immutable. He who can cease to love whom he
has once loved, does but dream he loved. For the conjunction of true Lovers
hearts, like solemn Matrimony, admits of no divorce. When the Virgin Zone is
untied, a knot is in the same instant knit, that can never be dissolved;
sometimes, indeed, as the Gordian, it may be cut asunder. Death may be the
Alexander to discind, but cannot untie it. Love ceases not, though what is
loved has ceased to be* When your Turtle has molted all her beautiful
feathers, and is grown old; you shall not cease to think her still the same,
still amiable and youthful: and what of her charming feature^ time has
impaired, your affection will continually renew; the pleasing Form now lost to
your eye, shall be perpetually found fresh and lively in your mind. The
fidelity of Remembrance shall countervail the cruelty of Age: which may by a
natural Metamorphosis render your Wife a stranger to her former self, but has
not the more tyrannical power to alienate her from you. Nay, when Fate shall
have torn her from your arms, even then shall you still retain and enjoy her
in your imagination; you shall think her not dead, but only absent* and as
often as you mix embraces w^t^ her kind Ghost, you shall deny her to have
perished, Love shall make you triumph over Mortality; and in the ardor of your
spiritual ^ruition, you shall bid defiance to Destiny, crying out, Though you
have separated us, O Fatal Sisters! you have not divided us; yet we converse
together, yet we are a pair, from others you have taken away the Woman, from me
not so much as her shadow. While she lived, we used but one Soul; now but one
Body. Her Spirit is received into my breast, and there remains fixed, as in its
proper Asterism and Heaven.

Thus Love seems to perform i^s course, as the Sun, in a Circle, always
returning to the point whence it set forth: so ending in it self, as always to
begin. For, no man loves, who can ever be able to love either, less, or not at
all. Of love there can be no end, because no satiety. Like Heaven and a
contemplative Mind, it is perpetually in motion, never at rest: yet that labor
does not weary, but refresh. Thus the end of one benefit, is a degree toward
another: and the Soul provoked by a double ardor, cherishes first the person,
and then its own obligations; ad amor is perennitatem sufficit amasse.

Notwithstanding Love be thus immortal, as being the proper affection of an
immortal Soul, and devoted to an eternal Object, Good: yet can I not deny, but
it is a kind of Death. For, who is ignorant that Lovers die as often as they
kiss, or bid adieu: exhaling their Souls upon each othe^s lips. Like Apollo's
Priests possessed with the spirit of Divination, they are transported out of
themselves; their life is a perpetual Ecstasy; they divest themselves of their
own Souls, that they may be more happily filled with others. I believe
Pythagoras his Metempsychosis or Transmigration of his Soul, when he loved, not
when he philosophiz'd. At sight of a fair and well built house, our souls, like
delicate and proud Ladies, grow weary of there own homely dwellings, and are
unquiet until removed thither: because they were not born, they affect to live,
yea to be born again therein* Longing for the Elyzium of their Mistress breast,
the only Paradise for Lovers Ghosts, they break the prison of their own, and
anticipate the delivery of Death, and fly thither, as to the place of their
eternal mansion. Whoever thou art, that dare to doubt of these excursions of
amorous Souls; let me advise thee attentively to observe, how the Soul of a
Lover almost visibly flies to that part of the body, which approches nearest to
his Panthea. If they join hands, you may perceive their souls to be palpably
distributed into their fingers, mutually to take ho^d, and entwine each with
other. If they stand side by side, their bowels yern, their hearts leap for
joy, their spirits flow in crowds into their breasts, and raising strong
palpitations, salute each other, as Clowns use to do, with thumps; as if they
strove to dissolve the l^gaments of life and intermix embraces. What kind of
Magique is that, by which the blood is made to overflow the cheeks with crimson
waves, at the presence of a dear friend; springing up out of the Arteries of
the wounded Heart, as an index of its sufferings, no otherwise than the blood
of a murdered man is said to flow forth afresh, to betray the Homicide? only
with this difference, that the blood, in the case of Murder, flows, I know not
by what instinct, ^or revenge: but in a Lovers blushes, for cure and remedy of
his harm* See, how greedily his soul catches the sounds of her voice; and
retired wholly into his ears, stands there watching every accent, nay is
converted into the sense of Hearing, or rather into the very sounds it
receives. In exchanging words, they exchange spirits: and immigrate into the
wishes they utter. See, how their wandering souls in a continual efflux sally
forth at their encontring eyes; and consuming themselves in greedy looks, leave
their bodies faint and liveless, many times falling into swoons and Syncopes.
To Lovers it is the same thing, to speak, and to expire; the same, to see, and
to extramit themselves by the eye* to gaze, and to pass into the object. In
them the Platonic opinion, that sight is performed by Extramission of rays
holds true. Thus the whole Man hastening to get forth, crowds one while into the
Ear, another into the Eye, sometimes into the Lips: suavia dans Agathoni,
animam ipse in labra tenebam; was Plato's confession of himself; living only in
that part, wherein he at present enjoys his Fellow, his other and better half.
Thus Love epitomizeth Human nature; compelling Men to breath and live more
contractedly; and (like some imperfect Animals) to be content with one sense
alone. But thus to reduce him from a necessity of many Organs or Instruments of
life, sense and motion, to a capacity of existing more delightfully by one
single Organ; is not to maim Man, but render him more perfect and divine. We
will therefore, if you please, conclude this Paragraph with a pertinent Stanza
of that incomparable Critique in Love, old Chaucer: who in most lively and
never-vading colors painting the surprise and astonishmen of Troilus, (till
then a Woman-hater) at first sight of the fair Creseide, in her mourning habit,
sparkling like a Diamond set in Jet; says thus. Lo, he that iete him selven so
conning,
And scorned hem that loves pains drien,
Was full unware that love had his dwelling
Within the subtel streams of her ^yen;
That suddenly him thought he felt dren,
Right with her look, the spirit in his heart.
Blessed be love, that thus can folk converte*


SECT. VI.
IN such spiritual efforts and sallies, the Body indeed suffers a manifest,
though a grateful detriment; but (what is a wonder even for wise men) the soul
acquires Augmentation. For, as if she were also definable by Extension, being
by a certain expansion more diffused than before, she that was originally the
Guest of one breast, become's thenceforth the Governess of two. Confused
betwixt two bodies, she scarcely knows for which she was first formed: but as
it were suspended betwixt both, she perfectly informs neither. By one Law of
Nature she is confined to one body; by another Law of the same Nature, Love,
she is carried forth to animate and possess another, which she strives to make
equally her own: so that in this case you are obliged to acknowledge both a
Diminution and an Increment of her Sovereignty. Every Individual in love, is
thenceforth a Number; carrying always with him, as Antipheron did, another
Himself: if at least he may properly be said to be a Number, whom one computes,
whom one distinguishes, whom the word Homo alone expresses; an Hermaphrodite
and yet no Monster. By a fruitful error, to men in Love, as well as to men in
Drink, all objects appear double: yet no otherwise than the eyes themselves are
double, which have one and the same motion, one and the same sight. Here you
see a kind of penetration of Dimensions, two persons so closely embracing, as
to fill up the same space, as to become one, as to destroy their embraces; for,
embraces imply a difference. While, like ovids He^maphrodite, Salmacis, the
person courting, and the person courted are one and the same; he knows not
whether he love, or is beloved more truly; nor does he enjoy, but is converted
into his wish. Ah, Cupid, thy very bounty is mockery; thy favor, like that of
Grandees in Court, hypocritical* while thou hidest within my breast, what I
require to be in my arms. Thou art too propitious in making us one: rather
divide us, that we may feel our selves to be what we would be, different in
sex, one in will and desire. Obstat cupienti, nimium frui. To have her made the
same with my self, whom I covet only as a Partner of my joys, is to prevent
them. This excess of kindness, this assimilation of another to my self, makes
me think, I do not embrace my Friend, but a shadow; which always treads in my
footsteps, and imitates all my motions. Stand farther from me, O my dearest,
who art nearer to me than I am to my self; that I may enjoy that pleasure,
which consists in the knowledge of a Distinction.

But, alas! I forget my self, and wish a Contradiction. The same power that
makes one of two, makes also two of one. The Arithmetic of Love is performed
as well by substraction, as by Multiplication: nor do we think that substraction
a loss, but a Compendium; unless it be more advantage to have our strengths
collected, than extended. Every thing (you know) is so much the more perfect,
by how much the more simple. To be comprehended within no space or number, is
the prerogative of the Deity: and what is Best and Highest, can be but one.
Love, therefore, as it has this Divine perfection of Unity; so has it
likewise that other of Self-communication. For, what is perfect, is incapable
of addition or increase otherwise than by Diffusion or Distribution of it self.
The only Usury of Love, is to make others rich. This liberality of conferring
ones self upon another, is the only good Mankind can justly call his own, and
the first Donative of Heaven. Other things are the gifts of Fortune, which we
can no more give, than the light of the Sun, or the common aer; nay, which we
have scarcely right enough to appropriate to our selves. Whoever loves, then,
comes near to the Divine Nature; as placing his chief delight in doing good,
in making another happy. Hence it is, that as Men of youthful and strong Bodies
are naturally desirou^ to beget issue of their Loins: so those of great and
vigorous abilities of Mind feel in themselves a certain noble ardor, that
incites them to beget children of their understanding, a praegnancy of the
Brain, and most chaste Lust of propagating virtue; which is commonly named
Platonique Love. Wherefore, Love is, in this respect at least; so far from
proceeding from want (as Mr. Hobs derives it) that on the contrary it is the
effect of wealth and abundance. Nor ought we longer to complain of Nature, as
closehanded and niggardly in her Gifts to Mankind, since she has been so
indulgent and bountiful in instituting this ingenious commerce, whereby every
one both communicates himself, and receives another (for, by Love we do not
sell, but exchange ourselves) yea transferrs into his own treasury whatever is
excellent and divine in another; being adopted heir to another riches, he
becomes more accomplished by endowment, and in another supplies his own
defects. This Munificence of Love in communicating whatever it thinks good and
delectable, is evident even in the delight of sensual Fruition, which being a
pleasure consisting in a conjunction not only of two Persons of different
sexes, but also of two different Appetites in each Person; viz. to please, and
to be pleased; and the former of these two Appetites being an Affection of the
Mind consisting in the Imagination of power to please: it necessarily follows,
that each p^rty becomes so much the more joy'd or pleased in himself, by how
much the more able he finds him to please or cause joy in the other. So that
they rival each other in the Communication of delight. The same may be said
also of Platonique Love, or generous Charity; the delight whereof consisting
likewise in the exercise of ones power or ability to enrich the understanding
of another, and impraegnate his Mind with the seeds of Virtue: the Socrates
must be so much the more delighted in his own Mind, by how much the more he
finds the Alcibiades bettered by his in^tructions* Here Is all the difference,
the delight of sensual Love depending partly upon the powers of the Body, is
therefore furious, short of duration, and subject to decay: the Platonique
depending solely upon the Mind, whose powers are perpetual, is therefore calm,
of one equal tenor, and everlasting.

Here finding my boat unexpectedly brought upon the blessed coast of the New
Atlantis, or terrestrial Paradise, FRIENDSHIP, where the aer is perpetually
clear and serene, the sea pacific, and the land spontaneously fertile; a place
wherein nothing is found but Consolations, whose King, Altabin, is a wise man;
whose peaceful inhabitants are rich in their contempt of all pecuniary Commerce
within themselves; where the Tirzan, or true Father of the Vine, Love, composes
all differences, and extinguish^^ all animosities; and where the Sons and
Daughters of Bensalem live in perfect amity and concord: being come, I say, to
this happy Port, give me leave my dear Friend, here to cast anchor, and end my
voyage. I had designed to sail farther, to discover what that wonderful
something in Love is, which we observe to be more powerful than all Calamites,
more august than Honor, more splendid than Riches, more delightful than
Pleasures, more sovereign than Empire* more venerable than Authority, more
charming than Beauty, more illustrious than Wisdom; that for which we contemn
and trample upon all those glorious things, so much either feared, or adored by
the world; yea, for which alone we do not contemn, but esteem and worship them:
that, which so fully pleases alone, that even the vilest things please for the
sake thereof; which enjoye's this privilege of Majesty, that nothing can turn
to its dishonor; which is above the reach of Infamy, and can honest even vice
it self. But, perceiving the Needle of my Cogitations, no less than that of my
Affections, to fix it self on that point of the Compass, wherein you and I seek
for Happiness in this life, our constant Friendship: I confess, my Mind is so
entirely taken up with the ravishing Contemplation thereof, that I cannot at
present divert it to prosecute what I intended to speak, concerning several
other admirable and stupendous effects of this Heroic Passion; whereof I have
here drawn no perfect Picture, but only a rude Scetch, or rather a few gross
and confused lines, by way of supplement to Your more artificial Representation
of it, in your Ephesian Matron. Let us, therefore, now (if you please) go
ashore, and repose our selves in the newly mentioned Island of Bensalem, (where
though we be not advanced to the honor of being Fellows or Brethren of
Salomons House; yet we may be well received into the House of strangers)
reserving what remains untouched of our Argument for another divertisement; and
in the mean time, with our dearly beloved Don Geffrey, Beseeching every Lady
bright of hew,
And every gentil woman, what she be,
Albeit that our Matrons were untrue,
That for that gilte ye be not wroth with me.
Ye may in other Books their gilte se.
And gladder I would write, if that ye lest,
Penelopes truth, and faith of good Alceste.
Ne say I not this all only for these men,
But most for women that betrayed be
Through falls folk (God yeve hem sorrow,
That with great wit and subtlety (amen)
Betraien you; and this meveth me
To speak, and in effect you all I pray,
Bethe ware of men, and herkeneth what I say.
But God forbid, but a woman can
Ben as true and loving as a man.
For it is deintie to us men to ^inde.
A man, that can in love be true and kind.
Thus ends now my tale, and God us send
Taling enough unto our lives end.


FINIS.
Some Books printed for Henry Herringman at the Anchor in the Lower walk of the
New-Exchange.
Folio's
Dr. William Howel's History of the World. Pietro Della-Vals Travels. Astrea, a
Romance; 1, 2, and 3 volume. Clelia, a Romance; 5th volume. Dom John de Castro.
Grand Scipio a Romance. James Howels History of Venice. Bishop Andrews second
volume of Sermons. Sir Robert Howard's four Plays. Wall-Flower, a Romance. Mrs.
Phillips Poems. Mr. Abraham Cowley's Works. Ben. Iohnson's second volume.
Quarto's.
Charleton's Natural History. His Immortality of the soul. His History of
Stonehenge. His Character of the King* Boyle's Essaies in Latin and English.
Parthenissa, a Romance, in Five Tomes. Blunt's Art of making Devices. A
Discourse of Schools and Schoolmasters. Fisher's Ironiodia Gratulatoria. Civil
Right of Tithes.
Octavo's large.
Boyl's style of Scripture. His Seraphick Love. His History of Colors. His
Reflections.
Bergerac's Le^ters. Humane Industry. Humane Soul. Sir Robert Howard's Poems.
Sir Thomas Higgons Poems. Buscon, or the Witty-Spaniard. Rats Rym'd to death.
Yelverton's Christian Religion* Characters on the Passions All Horace in
English. Carter's Heraldry. Grand difference between France and Spain.
Sucklings Poems and Remains. Pastor fido; English. Sir Toby Mathews Letters.
Court of Rome. De-Laines French Grammar Evelin of Employment Dryden's Annus
Mirabilis. Quevedo's Visions. Wallers Poems. Denhams Poems. Donns Poems.
Crashaws Poems. Judgments of God against Atheism and Profaneness. Fleckno's
Loves Dominion. The Ephesian Matron. Cimmerian Matron, to which is added the
Mysteries and Miracles of Love.
Octavo's small.
Bishop King's Poems. Game at Chess-Play. Davenant's Declamations Flecknoes
Diarum Honest Ghost. Horace, his Odes and Epodes. Kellison on the 51 Psalm.
Method of Reason; des C^rtes. Musarum Deliti^. Pantagruel's Prognostication*
Heroic Education. Lo. Castlemains Account of Candi^. Carew's Poems. Sir Will.
Davenant's Madagascar* Sir. Will. D^venants Gondibert.
Large Twelves.
Rawleighs Ghost. Gregory Nazianzen's Orations in English. Bishop Kings Psalms.
Mazarines and Oliver Cromwels Design to surprise Ostend.
Small Twelves.
Amourus Fantasme, a Play. Enchanted Lovers, a Play. Balsacs Converson of the
Roman.
PLAYS, Folio and Quarto.
Adventures of Five hours. Mustapha. Henry the Fifth* Just Italian. Unfortunate
Lovers. Love and Honor. Albovine King of the Lombards. Cruel Brothe^s. Cruelty
of the Spaniards in P^r^* History of Sir Francis Drake. Siege of Rhodes, first
and second Parts. Nuptial of Pelius and Thetis. The Widow, a Comedy. Love in a
Tub. Rival Ladies, a Comedy. Indian Emperor. Am^zone Queen. Pompey the Great.
Maiden Queen. The Usurper, a Tragedy. Cutter of Colemanstreet. The Carnival, a
Comedy. Mayor of Queenborough. Tarugo's Wiles, or the Coffee-house* Duke of
Lerma. Villain, a Tragedy. Dryden's Essay of Poesy* Duel of the Staggs.

