C R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION Requiring the putting in Execution the several Statutes made
against the Importation of Iron-Wyer, Wooll-Cards, and other Manufactures made
of Iron-Wyer; and for the Encouragement of the Manufactures of Iron-Wyer in
this Kingdom.
CHARLES R.

WHereas by several Acts of Parliament made in the Third year of King Edward
the Fourth, the First year of King Richard the Third, the Nine and thirtieth
year of Queen Elizabeth, and the Fourteenth year of His now Majesty's Reign,
and other Statutes of this Kingdom, It is Enacted (amongst other things therein
contained) That no Iron Thread (commonly called White Wire) nor Cards for
Wool, nor Card-Wyer, nor Iron-Wyer for making of Wooll-Cards, shall be
Imported into this Kingdom (wherein the best Iron Thread or Wire is made;) And
whereas by the Manufactures of making and drawing of Wire, and of making
Wooll-Cards, very many poor people and their Families have been employed and
maintained, and the said Wooll-Cards are of great concernment to this Kingdom
for the good making of Woollen Cloth; The Kings most Excellent Majesty
therefore taking the Premises into his Princely consideration, and being
sensible, that if the Importation of Foreign Wire, and other Manufactures
aforesaid should be permitted, the same would tend not only to the destruction
of the said Manufactures within His Dominions, and to the great prejudice of
the ancient and profitable Trade of Clothing, and diverse other Trades which do
necessarily depend upon Iron Wire, and the several Manufactures before
specified, but also to the ruin of many hundreds of Families, whose sole
livelihood consists therein, is graciously pleased for the preservation of the
said useful Manufactures (which he is resolved to encourage) and for the good
of his Subjects, by this His Royal Proclamation (with the Advice of his Privy
Council) strictly to charge and command, That from henceforth no person or
persons whatsoever, Natives, Denizens, Aliens, or others, do or shall Import,
bring or convey, or cause to be Imported, brought or conveyed into any place or
places within this His Realm of England, or Dominion of Wales, from or out of
any part or place beyond the Seas, any of the said Foreign Wire or Wooll-Cards,
or any other Manufactures made of Foreign Iron-Wyer, contrary to the Acts of
Parliament aforesaid, or any of them, or any other Law or Statute of this
Kingdom, upon pain of forfeiture thereof according to the said Statutes, one
Moiety to His Majesty, and the other Moiety to him or them that shall Seize the
same, or such other Penalties and Forfeitures as by the Laws of this Kingdom
and his Majesty's Prerogative Royal may be inflicted upon the Offenders: And
that under the like Penalties no old Iron-Wyer taken out of old Wooll-Cards,
shall be put into new Leather or new Boards, and put to sale. And His Majesty
does strictly charge and command as well the Governors, Assistants, and
Society of the City of London of and for the Mineral and Battery Works, as also
the Commissioners, Farmers, and all other Officers whatsoever of His Majesty's
Customs, and all other persons whatsoever, to Seize all such Foreign Wire and
Commodities aforesaid as shall be Imported or Sold contrary to the said
Statutes, and to this His Royal Proclamation, in whose hands soever the same
shall be found: And that they and every of them be in all respects diligent and
circumspect in the preventing the Importation of the several prohibited
Commodities before specified, and in the discovering thereof when Imported, and
that they make Seizure thereof according to Law, and cause the Offenders
therein to be punished as to justice shall appertain. And His Majesty does also
hereby require all Justices of the Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs,
Constables and other Officers whatsoever, to be aiding and assisting in all
things touching the due execution of this His Majesty's Royal Proclamation from
time to time as occasion shall require, as they will answer the contrary at
their utmost peril.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Third day of May 1678. In the Thirtieth
year of Our Reign.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill, Christopher Barker, Thomas Newcomb, and Henry
Hills, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1678.


