DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION Prohibiting the Importation of Painted Earthen Wares.
CHARLES R.

WHereas the Art of making all sorts of Painted Earthen Wares is a Mystery but
lately found out in England, and with great Costs attained to, whereby great
benefit and advantage will accrue to this Our Kingdom in general, and to very
many private Families who already make their chief Livelihood and Subsistence
thereupon: Notwithstanding which, diverse Merchants and others have lately
Imported into England great quantities of the like Painted Earthen Wares, from
Parts beyond the Seas, and do sell the same at an undervalue, to the great
discouragement of so useful a Manufacture lately found out, and utter ruin of
the Inventers thereof, besides the impoverishment of several Families which
subsist by it; We therefore, by advice of Our Privy Council, have thought fit
to publish this Our Royal Procalmation, and do hereby straightly Charge and
Command, That from henceforth no Person or Persons, Native or Foreigner, do, or
shall import, bring, send, or convey, or cause to be imported, brought, sent,
or conveyed into Our Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwick
upon Tweed, or any part thereof, from, or out of any Place or Parts beyond the
Seas, or out of any other of our Dominions, any kind or sort of Painted Earthen
Wares whatsoever (except those of China, and Stone Bottles, and Iugs) by way of
Merchandise, to be sold, bartered, or exchanged within this Our Realm of
England, Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed aforesaid, or any of
them. And further, That no Person or Persons whatsoever, that now use, or
hereafter shall use the Trade or Occupation of Retailing, Selling, or Uttering
of any Painted Earthen Wares, of what sort or kind soever (except those of
China, and Stone Bottles and Iugs) within any of Our Kingdoms or Dominions,
shall at any time hereafter, directly or indirectly, buy, bargain, or contract
for or concerning the Importation of any Painted Earthen Wares, of what sort or
kind soever, (except before excepted) made beyond the Seas, or in any other
Place out of Our said Realm of England and Dominion of Wales; nor shall bargain
for, buy or sell such Painted Earthen Wares so Imported, knowing the same to be
Manufacted beyond the Seas, upon pain of being grievously Fined, and suffering
the utmost Punishments which may be lawfully inflicted upon the Contemners of
Our Royal Authority; Any Charter, License, Power, Authority, or Privilege to
the contrary notwithstanding. And We do hereby further straightly Charge and
Command all Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, the Commissioners of Our Customs,
Comptrollers, Searchers, Waiters, and other Officers of all or any of Our Ports
within Our said Realm, and all Constables, and other Officers and Ministers of
Justice, and all other Our loving Subjects, to be diligent in and about the
preventing of the Importation of the said Painted Earthen Wares, and discovery
of the same, if any such shall be Imported, and to cause the Offenders to be
duly punished, as to Law and Justice shall appertain.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the 22th day of July in the 24th year of Our
Reign. 1672.
LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers
to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1675.


