C R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION that the Moneys lately called in, may nevertheless be current
in all Payments, to, or for the use of His Majesty, until the First day of May
next.
CHARLES R.

WHereas by Our late Proclamation of the Seventh of September last, for calling
in all Moneys, Gold and Silver, Coined or Stamped with the Cross and Harp, and
the Circumscription, The Commonwealth of England, and for making the same to be
current only to the First of this instant December, and no longer; We did
publish and declare Our Royal Will and Pleasure, That from and after the last
day of November then next ensuing, no Moneys whatsoever, either of Gold or
Silver, having the Stamps aforesaid, should at any time be received, allowed,
or taken as current Money, nor should the same be used in any Receipt or
Payment whatsoever, but should from thenceforth cease to be lawful Money of
England, to all intents and purposes whatsoever. We taking the Premises into
Our serious consideration, and choosing rather to take the loss and prejudice
upon Our Self, which shall happen by reason of the said Moneys so Coined and
stamped as aforesaid, then that any of Our Loving Subjects should be prejudiced
or losers thereby; and to the end the same may remain within Our Kingdom, and
not be transported to Foreign parts, have thought fit to publish and declare,
and hereby (by and with the Advice of Our Privy Council) do publish and
declare, That no part of the said Moneys so Coined and Stamped as aforesaid,
shall continue current, or be paid, or payable to, or between all or any of Our
Subjects. But nevertheless, that it shall and may be lawful, to, and for any
person or persons whatsoever, which at any time or times before the First day
of May now next coming, shall pay or deliver any Sum or Sums of Money, to, or
for the use of Us, Our Heirs and Successors, for, or in respect of the free and
voluntary Present, or any Rent, Custom, Excise, Tax, or any other Duties
whatsoever, to pay, send, or deliver, or cause to be paid, sent, or delivered
the same, or so much thereof, as they shall think fit, in the said Moneys so
Coined and Stamped as aforesaid, into any of Our Public Receipts, where the
same shall be received as any other Moneys that are current within this Our
Realm, may or ought to be received or taken; and that from and after the said
First day of May now next coming, the same shall not be current, nor be any
ways paid or payable to Us, Our Heirs or Successors, or to any other person or
persons whatsoever. And Our further Will and Pleasure is, and We do hereby
direct and appoint, all and every Our Commissioners, Collectors, or Receivers
of the several Duties aforesaid; and also all and every Our Officers and
Ministers of Our Exchequer, and of the Receipt there, for the time being; and
all others whom the same shall concern, Not to refuse, but to receive such of
the said Moneys, as shall from time to time be tendered or paid to them, or any
of them, within the time, or for any the Duties or Payments aforesaid, in such
manner as any other Moneys that are current within this Our Realm, may or ought
to be received. And that upon the Receipt of any considerable sum thereof, they
do from time to time acquaint Our High Treasurer, and Chancellor of Our
Exchequer therewith; to the end, that such speedy direction may be given for
new Coining thereof, as shall be thought fit, We being willing for the ease of
Our Subjects, to take the charge of the Coynage thereof upon Our Self. And We
do hereby further publish and declare, That if any person or persons, during
the time aforesaid, shall presume to Wash, Clip, File Counterfeit, or otherwise
abuse any the said Moneys so Coined and Stamped as aforesaid, That then all and
every such Offenders shall be proceeded against according to the Laws and
Statutes of this Our Realm.

Given at Our Court at Whitehal the Seventh day of December, in the Thirteenth
year of Our Reign. 1661.
LONDON: Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the KING'S
most Excellent Majesty. 1661.


