CR
DIEV^ET^MON^DROIT
HONI^SOIT^QVI^MAL^Y^PENSE
royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION PROHIBITING The Importation of diverse Foreign Wares and
Merchandises into this Realm of England and the Dominion of Wales, and Sale
thereof; and to Repress the excess of Gilding of Coaches and Chariots.
CHARLES R.

WHereas by several Acts of Parliament made in the times of Our Predecessors
(that is to say) in the First year of King Richard the Third, in the Third year
of King Edward the Fourth, in the Nineteenth year of King Henry the Seventh,
and in the Fifth year of Queen Elizabeth, it is Enacted (amongst other things)
That no Merchant, Denizen nor Stranger, nor other person shall bring, send or
convey from beyond the Sea into this Our Realm of England, or Dominion of
Wales, any Laces, Ribbonds, Fringes, Imbroidery, Laces of Silver or of Gold,
Hats, Knives, Scissers, Painted Ware, Caskets, Points, Gloves, Locks, or
Brushes to be uttered and sold within our said Realm of England, or Dominion of
Wales, by way of Merchandise, upon pain to forfeit the same Wares and
Merchandises, as often as they may be found in the hands of any person or
persons to be sold, the one half of the said Forfeitures to go to the use of
Our Self, and the other half to any of Our Subjects that shall first seize the
same, the which to do, they are thereby Authorized. And whereas complaint has
been to Us made by the Artificers in this Our Realm of England (as well within
Our City of London, as within other Our Cities, Towns, and Boroughs) that
notwithstanding the said Statutes, and the Penalties therein contained, Foreign
Wares and Merchandises of the sorts aforesaid (amongst others) have of late
been brought from beyond the Seas in great abundance, and sold within this Our
Realm of England and Dominion of Wales, whereby the said Artificers and their
Families are not only utterly impoverished, the youth not trained up in the
said Sciences, and thereby the said Faculties, and the exquisite Knowledge
thereof, like in short time, within this Our Realm to decay, but diverse of Our
Cities and Towns are thereby much impaired, the whole Realm greatly endamaged,
and Foreign Countries much enriched: We with the Advice of Our Privy Council,
out of Our Princely care of the Artificers of this Our Realm, in the Sciences
aforesaid, to whom We resolve to give all good encouragement, they being
nothing inferior to Foreigners (although (as We cannot but take notice) Our
Subjects are too inclinable to a preferrence of Foreign Manufactures before Our
own) and for prevention of like mischiefs for the time to come, have thought
fit by this Our Proclamation to revive the notice and memory of the said Acts
of Parliament, and the Penalties therein contained, to the end that all persons
which are or shall be therein concerned, may not be able to pretend ignorance
of their dangers or duties touching the premises: And do also by like Advice
by this Our Proclamation straightly Charge and Command all Merchants, as well
Denizens as Strangers, and all other persons whatsoever, not to presume at any
time hereafter to bring, send or convey into this Our Realm of England, or
Dominion of Wales, from any part beyond the Seas, any Foreign Bone-Lace,
Cut-work, Imbroidery, Fringe of Gold, Silver, Silk, or Thread, Lace of Gold or
Silver, Ribbonds, or Bever-Hats (or any other the Wares or Merchandises above
mentioned, or by the said Acts of Parliament, or any other Prohibited to be
Imported) by way of Merchandise, to be sold, bartered, or exchanged within this
Our Realm of England, or Dominion of Wales, contrary to the form and effect of
the said Acts of Parliament, or any of them, upon the pains and penalties in
the said Acts contained, which (if they do) they must expect, with the
uttermost severity, to be inflicted upon them. And for that end We do hereby
straightly Charge and Command all Searchers, Waiters, and all other Our
Officers and Ministers whatsoever (upon the forfeiture of their Offices and
Places, and such other Penalties, as for their negligences or connivances may
by Law be inflicted upon them) to use their uttermost care and diligence to
discover all Foreign Wares and Merchandise abovesaid, or others by the said
Acts of Parliament, or any other prohibited, which shall be Imported from
beyond the Sea into this Our Kingdom of England, or Dominion of Wales, contrary
to the said Acts or any of them, and to seize the said Wares and Merchandises
to Our use, to the end such proceedings may be thereupon had, as shall be
agreeable to the said Acts. And We do hereby require the Chief Baron and Barons
of Our Public Exchequer, and all other Our Judges and Ministers of Justice
whatsoever, that they be very careful (as occasion shall require) to put Our
Laws in due and ffectual execution against those which shall offend in the
premises.

And whereas diverse Acts of Parliament have been made for the restraint of the
wasting of Gold by Gilding, upon great Penalties, notwithstanding which Acts,
the Gilding of Coaches in and about Our City of London, and elsewhere in Our
Realm of England, and Dominion of Wales, is grown into frequent and excessive
use, to the great wasting and expense of Gold, whereof by this means (amongst
others) there is a great scarcity; We out of Our Royal Care to prevent this
excess and mischief for the time to come, Do (by like Advice of Our Privy
Council) by this Our Proclamation straightly Charge and Command all makers of
Coaches and Chariots, and all others which shall put to sale any Coaches or
Chariots within this Our Realm of England, and Dominion of Wales, that they do
not hereafter Gild any Coaches or Chariots, or cause the same to be Gilded, nor
sell or expose the same to sale, being Gilded in any part thereof (except only
such Coaches or Chariots as are or shall be provided for the use of Us or Our
Royal Family, and excepting Coats of Arms upon other Coaches) upon such Pains
and Penalties to be inflicted upon the offenders, as are by Our Laws and
Statutes in such case provided.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Twentieth day of November 1661. in the
Thirteenth year of Our Reign. GOD SAVE THE KING.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the KING'S
most Excellent Majesty, 1661.

At the KING'S Printing House in Blackfriars.


