C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION Touching the Planters in the Island of Saint CHRISTOPHERS.
CHARLES R.

WHereas it has been Our care before and since the Restitution of that part of
the Island of Saint Christophers, which formerly belonged to Us and Our
Subjects, to provide for the Plantation and Improvement thereof, by giving all
manner of Encouragements to Our good Subjects to return thither, and to
Re-establish the former Trade and Commerce: In order whereunto We lately sent
thither Sir Charles Wheeler Baronet, with Our Commission to be-Our
Lieutenant General, and General Governor of Our Leeward Islands in America;
and for the better execution of so important a Charge, gave him such Directions
and Instructions as were most suitable to these Our Royal Intentions, and might
best tend to the advancement of the general Good and Welfare of all Our
Subjects there, so that We might reasonably have expected before this time,
some Account of the good success of these Our endeavors in the happy and
peaceable Settlement of Our Subjects in their former Proprieties and
Possessions; nevertheless, to the utter disappointment of Our just
expectations, and the general Discouragement of such of Our Subjects who
formerly Inhabited that Island, We are given to understand, That on or about
the Twenty fourth of August last past, Sir Charles Wheeler has caused a
certain Proclamation to be published in that Island, thereby endeavoring to
oblige the former Inhabitants and Proprietors to appear before a certain Court
of Claims by him there Erected, and to return with a Stock sufficient for the
quantity of Land they Claim, on peril of losing such part of their Estates they
shall not be able to Stock, which shall be given to them who are better able;
And moreover, to be Contributory to all Levies to be made for satisfaction of
the French Demands, upon any Article of the Peace at Breda, or for satisfaction
of any other disbursments concerning Fortifications, or any other Public
Expenses; with a further menacing intimation to all such as shall be found to
have Acted or Counseled in the late Rendition of the Island to the French, or
have been guilty of any Cowardice or Folly in that War, That they are not to
expect the like advantages with the rest of Our Subjects: And a Declaration,
That upon every man's Estate a Quit-Rent shall be reserved, greater or lesser,
according to the merit or demerit of the person Restored, with an allowance of
no longer time to such of Our Subjects who were in the Barbados and Caribee
Islands, for putting in their Claims, then One Month, and but Three Months to
those who were in any part of Europe, Virginia, Jamaica, Carolina, Bermuda's,
or New England, Then which nothing could have been done more contrary to the
Commission and Instructions We had given him, nor more repugnant to Our Royal
Intentions, and the just Interests and Advantages of the ancient Planters and
Proprietors: Wherefore, and for the better prevention of the ill consequences
which might otherwise ensue upon that Proclamation so issued out by the said
Sir Charles Wheeler, if the same should be allowed to have any force or effect,
We have thought fit, by Advice of Our Council, to Publish this Our Royal
Proclamation, and do hereby Declare Our Will and Pleasure, That the said
Proclamation, and every thing therein contained, is, and shall be null and
void, to all intents and purposes whatsoever, as if the same had never been had
nor made; And because the Return and Re-settlement of the ancient Planters and
Proprietors has been many ways obstructed, not only by the Severities of the
said Illegal Proclamation, but by several accidents which for a long time did
very much retard the Surrender of the said Island, We therefore out of the just
sense We have of the great Sufferings of the said late Planters and
Proprietors, do by these presents, for their ease, and in their favor, further
Declare, That all and every the late Planters and Proprietors, their Heirs,
Executors and Assigns, or their Agents respectively, shall be admitted to enjoy
their several and respective Plantations, carrying with them such Stock only
as they are able, or can conveniently provide: Which Grace and Favor of Ours
We would have to be understood with these Qualifications and Restrictions only
(That is to say) That such who have sold their Plantations to the French, or
Claim under those who did Sell the same to the French, shall be obliged to
re-imburse the Purchasers the Price or Money they or those under whom they
Claim, did actually receive for their respective Possessions and Estates,
within the space of one whole year, to be accounted from the Re-delivery of the
English part of the said Island, which We are informed, was upon the 5/15 of
July 1671. And all such who have not Sold to the French and their Heirs,
Executors and Assigns, and their Agents respectively, shall be obliged to
return unto the said Island before the Twenty fifth day of December, which
shall be in the year of Our Lord, One thousand six hundred seventy two. And We
do further Publish and Declare Our Royal Will an^ Pleasure, That no Taxes,
Tallages, Aides, or other Impositions whatsoever, shall at any time hereafter
be Assessed or Imposed, nor any Quit-Rents Reserved or Required, nor any Moneys
Levied, nor any kind of Charge be laid upon, or raised out of any Lands or
Tenements in the said Island, unless it be by virtue of some Public Law made
or to be made by the Assembly of the said Island, and with the consent of the
Governor and Counsel there Assembled. And moreover, of Our further and more
especial Clemency and Favor unto Our good Subjects in the said Island, We are
Graciously pleased to Declare, That all and every the Inhabitants, Planters and
Proprietors of the said Island, and (...) and every person and persons Claiming
by, from, and under them, or any of them, and all other Our S^bjects in the
said Island, shall be, and are hereby Freed, Indempnified, and Discharged, as
against Us, Our Heirs and Successors, of and from all Crimes, Offenses,
Miscarriages, and Misdemeanors whatsoever, which happened, and were committed
in the said Island during the late War in the said Island, and of and from all
Pains and Penalties incurred for or by reason of any matter or thing done, or
omitted to be done during the said late War; And of and from all Prosecutions,
Molestations, or Inquiries touching or concerning the same; All which matters
and things shall be, and are hereby put into perpetual Oblivion, nor shall the
same be ever mentioned to the prejudice of any of Our Subjects, either in their
Persons, Estates, or Reputations. All which We Command to be Obeyed in all Our
Dominions, and all Our Officers Civil and Military, to be Assisting in the
Premises, as they will answer the contrary at their utmost perils.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Two and twentieth day of December 1671. in
the Twenty third year of Our Reign, 1671.
In the SAVOY, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker,
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1671.


