C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION Prohibiting the Importation of ALLOME.
CHARLES R.

WHereas by the care and Expense of Our Royal Grandfather King James of ever
blessed memory, the great and commendable work of making Allome of the Native
Mines of this Our Kingdom has been brought to such perfection, as that
sufficient quantities of good and well roached Allome have for many years past
been made, as well for the supply of Our own Dominions, which before cost Our
Subjects much Treasure, as for foreign vent and sale of great quantities thereof
into other Kingdoms. By the making of which said Commodity at home, although
the benefit accruing in general to Our whole Realm is great, and the
Encouragement that thereby is given to Shipping and Navigation very
considerable, besides the increase that by means thereof is brought to Our
Revenue; yet nevertheless having experienced, that unless a restraint be laid
upon the Importation of Allome from abroad, and the use thereof when it shall
be brought in inhibited, so profitable and commodious a Manufacture cannot be
upheld and maintained: We have therefore thought fit (with the Advice of Our
Privy Council) to use all honorable means for the maintaining of that
Manufacture in this Our Kingdom: And do by this Our Proclamation (according to
the Example of Our late Royal Father and Grandfather) straightly charge and
command, That no person or persons whatsoever, do hereafter import or bring, or
cause to be imported or brought any Allome, or the Minerals or Materials for
the making thereof, into this Our Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, or
Town of Berwick upon Twede, upon pain of Our high Displeasure, and of the loss
and forfeiture of all such Allome, Minerals and Materials which shall be so
imported, and to incur such other penalties and punishments as by the Laws and
Statutes of this Our Realm, or otherwise may justly be inflicted on them for
contempt or neglect of our Royal Command herein. And We do also hereby straightly
charge and command all Our loving Subjects whatsoever, That they and every of
them do hereafter wholly forbear to buy, bargain for, sell, utter, or spend any
of the said Allome, Minerals or Materials, upon pain of the seizure, loss, and
forfeiture of the same, and to be proceeded against as contenmers of Our Will
and Pleasure herein declared. And we do hereby authorize and require all
Mayors, Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, Bailiffs, Constables, and other Our
Officers, Ministers, and loving Subjects, That they and every of them, when,
and so often as they or any of them shall be requested in that behalf, be
aiding and assisting from time to time in the due execution of the premises.
And further, That all Our Customers, Collectors, Farmers, Searchers, Waiters,
and all other Our Officers and Ministers in Our Port of London, and all other
Our Ports, Havens, and Creeks within this Our Realm and Dominion of Wales, do
from time to time take care to search for, and seize as forfeit to Our use all
such Allome, Minerals, or Materials as shall hereafter be imported, conveyed,
or brought into any Our said Ports, Harbors, or Creeks, contrary to the intent
of these Presents: And this shall be their Warrant and discharge in that behalf.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the 27th. day of April, 1667. In the
Nineteenth year of Our Reign.
In the SAVOY, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker, His
Majesty's Printers, 1667.


