By the King.
A PROCLAMATION Touching the Transportation of Corn.
CHARLES R.

THe Kings most Excellent Majesty taking into His Princely Consideration, That
now after the late interruption of Foreign Commerce and Trade, the
Transportation of Corn may be a public good and advantage to His People, has
thought fit (with the Advice of His Privy Council) to Publish and Declare, and
does hereby Publish and Declare, That by the late Act of Parliament for the
Encouragement of Trade, It is (among other things) Enacted, That from and after
the First day of September, which was in the year of our Lord 1663 and from
thence forward, when the Prices of Corn and Grain, Winchester Measure, do not
exceed the Rates hereafter following, at the Havens or places where the same
shall be Shipped or Laden, (viz.) The Quarter of Wheat Eight and forty
shillings, the Quarter of Barley or Malt Eight and twenty shillings, the
Quarter of Oats Thirteen shillings and four pence, the Quarter of Rye Two and
thirty shillings, the Quarter of Pease or Beans Two and thirty shillings,
current English money; That then it shall be lawful for all and every person
and persons to Ship, Load, Carry and Transport any of the said Corns or Grains
from the Havens or places where they shall be of such Prices, unto any parts
beyond the Seas, as Merchandise; Any Law, Statute, or Usage to the contrary
notwithstanding, paying such Rates for the same, and none other, as are to be
paid when the same might have been Transported by the late Act of Parliament,
Entitled, A Subsidy granted to the King of Tonnage and Poundage. And whereas
His Majesty is informed, That none of the said sorts of Corn or Grain do hear,
or are risen to the Prices in the said Act for Encouragement of Trade
mentioned, so that the same may be Transported by virtue thereof; Yet
nevertheless, for prevention of all questions that may arise touching the
uncertainty of Prices, and in respect the Prices which are now low, and under
those mentioned in the Act, may rise, by reason of the Liberty of
Transportation, which otherways would not be so high: His Majesty is graciously
pleased to give, and hereby does give full Liberty and License to all and every
person and persons whatsoever, from henceforward, to Ship, Load, Carry and
Transport out of this Realm of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town or Port of
Berwick upon Tweed, into any the parts beyond the Seas, all or any of the said
sorts of Corn or Grain, whatsoever the Prices thereof are or shall be, without
any molestation or trouble, or incurring any Penalty or Forfeiture, paying such
Customs and Duties only, and no other, as should be paid when the same may be
Transported by the said Act of Tonnage and Poundage. Wherefore His Majesty does
hereby Will, and strictly Require the Farmers of His Customs, and other
Officers, Ministers and Subjects whatsoever whom the same may concern, to take
notice of this His Royal Proclamation, and give all due obedience thereunto, at
their perils. Provided, and His Majesty's Pleasure is, That this Proclamation
shall continue only for the space of Three Calendar Months from the date
hereof, and no longer.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Eleventh day of September, 1667.
In the SAVOY, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker,
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1667.


