By the King.
A PROCLAMATION To Restrain the Excessive Carriages in Wagons and four-Wheeled
Carts, to the destruction of Highways.
CHARLES R.

WHereas it appertains to Us to have special Care, that the common Highways,
and Bridges, leading from place to place within this Realm, might be kept in
due repair for the ease and good of Our Loving Subjects; And observing
notwithstanding the good provision of Our Laws in that behalf made, and the
conformity and forwardness of Our Subjects in so Public and Necessary a Work,
That Our Highways and Bridges are at this present grown into great decay, and
very dangerous for Passage, We have upon due examination found, that the said
Decays are occasioned by the common Carriers of this Realm, who for their
singular and private profit, do now usually Travail with Carts and Wagons with
four Wheels, drawn with eight, nine, or ten Horses or more, and do commonly
therein carry sixty and seventy hundred weight at one burden at one time,
which burden and weight is so great and excessive, as that the very Foundations
of Bridges are in many places thereby shaken, and the Highways and Cawseys
Furrowed and Ploughed up by the Wheels of the said Carts and Wagons so
overladen, and made so deep, and full of dangerous Slows and Holes, as neither
can Passengers Travail thereby in Safety, nor the Inhabitants or Persons by Law
bound to repair them, be able to undergo so great a charge: Where heretofore
all common Carriers usually went with Carts of two Wheels only, wherewith they
could not well carry above twenty hundred weight at once, or there abouts,
which the Bridges, Cawseys, and ordinary Highways, did and might well bear
without any great damage to the same: We therefore intending the Reformation of
the Premises, and it having been resolved by the Advice of the Judges formerly
taken herein, That by the Law of this Our Realm, the said excessive and
extraordinary kind of Carriages, whereby Our Highways are thus destroyed, are
common Nusances and Annoyances against the Weal-publique, and an offense
against Our Crown; Do hereby straightly charge, require and command, that no
common Carrier, or other person or persons whatsoever, shall hereafter use, go,
or travail with any Cart or Wagon made with four Wheels, to be drawn with above
five Horses at once along their Journey, unless they go all two abrest, in
which case they are limited to no number, that the Highways and Bridges may
hereafter receive the less damage thereby, upon pain of incurring Our high
Displeasure, and to receive condign punishment, as contemners of Our Royal Will
and Commandment, and to be further prosecuted and punished for the said
Nusances and Annoyances, by Fine and such other ways, as the Laws of this Our
Realm have provided against Offenders in that kind: To which end, We do hereby
expressly charge, as well Our Judges, as Our Atturney-General, to exact and
require the extremity of Our Laws in that behalf; And that every Offender
contrary to this Our Proclamation shall for his contempt be prosecuted in Our
Court of Kings Bench, and other Courts whereunto the Cognizance thereof shall
belong, by Information or Indictment, and thereupon be Fined and proceeded
against according to their demerit; Nevertheless, Our Intent, Will, and
Commandment is, And we do hereby straightly charge, command, and prohibit,
that no common Carrier whatsoever shall by color hereof take occasion to
Inhance or raise the prices of Carriage from any part or place within Our said
Realm, under pain of Our Displeasure, and upon complaint thereof to Us, or Our
Privy Council made, to be further punished; as shall be thought fit and just
according to Law. And lastly, We do hereby Will and Require all Majors,
Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, and other Our Officers and Ministers in all
Counties and Privileged Places whatsoever within this Our Realm, that they,
and every of them in their several Offices and Places, do from time to time
provide and see to the due execution of this Our Pleasure and Royal
Commandment; and that they discover and make known all offenders herein, that
they may be severely punished for their contempts, as also that they neglect
not, but continue the repair and maintenance of Highways, Bridges and Cawseys
within this Our Realm, according to the Laws, Statutes and Ordinances now in
force, as they tender Our Pleasure, and will answer the contrary at their
utmost perils.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Sixteenth day of August, 1661. in the
Thirteenth year of Our Reign. God save the KING.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the KING'S
most Excellent Majesty, 1661.

At the KING'S Printing House in Black-Fryars.


