A TREATY OF Friendship and Commerce, Between His MAJESTY of GREAT BRITAIN,
etc. AND The Most Serene PRINCE the DUKE of SAVOY, CONCLUDED At Florence the
19th day of September, 1669.

Published by His Majesty's Command.

LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill, and Christopher Barker, Printers
to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1673.

The Instrument of Commerce with the Duke of SAVOY.
THe convenient situation of the Port of Villa Franca in the Mediterranean
Sea, and the Capacity of the same, together with the security of it in all
respects; have been efficacious motives to His most Serene Highness the Duke of
Savoy, for the Exhibiting and Pronouncing the same Free to the Whole World:
with a Belief, that it might in time prove advantageous to the Public, and to
His Royal Highness in particular. But it so falling out, that the vigor of
things which are established by the best Counsel, in process of time, are
rendered languid and subject to mutation: It has therefore pleased His Royal
Highness not only to reconfirm the Free State and Condition of His Port; But
over and above to offer the same to His Majesty of Great Britain, etc.
increased with new Privileges, and augmented with inviolable Capitulations. To
these motives a most valid and reciprocal Inducement joins itself: To wit, the
Luxuriant Fertility of soil, which is obvious in the Kingdoms and other
Plantations which are under the Dominion of His Majesty of Great Britain, etc.
As also in the Dominions of His said Royal Highness: which superfluity, since
it is so properly and naturally transmitted, and emptyed into the mutual
Territories, with the reciprocal fruit, and advantage of the Subject: 'Twas
easy for both Princes between whom there passed long since the Ties of an
Ancient Friendship, confirmed by repeated Alliances, and by late conjunction in
Blood; to entertain thoughts of super adding the new Tie of mutual Commerce, by
which they might upon the score of advantaging their Subjects further oblige
and reciproeally Engage themselves to each other. To this end and purpose, it
has pleased His most Excellent Majesty by His Letters Patents under the Great
Seal of England, to constitute Sir John Finch Knight, now Resident for His
Majesty of Great Britain with the Great Duke of Tuscany, His true and lawful
Attorney, with a Plenipotentiary Power, as appears out of the Letters Patents
themselves. And to the same intent and purpose His Royal Highness has thought
good to invest with the same Power and Authority Signor Joseph Maurice
Filippone, His Counselor, Auditor, and Procurator General of His Revenue: As
is likewise apparent from the Letters Patents of His Royal Highness: Both which
Plenipotentiaries after several meetings have finally concluded as follows.

Articles Covenanted.
I.
FIrst, Since Commerce was always the Companion of Peace, That Peace which for
many years was never interrupted by War, is now ratified, established, and
confirmed, between the most Potent Monarch CHARLES the Second, King of Great
Britain, etc. and His Royal Highness CHARLES EMANVEL the Second o that name,
Duke of Savoy, etc. Both whose Subjects are obliged as well by Sea, as Land,
upon all occasions to perform to each other all actions of mutual Civility and
Kindness.

II.
Secondly, It shall be permitted to, and lawful for all sorts and kinds of
Ships and Vessels, belonging to His Majesty the King of Great Britain, etc. Or
any of His Subjects, to conduct and bring into the Ports of Villa Franca,
Nizza, or S. Hospitio all things whatsoever, or all kinds of Merchandise,
whether produced by Nature, or made by Art, in any part of the World: All which
things or Merchandise so brought, shall freely and lawfully by the Captains, or
Masters, or any under them, or by the Merchants, or Factors His Majesty's
Subjects, be landed and brought into the Houses of the said Merchants or
Factors, or into any Magazines, or Warehouses out of their Houses in the said
Ports; and there conserved and kept by them as long as they please; without
Confiscation, Imposition of Custom, or Exaction of any Duty whatsoever.
Furthermore, if all the said things or any part of them shall not be sold in
the said Ports; It is, and shall be lawful, for the said Captains, Masters,
Merchants, or Factors, His Majesty's Subjects, freely to send all or any part
of the said things by Sea to whatsoever other Place they please, without paying
any Custom, Duty, or any sort of Imposition whatsoever.

III.
Thirdly, That all and every sort and kind of things, and Merchandise which
shall be sold in Nizza, Villa Franca, or S. Hospitio, and after the Sale made
shall be dispeeded or sent by Sea into the Territories of any other Prince,
both in respect of the Seller and Buyer, shall always be free and clear from
all Custom, Duty, or Imposition whatsover: But as to all those things and
Merchandises which after the sale made in the said Places, shall pass by land
into the Territories of any other Prince, It is also Covenanted and agreed,
That during the space of Ten years to ensue from the day of the Publication of
this present Agreement, All such Goods shall be free and clear from all Custom,
Duty, or Impost whatsoever for their passage by land, and from any other
Penalty whatsoever both in respect of the Buyer and Seller; Which Ten years
being expired, if His Royal Highness will not further confirm this freedom of
Passage according to the aforesaid Form and Manner: In such case for all and
every the said things, which after sale made pass by Land as aforesaid, shall
be paid only one half of that Imposition or Duty which is exacted for passage
in the Rates or Tariffe Printed in the end of the Order published the 30th
October 1633.

IV.
Fourthly, All and every sort and kind of things or Merchandise which are
produced by Nature or made by Art, in any of His Majesty's Kingdoms, or in any
Plantations of the West or East Indies, or any other Territories which at
present are, or hereafter shall be under the Dominion of His Majesty, may and
shall be freely sold by the Subjects of His Majesty, throughout all the
Dominions of His Royal Highness and any part of His Territories or places of
Jurisdiction, without any Prohibition or Penalty, notwithstanding whatsoever
Law or Edict to the Coutrary, Excepted always, and only, Salt, Tobacco,
Gunpowder, Match, Birding Shot, Bullets, Whalebone, Cards of all sorts; because
it is the Custom to Farm out the Liberty of selling these mentioned things, as
Monopolies to particular persons: Notwithstanding free leave is granted to His
Majesty's Subjects, according to what is expressed in the Second Article, to
receive and keep within their Houses, or Warehouses, all the aforesaid
forbidden Commodities, without any Custom, Duty or Penalty: Nay further free
leave is granted to His Majesty's Subjects to sell the said forbidden
Commodities to the Monopolists or Farmers themselves, But all sorts of
Merchandise (except the aforesaid Prohibited ones) which shall be introduced
and brought into the Ports of Villa Franca, Nizza, or S. Hospitio, when they
shall be extracted out of the said Ports, to the end that they may be vented
and sold within the Dominions of His Royal Highness, he alone that extracts
them, whether he be the Buyer or the Seller, shall pay only one half of that
Custom, or Duty which is specified in that Book of Rates or 'Tariffe, a Printed
Copy of which underwritten by the Procurator of His Royal Highness was by him
delivered to Sir John Finch, which Duty or Custom once paid, nothing more shall
be paid within the Dominions of His Royal Highness either by the Buyer or the
Seller for the said Goods or Merchandise: with express Declarations, that for
all Woollen Manufactures, or whatsoever Commodities aforesaid which as it
appears are not specified in the aforesaid Books of Rates or Tariffe shall be
paid Duty or Custom, one and a half per Centum, that is half only of the three
per Centum imposed upon all Commodities which are not specified in the
mentioned Book of Rates, by the last Article or Lines of it, which Duty or
Custom being once paid, nothing more shall be paid neither by the Buyer nor the
Seller, within the Dominions of His Royal Highness.

V.
Fifthly, It is covenanted and agreed That all sorts of Ships and Vessels
belonging to His Majesty of Great Britain, etc. or any of His Subjects, which
shall set sail from England, or any Place under the Dominions of his Majesty,
or out of His Majesty's Dominions, not being infected with the Plague, and
shall arrive at the Ports of Nizza, Villa Franca, or S. Hospitio, with
Certificates or Patents of Good health, having in their Voyage had no Commerce
with any places or Persons suspected to be infected with the Plague; are, and
ought to be, Free and clear, from making Quarantena, or any days whatsoever of
purgation: and there shall be immediately granted to the Persons in the said
Ships present and free Commerce or Prattick; and all things and Merchandise of
whatsoever sort or kind, brought by the said Ships, shall immedately without
any delay be permitted freely to be landed, and carried into the Houses, or
Warehouses of the Merchants His Majesty's Subjects in Nizza, Villa Franca, or
S. Hospitio; But if the above mentioned Ships shall arrive without a
Certificate or Patent of Good Health, or if in their Voyage they shall have
practiced or had Commerce with any Persons or Places suspected of the Plague:
In such case both Persons and Goods shall be subject to Quarantena or
Purgation; but the days of Quarantena or Purgation shall be shortened both in
respect of the Persons and Goods, as much as the care of preserving the Public
Health can possibly permit; but what Merchandise is subject to the Lazaretto,
or to make Purgation, as also the Lazaretto Duties or Expense of Goods that
make Purgation, is with other Particulars contained in a Paper of the Rates of
the Lazaretto Duties at the End of this Instrument, which never can or may be
changed or altered without the Consent of the Consul, and the major part of the
Merchants residing in the said Ports.

VI.
Sixthly, Because Ports which are called Free are wont to give Protection and
Refuge to Bankerupts, or Persons that Fail and Break with other Men's Estates;
The same Piety of His Majesty which Protects those who are good, Punishes them
that are Bad; Therefore as to what concerns His Majesty's Subjects, it is
Covenanted and agreed, notwithstanding whatsoever Edicts published, That His
Majesty's Subjects be wholly deprived and utterly cut off from enjoying that
Protection which is commonly called Safe Conduct; reserving to every Subject of
His Majesty his proper Right; Likewise all His Majesty's Subjects shall be
deprived of the benefit of Protection or Safe Conduct, who shall commit any
crimes whatsoever against His Majesty, as also all of His Majesty's Subjects,
whether Master, Mariners, or others, who shall be guilty of Barratry; to whom,
as also to all Pirates and Robbers at Sea who are His Majesty's Subjects, all
License shall be denied of selling Goods or Merchandise, or Contracting for
them in the said Ports: But in regard all that is mentioned in the foregoing
Part of this Article, relates only to His Majesty's Subjects, it is Covenanted
likewise and agreed in favor of the said Subjects, that they shall fully and
entirely against all Strangers (as well as all Strangers against them) enjoy
the Privilege of Safe Conduct or Protection promised, and published in the
Edict of a Free Port, by His Royal Highness.

VII.
Seventhly, All the Subjects of His Majesty who live at Nizza, Villa France, or
S. Hospitio in order to Trade or otherwise, are declared free, and clear from
all Tributes, Taxes, or Levies of money, which are or shall be imposed by His
Royal Highness.

VIII.
Eighthly, It Is likewise declared, that the Persons of His Majesty's Subjects,
residing at Nizza, Villa Franca, or S. Hospitio, shall not be liable or subject
to arrest, or imprisonment, or their Goods to Seizure or Sequestration for any
Civil Causes, unless a Legal Citation has first praeceded; But in Criminal
Causes, which are punished with Death or Corporal Punishment, they shall be
subject to Imprisonment without Citation.

IX.
Ninthly, It is permitted, and shall be lawful to all and every one of the
Subjects of His Majesty of Great Britain, etc. dwelling in the said Ports to
live in their own Religion, after the same manner that is permitted either at
Genoua, or Legorn, and a convenient and decent place of Burial shall be
allotted and assigned for the Interrment of such of His Majesty's Subjects, as
shall decease in the said Places.

X.
Tenthly, Since that nothing does more torment any man then Controversies in
Law before Tribunals of Judicature, in regard of the great Expense both of Time
and Money; But more especially One who is a Stranger to the Customs of the
Place, and an Alien to the Laws: Therefore it is Covenanted and agreed, between
His Majesty of Great Britain, etc. and His Royal Highness, That all Differences
or Controversies whatsoever, which shall arise between Subject and Subject of
His Majesty, or between the said Subjects, and any person, that is no Subject
of His Majesty, shall be only pleaded before, and be decided only by a Judge
who shall be called the Delegate of the English Nation, which Delegate shall
always be chosen by the Subjects of His Majesty who live at Nizza, Villa
Franca, or S. Hospitio; Provided always, that the Election be made out of the
number of those Ministers of His Royal Highness which Constitute the Consuls of
the Sea: The Delegate so chosen shall be continued during the pleasure of the
National Electors; Provided that this Continuation be no longer time then what
is limited by His Royal Highness for the Period of the Office of the rest of
the Consuls of the Sea. When this Delegate is elected, the Nation shall present
Him to His Royal Highness, with a Petition, that by His Authority he may be
appointed to exercise this Charge; By which Authority being Constituted, he
shall with Brevity and Expedition decide and determine all the aforesaid
Controversies, without the formality of Legal Processes, according to the
validity and weight of Reason, having regard only to the truth of the Fact:
And all this shall be done without any Costs, Charges, or Expense, except only
the bare payment of the Writing. From the Sentence given by this Delegate,
there shall no Appeal be made or allowed, except to the Tribunal of the Consuls
of the Sea residing at Nizza, where the Delegate himself is to be one, and sits
as one of the Judges, from which Tribunal no Appeal is to be admitted. But if
in the progress of time, His Majesty's Subjects in the said Ports become
numerous, (which is to be hoped, from the good and well composed Laws) if any
inconvenience be found in the deciding of Controversies according to the manner
prescribed; then as to whatsoever Controversies which shall happen and arise
only between Subject and Subject of His Majesty, the following Rule for an
unappealable deciding of them shall be established, and confirmed between His
Majesty and His Royal Highness, which then is to be in full force and vigor
from that time which His Majesty shall require it of His Royal Highness. The
Form or Rule is this: The Subjects of His Majesty shall choose out of the
number of the English Nation Three, which for life and manners are esteemed Men
of the greatest Integrity amongst them; these Three they shall humbly present
to His Royal Highness, that He may benignely please to appoint One of them, who
under the Title of Delegate of His Royal Highness, is to exercise the Office
which shall immediately be declared: By whose Authority when he shall be
constituted, and to that purpose has obtained Letters Patents from His Royal
Highness, he shall notwithstanding be incapable of exercising his Charge, till
he has first taken Oath before the already mentioned National Delegate; or, in
his absence, before some other of the Consuls of the Sea residing at Nizza for
His Royal Highness. These things premised, when a Controversy or Difference
shall arise or happen, the Plaintiff and the Defendant shall each of them
choose two Arbitrators, whom they shall Declare and Constitute to be such
before the Delegate of His Royal Highness, to every one of which the Delegate
shall administer an Oath upon the Holy Evangelists, to this Purpose; That they
will according to the utmost of their Power, laying aside all respect of
Persons, and according to good Conscience and best Rule of Justice give their
Sentence of Arbitration, Righteously and Faithfully. After which Oath they may
convene, as occasion offers, but always in the presence of the said Delegate;
which Delegate shall have no voice in case that the Major part of the four
Arbitrators agree in their Arbitration; which if they do, the Decision so made
shall be valid and Firm: But if the Arbitrators by reason of their Equality of
Votes agree not; then the Delegate of His Royal Highness, having first taken
the same Oath the Arbitrators did, before one of the Consuls of the Sea at
Nizza, shall have a Vote amongst the other four Arbitrators, and the Decision
shall be on that side which has the Majority of Votes, to all purposes Valid
and Firm. In both Cases the Decision thus Amicably made, shall be transmitted
to His Royal Highness within the space of one Month, that by His Authority it
may have its full force and be put in Execution. This Delegate shall be further
obliged to make Writings or Records, as Delegate of His Royal Highness, and it
shall be his Charge carefully to keep and preserve the same. He shall be
continued three years in his Office, and be obliged to give an Account to the
Delegates that succeeds him, of all matters that were transacted under him.

XI.
Eleventhly, If any Subject of His Majesty shall die in the said Ports without
making his Will, or shall appoint by his Will one to be Executor who lives in
none of the said Ports, the whole Nation shall be convened, and by them some
Persons shall be chosen of Good Life, Fame, and Credit; who together with the
Delegate of His Royal Highness His Majesty's Subject, and the Consul of the
Nation, shall take care of the Estates of the Person deceased, so that it may
not be embezzelled, but kept for them to whom of Right it does belong: Which
Persons so Elected by the Nation, shall be, before the Tribunal of the Consuls
of the Sea residing at Nizza, Constituted and appointed Administrators to the
Intent aforesaid, of the Goods of the Deceased: And to this end, they shall
have full Power to demand and keep whatsoever of right belonged to the Person
deceased, and also to pay and discharge whatsoever of Right was due from the
Deceased Person to any other.

XII.
Twelfthly, All Mariners, Subjects of His Majesty, who shall desert their own
Captain or Master, and enter into any other Ship or Vessel, upon Complaint made
to the Officer of His Royal Highness at Nizza, Villa Franca, or S. Hospitio.
shall be taken from the Ship that received them, and be restored to their first
Captain or Master. If any Mariner deserts his own Captain or Master, and
retires into any public or private house of any of the Inhabitants in the said
Ports, and shall be concealed by the Inhabitant, he shall be forceably taken
out of the house, and the housekeeper fined Twenty Dollars, for every such
Offense; If any Mariner shall lie all night on shore in any public or private
house without leave in writing under the hand of his Officer, the housekeeper
lodging him shall pay Ten Dollars; If any Mariner contracts a Debt with, or
runs in Debt to any Inhabitant of the said Ports, above the sum of One Dollar,
without License in writing from his Captain or Master, his Creditor shall lose
it: But if any Mariner does get one to be bound for the Debt, who is not a
Mariner, the Mariner shall be let go; But the person that is bound for him may
be retained for the Debt.

XIII.
Thirteenthly, It is Covenanted and agreed that all Ships of War belonging to
His Majesty, whenever they shall come into the said Ports, shall in every
Point be received with the same Honor, as any Ships or Vessels whatsoever
belonging to whatsoever Monarch or Prince; During the abode of His Majesty's
Ships in the said Ports, nothing Necessary or Convenient shall be denied them,
they paying a competent Price for it, And as for their Victualling, License is
granted to any Person deputed to Victual the Ships throughout all the Dominions
of His Royal Highness, to contract for, and buy all things necessary and
convenient for sustenance, and to cause all the said things so bought, to be
brought into the said Ports, without any Custom, Duty, or Impost, paying for
them only the First Cost; And it is further Covenanted, that the said Ships of
War of His Majesty, during their abode in the said Ports, shall be Protected
and Defended against any whomsoever that would attempt any Violence or
Hostility against them.

XIV.
Fourteenthly, Since in this Instrument of Commerce there has been mention
made, of certain Fiscal Orders or Tariffes, commonly called Books of Rates or
Public Duties: One of which Printed the Tenth of December, One thousand six
hundred and fifty one, contains the Customs, or Duties, which are to be paid
for all Commodities whatsoever, which are sold within the Dominions of His
Royal Highness. A Second contains at the end of the General Order of the Porto
Franco, (the Thirtieth of October, One thousand six hundred thirty three) The
Duties that are to be paid for Passage by Land through the State of His Royal
Highness. And the Third, and the Last, underwritten by the Procurator of His
Royal Highness, contains the Lazaretto Duties, or Expenses, which are to be
Paid for the Purging of Goods that make Quarantena; All which three Books of
Rates, and Duties, are to be regulated according to the Limitations and
Restrictions in the foregoing Articles: It Is covenanted, that the said
Tariffes, or Rates; and Duties, shall never be changed or altered without
consent of the Consul and the Major part of the English Merchants, and Factors
residing in the said Ports. It Is also further Covenanted that the Merchants and
Factors, Subjects of His Majesty, shall be dispatched with all Expedition in
the several Places where Customs or Duties are to be paid, and that none of
the said Subjects shall be at any time liable to Revision of Accounts under
pretense of Defraudation, And if any Officer of His Royal Highness by way of
Reward, Voluntary Donative, or any other way whatsoever, shall Exact or receive
any sum or value, beyond what is appointed in the mentioned Tariffes or Rates,
limited as in the aforesaid Articles: The Person so offending shall be
imprisoned the space of Three Months, or more, if His Royal Highness think
fit, and shall pay three times the full value of what he so demanded or
received; one half of which shall be applied to His Royal Highness, and the
other half to the Accuser or Informer.

XV.
Fifteenthly and Lastly, It Is Covenanted and agreed, That all Immunities,
Privileges, and Concessions, which in the General Publication of a Free Port
made by His Royal Highness are not mentioned or specified in the foregoing
Articles, shall be for the full Advantage of His Majesty's Subjects to all
intents and purposes, be understood to be expressly mentioned and contained in
the Body of this Present Instrument: And whatsoever for the future of Immunity,
Privilege or Advantage, shall be granted to any other Kingdom or State, all
and every of the said Immunities, Privileges, and Advantages, are and shall be
as fully with all their Circumstances granted to His Majesty's Subjects, as if
they were expressly Covenanted and agreed for in this present Instrument. For
the full and undoubted Confirmation of which, and of all the foregoing
Articles, the above named Procurators of His Majesty of Great Britain, etc. and
His Royal Highness, having diligently read and weighed all the above said
Fifteen Articles, have hereunto put their Hands and Seals, at Florence the
Nineteenth day of September, the Year of our Lord One thousand six hundred
sixty nine.

L. S. John Finch.
L.S. Joseph Maurice Filippone.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill, and Christopher Barker, Printers
to the KINGS most Excellent Majesty, 1673.


