(...)


ENQUIRIES INTO Human Nature, IN VI. Anatomic Praelections IN THE New THEATER
of the Royal College of Physicians in LONDON.

BY WALTER CHARLETON, M. D. and Fellow of the same College.

Published by Order of the Most Learned PRESIDENT.

Furori ac dementiae proximum est, suprema inquirere, and aliena perscrutari,
iis ignoratis quae sunt in nobis. Socrates. LONDON, Printed by M. White, for
Robert Boulter, at the Turks Head in Cornhill, over against the Royal Exchange.
1680.

J. P. Sc.


Printed for Robert Boulter at the Turks head in Cornhill against the Exchange.
1680.


TO THE Right Worshipful Sr. JOHN CUTLER, Knight and Baronett.
WHatsoever Sacrifices Men have at any time offered up to God, they had first
received from His Bounty: nor were they therefore the less Acceptable to Him,
if offered with humility, gratitude, and sincere devotion. I have reason then
to hope (Noble Sir) that this Book, which I now bring as an Oblation of Honor
to your Name; and bring with grateful sentiments of your exemplary Munificence
so happily exercised upon our Illustrious College of Physicians; will not be
the less acceptable to You, because it is already Yours, by unquestionable
right.

I call it Yours; because, though it be an abortive Child of my weak brain,
'twas begotten by a Conjunction of my Obedience to the Command of our Most
Worthy President, with my honest Ambition to contribute my Mite toward the
advancement of the Noble Art of Dissection, to which You have given so ample
Encouragement: because 'twas born in Your Magnific Theater, at the Inauguration
thereof: and because it now comes abroad into the World with no other aim, but
publicly to acknowledge Your Heroic Beneficence.

Nor do I indeed know any other way of making that Acknowledgement, so
agreeable either to the Generosity of Your Mind, or to the Nobility of Your
Design, in erecting the Anatomic Theater; as this I have taken, is.

For, to Your Great Spirit, it is much more delightful to accumulate Benefits,
than to receive Thanks and Eulogies from Your Beneficiaries: and You are
always best pleased with those acts of Your Charity, which are done in secret,
and which are not otherwise to be known, than by the light of their own Merit.
Whence it is, that Your Liberality walks in paths new and remote from the
Common rode, yet direct, and leading at length into most spatiose fields of
public Utility, where industrious Men may reap a more plentiful harvest of
rewards, than they can at first expect: and that the streams of Your Goodness
resemble those Rivers, which, though running under ground, diffuse fertility to
whole Countries and Provinces through which they pass. Of this, the Mechanic
Lecture You have founded in Gresham College, for the promotion of Manual
Trades; and Your Anatomic Theater, are illustrious Examples, worthy the
imitation of Good Kings, and the envy of Bad: being Both so deeply founded upon
Wisdom, that the Advantages they promise, are of Universal concernment to the
present Age, and (if Men be not wanting to themselves) cannot but extend to all
in Ages to come; rendering their Usefulness more and more Conspicuous, the
lower they descend to Posterity.

And as for the Nobility of Your Design in the later; that can not be denied to
be full of Piety toward God, and of Benevolence toward Men.

Of Piety toward God; in that it aims at the incitement of even Philosophers,
to make farther researches and discoveries of the infinite Goodness, Wisdom,
and Power of God, discernable in all his Creatures, but more eminently in the
admirable fabric of Man's Body: and by consequence, to increase their Love and
Veneration of the Divine Majesty. For most certain it is, that profound
Contemplation of the Works of Nature, is of it self powerful enough even to
compel Human Reason to admire, love, praise, and adore the Transcendent
Perfections of the Author of Nature; that we are all naturally disposed to form
in our Minds such Notions of the Deity, as are proportionate to the discoveries
we make of the Excellencies thereof, in the Objects we contemplate; and in
fine, that our Devotion toward the same Deity, is always proportionate to
those Notions. Hence doubtless it was, that the most inquisitive Naturalists
amongst the Ancients, were also the greatest Celebrators of the Supreme Being:
and that the Indian Gymnosophists, the Persian Magi, the Egyptian Sacrificers,
the Gallic Druids, and the Athenian Hierophantae, were to their several Nations
both Philosophers and Priests; teaching at once the mysteries of Nature, the
duties of Religion, and the rites of Divine Worship. Evident it is then, that
Your Theater may be properly enough called, a Temple of Natural Theology, where
the Perfections of God are studied in the Works of His hands, and His Praises
celebrated with Understanding. Deum enim colit, qui novit.

Of Good Will toward Men; in that it has provided the fittest Means to bring
the most Ancient, the most universally Useful, and therefore the Noblest of all
Arts, the Art of Healing, to Perfection. For, Anatomy being the Grand fundament
of Medicine, and yet (with sorrow I write it) incomplete; it cannot be, but
every new discovery thence arising to the Learned and Judicious Professors,
must conduct them, not only to more certain Science, first of the true Economy
of Man's body, in the state of Nature; and then of the disorders and perversions
of that Economy, by Diseases, with their respective Seats and Causes: but also
to the most rational and propre Indications, for the preservation of that, and
the cure of these. Nor can You think me to speak rather from affection or
partiality, than from right judgment; if I affirm, that no Men are more likely
to make such Discoveries by accurate Dissections, than some of the now
flourishing Fellows of our College are: so great are the Testimonies they have
already given to the World of their unwearied Diligence, solid Erudition, and
admirable Sagacity of Spirit. So that it is not easy for me to determine,
whether these Gentlemen be more Worthy of Your Theater, or Your Theater more
Worthy of them. But of this I am sure, that such a Theater has been most fitly
conjoined to such a College: and I dare prophecy, they will mutually add more
and more Honor each to the other.

Now (Honored Sir) if You please to reflect upon what I have said, of the
Generose Temper of Your Mind, and of the Wisdom of Your Design in this
Magnificent Structure; You will (I presume) be soon induced to believe, what I
before affirmed, that I could give no testimony of the great Respect and
Gratitude I owe You, more decent and congruous to Both, than the Dedication of
these my late Anatomic Praelections to You is, in which (how imperfect soever)
I have shown my self willing at least, and Zealous to be serviceable to Your
End, without offending Your Modesty.

The Reasons I have brought, seem sufficient, both to evidence the Right this
Book has to Your Favor, and to justify my Election of it, as the least
indecent Sacrifice I could offer to Your Glory: and the same may serve also to
incline You to receive it benignly, as a specimen of my Devotion to so Eminent
a Benefactor; and to permit me to expose the same to the Censorious World,
under Your Auspicious Patronage; which will certainly afford it defense from
Contempt, and might also give it long Life, were it not of an infirm
constitution, as having been formed in haste, and in the declining age of its
Author, and,

March the 27th A. D. 1679. Noble Sir, Your most sincerely devoted, humble
servant, Walter Charleton.

Advertisement.
LEst the Errors of the Press (which yet are neither many, nor great) be
imputed to the Author, who wanted leisure to prevent them; the Reader is
civilly desired to correct them thus.

In Page 19. Line 26. of the Preface, read, of one and the same part: p. 26. l.
30. of the Preface, r. Trismegistus in Asclepio.

In the Book.

Page 23. l. 31. r. Pelican and most other fowls: p. 52. l. 19. r. betwixt it
and the second or middle coat: p. 130. l. 20. r. spontaneous: p. 132. l. 13. r.
and is not only convenient: p. 421. l. 19. r. (...). p. 430. l. 11. r. (...) --
p. 436. l. 2. r. (...) -- p. 437. l. 31. r. purification of the blood: p. 438.
l. 1. r. or not yet despoiled of its spirits: p. 473. l. 26. r. (...) p. 478.
l. 7. r. which threatening a flux: p. 498. l. 5. r. a force by transmission: and
l. 16. r. of such a power: and l. penult. r. framed: p. 502. l. 25. r. Kingdom
of Fairies: p. 505. l. 20. r. Philosophy: p. 513. l. 24. r. arise: p. 515. l.
22. r. divine Wit: and l. 33. r. so like a bogg: p. 519. l. 9. r. Caspar
Barlaeus: p. 544. l. 25. r. coadjuvantesque omnium operas.

PREFACE.
OF THE Antiquity, Uses, Differences, etc. OF ANATOMY.
THIS Place is sacred to the study of God's Works, for the benefit of Mankind;
the Occasion of this Assembly, rare, inaugural, and worthy of the greatest
solemnity; the Assembly it self, frequent, and consisting (for the major part)
of Men Noble, Wise, Learned and Curiose; and my talent, but a mite. Highly then
it concerns me, before I advance one step, to stand still, a moment or two, and
seriously consider, what my Subject is, and what my Province.

My SUBJECT is, the most abstruse Economy of Nature in the body of Man; a
System of innumerable smaller Machines or Engines, by infinite Wisdom framed
and compacted into one most beautiful, greater Automaton: all whose parts are
among themselves different in their sensible elements, in their magnitudes,
figures, positions, textures, motions, actions and uses; yet all ordained and
adjusted to one common End, namely, to compose a Living Ergasterium or
Workhouse, in which a Reasonable and Immortal Soul may, not only commodiously,
but also with delight, exercise all her divine Faculties, to her own felicity,
and to the praise and glory of her Omnipotent Creator. A Subject (as ye, Noble
and most judicious Auditors, will all readily acknowledge) admirable even to
astonishment; full of variety, and no less full of wonders: a Subject, wherein
the most acute and piercing Wits have found more, much more to amuse, than to
satisfy their Curiosity; and which has forced them, after all their anxious
disquisitions, to sigh forth that pious Exclamation of King David, Quam
admirabili nos structura Deus formavit!

My PROVINCE is, the Anatomic Administration of these ruins of a Man, i. e. to
take asunder some few at least of the various Organs of this Masterpiece of
the Creation, so that we may explore their several conduitpipes, their springs,
movements, actions, communications, offices, in fine, their whole Mechanism or
Construction, upon which their respective Functions necessarily depend. For,
most certain it is, that the Divine Architect has framed all things, as in the
Greater World, so likewise in this Microcosm, in number, weight, and measure:
and we have it, as a precept, from our Oracle Hippocrates (lib. (...)) that a
genuine Physician ought [(...)] to evince whatsoever he delivers as doctrine
(if it be possible) by demonstration.

These things considered, I appeal to You, Most Prudent and Venerable
President, who have been pleased, from Your good opinion, not of my
sufficiency, but only of my diligence, this day to place me where I deserve not
to sit; and to You, my most Learned Colleagues of this Illustrious Society, who
honor me by your presence: whether it be not necessary for me to set before
you, in a short Proem, some at least of the many sentiments I have conceived in
my mind, of the singular Dignity and Excellency of the task assigned me. When
by so doing, I shall at once pay some part of the debt I owe, both to the
honor of this Temple of Philosophy, in which we now sit; and to the Solemnity
of this Convention: and show my self, however unfit worthily to administre so
noble a Province, yet duly conscious of the weight of it; which may perhaps
somewhat conduce to render my faileurs the more Venial.

That I may therefore both invite your Attention, and pre-ingage your Candor; I
ask leave to make my self, for a few minutes, your (...) or Remembrancer, by
recalling into your memory, what ye have heretofore read, in the monuments of
the Ancients, concerning the Antiquity of the Art of Dissection; and what ye
have, from your own happy Experience and Observation, collected, touching the
great and manifold Utility of the same. Which, I shall endeavor to do, with as
much of Perspicuity, as the Umbrage of the Argument, and the Scantness of my
Readings will permit; with as much of Conciseness, as can be brought to consist
with that Perspicuity..

As for the ANTIQUITY of Anatomy; that doubtless is, if not equal, yet not
much inferior in age to Medicine it self, which seems to have been invented by
men in the very infancy of the World. For, (1.) If Necessity be, as hitherto on
all hands it has been admitted, to have first suggested to Man all those
profitable inventions, whereby Humane life has been rendered either more
defensible, or more comfortable: we may with good reason infer, that the Art of
Medicine, i. e. of preserving and restoring health, had its beginning as early
in the morning of Time, as any of the rest: it being certain that men's bodies
were then not only liable to, but actually infested with various distempers,
pains, infirmities and other maladies; the Laws and Constitutions of Nature
continuing perpetually the same: and no less certain, that men observing what
things were agreeable, what disagreeable to the body, what mitigated, what
exasperated their maladies, were by the very dictates of Reason taught to
provide for the conservation of their Health, by abstaining from things
noxious, and for the restitution of it when impaired, by using things
convenient and beneficial; as the Divine old man of Coos has with admirable
sagacity observed in his excellent Book (...). Now if Medicine be so ancient,
it is highly probable, that Anatomy, which is the principal fundament thereof,
is not much less ancient, if not equal. Could Men (think ye) feel themselves
tormented in any member or part of the body, or unable to use the same in the
actions to which it was originally destined and comparated, and which it had
with facility and indolency always performed before; could they (I say) be
sensible of this, and at the same time not highly solicitous to know in what
part of that disaffected member the pain or defect chiefly lay, what piece of
the Organ had been broken, stopped, displaced or otherwise vitiated, so as to
discompose the whole frame, and make it unfit to execute its proper functions?
Or how was it possible for them to acquire this knowledge, unless by first
acquainting themselves with the natural composition of that same member, i. e.
with the various similar parts whereof it is made up, with their several
constitutions, slzes, figures, textures, positions, connexions, etc. in fine,
with the whole Mechanical ration of the organ, upon which its aptitude to
perform its proper actions necessarily depends? But this they never could do,
otherwise than by dextrous dissection of that member in the body of some one or
more defunct. I ghess therefore, that the Art of Dissection and that of
Medicine were Twins, that had Humane Wit for their Father, and Necessity for
their Mother: and (2.) That they neither were born in Greece, nor are so young
by a thousand years, as even most Antiquaries themselves have concluded them to
be. For, though that great devourer of its own productions, Time, has consumed
the greatest part of the monuments of the younger world; leaving us very few,
and those too imperfect, full of chasms and decays: yet I am able to prove,
from the records of an Author or two of unquestioned credit, and venerable
antiquity, that both are much elder than most Learned men have, after long
raking in the rubbish of old Athens, determined them to be.

It is not unknown to the Learned part of this assembly, that Ptolomaeus
Philadelphus King of Egypt, a Prince of a curious spirit and large heart,
finding in the immense treasure of Books he had collected and stored up in his
Library, the Histories of most other Nations, but none of his own the
Egyptians; to supply that defect, employed one Manetho, a man of solid
Erudition, a Priest and Master of the Rolls kept in the Temple of Memphis, to
compose a History de rebus Aegyptiacis, from the first original of that mighty
people, down to his own times: and that accordingly Manetho, consulting the
antique Volumes of Mercurius Secundus, which had been many hundred of years
preserved in the most sacred recesses of the Temple, and the more antique
Hieroglyphic Marbles, compiled out of them a true History of Egyptian
Antiquities; a Book, whose loss all Learned Chronologers lament, whose
dispersed fragments they religiously venerate. From this Book, Syncellus, an
excellent Chronographer, who flourished in the year 800. after our Saviors
Nativity, is said to have transcribed whatever he wrote in Graec in his so much
admired work, concerning the Dynasties of the Kings of Egypt, and other
Antiquities of that Nation; which our most profound Reformer of the vulgar
Computation of Times, Sr. John Marsham, thus commends. Quicquid supellectilis
hodie superest ad instaurandas Aegyptiorum origines, id fere totum debetur
Syncello; neque tanti sunt momenti quoe Herodotus omnium primus, aut illum
secutus Diodorus Siculus, de Regibus Aegypti tradiderunt.

This Syncellus, among many other memorable things page 54. c.
recounted of the Egyptian Kings of the first Age, delivers, That after the
decease of Menes, first King of the Thinites, Son of Cham, Founder of Memphis,
called by the Hebrews Ham, by the Egyptians Jupiter Hammon; Egypt came to be
divided into two Kingdoms, Thebes and Memphis: this, under Athothes or Mercury;
that, under Tosorthus or Aesculapius; both after honored with Divine titles and
worship. Then commemorating the virtues and merits of these two Kings, he says
of Mercury, (...): he built a palace in the City of Memphis, and wrote P. 55. 6.
Books of Anatomy; for he was a Physician: of Aesculapius, (...), etc. he is
held to be Aesculapius by the Egyptians for his skill in Medicine; and he
found out the art of building with squared stones. This Record is attested also
by Clemens Stromat. lib. 1. p. 634. b.
Alexandrinus, an Author of no less credit, and near upon six hundred years
elder than Syncellus, who says expressly; Ex 42. Mercurii Libris, 36. ad
Aegyptiorum Philosophiam, 6. reliqui ad artem Medicam pertinent; quorum primus
fuit Anatomicus, (...), de constructione corporis.

I am not ignorant, that some great Scholars of this our Age, hold it more
probable, that the Art of Anatomy here attributed to Mercury the first, was the
invention rather of his equal Aesculapius, who is esteemed (...) Medicinae
Author. But since these same Critics deny not Mercurius and Aesculapius
Aegyptius to have been Contemporaries; it makes no difference, as to the
Antiquity of Anatomy, which chiefly we are now seeking, to which of the two the
glory of its first invention be ascribed. Let others then contend about this
nicety, while we remarque, that from the Texts just now recited, three
considerable things are evident.

(1.) That the Egyptians have a just and clear right to the honor of the
invention of the noblest of all Arts, Medicine: and therefore Pliny did them no
wrong in saying, non immerito Medicinam Aegyptii apud ipsos volunt Not. Hist.
l. 29. c. 2.
repertam fuisse; and Aesculapius Memphites inter primos hominum numeratur, qui
opinione humani Dii facti sunt.

(2.) That the most useful inventions of the first of Historical Times, were
Medicine and Architecture: one to furnish mankind with helps against
infirmities of the body, the other to defend him from injuries of the air: both
suggested by Necessity. Hinc quippe praematurum medicandi aedificandique
studium.

(3.) That this our Egyptian Aesculapius was one thousand years elder than the
Aesculapius of the Graecs, who was of Epidaurus, and there for many hundred
years worshipped with solemn rites and religious devotion, as the God of Health.
For, Clemens Alexandrinus casts the Apotheosis Stromat. l. 1. p. 322.
or Consecration of this Aesculapius Epidaurius into the fifty third year
before the sackage of Troy: telling us from Apollonius the Rhodian, that he
accompanied Jason in his voyage. Which, though the name of Aesculapius be not
found in Apollonius his list of the Argonauts, is yet probable from the consent
of Times: for Machaon, son to the same Aesculapius, is by Homer numbered among
the noble Graecians that bore arms at the siege of Troy. Iliad. (...). (...),
(...):
Quos duo ducebant, Medicorum principe nati,
Praestantes Medici, Podalirius atque Machaon.
So that if we compute from the second King in the first Dynastie of the
Egyptians, down to the fifty third year precedent to the Excidium Trojae, we
shall find the intervenient space of time to amount to about a thousand years.
Of so much greater antiquity is the first Inventor of Medicine among the
Egyptians, than that Aesculapius to whom the Graecs erroneously or arrogantly
ascribe it, and of whom Lib. 1. cap. 10. institutionum divi^^^.
Lactantius says, quid fecit aliud divinis honoribus dignum, nisi quod sanavit
Hippolytum?

This I have noted, only to show the great Antiquity of my Profession, not to
detract from the renown of the Grecian Aesculapius, who being also excellent
in the Art of Medicine, augmented the honor of it in his own Nation; and
therefore deserves from me the incense of a little breath in sacrifice to his
memory. Give me leave then, I pray, to speak a few words concerning him, toward
the satisfaction of those among my Auditors, who perhaps have been less
conversant in Books. At Epidaurus a City in Argolis or Argia (at this day
called by some, Saconia, and Romania Moreae by others) situate near the Aegean
sea, he was worshipped as a Divine Numen; having there erected to him a magnific
Temple, in which the Sick, after due oblations, were laid to sleep, and said
to be secretly taught by the God himself in their dreams, by what remedy they
might certainly be healed. This is more fully delivered by Pausanias: Lib. 2.
Lib. 8.
and Strabo reports farther, that among many others in that place and manner
restored to health, one Archias, son of Aristaechmus of Pergamus, was freed
from dreadful Convulsions in all his limbs, only by following the counsel of
his dream: and that returning to Pergamus, in gratitude he brought with him the
religion and worship of the Epidaurian Temple, building another in imitation of
it. De quo templo etiam Corn. Tacitus (Annal. 3.) in asylorum apud Graecas
civitates antiquitus constitutorum origines inquirens, haec habet: Consules
apud Pergamum Aesculapii compertum asylum retulerunt: caeteros obscuris ob
vetustatem initiis niti. From Pergamus the same Superstition was in process of
time transferred also to Smyrna, and a third Temple raised there: in which one
C. Claudius Valerius Licinnianus was Chief Priest; as appears from a Marble not
long since brought from Smyrna, and now extant in the Sheldonian Theater at
Oxon. in number the forty sixth Marble.

The testimonies I have brought, are (you see) authentic; nor can you longer
doubt, that among the few relics of the younger world that have escaped the
jaws of Oblivion, some are yet extant to attest the great Age and honor of this
pair of Noble Sisters, Medicine and Anatomy. So solid were their Principles, so
durable have been their Constitutions, so illustrious their Propagators, so
sacred their Records, and (if I may be permitted to speak as a Platonist) so
powerful a Genius has preserved them..

Was Anatomy then taught by the Founder of Memphis? Is it by a whole Age at
least elder than the eldest of those mountains of brick, or as Diodorus Siculus
vainly calls Lib. 4. c. 169.
them, (...), Eternal Habitations, the Egyptian Pyramids? And has it from that
time to this day continued in use and esteem among wise men wheresoever Letters
and Civility have flourished? This certainly, is alone sufficient to evince the
great UTILITY of it, were all other arguments wanting. For, Human Inventions,
however subtle and grateful at first to the Curious, are never longliv'd,
unless afterward they be found useful also and beneficial to Mankind. But in
what does the Utility of it consist? In so many things, I want time to
enumerate them, and must therefore content my self to touch only two or three,
such as lie most open and obvious even to vulgar observation. I say then, that
the study of Anatomy is singularly profitable to a Man, in respect of Himself,
in respect to God, in respect of the Divine Art of Healing: each of which
requires to be singly considered.

(1.) In respect of Ones-self. That Apollo, when from his Delphic Oracle (as
Plato in his Alcibiades relates) he delivered that most wise precept, (...),
Know thy self, thereby implicitly enjoined the study of Anatomy; is more than I
shall venture to avouch; but this I dare boldly affirm, that no Mortal can
attain to any profound knowledge of Himself, without long and strict scrutiny
into the mysterious Economy of Human nature; which can be no otherwise made,
than by the helps and light of Anatomy. Of the simple essence of the Rational
Soul, we seem in this umbratil life incapable to know much* For, She being, as
Wise men teach, and most of us believe, a pure Spirit; we can have of her no
idea or image in our Fantasy, and consequently no Notion: all our Cognition
being built upon Idols or Images stamped in the mint of Imagination; and all
our Reasonings or Discourses, nothing but connection of many of those Images
into chains, sometimes of more, sometimes of fewer links. We cannot therefore
deny our ignorance of the nature of that noblest part of our selves, from which
we derive all our little Science: and must be content to entertain our
irrequiet Curiosity with the faint glimmerings of light, that shine through the
acts and operations of that Celestial Ghest in our frail and darksom
Tabernacles of flesh. What then remains to be known by us of our selves?
Nothing, I think, but the Divine Architecture of the Body, the fabrique of the
various Organs, by which the Soul acts, while she sojourns in it: and these (ye
know) are not to be understood but by dissecting and distinctly contemplating
the several parts of each Organ, so as to investigate the Mechanical reason of
its aptitude to its proper motions, actions and uses.

Does any man here conceive, that the Oracle is to be expounded only of the
Passions of the Mind, and the Art of moderating them by the dictates of
Prudence, and rules of Virtue? I say, that neither is the knowledge of the
Passions to be acquired without frequenting the Schools of Anatomists. For, the
Passions seem to be in the general, only certain Commotions of the Spirits and
blood, begun in the seat of the Imagination, propagated through the Pathetic
nerves to the heart, and thence transmitted up again to the brain: and
therefore whosoever would duly enquire into their nature, their first sources
and resorts, their most remarkable differences, tides, forces, symptoms, etc.
will soon find himself under a necessity to begin at Anatomy, thence to learn
the course of the blood, the structure of the brain, the origin and productions
of the nerves, the fabric of the heart with its pulses, and the ways by which
a reciprocal communication or mutual commerce is so swiftly effected, so
continually maintained betwixt the Animal and Vital machines. Otherwise, how
highly soever he might think of his own speculations, he would hardly be able
clearly to solve any one of the Phenomenon of this or that particular Passion;
for instance, whence it is, that Blushing is the proper sign of Shame, Paleness
the Character of sudden Fear, Sadness the inseparable concomitant of Hate, and
sic de caeteris. In a word, he would as soon be at a loss in tracing the
intricate Labyrinth of Human Affections, as a blind man that should undertake
to give the Chorography of a whole Country, merely from a relation of some
memorable action done in some part of it.

Nor should I believe such a man half so likely to temper and compose the
tumults of his inordinate Passions, as a skilful Anatomist, who understands, by
what impressions they are occasioned, upon what parts of the brain those
impressions are made, what sympathy and confederation Nature has instituted
between those parts and the Cardiac nerves, how those nerves divided into
innumerable fibers contract the ventricles of the heart, and how that
Contraction, according to the various degrees of its force and velocity,
necessarily impells the blood more or less copiously and violently through the
arteries into the parts most concerned in the Passion at that time most urgent.
For, certainly, he that has the advantage to understand all these things, is
better instructed to appease the impetuous Commotions at any time raised within
his breast, by reducing the rebellious appetites of his inferior Faculties to
obedience to the contremands of his Superior or Reason; in which one thing the
sum of all Moral Philosophy consists, and which advanced into a Habit, becomes
Virtue it self. So that take the Counsel given by Apollo, in which of the two
senses ye like best, viz. either as directing to learn the admirable frame of
the Body, or as intimating that wisdom consists chiefly in the regulation of
the Affections; still the study of Anatomy will be requisite to acquiring the
Knowledge of Ones-self.

(2.) Requisite it is also to conduct even a Naturalist to the Knowledge of
GOD. I mean the knowledge of not only the Existence of a Supreme Being in the
World, but also of his Eternity, omnipotent Power, infinite Wisdom* and
inexhaustible Goodness; for as to the Divine nature it self, that we must all
with holy astonishment confess to be to Human Understanding incomprehensible;
for, how can a finite have an adaequate notion of an Infinite? Most true it is
indeed, that there are in every part of the Universe certain marks or impresses
of a Divine hand; and the smallest Insect that creeps upon the earth, the very
grass whereon we tread, yea, even things Inanimate proclaim the Glory of their
Maker, inciting us to venerate, praise and adore Him: so that St. Paul preached
true Natural Theology to Infidels, when he taught, that the invisible things
of God are known by the visible things of his Creation; and Heraclitus gave a
memorable hint of his piety toward the Summum Numen, when inviting into his
poor smoaky cottage some proud strangers that disdained to put their heads
under so vile a roof; Enter, said he, nam etiam hic Dii sunt, here also are
Gods. And in truth, every page in the great Volume of Nature, is full of real
Hieroglyphics, where (by an inverted way of Expression) things stand for
words, and their Qualities for Letters. Whence perhaps Plato (in Timaeo) took a
hint of that sublime thought of his, that the World is Gods Epistle written to
mankind. But if we survey the Epitome of the World, the Temple of Man's Body, in
which as in a Model or Exemplar, all parts of the Greater World are represented
in little; we shall there find something more august, more Majestical. Who can
observe, that so magnificent a pile is raised only e luto, out of a little
slime; that from a few drops of the Colliquamentum or Genital humor, of a
substance Homogeneous or simple, are formed more than two hundred bones, more
Cartilages, very many ligaments, membranes almost innumerable, myriads of
arteries and veins, of nerves more than thirty pair with all their slender
branches and continued fibers* near upon four hundred muscles, a multitude of
glandules, and many other parts, all diverse each from other in substance,
consistence, color, texture, fabric, etc. Who can, I say, observe this,
without being forced to acknowledge the infinite Power of the Divine Architect*
who makes the very Materials of his building? Who can look into the Sanctum
Sanctorum of this Temple, the Brain, and therein contemplate the pillars that
support it, the arched roof that covers and defends it, the fret-work of the
Ceiling, the double membrane that invests it, the resplendent partition that
divides it, the four vaulted cells that drain away impurities, the intricate
labyrinths of arteries that bring in from the heart rivulets of vital blood to
heat and invigorate it, the Meanders of veins to export the same blood, the
Aqueducts that preserve it from inundation, the infinite multitude of slender
and scarce perceptible filaments that compose it, the delicate nerves or chords
spun from those threads, the original of that silver chord (as Ecclesiastes
calls it) or Spinal marrow, upon which the strength of back and limbs chiefly
depends; and many other parts of the wonderful Engine: and not discern an
infinite Wisdom in the design and construction of them? And as for the infinite
Goodness of God; that is no less conspicuous in the connection of so many and
various instruments into one complex Automaton, by which they are so admirably
combined, that every one works for it self and for the public at once; that
every one performs its peculiar office apart, yet all cooperate to one and the
same common end, the subsistence, safety, and welfare of the whole; and that if
any one happen to be put out of order or tune, all the rest sympathize with it,
and the whole Harmony of Functions is discomposed. Add to this stupendous
Machine an internal Principle to give it life, sense, voluntary motion, and
understanding: and then ye may say with Cicero; Jam vero animum ipsum mentemque
hominis, rationem, consilium, prudentiam, qui non Divina cura perfecta esse
perspicit; is his ipsis rebus nobis videtur carere.

If then the admirable fabric of our Body demonstrates the Power, Wisdom and
Goodness of the Maker; (whom the Scripture most emphatically calls [Yotzer
Hakkol] (the Former of all things, Jer. 10. 16.) and if it be by the help of
Anatomy alone, that we come to contemplate and understand the excellency of
that fabric: we may safely conclude, that to study Anatomy diligently and
reverently, is to learn to know God, and consequently to venerate Him; Deum
enim colit, qui novit. After this, what others, out of ignorance, may think or
speak to the prejudice of this so useful Art of Dissection; I am neither
concerned, nor solicitous to know: but this I openly declare, that if I knew an
Atheist (if there can be such a Beast in the world) I would do my best to bring
him into this Theater, here to be sensibly convinced of his madness. For, sure
I am, that some of the Ancient Heathens have called the structure of Man's Body,
the Book of God: and that even Galen himself, an Ethnic too, slow of belief,
and most alien from Superstition, learned so much of Piety from dissections,
that in his whole seventeen Books de usu partium, he sings a perpetual Hymn as
it were in praise of the Divine Architect that formed them. Of which laudatory
Hymns I have chosen one, which seeming to me more lofty and harmonical than any
of the rest, and more proper for this place, deserves my recital and your
remark. In his third Book, contemplating the skin that invests the sole of the
foot (a part despicable to vulgar eyes) He breaks forth into this rapture of
admiration. Cutem ipsam (says he) non laxam, aut subtilem, aut mollem; sed
constrictam, and mediocriter duram, sensilemque, ut non facile pateretur,
subdidit pedi Sapientissimus Conditor noster: cui Commentarios ego hos, ceu
hymnos quosdam, compono: and in eo pietatem esse existimans, non si Taurorum
(...) ei plurimas quispiam sacrificarit, and casias aliaque sexcenta unguenta
suffumigarit: sed si noverim ipse primus, deinde exposuerim aliis, quaenam sit
ipsius Sapientia, quae Virtus, quae Providentia, quae Bonitas; ignorantia
quorum summa impietas est, non si a sacrificio abstineas. Quod enim cultu
convenienti exornavit omnia, nullique bona inviderit; id perfectissimae
Bonitatis specimen esse statuo: invenisse autem quo pacto omnia adornarentur,
summae Sapientiae est; ac effecisse omnia quae voluit, Virtutis est invictae. A
Hymn not unworthy to be sung, with solemn Music, even in our Churches.

(3.) Besides these two noble uses of Anatomy, by me now explained, there
remains here to be considered yet a third use, not, as the former, common to
all mankind, but proper to Physicians: to whom the study of it is, not only
profitable and delightful, as to their private speculations; but also
necessary, as to their well understanding the divine Art of Medicine which they
profess. This Necessity is indeed so universally known and acknowledged by all
wise men, that to go about to prove it, would be as supervacaneous, as to light
a candle to show the Sun at noon: yet because there are some, who either
blinded with the smoke of fallacious Chemists, or corrupted by some private
interest, perceive it not; give me leave, I pray, toward the disenchantment of
these, briefly to set before them two or three of the plainest causes or
reasons that make Anatomy the grand fundament of Medicine.

Hippocrates (I remember) does often inculcate to his 1. Epidem.
Disciples, the genuine Sons of Art, three cardinal precepts, in which the
whole duty of a Physician seems to be comprehended. The first is, (...), to
understand the present state of the sick, the nature of the malady, and the
part affected: the second, (...), to prognosticate the event of the disease:
the third, (...), to relieve or heal the sick. But in all these three duties,
he that is ignorant of Anatomy, must needs be shamefully deficient.

In the Diagnostic part, because no good judgment can be made of the nature and
kind of any disease, unless it be first known, what part of the body is thereby
chiefly affected; and the most certain indieia or distinctive signs of the part
affected, are taken principally from the situation of the part, and from the
action of it hurt. For instance, he that knows the Liver to be naturally seated
in the right Hypochondrium, if in that place pain be felt, or swelling appear
from a Tumor within, will easily thence collect, that the Liver is the part
then affected: and he that knows, that the principal action of the Stomach is
Concoction, will soon know, if Concoction be hurt, that the Stomach is
misaffected. But both the places and actions of the parts are learned only from
Anatomy: and therefore whoever is ignorant of Anatomy, can have no certain
knowledge of either those, or these.

In the Prognostic part he must likewise fail, because the best Ostenta or
Signs of the future good or evil event of any Sickness, are all derived from
these three heads, viz. the Excretions, the Action hurt, and the Habit of the
body, in color, figure and bulk: none of all which are to be known without
Anatomy: and he is likely to make but an ill Predictor of events to come, who
has not skill enough to observe and discern the signs that portend them.

In the Curative part also he must be equally deficient, because the true and
exquisite Method of Healing is grounded upon, and designed by rational
Indications, and every Indication is desumed not only from the nature of the
Malady, but also from the part thereby affected; and therefore according to the
various constitution, temper, site, connection, sense and other qualities of the
affected part, the remedies to be used, ought to be various. And with what face
can a Surgeon pretend to recompose broken, or restore dislocated bones, who
is ignorant of their site, figure, structure, and articulations? Manifest it is
then, that whoever pretends to the cure of diseases, and yet remains ignorant
of Anatomy; is either an impudent Impostor, or at best a Fool. What then are
they, who put their life into the hands of such men?

From these nobler Uses of Anatomy in Physic, Natural Theology, and Medicine
now explicated, I might descend to many others, less noble indeed, yet not
unworthy the notice and consideration even of Wise men, observable in various
inferior Arts; more particularly in those two Arts so highly inservient to
Magnificence, Ornament and Delight, Architecture, and Painting, both which
borrow their exemplars, rules, graces, perfection and estimation from the
proportions, symmetry and pulchritude of the parts of Man's body. But these
being alien from my task, and the hours assigned me for the performance
thereof, being few; I am obliged to pretermit them. Notwithstanding, lest I
should by mentioning them en passant, excite in some of my ingeniose Auditors
of the Younger sort, a curiosity which I have not now leisure to satisfy: it is
fit I should refer them to two or three Authors of good note, to be by them
fully informed how requisite the study of the fabric of man's body is to all who
desire to excel in either of these Arts. For Architecture then, I would direct
them, first to Vitruvius, (who in lib. 3. cap. 1.) laying this down for a
fundamental Maxim; non potest aedes ulla sine symmetria atque proportione
rationem habere compositionis, nisi uti ad Hominis been figurati membrorum
habuerit exactam rationem; and immediately after measuring the proportions that
the several parts of a well-shap'd Man hold one to another; proceeds to
commensurate the parts of sacred Aedisices or Temples by the like proportions:
and (in lib. 4. cap. 1.) treating of the Columns of the three Orders, expressly
derives the dimensions of those of the Tuscan Order, with their bases,
diminutions, pedestals, capitals, etc. all from the proportions observed by
Nature in the feet, legs and thighs of man; pursuing the same Analogy, upon
all occasions, throughout his whole work: and after to Albert Durers excellent
Book de Symmetria corporis humani. To these may be added Spigelius, who in his
first Book of Anatomy, from the seventh Chapter to the end of the Book, has
with singular diligence described the proportions of the exterior parts.

For Painting, I recommend to them the incomparable Lionardo Da Vinci, della
Pittura: not only because he was eminently skilled in all parts of Anatomy, as
appears by the accurate Figures that illustrate and adorn Vesalius' s noble
Volume De Corporis humani fabrica, all which were drawn and cut by Da Vinci' s
own hands; and the original Draughts of which are yet extant in a large
Manuscript of his in Folio, in the Italian language (but written from the right
hand to the left) carefully preserved in His Majesty's Cabinet at White Hall,
where I have had the good fortune sometimes to contemplate them: but also
because in his Treatise Della Pittura just now mentioned, he seems to me to
have described the figures, motions, forces and symmetry of the limbs, their
Articulations and Muscles, in various postures, more clearly than any other
Writer I have hitherto read..

Having thus compendiously inquired into the Antiquity, and recounted some of
the principal Uses of Anatomy; it is now opportune for us to explain, what
notion we have, and what are the most remarkable DIFFERENCES of the same.

Be it known therefore, that by Anatomy, according to the strict use and proper
signification of the Graec word (...)) or (...), I with all Learned Physicians
and Surgeons understand, a diligent, accurate and artificial dissection of
the body of any Animal, chiefly of a Man, in order to acquiring knowledge of
the substance, magnitude, figure, site, structure, connection, action and use of
all and every part thereof.

In the true notion of Anatomy then, two acts are comprehended; a work of the
hands, Dissection; and an exercise of the Mind or Intellect, Speculation. Of
these, the first is called by Galen, (...), Administratio anatomica, manual
operation: the other, (...), mental contemplation.

And hence arises the first Difference of Anatomy, viz. the discrimination of
it in (...), into Practic and Theoretic. The former of these is to be acquired
by long use and experience, and natural dexterity: the later, by reason and
sagacity, by hearing the Lectures, reading the Writings of Learned men
concerning that subject, and by intent Meditation. Again, the former may (for
distinction sake) be named Historical; the later, (...), Scientific.

To Anatomic Administration are required, not only many instruments of various
kinds, too well known to be here singly named, much less described: but various
manual Operations also, besides mere dissection, all subordinate thereto: viz.
exact commensurations and ponderations of parts inquired into, injections of
diverse liquors by syringes, inflations, extensions, ligations, excarnation,
application of Microscopes, and many others: and all to one general End, the
attaining to perfect knowledge of the subject, and every the most minute part
thereof; at least as much Knowledge, as the narrow limits of Human Wit can
comprehend.

To the Theorical or Speculative part it is requisite that the Anatomist
accurately observe (1.) the Universal Structure of the whole, and all its
proportions, beauties, and general defects; also its general Communities and
Differences with other Animals, and above all with other individuals of the
same species: (2.) the Conformation and Texture of every part, with their
Similar particles or visible Elements; also the Symmetrie or proportion the
parts hold both among themselves, and compared with the whole; the Communities
and Differences of one and the same parts in various Animals, and in other
individuals of the same kind; the comparison and disparity of any one part with
the rest of the same individual; and finally the various Sympathies and
Antipathies of every single organical part: (3.) the various Faculties, Actions
and Uses of every part.

Of both, the most proper SUBJECT is the body of Man extinct, considered as an
Universal Organ adaequately accommodate to all Faculties of the Soul, and
composed of a great multitude of less Organs, the retexture or unweaving of
which, so as to find out the Mechanical reason of their motions and actions, is
the grand scope of the Anatomist.

I say, the most proper Subject; not to exclude the bodies of Brute Animals,
the dissection of which also, though less properly, belongs to the Art of
Anatomy, as being subservient to the principal End thereof, nor a little
helping to the more facil investigation of what is sought for in the most
proper subject. For which reason, Zootomie or the dissection of Brutes of
various kinds, has been commended and diligently practiced by many as well
Ancient as Modern Physicians, as a thing of good use toward the advancement of
the History of Nature. Nor is Dendranatomia or the Anatomy of Plants and Trees,
begun (as it seems) many hundred years past by Theophrastus, and very lately
with happy success cultivated by Malpighius and our Dr. Grew, to be neglected:
forasmuch as from thence may be learned the admirable Analogy betwixt Plants
and Animals, chiefly as to their Generation, Nutrition and Augmentation; and
how far that Resemblance holds.

I say also, the body of Man extinct; to intimate my just abhorrence and
detestation of dissecting Men alive: a cruelty condemned by Celsus, forbidden
even by Humanity it self, nor ever (for ought I have hitherto read) publicly
permitted by any Nation how barbarous and sanguinary soever, no not in the most
flagitious of Criminals. I am not ignorant, either that Herophilus has been by
some Tertullianus ait, H^^opbilum plusquam septuaginta cadavera secuisse, and
sape viva hominum corpera, and Galenus de eodem scribens, Herophilus (inquit)
ad exquisitissimum anatomes (...) gnitionem pervenit, ac majori ex part, non
in bruris, ut plerique solent; sed in Hominil us ipsis periculum fecit.
accused of inhumanly raking in the bowels of condemned Malefactors, while they
lay roaring under his knife: or that Fabius Quintilianus, that excellent
Orator, in his eighth Declamation, entitled Gemini Languentes, introduces the
Wife impeaching the Husband Malae Tractationis, for that he had given leave to
an Empiric (for I cannot vouchsafe him a better title, nor easily find a worse)
to dissect one of her Twinns while yet alive, that he might find out the way to
preserve the other, who languish'd of the same sickness: and yet
notwithstanding I think my self free to choose whether I will believe or doubt
the verity of these Accusations. For, the Works of Herophilus being lost, and
nothing of his Memoirs remaining, but what has been transmitted to us by such
as either impugned his doctrine, or aemulated his glory: it is not improbable,
but his frequent dissections of Living Beasts might give occasion to his
Adversaries to feign him guilty of greater cruelty upon Men, by cutting up them
also while alive. And as for Quintilian' s Twinns; I should tell you no news
perhaps, if I affirmed, that the Roman Orators sometimes feigned the subjects
or arguments of their Declamations,. supposing knotty and perplex cases, on
purpose to show the dexterity of their Wit, and power of their Rhetoric in
unravelling them: and that therefore I think this case of the Twinns to be not
really true, but only imagined by Quintilian, as a fit subject whereon he might
make an elegant Harangue or pleading. But were it granted that these are no
fictions; yet would it still remain to be proved, that the Dissection of Men
alive, has at any time been used with public permission or connivence among
either Graecians or Romans.

The parts of a body dissected, whether it be of Man or Brute, are considered
either Absolute, as they appear in that body; or Relative, as they have more or
less of Analogy to the same parts in other Animals either of the same, or of a
diverse kind. And hence arises a second division of Anatomy into Simple and
Comparative: of which the former is wholly conversant about the observation and
knowledge of those parts, which pertain in general to the Body of Man, without
farther scrutiny: the later, though inservient to the former, is yet of much
greater extent. For, to Comparative Anatomy it belongs (1) to compare the whole
body with all its most remarkable parts; and to note the weight, measure,
proportion, symmetrie and pulchritude of both that and each of these: (2.) to
compare the same parts in human bodies of different Ages, different Sexes,
different Climats, Countries, etc. for these things may cause a visible
disparity, and there is no doubt but that the figure and structure of the
interior parts is very little inferior, for variety and lineaments, to the
exterior; and that the Hearts, Livers and Ventricles are as different in Men,
as either their foreheads, or noses, or ears: (3.) to compare the parts of
Brutes of various kinds, Quadrupeds, Fowls, Fishes, yea even of Infects and
Worms, with the same or like parts in Man; that so the Communities and
Proprieties may be observed and registered. Nemo enim de partis alicujus usu
sive officio recte determinaverit, qui ejus in pluribus animalibus fabricam,
situm, annexa vasa, aliaque accidentia non viderit, secumque diligenter
pensitaverit. Harv. in praef. ad lib. de Generat. Animal.

This COMPARATIVE Anatomy, how recent soever as to the name, was yet most
certainly held in great estimation, and much practiced by the Ancients, chiefly
Graecians. For, well known it is, that Democritus of In Epistola Hippocratis ad
Damagetum.
Abdera exercised himself assiduously in dissection of Brutes of various kinds,
(...) (as himself expressly declared to Hippocrates come to visit him) (...),
not from hatred of Gods works, but curiosity to find out the nature and seat of
Choler and Melancholy. Nor is it less known, that Aristotle also spent some
years in the same work, as is most evident from his elaborate Books de
generatione, de partibus, and de historia Animalium: Plin. lib. 8. cap. 16.
being to that end furnished with Living Creatures of all sorts, that whole
Asia and Graecia, in Land or Seas, afforded, at the charges of his Royal
Disciple, Alexander the Great, to the expense of no less than eight Athenaeus
lib. 9. cap. 13.
hundred Talents: and that this mighty Conqueror, in the heat of his Wars and
pride of his Triumphs, gloried in his great proficiency in the knowledge of the
nature and fabric of the parts of various Animals, under so wise a Teacher; as
if he had obtained by his Learning no less glorious victories over the secrets
of Nature, than he had gotten from Nations by his sword. How much Galen was
versed in this Comparative Anatomy, is sufficiently apparent, not only from his
excellent Volums de Administrationibus Anatomicis, and de usu partium, and the
account he gives of his many public dissections at Rome in the presence of the
Noblest Romans, and among them of Boethius and Paulus Sergius Consuls; but also
from this, that some of the Neoterics, and principally Vesalius, objected
against him, that he had been less conversant in the dissection of Human
bodies. What progress the Graec Physicians that succeeded long after Galen,
made in the same part of Anatomy, is indeed difficult to be collected from
their Works, now grown almost obsolete among us: but whoever has perused the
monuments of Aretaeus, Theophilus, and Oribasius, needs not to be advertised by
me, that they have not wholly neglected it. If we come down to this last
Century of years, we find the dissection of Brutes, in order to the collation
of their inwards with those of Man, to have been diligently persued, first by
Falopius, Casserius Placentinus, and Bauhinus; and after them, by Fabricius ab
Aquapendante, M. Aurelius Severinus, and our immortal Harvey, etc.

Just cause therefore I have to admire, why the Lord Chancellor Bacon, a man of
almost infinite reading, strong memory, and profound judgment, and who
doubtless had looked into the Writings of many, if not of all the Eminent
Authors by me now mentioned; should yet notwithstanding (in lib. de Augmento
Scientiarum 4. cap. 2.) among the Desiderata Medicinae, put down this
Comparative Anatomy, and so positively define it to be deficient; accusing
Physicians to have altogether neglected it. Nor can I easily solve this my
admiration, unless by conceiving, either that this Great Man understood much
more of his own Profession, the Law, than of ours, the Art of Medicine; or that
by the word, Deficient, he meant Imperfect. If this later Solution be admitted;
then indeed he will be the less culpable: because it is too true, that the
ample field of Anatomy Comparative has not been hitherto so fully cultivated,
as to bring forth a harvest rich and abundant enough to satisfy our hopes and
expectation. But that Physicians have been guilty of so much sloth and
ignorance, as to suffer it to lie barren and wholly neglected, through so long
a series of Ages: this, I humbly conceive, ought not to have been affirmed,
unless it could have been fully proved..

Nevertheless I gratefully acknowledge, and applaud the Heroic Zeal this
Illustrious Lord had for the improvement of our Art, among others useful to
human life: yea I interpret his censure, not as a reproach, but incitement of
our industry. And this I the more willingly do, because if he were somewhat too
severe in his sentence of Comparative Anatomy, he has bin (in the very same
place of his Book) as much too favorable to Simple; concluding it to have been
most clearly handled, and observed even to a curiosity: whereas in truth we are
not so happy, as to have just cause to say so at this day. For, after all the
new Discoveries made in Human bodies by Anatomists who have lived since his
time, Simple Anatomy must be confessed to be still in its Youth, far short of
Maturity and Perfection. There are yet, alas! terrae incognitae in the Lesser
World, as well as in the Greater, the Island of the Brain, the Isthmus of the
Spleen, the Streights of the Renes Succenturiati and some other Glandules, the
Northeast passage of the drink from the Stomach to the Serosi humoris iter ad
renes, hactenus quasitum magis, quam repertum arbitror: frustraque suisse
omnes, qui Isthmum hunc fodere aggressi sunt, etc. Cl. Entius in Antidiatribe
page 63
Kidneys, and many other things, remain to be farther inquired into by us, and
perhaps by Posterity also. In fine, this Simple Anatomy is a study so abstruse
and difficult, and withal so vast and diffuse; that the last complement of it
cannot with reason be expected from the diligence of any one Man how sagacious
and industrious soever. It Is therefore seriously to be wished, that the work
were so divided among those curious Wits, that are by secret instinct disposed
to digg in this mine of knowledge, as that every one might take to his share
some one single part of those that are not yet fully explained, and do his best
devoirs to explore and demonstrate the whole Mechanic frame of it. If this were
done, doubtless we should in few years find a very considerable Accession made
to the late inventions in Man's body, and with more justice than now we can,
approve the Lord Verulam' s opinion, that Simple Anatomy is already arrived at
Perfection.

To advance this so noble, so useful Art of Anatomy, and accelerate its
progress toward Consummation; that so the Pathologic part of Medicine being by
degrees raised from the darkness of uncertain Conjectures, to the light of even
sensible Demonstrations, the infirmities of Men's bodies may at length be more
certainly and easily cured, their pains and torments sooner eased, and their
Lives prolonged: to this Noble End, I say, this Magnificent THEATER, wherein we
now sit, has been with so great cost and art erected by the Generose FOUNDERS;
whose private Munificence, exceeding that of Kings, admits of no rival but the
Wisdom that directed it; whose large hearts were at the same time filled, with
Charity toward all Mankind of the present Age, and with Providence for the
relief of all in Ages to come.

Among these, Gratitude it self exacts, that I should with singular honor
mention our Principal Benefactor, Sr. JOHN CUTLER; a Person to whom God has
given that double blessing of great Riches, and as great Prudence how to use
them to the noblest of Human Ends, the Public Good; and who having no Augustus
to favor and assist his Beneficence, is by so much a greater Patron to Learning
than Mecaenas was.

Does any here think, that this stream of His Bounty might have been derived
upon some other ground more fruitful of benefits, than this Garden of
Philosophy? Let me, to undeceive that man, advise him seriously to consider,
first that excellent sentence of Pythagoras (to whom all Philosophers ow that
modest name) that there are two things which most ennoble Man, and raise him up
to a resemblance of the Divine Nature, namely, to know truth, and to do good:
and then, that there is no Human Science that does either more gratify and
enrich the Understanding with variety of choice and useful truths; or more
enable a Generose Mind to exercise its Faculties to the good and benefit of
others, than that of Anatomy, as it is a principal fundament of Medicine, does.
For, both these are certain and evident Verities: and after due consideration
of them, no man can longer doubt, that he who places his Munificence upon
erecting an Anatomic Theater, for advancement of the Art of Healing the Sick;
does a Work as conducive both to the Glory of God, and to the Common Good of
Mankind; as he that builds a Church, or as he that founds and endows an
Hospital.

I say, to the Glory of God; because I am taught, not only by Galen (3. de usu
partium.) that the discerning ones self, and discovering to others the
Perfections of God displaid in His Creatures, is a more acceptable act of
Religion, than the burning of Sacrifices or perfumes upon His Altars; nor only
by Trismegistus (in Asclepium cap. 15.) that the thanks and praises of Men are
the most grateful incense that can be offered up to God: but even by God
Himself, in His Written Word, that he who sacrifices Praise (for so it is in
the Original) honors Him.

I say, to the common Good of Mankind; as well because the Necessity of
Medicine is Universal; so that even Kings themselves are sometimes forced to
obey the precepts of Physicians, when the pains they feel assure them, that a
Crown cannot mitigate the Head-ake; nor an Army deliver from the horrors of a
Fever, nor the Roial Garter drive away the torments of the Gout: as because to
heal the sick, is by so much a nobler act of Charity, than to feed the Hungry,
or cloth the Naked, by how much Intellectual Powers of the Mind are both more
difficult to be attained, and more Excellent in their nature, than the
transitory gifts of Fortune. Riches many times come easily, and unexpected,
even to Men ignorant of the right use of them: the Art of Healing is never
acquired but by hard, anxious, and long study, and by accurate Observations.
Manifest therefore it is, that whosoever by his Munificence contributes to the
advancement of this so difficult, so noble, so universally useful Art, does
thereby signalize both his Piety toward God, and his Charity toward Men, in a
way most acceptable to Him, most beneficial to them.

More, much more I would say in Commemoration of this Worthy Knight' s
Exemplary Bounty; but that I know, that to him it is far more grateful to
conferr Benefits, than to receive Acknowledgments; and that this very Fabric
has already raised him, as above all Envy, so above all Praises. The same will
(I prophecy) remain a perpetual Moniment of his Heroic Zeal for the promotion
of Natural Science, and recommend his Name to all posterity. For, Fame built
upon Universal Beneficence, cannot but be immortal; because it can be no man's
interest to suppress it, and all are by gratitude obliged to propagate it. Some
Great Men (as the Vulgar call them) hunt after Renown, by enlarging Empires and
Kingdoms; some by conducting mighty Armies, and fighting bloody Battles; others
again by erecting Pyramids, massy Tombs, and other the like Pageants of human
injustice, pride, or cruelty: but these, alas! all these pursue only flying
shadows: and either the gulf of Oblivion will soon swallov them down, as
ignoble and obscure; or if any memory of them chance to survive their funerals,
'twill be conjoined with contempt and detestation. Quae saxo struuntur (says
Tacitus, Annal. lib. 4.) si iudicium posterorum in odium vertit, pro sepulchris
spernuntur. Only those happy Men shall flourish in the esteem and veneration of
all future Generations, who have acquired fame and honor by doing good. This
therefore is true Glory, and of this our Noble Benefactor, of whom I speak, may
rest secure. Multos veterum velut inglorios and ignobiles oblivio obruet:
CUTLERUS posteritati narratus and traditus, aeternum superstes erit..

Would I were equally secure of Your good acceptance (I dare not say,
Approbation) of the mite I am about to contribute toward the accomplishment of
his so gloriose Design. But, alas! this is a wish without hope; so destitute I
know my self to be of all the Faculties of Mind requisite to so difficult an
Achievement; my Zeal for the promotion of Anatomy, only excepted: and much
more reason there is, why I should apologize for my insufficiency, before I
farther expose it. Notwithstanding this discouragement, considering with my
self, that profound Erudition, and great Humanity are (like Love and
Compassion) inseparable: I think it much safer to confide in Your Candor and
Benignity for pardon of my Defects, than to attempt to palliate them, by
Excuses, however just and evident. Not to be conscious of my faileurs and
lapses in my following Lectures, would argue me of invincible ignorance; not
freely to acknowledge them, would be tacitly to defend them: to seek by
speciose praetences of have, of frequent diversions, of natural impatience of
long meditation, of bodily indispositions intervenient, and other the like
vulgarly alleged impediments, to extenuate them; were the most certain way to
aggravate them: and to conceal them from your sight, is in this place and
occasion impossible. Having then no other Refuge but in Your Grace and Favor, I
fly to that alone, to secure me from the danger of malignant Censures, which I
am more than likely to incurr: nor will I fore-arm my self with any other
defense, but this.

If the Matters of my subsequent discourses shall appear to be, neither Select,
nor of importance enough to compensate Your time and patience; be pleased to
remember that saying of Aristotle, (Metaphys. lib. 2. cap. 1.) Non solum illis
agendae sunt gratiae, quorum opinionibus quis acquiescet; sed iis etiam, qui
superficie tenus dixerunt. Conferunt enim aliquid etiam isti: habitum namque
nostrum exercuorunt. Si enim Timotheus non fuisset, multum melodiae nequaquam
habuissemus. Si tamen Phrynis non fuisset, ne Timotheus quidem extitisset, etc.

If my Style shall sound somewhat harsh and ungrateful many times to Ears
unatcustomed to any but their Mother tongue, as coming too near to the Latin; I
entreat you to consider, this is either no indecency in this place, or such a
one at worst, which I could not otherwise avoid, than by involving my sense in
the obscurity of words less proper and significant; the nature and quality of
the Subjects treated of, being such, as cannot be fully expressed in our yet
imperfect Language. So that I have a clear right to that honest plea of
Lucretius,

Abstrahit invitum patrii sermonis egestas..

PRAELECTIO I. Of Nutrition.
MAN being considered, ut Animal Rationale, as a living Creature naturally
endowed with Reason, and composed of two principal parts, a Soul and a Body;
each of which has various Faculties or Powers: the sum of Human Nature must
be comprehended in those Powers conjoined.

Of these Powers, some are peculiar to the Soul or Mind, others belong to the
Body, as Organical and animated by the Soul.

To the Former sort are referred the Faculties of thinking, knowing, judging,
reasoning or inferring, concluding, electing, and willing; all commonly
signified by Understanding and Will. All which being remote from the Province
of Anatomists, I leave them to be handled by Philosophers inquiring into the
nature of the Soul.

Of the Later, some are requisite to the complement of Man, as single or
individual; viz. the Faculties of Nutrition, of Life, of Sense, and of
Voluntary Motion: and there is one that respects the Procreation of Mankind,
namely the Power Generative. And these are the natural Faculties, to which as
principal Heads, the Learned Anatomist is to referr all his Disquisitions; that
at length he may (if it be possible) attain to more certain knowledge of the
Mechanic frame of the Organs in which they are founded. But being more than can
be, though but perfunctorily, inquired into in so few hours as are assigned to
this public Exercise; I have therefore chosen to treat of only some of them at
this time, viz. Nutrition, Life, and voluntary Motion; not as more worthy to be
explained than the rest, but as more comprehensive or of larger extent.

I have chose also to begin from NUTRITION; not only because the Stomach, Gutts
and other parts principally inservient thereto, being, by reason of impurities
contained in them, more prone to putrefaction, ought therefore first to be
taken out of the cavity of the Abdomen, to prevent noisomnes: but because
Nutrition seems to be, if not one and the same thing with, yet at least equal
or contemporany to Generation it self; and that both (...), in respect of Time;
and (...), in respect of Nature.

For though the operation of the Power Gen rative, or Formative Virtue, may seem
to precede that of the Nutritive: yet in truth the Stamina or first rudiments
of an Embryo are scarcely delineated, when they begin to be augmented also by
nutrition; so that it is consentaneous as well to the observions of Dr. Harvey
and others since, as to reason, that Formation and Nutrition are but different
names of one and the same act of the Plastic power. Again, Generation and
Accretion are not performed without Nutrition: nor Nutrition or Augmentation
without Generation. To nourish, what is it but to substitute such, and so much
of matter, as is, by reason of exhaustion, wanting to the solid parts of the
body, namely flesh, nerves, veins, arteries, etc.? and what is that in reality,
but to generate flesh, nerves, veins, arteries, etc.? In like manner Accretion
is not effected without Generation; for all natural bodies capable of
Nutrition, are by accession of new parts augmented, and these new parts must be
such as those of which the bodies were at first composed: and this is done
according to all their dimensions. So that in verity, the parts of an Animal
are increased, distinguished, and organized all at the same time, by the same
Formative power. Moreover if we reflect upon the Efficient cause of Formation
and Nutrition, and upon the Matter it uses; we shall on both sides find it
necessary, that those two works (if ye will have them to be distinct) be
carried on together. On the part of the Efficient; because idem esse principium
efficiens, nutriens, and conservans in singulis Animalibus, necesse est: nisi
aliam formam in puero, aliam in adolescente, and in seen aliam constituamus;
quod absurdum est. On the part of the Matter ex qua; because all Animals (such
as are produced per Epigenesin, of which alone is our discourse: not of such
Infects that are generated per Metamorphosin) are made of one part of the
Matter prepared by the Formative Spirit, and nourished and augmented out of the
remainder, not out of a diverse matter. For, whatsoever is superadded to the
first rudiments of the parts, ought certainly to be of the very same substance
with what was praeexistent, and so must consist ex congenere materia: their
renovation, as well as first corporation, being effected by Aggeneration or
superstruction, i. e. per Epigenesin. So that from all these reasons put
together it is constant, that Nutrition is nothing else but Generation
continued; and as necessary to the conservation of every individual Animal, yea
every individual Plant also, as Generation it self is, to the conservation of
the Universe. Which our most sagacious Sr. G. Ent well understanding,
recommends to the belief of his Readers in these few, but memorable words (in
Antidiatribae page 40.) Nutritio sane videtur esse veluti continuata quaedam
generatio; quae est opus ideale, ad exemplar primitivum actiones suas dirigens,
etc.

That I may both illustrate and confirm this Theorem, give me leave to
represent to you in a few lines, the method and process of Nature in the
formation of a Chick out of an Egg according to the most accurate Observations
of Malpighius, the sum of which is this. In lib. de ovo incubato.
From those Observations, containing eight several acts of the Formative power,
it is highly probable,

(1.) That the Spirit, Plastic Virtue, or Archeus (call it by what name you
please) of the Egg, lies dormant as it were and unactive for some time after
the Egg has been laid, as if it expected the incubation of the Hen, or some
other warmth equivalent thereto, to help it to exsert its power, and begin the
great work of building for it self a house, according to the idea or model
prescribed by the Divine Architect, whose instrument it is: and that having
obtained that requisite aid, it soon acts upon the genital humor, in which it
is lodged, by way of attenuation or eliquation,. that so the Matter may be made
more fluid and obedient to its energy. Which seems to be the first Act.

(2.) That this Spirit, having drawn the first lines or threads of the solid
parts of the Embryo, and disposed them into their proper seats, does
immediately after design certain ways or passages, by which those slender and
delicate Stamina may be commodiously supplied with vital and nutritive liquors,
for their enlivening and nutrition: and to that end, mark out and appoint three
Fountains as it were in the now more fluid Colliquamentum, and thence deduce as
many Canales or rivulets; two of which are from their origin united, and
therefore somewhat greater; one out of the first rudiments of each ventricle of
the Heart (not yet conspicuous, because not coagulate, but pellucid) and a
third consisting of many smaller rills flowing from the like rudiments of the
Brain. So that we may thence collect, that the two former of these Canales are
made to bring in the vital humor from the Heart, the third to bring in the
Succus Nutritious from the Brain, to the first rudiments of the Chick: and that
in process of time, those are turned into the Aorta and arteria Pulmonaris;
these into pairs of Nerves. And this I take to be the whole work of the second
Act.

(3.) Lest these so necessary fountains should by exhaustion fail, the same
Architect, directed by divine instinct, provides also for their perpetual
supply. To irrigate the Brain, Rivulets are brought thither from the trunc of
the grand canale of the Heart: and to feed the current of the Heart, three new
streams are derived to it; one from the interior Lake or Colliquamentum, a
second from the exterior by the ways of the Navill, and a third from the yolk
of the Egg by veins, that by all these importing conduit-pipes fresh liquors
may be continually deduced from the parts nourished into the Heart. Which pipes
are soon after compacted into veins, either such as are designed to bring back
the Blood, or such as are ordained to convey the Chyle, or the Lympha. And this
may be called the third Act.

(4.) It Is evident, that the same invisible Agent advances in the next place to
distribute the vessels derived from the rudiments of the Heart, viz. the
Arteria Pulmonaris and Aorta, first whole, then divided and subdivided into
branches still smaller and smaller, till at last they dwindle into Capillaries:
and on the contrary, to collect and by degrees unite all the rivulets that
return from the Stamina of the solid parts to the Heart, till they all meet and
make a confluens in the single trunc of either the vena portae, or vena cava.
For even common sense teaches us to call that the original or sourse of a
Canale, from whence the liquor which it conveys, flows: as every River is
truly said to begin from its head or spring. And Malpighius has, by the help
of Microscopes, observed, and in his sixteenth and eighteenth Figures
faithfully (as I believe) represented, certain varicose veins lying in the
Umbilical area or space, not yet extended to either the Heart or Liver: and
therefore also, not the Heart, but the Stamina of the parts circumjacent, ought
to be reputed the Origin of the veins. And this distribution of one sort of
Canales, and collection of another, completes the fourth Act.

(5.) No less evident it is, that from the beginning the Vital Nectar is clear
and transparent, and so remains, till somewhat of the Yolk has been mixed with
it. For, not only Malpighius, but our equally curiose Dr. Glisson (de
ventriculo and intestinis cap. 20. number. 67.) expressly affirms, that he had seen
blood of a rusty color in the coats involving the Embryo of a Chick, before
any the least sign of blood could be discerned in or about the Heart. But this
so early beginning of blood may be ascribed, either to the speedy excitation of
the Spirits by the incubation of the Hen, to whose heat those veins are
somewhat nearer than the Heart is: or to this, that perhaps somewhat of a yolky
tincture had preceded and caused that rusty or dark red. However, this
beginning of Change in the Vital liquor from transparency to redness, seems to
be the fifth Act.

(6.) All the Canales just now described, being fixed and opened, and the vital
liquor exalted some degrees nearer to perfection; the Plastic Spirit proceeds
to finish the whole body: so regulating its operations, as to augment those
parts first, which ought to be first used; and then to add to the dimensions of
others, whose use may be longer wanted without detriment. And this slower work
of accomplishing all parts, by way of Nutrition and Augmentation, may be
accounted the sixth Act.

(7.) The same Architectonic Spirit as it spinns the first Stamina of all the
solid parts, so does it gradually augment and complete them all out of one and
the same homogeneous liquor, viz. the Colliquamentum, or spermatic humor
clarified by Eliquation: and this by transmuting the same into as many several
forms, as there are different kinds of similar Spermatic parts in the whole
body; namely into bones, cartilages, ligaments, tendons, membranes, fibers,
etc. So that all the Organs are at length composed of dissimilar parts by
wonderful artifice context, without the least of confusion or incongruity.
Which deserves to be reckoned the seventh Act.

(8.) In that work of Organization, it is credible, the inimitable Artist
divides without section, only by terminating the parts; and unites without glue
or cement, only by continuing them to the common term or bounds, which depends
more upon union of matter, than upon union of nature. By these admirable
artifices of Division and Unition, the Plastic Spirit perforates, separates,
conjoins, cements the yet fluid, at least soft Stamina of the parts, where how,
and as often as need requires: it deduces and runns out their Rivulets
terminated in the fluid matter as by channels; it preserves from confusion the
two different Colliquamenta, and the Yolk, divided as it were by partitions: it
so distinguishes and disterminates even contiguous and semblable parts; that
they may be diversely moved at the same time without interfering or impediment,
and each yield to other when occasion requires: and thus almost all fibers,
very many membranes, and (in many sorts of Animals) the Lobes of the Lungs and
Liver, and the Cartilages mutually touching each other in the joints, etc. are
divided among themselves. In a word, by these ways and degrees here by me from
Malpighius his Microscopical Observations collected and rudely described, it
seems most probable, that the Embryo is formed, augmented and finished in an
Egg.

Now therefore (that we may accommodate this Epitome to our present Argument)
if this be the method and process that Nature uses in the Generation of
Oviparous Animals; and if she uses the like in the production of Viviparous
also, as Dr. Harvies observations, and our own assure us that she does: we may
safely conclude, that Human Embryons are in like manner formed, augmented and
finished, by one and the same Plastic Spirit, out of one and the same matter,
the Colliquamentum. Quod er at probandum.

I add, that the same Plastic Spirit remaining and working within us through
the whole course of our life, from our very first formation to our death; does
in the same manner perpetually regenerate us, out of a liquor analogous to the
white of an Egg, by transmuting the same into the substance of the solid parts
of our body. For, as I said before, Nutrition is necessary to all Animals, not
only in respect of the Augmentation of their parts, while they are little
Embryons; but also in respect of their Conservation after during life: because
their bodies being in a natural consumption or exhaustion, would inevitably be
soon resolved into their first elements, unless the providence of Nature had
ordained a continual renovation or reparation of the parts, by substitution and
assimilation of fresh matter, in the room of those particles dispersed and
consumed. Having therefore, to some degree of probability explained the former
necessity of Nutrition, and the causes of it, my next business must be, to
inquire into the Later. Which that I may the more effectually do, I find my
self obliged to begin my scrutiny from the Causes of the perpetual Decay or
Depredation of the substance of our bodies, viz. the Efficient or Depraedator,
and the Matter or substance thereby consumed, and the Manner how.

The Depraedator then, or Efficient cause of the perpetual consumtion of our
bodies, seems to be, what all Philosophers unanimously hold it to be, the Vital
Heat of the blood, therein first kindled by the Plastic Spirit, continually
renewed by the Vital Spirit, and by the arteries diffused to all parts of the
body, that they may thereby be warmed, cherished, and enlivened. This Lar
familiaris, or Vital Heat continually glowing within us, and principally in the
Ventricles of the Heart, called by Hippocrates, (...), ingenitus ignis; by
Aristotle, (...), accensio animae in cord; and flamma Biolychnii, the flame of
the Lamp of Life, by others; and by others again, ignea pars Animae Sensitivae:
is what Physicians generally have heretofore understood by Calidum innatum,
though they seem to have had but an obscure and inadaequate notion of the thing
it self, as I hope to evince, when I shall come to inquire, what life is, and
upon what it chiefly depends. Meanwhile supposing it to be an Actual Heat
consisting in a certain motion of the various particles of the blood, and in
some degree analogous to fire or flame; I cannot conceive, how it is possible
for it to subsist or continue, for so much as one moment of time, unless it be
maintained by convenient fuel, which is thereby uncessantly fed upon, and by
degrees consumed: for it is of the nature of all fire, how gentle or mild
soever, to generate and conserve it self only by preying upon and destroying
the matter in which it is generated. This Vital Heat therefore without
intermission agitating, dissolving and consuming the minute and most easily
exsoluble particles of the body; must be the Depraedator here sought after. So
that in truth, we have one and the same cause both of our life, and of our
death; or (to speak more properly) our very life is nothing but a continual
death, and we live because we die. For, we live so long, as while this internal
Vestal Heat is kept glowing in the blood: and when it ceases to glow, either
from want of convenient sustenance, or by violent suffocation, life is
instantly extinguished. So true even in this natural sense is that Distich of
Euripides; Quis novit autem, an vivere hoc sit emori:
An emori, hoc sit quod vocamus vivere?


The Matter consumed, I humbly conceive to be, for the greatest part, the fluid
parts of the body, chiefly the blood and spirits, which are most easily
exsoluble; and somewhat, though but little, of the substance also of the solid
parts. For, Experience teaches, that diverse Animals, Bears, Dormice, Swallows,
etc. sleep the whole Winter, without receiving any supply of aliment: and yet
have all the solid parts of their bodies as large and firm, when they awake
again in the Spring, as when they first betook themselves to their dens or
dormitories: and the Reason hereof seems to be this, that their Vital Heat
being all that time calm and gentle, consumes their blood and spirits but
slowly, and very little of their solid parts; as a lamp burns long, when the
oil that feeds it, is much, and the flame but little and calm. We have Examples
also of Leucophlegmatic Virgins, who from a gradual decay of Appetite, have
fallen at length into an absolute aversion from all food, and endured long
abstinence, without either miracle or imposture; and yet notwithstanding have
not been emaciated in proportion to the time of their fasting. Whence it is
probable, that in our bodies there is not so rapid and profuse an expense or
exhaustion of the substance of the solid parts, as heretofore many learned
Physicians have imagined to be made by the activity of the Vital Heat.

If it be objected, that in many diseases, the habit of the body is wont to be
very much extenuated: we are provided of a double answer. First, That
extenuation seems to proceed rather from a mere subsidence or flaccidity of the
Musculous flesh, for want of blood and the nourishing juice to fill and plump
it up; than from any great deperdition of the substance of the fibers, of which
the Muscles are mostly made up: otherwise such decays could not be so soon
repaired, as we observe them to be in the state of convalescence. Secondly,
Whatever be the cause of the extenuation objected, it impugns not our present
supposition, which extends not beyond the natural and ordinary depraedation
made by the Vital Heat in the state of Health.

And as for the Manner how the blood, spirits, and other fluids (and if ye
please to have it so, also the less fixed, and more easily exsoluble particles
of the solid parts) are consumed by the Vital Heat; this may be sufficiently
explained by the familiar example of oil consumed by the flame of a Lamp.
Whether we take fire or flame to be a substance luminose and heating; or
conceive it to be only a most violent motion of globular particles in its
focus: most certain it is, that it consists in a perpetual fieri, i. e. in a
continual agitation or accension of the particles of its (...), pabulum or
fuel, and perishing as fast as it is propagated: so that fire is made fire,
and again cease to be fire, in every the shortest moment of time; and when in
the combustible matter there remain no more particles, in which it may generate
it self anew, it instantly perishes. Now continual Dispersion being the proper
and visible effect of fire or flame; the matter or fuel wherein it subsisteth,
cannot but be in continual flux or decay. In like manner, the Vital Heat of
Animals subsisting by a continual accension of new spirits in the blood, as
that is passing through the Heart; those vital spirits, transmitted from thence
through the arteries to the habit of the body, no sooner arrive there, but
having warmed and enlivened the solid parts, they immediately fly away, and
disperse themselves by insensible transpiration, carrying along with them many
watery vapors, and (perhaps) some sulphurous exhalations. Moreover, there
being in all the solid parts of the body, certain mild, sweet and balsamic
spirits, as it were affixt unto and concorporated with them; it is very
probable, that the Vital Spirits acting upon them also by way of exagitation,
by little and little dislodge them, render them Volatile, and at length wholly
disperse them: whereupon the minute particles in which they did reside, become
mortified, and as excrements, are excluded together with the exhalations of the
blood. And this I apprehend to be the reason and manner of the depraedation
made upon the body by the Vital Heat.

Here no man will I hope, exact from me an accurate computation of the daily
expenses of this Vital Heat, which like some Governors, rules by exhausting. If
any should, I might perhaps applaud his curiosity, but should not be able to
satisfy it. For, so great is the difference among men, in respect of
temperament, diet, age, exercise, the season of the year, and various other
circumstances, that no definite calculation can be made of this dispense, no
not in those who keep to the strictest rules of an Ascetic life, weighing
themselves and their meat and drink, as Cornaro is reported to have done,
daily. We may indeed conjecture from the Static experiments of Sanctorius, that
the expense is great; for instance, if forty pounds of meat and drink be
supposed sufficient to maintain a man of a middle stature, sober, and of good
health, for ten days; and about twenty pounds be assigned to the excrements
voided by stool and urine in that time: the other twenty pounds may be
reasonably ascribed to insensible transpiration: but still this is mere
conjecture. Let it then suffice, that we certainly know the quantity of blood
and spirits daily exhausted by the Vital Heat that conserves life in us, is
very great: and that the greatest part of the matter of insensible
transpirations, is the Vital Spirits, which are continually generated, and
continually dispersed.

How apt and powerful these Vital Spirits are, by reason of their subtility and
brisk motions, to exagitate and disperse the more exsoluble particles of even
the nerves, fibers, membranes and other tender and sensile parts; may be in
some measure collected from various diseases and symptoms, that seem to arise
from their various depravations or vicious qualities. I shall not therefore go
much out of my way, if I make a short Digression, to recount a few of those
painful and contumacious Maladies, which are with good reason referrible to the
vices of the Spirits, rendering the tone of the nervous parts either more strict
or more lax than it ought to be; at least according to the doctrine of Prosper
Alpinus, not long since revived and illustrated by Dr. Franc. Glisson, whose
name is Elogie sufficient.

If it happens, that the Blood is too vinose, i. e. too abundant in Spirits (as
in Good fellows commonly it is) many times it induces diseases depending upon
Fluxion. For being by the arteries protruded into the more tender parts with
greater force and impetuosity than is fit, it rather invades than cherishes
them, by that violence putting their unfixt particles into a flux. And this
Fluxion usually first invades such parts, as being weaker than the rest, are
therefore more disposed to receive it. If the prevailing Spirits of the blood
be, not only Vinose, but Saline also; many times there insues the like Fluxion
conjoined with a languor and laxity of the tone of the parts, such as is
always observed in Catarrhs, in moist Coughs, in Ebriety, great heaviness to
sleep, the running Gout, etc. And it is remarkable, that these Fluxions are
usually so much the more fierce and vexations, by how much the more infirm and
yielding the nerves and fibers of the part invaded are; because these want
strength to make resistance by vigorous contraction of themselves: whereas
nerves naturally strong and tense; somewhat repress and break the force of the
blood rushing in upon them. Which is perhaps one, if not the chief reason, why
men of firm and vigorous nerves are very seldom or never infested by the Gout.
If this resolving fluxion chance to be accompanied with a Fermentation of the
blood; then commonly the evil consequent is a rheumatic, arthritic, or
pleuritic Fevre.

On the contrary, if the Spirits that have obtained dominion in the blood, be
Sulphurous or oily; there follows a Fluxion causing a Constriction and
shutting up of the invaded part. For though the arteries pour out blood
abounding in impetuous Spirits, and so cause a Fluxion: yet notwithstanding
those Spirits, by reason of their oyliness, neither easily pass through the
habit of the parts, as the Saline do, nor are dispersed by insensible
transpiration; but remain shut up, as in a close prison, and striving for
liberty, raise great tumults and pains. Hence are excited various Symptoms,
according to the various parts into which the Fluxion rusheth: in particular,
if the Fluxion be determined upon the Gutts, there follow grievous Colic pains;
if in the Stomach, a dire inflation of it; if upon the Limms, that sore affect
which Physicians generally call a Rheumatisme, which is not, as some have
erroneously thought, rained down from the head, but proceeds only from
sulphurous Spirits effused out of the arteries into the habit of the body, and
therein imprisoned, their own oyliness making them unapt to transpire; and
their tumultuous distension of the parts containing them, causing acute pains.
Hence also come wandering Scorbutic pains, Hypochondriac winds, rumblings in the
stomach and gutts, Headaches, the Tooth-ake, etc. And all these evils are the
more aggravated, by how much the more firm and tense the nerves of the part
affected are: whereas in Saline fluxions the contrary happens, tho* they be no
less pernicious in the end, by relaxing, fretting, and as it were melting the
tone of the parts affected.

Finally, if the strength of the nerves and fibers be greater than the force of
the blood flowing in from the arteries; in that case succeeds a Disease e
diametro contrary to Fluxion; viz. Obstruction and Infarction, and for the most
part transpiration hindered. The manner how, seems to be this: The too rigid
tension of the nerves and fibers in any part, rendering the passage of the
arterial blood through it more difficult than is requisite to the circuition of
it freely; the thicker and more viscid parts thereof must of necessity stick in
their passage, and so produce Obstructions. And this vice always is the more
intended, by how much the more languid and sluggish the Vital Spirits are. For
when these are copious and vigorous, they easily prevail over the light
renitence or reluctance of the nerves, and maugre their opposition carry on the
blood in its circuit: but when they flagg and act but dully, they yield to the
opposition of the nerves and fibers, and leave the grosser and more viscid
parts of the blood sticking in the passages. In a Cachexy, Dropsy, Asthma,
Scorbute, obstruction of the pipes of the Lungs, tumors and imflammations of
the viscera, etc. the nerves commonly are more strict or tense than they ought
to be. But if a Saline fluxion chance to be conjoined with, or to supervene
upon such an excessive tension of the nerves, it either wholly solves the
disease, or very much mitigates it at least. Whereas on the contrary, if while
the nerves and fibers continue strong, such a constriction of them be
accompanied with a Sulphurous fluxion, then it causes dismal tempests in the
parts affected; Convulsions, Epileptic fits, Apoplexy, extreme difficulty of
breathing, Suffocation, Hysteric and other the like passions.

Now, if the Genealogy of these Fluxions here described, be consentaneous to
reason and experience; it does not a little confirm what has been delivered,
touching the depraedation of the more easily exsoluble substance of the parts
by the Spirits of the blood. For, though what happens in a praeternatural state
of the body, be not always a good Argument of what is done in the natural
state: yet in this case; considering that the motion of the blood, is the same,
and that the Spirits also continue Spirits, in both states; so that the whole
difference consists only in this, that in the fluxions alleged, the Spirits are
supposed to be only depraved with Saline or Sulphurous qualities, not wholly
alienated from their nature: considering this, I say, the inference I have
made, is not ingenuine. For, to argue from the identity of the effect, to the
identity of the cause, or e converso, is no Paralogism. And so I conclude this
not impertinent digression..

FROM the causes and manner of the continual consumtion of substance in
Animals, we may opportunely proceed to an inquiry into the causes and manner of
the continual Restoration of the same by way of Nutrition.

Of this Restoration, the Efficient principle (or (...), (as Aristotle calls
it) is certainly the very same with the Generant or Formative: because, as I
said before, Generation cannot be effected without Augmentation, and
Augmentation is Nutrition. Not that I am of their opinion, who hold that Life
and Nutrition differ, not in re, but only in ratione; for the Human Embryo
perhaps is nourish't before the Empsychosis: but that I conceive, that Life
consists in and depends upon a continual generation of the Vital Spirits out of
the most subtle, active and volatile parts of the blood; and that Nutrition
consists in reparation or instauration of what is absumed, by apposition and
assimilation of consimilar or congenerous matter. So that according to the
distinct notions I have of these Twinns, Life is maintained by Dispersion of
the most spirituose parts of the blood: and Nutrition is, on the contrary,
affected by apposition and assimilation of new matter.

The Material or constituent Principle, I take to be a certain mild, sweet and
balsamic liquor, analogous to the white of an Egg, or at least the
Colliquamentum, out of which the Chick is formed. For, since all Animals are
nourished with the same out of which they were at first made up, according to
that common Axiom, iisdem nutrimur, ex quibus constamus; and that of Aristotle,
eadem materia est, ex qua augetur* animal, and ex qua constituitur primum: and
since they are all corporated ex colliquamento: we may well conclude, that the
Succus nutritious, sive ultimum nutrimentum partium, is in all qualities
semblable to the Colliquamentum of the white of an Egg. Far from the white of
truth therefore are they who think, that the parts of the body being in
substance diverse, the parts of the Aliment also ought to be equally diverse, as
if Nutrition were really nothing but selection and similar attraction of
convenient aliment: and that there were not required in every single part a
concoction, assimilation, apposition and transmutation of one matter common to
all. For, first, it is a difficult question, whether there be in nature any such
thing as Attraction, or not; and to prove Similar Attraction, is yet more
difficult: so that the very fundament of this opinion is merely precarious: and
then it is most evident from what we have said of the constitution and
augmentation of all parts of an Embryo ex colliquamento, that the Aliment
common to all parts, is Similar, not Heterogeneous: it being the proper work of
the Plastic power, still remaining in every Animal, as to form all the various
parts out of the same Homogeneous matter at first, so to augment and repair
them all, during life, out of like matter, by transforming that into the
substance of every part, which is indeed potentially all parts, but actually
none; as out of the same rainwater all sorts of Plants receive their
nourishment. Which is no more than what the Philosopher long since taught, when
opposing the doctrine of Anaxagoras, Principium rerum qui dixit Homoeomeriam,
he says expressly, Distinctio partium non, ut quidam opinantur, propterea fit,
quia simile suapte natura ad simile sertur: nam praeter alias multas, quas
ratio ista habet, difficultates, accidet, ut quaevis pars similaris scorsum
creetur, verbi gratia, ossa per se, and nervi, and carnes, si quis eam causam
amplectatur, etc.

Finally, as to the Manner how this Homogeneous matter is by the Plastic power
accommodated to the Refection of all the various parts of the body; most
probable it is, that this admirable work is gradually done by distribution,
apposition, affixion or agglutination, and assimilation or transmutation: all
which acts must be successive performed, before the operation can be complete.
For the Succus nutritious being prepared, first in the Stomach and Gutts, and
then in other parts to that end ordained, must be distributed, brought home and
apponed to all parts that need refection; then from contiguity by apposition,
it must be advanced to continuity by affixion or agglutination; and in fine
made of the same substance with each part, by assimilation or transmutation,
which is the perfection or ultimate term of Nutrition.

Now if we reflect upon what has been here briefly said concerning the double
necessity of Nutrition, and concerning the different ways by which Life is
maintained, and the substance of the solid parts recruited; it will plainly
appear, that the expense of Aliment taken in by the mouth, at least of the
Chyle extracted from it, is double; viz. that one part of it is converted into
the Succus nutritious, for instauration of the solid parts; the other (much the
greater) is changed into Blood, which is the subject, and as it were the fuel
of the Vital Heat. That we may therefore trace the footsteps of Nature in both
these so necessary Operations, and at length discover as much of her whole
processes therein, as our poreblind reason will permit us to discern; let us
inquire into the Method used by her in the work of Chylification first, and
then into that of Sanguification. For, these being well and diligently
explored, we shall with the less difficulty comprehend the whole History of
Nutrition from the beginning to the end.

Begin we then from CHYLIFICATION, i. e. the turning of all the convertible
parts of our Aliment or sood into Chyle, the common matter of which both the
Succus nutritious, and the Blood are, though by different ways, confected. But
because the Organs by Nature framed for, and used in this work, are various;
and because, as the Chorography of a Country is highly conductive to the
clearer understanding of the History of it, so the Knowledge of the fabric of
those Organs is necessarily praerequisite to our attaining competent knowledge
of their respective Actions and Uses: we are therefore obliged first to survey
these Organs singly, and to examine the nature and frame of each apart;
proceeding from one to another, according to their natural order, not of
dignity, but of position; and Anatomically administering each, (that I may use
the words of Aristotle, at least if that Book de Respiratione by most of his
Interpreters ascribed to him, be truly his) (...), both to satisfy the sight
of the Spectators, and to inform the Understanding, if our diligence may extend
so far..

HISTORIA GULAE.
OF these Organs then, the First to be treated of is the Pipe or Funnel by
which the meat and drink is carried from the mouth down into the Ventricle, to
which as an Appendix it is continued.

This part has obtained more than one Name, as well among the Ancient Graecs,
as among the Latins.

By Hippocrates it is sometimes called (...), Ventriculi osculum, the mouth or
inlet of the Ventricle, from the narrowness of it; as in lib. (...): and indeed
among the Graecians the word (...) was common to every thing that was narrow,
oblong, and hollow: sometimes, (...), quasi solus comedens, from its devouring
faculty; as in lib. (...) to which Aristotle seems to allude (3. de part.
animal. cap. 3.) where describing the Oesophagus, it is (says he) via, qua
cibus and potus devoratur, ideoque nonnullis fistula cibaria dicitur.

By the Latins also, in imitation of the Graecs, it is sometimes named
Stomachus; as by M. T. Cicero (lib. 2. de natura Deorum) where he says;
linguam autem, ad radices ejus haerens excipit stomachus, quo primum illabuntur
ea, quae accepta sunt ore, etc. and by Cornelius Celsus (lib. 4. cap. 1. and
5.) but more often, Gula, most probably (...), which signifies a little basket
or wicker snapsack, wherein soldiers upon a march used to carry their
victuals; and which some wrote with a double (...); so that our English name,
Gullet, from thence derived, comes nearer by a little to the Original than the
French, Goulet, which is abused to express the Larinx or head of the Windpipe.
But this Latin word Gula is not exempt from ambiguity. For, though in its native
and genuine sense, it denote the part of an Animal now exposed to sight; yet
sometimes it is used to signify the forepart of the neck, as in that vulgar
phrase, gulam frangere; and sometimes, any inanimate body whatsoever, that is
(like the Gullet) narrow, oblong, hollow, and ending in an ample cavity; as
gula maris, gula montium, gula phialae; and in all Wind-instruments of Music,
the neck or narrow part next to the Mouth-piece, is called gula. Here some
perhaps may think I mispend my time upon such Grammatical niceties. If so, I
shall only advertise them, that no less man than Plato recorded this as a
maxim In (...).
worthy the remark of a Wise man, (...), he that understands the names of
things, understands also the things themselves.

This Gula is not, as Aristotle (de hist. animal. lib. 1. cap. 2. and lib. 4.
cap. 3.) expressly affirms it to be, Common to all kinds of Animals whatsoever:
but to all that respire. Nor is it consentaneous, that the neck was designed by
nature for the elongation of the Gullet; (1.) Because the Vertebrae of the neck
are of themselves sufficient to evince, that it is subservient to the various
motions of the head; and in Animals of very long necks, it serves also to reach
their food; as in Cranes, Storks, Swans, etc. (2.) Because many Animals that
have Respiration, have yet no neck, as the Toad and Frogg, among the
Amphibious; and among Fishes, the Porcpisce, Dolphin, with most, if not all
others of the Cetaceous tribe: but on the contrary, it seems rather that the
Gullet was made long to correspond with the neck, that so it might reach from
the Mouth to the Stomach: as in Birds. Wherefore Fabric. ab Aquapendente's
Climax or Isadder, which lie made of Aristotle's timber; viz. Those Animals only
have a Gullet, that have a neck; those only have a neck, that have a throat and
windpipe; those only have throat and windpipe, that have a voice; those only
have a voice, that have respiration; those only have respiration, that have
lungs and breast: will not bear the weight he lays upon it, every rong almost
being instable. Nor can I assent to his doctrine, (in tract. de Gula) that all
Crustaceous, and all Testaceous Fishes want the Gullet; because my eyes have
assured me, that both Oysters and Lobsters have it, and a lively
repraesentation thereof is to be seen in the figures inserted into Dr. Willis
his Book de anima Brutorum, ad finem cap. 3. So that the Gullet seems to have
been granted by Nature to some other Animals also, besides those that respire;
for neither Oysters, nor Lobsters have respiration.

But much Difference of this Gullet is observable in living creatures of
various kinds: and that in various respects. (1.) In respect of Substance:
which in some, is more membranose; as in most feathered fowl: in others, more
fleshy; as in man, in a horse, ox, swine, etc. in others, almost horny, as in
Crabs and Lobsters, as also in the Cormorant, which feeding altogether upon
fish, and swallowing them whole even while they are yet alive, might otherwise
have his gullet rased or cut by the prickles and scales of some of them. (2.)
In respect of Length: for it is in some longer, as in the Giraffa, Crane, Heron,
Stork, Swan, Vulture, Emeu or Cassoware, Ostrich, Onocrotalus or Pelican, or
most other Fowl of the greater size: in others shorter, as in the Frogg,
Crevice, etc. in all, according to the length of the thorax and neck. (3.) In
respect of Magnitude; which in some is extremely great, in proportion to their
bodies; as in the Gull, Duck, Viper, Pike, and all other Animals that devour
their prey whole, and swallow great gobbets without chewing: in others mean, as
in Man and all other Animals that divide their food into morsels, and break it
into smaller pieces by mastication: in others again extremely little in
comparison of their bulk; as in the Whale, whose throat (as Schonfeld in
Ichthyologia tells us) is so narrow as not to admit any fish bigger than a
Whiting. (4.) In respect of site. For in Man, and in all terrestrial
four-footed beasts, it is carried down from the root of the tongue betwixt the
Aspera arteria and the spine; and therefore the Aspera arteria is made of
cartilagineous circles, not perfect, but ending in a membranose substance,
where it bears upon the Gullet, that so it may yield and give way to the
dilatation thereof in the act of deglutition: but in most Birds, it descends on
the right side of the Aspera arteria, which not resting upon it, is therefore
made of perfectly circular cartilages; a pretty contrivance of Nature, and
probably conducing to render the voice of singing birds more shrill and
musical. Only in the Bustard, the Gullet goes winding, like the streaks in the
bore of a screwed gun, one whole turn about the neck. Other differences there
are, but of so small moment, that their notice could hardly compensate your
patience to hear, or my labor to recount them. Omitting them therefore, I pass
to the description of it.

It Is (ye see) a body round, long, hollow as a pipe, soft and tensil, and
therefore easily distended and contracted again both in wideness and length; so
that being opened by the meat and drink passing through, it naturally closes it
self again, and the sides come together. The upper orifice of it, when not
used, is exactly constring'd by a transverse Muscle; as the mouth of a purse is
drawn together by the strings: the lower also is in like manner shutt, but by
the circular fibers of the upper mouth of the Stomach.

Placed it is immediately behind the Larynx: not that by reason of this
position, some few drops of the drink may slide down into the Windpipe to
bedew and moisten the sides thereof; as Fabric. ab Aquapendente dreamed; for if
we well contemplate the constructure of the Larynx it self, we may even from
thence be convinced, that nature was solicitous to prevent the falling of any
the least drop of liquor down into the Aspera arteria, and that if any chance
to slip down, it is by accident, and against her intention: but rather that the
act of deglutition may be the more exactly performed, and to prevent the
slipping down of any bit of meat into the bore of the Windpipe, to endanger
the stopping of it; as will be more fully shown when we come to consider the
reason of swallowing.

It descends in a straight line betwixt the Aspera arteria and the Vertebrae or
Sphondyls of the neck; then enters the Thorax, and arriving at the fourth
Vertebra thereof, inclines by degrees to the right side, to give way to the
ascending trunc of the great Artery: but attaining to the ninth Vertebra,
returns a little to the left side; where climbing over the same Artery, till it
come to the eleventh Vertebra, it passes through the nervose part of the
Diaphragm or Midriff toward the left side, by a hole clearly distinct from that
of the great Artery.

The Similar parts of which this instrument of Deglutition is composed, are
Common, and Proper. Of the first sort, are the vessels and outward membrane or
coat, wherewith it is vested.

Arteries it receives, in the neck, from the Carotides; in the Thorax, from the
intercostal; in the Abdomen, from the Coronary branch of the Stomach: and Veins
in like manner, in the neck, from the jugular; in the Thorax, from the Azygos
or Non-parielle; in the Abdomen, from the Coronarie vein of the Stomach. Nerves
it borrows from the sixth pair or par vagum, and chiefly from the anterior
branches of it. Lymphaeducts it has none, at least none hitherto have been
discovered in it; though some of our Modern Anatomists have conjectured, that the
two Glandules on each side connected to it in the Thorax, spew out a certain
humor into it, to keep it always slippery and moist. But this Conjecture has
been sufficiently enervated, first by Dr. Wharton (in cap. de gland.
Oesophagaeis) and since by Dr. Glisson (in lib. de Ventric. and intest. cap.
1.) both adferring stronger reasons to prove, that the liquor falling from the
Tonsills and glandulae Maxillares is destined to the lubrication and
humectation of the Gullet, all along from upper to lower end.

The Exterior Membrane that, to strengthen and secure it from cruentation,
invests it, as the Skarf skin does the true skin; is derived, by some from the
peritonaeum; by some, from the Pleura; by others, from the Ligaments of the
sphondyls of the back; and by others again from the Diaphragm; and in truth it
is united to all these parts, so that it is difficult to determine from whence
it has its principium originationis; unless it be lawful to say, that it
arises from the first proper tunica of the Oesophagus it self, as the Cuticula
comes from, and is sustained by the Cutis. However, consisting of only
membranose fibers, and those too extremely slender; it seems to be of no other
use but only to cover the Gullet on the outside, and so to prevent cruentation.

The Proper parts, are only two other Membranes, the Middle and Inmost.

The Former is very thick and fleshy, as if it were an oblong, round Muscle
bored through from end to end; whence Hoffman took the hint of his assertion,
that it is really a Muscle, and liable to Palsy and Convulsions. The Fibers of
it, according to the accurate description of Steno, are Spiral, and of two
distinct orders, mutually decussating or intersecting each other, so as to make
two skrews as it were running contre one to the other: and according to Dr.
Willis's observation, they seem to constitute two compound Muscles, that make
four Parallelogramms with fibers tending contrary ways, and mutually
decussate. And this, he says, may be plainly perceived by the eye, if this
middle tunic of the Gullet, being dexterously separated from the other two, be
first tied at both ends, then blown up, and dipped twice or thrice in boiling
water, to swell or plump up the fibers: which by that means will become so
conspicuous, as that two contrary orders with their tendons may be distinctly
discerned. After, if the same tunic be turned the inside outward, and again
blown up; two opposite orders of ascending fibers will in like manner show
themselves. Lastly, if the Tunic be cut length-ways in the middle of the
tendons, and laid flatt upon a plane, two Parallelo gramms will appear in one
Superfice, and two other lying contrary to them, in the other. Whence it may be
inferred, that this Middle Membrane was thus artificially framed by Nature, to
adapt the Oesophagus to all the various Motions requisite to its office or use,
viz. expansion and constriction of its cavity, distension and contraction
secundum longitudinem, and each of these either downward or upward, and in
various degrees, as occasion requires. Nor is it improbable, that the
Descending order of double fibers is inservient chiefly to deglutition, by
constringing the Gullet from above downward; and the Ascending, to ructation,
expuition, and vomition, by constringing the Gullet from below upward.

The later or inmost Membrane lining the Gullet, has on its inside a kind of
Scarf, thinner than Tisfany, woven of threads or fibers extremely sine; which
veils its whole cavity over as it were with a downy superfice: but all the rest
of it is nervose, furnished with fibers of different kinds and diversely context.
This Membrane is continued to that which lines the palate, throat, mouth and
lips: and descending to the stomach, covers the mouth thereof round about
within, reaching three inches below it: where it appears very thick and of a
close texture, discernable from the inmost Tunic of the Stomach, which there it
covers, by the extreme whiteness it acquires by a little parboyling. Now from
the nervose substance, and delicate interior superfice of this Membrane, it is
not unreasonable to conjecture, that it serves chiefly to render the Gullet of
exquisite sense. Whence perhaps it is, that we feel somewhat of complacency and
pleasure from grateful meats and drinks, after they have passed the mouth and
palate, and are entering into the Stomach: and on the contrary, of nauseousness
and offense from ungrateful, even while they descend, and before they can come
to displease the stomach, so as to cause it to complain to the brain of the
irritation. And the deep insertion of this membrane into the stomach, even
below the upper orifice thereof, may be (as Dr. Willis ingeniosely guesses) the
reason of the intimate commerce betwixt the Gula and Ventricle, which is so
great and quick, that if either be excited to expel what is offensive, the
other instantly sympathizes and cooperates to its relief by vomiting,
expuition, or eructation.

Having thus surveyed the whole fabrique of the Gullet, it is from thence
sufficiently manifest, that the proper Action to which it was adapted, is
Deglutition or Swallowing, which is thereby chiefly performed. I say chiefly;
because in truth the whole process of Swallowing consists in a certain series
of many actions, by an admirable providence of Nature combined in order to one
end. For, the Faculty or power of transmitting meat and drink from the mouth
into the Stomach, is founded, not only in the Oesophagus, but in many parts of
the Mouth also; in the tongue, palate, uvula and its little muscles; in the
Larynx and its muscles, as well those that draw it up, as those that pull it
down; in the Pharynx and its three muscles; and in the Sphincter of the Gullet.
Yea more, there is farther required also a concurrence of two Humors, one from
the Glandulae Salivales, the other from the Tonsils, to render the mouth and
gullet conveniently moist and slippery. For, we have it from the Oracle of
Experience, that when these humors fail, as in Fevers they often do, the
swallowing of solids becomes more difficult than the swallowing of liquids: and
on the contrary, when they are redundant, as in Catarrhs commonly it happens,
solids are more easily swallowed than liquids; because the muscles inservient
to this motion, need not be constringed so closely to gripe and depress solids,
as to squeez down liquids.

Now in this Syndrome or concurse of various Actions requisite to the whole
work of Deglutition, some are Praeparatory or antecedaneous: others,
constituent or proper. The Praeparatory are (1.) Direction of the meat and
drink toward the fauces by the tongue and cheeks; (2.) Compression of the
Atmosphere, or (as they vulgarly call it) Suction; (3.) Compression of the
thing to be swallowed, betwixt the tongue and palate, that it may tend inward;
and (4.) A double clausure in the throat, to hinder the same from slipping any
but the right way. All which have been so fully explained by Dr. Fr. Glisson
(de ventric. and intestin. cap. 16.) that it is enough for me only to mention
them.

The Proper also are four, viz. (1.) The ascent or raising of the roots of the
tongue, and head of the Larynx; (2.) The vigoration or tension of the muscles
of the Pharynx, whereby the orifice of the Gullet is opened, and at the same
time drawn up to meet the matter to be swallowed; (3.) The Contraction of the
Sphincter of the Gullet, to press the matter downward; and (4.) The Peristaltic
or compressing motion of the same Gullet, to continue the protrusion till the
matter be thrust down into the Stomach. Each of which actions, as more
pertinent to my present theme, I shall endevor briefly to explicate.

(1.) The elevation or raising up of the roots of the tongue, together with the
head of the Larynx, necessarily compresses the bolus sticking in the throat,
and by that compression forces it into the mouth of the Gullet. For, being so
environed, as that it cannot slipp away either by the funnells above leading to
the nosestrills, or by the palate, it must be crammed into the orifice of the
Gullet: there being no other way or door left open, by which it may free it
self from compression. Nor does this compression instantly cease, but is
continued till the roots of the tongue, and head of the Larynx filling up the
whole cavity of the throat, have thence driven all the matter contained
therein, and thrust it down into the Gullet.

(2.) Whilst this action is performed, the Muscles of the Pharynx being also
vigorated, i. e* set on work by tension, cause its membrane closely to embrace
the roots of the tongue and head of the Larynx in their ascent; but so, as that
the orifice of the Gullet is at the same time carried upward, and a little
forward, to meet the matter to be swallowed. No wonder then, if the described
compression easily squeez into the Gullet all the matter brought into the
throat: when the same is promoted by a clausure on each side, from below by the
ascent of the tongue and Larynx, from above by the tension of the muscles of
the Pharynx; and at the same time the mouth of the Gullet is offered, as a door
by which it may slipp away, and evade the compression.

(3.) No sooner is the matter in this manner thrust down into the orifice of
the Gullet, than the Sphincter Muscle thereof constringing it self, so girds
the orifice, as that it not only prevents the recoiling or slipping back of the
matter into the mouth, but squeezes it somewhat farther down. And then

(4.) The Peristaltic or Compressing motion of the spiral fibers of the Gullet
beginning, and by degrees girding the sides thereof farther and farther
downward, soon thrusts the matter into the cavity of the Stomach. And this
seems to me to be the most reasonable and plain account, that hitherto has
been given, how the whole complex work of Deglutition is performed Mechanically.

A work of so great Use to the whole body, that all men know and acknowledge it
to be absolutely necessary to the conservation of the whole: Experience
teaching even the most illiterate, that when it happens to be abolished, as in
various diseases of the throat, chiefly in inflammations, tumors, and palseys
of the muscles of the Larynx and Pharynx it often is, miserable famine and death
inevitably ensue. It is not then without good cause, that Nature has
(according to her accustomed bounty in works of public utility, either to the
subsistence of individuals, or to propagation of the species) to the exercise
of the faculty of Deglutition annexed an ample reward, viz. a grateful
Complacency of the instruments therein used, yea a pleasure so inviting, that
many Animals are thereby allured to hurt themselves by eating more than they
can digest; and above all intemperate Man, whose diet is in variety of tastes
the most delicious. With which vulgar remark I conclude this short and
imperfect history of the Oesophagus.

PRAELECTIO II. HISTORIA VENTRICULI.
THAT we may not in our surveys divide parts that Nature has so closely
conjoined, let us in the next place convert our contemplation upon the
principal Organ of Chylification, wherein, as in a public Kitchen, nourishment
for the whole body is praepar'd, viz. the STOMACH.

This common Receptacle of all our meat and drink, and Laboratory in which all
the profitable parts of both are, by the inimitable Chemistry of Nature,
converted into a certain whitish liquor somewhat resembling barley cream, and
called Chyle; has been by the Ancient Graec Physicians described under three
diverse names. By Hippocrates it is sometimes called (...), from (...), which
signifies to receive or contein, because it receives all the Aliment swallowed
down; and wherever in his works we meet with the word (...), without addition
to appropriate it to the Head or Thorax, which by him are also named (...),
bellies, there we are to understand this part alone: sometimes (...), i. e.
Cavity; and sometimes (...), Heart, from the vicinity of the upper orifice of
the Stomach to the Heart, and the symptoms thence arising. But of these
Appellations, the two first are common to all great cavities or receptacles in
the body: and the last, in stricter sense, denotes, not the whole stomach, but
only the principal and most sensil part of it, the Mouth. Among the Latins
likewise we find an equal variety of denominations. For Celsus (lib. 1. cap. 2.
and lib. 4. cap. 5.) uses the words, Venture, Ventriculus, and Stomachus
indifferently to signify this whole part: and Cicero (de not. Deor. lib. 2.)
expresses the same by Ventriculus and Stomachus indiscriminately. But now use
has obtained, that the diminutive Ventriculus (quasi minor ventor) without a
limitation annexed, stand for the proper name of what the Vulgar calls the
Stomach. For though Anatomists name the cavities of the Heart and Brain, also
Ventricles; yet they never do so without adding, for distinction sake, the name
of the part, viz. Heart or Brain, of which they speak.

This Ventricle then, being an Organical part, of great dignity, but greater
necessity; well deserves our strictest scrutiny. Let us then with diligence and
patience consider, (1.) The Structure or Organization, (2.) The Elements or
similar parts, and (3.) The Actions and Uses of it. For if we can attain to a
competent knowledge of all these things, I do not see what can remain to hinder
us from coming at length to understand the nature of it fully and perfectly.

Begin we then from the Site or situation of it: which being not the same in
Animals of all kinds, but various; requires to be considered, first in genere,
and then speciatim; to the end that Comparative Anatomy may go hand in hand
with simple or Positive.

In all Animals that have blood, Fowls that feed upon corn only excepted, the
Ventricle is seated in the upper part of the Abdomen. The superior Orifice of
it, in Man, in all four-footed Beasts, and in all Fishes that have lungs, is
immediately under the Diaphragm: but in all Fishes that respire not,
immediately appendant to the mouth; as well because having neither thorax nor
neck, they consequently want the Gullet; as because in them the belly is
disterminated from the mouth, by a certain membraneous partition, not much
unlike to, and, as to separation, supplying the defect of the midriff. Whereas
in Animals that respire, the Gullet is requisite, because of the interposition
of the breast betwixt the mouth and the Ventricle; which could not be
commodiously placed above the diaphragm in the thorax, for more than one
reason: viz. (1.) Because it would have straightened and compressed the Lungs,
especially when filled and distended with food; (2.) Because the Thorax being
environed with strong bones, could not be distended enough to make room for the
expansion of the lungs, and repletion of the Ventricle, both at once; and (3.)
Because the steams arising from the meat and drink fermenting in the Ventricle,
would much infest the vital parts. Which last incommodity, Nature seems to have
prudently prevented, both in Birds that have the ingluvies or Cropp placed, not
in the lower belly, but under the neck before, and without the furcula; and in
Fishes also that want respiration: by separating the heart from the ventricle
with a certain membraneous partition, instead of a diaphragm. Again, the same
upper orifice of the ventricle, in Man, and in all Quadrupeds, is placed
immediately under the diaphragm, to prevent the farther elongation of the
Gullet, which would have been unprofitable at least, if not in many respects
incommodious.

Nor is the providence of Nature less admirable in placing the Ingluvies (in
Granivorous Fowls we call it the Kropp or Craw, and the Gorge in Carnivorous)
of Birds under the neck, betwixt the horns of the os jugale, called by us the
Fork or merry-thought: she seeming to have had three inducements thereto. (1.)
The Crop having no commerce with any part in the Abdomen, but only with the
Gizard, to which it is continued by a peculiar pipe or inferior Gullet, and by
which the corn steeped and softened in the Crop is converted into Chyle; there
is no necessity why it should be seated therein. (2.) The Crop serves also to
keep the body of the Fowl aequilibrated upon the legs: whereas if it were in
the lowest belly, it would, when full of food, make the hinder part much too
weighty for the fore part. (3.) Fowls for the most part, chiefly the
Granivorous, feed their young with half-digested chyle, or corn macerated,
puking it from the crop into their mouth, as is commonly observed in Doves and
Rooks; which they could not so commodiously have done, if the crop had not been
seated so near the mouth.

And as to the situation of the Ventricle considered in Specie; it is placed in
the highest region of the Abdomen, partly in the left hypochondrium, partly
under the pit of the stomach, having on the right side, the Liver not only
accumbent but incumbent upon it; on the left side, the Spleen adhaering to it;
at the bottom, the Omentum or Kell or Caul fastened all along; and behind, the
Pancreas subjacent (from thence named by some, the Pillow or Cushion of the
Ventricle) and on the fore part, the Colon: and in this position it is
established by various connexions: the superior orifice is continued to the
Gullet, and by the mediation thereof firmly annexed to the midriffe: the
inferior, united to the Duodenum, and by the mediation of the Omentum, connex'd
to the Liver, Back, Spleen, Colon, and Pancreas.

The second thing remarkable in the Structure of the Ventricle, is the
Magnitude or Capacity of it: which being various, not only in Animals of diverse
kinds, but in some individuals also of the same species, chiefly in men;
requires therefore to be considered first Comparatively, and then Positively.

If we compare the Magnitude of the Ventricle, with that of the whole body of
the same Animal; we shall find it in weight not to exceed the hundredth part of
it. So that we might well admire, that a part so small should suffice to cook
provision for the whole; did we not at the same time remember, that the Gutts
help it not a little in that office.

If we compare the Ventricle of Man, with those of other Animals; we shall find
it to be in him less, in proportion to the whole body, than in them. So that
Aristotle's general rule (de hist. animal. 2. cap. 17.) Animalia majora,
majorem; minora, minorem habent ventriculum; seems not to exclude all
exception: and there is reason for us to believe, that Nature adjusted the
capacity of the Ventricle in all sorts of Animals, rather to the nature of
their proper food, than to the magnitude of their bodies. For (1.) Where the
food is coarse, yielding but little nourishment out of a great mass; there much
of it is required to satiate the appetite, and recruit the body; and
consequently the greater the capacity of the Ventricle. Hence perhaps it is,
that the Horse, the Ass, the Ox, Sheep, Goats, etc. that feed upon herbs,
grass, hay, stubble, and other the like lean and poor aliments, from a great
quantity of which, but little nourishing juice can be extracted, have great
bellies. On the contrary, where the food is rich, i. e. containing much of
nutriment in a little; there is required a less quantity of it to satiate the
appetite, and repair the body; and by consequence a less ventricle: as in Man,
who living upon delicate meats that nourish much in little quantity, has but a
small ventricle, in comparison of his whole body; and it is observed, that men
of a more delicate diet, such as is used at the tables of Princes and Grandees,
have generally less Ventricles, than others that live upon coarse fare. (2.)
Animals that eat but seldom, ought to have the Ventricle of large capacity,
because they devour much at once, to compensate their long fasting. Which is
exemplified in Lions, Tygres, Wolves, etc. beasts of prey, which though
carnivorous, and consequently of an opime or highly nourishing diet, are yet
compelled many times to undergo the sharp pinches of hunger long, till they
meet with food: and then they gorge themselves, as if they intended to barrel
up in their panches, flesh for many days to come; and are to that end
furnished with ample stowage in their bellies. The like may be said also of
those Men, who are accustomed to eat but one meal a day (whether it be a dinner
or a supper) and that a great one: for by that surcharge, they so distend their
stomach, as of necessity to render it in tract of time thinner, and by
consequence weaker, than is requisite to health. And hence in all probability
it is also, that great Drinkers enlarge the capacity of the Ventricle, by
stretching the coats of it; till at length they come to destroy the tone and
strength thereof by habitual extenuation, and to verify Seneca's saying of
intemperate men, (epist. 39.) quae fecere, patiuntur, they are their own
tormentors.

Finally, if we compare Human Ventricles among themselves, we shall find the
variety to be great, in respect of difference in age, sex, stature, diet, and
above all in habitual temperance or intemperance. Greater is the capacity of
the Ventricle commonly in men than in women, in proportion to their bodies; and
yet women are not, as Aristotle believed, greater gluttons than men, but rather
less; as having less room in their bellies to receive, and less of heat to
concoct food. Greater in men of middle age, and of tall stature, than in old,
and of low stature. Greater also in Gluttons and Drunkards, than in the Sober.
Difficult it is therefore to determine, what is the Positive Magnitude of it in
men; especially since we are yet uncertain, whether the Ventricle may by strong
inflation or pouring in of liquors, after it has been taken out of the body of
a dead man, be brought to hold more than before while he was alive and in
health. But if we may be permitted to take the gage thereof from some
experiments to that end made, and from vulgar observation; we may conjecture,
that the Ventricle of a man of middle age and stature, nor given to excess,
cannot contain above seven pints, of sixteen ounces to the pint: and Loselius
affirms, that he having cleans'd and dried the Ventricle of a man, together
with the whole Oesophagus, found the weight of both together not to exceed two
ounces and two drachms. Considering this, I have often admired what the grave
Plutarch delivers concerning the draught of wine drank by Alexander the Great
in the close of his last supper. For, all Historians that have written the life
and gests of this great Troubler of Mankind, describe him to have been of mean
stature: and the Scyphus Herculeus or (as Seneca in Epist. 83. calls it)
Herculaneus, (a silver bowl or kind of Grace cup, consecrate to Hercules, in
memory of his excellent faculty in drinking) is expressly said by Athenaeus
(lib. 11. cap. 9.) and by Budaeus and other Antiquaries versed in the Measures
of the ancient Graecs, allowed to contain duos Congios, two Gallons, or sixteen
Pints. A huge Romer to be drank off in the end of a great Supper, and by a
little man too, one at least to whom that (...) (as Euripides calls it) or
Dignitas formae (as Cicero 1. de Offic.) that majestical stature so commendable
in a Prince, was wanting. Let others believe (if they please) that he died by
poison; I, for my part, believe, that draught of wine was poison enough to
destroy him, and therefore conclude with Seneca; Alexandrum intemperantia
bibendi, and ille Herculaneus ac fatalis scyphus condidit. Nor can I believe
Suetonius, where among other private debauches of Tiberius, he relates, that
one of his favorites was advanced by him to an office of eminent trust and
dignity, ob epotam in convivio vini amphoram. Amphora enim est octava pars ejus
vasis, quod modium vini Galli dicunt; quodque vini tricenos senos sextarios
Parisinos capit: sextarius autem octonas eas, quas pintas vocant.

The third thing considerable in the Structure of the Ventricle, is the
Singularity of it in some kinds of Animals, and Plurality in others. To Man,
the most perfect Animal, Nature has granted but one Ventricle. True it may be
indeed, that she sometimes, though very rarely, produces men with more than one;
as Riolan. writes, that twice he had found a double Ventricle in man; and
Sperlinger, that he had observed the like in a woman of Wittemberg; and Thom.
Bartholin. forbids us to doubt there was a double stomach in a man that chewed
the cudd, described by Salmuth and others: but such are to be numbered among
Monsters, of which there are some few among Animals of whatsoever kind.

She has likewise granted no more than one to all Four-footed Beasts, that
either live upon flesh, as the Lion, Panther, Tigre, Wolf, Fox, Dog, Catt,
etc. or have teeth in both jaws, as the Horse, Ass, Mule, Elephant, etc. to all
Birds of prey, as the Eagle, Kite, Hawk, Owl, Raven, etc. and to all Fishes of
what sort soever. Nor does it consist with her wisdom to multiply organs, where
a singular may serve the turn as well: chiefly when it is of greater
perfection, that one suffices.

I will not therefore say, she has been more bountiful, where she has
doubled, or quadrupled that donative.

In all Granivorous Fowls, she has framed two Ventricles; the Crop and Gizard;
the one, membraneous; the other, fleshy and muscular: and the reason seems to
be this. These Fowls wanting teeth in the mouth, and for their sustenance
swallowing hard grains of corn whole; 'twas therefore requisite, they should
have two Ventricles: one, wherein their hard food, mixed with the water they sip
in, might be steeped or macerated, and softened; another, by which the corn so
prepared, might be broken, and as it were ground. For, the Gizard may with good
reason be compared to a mill; the opposite sides of its interior coat, being
broad, hard, and rough, and so far resembling the upper and nether millstones;
and by their motion of mutual confriction or rubbing against each other,
performing the like office that the millstones do. Again, the two contrary
Muscles investing that hard and rough coat, set and keep the mill a going; by
turns contracting and moving themselves, so that the rough sides of the machine
rubbing hard one against the other, break and grind the grains of corn lying
betwixt them. And hereof, such Fowls seem to be themselves conscious. For they
peck up among the grains of corn, small fragments of stones, pebbles, or
flints; which being carried together with the macerated grains, out of the Craw
into the cavity of the Gizard, are there of great use to the more facil and
expedite grinding of them into chyle, serving instead of teeth. Nor do they
this by chance, but guided by natural instinct. For before they swallow any
such small pebble, they try it in their mouth, whether it be angular or sharp
edged, or not: and then if they find it to be rough and pointed, they swallow,
if smooth and blunt, they reject it, as useless. So that doubtless there is
Election in the case. Now those two Ventricles being necessary to the
preparation and confection of the Chyle in all Granivorous Birds; Nature
prudently furnished them with more than one: and two sufficing, she furnished
them with no more.

But other kinds of Animals there are, on which she has conferred no less than
four Ventricles: viz. all that have no teeth in the upper jaw, as Bievs, Sheep,
Goats, in a word all Quadrupeds that bear Horns, and all that bear no horns,
and yet chew the Cudd, as Camels, Dromedaries, Hinds, Does, and some sorts of
Sheep: not so much perhaps, because they have no teeth in the upper jaw (for
they want them not, as Dr. Glisson well observes) as because they gather their
food by whole mouthfulls at once, and so instantly swallow it; the incisores or
cutting teeth of the lower jaw, serving them instead of cutting-hooks to shear
the grass or hey, and the callose gumms of the upper, together with the tongue,
serving them, instead of hands, to grasp and hold the same steady the while. So
that considering, they at first swallow the food whole, they have no need of
teeth above, but require to have four Ventricles for the preparation and
concoction of it after. To which may be added another Use or final cause of
Rumination first assigned by Sr. G. Ent (in Diatrib. p. 24.) in these words. In
hunc finem [viz. succi nutritii copiosiorem ex ore ad cererum, quod est ejusdem
promptuarium, delationem] animalia Ruminantia cibum e ventriculo per oesophagum
reducunt, ut succo ibidem expresso bis fruantur: totamque eorum palatum ex
conglomeratis exilibus glandulis intus construitur forisque tunica crassa
multis minim is for aminulis pertusa, prominentisque papillaribus loricatur.

Of these four Ventricles, common to all Animals that eat the same food twice
over, i. e. that Ruminate, or chew the Cudd, the first Aristotle names (...),
the great cavity; the Latins Rumen; and we, the Cudd or grass-bagg: for in
this, as in a Kettle, the collected food is macerated, and parboyl'd as it
were, before it is returned up into the mouth to be chewed: the second, (...),
reticulum, from the resemblance the interior surface of it bears to a caul of
network; and our Butchers, the Paunch; which (according to Dr. Glisson's
opinion) is a passage either into the first, before rumination, or into the
third, after: the third, Omasum, (...), from the wrinkles and roughness of it;
and we, the Tripe; the office of which is, not only to receive the food, after
rumination, but farther to soften it, and pressing out the juice by closing its
wrinkles, then to transmitt the same into the Fourth, reteining, by reason of
its great asperity, the harder and unprofitable dreggs, to be excluded as
excrements: the Fourth, Abomasum, (...), quasi perficiens; in English the
Hony-tripe; because the many and great folds of its inmost membrane,
intersecting each other, represent the cells of an Honycomb. This Ventricle
receives the half concocted juice from the third, and at length perfects the
work of Chy lification. But this may withal be noted, that in Calves, and Fawns,
and Lambs, while they suck; the first Ventricle remains much contracted, and
the third almost empty; but the fourth bigger than the rest, which seem
therefore to lie idle till the young beasts begin to feed upon grass. And the
reason perhaps may be this, that Milk being very fine aliment, and so requiring
no preparation, or defaecation in the other three Ventricles; is conveyed
directly into the fourth; where are always found certain relics of it,
curds, whey, and sometimes milk not yet coagulate; none of which can be found in
either of the other Ventricles.

The fourth considerable in the Structure of the Ventricle, is the Figure or
shape of it. Which when the cavity is filled, nearly resembles a Bagg-pipe,
chiefly if the Oesophagus and Duodenum be taken in to heighten the similitude:
partly round, that it may have the greater capacity; partly oblong, that it may
be adjusted to the latitude of the back. Before, it is equally gibbose, and in
corpulent men bears up the higher region of the belly; a thing by all Eastern
Nations much affected, as manly and graceful: behind, while it remains in its
place in the body, it makes two swellings, one on the right side, the other on
the left, giving way in the middle to the vertebrae of the back and the trunes
of the great Artery and vena cava. The left side or end of it is greater than
the right; that on the right hand, it may make room for the greatness of the
Liver, and compensate the smalness of the Spleen; perhaps also that it may be
more easily exonerated by the Pylorus, than by the Gullet; because the
peristaltic or compressive motion is always stronger in a less and oblong
cavity, than in one greater and exquisitely round. The length of it runs along
from the left side to the right, not in a straight, but crooked line, making a
semicircular figure representing a crescent. For, the superior orifice almost
touches the Midriff; but the middle parts recede a little from it: and the
Pylorus recurrs toward it as much, yea more, so as to make an arch; and
therefore in truth, what we call the lower orifice of the Ventricle, is the
higher of the two. And the reason of this exaltation of the outlet somewhat
above the inlet, seems to be, lest the food, chiefly the liquid part of it,
should too soon slide down out of the Ventricle; which would easily happen, if
the Pylorus were lower.

But not in all sorts of Living creatures is the figure of the Ventricle the
same. For in Quadrupeds that ruminate, the (...) or Great Ventricle is rather
perfectly round; because being of so ample capacity, if it were extended
longwaies cross the back, as the Ventricle of Man is, it would trouble the
situation, not of the Liver only, but also of the other three. Round it is
likewise in the Rana piscatrix, with many cartilagineous nodes on the outside
opening inward; and almost round in the Hound-fish or Galeus piscis, nearly
representing the great earthen jarrs wherein oil is kept. But in Animals that
have one Ventricle, it is for the most part oblong. So also is the fourth
Ventricle even in those that chew the Cudd: perhaps that by its peristaltic
motion, which (as I said before) is more powerful in an oblong cavity, than in a
round, it may the more easily expel either upward or downward what is
offensive. In the Lobster, the figure of the Ventricle is triangular, that the
three teeth placed within, on each side one, may be brought to touch, and by
contrition grind the food.

In the last place occurr to our contemplation, the two Orifices of the
Ventricle, both situate in the upper region thereof. Of these, that on the left
side is sometimes called simply the Mouth of the Ventricle, sometimes by way of
excellence, the Stomach; by the Ancients, (...), the Heart; because the Affects
of it cause swoonings and other terrible symptoms like those of the Heart when
the pulse or motions of it are perturbed or intercepted: and this, both because
of the most exquisite sense of this Orifice, which is furnished with various
nerves: and because the Heart sympathizes with it, as well by reason of
vicinity, the Stomach being but a very little distant from the cone of the
Heart; as of community of nerves derived from the sixth pair or conjugation.
Wider it is, and thicker than the other; but like a Sphincter, keeps it self
always contracted even to a point, unless in the time of swallowing, belching,
and vomiting.

The other on the right side, called Pylorus, i. e. the janitor, though likewise
girt about with circular fibers, is not drawn so close together, nor kept so
constantly shut; only during digestion, it is somewhat contracted, so as to keep
in all solids, and give way to liquids to slide down into the gutts. Dilated it
is sometimes, either in great diseases, the Lienteria, Cholera, and iliaca
passio; or in great exigents, after solid and indissoluble things have been
casually swallowed; as is evident from many examples of men, women and
children, who having swallowed gold rings, pieces of money, nutts, bullets,
lizards, loches alive, etc. voided them by stool entire: though sometimes such
things stick in the Pylorus, and produce dismal, torments, and death, a
memorable example whereof is recorded by that excellent Anatomist, Theodorus
Kerckringius of Amstredam (Spicilegii Anatomici observe. 1.) in a little Girl of
five years of age, who died of a stoppage of the Pylorus, caused by a Dutch
Stiver she had swallowed, which in her Ventricle opened after her death, was
found so firmly to have plugg'd up the Pylorus, that nothing could pass out by
that door. And this is all the shortness of my time would permit me to speak
concerning the things chiefly remarkable in the Organization of the Ventricle,
viz. the situation, the magnitude, the number, the figure, and the two orifices
thereof; as well in genere, as in specie..

We come in the next place to the visible Elements or SIMILAR parts whereof
this so necessary Organ is composed.

Of these constituent parts, some are Common also to other organs; others
Proper and peculiar to the Ventricle only. To the former classis belong the
vessels, whether importing, as Nerves, and Arteries; or exporting, as Veins,
both sanguiferous, and chyliserous: to the later appertain the three Tunics,
with their fibers and parenchymata. All which require to be described and
considered singly. Which I therefore, encouraged by your patience and
attention, will endevor to do as briefly as is possible: observing the same
order in which I have now mentioned them.

The Nerves by which the Ventricle is made participant of sense and the
invigorating influence of the brain, are all derived from one original, viz.
the sixth pair, or par vagum. For, this pair, of all others the most liberal,
distributes to the parts below the Midriff, four principal branches; from the
anterior two, of which proceed the two anterior and superior nerves of the
Ventricle; the left, from the right branch; the right, from the left: and the
posterior branches, called by Dr. Willis (in Neurologia) the Intercostals,
coasting along the spine of the back on each side, descend to join with the
superior plexus of the Abdomen; and there uniting with some surcles of the
anterior branches, make a little nervose chord, which connects the Renes
succenturiatos or glandulas renales, and from which, as from a common stalk,
almost all other parts contained in the Abdomen receive their nerves. Among the
rest, some surcles shooting forth from this complication, and accompanying the
Coeliac Artery, distribute themselves, partly to the bottom of the Ventricle,
partly to the left prominency of it, and partly to the spleen. The Ventricle
then being thus plentifully furnished with nerves, and those too continued to
the principal branches that send forth surcles to most other parts in the same
great cavity contained: it seems not difficult to conjecture, that the
remarkable consent and sympathy betwixt those parts and the Ventricle, arises
chiefly from that community of nerves; nor to give a probable reason, why
vomitings usually accompany the Colic, Hypochondriac winds, and Hysteric fits;
the irritation being, by continuity of the nerves, easily propagated from one
part to another.

The Arteries that continually bring in blood and life to the Ventricle, are
reckoned to be in number five, each served by a vein, to export the blood after
it has done its office of heating, cherishing, and enlivening. These Arteries
and veins are called, arteria and vena pylorica; arteria and vena
gastro-epiplotca dextra; arteria and vena gastrica, from whence proceeds the
coronary branch; arteria and vena gastro-epiploica sinistra; and the vas breve
arteriosum and venosum. All the divarications and branchings of which vessels,
discernable in the coats of a human ventricle artificially blown up, are most
accurately represented in the first table of Dr. Willis's Book entitled
Pharmaceutice Rationalis: whither, for expedition sake, I refer the
unsatisfied: meanwhile commending to their notice three observables concerning
these numerose vessels.

(1.) That they all tend inwards, and in their progress subdivided into
innumerable spriggs smaller still and smaller, till they dwindle into
Capillaries, are at last terminated in the inmost coat or nervose membrane of
the Ventricle; infecting the interior surface thereof with redness, as if it
were bloudshot. Which will be conspicuous, if after the Ventricle has been
blown up, and dipped a little in boiling water, it be turned the inside outward,
and the downy lining neatly separated: for, then the innumerable terminations
of the arteries and veins, will appear to cover the nervose membrane, as with a
bloody nett.

(2.) That their capillary surcles are equally dispersed upon all parts of each
Tunic, as if their uses were thereby signified to be equal in all parts. This
also is apparent to sense; for, though all the three Tunics be white, yet in
living dissections, wherever the Ventricle is pricked with the point of a
needle, there will be seen blood to wooz forth.

(3.) That the Arteries and Veins respectively official to them, are exactly
proportionate among themselves, as well in the amplitude of their truncs, as in
the distribution of their branches, and in the portion of the Tunic to which
they are distributed: so that the vein correspondent to each artery, is
adjusted to export as much blood, as the artery imports. Whereas in most, if
not all other parts of the body, the arteries are generally observed to be less
than the reducing veins: because in those, the motion of the blood is stronger
and swifter; in these, weaker and slower. This proportionate distribution is
most clearly discernable in the branches of the Gastric vein and artery, which
in their Coronary divarications, no less than in their turncs, are exactly
correspondent each to other. The reason whereof, according to the judgment of
Dr. Glisson, who seems first to have remarkt the thing, may be because the
arteries and veins have their origines near at hand and together, and the three
last have theirs from proportionate vessels, the Splenic artery and vein; not
that they bring in any thing from the Spleen to the Ventricle (as the Ancients,
ignorant of the Circulation of the blood, erroneously held) but that they are
more commodiously derived from thence, than they could be from any other vessel
whatever; the vicine situation of the Spleen considered.

The Venae lacteae of the Ventricle appear to be but few, in comparison of the
great multitude issuing from the Gutts. Dr. Glisson tells us, that those showed
to him by Dr. Wharton in the Ventricle of a Dog dissected alive, were not
many: adding this description of them. They took their original (says he) from
the bottom of the Ventricle, and not far from thence, supported by the anterior
membrane of the Omentum or kell, they were carried along to the greater
Glandule thereof; and after entrance into it, they crept along the right margin
of the Pancreas; then sustained by the Mesentery, they went on directly to the
Common Receptacle, and into that discharged their milky freight. And this
perfectly agrees with what I have more than once observed, and can visibly
demonstrate in living dissections of Dogs. It Is somewhat strange then that the
curious Dr. Willis should never perceive any of these Chyliferous vessels in
the Ventricle; or at least, not so much as mention them in his Anatomic history
of that part, wherein he pretends to so much accurateness: but much more
strange, that he should in the same book teach, that the sanguiserous veins of
the Ventricle take in part of the Chyle out of its cavity, and carry it
immediately into the mass of blood; when if he had considered the use of the
Glandules of the Mesentery, and the separation of the purer parts of the Chyle
from the impure and excrementitious, performed in the Gutts; he might have
inferred from either of those reasons, that while the Chyle remains, either not
perfectly concocted, or not sufficiently defaecated, in the stomach, no part of
it ought to be so immaturely commixt with the blood. But this is my opinion,
and that was his: and therefore every man is free to approve which he thinks
most consentaneous.

As for Lymphaeducts, if we take them as contradistinct to the Venae lacteae;
hitherto I have heard of none discovered, and therefore believe there are none
in the Ventricle; the rather because there are some Venae lacteae, which are
congenerous to them; nor is it Natures use to multiply kinds of vessels, where
one kind is sufficient. True it is indeed, that in the Mesentery, both venae
lacteae and lymphaeducts are found: but this objection has been fully answered
by Dr. Glisson (in libr. de ventric. and intest. cap. 3. number. 8.) saying, they
those vessels differ more in respect of the liquors that carry, than of the
structure or constitution of their similar parts. For, the Lympha is a thin,
hungry liquor; the Chyle thicker, succulent, and rich: this is brought from
parts newly recruited with fresh aliment; that, from parts that want refection:
though both are discharged into the Common Receptacle. Wherefore although
Lymphaeducts pass through the Mesentery, yet are they not to be reputed the
genuine vessels thereof, but aliens traveling along the nearest way through
it. And if they staid to bait at any part well stored with Chyle, it is probable
the liquor they would suck in, would make them of the same milky color with
the true venae lacteae. And these are all the Common Similar parts of the
Ventricle..

The Proper are (as I said before) three Tunics or Membranes, with their Fibers
and Parenchymata.

The three Tunics, although they seem to cohaere but slightly, so that being
moved by a little impulse of the finger any way, they slip one upon another;
are notwithstanding connected with that pretty artifice, that each has its
Fibers implicated with those of the next; which fibers must be dexterously cut
off, before the Tunics can be separated, whether the Ventricle be raw or boiled.

That which first offers it self to the view, is the Exterior Tunic; which some
will have to be borrowed of the Midriff, and others, from the peritonaeum: both
which opinions will be found light, if put in the balance against the moments
of reasons brought to refute them, by the most judicious Dr. Glisson (de
ventric. and intest. cap. 4. number. 2.) who with more justice affirms it to
belong to the Ventricle by right of origination, as properly as either of the
other two; at least in respect of its peculiar fibers and parenchyma. Thicker
it is, and furnished with more nervose fibers, and consequently stronger than
any membrane derived from the Peritonaeum: in substance, texture, and course of
fibers, exactly resembling the exterior coat of the Gullet; so that if ye
remember our description of that, ye will need no other idea of this. The uses
of it are many, viz. (1.) To invest, and corroborate the Ventricle, and to
preserve it from cruentation on the unequal side; (2.) To sustain the great
multitude of vessels that are divided and subdivided into innumerable surcles,
as they diffuse themselves betwixt it and second or middle coat; (3.) To
conserve the heat of the Ventricle, so requisite to concoction; (4.) To concur
to the peristaltic motion of the same, which it does by virtue of its
transverse fibers contracting or shortning themselves spontaneously. Here
recurrs to my memory a certain Pathological remark added by Dr. Willis to his
description of this utmost coat of the Ventricle: I have observed (says he) in
the bodies of many who had long languish'd under loss of appetite, continual
nauseousness, and frequent vomitings, dissected after death; that sometimes a
serose humor, sometimes an effusion of bile, sometimes an abscess, upon the
outside of the Ventricle, had by irritation of it, been the cause of those
dismal symptoms. A singular observation, which I the more willingly recount,
because 'thas been my luck once or twice to meet with the like.

The second or Middle Tunic is much thicker and more fleshy than the first,
laced every where with fibers, and consequently both stronger, and more potent
to perform the Peristaltic motion, to which chiefly it seems to be adapted. The
position and course of these fibers are various in the various parts and sides
of it. On the Concave or inside, strong fleshy fibers run down obliquely from
the left hand toward the right, till they arrive at the bottom: so that when
they contract themselves, they must of necessity pull the bottom of the
Ventricle obliquely upward toward the left orifice; and therefore conduce to
vomiting and other expulsive motions by the same. On the top or ridge of the
same unequal side, are many fibers of a distinct order, which hemming in the
left orifice of the Ventricle, tend to the right, and rising a little
therewith, cover it, and then terminate therein. So that they seem, by their
action, which is contraction, to bring the right orifice nearer to the left,
which is always done in vomiting: which motion being continued sometimes even
to the bottom of the Duodenum, both the Bile or Gall, and Pancreatic humor are
pumpt up into the stomach, and thence ejected by vomit. On the Unequal or
outside, are likewise fibers of two sorts, though both circular. For some
incircling the mouth of the stomach, where the Oesophagus ends, gird it about,
and so close it: and others, incomparably more in number, incompass the whole
Ventricle, tending from the upper parts, to the bottom, in parallel lines, and
thence ascending again from the bottom to the top, like so many Zones or
girths: so that when they are put into action, they must needs bring the bottom
of the whole Ventricle nearer to the top, and the sides also nearer together,
and so lessen the cavity thereof; so that whatever is at that time contained
therein, being raised upward and pressed on every side, can hardly evade being
expelled by one of the two orifices, or by both; as it often happens from
violent irritations of the stomach, and always in the Cholera.

Now from these various orders of strong fleshy Fibers wherewith this Middle
coat is guarded, we may easily collect, that it was so framed by Nature, to be
the principal instrument of the Peristaltic motion of the stomach, as well as
to corroborate and defend it.

The third or Inmost Membrane, is remotely different from either of the other
two. For, in substance it is, though not wholly nervose (as most Anatomists have
affirmed) yet much less fibrose, and less tenacious or tough, and consequently
less extensible. Which seems to be the reason, why Nature has made it so much
larger than either of the two coats that invest it, that when by their
compressive motion or contraction, the cavity of the Ventricle is minorated,
this falls into many wrinkles or plaits, and so remains till the Ventricle be
again distended by repletion, and then all the wrinkles disappear: the
largeness compensating the want of tenacity, and the wrinkles making it capable
of equal extension with its fellows, without danger of rupture. Moreover, the
inner surface of it is spongy or porose, and unequal; as being covered with a
downy veil consisting of threads exremely fine, and perpendicularly inserted
into the coat, resembling the right side of velvet or plush. A singular
artifice of Nature, and such wherein she seems to have had more than a single
aim. For (1.) This plushy lining serves to defend the coat from the injuries of
solid and hard meats, which otherwise might, by their immediate contact, offend
and irritate it. (2.) It conduces somewhat to the firmer detention of the meat,
and not yet perfectly concocted Chyle; which otherwise, if the supersice of
this coat were smooth and polite, would easily slip down too soon. (3.) It
helps to cover the extremities of the innumerable arteries and veins terminate
in this coat, and so prevents the cruentation of it. (4.) It makes way for the
exsudation of humors brought thither with the blood, by the arteries. For, in
Man and all Carnivorous Animals, the Ventricle is always found to be sinear'd
all over within, with a certain slimy or pituitose humor, which sticks so fast
to the inner or plushy surface of this Coat, as if it were a kind of vegetable
growing out of the pores of it. Which Mucus or Phlegm, though an Excrement in
respect of the whole mass of blood, from which it was by secretion separated;
is nevertheless of great use to the Ventricle into which it is excern'd; and
that in three considerable respects. (1.) By lining the concave side of this
inmost membrane with its mucilagineous substance, it serves to secure it the
more from Cruentation. For though the stomach of a dead man, when invers'd,
does not appear bloody, even after this Mucus has been wiped or scraped off;
perhaps because the motion of the blood is then ceased, and the cold of death
has shut up the pores by which it might wooz out: yet in the living, this
Mucus cannot be wholly purged away, but cruentation will soon ensue; as is seen
in the Dysenterie, and superpurgations by violent and corrosive Medicaments, in
which cases bloody stools happen, and yet without the rupture of any vessel, or
exulceration of either Ventricle or Gutts. (2.) The same Mucus conduces to
render the inside of this coat more slippery, so that it may more easily expel
any offensive matter, upward or downward, as occasion requires. (3.) By growing
acid or sour, it serves, both to excite hunger, and to facilitate the
dissolution and fermentation of the meat and drink in the stomach. Of this
Mucus much more might here be said, did I not foresee that I shall be obliged
to resume it, when I come to inquire into the actions and uses of the Stomach.
Meanwhile I must not omit to observe, that the Unequal side of this Plushy
lining of the inmost Membrane thereof, is set thick with small Glandules: which
Dr. Willis conjectured to be there placed, both to cover the mouths of the
arteries and veins there terminated, and to receive and separate some humor, by
way of percolation; nor do I dislike that conjecture.

We are now arrived at the two last of the proper constituent parts of the
Ventricle, the Fibers and Parenchymata; which will fully compensate our
patience, if we fix our thoughts awhile upon the consideration of them.

The various significations, and more various Etymologies of the Latin word,
Fibra (about which there has been no little hacking and slashing among
Grammarians) I willingly pass by; and with Salmasius deriving it from the
Aeolic (...), pro (...), which according to the interpretation of Hesychius,
denotes a soft and slender thread; take it, according to the use of Anatomists,
to express a certain similar part, nearly approaching to the nature of a nerve,
and continued to one, but much more slender: so that I am apt to believe it to
be a single filament elonged from some nerve, after its division into many
threads, each as fine as that spun by the Silkworm, if not finer. The best
description of it, that I have hitherto read, has been given us by Dr. Glisson
(de ventric. and intestinis cap. 4.) which I will therefore recite, as worthy
to be known by those who have not perused that most elaborate Book, and to be
revived in the memory of those who have.

A Fiber is (says he) a body in figure like a thread, slender, tenacious,
tensil and irritable, made of a spermatic matter, and destined to some motion
and strength.

(1.) In figure like a thread, i. e. oblong, round and smooth; (2.) Slender, as
a Spiders thread; (3.) Tenacious, i. e. tough, or whose parts firmly cohaering,
are not easily broken; (4.) Tensil, i. e. capable of being extended in length,
the latitude the while diminished, and of being thickened in breadth, the
longitude the while abbreviated; (5.) Irritable, i. e. such as may be by
irritation excited to contract it self, and is naturally apt to relax it self
again, when the irritation cease; (6.) Made of a Spermatic matter, i. e. if
it be a naked or simple fiber such as those of all the Muscles; but if stufft
with any parenchyma, perhaps then not made of only a spermatic matter, and such
are all the fibers of the Ventricle and Gutts; (7.) Designed for motion and
strength; because being of a tough consistence, it cannot but add to the
strength of a part; and being capable of extension and contraction, it must
therefore be destined to motion.

This description, though true and plain, seems yet somewhat too narrow to
comprehend the whole nature of Fibers generally considered. Let us therefore
enlarge it by subnecting a few lines more, concerning the constitution, uses,
action and passion of them.

(1.) The Constitution of a Fiber is either insita or influens, native or
adventitious. The Native is again Similar, or Organical. The Similar consists
in a mattar fitly disposed, in a just temper, corpulency, cohaerence of parts,
tensibility, flexibility, continuity, hardness and softness. The Matter is
wholly Spermatic, although sometimes it be stuffed with a bloody pulp, as is
observed in the fibers within the Ventricles of the heart. Wherefore the native
temperament of all fibers is cold and moist indeed, but enriched with delicate
and noble spirits, however fixed: and consequently they require to be nourished
with a spermatic aliment. The Corpulency or fleshiness of fibers is variable,
sometimes greater, as in strong and laborious men; sometimes less, as in weak,
lean and sedentary. The Cohaerence of parts ought to be firm and tough, that
they may be extended without danger of divulsion or rupture, and return to
their natural posture, by spontaneous contraction, after extension. Their
Flexibility depends, partly upon their tenacity, partly upon their middle
constitution betwixt hardness and softness; that they may be neither rigid or
stiff, nor flaggy.

The Organical native constitution of fibers, consists in their due
situation, figure, magnitude and continuity; all which are included in their
former description.

The influent constitution of them, is either Vital, or Animal. If the vital
influx be deficient, the force and strength of the fibers soon languishes, as
in swoonings and faintings. Yea, if it be but depraved, as in fevers, their
vigor in a few hours decays. If the Animal influx be intercepted, as in the
palsy; they quickly become languid and stupid: yea, if the brain and nerves
grow dull and sluggish, the fibers at the same time grow flaccid and loose,
unapt for vigorous motion.

(2.) The general Uses of all fibers are to corroborate the parts to which they
belong, and to move them. The special uses are various, respective to their
various formation in diverse parts: as (for instance) in the Stomach and Gutts,
they serve chiefly to their Peristaltic motion.

(3.) The Action of Fibers is either Common, or Proper. Common, when being
invigorated, i. e. set on work by extension, which is against their nature,
they pull and move the part to which they are connex'd; as a chord pulled by a
man's hand, pulls a plummet or any other body fastened to it: but this seems to
me to be, in strictness of truth, rather Passion, than action, in respect of
the fibers themselves; for, they suffer extension, being, notwithstanding their
natural renitency, stretched in length, by the pulling of the nerves from which
they are elonged. Wherefore (according to my weak judgment) their Proper action
is only Selfcontraction, by which they restore themselves to their natural
posture. A motion common indeed to all Tensil bodies whatever; and therefore
rightly termed by Philosophers, motion of Restitution; the cause whereof I take
to be the strong cohaerence of the parts of which they are composed. If so,
what need we amuse our selves by striving to deduce the spontaneous Contraction
of nerves and fibers, either from natural Instinct, which implying I know not
what secret suggestion, pro re nata, from some foreign cause, whether God, or
His servant Nature, is to me unintelligible: or (what is equally abstruse) from
Natural Perception, which supposes even inanimate things, yea every the least
particle of matter in the whole Universe, to be naturally endowed with
knowledge of what is good or evil to their nature, with appetites to embrace
the good, and eschew the evil; and with power to move themselves accordingly:
faculties that my Philosophy will not grant to any but rational creatures?

(4.) The Passion therefore of a Fiber, is the extension of it, which is a
passive motion coming from a cause without the essence of the fiber it self.
Which cause, unless it actually relax or stupesie the fibers, incites or
irritates them to contract themselves: and the more violent the irritation, the
stronger is the renitency and spontaneous contraction; as is observed in
convulsions. To me it seems impossible, that a simple fiber should by its own
action alone extend it self in length: nor have I wit enough to conceive how
this can be done: since all extension is a less or greater degree of force
tending to the tearing asunder of the parts of the tensible body, against which
divelling force the firm cohaerence of the parts makes it strive. And as for
the Cessation of fibers; that is when they neither act, nor suffer, but rest
from all either extension or contraction, having restored themselves to their
natural posture of laxity. This they attain to chiefly in sleep, when all
fibers of the whole body, (those that serve to respiration and the motions of
the heart, only excepted) are at rest, and thereby refreshed, acquiring after
labor and weariness, new strength and vigor, from the sweet, mild and balsamic
juice dispensed to them from the brain by the nerves.

After this concise survey of the fibers in the membranes of the Ventricle,
there remains only their peculiar Parenchyma to challenge our observation:
which it may with the greater right pretend to, because there are many who
question whether it be real, or imaginary; because the whole Ventricle being of
a white color, seems therefore to be made up only of fibers and membranes. It
concerns us then to be certified (1.) Of the real existence, (2.) Of the
necessity, (3.) Of the quality, and (4.) Of the various uses of what we call
the Parenchyma of the Ventricle, as a distinct part thereof.

(1.) To be assured even by our own eyes, that there is really such a thing; we
need only to essay the excarnation of the stomach, by laying it extended upon a
plain board, and then scraping it moderately hard with a blunt knife; in the
same manner as Sheep skins are scraped by those who make Velom and Parchment;
or gutts by those who make Sawciges. For, by this easy means, you may scrape
off so great a quantity of soft white pulp, as will by nineteen parts of twenty
exceed all that you leave behind of membranes and fibers, which will yet remain
as strong and tenacious as they were before. Against which experiment, I see
not what can be objected. For if the firm cohaerence of the fibers of the
Stomach be not only not abolished, but not at all diminished, by this scraping
away of the pulp that stufft them; it follows, that the pure fibers, in which
alone the strength of the stomach consists, still remain entire, and that
nothing but the Parenchyma or pulp has been taken away. From the same
experiment it appears also, that the membrane and pure fibers of the Ventricle
are in themselves pellucid or transparent; as we see in the skins of Sawciges:
and that they owe all their opacity to their stuffing with this Parenchyma.

(2.) Which is necessary to the constitution of the Stomach, in more than one
respect. Necessary it seems to fill up and make smooth and plain the
inequalities arising from the contexture of the fibers, which running various
courses, and riding each over other sometimes, would otherwise render the
surfaces of the membranes uneven. Necessary it is also to stop the pores of the
Stomach, that it may hold liquors the better, and be stanch even to vapors and
wind: as linen cloth is made to hold water by dipping it into melted wax, oil
and turpentine, which fill up the void spaces betwixt the threads, in the same
manner as this mucilaginous pulp fills up the interstices betwixt the fibers,
and so makes the membranes impervious. Necessary it is to the augmentation and
extenuation of the fibers themselves. For, the fibers of the Stomach, although
seldom or never liable to fatness, are yet easily capable of plumpness and
leanness. In men sick of a Consumtion, they are always extenuated: in fat men,
always plump and thick. But these mutations could not so easily happen, if the
fibers were not stuffed with some pulp: for all Parenchymata are easily melted
a way by degrees, but fibers not without great difficulty; nor do I know any
thing more apt to colliquate their substance, and destroy their tone, than
Brandy and other corroding Spirits, how highly soever extolled by Chemists that
distill them. We may see in men languishing of Hectic fevers, and ulcers of the
lungs, the Tendons of the muscles remaining entire, when the pulp of them is in
the mean time almost wholly consumed. Whence it is evident, that the fibers,
which are more easily obnoxious to augmentation and diminution than other solid
parts, have much of a pulpy substance in their composition.

(3.) This pulp, if softened and diluted with water, is like a mucilage or
gelly; otherwise, tenacious, tensible, and strong, like paste: so as to be
impervious to winds and liquors, though apt perhaps to imbibe the thinner and
spirituose part of the Chyle. Different from the Parenchyma of the bowels; and
from that of the Muscles also: as being neither bloody, but white and
spermatic; nor congested into a mass, but spread abroad, like plaster, so as
to bear extension and contraction together with the fibers; part of it being
stuffed or crammed into the fibers, the rest dawbed upon and betwixt them, so
as to fill up and plane their interstices.

(4.) Besides which two Uses, it seems to serve also to three others: viz. to
the safe conduct of the Venae Lacteae proceeding from the Stomach, which
probably have their roots in the parenchyma of the inmost tunic thereof, where
the small Glandules observed by Steno and Malpighius, are seated: to the
separation of the mucus or pituita emortua from the blood brought by the
arteries into the coats of the Ventricle; of which we shall more opportunely
inquire, when we come to the uses of the Stomach: and lastly to make way for a
larger current of blood to pass through the membranes of the Stomach, than
otherwise they and their pure fibers could through their substance transmitt.
For, Fibers, by how much more firm and tenacious they are than the Parenchyma
is, by so much more they resist the transition of the blood: and therefore if
here were no Parenchyma, certainly the Ventricle would be irrigated with more
slender streams of blood, and consequently colder than it ought to be. Whereas
now no less than five conspicuous arteries discharge themselves into its coats.
Certain therefore it is, that a more liberal afflux of blood is required to the
constitution of the stomach, than seems possible to be transmitted through the
naked membrane and fibers without this pulp.

Having now at length finished (I wish I might say, perfected) my survey of all
visible Elements, or constituent parts of the Ventricle; I should proceed to
the functions, actions and uses of it. But remembering that an empty Stomach
has no ears, and considering that it would be double wrong to you, should I at
once starve both your bodies and your curiosity: I choose rather here to break
off the thread of my discourse, than to weaken that of your life, by detaining
you longer from necessary refection..

PRAELECTIO III. Of the ACTIONS and USES of the VENTRICLE.
AFTER dinner sit a while; is an old and good precept to conserve health. Let
us then (if ye please) now observe it. And that we may repose without idleness,
let us calmly inquire into the method, causes, and manner of Digestion:
resuming the clew of our discourse where hunger and thirst brake it off, when
it had brought us to that place, where we might most opportunely consider the
ACTIONS and USES of the Ventricle, whose admirable Structure and various Parts
we had so particularly contemplated, in order to our more accurate
investigation of them.

In this disquisition, Nature her self has plainly marked out the steps
wherein we are to tread; having assigned to the Ventricle eight distinct
operations or actions to be performed in order successively. These Actions are
(1.) Hunger, (2.) Thirst, (3.) The Peristaltic motion, (4.) Reception, (5.)
Retention, (6.) Concoction, (7.) Secretion, (8.) Expulsion: each of which has
a peculiar Faculty respondent to it; for every action in specie distinct,
necessarily implies a distinct power. But because each distinct faculty, and
the action respondent to it, are, though in reason different, yet in reality
one and the same thing: I shall not treat of them separately, but describe them
together under the more familiar name of action; the rather because if we can
be so lucky to find out the true reason of any one operation here specified, we
need search no farther to know the nature of the faculty to which it belongs;
all mechanical operations conducting our understanding to the knowledge of the
proper powers by which they are performed. Following then the order of Nature
in examining these Actions, I begin from the first, viz. HUNGER.

Among the many differences betwixt Plants and I. HUNGER.
Animals, this is not the least remarkable; that Plants are fixed by their roots
which serve them also instead of mouth and stomach, in the earth, so that they
remove not from their places in quest of nourishment: Unde facundiss. noster
Entius (in Antidiatribae page 5.) Plantae, inquit, non sunt quidem gressiles,
sed humo affixae, secum continue habitant: quod pluvia solum ac rore
(tenuissimo scilicet victu) pascantur. Ideoque cum ad rivulos potatum ire
nequeant, expansis veluti brachiis, facundos imbres a Jove pluvio implorant:
But Animals having their Stomach within their bodies, and sucking no juice
immediately from the earth, are therefore forced to change their stations, and
range from place to place to find food convenient for their sustenance. And
because the capacity of their Ventricles and Gutts, is not so great, as at once
to contain a quantity of food sufficient to maintain life for many days
together; necessary it is, they should often be recruited by eating fresh
aliment. To obtain which, they must seek it: and to oblige them to seek it,
they must be excited and urged by something within them to that quest: and to
that excitation is required an internal goad as it were, and that a sharp one
too and irresistible, the inevitable necessity of their nutrition considered:
otherwise they would neglect to supply themselves in due time with new
sustenance, and consequently soon pine away, and perish. Now the goad that
compells them to feed, is Hunger and Thirst; the one urges them to seek meat,
the other, drink: both by Aristotle expressed by the name of Appetite; by Galen
called Sense; and by Dr. Glisson (who from the singular goodness of his nature,
took pleasure to reconcile the different opinions of the Ancients) more truly
defined to be, Appetite of meat and drink, conjoined with Sense of the want of
them. For, impossible it is, an Appetite Sensitive should be excited to desire,
unless there be represented to it an object to be desired. If therefore,
according to Aristotle, hunger and thirst involve the Appetite of meat and
drink, it praesupposes a sense of the absence of them. And granting a sense of
them as things desirable, there is necessarily excited an Appetite of them.
For, sense of want is of its own nature querulous and craving: and by how much
more important to the conservation of life the thing wanted is, by so much the
more urgently does it stimulate the Appetite to crave it. Whence it follows of
necessity, that hunger and thirst are both Appetite and Sense; quod erat
probandum.

To dispell all umbrage of doubt that may arise from ambiguity of words, to
eclipse this verity; it concerns me to put ye in mind, that hunger and thirst
are each of them taken in a double signification; sometimes for the object of
which the stomach is sensible, sometimes for the affect of the stomach by which
its appetite is excited. In the former acception, by hunger or thirst is meant
only the want of meat or drink in the stomach: in the later, a sense of that
want, together with an appetite of one of the two. Now according to the former
of these two notions, the truth is, neither hunger nor thirst can be either
sense or appetite; but the objective cause of both: but according to the later,
each of them is both sense and appetite. And that this later is the most proper
and commonly received notion, is evident even from hence, that frequently there
is want of meat in the stomach, when there is no sense of that want, and then
it is not called hunger: as in fevers, and after profuse vomiting. The same is
confirmed by that disease called Appetitus caninus, a Dogg-like appetite, in
which though the Stomach be even surcharged with abundance of meat, yet still it
craves more, and sends up to the imagination a sad complaint, that it feels
hunger, and desires a farther supply of meat. We may therefore from both these
opposite instances conclude, that Hunger does properly signify sense of want
of meat; and Thirst, sense of want of drink: and consequently that one includes
Appetite of meat; the other, Appetite of drink, to supply that want.

But what kind of Sense is this by which the Stomach perceives the want of
food? Is it referrible to any of the five external senses? Or do hunger and
thirst constitute peculiar sorts of senses proper only to the stomach?

I answer, that the senses of hunger and thirst seem to have great cognation
with the sense of Touching, as also with those of tasting and smelling; and yet
notwithstanding are, not only gradually, but specifically discrepant from every
one of them. For, Faculties are in specie different among themselves, if they
necessarily require absolute Constitutions in specie different, in which they
may be founded. For a sensitive Faculty is really nothing else, but an aptitude
of the sensorium to perceive: and this aptitude is of necessity diversified, if
the absolute constitution, in which it is rooted, be diverse. Now that the
senses of Hunger and Thirst necessarily require an organ or sensorium in a
peculiar manner framed, that they may therein be founded; is sufficiently
manifest even from this, that no part of the whole body, but the Stomach only,
is sensible of the want of meat or drink. In the last degree of a Consumption,
called Marasmus, in which all parts of the body are extremely emaciated, and in
want of nourishment; there is no part, but only the Stomach, touched with sense
of hunger: and in a fever likewise, though almost all parts be parched and
dried by heat, yet none feel thirst, but that to which the faculty of thirsting
peculiarly belongs, which is the Stomach. Certain it is then, that to the
founding of these peculiar Faculties, a peculiar constitution, whether similar,
or organical, and such as is diverse from that in which the faculty of Touching
is founded, is of necessity required: seeing that the sense of Touching is
exquisite in many parts of the body, in which notwithstanding neither hunger
nor thirst is ever felt. Wherefore the sense of Touching is of a different kind
from those of hunger and thirst.

Besides, the pain of the Touching is specifically different from the pain of
hunger and thirst: as every man may observe in himself, if he compare the one
with the other, either at diverse times, or together, in the same organs: if he
estimate them at diverse times, he shall easily distinguish the gnawing trouble
of extreme hunger, from exquisite pain of his stomach: yea it frequently
happens, that vehement pain of the stomach prevents hunger, or extinguishes it;
and on the contrary, that hunger is then sharpest, when the stomach is free
from pain. If he compare them when they are coincident, he shall even then
perceive a manifest difference betwixt the pain of the stomach, and the craving
sense of hunger. Nor is it indeed possible that these sensations should be not
specifically discrepant each from the other; because two Accidents of the same
species cannot at the same time inhaere in the same subject: because one will
necessarily drown the other.

As for the senses of Smelling and Tasting; true it is indeed, that they have
somewhat more of affinity to hunger and thirst, than that of Touching has; for
they both judge of the qualities of the meat and drink, before they are
admitted into the stomach; and hunger has so powerful an influence upon them,
that the taste and smell of the very same viands that are most grateful to an
empty stomach, become loathsome to a full one: and yet notwithstanding this
affinity, they are senses specifically different from both hunger and thirst,
as is most evident even from hence, that they are founded by Nature in organs
of peculiar constitutions, and accommodate to the perception of their proper
objects. Constant therefore it is, that hunger and thirst are querulous senses,
and specifically discrepant from all other senses, and peculiar to the
Ventricle. Which is the proposition here examined.

I add, that they are essentially different also one from the other, though
seated in one and the same organ. But this position being much more nice and
intricate than the former, requires us to consider them apart, that we may the
more distinctly investigate the peculiar nature and proper essence of each.
Begin we then from HUNGER; inquiring (1.) What is the Object of it, and (2.)
What the Constitutions of the Ventricle, wherein it is rooted.

The OBJECT of Hunger is either absent, or present: the former of which is, not
only specifically different from, but in some sort opposite to the later. For,
the present object is displeasing and troublesome to the stomach: the absent,
grateful, and when present, satisfactory.

(1.) The Absent object proper to hunger, I conceive (with our most excellent
Dr. Glisson) to be that nutritive Succulencie or juiciness, which all wholesome
meats contain in them more or less, and which being alterable, is apt to be
changed into Chyle; viz. a certain substance or matter, mild, tender, easily
mutable, abounding in sweet and fixed spirits, not destitute of fatness,
tempered with a due portion of earth, and condited with some salt of its own.
These are the qualities of that matter which I call succulent and nutritive,
and which I hold to be the proper absent object of the faculty of feeling
hunger. For, all aliments contain in them copious spirits, and those for the
most part fixed; which the stomach, by inducing fermentation upon them, excites,
and brings to a certain moderate fluor, that they may more commodiously be
thence transmitted into the milky veins, and become nourishment, partly to the
blood and vital spirits, partly to the spermatic and solid parts of the body.
They all contein also some fat, more or less, in them; which fat, as the Oracle
of experience teaches, is highly profitable to appease the importunity of
hunger, and desirable for nourishment. In fine, they all contein also somewhat
of salt and somewhat of an earthy substance; and without the alloy of these two
ingredients, neither could the spirits conserve their fixation, nor the fat its
sweetness. Now this nutritive Succulency, the proper object of hunger, is said
to be absent, not that it is perpetually so, or that it is not perceived when
it is present; but only because in the principal action of the Faculty, namely
hunger, from which the whole is denominated, it is really absent. Besides, the
utility of things is better understood by the want, than by the full fruition
of them: nor should we take notice, that the stomach perceives the meat
contained in it, and is therewith appeased and satiated; unless we were
sometimes urged and molested by hunger upon the want of meat. However, most
certain it is, that this Object, when present, is always perceived by the
stomach with complacency and delight: and when absent, is much more esteemed:
and therefore the object, in hunger, is justly called absent; and the whole
Faculty as justly defined, Sense of hunger, and Appetite of meat.

(2.) The Praesent object, is that offensive and gnawing kind of pain that
molesteth the Stomach, whenever it wants and craves meat. The formal Reason
of this ungrateful sensation, seems not to consist (as our Master Galen, and
the whole Schole of Physicians ever since his days have taught) in a certain
Suction; for neither can any of the constituent parts of the Ventricle cause
any such motion in it, nor can the Ventricle suck it self, because no natural
Agent can do an action displeasing to it self: but to arise merely from Acid
humors contained in the cavity of the stomach; which by astriction, asperity,
rosion, and fretting of the inmost membrane of the Stomach (as if they
endeavored to draw forth a tincture from it) cause it to feel a kind of
Vellication or gnawing, and to complain to the imagination of the want of that
mild, sweet and nutritive Succulency, that is requisite to mitigate and
extinguish that offensive Vellication, and to induce complacency in the room of
it. And these Acid humors in this manner causing a sense of Vellication in the
Ventricle, seem to be, partly the relics of meat still remaining in the
cavity thereof, partly the sour Phlegm brought with the arterial blood into
the inmost tunic of it, and there separated: of both which we shall have
occasion ere long to speak more opportunely. Mean while, having thus concisely
proposed to your more judicious examen, what seemed to me most probable
concerning the double object of Hunger; I haste to the Constitutions of the
Stomach, in which that offensive sense of want of meat is founded.

These CONSTITUTIONS are (according to the division of the parts of the
Ventricle mentioned in my first Lecture) either common, or proper. The Common
are (1.) The Temperament, (2.) The firm Tone, (3.) The Cavity, (4.) The
Asperity of the inmost coat, (5.) The acute Sensation, and (6.) The Porose or
spongy substance of the same inmost coat of the Ventricle.

Among these, the first place is due to the Temper of the Stomach; upon the
justice of which the natural vigor of this Faculty of craving meat, so
necessarily depends, that if but the influent temper (to praetermitt the insite
or native) happen to be deficient, or depraved; the appetite soon comes to be
impaired or vitiated accordingly. Of this we have an eminent instance in a
fever, which no sooner invades, than it dejects all appetite of meat, inducing
great thirst in the room of it: and the reason seems to be this, that by the
febrile heat of the blood brought into the inmost tunic of the stomach by the
arteries, the acid ferment therein lodged is destroyed. For Acids (ye know) are
apt to extinguish thirst, and all inflammations of the blood augment it, by
overcoming their acidity.

The second is due to the firm Tone of the membranes and fibers of the
Ventricle. For if this Eutonia of the whole organ be any way vitiated, the
appetite of necessity more or less languisheth, flaggs, and vades: because the
stomach, having its fibers relaxed, can neither contract it self enough to
embrace the food it receives, nor be duly sensible of the complacency thence
resulting. For, both the relaxation, and the infirm cohaerence of the tone of
any part, very much diminish the vigor of it, and induce sluggishness and
stupidity instead of it. How requisite to the excitation of a good appetite,
the firmness of the tone of the stomach is, may be collected, not only from the
experience of great Drinkers, who by excessive distension of the coats, by
continual soaking the fibers, and by diluting and rinsing away the Acidum
esurinum (as Helmont calls it) of the stomach; have little or no appetite to
wholesome and nutritive meats, and at length so ruinc the tone of the stomach,
that they become insensible of hunger, and dye languishing, most commonly of
Dropsies (some of the Lymphaeducts being broken in their bellies) or
Consumptions from want of nourishment: but also from our own observation of the
diminution of our hunger, in the heats of Summer, and the reviving of it in
Winter. The reason of which remarkable alteration and vicissitude, seems to
consist in this, that in the Summer, the whole body being as it were dissolved
and enervated by immoderate heat, and the spirits continually exhausted by
sweats and profuse transpiration, the tone of all parts becomes softer and more
lax than it ought to be in the state of health; and consequently the appetite
of the stomach to solid meat, dwindles into thirst: but in Winter, when all
parts are constringed and rendered more dense by cold, the appetite grows
strong again, and craves more of solid meat to satiate it. Which doubtless was
well understood by the wise Author of that vulgar Aphorism (lib. 1. aphor. 15.)
Ventres hyeme and vere sunt natura calidissimi, somnique longissimi: iis igitur
temporibus cibi accessio est adjungenda, etc. and which holds true also in hot
and cold countries compared together. This may be farther confirmed from hence
also, that as all remedies used by Physicians to relieve languishing stomachs,
have somewhat in them of astriction; as wormwood, roses, mint, coriander,
quinces, pomegranates, and generally all acids: so all that soften and relax
the tone of the stomach, weaken the appetite; as syrup of Althaea, violets,
conserve of mallows, oil of sweet almonds, fat pottages, etc.

The third constitution requisite to hunger, is a just capacity of the stomach.
For, if the stomach were not hollow within, it could be neither sensible of
emptiness, nor capable of repletion. If its cavity be not of a just magnitude,
it can neither crave, nor receive a proportion of food necessary to supply the
indigence of the body. Hence it is, that such who have the stomach less than is
fit, are commonly subject to frequent vomitings after full meals: and that on
the contrary, they who have wide and deep paunches, often eat more than they
can digest, and so render themselves liable to surfeits.

The fourth is, a moderate Asperity or roughness of the inmost membrane of the
stomach. For, where this is wanting, as in the Lienteria it always is; there
the appetite continually languishes, till it be wholly extinct. And all
Lubricantia, or things that induce a complanation and slipperiness upon the
inside of the Ventricle, whether they be alimenta or medicamenta, sensibly
blunt the edge of hunger; as Manna, Cassia, Elect. Lenitive, etc. as on the
contrary, all things that conserve or increase the asperity of the lining of
the stomach, as verjuice, unripe fruits, pomegranate flowers and rinds, etc.
whet the appetite.

The fifth is, an acute Sensation of the stomach. For, were the stomach a part
endowed with a dull sense, how could it be sensible of the vellication of
hunger? 'Twas not therefore without singular providence, that Nature made the
inner superfice of the Ventricle extremely tender and delicate, and dispersed
so many nerves (more than can be found in any other part) upon the membranes
composing it; more particularly upon the superior orifice of it, where hunger
seems chiefly to reside. And it has been observed by Physicians, that in what
maladies soever the nerves of the stomach are disaffected by relaxation,
stupefaction, or diminution of the Animal influx from the brain; in the same
the appetite is equally injured and dulled; as in the Lethargy, inveterate
Scorbute, Tabes dorsalis, etc. Manifest it is therefore, that an acute
Sensation is required to the perception of hunger.

So is also (in the sixth and last place) a Porosity or spunginess of the
inmost membrane of the stomach. For if the pores happen at any time to be
filled up with the mucus or dead Phlegm separated from the blood in that
membrane, as usually they are in leucophlegmatic Virgins, and such as are
troubled with the Greensickness; or daubed over with any viscous humor, and
closed up, as in all scirrhose tumors of the Ventricle they always are: in
either of these cases, the Appetite fails, the membrane ceasing to imbibe the
Chyle. Hence most probably it is, that mints, red roses, marmalade of quinces,
and other the like grateful Astringents, which are otherwise beneficial to the
stomach, prove highly noxious, if used by those who have obstructions in it:
when wormwood, wine, steel, and almost all Aperient remedies, in that case
excite and revive the languishing Appetite. Evident therefore it is, that to
complete the reason of Hunger, is required at least a freedom of the inmost
Tunic of the stomach from obstruction.

Having thus run through the Common constitutions of the Ventricle, in which
Hunger is necessarily rooted, we are arrived at the Proper: of which there are
two Organic, and one Similar.

Of the Organic, the first consists in the wrinkles and folds of the inmost
membrane of the Ventricle, which being larger, and capable of greater
distention than the two that invest it, cannot therefore be constringed by
their contraction, without falling into wrinkles or folds. Now this Corrugation
both augments the Asperity of the inner surface of this Tunic, and makes it
more sensible of emptiness, which is a part of hunger, and such a part, without
which the essence of hunger cannot be entire or complete: in both respects not
a little conducing to the more easy and effectual perception of the
vellication of the fibers by the Acid ferment.

The other consists in the nakedness of the same superfice of the inmost
membrane, which renders it more apt to perceive, both the ungrateful gnawing of
the Acid humors, when it is empty; and the grateful juice of meat, while it is
replenished; the very nerves lying bare to the touch of both.

The Similar (and last) constitution proper, wherein hunger is founded, is a
certain praedatory or devouring quality of the same inmost membrane of the
Ventricle, consisting in an acid impraegnation, by which it is adapted to
dissolve, melt, and ferment solid meats, so that being commixt with liquids,
they are changed into a milky broth or Chyle. Here we find an eminent instance
of that vulgar axiom, that Nature takes the most compendiose way to attain to
the ends at which she aims, as often as is possible, designing one instrument
to various effects. For, this very similar constitution, in which the faculty
of hunger is chiefly founded, is the fundament also of the principal faculty of
the stomach, the power of Concoction. And hence it is, that if at any time the
Digestive power happen to languish, the Appetite also grows proportionably dull
and weak; and on the contrary, while that continues in vigor and full energy,
this likewise is quick and sharp: as if they were two stalks shooting forth
from, and dependent upon the same root, they thrive and decay together. True it
is (I confess) that there sometimes occurr to the observation of Physicians
certain anomalous cases, in which this confederation fails; the Concoctive
power of the stomach being much dejected and weakened, while the Appetite is but
little diminished; and on the contrary, the Appetite being weak, where the
Digestion is good and laudable. But this faileur always happens where all the
constitutions, in the syndrome or concurse of which the Appetite of meat is
founded, are not coincident with that constitution, in which the power
Digestive is rooted: in which case commonly men are greedy of, and cramm their
stomachs with more meat, than they can digest, to the great detriment of their
health, and the generation of crudities, the common seminary of many diseases,
the origin of which is to be ascribed to the disproportion betwixt the forces
of these two confederate powers, the Appetite and the faculty Digestive. Let
those therefore, who have this Appetite in excess, to prevent the innumerable
evils consequent to surfeits and crudities, observe the good old rule of rising
from the table before they have satiated it: because in them, Satiety is not
the measure of eating, as it is in others, in whom the faculties of hunger and
concoction are (as they ought to be) aequivalent. For, according to the
institute of Nature,

This Satiety is a certain grateful cessation of the sense of hunger, arising
from a perception of moderate repletion of the stomach with food. For, the
stomach being replete, the sense of inanition immediately cease; because the
inanition it self is then taken away. Besides, the succulency and nutritive
benignity of the meat, foments as it were, and cherishes the nakedness of the
inmost tunic of the stomach, mitigating the querulous sensation of it, and
inducing a complacency in the room thereof: and at the same time, the sour
relics of the former repast, and the Acid Phlegm in the stomach, being
contemper'd by the mild and sweet juice of the meat, gnaw and vellicate the
stomach no longer, but set themselves to act upon the newly received aliment,
and by their acidity to melt and dissolve it. So does also the Praedatory and
Chylific quality of the stomach it self, having new matter whereon to exercise
its corrosive and dissolving energie. So that upon this saturity or repletion,
the stomach soon finds a kind of delightful satisfaction within it self, and by
the mediation of its nerves, communicates that grateful sensation to the brain:
and in this manner the industry of Animals, excited by the sharpness of hunger,
and employed in quest of nourishment, is when they have obtained it, fully
recompensed with the pleasure of repletion.

But the government of this mighty Prince, Hunger, is (as other Empires) liable
to great and dangerous disorders, sometimes too remiss and dissolute, sometimes
corrupt, and sometimes tyrannic: whence arise various diseases and symptoms
that perturb, pervert, and not seldom also subvert the whole Economy of the
body.

These may be commodiously referred, either to the Diminution, or to the Excess,
or to the Depravation of Hunger: to

Diminution, when the Appetite is less than it ought to be: which is commonly
called, by the Graecs, (...), by the Latins, dejectio appetitus, and by us,
weakness or decay of appetite: and divided into Simple dejection, and dejection
mixed with nauseousness or loathing. The former is varied by degrees, according
to the less or greater laesion of the faculty, and the variety of the
constitutions in which the same is founded; as may be easily collected from the
account I have given of those constitutions. The last degree of Diminution is
named by some, (...), prostratio appetitus; by others, (...) sive (...), fames
plane abolita; by others again, (...), simplex carentia famis, but (as has
been well observed by the most accurate Dr. Glisson) improperly, because the
word, (...) signifies rather the cause driving away hunger, than the abolition
of it. In this extreme debility, the Constitutions of the stomach proper to
this faculty are so far infringed and hurt, that they neither perceive the
inanition of the stomach, nor complain of the want of food. The later is
subdivided into Nauseousness or loathing cum materia, whether meat lately
eaten, or vitiose humors congested in the stomach; and sine materia, when the
praedatory constitution of the inmost membrane of the Ventricle, which
consists (as I have said) in Acidity, is alienated from its nature and proper
object; as always it is in fevers, the inflammation of the blood being e
diametro repugnant to that acidity, and inducing insatiable Thirst, in stead of
moderate hunger.

The vice opposite to this, is Augmentation or Excess of hunger; which likewise
afflicts in various degrees, the last of which, is distinguished from the rest
by the peculiar appellation, (...), vehemens fames, and (...), appetitus
caninus. In this exorbitant Affection, the praedatory quality of the Stomach is
highly intended, and becomes outrageous, even to cruelty: and for the same
reason, the Acid phlegm, which the inmost membrane spews out into the cavity of
the Ventricle, acquires a greater and sharper acidity, that even corrodes the
nerves and fibers, like Worms incesfantly gnawing them. Hence the stomach is
afflicted with great anxiety, and by reason of the excessive strength of its
praedatory constitution, devours, digests, dissolves, dissipates and consumes
whatever is brought into it in a trice, and when full, still craves more;
seldom ceasing, till surcharged, it be forced to eject, upward or downward,
what it has lately devoured with insatiate greediness. If therefore any of the
Virtuosi should interrogate me concerning the monstrose Voracity of some
Gluttons, such as were Wood the great Eater of Kent, and Marriot (whom most of
the Seniors here present (I believe) knew, at least by sight) I should venture
to ascribe it, partly to the extraordinary amplitude of the stomach in such
unhappy men; for otherwise where can they have stowidge for so great a mass of
meat, as they usually devour at a meal: but chiefly to a certain piercing and
corrosive Acidity lodged in the cavity of the stomach, that both renders their
hunger insatiable, and dissolves and consumes the meat almost as fast as they
swallow it down. And this Conjecture seems to me the more probable, because
Marriot himself more than once told me, that his Greedy worm (as he called it)
first began to bite him, within two or three days after he had eaten a large
breakfast of a salted gammon of Bacon. For, certain it is, that salt, though
it retain its native favor, while it continues fixed, does notwithstanding,
when brought to the state of fusion, acquire acidity; and that so much the more
sharp and fierce, by how much the nearer it is, by fermentation or heat,
advanced toward the state of volatility: nor is any thing more solenne to
Chemists, than to draw out of salts distilled, liquors acid and corrosive to
the last degree, illustrous examples of which we have in the spirits of common
salt, nitre, and vitriol. Why then may it not be supposed, that the like effect
may be sometimes produced in the body of man? that the great quantity of salt
eaten by Marriot, being partly by the heat of his stomach, partly by
fermentation therein made, brought to a state of fluxility; and commixt with
his blood, be farther advanced to so high a degree of volatility, as to become
extremely corrosive? If this be supposed possible, 'twill not be found
unreasonable to guess, that the Mucus or pituita emortua spewed out by the
arteries into the inmost tunic of his Ventricle, and impraegnate with corrosive
Acidity, might be the principal cause of his excessive Appetite, and of the
quick dissolution and consumption of whatever he devoured. So that in strict
truth, his stomach, not he, was the great Eater; or rather the corrosive
acidity of humors contained in his stomach.

The third enormity incident to this faculty, is Depravation of appetite,
called in the general, Pica, in women with child, Malacia: seldom afflicting
men, frequently women, and among these such chiefly who have either the green
sickness, or great bellies; and proceeding in them a suppressis Catamenus. Which
stagnating circa uterum, and acquiring a peculiar kind of corruption; when they
have therewith infected the whole mass of the b'oud, leave such a vicious
tincture in the Mucus or dead Phlegm thereof, separated from the b'oud in the
inmost coat of the stomach, as that from thence arises a perverse hunger, not
of good and wholesome meats, but of things absurd and uncouth, such as chalk,
loam, charcoal, ashes, unripe and austere fruits, turfs, and other the like
trash. If I do not pursue this extravagant Appetite farther in this place, it is
not because I have no more to say concerning the Conjunct Cause of it; but
because the Law of decency obliges me to be reserved, where the Argument
belongs only to the knowledge of the grave Physician, who alone is priviledg'd
to philosophize chastely (...). Contenting my self therefore with what has been
said concerning the first Action of the Ventricle, Hunger; I proceed to
contemplate the nature of the Second, viz. THIRST..

The Faculty of THIRST is also necessary to nutrition, II. THIRST.
as respecting the Vehicle of solid aliment, whereby it is diluted, and reduced
into a thin and liquid substance, called Chyle. Yea more, a Vehicle is
requisite also in respect of the Blood, which would be of too thick a
consistence, and unfit to perform its circuits round the body, if it were not
now and then diluted by fresh supplies of drink: nor could this Vital Nectar be
commodiously purged and defaecated from various impurities and excrementitious
parts, namely the Bile, salt, tartar, and mucus; unless it were daily rinsed as
it were with a sufficient portion of thinner liquor. For, it is by the help of
our drink alone, that the saline and earthy excrements of our blood are driven
out by urine. Ye may add yet another use of liquids suggested first by Sr. G.
Ent (in Antidiatribae page 28.) in these words* Quo chyli pars tenuior
expeditius [e ventriculo per oesophagum, per viam filtrationis, ad cerebrum]
sursum ascendat, humectatione opus est; quemadmodum in filtratione usu venit:
atque hinc etiam potandi necessitas; sicca enim ascensum hujusmodi frustrantur.
Ideoque ardente febre correpti, quibus lingua faucesque arent, subito
macrescunt. And these are the principal reasons that seem to have induced
Nature to institute thirst, or Appetite of drink, in all Animals.

That this Appetite of drink is seated in the Ventricle, as in its subject, can
not be denied: but that it is confined to the Ventricle only, can not be
granted. (1.) Because drink received into the stomach, does not always mitigate
thirst: and therefore that part of thirst that remains after a competent
quantity of drink, must reside in some other parts vicine to the stomach. For,
it is unconceivable that the stomach, when replete with cold and moist, should
still feel and complain of want of both. (2.) Because they who in fevers are
tormented with insatiable thirst, complain not so much of heat in the stomach,
as dryness and parching of their tongue, throat and gullet. Nay they find more
alleviation and relief from frequent washing of their mouths and throats with
fountain water, small beer, and other convenient liquors; than from all the
cold drink they can pour in. The like solace they find also from holding in
their mouths, such things as any way promote the flowing forth of the Humor
Salivalis or spittle, though they be neither actually cold nor moist in
themselves; such as Prune stones, polisht Crystal, pieces of gold (all which by
their weight and pressure upon the tongue, further the profusion of the
spittle) and sal prunellae, which detained only in the mouth, and there slowly
melted, palliates the thirst. We may therefore conclude, that the adaequate
subject of thirst includes not only the Stomach, but the gullet also, and the
throat, with the tongue: all which are covered with one and the same membrane,
and must therefore sympathize.

The OBJECT of this faculty is (as of Hunger) twofold, Absent, and Praesent.
The Absent Object is in the general, whatsoever liquor is fit to be drunk, and
to satisfy thirst. For we thirst after Wine, Water, Beer, Ale, Whey, Cydre,
and any other delectable juice or tincture whatsoever. But to render any of
these, or any other Potulent matter, the genuine and formal object of thirst,
are required these Conditions following.

(1.) That it be liquid, or fluid, like water. For solid bodies are unapt to
quench thirst, unless they be such as may be melted or dissolved in the mouth,
or by irritation cause the glandules of the mouth to discharge the spittle
sooner or more copiously, than otherwise they would do: which is but to abate
thirst by accident, as a pipe of Tobacco sometimes does, only by bringing rheum
down, that moistens the mouth.

(2.) That it be Humid or moist also, at least effectively. For certainly
whatsoever potulent matter appeases thirst, does some way or other moisten the
parts that were dry and thirsty before. Vinegre and Sal prunellae, though in
some respect they may be said to be cold and dry; yet being taken into the
mouth, may be nevertheless allowed to mitigate thirst, in so much as they
dissolve the viscid and adust humors adhaering to the surface of the tongue,
and open the sluices of the spittle, that were before obstructed.

(3.) That it be thin, penetrating, and in some sort cutting or sharp. Thin it
must be, to irrigate the thirsty parts the sooner: but not too thin, lest it
slide away before it has moistened them, which perhaps is the reason, distilled
waters, without any other mixture, are ineffectual to quench thirst: but a
little thickened with cooling syrups, and contemper'd with acids, they make good
julebs to that purpose. It must be penetrating also, and sharp or acid, to
insinuate the deeper into the membrane which is the seat of thirst, and moisten
more than the superficial parts thereof. For, daily experience teaches, that
thick, viscid, sweet and heavy drinks, rather increase than abate thirst. It
appears then, that the formal reason of drink, in respect of which it is said
to be the absent object of thirst, does consist in its fluidity, humidity,
moderate tenuity, and aptitude to penetrate and cut.

If any accuse me of forgetfulness, for that I have here omitted to list
coldness among the qualities of drink most convenient to extinguish thirst; I
entreat such to take notice, that I did it ex professo: dissenting from this
opinion of the Peripatetics, that the absent object of thirst, is frigidum and
humidum. For, in the Schole of experience I have learned, that drinks actually
hot quench thirst, as well as actually cold; witness those many hundreds of men
now living in this City, who always warm their ordinary drink, and yet are
seldom or never molested with inordinate thirst. And as for drinks potentially
hot; many of them also mitigate thirst: as several sorts of wines, as well
strong and generous, as weak and subacid; as also strong beer, and Hydromel.
Notwithstanding these observations I deny not but liquors, whether actually or
potentially cold, caeteris paribus, are to be preferred by men in health, as to
the extinction of thirst.

The Manner how we become sensible of thirst, seems to be, not positive, but
negative or privative. For the parts in which thirst is placed, perceiving
themselves to be drier than their natural constitution requires, transmit to
the brain, by the nerves, their sense of the want of convenient liquor to
moisten and relieve them: and this sense of want being thus propagated to the
internal sense, whose organ is the brain, instantly stimulates it to desire and
seek after drink, to supply that want.

The Praesent Object, that causes the sensation of this defect of moisture in
the external organ, and more urgently soliciteth the phantasy than the Absent
object does; consists in the adventitious and offensive dryness of the
membrane investing the stomach, gullet, throat and tongue. Which being ordained
by nature to be perpetually irrigated with a certain mild humor; whenever
that irrigation fails, immediately perceives its natural constitution to be
changed, and communicates that ungrateful perception to the nerves, and by them
to the brain. But this Dryness which we conceive to be the praesent object of
Thirst, is not so much a superficial siccity (though that also is perceived) as
a profound and internal in the membrane therewith affected: and in that very
respectclearly differs from that external siccity, that falls under the
perception of the sense of Touching. For the Touch judges indeed of dryness,
but only as of an object occurring from without, not as of an intrinsecal
affection of its own organ, wherewith it is profoundly altered. And hence may
be collected that conspicuous and evident distinction between the sense of
Thirst, and the sense of Touching. The Touch perceives the superfice dry or
moist, of another body: the sense of Thirsting, on the contrary perceives the
internal and profound dryness of its own organ, the membrane in which it
resides. For example, a man in a burning fever, may with his finger feel the
dryness and asperity of his tongue; but not his thirst: nor is the finger, or
any other part of the body, howsoever dry and parched, ever sensible of thirst,
but only the membrane to which Nature has confined the sense thereof. Nor does
this membrane perceive thirst by the same sense of Touching, by which it feels
external objects that touch it, but by a certain faculty proper and peculiar to
it self. Wherein then does that peculiar Faculty consist? Certainly in the
syndrome or confederation of its Constitutions.

These CONSTITUTIONS (as those in which Hunger is founded) are either Common or
Proper. The Common are (1.) Exquisite sensibility, (2.) Tenderness, (3.)
Mobility, (4.) Permeability, (5.) Cleanliness of the membrane or proper organ.
The Proper are the native moistness, the proclivity to dryness, and impatience
of bearing that dryness without anxiety, of the same membrane. Of each of which
Constitutions I shall speak singly, but briefly.

(1.) That the Organ of Thirst is of delicate sense, is evident even from this,
that it is endowed also with the faculties of touching and tasting: for needs
must that part be exquisitely sensible, which is the subject of three several
senses. It was not then for nothing, that Nature made it nervose, and furnished
it with plenty of nerves.

(2.) That Tenderness or softness (which is a quality very near of kin to
sensibility) also is competent to it, is manifest to the Touch; and from hence,
that if it were not easily alterable, by reason of its fine and delicate
contexture, it could not so familiarly be affected by simple dryness, which is
otherwise but a dull and sluggish quality.

(3.) Mobility also, i. e. flexibility and tensibility, is requisite to the
same membrane, in some sort. For, the subtle motions of the tongue and palate,
are sufficiently known from the very articulation of letters; those of the
Gullet, from the deglutition of meat and drink; and those of the stomach, from
its repletion, inanition, ructation, vomiting, etc. And this constitution of it
also is hurt by dryness.

(4.) The Permeability or porosity of this membrane, is in the tongue, palate
and throat very conspicuous, as well from the many little asperities every
where discernable in it, which adapt it to spew out into the mouth, the spittle
which the glandulae sublinguales brings into them: as from this, that (like a
sponge) it imbibes and retains any moisture put into the mouth. And in the
stomach too the same porosity is no less evident from the acid phlegm that is
daily emitted from the arteries through this membrane, as it were by way of
exsudation, into the cavity of the Ventricle.

(5.) Cleanness also is requisite to the constitution of this membrane. For, in
the state of health, it is not polluted with any sordid excrements or
impurities, nor obstructed with humors sticking in the pores of it, nor
discolored with any adventitious tincture, but always neat and clean. And
these are the five common qualifications required in the organ of Thirst.

Of the three Proper, the first is a certain natural Mador or moderate
moistness: for a perpetual supply of which Nature has placed in the mouth, six
conspicuous fountains, the two ductus Salivales, the two Tonsills or almonds,
and two rivulos catarrhales bringing moisture from the brain: and not thinking
those enough, she has superadded innumerable glandulose Asperities in the
tongue, palate and throat, which also with their dew contribute to the
perpetual irrigation of this membrane. And therefore this may be reputed, the
fundamental Constitution, in which the faculty of Thirsting is grounded, and
upon which the two following are superstructed, as complemental additions.

The Second, Proclivity to exsiccation, if it be not ever now and then refresht
with moisture. For the heat in the stomach and gullet, and the vicinity of the
heart, contribute much to this arefaction: and in the mouth and throat, the
dryness of the air inspired, and the heat of the breath expired, concur to the
same effect. But above all these causes, the descent of the Chyle, and Venae
Lacteae, introduce dryness upon the stomach, by exhausting the liquors out of
it, and consequently by renewing the want of fresh drink, to supply the
Universal Latex serosus, which failing, the sources of the Glandulae Salivales,
and other fountains of moisture in the mouth, must soon be exhausted. No wonder
then, if the natural moisture of this membrane, unless now and then recruited,
be apt to fail, and arefaction soon succeed into the room of it.

The third and last, is a certain impatience of dryness, without a querulous
sensation of it. For, since this membrane ought, according to the institute of
nature, to be always moistened; and yet notwithstanding is, for the reasons
newly alleged, apt to be left destitute of its natural moisture; and since it
is, as I have already evinced, of acute sense: it follows of necessity, that it
can not but be sensible of, and impatiently tolerate dryness, which is so
repugnant to its natural constitution. And so at length have we attained to the
knowledge of the reason of Thirst, and of the manner of its Sensation. And as
for the various degrees of it; they arise from the various degrees of
exsiccation, and the shorter or longer continuation thereof.

Having thus found, both the formal reason, and the proxime cause of Thirst; it
follows, that we inquire into the remote Causes of the same. These therefore
may be all referred to six heads, whereof four are General or more remote, and
the other two Particular and less remote. The General Causes are (1.) Too long
abstinence from drink, (2.) Immoderate heat of the body, and chiefly feverish
distempers of the blood, (3.) Defect of the general Latex serosus, (4.)
Diversion of the same Latex from the organ of thirst, to other parts. The
Particular are (1.) Defect of the Latex in the Glands that serve particularly
to supply the membrane with moisture, and (2.) The depravation of the same
Latex by qualities aliene from its natural constitution. Each of which causes I
should particularly have explained, had I not considered, that a simple
enumeration of them may be sufficient to the Learned part of my Auditors, and
that I want time fully to explicate them to the rest. Trusting therefore in the
memory of those, and the equity of these; I here conclude my jejune discourse
of the second action of the Ventricle, Thirst; and following the clew of my
method, pass to the third, viz.

The PERISTALTIC or COMPRESSIVE MOTION of the Stomach.
The appetites of hunger and thirst being satisfied, the III. The PERISTALTIC
Motion of the Ventricle.
Ventricle pleased with that relief, closely embraces the newly received meat
and drink on all sides, spontaneously contracting it self into a narrower
compass, and thereby lessning its cavity, so as to compress the contents: and
this spontaneous contraction is therefore by Galen named in his language,
(...), motus compressivus circumquaque; as the faculty or power by which the
action is performed, is called (...), Facultas circum-constrictiva. The same
Faculty is well defined by Gorrhaeus (a faithful Interpreter of Galen) in these
words; est quae alimentum attractum arcte complectitur, quo melius concoquatur;
ministra est virtutis retentricis, atque inde concoctricis. But this
definition, though convenient to the nature of the thing, so far as it extends,
and to the notion Galen seems to have had of it: is notwithstanding too scanty
to comprehend the formal reason of the Faculty, or to explain the Manner of its
operation. Let us therefore seek farther, in hope at length to discover both.

To found this Peristaltic Power in the stomach and gutts (for we are not now
considering any other of the various cavities in the body, all which are also
endowed with the like power) five things are of necessity required, viz. (1.) A
Cavity or receptacle, (2.) Matter contained in that Cavity, (3.) Tunics or
membranes invironing the same, (4.) Fibers to gird or constringe those
membranes, (5.) Distinct orders, and different texture of those fibers. For, in
what part soever these five constitutions are concurrent, as they certainly are
found in the Ventricle and gutts; that part has a just and clear title to a
Peristaltic power, and may exercise it whenever occasion requires. But the two
last constitutions are those in which the power is principally founded: the
Fibers alone being the active cause of the compressive motion; and the
different orders and texture of them, the causes of the differences of the same
motion. Our business therefore must be, to inquire chiefly into the actions of
the several orders of Fibers formerly described by us in the Tunics of the
Ventricle, from the variation of which the various kinds of this compressive
motion receive their distinction.

This Motion then is observed to be threefold, (1.) Downward, (2.) Upward, (3.)
Partly downward, and partly upward: and the last sort is subdivided into (1.)
That which is performed with a certain Luctation or strife, and (2.) That which
is performed, not only without strife, but with a kind of sport. Besides these
differences, there are yet others subordinate to them. The Peristaltic motion
with strife, is either equal, and then it may be called Tonic or Aequilibrate;
or unequal, and then it is in the yielding fibers, repressing and inverting; in
the prevailing, the Peristaltic motion inverted. The Sportive motion is, from
its use, called, the distributive motion of the Chyle. Moreover all those
different sorts of the Peristaltic motion have their various degrees, by which
also they are remarkably discriminate among themselves: as being sometimes
robust, sometimes languid; one while torpid and sluggish, another while vigorose
and quick; sometimes placid and sedate, sometimes turbulent and tumultuous. And
in handling all these, we are to consider the manner of the conspiracy and
cooperation of three orders of fibers: beginning from the Peristaltic motion
downward, which in the order of nature is praecedent to the motion upward;
because the matter moved must first descend into the cavity of the stomach,
before it can be therein agitated hither and thither. Not that this motion is
to be understood to be downward in respect of the Center of the Earth, but of
the ductus or passage continued from the mouth to the fundament.

This Peristaltic motion downwards being sensibly performed in the swallowing
down of meat and drink, in the descent of the Chyle, and exclusion of the
excrements, is sufficiently demonstrated from those actions: and performed by
virtue of all sorts of fibers.

First, By contraction of the Transverse fibers, which like Zones, making
entire circles, must by shortning themselves, make less circles, and
consequently by drawing the cavity they gird into a narrower compass, compress
and squeez out the matter therein contained, upward or downward. Supposing
then, that they begin their contraction from above, as about the upper orifice
of the stomach; it is necessary they should depress or squeez down the matter
contained in the cavity of it. For, the inferior fibers are supposed to be not
yet vigorated or put into action, but to give way, and to suffer distention
from the matter contained: and this very distention it is, that causes them to
act by restoring themselves to their natural state of moderate laxity. So that
by this means the inferior fibers being successively excited to pursue this
motion from above downward, contract themselves successively, till they thrust
the matter contained quite out of the cavity that contained it.

Secondly, Of the Right fibers, which also conspire to this Peristaltic motion
downward. For, so soon as the Transverse contract themselves from above, they
compress the Right contiguous to them, and thereby incite them to contract
themselves upward, by the spontaneous endeavor of restitution; so that they
pulling the sides of the cavity upward, cause it to forsake the matter
contained, and by that means promote the descent of it. For in this case, it is
all one, whether the matter contained be depressed, or the cavity containing be
drawn upward from it. And this subduction of the cavity or ductus from the
matter contained, answers successively to every descendent contraction of the
Right fibers, until the matter be brought thither, whither Nature ordein'd it
should be detruded. Wherefore this complex motion of Transverse and Right
fibers, may be not unfitly compared to motion of Earthworms crawling upon the
ground. They take hold of the surface of the ground with their foreparts, which
are to that end furnished with little circular asperities, and then shortning
themselves in the middle, draw up their hinder parts toward their foreparts,
and so slide over the ground. Exactly so do the Right fibers withdraw the sides
of the ductus from the matter contained in it.

Thirdly, By the contraction of the Oblique fibers, which contribute their help
too to this Peristaltic motion downward. For, as they obtain a middle situation
betwixt the Tranverse and Right, so they perform a middle Action: partly
depressing the contained matter, partly drawing the sides of the cavity upward;
so cooperating with the Transverse fibers, in the depression of the matter,
with the Right, in the retraction of the cavity. And in this manner all three
orders of Fibers seem to concur to the performance of the Peristaltic motion
downward.

To which the motion Upwards being contrary, and effected by the concurrent
constriction of the very same fibers; the Manner of it must be contrary, viz.
by inversion of order. For, if the contraction of the Transverse fibers begin
from below, and proceed upward, they must press the matter that they gird,
upward: and the Right at the same time put into action first from below, must
draw down the sides of the cavity from the matter therein contained, and
consequently help to impell it upward. And as for the Oblique; they, as in the
former motion, partly assist the action of the Transverse, and partly promove
that of the Right. So that this Peristaltic motion from below upwards, is (as I
said) coincident in all things with the motion from above downward, unless it
be that the order of moving is inverted, and the terms of the motion contrary.

The two contrary Peristaltic motions being thus explained, it is easy to
comprehend the reason and manner of the Mixed motion, which is partly downward,
partly upward; and belongs only to the stomach and gutts. Of this, the most
acute Dr. Glisson has observed three different species; two with luctation,
and a third delightsom: all to be also ascribed to the same three orders of
Fibers (for, as ye may remember, there are no more) but moved in different
manners, and more complexly. First, If it happen, that fibers near in situation
to, but sufficiently distinct from each other, superiors and inferiors, set
upon the work of Peristaltic motion together; and that some by compression
squeez the contained matter downward, others urge it upward: in this case,
there must arise, in stead of a concurrence, a luctation or contention of the
two mutually repugnant forces, and the Peristaltic motion must be Laboriose.

Secondly, That this Luctation may be determined to aequality, or inaequality,
it is requisite the forces or devoirs of the fibers contending, be aequal or
unaequal accordingly. To equality of the forces, are required on both sides
circular fibers shutting or closing the ductus or cavity. For, if the matter
contained, should freely slip away, the scope at which Nature aimed, when she
instituted this motion, would certainly be frustrate, viz. the Retention of the
aliment. Which great inconvenience she foreseeing, wisely provided against it,
by placing strong circular fibers about each of the two Orifices of the
stomach; which seems to be the reason, why in the stomach, and only in the
stomach, this luctation is naturally found Aequal. I say, naturally; because
there may happen to be in the Gutts also the like Aequality, when they are
obstructed both above and below at the same time, so that the matter contained
in the intermediate space can not be propell'd either upward or downward: but
this case is very rare, and preternatural. Notwithstanding this aequal
contention be peculiar to the two Orifices of the stomach, we are not to
imagine it to be so constant, but that somewhat of the Chyle, during the act of
Concoction, or part of the drink also, chiefly if it be spirituose, may now and
then slip out through the Pylorus, being urged by the delightsome strife of the
fibers intermediate between the two orifices. We may therefore conclude, that
this Peristaltic motion proper to the stomach, is rooted, chiefly in the
Annular fibers of its two Orifices, and partly in the fibers intermediate
between them: and we may define the same to be a close comprehension of the
meat in the stomach, so aequilibrate, that the meat can neither slip thence
either upward or downward praematurely, nor remaining there fluctuate.

But many times there happens as well in the stomach, as in the gutts, an
Unaequal and fluctuating Peristaltic luctation; as may be inferred from slow
and difficult Concoction, from wind pent in, from a laborious distribution of
the Chyle, and many other Hypochondriac affects. And in this motion also, as in
the former, the contending fibers are Antagonists, the superior striving on one
part, the inferior on the other: those endevoring to thrust down the matter
contained, these to impell it upward; but with unaequal forces: whence it
comes, that the matter is agitated up and down by a kind of fluctuating motion:
and therefore this Unaequal contention is rightly enough called a Peristaltic
motion Fluctuating. Commonly it praecedes, and portends eructation, vomiting,
praemature descent of the Chyle, torments of the Gutts, colic pains, fluxes of
the belly, and the like symptoms, arising from offensive irritation of the
fibers of the stomach and gutts. The fibers concerned in this turbulent motion,
may be divided into two parties, the Praevailing, and the Yielding. The
Praevailing fibers do, not only suppress, but also invert the Peristaltic
motion of the yielding; yea more, they pursue their victory, till either other
fibers rise up and repel the force of the former, or they themselves, the
irritation by little and little ceasing, become quiet of their own accord. To
explain this by an Example; in the fluctuation of the stomach, if the
Peristaltic motion begin about the upper orifice, it proceeds thence to the
fibrose neck of the lower, and is there, by reason of the strength of those
fibers, repressed and inverted: then the motion ascends by degrees to the upper
orifice, where it is again repressed and inverted downward; nor does the
fluctuation cease, till the wind be by belching discharged, or the cause of the
irritation, whatsoever it be, expelled, whereupon the contending fibers are
appeased, and the war comes to an end. In like manner, if in the gutt Ileum
the Peristaltic motion begin about the Colon, and drives the matter contained
in the Ileon upward; the motion is hardly repressed, till part of the matter be
brought up to the fibrose neck of the Pylorus; and then it is not only stopped,
but inverted. The same may be conceived to happen in the Colon and intestinum
Rectum, in which the two terms of the motion are the Valve of the Colon, and
the Sphincter of the fundament.

The Third and last kind of the Mixed Peristaltic motion, is that which
distributes the Chyle, and which is rather placid and grateful to both stomach
and gutts, than tumultuous or offensive. The manner of this subtle and complex
motion may be conceived from an inspection of the gutts of an Animal newly
killed, and opened while some relics of the vital heat are yet remaining in
them. For one shall see the Gutts variously shortning, wrigling and wresting
themselves, like a heap of Earthworms crawling some over others, and striving
as it were to creep upward and downward by turns; but without a directing
faculty. Now the use of this admirable motion is double, viz. (1.) An aequal
distribution of the Chyle and other matters contained in the stomach and gutts,
(2.) The Agitation of the Chyle it self. For, all things admitted into the
stomach and gutts, require an equal distribution in them; but the Chyle
requires also a peculiar agitation, that it may be in all parts of the gutts
brought home to the very mouths of the Venae Lacteae.

Finally, as for the Gradual Differences of the Peristaltic motion; they are
either simple or complex. The Simple arise from the strength, irritability, and
actual irritation of the three orders of fibers; and therefore cannot exceed
the number of three. For, from the strength of the fibers, the Peristaltic
motion is said to be strong, moderate, or weak: from the various degrees of
their irritability, it is named quick, moderate, or sluggish: from the greater
or less actual irritation, it is called tumultuous, moderate, or sedate. The
Complex proceed from the various combinations of the Simple, and therefore may
be collected from our praecedent descriptions of the same. Let this therefore
suffice concerning the Peristaltic motion of the Ventricle and gutts; and let
us progress to that which many excellent Men, in imitation of Galen, have
called, the Attractive Faculty of the Stomach..

In hunting after Verity in the works of Nature, they IV. The RECEPTIVE power
of the Ventricle.
are of all men most liable to error, who neglecting the use of their own
sagacity, and shutting the eye of reason, follow the cry of Authority, and run
on in the tract of their Leaders, without stopping to examine whether it be
right or not. Of this, we here are fallen upon a remarkable example. For, some
Anatomists, neither few in number, nor of obscure name, blindly adhaering to
the opinion of their Predecessors, as Geese go in a file to the water, have
rashly ascribed to the stomach, I know not what Attractive Faculty, by which
they imagined the meat and drink to be drawn into it, as iron is by the Vulgar
believed to be drawn by a Loadstone: placing this power (forsooth) in the Right
fibers thereof; than which it is not easy to find a grosser absurdity. For,
this supposed Power is neither necessary, nor probable.

(1.) Not necessary; because all meat and drink is brought into the stomach by
Deglutition or swallowing alone; and that action is performed (as we have
formerly demonstrated) not by way of Attraction, but depression and protrusion.
What need is there then of Attraction to do the same work? or is it the custom
of Nature to multiply faculties to no purpose?

(2.) Not Probable; because perhaps there is really no such thing in nature as
Attraction; all motions thereto ascribed, being more truly referrible to simple
impulse. And if there were, the Attraction here imagined, must be either
Similar, or Organic. But that there is no Similar Attraction in the case, is
manifest even from this; that Similar Attraction supposes a certain
congregation or spontaneous concurse of things like to their like: but betwixt
the meat and the stomach is, neither spontaneous coition, nor similitude; nay,
sometimes it happens, that by deglutition are brought into the stomach things
highly ungrateful, and unlike to it, as purging medicaments. Whence we may
safely conclude, that the admission of things into the Ventricle is not
performed by virtue of Attraction Similar, but only of swallowing.

And as for Attraction Organic; here are no instruments fit to effect it. These
Authors indeed are pleased to affirm, that the Right fibers draw down the meat:
but they have omitted to show how. Have these fibers hooks to take hold of
every bit of meat that comes into the mouth? can they, like chords, pull it
down? Should these Litterati seek refuge in the old Peripateric dream of
attraction ob fugam vacui, they could not defend this their opinion: (1.)
Because that fantastic Sanctuary has long since been demolished; (2.) Because
the Stomach can not possibly form any such cavity, as is requisite to introduce
a competent vacuity. For, if it contract its fibers on all sides, it must of
necessity diminish its cavity: and if it relax them, the sides of it instantly
flagging, come together: in both postures excluding vacuity. In fine therefore,
seeing this Attractive Faculty ascribed to the Ventricle, is neither necessary,
nor explicable either by the hypothesis of Similar attraction, or by mechanic
principles, or by the Aristotelean supposition of Natures abhorrence from
vacuity: what remains to support it? Certainly nothing, but the credulity of
those servil spirits, who choose rather to err with their Teachers, than to
recede from them; as if Philosophical doctrines were, like the principles of
Religion, not to be examined, but implicitly believed. Let us then wholly
expunge this Attractive power out of the list of Faculties belonging to the
Stomach, not only as fictitious, but absurd also and impossible.

This was well understood by our incomparable Dr. Glisson, who thereupon
endeavored, instead of this imaginary faculty of attraction, to substitute
another less improbable, which he called the Receptive faculty of the
Ventricle; defining it to be, a certain aptitude of the stomach, by which it
relaxes its fibers, and inlarges its cavity, to receive meat and drink brought
into it, without reluctation: and the Reason that induced him so to do, is
this; that whenever the stomach dislikes the thing to be swallowed, the act of
deglutition is performed with difficulty, and accompanied with nauseousness and
great aversation: but on the contrary, things grateful to the stomach, though
bitter perhaps and unpleasant to the Taste, are yet easily swallowed, and
received by the stomach with complaisance and delight.

Nevertheless, such (I acknowledge) is the dullness of my brain, that I do not
yet comprehend the necessity of this substitution. For, although the stomach
be, by reason of its cavity, apt to: receive meat and drink; it does not
necessarily follow, that therefore this Aptitude deserves the name of a
Faculty: unless ye shall judge it reasonable for a man to say, that because a
sack is capable to be filled with corn, and a bladder with liquor or wind,
therefore they have a Receptive Faculy. A Faculty (ye know) implies an Action;
but the Receptive faculty here spoken of, seems to me to be a mere Passion. Is
it not manifest even to sense, that the stomach is always more or less
distended, in proportion to the quantity of nourishment brought into it? and
whence comes that distension? certainly not from spontaneous relaxation of the
fibers of the stomach, but on the contrary, from their forced extension by the
weight and bulk of the meat and drink admitted. For, no Tensile body whatsoever
can extend it self, because extension is an endevor and degree toward the
solution of its continuity, and therefore repugnant to its nature; and no
natural Agent can act toward its own destruction. The proper and sole action
of all fibers, is spontaneous Contraction, whereby they restore themselves to
their native posture and quiet, so soon as the stretching they suffered,
ceases. How then the fibers of the stomach should come to be able to stretch
themselves in length, I do not understand. And as for the difficult swallowing
of things which the stomach abhorrs, and the nauseousness accompanying it; why
may not that be referred to the praejudice of the Imagination consequent to the
perception of their ungrateful sme'l or taste? the rather, because when Reason
has mastered that praejudice, as it always does in men taking vomits, purges,
and other ungrateful medicaments, even the most unpleasant things are without
difficulty admitted into the stomach. So is Wine also in excessive quantity
poured in by Drunkards, notwithstanding the reluctance of the stomach. So that
it is not constant, that the stomach has a Receptive Faculty, whereby it is
empowered to admit what it likes, and to reject what it dislikes, as this
Paradox supposes it to have. This I have taken liberty to say, not from a
petulant itch of contradiction, not from vain ambition to have the glory of
contending with so great a Champion, but merely from the uncertainty of my
judgment: which induced me to set before you the arguments for and against
this opinion of a Receptive faculty in the stomach, to the end that I might
learn from you, which are the more weighty. Leaving this nice quaestion then to
your decision, I proceed to the fifth action, or,

RETENTIVE FACULTY of the Stomach, V: RETENTIVE faculty of the Stomach.

Which is highly necessary to Nutrition. For, the transmutation of the newly
received meat and drink into Chyle, being not performed in a moment, but a work
of some hours; unless they be retained in the stomach a competent time, till
that work be finished, both the Concoction, and the immediately following
Distribution of the Chyle, without which there can be no Nutrition, must be
imperfect.

This Retentive power seems to me to be wholly Organic, and to consist, partly
in a moderate and gentle Contraction of all the fibers of the Stomach, but
chiefly of those that close the two Orifices of it; partly in a due Asperity of
the inmost Tunic of the same.

(1.) In a moderate Contraction of all the fibers; because otherwise the
stomach could not closely embrace the food while it is concocted, which
requires a Tonic motion of all the fibers, and such a one too, as renders their
forces in a manner equal, in all parts of the stomach; except the two orifices,
where the constriction is stronger and closer, and chiefly in the superior,
which during the whole action of Concoction remains closed even to a point. And
this Contraction must be moderate and gentle, because all violent and impetuose
Contraction, either causes expulsion, or at least makes the retention
turultuose and inordinate; both which equally frustrate the design of Nature in
the work of Chylification. During which the Ring of the Pylorus is not so
closely shut, but that it gives way to liquids to slide down now and then into
the gutts; though at the same time it strictly retains whatsoever is solid, and
not yet converted into Chyle, that it may be farther digested. Nor does it seem
necessary, that liquids should undergo any farther concoction, being in that
form fit to be admitted into the Venae Lacteae; whereas Solids are not fit,
till they have been melted. Which seems to be the reason, why those who drink
the Spa, Tunbridge, and other the like subacid mineral waters, stay not
expecting any concoction of them, but piss them out in a short time after, just
such as they drank them. So do Good Fellows for the most part render their wine
by urine, almost as fast as they pour it into their stomachs, at least much
sooner than it can be digested. And all know, that Wine is no sooner received
into the stomach, but in a moment it enters into the veins, cheers the heart
(as they say) and recruits the spirits, rendering the pulses stronger than
before. From all which instances we may collect, that liquids, chiefly such as
are full of spirits, stay not long in the stomach, but soon slip through the
Pylorus into the gutts, and insinuate themselves into the Venae Lacteae,
leaving the grosser and solid parts of the food behind, to receive farther
elaboration.

(2.) In a due Asperity of the inmost membrane of the stomach. For, as
lubricity and smoothness of any surface favors the slipping away of bodies
touching it: so does the Roughness conduce to their adhaesion. And all
Astringent remedies, unless they some way or other induce a loathing or
nauseousness upon the stomach, as they cause a contraction of the fibers, so do
they corroborate the Retentive faculty of the stomach: whereas on the contrary,
all Lubricantia conduce more to Expulsion, than to Retention. Again, in the
Lienteria there is always too great a slipperiness of the stomach and gutts:
as too great an Asperity in Costiveness. Finally, crude or raw food has
always in it somewhat of asperity; but being praepared by fire, becomes more
soft, tender and slippery. Which may be the reason, why raw meats generally are
more easily retained in the stomach, and such as are thoroughly boiled, baked,
or roasted are more easily expelled: those inducing roughness, these smoothness
upon the parts of the stomach they touch. So that from all these instances it
may be inferred, that to the Retentive power of the stomach, a certain Asperity
in the surface of the inmost coat thereof is required.

To these two Organical Constitutions of the stomach, in which it is apparent,
that the Retentive power thereof is founded, some have added a third, not
Organic, but Similar, and consisting in a certain Complacency or delight, which
the fibers receive from the praesence and contact of the meat and drink. But
this opinion being grounded wholly upon the Hypothesis of Natural Perception,
which yet seems obscure, entangled with various difficulties, and therefore
doubtful; I suspend my assent thereunto, till I shall have learned from you,
whether I ought to embrace, or reject it. Meanwhile I take liberty so far to
justify this my suspense, as to allege a reason or two in defense of it.

That not only the stomach, but all other sensile parts of the body are, from
the very first moment of their formation, naturally endowed with a certain
power, by which they distinguish what is grateful and profitable, from what is
ungrateful and noxious; and which is the cause of all those motions and actions
by Physicians generally and truly ascribed to irritation; is most certain, and
to all men that consider Human nature* evident even from these arguments
following.

(1.) In an egg, the very Vesicula pulsans, before it is formed into a heart,
and a day or two before any the least rudiment of brain or nerve can be
discerned; if it be, though never so gently, touched with the point of a needle,
does instantly contract, and (like the sensitive plant) shrink in it self, as
feeling the hurt done to it.

(2.) And the first model or draught of the Embryon, while it appears to be a
mere mucilage or gelly, before there is any distinction of members, and when
the brain is yet nothing but clear water; if it be in any part likewise pricked,
contracts, and wreaths it self, like a maggot or caterpiller: demonstrating to
the eye of the Spectator, that it feels the puncture, and endevors to avoid it.

(3.) After the whole work of Formation has been consummated, from the hour of
our nativity to that of our death, there are performed within us many secret
motions and actions, which are by Physicians (for distinction sake) called
Natural, because they are done, not only without our knowledge or direction,
but even against our will; so that we cannot moderate, accelerate, retard, or
inhibite them, as being independent upon the regimen of the Brain: and yet
notwithstanding this independency, they must proceed from some kind of
Sensation, by which the parts wherein they are done, are incited, irritated and
altered. For instance; in the Heart it self there often happens great disorder
of its motions, causing palpitations, tremblings, convulsions, faintings,
swounings, and various alterations of the Pulse, in magnitude, celerity,
rhythm, etc. and all from some morbifick matter offending the fibers, and
hurting their natural sense. For, whatsoever by its own motions endevors to
deliver it self from offenses and harms, must certainly be endowed with a power
to perceive or feel them.

Nor is the skin it self destitute of this distinct faculty. For, Experience
convinces us, that it easily distinguishes a venenate or poisonous prick, from
a simple one; and thereupon constringeth it self, and becomes more dense, so
that an inflammation and burning Tumor arises from thence; as may be observed
in the invisible punctures made by the sting of a Wasp, the tooth of a Spider,
or the proboscis of a Gnat. To be the more ascertained of this, our most
sagacious Dr. Harvy made a pretty experiment upon himself, and has left it
upon record in 56. exercitat. of his incomparable Book de Generat. Animal. I
pricked my hand with a needle, says he; and soon after rubbing the same needle
against the tooth of a Spider, I thrust the point of it into my hand in another
place: nor could I perceive any thing of difference betwixt the two little
punctures. But in the skin it self there was somewhat that discerned betwixt
them. For, in the place where the venenate prick had been made, the skin soon
contracted it self into a little hard tumor, accompanied with redness, great
heat, inflammation, and acute pain; as if it fortified it self against the
invading enemy, and strove to expugne it.

To come to the stomach, our praesent subject; this part also, and the gutts,
being offended and provoked by ill humors, often raise great commotions,
nauseousness, belching, vomiting and fluxes of the belly: and as it is not in
our power, at pleasure either to suppress, or to promote those disorders; so
neither do we know any sense depending upon the brain, that can exstimulate
those parts to such violent and tumultuous actions. It Is wonderful even to a
Philosopher, that a little of the infusion of Crocus Metallorum should produce
such strange commotions in the stomach. We can not distinguish that infusion,
from good Sack, by the taste; nor perceive any trouble or offense in swallowing
it: and yet there is in the stomach a certain sense that soon discerns the
Antimony from the Wine, that abhorrs it, and incites the stomach with all its
forces to eject it by vomiting. Hence also it is perhaps, that Alum, Vitriol,
Salt of Vitriol, and (sometimes) Salt of Steel; though by their astriction they
augment the asperity of the inmost membrane, and the contraction of the fibers
of the stomach (which are the two Organical Constitutions, in which the
Retentive power of it is, according to my opinion, wholly founded:) are
observed notwithstanding commonly to excite vomiting; and this only, because
they have somewhat in them that is highly ingrate and offensive to the natural
sense of the stomach.

Now from these Arguments and particular instances (to omit others of the like
importance in other sensile parts of the body) it seems most evident, that
there is in us a certain sense of Touching, that cannot be referred to the
common sense, nor belong to the jurisdiction of the brain; and therefore is
rightly distinguished from the Animal sense of Touching. Such a sense we
observe in Zoophytes or Plant-animals, the Sensitive plant, sponges, and the
like. And as Physicians teach, that Natural actions differ from Animal: so with
equal reason may we say, that this Natural sense of Touching, whereof we are
not conscious; differs from the Animal sense of Touching, whereof we always
are conscious; and that it constitutes a distinct species of Touching.

This, manifest from its effects, but perplexingly obscure in its origin and
essence, Campanella (who wrote large and most subtle Commentaries concerning
it, now almost neglected) and our Excellent Dr. Harvy called by the name of
Tactus Naturalis: but their Equal, Dr. Glisson, coming after to consider the
thing more Metaphysically, and founding the very life or substantial Energie of
Nature wholly upon the same, denominated it Perceptio Naturalis, thereby to
distinguish it from all the Senses, as well internal, as external; from which
he will have it to be really different, as for many other Reasons (alleged in
cap. 15. lib. de Vita Naturae) so chiefly for this; that it is not immediately
communicated to the Brain, or Common Sensory, as Nature has instituted that
all Sensations of the Organs of the External Senses should be communicated,
before the act of Sense can be complete; though the same Natural Perception may
be, and often is, by various degrees, changed into Sense.

Now therefore, that I may draw all the lines of this Digression quite home to
the Center of my praesent scope; that there is such a thing as Natural Feeling
or Perception, I acknowledge: that the name of Natural Perception is more
distinctive, and therefore more proper, I confess: I grant also, that this
discerning faculty is, by the immense bounty of the Omnipotent Creator,
conferred upon all the sensile parts of the body, and among these upon the
stomach in a high degree: I farther grant, that by virtue of the same, the
Retentive Faculty of the Stomach may be, in some cases, much aided and
promoved: All these things I hold my self obliged to concede. What then remains
to be the subject of my doubting and suspense? Two things there are, which yet
I can not bring my weak reason to admit, though they have been, and with strong
arguments too, asserted expressly by a Man, whose doctrine I often follow, and
whose authority I venerate.

The First is, that not only the sensile parts of Animals, but this inanimate,
yea, every single particle of Matter in the Universe, is from the Creation,
endowed with this faculty of Natural Sense, or Perception, (call it what ye
please) and with its inseparable Adjuncts, natural Appetite and Motion. For,
who can believe, that any part of this dead body has a perception of the knife
of the Dissector, and that the fibers of the flesh suffer as much of irritation
from the solution of their continuity now, as when the body was animated by a
soul, and they were invigorated by the heat of the arterial blood, and the
influence of the vital spirits? Who can be persuaded, that a marble pillar,
when knocked with a mallet, feels as much pain, as the limbs of an Animal, that
is beaten with a cudgel? And yet both these things must be true, if the
supposition of Natural Sense or Perception be so. What then shall I do to
extricate my thoughts from the perplexing difficulties of this Aenigmatic
Paradox? My Curiosity urges me to examine them, my Understanding is unable to
solve them, and the Theorem is most noble in it self. Wherefore my desire of
Knowledge will be alone sufficient to excuse me, if despairing of satisfaction
from my self, I humbly seek it from the Oracle of your more discerning
judgment.

The Other (more nearly touching the point in quaestion) is this. I do not
perceive any necessity, why Natural Perception should be brought in to concur
with the two newly explained Organical Constitutions of the Stomach, in which
the Retentive Faculty thereof seems to me to be wholly founded. For (1) that
placid quiet which the Stomach is observed to enjoy, when satiated with good
and wholesome food, may arise only from the cessation of the anxiety and trouble
it suffered from the vellication or gnawing of Hunger; the biting Acidity of
the Fermentum Esurinum being now blunted by the benign juice of the Aliment
newly received. After which, the fibers, that before were irritated, gently and
placidly restore themselves to their natural posture (as all other Tensil
bodies also do) and therein attain to quiet and ease. So that the Complacency
of which the stomach is then sensible, seems referrible to the Sense of
Touching, common to all sensile parts of the body. For, if Hunger be an
ungrateful Sense of emptiness or want of food; why should not Satiety be a
grateful sensation of the supply of that want? since contraries are ever
comprehended sub eodem genere. (2) But were the Complacency transferred from
Sense to Natural Perception, yet would it not be necessarily consequent, that
therefore the same is required to consummate the Retentive faculty, because
usually the meat is retained in the stomach a good while, some hours, after the
complacency cease; and therefore the Retention seems, not to depend upon it.
And this may be confirmed from hence, that it is observed, that by how much
more delicate and grateful to the stomach the meat received is, by so much the
less while it is therein retained. Now these are the reasons that withhold me
from assenting to that opinion, which places the Retentive power of the
stomach, chiefly in the Natural Perception of it. But whether they be of weight
enough to justify my suspense, or not; I leave to your determination; and here
turn over leaf to a new lesson, viz.

The CONCOCTIVE Faculty of the Ventricle.
WHICH, according to the order of Nature, is VI. The CONCOCTIVE Faculty of the
Stomach.
next to be considered; for all food is swallowed, received, and then retained
by the stomach, in order to its concoction or conversion into Chyle.

That this operation is, not organic (as we have shown all the praecedent to
be) but wholly Similar, is sufficiently evident from hence; that the Chyle it
self, when confected, is similar; and all the Actions, by which it is made
Chyle, are so too: nor dos the Cavity of the Stomach contribute more to this
work, than a pot does to the boiling of the flesh, that is put in it over the
fire.

Most true it is nevertheless, that the Organ in which the work of
Chylification is performed, is principally the Ventricle, in which the
Concoctive power is most vigorose, and to which Nature has committed the most
difficult part of the whole operation. I say Principally the Ventricle; because
I would not wholly deprive the Gutts of their right to the like power of
changing aliments into Chyle, though they do it less efficaciously than the
stomach, and as it were at second hand; that is, if any part of the Chyle
happen to descend into them not perfectly elaborate, they farther concoct it,
finishing the work the stomach had begun. Hence it is worthy our observation,
that the Chyle taken in by Venae Lacteae immediately from the stomach, is
thinner and more spirituose, than that imbibed from the Gutts; and that
received from the superior Gutts, thinner than that exported out of the
inferior; and in fine, the thickest is conveyed out of the Colon, and
intestinum rectum. So that we may conclude, the stomach is the primary seat or
place of Chylification, and the Gutts, the secondary.

Having thus easily found, what kind of operation the conversion of meat and
drink into Chyle, is; and where it is performed: we are in the next place
diligently to inquire (1.) What are the capital Differences of Aliments to be
concocted in the stomach; (2.) What various Mutations or Alterations the food
ought to undergo, before it can be brought to the requisite perfection of
Chyle; and (3.) What are the Causes, by which those Mutations are effected. And
these are the three general heads of this our disquisition.

As for the FIRST, viz. the differences of Aliments to be digested; it is well
known, that all our food is either Meat or Drink, solid, or liquid; and all our
drink, either spirituose, or watery.

That all Potulent liquors require less coction in the stomach, than solid
meats, is not to be doubted; because they serve rather to dilute the thicker
aliments, and give them a consistence requisite to their conversion into Chyle,
than to nourishment: and because daily Experience teaches, that by how much the
thinner and more penetrating, or diuretic they are, by so much the sooner they
pass by urine, without any notable alteration; as we have already declared of
the Spa and Tunbridge waters: and spirituose or vinose drinks, (caeteris
paribus) are sooner digested, than such as are not vinose; yea more, they are
justly preferred for their virtue to promove and accelerate the digestion of
other things. The reason of which perhaps is, as well because their spirits
augment the influent heat of the stomach, as because they soon grow acid, and
so quicken the activity of the dissolving ferment therein contained. For, most
certain it is, that all wines turn acid, almost as soon as they are received
into the stomach; because by the Fermentation therein made, their sweet and
more fugitive spirits are dispersed in a trice: and those being gone, the
relics soon grow sour, from the operation of the acid ferment upon them; and
by that newly acquired sharpness, further concoction.

Liquid or spoon-meats also, as pottages, milk and the like, are sooner and
more easily digested, than solid: because their nutritive parts being actually
dissolved aforehand, they require only a light elevation of their spirits, by
the fermentation of the stomach, to make them perfect Chyle, and fit to be
admitted into the Venae Lacteae. Provided, that if they be of a thick
consistence, as pap, barley cream, frumentry, gellies, buttered eggs, and such
like, they be first diluted with drink, that they may more easily pass into the
milky veins.

Solid meats are, as of greatest nourishment, so most difficult of digestion.
For, they must pass through all the various Alterations requisite to the
concoction of any Aliment whatsoever, before they can be brought to the state
of perfect Chyle. While they remain in a solid form, it is impossible for them
to enter into the inconspicuous mouths of the Venae Lacteae: and therefore it
is necessary, they should be melted, and reduced into the form of liquor, at
least that the tincture drawn from them may be such, before they be offered to
them..

Now those various ALTERATIONS requisite to the perfect concoction of solid
meats, are (besides those that are common also to liquids) but two, viz.
Liquation, and Extraction of Tincture.

By the first, they are dissolved into a kind of Gelly or Mucilage. For, bread
is by digestion turned into a papp, and the softer parts of flesh into a gelly
or Consumme. The harder parts of neither are wholly dissolved, but for the most
part commixt with the Excrements of the belly, voided whole. Hence it is, that
experienced Nurses judge of the good or bad concoction of Infants, from
inspection of their stools. For, if they therein discern any relics of flesh
undissolv'd, they truly conclude from thence, that their digestion is
imperfect, and that food of easier concoction is more convenient to their weak
stomachs, and accordingly abstain from giving them flesh, till they are more
able to digest it.

By the other, the Tincture of solid meats is extracted: and this Alteration is
competent to such tough and stubborn meats, as refuse to be dissolved. Some
things indeed are now and then swallowed down, that by reason of their
hardness, are incapable either of dissolution, or of yielding any tincture;
such as Cherrystones, the kernells of grapes or raisins, etc. but these deserve
not to be reckoned among Aliments, nature always rejecting them whole and
unchanged, among the Excrements. And these are the two requisite Alterations
proper to solid meats: besides which, there remain yet three others common to
both solid and liquid. Of these

The First is Dilution or through-mixtion of them with the drink; without which
even liquids themselves, if of a consistence tending to thickness, could never
be transmitted into the Venae Lacteae. To this Dilution of solids is required,
at first a small quantity of liquor: because a large draught in the beginning
of a meal, does dissolve, not the whole substance of the meat, but only the
more tender and thinner parts of it, and extract them by way of tincture,
leaving the rest untouched. But after the substance of the meat has been
eliquated into a gelly, a larger proportion of drink is requisite to give it a
thinner consistence. On the contrary, to the Extraction of a tincture, a
copious Menstruum (as Chemists well observe) is required. Which our skilful
Farriers and Grooms having from experience learned, keep their Horses from
water for an hour or two after they have eaten their oats. It Is therefore a
good rule for conservation of health, to drink sparingly in the beginning of a
repast; and freely toward the end of it, when the meat has been dissolved, and
requires to be farther diluted.

The second is, an Exaltation of the spirits of the meat to the degree, not of
Volatility, but Fusion, that they may be more easily admitted into the Venae
Lacteae, and passing thence into the blood, serve to recruit the vital spirits.
For, the proper office of the stomach is, to make of the food a permanent
liquor, not fugitive vapors, that would inflate and torment it: and that
permanent liquor ought to be replete with gentle spirits, that the vital
spirits, which are continually dissipated and consumed, may be from thence
supplied. Whence we may collect what the reason is, that Wine and all vinose
drinks do less require this alteration, than other liquors, viz. because their
spirits are in the state of fusion before they are admitted into the stomach,
and so need but little farther elevation.

The third and last Alteration common to both solids and liquids, is an
Assimilation in some measure of the nourishment to the nature of the body to be
thereby nourished; at least a bringing of it nearer to the constitution of the
body. For, by how much the more of similitude is betwixt two bodies, so much
the more easily is the one transmuted into the other. Of this Assimilation are
two parts; of which, one takes away the qualities of the food that made it
unlike to the constitution of the body assimilant; the other introduces new
qualities more agreeable and conform to it. The first is destructive of the old
form; the second eductive of a new one. The destructive part consists in, first
a gradual debilitation, and then a total subduing or taming of the relics of
the former seminal impressions of the aliments: in all which there certainly
remain some vestigia or prints as it were of their pristine form, which may
properly enough be called their seminal impressions: and these are to be at
least so far subjugated, as to leave the matter capable of, and disposed to
admit new specific impressions. Not that it is necessary they should be utterly
abolished or eradicated, which perhaps is more than either the acid serment, or
heat of the stomach, or both together can do. For, in all Aliments, Vegetables
or Animals, there are (...) (as Hippocrates de prisca Medicina, calls them)
certain indelible characters, or insuperable qualities, that may be as it were
tamed or kept under, but can never be totally destroyed. Our meat indeed is
cookt by fire, broken into small pieces by our teeth, softened by the liquor
salivalis, boiled in the stomach, melted by the acid ferment, exagitated by the
peristaltic motion of the gutts, and therein farther elaborated, and separated
from its dreggs, squeezed into the milky veins, thence transmitted into the
common receptacle, thence propell'd by the Chyliferous pipes into the
subclavian veins, and so mixed with the blood, exagitated again by the motions
of the heart, and impraegnated with vitality by the powerful energy of the
vital spirits; all these alterations, I say, it does undergo, and yet
notwithstanding it still reteins much of those invincible relics of its
former nature, which the Chemists have named, mediae vitae characteres, and
others, Seminales impressiones. And hence it is, quod omnia animalia sapiant
alimenta quibus vescuntur, All Animals, however praepared or cook't, still
retain some savor, some ragoust of their usual food: as Birds that live upon
little fishes, yield a sishy Haut-goust; and the flesh of Swine fed with
Sea-Onions, is apt to cause vomiting in the Eaters of it, etc. Wherefore by
this last act of Concoction, we are to understand only such a change of the
Aliment, as renders it more familiar and assimilable to the nature of the parts
of the body therewith to be nourished: for, a perfect Assimilation is not to be
expected, till the same shall be intimately united with them. Nor is
Chylification, what many have conceived it to be, an absolute Metamorphosis of
the Aliment, or corruption of its first form, and change of it into a new
species; there seeming to be no such thing as Corruption in the case, but an
Exaltation rather, or Melioration of the nature of the food, by advancing it
from the state of fixation, to that of Fusion, that it may be praedisposed to
its succeding conversion into blood and the Succus Nutritious. True it is
indeed, that the meat is sometimes corrupted in the stomach, by vicious humors
therein contem'd and depraving it, and by various other causes: but it does not
from thence follow, that absolute Corruption is necessary to the praeparation
of the Chyle; but rather that the meat, if by accident it be absolutely
corrupted in the stomach, is thereby rendered unprofitable to nutrition for the
most part. True it is also, that the dreggs of the Chyle, being by way of
Degradation from their former nature, changed into Excrements, put on a new
form in the Colic Gutt, and differ in specie from that part of the meat out of
which they are made: and yet notwithstanding, we can not from thence rightly
infer, that the Chyle, which is by a perfective motion gradually meliorated,
is necessarily changed also into a new species, before it can actually nourish.

Is no part of the Aliment then, in the act of Chylification, metamorphosed
from one species to another? I conceive not; unless the Version of the Acidum
Vegetabile in salsum Animale, be accounted a Specific Mutation. If so, then
this must be excepted from the general rule. For, certain it is, and
acknowledged even by Chemists themselves, that Vegetable Salt, such as is
usually extracted from Plants, is no where to be found in the bodies of
Animals; neither in their blood, nor in urine, nor in flesh, nor in bones,
hairs, nails, etc. and therefore very probable, that every Acidum Vegetabile is
transmuted in Salsum Animale, either in the stomach, or in the descent of the
Chyle into the Gutts, or soon after. Nor is it (in my poor judgment at least)
a thing of small moment, or lightly to be regarded, that all parts of all
Animals, are composed of a Saline principle, of a diverse nature from that of
either Vegetables, or Minerals; yea more, that the Saline, volatile spirits of
Animals, come much nearer to the nature of Sal ammoniac, than to that of Salts
Vegetable, or Mineral. But whether these saline spirits of Animals may in all
things be consistent with the Nitro-aereous spirit asserted by the ingenious
Dr. Mayow; may with good reason be doubted. For, although it be said, that this
Nitro-aereous spirit does, in passing through the Lungs, put on the genius of
Animal Salt: yet it remains still to be inquired, why Nature should ordain that
spirit to be fetched from without from the Air, which Animals have in
abundance within them, in the Aliments praepared in themselves. This nicety
therefore I leave, as I found it, doubtful: and proceed to inquire, Whence it
is, that the Stomach infects all meats and drinks with Acidity.

This requisite and remarkable quality seems to be superinduced by the Stomach
upon the newly received aliment, by four several ways, viz.

(First) By educing and separating the sweet and benign spirits of the
Aliments, from the grosser parts of them; and then either absorbing them into
its Venae Lacteae, or transmitting them by the Pylorus into the Gutts, or
dissolving them into wind. For all nutritive juices whatsoever, so soon as the
sweet and easily dissipable spirits, that praeserve them, are exhaled, grow
acid: as is commonly observed even in Milk, whose fugitive spirits being for
the most part drawn forth by the stomach, and thence discharged by belching;
the remaining part soon acquires to it self somewhat of acidity. But the truth
is, this Eduction of spirits, though it make way for acidity to succeed, does
not yet produce it in that degree which we frequently perceive in very sour
belchings: and therefore we are obliged to advance to the

Second Cause, which consists in this; that the stomach turns liquors sour, by
bringing their Saline principle or element, to the state of Fusion. For, this
Saline Principle, while it remains fixed, retains its saltness: but being
advanced to the state of fusion, soon becomes acid, and that so much the more
fiercely, by how much the nearer it is promoted to Volatility. Whence it is,
that meats and drinks long detained in the stomach, are observed to acquire
vehement acidity. So likewise when any of the Glandules, that serve either to
secretion, or to reduction, have, by reason of their obstructions, long
detained in them the humors that remain to be carried off, after the
distribution of the Succus nutritious; they cause them by that means to grow
more and more acid by degrees, to the no small detriment of health. Of this we
have a remarkable Example in sharp and acid Catarrhs; which seem to owe their
origin to the recrements of the brain and nerves, longer than is fit retained
in the Glands destined to their secretion and exportation; and by reason of
their stagnation, grown acid; and which sometimes become so extremely sharp, as
to corrode and ulcerate the Tonsills, throat, nose and other parts they touch.
Of this way of converting the fixed salt of mixed bodies into an Acid, only by
Fusion, I should here have said much more, had I not saved my self that labor,
by explaining the same expressly and copiously in the seventh Chapter of my Book
de Scorbute, where I endevor to trace out the Genealogy of that sort of
Scorbute, which seems to arise from the praedomination of Acid Humors.
Referring therefore the unsatisfied to that discourse, I shall add only this
necessary advertisement; that this seems to be the cause, why the relics of
the former meal often contract so great a sharpness, that if they chance to be
thrown up by vomit, they set the very teeth on edge, and excoriate the throat
by their cutting sowrness; and that the natural use of this acid liquor in the
stomach, is that, as a kind of Menstruum, it may serve to dissolve the solid
meat, or at least to extract a tincture of it the sooner. For, so far is it
from being nutritive, that it is on the contrary, a great depraedator, if
considered apart by it self, and not mitigated by commixture with the sweeter
parts of the Chyle. It cannot then be designed by Nature, as requisite to the
natural constitution of the Chyle, but only as a fit instrument for the
dissolution of solid food. Which is abundantly confirmed by the very taste of
the Chyle, which in its natural state, is always sweet.

(Thirdly) The stomach produces this Acidity, by mixing with the newly received
meat, both the acid relics of the former meal remaining in it, and the acid
Phlegm brought into it from the arteries. Which mixture is yet so far from
conducing to the perfection of the Chyle, that it rather renders the same so
much the more impure. For the Venae Lacteae admit not the Chyle, until the pure
and sweet part of it has been separated in the Gutts from the acid: as appears
from the sweet and mild taste of the liquor contained in them. Which is another
argument, that the Acidity contracted in the Stomach belongs not to the nature
of the Chyle, but is requisite only to the dissolution of the solid meats.

(Fourthly and Lastly) The stomach induces acidity, by this, that the
principles or elements praedominant in its native constitution, namely hungry
spirits and a sharp salt, being actuated and instigated by the vital influx,
act powerfully upon the newly admitted aliments, and (according to the manner
of all natural Agents) endevor to assimilate them to their own nature, i. e. to
imbue them with their qualities. To effect this, It Is necessary they should
promote the fixed salt of the food, to the state of Fusion: which being once
achieved, that sat soon grows acid, and comes near to the sharpness of
Vinegre, if it be a Vegetable salt, such as is contained in bread, sugar,
honey, beer, wine, and almost all sorts of drink. For, Flesh indeed does not
with equal facility turn sour, nor suffer its spirits to be so soon exalted.
Whence we may learn, that to put flesh into ale, beer, wine, or any other
drink, in hope to render the liquor more nutritive and strong, is a vain thing;
because it communicates to the liquor, little or nothing of its nutritive
virtue. And in the stomach, all flesh is sooner or later dissolved into a kind
of gelly, or at least leaves a strong tincture in the drink commixt with it:
and if detained too long therein, it becomes salt, egre or rancid; the fixed
salt of it being fused, acquiring acrimony or rancor, rather than acidity. But
this happens, not in the natural state of Concoction, but when the stomach is
by some error committed in diet, hindered from doing its office rightly.

From what has been here said, concerning the four Causes of the Acidity
induced upon the Aliment, by the stomach, in the act of Chylification, we may
collect, That all food consisting of Vegetables, passes through three several
States or Conditions, before it is brought to the perfection of Chyle, first it
is made Acid, then salt, and at length sweet. How it comes to acquire to it
self the first and second of these Qualities, we have already seen. It remains
then to be inquired, How the Chyle comes in fine to be sweet.

To solve this Quaestion, it is requisite I should advertise you, (1.) That the
Acidity of which we have been speaking, is not vehement, but gentle and little;
and consequently the Saltness into which it is resolved, is likewise but gentle
and weak: for, both are to be distinguished, as well from the acid relics of
the former meat, as from the dissolving ferment of the stomach, neither of
which are hardly ever elaborated into good Chyle. (2.) That this gentle Acidity
when it is converted into as gentle saltness, loses it dominion to the fixed
spirit of the meat, which now advanced to the middle degree of Fusion,
over-powers and conquers it: and yet this praevailing saltness is no more, than
what may just serve to a due conditure of the Chyle. For, as it did not abound
in the food before concoction; so neither does it exceed that proportion after
in the Chyle, there being nothing of new salt added to it in this mutation. As
therefore, in the ripening of Fruits, there intervenes an Acid taste betwixt an
Austere or Styptic and a Sweet; and yet nevertheless, as the spirits of the
fruits attain to maturity, that Acid taste gives place to the succeding Sweet:
so it seems probable, that in the Concoction of the stomach, the meat, its fixed
salt being fused, and substance melted, does first become acid; and soon after,
its spirits that lay bound up and idle, being excited, become sweet again, or
is digested into a sweet juice. And this in short is the most rational account
I have hitherto met with, of the reason and manner how the Chyle at length
comes to be sweet, after the several changes it has suffered in the stomach.

But What becomes of the Acid relics of the meat, and of the saline
dissolving Ferment of the Stomach? I answer, that as to this particular, I am
of their opinion, who hold, that the volatile parts of those Relics, being
transmitted out of the Ventricle into the Gutts, and therein exagitated, are
received into the milky veins together with the Chyle, as of further use to the
blood it self: and that the gross and unactive parts, mixed with the
unprofitable residue of the Aliments, are excluded with the Excrements of the
belly. For, as to the Volatile parts; they seem fit to be inservient to Nature
even in one of her noblest actions, the generation of vital spirits in the
blood: which in all Animals consist, partly of saline spirits, partly of
Sulphurous. For, in no part of any Animal has hitherto been found any such
spirit, as that which is drawn from Plants after fermentation. This is well
known to those Philosophers by fire (as they call themselves) who have long
sweat in extracting the spirits of blood: and yet notwithstanding have never
been able, after all their pains and taedious processes, to draw any thing from
thence, but a certain salt spirit, not much different from the spirits of
Urine, of Hartshorn, or of Sal Ammoniac; unless that perhaps it was somewhat
more subtle, less acrimonious, and less ingrate. And certain therefore it is
(as I before affirmed) that whatsoever of Acid salt has not been actually
converted into salt in the stomach, is soon after, when the Chyle arrives at
the Gutts, changed into Animal Salt; no such thing as Vegetable Salt being to
be found in any part of any living creature..

Having now at length, (with more of haste perhaps, than of satisfaction to my
Auditors) run through all the general Differences of Aliments to be concocted,
and all the various Alterations they undergo in the stomach, before they can be
brought to the perfection of good and profitable Chyle: we come next to the
Third Head of our praesent Disquisition, viz. the CAUSES of those Alterations.

WHICH, though many and of various kinds, may nevertheless be commodiously
enough reduced to two general Classes or Orders; viz. such as are Foreign, or
Extra-advenient to, and such as are Indigenary or Inbred in the stomach.

To the First classis belong all things that any way conduce to the promotion
of Concoction, either by praevious Alteration of the Aliments, or by fortifying
the stomach.

Of those that remotely conduce to the work of Concoction only by Praeparation
of the food; some correct the Crudity of it by the help of fire, namely by
boiling, roasting, frying, or baking: others render it more mild and tender by
maceration, in brines, lixivia's, pickles, vinegre and the like: others make
the Aliments more familiar by way of hastening their Maturation: and others
again intenerate, and dispose them to dissolution, by mixture of some wholesome
and agreeable Ferment. Where it may be observed, that whatsoever Aliments,
whether solid, as bread, or liquid, as wine, beer, ale, hydromel, etc. that
have undergone Fermentation, before they are received into the stomach, invite
other Aliments, with which they are therein commixt, to fermentation. Hence it
is, that good wine, strong beer, vinegre, bread made light by leaven, and the
like, help very much to digestion.

Those that do so by corroboration of the stomach, are Peptic or Digestive
Remedies, as mints, roses, wormwood, Aromatics, etc. But all these (of both
sorts) being only Accessories and foreign, require not to be farther prosecuted
in this place.

The Inbred Causes of Concoction are, either Instruments generated in the
stomach, or the Constitutions of the stomach in which the Faculty of Concocting
is founded.

1. The Instruments are the Ferments contained in the stomach, four in number,
whereof two are Principal, and the other two only Adjuvant.

The Adjuvant or less powerful, are the Humor Salivalis, and the Acid Phlegm of
the stomach; both which help somewhat toward the inteneration of the meat. But
because they help but little, in comparison of the other two, I content my self
with the bare mention of them en passant.

The More powerful, are the Acid relics of the former meal, which though more
efficacious than both the Adjuvant ferments, are yet in comparison of the grand
one, less considerable; and therefore I may well be excused, if I pass them
also over in silence: and the proper Ferment of the stomach, which being the
Principal instrument of Concoction, deserves to be particularly considered.

The origin and nature of this admirable dissolving Ferment (the only true
Alkahest in nature) having been first investigated, not many years past, by the
great industry of the learned and judicious Moebius, and professedly proved by
convincing experiments and observations, in a prolix dissertation contained in
his Book de Fundament. Medicinae; and since that time, much illustrated by our
happy Dr. Glisson (de ventric. and intestin. cap. 20.) all that remains for me
to do concerning it, is only to recall to your memory the most remarkable heads
of those things ye have read in those discourses, by giving you a Breviary of
them. This therefore I will do, and in as few words as can with reason be
expected.

This Ferment then is nothing else, but the spirituose and saline effluvia
stirred up by the vital motion of the arterial blood, effused out of the
arteries into the cavity of the stomach and gutts, but chiefly of the stomach,
and therein condensed again into a sharp, penetrating and dissolving liquor;
apt to dissolve the solid meat, and to cause such a benign fermentation, as
tends, not to volatilization, but only to Fusion of the same; and in fine,
acting upon it, not by open force or violent invasion, but (after the manner of
Contagiose ferments) rather by clancular insinuation, and mixing it self, first
with the saline and spirituose parts, and then with the grosser and less
exsoluble.

In this concise Abridgement, I have (I confess) omitted two Positions, both
zealously asserted by the later of these two excellent Authors, out of whose
doctrine I abstracted it. One is, that that part of the blood, which is by the
Coeliac and two Mesenteric arteries, dispensed to the stomach and gutts,
chiefly to the inmost coat of them, is somewhat more salt and sharp, than the
blood distributed to other parts of the body. The Other is, that the Saline and
spirituose parts of the Meat newly admitted into the stomach, perceiving that
they are ill lodged, and that the Ferment with which they there meet, is really
semblable or like to them, and with all more noble (as retaining some relics
of vitality, with which it had so lately been ennobled, while it passed through
the heart and arteries) do easily admit, embrace and conjoyn themselves with it.

But I declare withal, that I omitted these Positions, not from inadvertency,
nor for brevity fake; but only because I doubt of the verity of them. For the
first supposes Similar Attraction, or mutual coition of things alike, ob
similitudinem naturae; which yet I do not find my self obliged to grant. And
the other depends upon the Hypothesis of Natural Perception, which is not yet
established beyond disputation.

However, it seems to me sufficiently probable, that this dissolving Ferment is
peculiar to, and generated in the stomach; because nothing like it is to be
found in any other part of the whole body: that to the constitution of it, is
required a concurse of both salt and sulphurous spirits (such are the vital
spirits themselves) but chiefly of Salt (than which nothing is more sharp,
penetrating and dissolving): and that therefore it may be called, as Moebius
named it, Sal spiritibus impragnatum, acre ac pungens; or, as Dr. Glisson,
Fermentum Ventriculi fusorium, feu principale coctionis instrumentum; because
it does not only efficaciously dissolve the solid parts of the food, but also
give it the first degree of Assiimilation to the nature of the Animal, out of
whose blood the ferment it self is derived. Which may be one reason, why the
same Aliment receives a diverse praeparation in the stomachs of Animals of
diverse kinds; the ferment being in some sorts different from that in others,
respectively to the difference of the blood. And this is all I have to say of
the chief instrument of Concoction, the proper and inbred Ferment of the
stomach.

2. The Constitutions of the stomach, in which the Concoctive Faculty seems to
be founded, are three; viz. Vital, Animal, and Natural. Of these, the two
former are influent, the first from the fountain of life, the blood; the
second, from the brain: the third, insite or implanted in the stomach it self
from its very formation. From all these Constitutions concurrent, and by an
admirable contrivance of the Divine Wisdom combined, there results a certain
power, which is the Principal Cause of all the operations of the stomach. Hence
we properly enough say, the stomach craves meat, and the stomach digesteth. For
the Seminal Principle of the stomach, including both the Vital and Animal
influences, together with the native Constitution, is the whole, and so the
Principal cause of all its operations. But this being a Complex cause, cannot
be well understood, unless the three Constitutions here named, of which it is
composed, be singly considered. What the Vital and Animal are, will be easily
collected from what I have designed to say, when I come to inquire concerning
life, and the influence of the brain. And as for the insite or congenite
Constitution; that consists in the Temperament, in the Habit, in the Tone,
and chiefly in the implanted spirit (as the Galenist calls it) or (as the
Chemists and Helmontians) Archeus, which assisted by the influent vital heat,
and by the Animal influx, is doubtless the grand cause of Concoction, and
together with the newly described Ferment, performs the whole work. Which being
accomplished, there immediately succeeds another operation equally necessary to
Nutrition, viz.

The DISTRIBUTION of the Chyle.
WHICH is performed by three distinct actions of the Distributive Faculty of
the stomach and Gutts, viz. (1) VII. DISTRIBUTION of the Chyle.
the Exclusion of the Chyle out of the stomach into the Gutts: (2) The
Agitation of it to and fro by the Peristaltick motion, partly in the stomach,
but chiefly in the gutts; and (3) the Transmission of it into the Milky Veins.
The reason and manner of all which actions I shall endeavor briefly to explain;
supposing them to be Organical.

As to the FIRST, viz. the Transfusion of the Chyle out of the stomach into the
gutts, I conceive it to be effected by a double motion of the Chyle; one,
impressed upon the Chyle; the other, natural to it, or spantaneous: The first,
upward; the second, downward. The impressed and upward motion, by which the
Chyle is elevated to the Pylorus, I ascribe to the Constriction or closing of
the whole stomach. For, all the fibers of the stomach, by the motion of
self-restitution (common to all Tensiles, after they have been extended in
length) more and more contracting themselves by degrees, of necessity lessen
the cavity in which the Chyle is contained; and this coangustation of the
cavity, of equal necessity raises it up to the Pylorus, and (the other orifice
remaining closely shut up, while the whole act of Concoction lasts) forces it
out at the same: in the same manner as the liquor of a Clyster is squeezed out
at the pipe; only by compression of all parts of the bladder including it. The
natural and downward motion, by which the Chyle slides down into the gutts, is
to be attributed to its Gravity, which causes it to descend from the Pylorus
into the gutts spontaneously.

But this later motion belongs not to that part of the Chyle, which is carried
off immediately from the stomach by the milky veins that are proper to it.
Which yet cannot be much, perhaps not the hundredth part of the whole mass of
Chyle, because the Venae Lacteae of the stomach are but few, their number
scarcely holding the proportion of a hundred to one, with the great multitudes
of those that take in their fraught from the Gutts.

Nor is all the other part of the Chyle devolved into the gutts together and at
once, but by degrees, as it comes to be concocted. For, it is constant from the
dissection of Animals alive, that the Chyle, when it is confected, is fluid or
liquid, and visibly distinct, yea easily separable from the solid meats not yet
dissolved; as broth is in a pot distinguishable from the flesh boiled in it.
And because the solid meat is for the most part heavier than the liquor, and
therefore sinks to the botom of the stomach; it must needs by pressure cause
the liquor to rise to the Pylorus, to give way to what presses it: So that the
thinner part of the Chyle is always first expressed. For the two orifices of
the stomach are of equal height, and both a little higher than any other part
of the same. Whence may be collected one good reason, why it is more conducible
to health, to sit or stand, than to lie down, upon a full stomach. For in a man
that keeps the Trunc of his body in an erect posture for some time after meat:
the load of the stomach creates little or nothing of trouble to the orifices of
it, but bears only upon the bottom and sides. Whereas he that lies down soon
after he has filled his belly, inverts the order of his meat, and turns the
liquid part out by the Pylorus, before it has been sufficiently concocted; and
so fills his body with crudities, than which I scarce know any thing more
pernicious to health. And this seems to me sufficient to explain the reasons
and manner of the devolution of the Chyle into the gutts, which is the first
act of the Distributive Faculty.

As to the SECOND, viz. the Agitation of the Chyle to and fro; this equally
distributes the Chyle to all the gutts, as is not only convenient, but of
absolute necessity to Nutrition. For, since Nature has dispensed Venae Lacteae
equally to all the Gutts, it is fit the Chyle al so should be equally
distributed to them all, sooner or later, that each one may have its share of
the dividend. Again, since only the outward superfice of the matter contained
in the stomach and gutts, bears against the orifices of the Venae Lacteae, and
since the Venae Lacteae do not hang forth, or stand strutting into that matter,
but are terminated in the interior membrane: it is requisite, the matter should
be turned and revolved to and again, that the whole may at length be brought to
their doors and offered to them.

Now this is effected wholly by an operation Organical, and the Efficient is
the Peristaltic Motion of the stomach and gutts, proceeding from the alternate
contraction and extension of their Fibers, as we have this day shown, when we
described the Peristaltick motion, and gave a Mechanic account of it. Choosing
therefore rather to exercise your Memory, than to abuse your Patience by a vain
repetition of the same things; I will here consider only the Congruity of the
figures of the stomach and gutts, to the Distribution of the Chyle, by virtue
of this Agitation.

As the stomach has the advantage in the office of Concoction, so is the power
of the Gutts, paramont in the business of Distribution: and therefore Nature,
which conferred these powers in different degrees upon them, and always
accommodates her instruments to their proper uses and ends, framed them of
Figures most commodious respectively to their peculiar functions. In
particular, she made the stomach more ample, but shorter: and therefore fitter
to Fermentation of the aliment: because by how much the more profound any
Cavity is, by so much more contracted is the superfice of the matter therein
contained (supposing the quantity equal) and consequently so much the less of
it comes to touch the sides of the cavity within; and e contra. The Gutts she
made slenderer, but longer; and therefore the apter to Distribution; because
gracility conjoined to longitude, promotes Distribution, in three several
respects. (1) The narrow or slender cavity of the Gutts, wanting deep
profundity, applies it self to the more parts of the Chyle contained in it at
once: (2) by reason of its great length, it affords room sufficient to the
greater number of Milky veins to range themselves in the interior superfice of
it, and (3) by reason of the gracility and length conjoined, the Chyle is more
easily commoved from the center to the circumference. Hence then we come to
understand the reason, both of the gracility, and of the length of the Gutts.

The Use of this distributive motion is threefold. (1) The reduction of all
things contained, whether in the stomach or in the Gutts, to an equal
diffusion, so that they may not lie congested in one place, and be deficient in
another: (2) The opportune admotion of the whole mass of Chyle to the orifices
of the Milky veins: (3) the facilitation of the descent of the Chyle. Of these
Uses, the first and second are more eminent in the Gutts by much, than in the
stomach: because (as I said but even now) but very little, scarce the hundredth
part of the Chyle is brought to the orifices of the Venae Lacteae in the
stomach; the main stream of it running down into the Gutts. But the Third is
more conspicuous in the stomach: because the Chyle that is by this motion
devolved to the Pylorus, rarely slips back again, but falls down by that
aperture into the Gutts, to the end it may be thence transmitted into the Venae
Lacteae, which is the

THIRD and last act of the Distributive Faculty, and seems to me to be done,
chiefly by Constriction of the Gutts, and partly by their compression by the
Muscles of the Abdomen assistant to Respiration; not by Attraction or Exsuction
of the Chyle by the Venae Lacteae.

First I say, chiefly by Constriction or Contraction of the Gutts; because it is
evident to sense, that the chyle coming into the gutts, fills their cavity,
swells them up, and distends their membranes; and consonant to reason and the
law of all nervose and fibrose bodies, that the fibers of the Gutts, irritated
by that distension, should endeavor to recontract themselves to their natural
state and position. Now this they cannot do, but they must at the same time
gird in the membranes, and streighten the cavity of the gutts: nor can the
cavity containing be lessened, without pressing the liquor contained, and
forcing it to recede some way or other. Upwards it cannot retire, because the
mouth of the stomach is barricadoed against it: downward it cannot evade, that
gate being shut by the Sphincter of the fundament: other way there is none, but
only that which leads into the Venae Lacteae. This way then the Chyle must
take, to deliver it self from pressure by the spontaneous Constriction of the
Gutts. Whence I am apt to conclude, that the Chyle is transmitted from the
gutts into the Venae Lacteae, by way of Expression: and that the proxime and
principal cause of that Expression, is the spontaneous Constriction of the
fibers of the gutts.

Secondly I say, partly by external Compression of the gutts, by the Muscles of
the Abdomen cooperating to the motions of Respiration: because it is most
certain, that by the contraction of these Muscles, the Gutts are compressed
almost on all parts; and no less certain, that this compression helps them to
squeez out whatsoever is contained in them: as appears in exclusion of the
excrements of the belly, in breaking wind, in belching, etc. If the Contraction
of these Muscles (such I mean, as is ordinarily made in Expiration) be thought
too weak to compress the gutts to a degree requisite to express the Chyle; I
can justly call in the depression of them by the Diaphragm in Inspiration, to
the assistance thereof: and that has been held of so great force to the
Expression of the Chyle out of the gutts into the Milky veins, even by Monsieur
Pecquet himself (a man of solid Erudition, an acute judgment, and curiose to
explicate natural things by Mechanic principles) that writing of the motion of
the Chyle (in dissertationis Anatomicae cap. 11.) he feared not to ascribe very
much to it, in these words. Ad respirationem redeo, in qua dum pulmones
dilatantur, etiam deorsum diaphragma premunt, jecurque quod tum pistillum
agens, succutientis per intervalla molis gravamine, non solum adigit chylum e
ventriculo per Pylorum in intestina secedere; sed corundem distendit porulos,
illioque subtilissimam impellit in lacteas alimenti substantiam.

If it be objected, that the depression of the stomach and gutts by the Midrif,
cannot concur with the Compression of them by the Muscles of the Abdomen;
because the contraction of these, is not Synchronic or coincident with the
distension of that: I have this to answer. True it is indeed, that these
motions are alternate, that is, when these Muscles are contracted, the Midrif
is relaxed upward, and by filling the lower part of the chest, expels the
breath upward; and so Expiration is performed: and on the contrary, when the
Midrif is distended, at the same time these Muscles are relaxed, the bowels
depressed, the cavity of the chest enlarged, and the air rushes into it from
without, and so Inspiration is made. This, I say, is true: but this truth seems
not to impugn the opinion I now defend. For, as often as the Compression of the
Stomach and guts by the Contraction of these Muscles, is intermitted; so often
is their Depression by the distended diaphragm, repeated or renewed: So that
though these motions be alternate, the pressure of the gutts, and consequently
of the Chyle contained in them, is continued; and as to the Expression of the
Chyle into the Venae Lacteae, it is all one whether the pressure be from above
or on the sides. I have seen young Lads at Paris, for sport, take the skin of a
Snake, neatly stripped off from head to tail, fill it with water, then prick it
through with a needle in many places, and in fine by either pressing the water
from one end toward the other, or compressing it hard in the middle, force it
to flow forth in as many slender streams, as the needle had made holes in the
skin. And this (methink) is a pretty lively representation of the manner of the
Expression of the Chyle out of the guts into the Milky veins.

Thirdly I say, not by Attraction or Exsuction, as is generally believed. For
(1) Natural Philosophers are not yet agreed upon the point, whether there be in
nature any such thing as Attraction, properly so called, or not: and they that
are on the Affirmative part, seem to me to have the worst end of the staff; it
being much more probable, that all the motions attributed to Attraction, are
really performed by Impulsion. (2) Although it were granted, that some bodies
may be moved by others by way of Attraction; yet would it still remain
extremely difficult to find, what should cause the motion of the Chyle, of
which we are now speaking, by the same way. Of all Attractions mentioned by
Philosophers, there are (if my weak memory deceives me not) but three
differences or sorts, viz. Attraction ob fugam vacui, Attraction Organic, and
Attraction Similar or ob similitudinem substantiae. But no one of these seems
to have place in the effect here proposed. Not the first; because the Venae
Lacteae are not, by reason of their exiguity, capable of such a vacuum
coacervatum, as the Aristoteleans require to cause attraction of even fluid
bodies: nor do they contain any disseminate vacuities (as they call them) when
they are not filled with Chyle; because then they close themselves and draw
their sides together, in so much that they wholly disappear. Here then is no
danger of vacuity, and consequently no necessity of Attraction for avoidance of
it. Not the Second; because the Venae Lacteae have no hooks, chords, or other
instruments, wherewith to take hold of the Chyle, and draw it into their mouths
out of the gutts. Nor the Last; (1) because all Similar Attraction supposes
Natural Perception, than which nothing is (to me at least) more doubtful: (2)
because the affinity or similitude of nature required to be betwixt the
Attrahent, and the thing to be attracted, is here wanting; for, what is there
of resemblance in substance, or qualities, betwixt the Milky veins, on one
part, and the Chyle, on the other? This is a fluid, those are solid bodies: the
Chyle is a liquor composed of heterogeneous or dissimilar parts; the Venae
Lacteae, on the contrary, are Similar, spermatic parts. Wherein then consists
the (...) or Analogy, that should cause an attraction of the one by the others?
If it be said, that, not the Venae Lacteae themselves, but the relics of the
former Chyle remaining in them, attract the new Chyle, ob similitudinem
substantiae. First we may deny, that, in the state of health, any thing of
Chyle is to be found remaining in the Milky veins, after the work of
distribution is finished; and justify this our denial by the testimonies of all
Modern Anatomists who have written of the motion of the Chyle, and of the Venae
Lacteae. And then we may ask of the Patrons of Attraction Similar in this case,
Why the Chyle contained in the gutts, being vastly more in quantity, should not
rather attract the supposed relics left in the Venae Lacteae? Besides all
these reasons daily Experience assures us, that not only pure and nutritive
Chyle, but the particles of Purging and other ungrateful and offensive
Medicaments, are received into the Venae Lacteae; which they would never admit,
in case they attracted the Chyle Elective, by election or choice, as the
supposition of Similar attraction implies. To conclude therefore; it was not
without reason I said, that the Chyle is not transferred from the gutts into
the Milky veins by way of Attraction or Suction, but only of Expression.

This may be confirmed by the very manner of the transmission of the Chyle into
the Venae Lacteae, which seems to be, not immediately from the cavity of the
intestines, but through the inmost Tunic of them, and that by way of
percolation.

First I say, not immediately from the cavity of the stomach and gutts; because
it is demonstrable even to sense, by various Anatomic experiments made in the
bellies of Animals alive or dead, that the Venae Lacteae do not perforate or
pass through the stomach and gutts, but are all terminated in the inmost coat
that lines them. For, neither by injection of liquors, nor by inflation with
air, nor by the strongest compression whatsoever, can any thing be made to pass
from the stomach or gutts into the Venae Lacteae, whether the Animal be opened
alive or dead, full or fasting Whence it is sufficiently manifest, that these
veins do not open themselves into the cavity of the stomach, or into that of
the intestines; for, if they did, what can be imagined to hinder the ingress of
liquors, or air, when vehemently urged by compression, into them? Wherefore I
say

Secondly, that the Chyle is transmitted by percolation, through the very
Parenchyma of the stomach and gutts, tanquam per manicam Hippocratis, as
through a streiner. For, it is not the custom of Nature to institute any
secretion or separation of humors without a Colatory: nor does she use, where
there is need of a streiner, to ordain a single membrane, but some peculiar
Parenchyma, to that purpose; much less to delegate that office to the naked
orifices of vessels of what kind soever. For, the orifice of a vessel, as
simply such, i. e. as a mere organ, promiscuosely admitts whatever is brought
to it; not separating one liquor from another, the thinner from the thicker,
the pure from the impure, but taking in without discrimination all that comes.
Seeing therefore that Nature for the separation of different liquors confused,
is always observed to use some Parenchyma as a Colatory or Streiner; and seeing
no other sufficiently noble and considerable use can be assigned to the
Parenchyma of the inmost Tunic of the stomach and gutts, but this I now
attribute to it: these things (I say) duly considered, I think it most
probable, that the Parenchyma of this Tunic does perform the office of a
Streiner to the Chyle, receiving and conveying into the Milky veins, the
thinner parts thereof, and excluding the gross and excrementitious; as an
Hippocras bag transmitts the Wine, but retains the Spices infused in it.

Now this very Percolation of the Chyle does (as I just now hinted) not a
little confirm my former assertion, that it is distributed from the cavities of
the Ventricle and gutts, not by Attraction or Exsuction, but only by
Expression. For, what can be imagined more likely to impell it, or drive the
thinner parts of it into, and through the Streiner, than Pressure? or whence
can that pressure come, but from the Spontaneous Constriction of the stomach
and gutts, conjoined with the alternate Compression of them by the Diaphragme
in inspiration; by the Muscles of the Abdomen, in exspiration?

Why then should not Anatomists be able, by compression or any other way
whatsoever, to force the Chyle, or other liquor injected, through this
Parenchyma or supposed Streiner?

I answer (First) that the Mechanic Ration of this Colatory being not yet (for
ought I know) discovered, even by those curious Dissectors, who have with the
best Microscopes contemplated the texture of it; I dare not pretend to
understand the true reason of the difficulty objected. (Secondly,) that if I
were permitted to declare my present conjecture concerning the same, I should
venture to say; that the impediment to the manual expression of liquors out of
the gutts into the Milky veins, in Animals dissected alive, may perhaps consist
in one of these two things: either that of the several causes or motions, in
the state of health and ease or indolency, concurring to this complex and
organic operation, one (or more) is wanting; and the Mechanism of the principal
Organ, the interior Membrane of the gutts, altered and vitiated, in the
praeternatural and dolorose state of the Animal dissected: or, that by reason
of the cruel torments the miserable Beast feels, the Tone of the gutts becomes
so strongly contracted and rigid, as to be wholly impervious. Which is the more
probable, because it is well known, that great and acute pain always irritates
nervose and fibrose parts to contract themselves, even to rigidity; which is
opposite to the gentle compliance and yieldingness required to permeability.
Which may be one cause, why Nature has endowed all Glandules ordained for
Secretion, with so little sense; viz. lest otherwise, being sensible of every
light irritation, they might be apt to shrink and condense themselves, to the
interruption and hinderance of their office. And for Animals dissected after
death; I should guess, that in them, the Colatory of the Chyle is rendered
impervious by Cold, which by strong constriction or constipation shutts up all
slender and inconspicuous passages of the body, that had been kept open by the
heat and motions of life. But these are my private Conjectures (as I have
already declared) offered rather to your examen, than to your belief. So is
whatsoever I have said in this disquisition, concerning the Distribution of the
Chyle; which I here conclude..

There remain yet two other Faculties of the stomach to be considered, viz. the
SECRETIVE, by which it separates from the blood brought into its membranes by
the Arteries, a certain slimy and subacid mucus, called pituita emortua, dead
Phlegm, because the spirits thereof being exhausted, it is of no further use to
the blood: and the EXCRETIVE, by which it exonerates it self of that dead
Phlegm, of the sour relics of the food, of its own decayed Ferment, and in
fine of whatsoever else is unprofitable or offensive; and that either upward,
by Eructation, or by Vomit; or downward into the intestines. But because the
explication of the Constitutions of the stomach upon which these Powers are
chiefly founded, and of the different motions and ways by which they are
respectively executed, is less pertinent and requisite to the short History of
Nutrition at this time by me designed, than those precedent are, upon which I
have hitherto insisted; and because the Sands in my glass are a good while
since all run down: therefore I find my self doubly obliged to pretermit the
explanation of them; lest I should at once, both rove from my principal scope,
and further transgress the law of this Royal College, which has set bounds to
all Exercises of this kind when here performed.

By the later of which reasons I am hindered also from tracing the Chyle in the
narrow, obscure, and anfractuose ways, through which it passes, before it can
attain to the end of its journey; and from observing particularly the Mutations
it undergoes, the Exaltation and Refinement it gradually acquires, and the
Secretion of its unassimilable parts, made in Organs by Nature to that use
ordained. Let it therefore at present suffice, if to gratify the Curiosity of
the Younger Students of Anatomy, I set before their eyes, not an accurate Map,
but a rude Landscape of the Galaxy or Milky way, in which the greater part of
the Chyle glides along through the purple Island of the body, to replenish the
ocean of blood.

The Chyle being now (as I said) squeezed out of the stomach and gutts, into
the slender pipes of the Venae Lacteae, flows gently on in them from the
Circumference toward the Center of the Mesentery; the precedent parts of it
being necessarily pusht forward by the succedent (ut unda undam pellit) till it
enter into certain Glandules there placed. And this may be called, the First
stage of the Chyles progess through the Galaxy. Extruded from thence, partly by
more Chyle crowding in, partly by compression of the Glandules, by the
distended Midrif, and contracted Muscles of the Abdomen, it flows into the
Common Receptacle or Cistern, first discovered by the Curiose and fortunate
Monsieur Picquet, and thence called by his name. Which I account, the Second
stage or remove of the Chyle. From the Common Receptacle (which consisting of a
membranose substance, situate at the very root of the Mesentery, upon the
sphondyls of the Loins, and filling up the space between the Muscles Psoae, is
incumbent upon the two long and fleshy productions of the Diaphragm) the Chyle
is transferred into the Ductus Chyliferus, which running upward, near the spine
of the back, and continued quite home to the Subclavian branches of the Vena
Cava, exonerate themselves into them, and commix the Chyle with the blood: and
this also seems to be done by impulse or protrusion. Because the two
Productions of the Diaphragm, lying immediately under the Common Receptacle,
cannot be distended (as together with the Diaphragm they always are, in every
inspiration) but they must force the Chyle therein contained, to give way, by
ascending in the pipes that from thence tend upward; after the same manner as
in artificial fountains, the water is mounted into pipes, only by pressing the
surface of that in the Cistern. Perhaps the so often mentioned Compression of
all parts included within the Abdomen, by constriction of the Muscles thereof,
may not a little contribute to this Elevation of the Chyle; which is the Third
remove of it. Next, the Chyle, by the said Subclavial veins brought into the
Ascendent trunc of the Vena Cava, is immediately imported, together with the
blood therein descending, into the right ear, and ventricle of the Heart. Which
by its Systole or contraction, squeezes it into the Lungs, where by their
Reciprocations it is more perfectly mixed with the blood, and whence it is
devolved into the Left Ventricle of the Heart, and finally thence squirted into
the Arteries, so soon as it has received the form and name of blood. Which is
the Fourth and last stage of its journey; at least of so much of it, as is
ordained to recruit the mass of blood, and afford matter for the supply of the
Vital spirits or Heat.

For, I blush not here to declare my adherence to the doctrine of that great
Light and Ornament of this College, Sir George Ent, that a considerable
portion of the most delicate and spirituose Chyle, is never brought, through
the Galaxy newly by me described, into the blood; but detached, and by other
ways, by membranes and nerves and fibers (perhaps by way of Filtration, as the
nourishing juice of Plants seems to ascend from the roots up to the top of the
highest spriggs) transferred to the brain, and by Meteorization refined into
the last aliment of the Spermatic parts. Which I do, not because I have
hitherto zealously asserted this doctrine, both in Exercitat. 10. lib. de
Oeconomia Animali, and lib. de Scorbuto cap. 8. but only because the Arguments
and Experiments brought against it, by Deusingius and some other Defendents of
that antique Placit of Aristotle, Sanguinem esse ultimum alimentum partium; are
not (in my judgment) half so weighty and cogent, as those brought to recommend
it to the belief of an equal Arbiter. Of all the Objections hitherto put into
the opposite end of the balance, the most ponderose seems to be that, which
has been, by way of induction, alleged by my Learned Colleague, Dr. Lower, from
a remarkable Anatomic Experiment made by himself, and recorded in his Book de
motu Cordis and Sanguinis, cap. 5. Whence he inferrs, that the whole revenue of
the Chyle is certainly expended upon the blood: and yet notwithstanding, I dare
affirm, that though the Experiment be true and ingeniose, the inference is more
than can be, according to the Laws of right ratiocination, from thence deduced.

The Experiment it self is (in short) this. If in a Dog, or any other Animal,
fed about three hours before, the pipe leading from the Common Receptacle, then
filled with newly imported Chyle, be broken (as without much difficulty it may,
by making a convenient incision betwixt the two lowest ribbs of the right side,
and tearing the Receptacle with the nail of the forefinger) so as the course
of the Chyle into the Thoracic vessels be intercepted; the poor Animal, how
plentifully soever supplied with food, will nevertheless perish by famine,
within few days after; and in his breast will be found a deluge of Chyle.

The Inference, this. Certain it is therefore, that the Animal, though
abounding with Chyle in the stomach, gutts, and milky veins, dies nevertheless
of famine, by reason that the Chyle cannot ascend, by the Thoracic pipes, into
the Subclavial veins, but is intercepted by the way: and by consequence, that
the whole stock of Chyle is imported, by the chyliferous vessels, into the
blood. Which to me seems to be a Paralogism.

For, granting, that whatever of Chyle is brought from the Common Receptacle
into the mass of blood, passes thither by no other way, but through the
Thoracic pipes: it will not therefore necessarily follow, that the whole
provision of Chyle made in the Ventricle, is conveyed thence into the Common
Receptacle, and so into the blood. For, why may not some part of it be diverted
into other ways, from the Ventricle by the membranes thereof, from the Glands
of the Mesentery, from the Lumbares, and others vicine to them? Chiefly when
the ways of that diversion or detachment are sufficiently probable; as I have
many years past shown, ex professo, in my Exercitation de distributione Succi
Nutritii per membranas and nervos: and when otherwise the spermatic parts of
the body would all be destitute of requisite nourishment; the blood being so
unfit to repair their exhaustion, that in all probability it rather preys upon,
and consumes them; as has been with many nervose reasons asserted by Dr.
Glisson, in lib. de Anatom. Hepat. Nor is it necessary, because the Dogs upon
which this Experiment has been tried, died within few days after, that
therefore they died of famine. For, why might not so great a wound, penetrating
into the cavity of the Thorax, be sufficient of it self to destroy them, in
that space of time? Why is it not more consentaneous to conceive, that in those
Dogs the blood it self being deprived of the requisite afflux of new Chyle
daily, and so alienated from its vital constitution, as to have been no longer
fit to afford a continual recruit of spirits, became vappid; and so inferred
death, in a few days? though the solid parts were not defrauded the while of
their portion of the Chyle brought to them by other ways. That in long
fasting, when new Chyle is wanting, the blood does usually estuate, grow
acrimonious, and prey upon the substance of the body: is a truth so well known
by common experience, that it needs not farther probation. But how long after
the wounds had been inflicted, did the Dogs live? That our Author forgot to
record; leaving the number of the days undefin'd, notwithstanding the
Circumstance of time be of great moment toward the strengthening his
supposition, that they perished merely by famine. For, if they survived but two,
three or four days, it is more improbable they should be in so short time
starved to death, than that they perished only by the wounds they had received.
Again, 'twas necessary, that by so great quantity of Chyle effused into the
cavity of the Thorax, the motions of the Diaphragm, Heart, and Lungs, should be
highly impeded; that from the putrefaction of the same Chyle, an acute fever
should be soon kindled; and that the whole Economy of Nature should be, in so
great streights, perverted into mortal confusion, in those suffering Animals.
There are then (you see) other causes, besides the interception of the Chyle,
to which the death of the Dogs may be with more of verisimilitude ascribed.
Where then is the necessity of that conclusion, that Famine alone killed them?
or how does this Experiment demonstrate, that the whole revenue of Chyle is, as
a due tribute, paid into the Exchequer of the blood? I am therefore to be
excused, if I deny this mighty Objection to be of force enough to subvert the
doctrine of the Nutrition of all the spermatic parts by the Succus nutritious,
clearly distinct from the blood.

More considerable it is, that even that Great Man, Dr. Franc. Glisson, who had
(in lib. de Anat. Hepat. cap. ult.) with so many, and so strong arguments drawn
from reason and observations, propagated this doctrine; has notwithstanding,
in his last and most elaborate work (de Ventric. and intestin. cap. 8.) taken
occasion to retract it, in these very words. Hic tres Errores a me olim
admissos ultro agnosco and revoco. Conjectabam quidem tunc (1.) Materiam succi
nutritii esse selectissimam Chyli partem; (2.) Hanc per viam secretionis in
glandibus quibusdam, potissimum Mesenterii, a reliquo chylo separari, and per
nervos ad cerebrum transmitti; (3.) Nervos splenicos e liene succum quendam
tenuem and mitem, qui sit vehiculum prioris, eligere sive exsugere. Hisce
tribus sententiis hic valedico, and argumenta, in quantum iis stabiliendis
inserviant, improbo; and similiter Corollaria, si quae sint, in quantum ab iis
solis dependeant, rejicio. This Palinodia of his did, I confess, not a little
surprise me, when first I read it: but my amazement lasted not long. For, when
I had found, that as to the Reasons inducing him to make that Recantation, his
silence had left me wholly in the dark; and that in the lines immediately
following he had subjoined this limitation of it, Interim non nego, quin detur
verus succus nutritious a cerebro per nervos ad omnes parts spermaticas
dispensatus; aut quin sit subjectum spirituum animalium. Sed aio, generari hunc
succum in solo cerebro, inter corticem ejusdem and medullam, per viam
secretionis; and sanguims mitiorem partem magisque spermaticam esse materiam,
etc. I perceived, that though he had, by his Authority, shook some part, he had
not yet demolished the whole of that fair structure by himself formerly
erected. And I have reason to believe, that he had never affirmed, that the
true succus nutritious is derived out of the blood; had not Fate, thinking the
honor he had before acquired by other noble discoveries in Nature, sufficient
to give him immortal renown, reserved the glory of farther revealing the
mystery of Nutrition, for Sr. George Ent. Who, in his incomparable
Antidiatriba lately published, has eternally obliged the world by declaring
his sentiments concerning the Matter, conditions, and generation of the true
succus nutritious; as also concerning the Manner and Ways by which the same is
distributed to all parts of the body thence to be recruited. To that
Aphoristical Book therefore I referr all those of my Auditors, who desire to be
more fully satisfied in this matter: and so conclude this my imperfect History
of Nutrition..

PRAELECTIO IV. Of Life.
THe Climax or Scale of Nature, by which she advances in her Works from less to
greater Dignity and Perfection, and distinguishes all things Animate into three
general Orders, consists (as ye well know) of only three Rungs or Degrees: of
which the first is simple Vegetation, to which all Plants are confined; the
second, Sense, which includes Vegetation, and is the Ne ultra to all brute
Animals; the third, Reason, which comprehends both Vegetation and Sense, as
inferior and subordinate, and Constitutes the royal Praerogative of Man, above
all his fellow Creatures that are [(...)] composed of Soul and Body. To each of
these degrees LIFE is annexed; for even Plants themselves are, by Universal
consent of Mankind, allowed to live and dye, as well as Sensitive and Rational
Creatures: and (...) dicitur (...). Sic Plato (in Timaeo) quicquid (...), i. e.
vivendi particeps est, jure Sane (...) (quasi vitale dixeris) id est animal
rectissime appellari potest. Insunt autem and plantis ipsis facultates vivendi,
nutriendi, crescendi, suique simile producendi. Sic etiam Arist. (de genesis
Animal. l. 2. c. i.) Sive planta, sive Animal est, inquit; aeque omnibus inest,
quod vim habet vegetandi, sive nutriendi, etc. but not Life of one and the same
kind; for the Life of Brutes is more Energetic, and consequently more Noble
than the Life of Plants; and the Life of Man much more Noble than that of
Brutes. And this of absolute Necessity, because a sensitive Soul is endowed
with more and higher Faculties or Powers, than a Vegetative; and a rational
Soul, with more and more excellent, than a Sensitive: and therefore the Life
which results from the Conjunction of either of these Souls with its proper
Body, conveniently Organized, must be accordingly different from the Life of
the other two. Which Aristotle well understanding, first defines Life in
general to be, Animae, ejusque organici corporis, per conjunctionem and unionem
utriusque actus and Vigor; and then teaches particularly, that Plants live by
the Sole act of their vegetant Soul, namely by Nutrition; Brute Animals, by the
Sole act of their Sentient, which includes the former; and Man by the act of
Reason, or (...), that is by Cogitation or Ratiocination, which as Supreme,
praesupposes both Vegetation and Sension.

Let this Scale of Nature then be our Method. Let us, who have proposed to
ourselves to follow her steps, as near as our poreblind Reason shall permit us,
ascend from the Life of Vegetation, to the Life of Sense; from the Life of
Plants, to that of Animals, and among them, of the most perfect Animal, Man
himself, who is our principal Subject. And that we may the more directly
conduct our present inquiries by the clew of her observable operations, let us
consider diligently (1) What Life is, (2) Whence it originally proceeds, (3)
What is the Subject wherein it primarily Subsists, (4) how it is perpetually
generated a new, from the first moment of its accension, to that of its total
extinction or period. (5) how it is continually diffused or Communicated from
its Fountain to all parts of the Body.

But because the Fundament of right Ratiocination is placed in the true
signification of Names, it is therefore requisite, that before I proceed to
investigate the nature and formal reason of Life, I should recount and explain
the various Names by which it has been called: not only to prevent Ambiguity,
by fixing their signification; but also in hope of gaining from them somewhat
of Light toward my Disquisition.

From Holy Scriptures then I begin, both from the Veneration due to those
Divine Oracles, and because they are of all Books whatsoever, most likely to
afford me hints of the abstruse thing after which I am serching.

The Writer of the Book of Genesis, in the short History of Man's Creation (Cap.
2. v. 7.) expresses the manner of it in these Words, according to the Graec
Text of the Septuagint. (...). Which the Vulgar La in version renders thus.
Formavit igitur Dominus Deus hominem de limo terrae, and inspiravit in faciem
ejus Spiraculum vitae, and factus est homo in animam viventem: and our latest
Translation thus. And the Lord God formed Man of the Dust of the Earth, and
breathed into his Nostrils the Breath of Life; and Man became a living Soul.
Here then by (...) Spiraculum vitae, Life is signified: but whether the Author
by those Words intimated or not, that God kindled Life in the Heart of Adam by
a vital Breath blown by his Nostrils into his Blood, as fire is propagated by
blowing; or whether he meant only, that God gave to Adam Life, as some have
interpreted them; is not for me, who pretend not to interpretation of sacred
Writ, to determine. Nevertheless I hope I shall not be thought to usurp the
Province of Theologues, if I take the innocent liberty of believing, that this
admirable act of Vivification done by the Omnipotent Creator upon Adam, was
done by way of Inspiration; by which, according to the genuine and proper Sense
of the word, is to be understood, a blowing in of some subtle and energetic
substance, into a place where before it was not, viz. into the Nostrils of the
human Body newly formed of the Dust of the Earth. Which will perhaps be found
somewhat the more reasonable, if the manner and circumstances of the miraculous
Revivification of the good Shunamites Son, by the Prophet Elisha (Kings 2. Cap.
4.) be well considered. For, we read, that after the Prophet had layn some
time, and much bestirred himself upon the Body of the dead Child, putting his
Mouth upon his Mouth, and his Eyes upon his Eyes, and his Hands upon his Hands,
and stretched himself again and again upon him; [(...)] the Flesh of the Child
waxed warm, and he Neesed seven times, and opened his Eyes. So that from thence
it seems inferrible, that as the first Man was inlivened, so this Child was
revived by Inspiration. Both acts doubtless were done miraculously, because by
the same divine Agent, God: yet with this difference, that the former was
performed immediately by God himself; the latter, mediately by his Instrument,
the Prophet; to whose Breath blown into the Child's Mouth, and to whose Heat
communicated to the Child's Flesh, and consequently to his Blood, the Author of
Life was pleased to give a Virtue so Efficacious, as to restore and renovate
the Vital motions of the Blood, Heart, Lungs, and Diaphragm of the Child, that
had been stopped by the cold Hand of Death: and those Motions being
recommenced, and the Brain reinvigorated by a fresh influx of arterial Blood,
replete with vital Spirits; by strong contraction of its Membranes, as it were
by a Critical Motion, expelled the material and conjunct cause of the Disease,
by Sternutation seven times repeted, before the Child opened his Eyes. For,
that the Seat of that most acute Disease was in the Brain, is manifest even
from the Child's complaint to his Father; [(...)] my Head, my Head. I am not
ignorant, there are some, who expressly affirm, that the word inspiration is in
sacred Scriptures used only Metaphoricaly; whether truly or not, let Divines
dispute. Meanwhile I am certain, the word Spirit, upon which inspiration
depends, is in many places of the holy Bible used to express Life. In Job. (c.
27. v. 3) quamdiu spiritus Dei est in naribus meis, signifies, so long as I
shall live, or have Life. And in Ezech (c. 1. v. 20.) Spiritus vitae erat in
rotis, seems to me to say, the Wheels were living. Other Instances I might
easily collect, if these were not sufficient to my Scope, and if I were not
obliged to hasten to other appellations and Characters of Life less liable to
controversy* and used, by Philosophers.

By Hippocrates, Life is per periphrasin, called (...), ignis ingenitus; and
(...), accensio animae in cord, by Aristotle. The Hebrews express it sometimes
by nephesch, sometimes by neschama; both which words indifferently signify
Soul, or Life. The Graecians, whose Language is more copiose, name it either
(...), which is derived (...), which signifies to Breath, or refrigerate by
blowing; nor unfitly, because to Breath or respire, is proper to living
Creatures: or (...)* alias (...); or (...); to which Hesychius adds (...).
The Latins, commonly Vita; which is deflected from the Graec (...), by cutting
off the Vowel (...), and changing b into v, as is usually done; and sometimes
Anima, whch is from (...), which signifies Wind; an Etymology owned by Horace
himself in this odd exprssion of his, Impellunt animae lintea Thraciae; in
Carmin lib. 4. Ode 12. and before him by Lucretius (lib. 6.) in these Words;
Ventus ubi, atque animae subito vis maxima quaedam
Aut extrinsecus, aut ipsa ab tellure coorta.
Who often calls the Soul, Ventum Vitalem.

FROM the various Names, we come to some few Notions that eminent Philosophers
have formed to themselves of Life; such as among many others, seem to me more
memorable than the rest, as well for the credit they have obtained in the
Schools, as for the great renown of their Authors.

Cardanus (a man of admirable Subtility of Wit, in his lucid intervalls)
defines Life to be, the Operation or action of the Soul: and (as Iul. Scaliger,
in Exercit. 102 Sect. 5. not without Signs of envy, observes) has therein many
Followers. In the number of whom I must not list my self. (1) because if Life
be an action of the Soul, the Body cannot be truly said to live. (2) if Life be
an action, there must be an action of an action; for the actions of Life in
Man, are (as Arist. 2. de anima, truly teaches) to understand, to have Sense,
to move voluntarily, to be nourished, to speak, etc. and to suppose an action
of an action, is manifestly absurd. In this point therefore I declare my self
to be no disciple of Cardans.

Fernelius (equal to Cardan both in time and fame, nor inferior in Sagacity of
Spirit) defines life thus, Lib. de animae facaltat. cap. 26
Est Animantium vita, facultatum actionumque omnium conservatio. But this
definition is too narrow for the thing, as taking no notice of the Body, which
yet is participant of Life, and upon whose Organs the exercise of all the
faculties and actions of the Soul depends.

Ludovicus Vives describes Life to be, Conservatio instrumentorum, quibus anima
in corpore utitur: because (says he) when the instruments are corrupted, life
cease. But neither in this description is it safe to acquiesce. (1) because
Life is conserved, not so much by the integrity of the Instruments, as by the
Faculties, which are before the Instruments, and upon which all the Functions
proximly depend. (2) The conservation of the Instruments does not make or
constitute Life, but rather follow it, as an effect. (3) if Life were only the
conservation of the Instruments, then would it necessarily follow, that part of
Life is lost or destroyed, when any of the Instruments are corrupted or cut
off: which is absurd; life being indivisible, and daily experience attesting,
that one or more of the Organs of the Body, as Hands, Feet, etc, may be cut
off, without diminution of Life. Which even Lucretius himself acknowledged in
these elegant Verses.

At manet in vita, cui men's animusque remansit,
Quamvis est circum-caesis lacer undique membris:
Truncus, adempta anima circum, membrisque remotis,
Vivit, and aetherias vitaleis suscipit auras etc.
Lib. 3.
Neither of these three Select Definitions proving in all points absolute and
Scientific; some here perhaps expect, that I, who am so bold as to reject them,
should dare also to substitute in the room of them, some new one of my own
excogitation, if not more perfect, yet at least less culpable. To these
expecting Gentelmen therefore I say, that much less of skill and strength being
required to demolish, than to build; a Pigmy may be able to pull down, what
Giants have raised; and that to form a true and complete definition of any the
most obvious thing in Nature, much more of Life, which is extremly abstruse,
would puzzel a much stronger Brain than mine. Well then may I be excused, if
conscious of my imparity to a task so desperate, I forbear farther to expose my
weakness by attempting it: and choose rather to leave them to collect, what my
sentiments are of the nature of Life, from my following discourse.

WHICH being designed only as a modest disquisition of the natural causes of
Human Life, I professedly pass by what that over-curiose nation of Scholemen,
impensly addicted to notions abstracted from all commerce with the Senses, and
to Speculations Metaphysical, have delivered of the Life of Spirits, of
Angels, Daemon's, and other Beings of that kind, subject neither to the Laws
of Nature, nor to the Empire of Fate. And this I do, because some of their
Doctrines far transcend the capacity of my narrow Wit, others seem more fine
than useful, and all are remote from my present institute.

I omit also what our equaly acute Dr. Glisson has with admirable subtility of
Wit, and immense Labor of Meditation excogitated, and not many Years before
his Death, divulged, of the Energetic Life of Nature, and its Faculties; by
virtue of which he supposed, that even the most minute particles of this
aspectable World do naturally perceive, desire, move themselves with Counsel,
and (what is yet more wonderful) frame Bodies for themselves to inhabit,
animate or inform them, and perform other most noble operations. Which I do,
not only because this opinion, how favorable soever, has not yet been received
as canonical by common assent of Philosophers; but also because I humbly
conceive it to be in all things (the Name only excepted) the same with that
antique Dogma first delivered by Plato, and after asserted by his Followers,
that all things in the Universe are Animate, that is, are naturally endowed
[(...)] with Sense and Selfmotion; which has been sufficiently impugned by
Aristotle, Lucretius, Gassendus, and all others, who have refuted Plato's
Doctrine de Anima mundi, upon which it is grounded. Not that I reject this
opinion of natural Sense, or Perception attributed to all things, but that I am
not yet convinced of the truth of it: and, Insipientis est, aliis dogmata illa
aut commendare, aut convellere, de quorum veritate ipsemet adhuc dubitat. And
well may I suspend my assent to this opinion, which gives to things inanimate
such Faculties, which my Philosophy will not grant to any but rational
Creatures. Nor indeed would either Lucretius, or Des Carts. For the former,
though, according to the Epicurean Hypothesis, which he in all things followed,
he attributes to Atoms (or as he calls them) Solida Primordia rerum, a
Spontaneous Mobility; nevertheless denies, that they are naturally moved with
Knowledge or Design, in these Verses. (Lib. 2.)

"Nam neque consilio debent tardata morari,
"Nec perscrutari primordia singula quaeque,
"Ut videant, qua quidque geratur cum ratione.
And the Later, in one of his Epistles to Mersennus (Epistol. part 2. epist.
44.) where he strictly examines the Doctrine of a certain Monk, that ascribed
to even the most minute particles of Matter, a Power of moving themselves, and
other ingenite propensions (the very same, I guess, with those supposed to be
inseparably conjoined with Natural Perception) plainly declares his Judgment of
the unreasonableness thereof, in these Words. Non probo indivisibilia ista,
neque naturales, quas illis tribuit, propensiones; istiusmodi enim propensiones
absque intellectu concipere nequeo, and ne irrationalibus quidem animalibus
tale quidquam tribuo: Sed quicquid in illis appetitus, aut propensiones
vocamus, per solas Mechanicae regulas explico.

These two praeliminary Advertisements premised, I come into the direct way of
my intended disquisition. That the Life of Man does both originally spring, and
perpetually depend from the intimate conjunction and union of his Reasonable
Soul with his Body; is one of those few Assertions in which all Divines and
natural Philosophers unanimously agree. And they have reason. For, while the
rational Soul continues in the Body, so long Life continues; and when the same
is separated from the Body, in that very moment of Time, Death succeeds.

Now this rational Soul being by most wise Men granted to be a pure Spirit, or
substance merely Spiritual; it is from thence necessarily consequent, that the
Life of it is Substantial, that is, the very substance of it, considered (as
Metaphysicians love to speak) non in ordine ad esse per se, sed in ordine ad
operationes. For, we dull-brain'd Mortals, to whom it is not granted, to be
able to conceive the nature of Beings purely Spiritual, by notions adaequate to
it; according to the Module of our understanding, distinguish even in Angels,
their subsistence Fundamental, from their Energetic Nature: although in reality
both are the same substance, but diversely considered. For, this substantial
Life, though it may be, as to its Operations, by the same Divine Power that
gave it, suspended; cannot yet be wholly taken away, so, as that it should
after continue to be a Spirit. Because if a Spirit be supposed to be deprived
of Life, the very substance of it must also be supposed to be at the same time
annihilated. For, who can conceive so gross a contradiction, as a dead Angel?
The same may be as truly said also of a Rational Soul, which is allowed to be a
Spirit too. Wherefore the Life of it is (as I affirmed) Substantial and
Essential, and consequently incapable to be taken away, unless the Soul or
Spirit it self be at the same time annihilated. Which the Omnipotent Creator
can indeed, when he shall so please, do: but it does not appear from any place
of holy Scripture, that he either has done, or ever will do it: and therefore
let no man doubt of the Immortality of his Soul. Sic etenim lethi praeclusa 'st
janua menti.


From this our fundamental position then, that the Life of a Man is in his
rational Soul essentially; it follows of necessity, that the same Life cannot
be in his Body too essentially, but by way of Participation or Communication.
Nor is it difficult to conceive in our mind, that the Life of the Body, being
separable from it, is only communicated to it, or derived from another thing of
a different Nature. For, if a substance essentially living, be intimately
united to another substance of its own nature void of Life; the thing composed
of those two substances so united, must have Life: but so, that the first part
live substantially or by virtue of its Essence; the other, only by
participation of that essential Life. Certain therefore it is and evident, that
the Life of a Man comes immediately from, and depends upon the Presence of his
rational Soul in his Body. Which is the Truth we sought after. I say,
immediately; because the Life of the Soul is originally from God, who created
it a living Substance.

Of the Souls of Brute Animals, the same may not be affirmed. For though it be
true indeed, that their Souls also are the Principle or Fountain whence Life is
communicated to the Bodies they inform; yet it is equally true, that these Souls
being Material or Corporeal, their Life cannot be essential to the matter, of
which they are composed, but flows from, and depends upon the determinate
Modification of that matter, from which their Souls Result. So that in Brutes,
as it is the Mode or manner of the disposition of the Matter, not simply the
matter it self, that constitutes the Soul: So it is the Hypostasis or
subsistence of the same Mode, upon which alone the Life, that is, the Act,
Energy and Vigor of the Soul depends. No wonder then, if we believe the Souls
of all Brutes to be by their nature Mortal, and to be actually dissolved,
together with their Bodies, by Death.

That I may explain what I understand by the Modification of the matter which
is here supposed to constitute the Soul of a Brute; give me leave, in this
place to make a short halt (for it is not a digression) while I briefly declare
what my sentiments are concerning the Souls of Brutes.

I humbly, and with Submission to wiser Heads, conceive (1) That the diversity
of kinds observed among Brutes, proceeds immediately from the diverse
Modifications of the common matter of their Souls, and the respectively diverse
Organizations of their Bodies: from both which by admirable artifice conjoined
and united into one complex System or Machine, various faculties and
proprieties must of necessity result, by which those several kinds are among
themselves distinguished. (2) That the Specific or determinate Modification of
the Soul, and respective Organization of the Body, in every distinct kind; is
to be wholly attributed to the Plastic virtue or formative Power innate and
affixed to the Seed of the Generants. (3) That this Plastic virtue is
originally founded in the still efficacious Fiat pronounced in the act of
Creation, by the Divine Architect of all things: who commanding all Animals to
increase and multiply, gave them at the same time power to fulfill that
Command, by endowing their Seed with an active Principle to form, and
impressing upon that Agent, a certain idea or exemplar, according to which it
is obliged and directed how to form, and not otherwise; provided the Matter
upon which it operates, be obedient and susceptible of that Idea. So that the
Idea first conceived in the Divine Intellect, and then prescribed as a Pattern
to the Plastic Spirit, with which the genital matter is impregnated; being not
in all kinds, nay not in any two kinds of Animals one and the same, but a
peculiar Idea assigned to each kind: it comes to pass, that the Plastic Spirit
thus directed, regulated, and confined by the Law of Nature, does out of that
genital matter form the Soul, and Organize the Body of every Brute Animal of
any one of those numerous kinds, exactly according to the prototype of that
kind. And by this means I conceive all Brutes to be generated, both Soul and
Body; and their distinct Species, without confusion, or innovation, conserved
throughout all ages.

If I conceive amiss, be pleased to consider, that many excellent Wits,
treating of the same Subject, have done so before me; and that the Theorem it
self is so abstruse, that, as Cicero (2. Tusculan.) said of the various
Opinions of Philosophers about the nature of a Soul, Harum Sententiarum quae
verasit, Deus aliquis viderit; quae verisimillima, magna quaestio est: so may I
say, Man may dispute, what is most probable, but God alone knows what is true,
concerning the Souls of Beasts, and their production.

Notwithstanding this darkness of my way, I must adventure to go a little
farther in it, and endevor to explain (1) What the Substance of a Sensitive
Soul is, or of what Particles it is contexed; (2) In what the Life or Act and
Vigor of it consists; and (3) What are the primary Functions and Operations
of it.

As to the First then, it seems highly probable, that a Sensitive Soul is not a
pure Spirit (such as the rational Soul of Man is) but a mere Body, yet a most
subtle and extremely thin one, as being context of most minute and most
subtle Corpuscules or Particles. For, if it were Incorporeal, it could neither
act, nor suffer in the Body which it animate's or informs: not Act, because it
could not touch any part; not Suffer, because it could not be touched by any
part of the Body. But that it does both act and suffer in the Body, is most
evident from its Sensations of external Objects, from its affects or Passions
consequent to those Sensations, from the motions it causes in the Members
respective to those Passions, and from its Union and consension with the Body
in all things. I call it therefore a Body, and say, that it is composed, or by
an admirable contexture, made up of most thin and most subtle Particles, such
perhaps as are most smooth and most round, like those of Flame or Heat: because
otherwise it could not diffuse it self so swiftly through, nor cohere within
with the whole Body and all parts of it; and because when it departs out of the
Body, the Body is not perceived to lose any the least thing of its former Bulk,
Figure, or Weight; no more than a Vessel of Wine loses by the exhalation of its
Spirits, or a piece of Amber-Grise loses by emission of its Odor. So that we
may imagine, that if the whole sensitive Soul of an Elephant were conglomerated
or condensed, it might be contained in a place no bigger than a Cherry-stone.

These constituent particles or Elements of a Sensitive Soul, I suppose to be
for the most part analogous to the nature of Fire: because the natural heat of
all Animals comes from the Soul, and their Life consists in that Heat.

I also suppose them to be at first contained in the genital matter: the most
spirituose or active particles of which are in the act of formation, by the
Plastic Virtue Selected, Disposed, Formed, and as it were contexed into a
little Soul; and the grosser or less agil framed by degrees into an organical
Body of competent dimensions, and of Figure answerable to the Specific Idea by
the Divine Creator pre-ordained and assigned to that Species, to which the
Generants belong. And this I suppose, because the brisk, vigorous and swift
motions of the Soul in the Body, require it to be composed of particles most
subtle and active; and because as well the Soul, as the Body, is by all
Philosophers granted to be formed of the seminal matter; and because otherwise
Brutes cannot be properly said to generate their like in Specie, and by
consequence, the Power to that end entailed upon them, by the first and
universal command of God, increscite ac multiplicamini, would be rendr'd of no
effect.

I farther suppose, that this Embryon Soul after this manner newly formed, or
as it were kindled, is daily augmented, by accession and assimilation of like
Particles, as the Body is augmented out of the grosser and less fugitive Parts,
of the Aliment: till both Soul and Body have attained to the standard of
Maturity, or perfection of growth; thenceforth slowly declining in Vigor, by
degrees answerable to those of their ascent, till they arrive at their final
Period, Death, which dissolving the system or contexture of the Soul, leaves
the Particles of which it was composed, to fly away, and vanish into Air; and
the Body to be resolved into its first Principles, by slower corruption. For,
Nutrition and Augmentation are (as yesterday I proved) Operations of the
Plastic Virtue continually reforming the whole Animal: and the duration or
subsistence of the Soul is the Vinculum of the whole composition or concretion.
So that the Soul may be, by an apposite Metaphor, called the Salt or Condiment
that preserves the fleshy parts of the Body from putrefaction; as the Spirits
of Wine preserve the whole Mass of Liquor through which they are diffused, from
losing its Vigor and generose quality: and according to that oraculous saying
of Hippocrates, (...), the Soul is always generated anew till Death. Which very
thing is argument enough to evince, that if it be not really a most thin Flame,
finer and more gentle than that arising from the purest Spirit of Wine burning
within a paper Lantern, it is at least very like to Flame. For, as this, so
that is every moment regenerated, at once perishing and reviving: perishing by
continual dissipation of some Particles, and reviving by continual accension of
others out of its proper aliment; the more subtle and sulphurous Particles of
the Blood serving to repair the decays of the Soul, as the grosser Particles of
the succus nutritious are convenient to recruit the exhausted substance of the
Body. So that it was not without reason, that Democritus, Epicurus, Lucretius,
and Hippocrates, among the Ancients; and among the Moderns, Fernelius,
Heurnius, Cartesius, Hogelandus, Honoratus Faber, and Dr. Willis, held the Soul
of a Brute to be of a fiery substance: and that Aristotle himself called it
(...); and that the Ld. Chancellor Bacon (natural Hist. centur, 7.) makes one
of the two radical differences between Plants and Animals, to consist in this,
that the Spirits of living Creatures hold more of Flame.

Finally I conceive, that this sensitive Soul, however it be a thing mixed or
composed of Particles among themselves in Magnitude, Figure, Position, and
Motion somewhat various, is notwithstanding by admirable Artifice so
constituted, and the parts of it so contemperate and context, that it is made
one most thin, and yet continued and coherent substance, diffused through the
whole Body. Nor can its component Particles, while it subsists in the Body, be
dissociated (otherwise than by their own evolation, which is instantly supplied
by the accession and unition of others) no more than the natural smell, color,
or taste can be separated from an Apple, Peach or any other Fruit. This
universal diffusion of it through the Body, is what the Ld. Chancellor Bacon
calls, Branching of the Spirits (in Not. Hist. Cent. 7. Paragraph. 1) where he
says, the Spirits of things Animate are all continued with themselves, and
branched in Veins and secret Canales, as Blood is; and what Dr. Willis calls,
Coextension of the Soul to all parts of the Body. Granting then, that this most
thin, continued and diffused Substance is contained in the Body, and as it were
coherent with the same, thereby sustained and bounded; we may with the more
probability conceive, that it is to the Body the cause of all the Faculties,
Actions, Passions, and Motions belonging to its Nature, as the Organ of such a
Soul; that it keeps the Body together, at once both conserving, actuating,
managing and governing it; and that it can be no more separated from the Body,
without the dissolution thereof, than the Odor can be separated from
Frankincense, without destroying the nature of it. And this I think sufficient
to explain what I conceive of the first quaestion proposed, viz. of what
Substance the Soul of a Brute is, and of what Particles composed.

As to the Second, viz. wherein the Life of such a Soul does consist; it seems
to me probable, that since Life, according to the general notion of it, is
nothing but Usura quaedam vigoris, mobilitatisque facultatum activarum ejus
rei, cui inest; the Life of a sensitive Soul is immediately founded in a
certain Motion of the active and spirituose Particles of which it is composed:
as the Life of an Animal consists in the continuation of the same determinate
Motion of those Spirits, by which it was at first kindled; and of the actual
exercise of the Faculties that emerge or result from the union of the Soul with
its Body, by the Fabric of the various Organs thereof adapted to perform all
the various Functions, Offices and Actions requisite to consummate the nature
of such an Animal in Specie. What kind of Motion that is, in which, as in its
Origin, I conceive this Life to be founded; I shall by and by declare, when I
come to enquire what is the immediate Subject or Seat of Life; having first
endeavored to solve the

Third Question proposed, viz. what are the principal Faculties and Operations
of a sensitive Soul. These then are (as ye well know) all comprehended in Life,
Sense, and motion Animal: of which I shall here consider only the Second,
reserving the First till by and by, and the Last till the Clew of my method
has brought me to treat of it in its proper place.

As to the Faculty of Sense therefore, which constitutes the chief difference
between living Creatures and things inanimate, which Lucretius elegantly call's
animam ipsius animae, and the extinction or total privation of which is Death;
since I have supposed a sensitive Soul to be Material or Corporeal, I must seek
for this noble Power, whereby she is qualified, not only to perceive external
Objects, but to be also conscious of all her Perceptions, in Matter after a
certain peculiar manner, so or so disposed or modified; and in nothing else,
lest I recede from that supposition. But in what matter is it most likely to be
found, whatsoever the determinate modification requisite to create such a Power
shall at length be imagined to be: in the Matter of the Soul herself, or in
that of the Body she animates. Truly, if we distinctly examine either the Soul
or Body of a Brute, as not conjoined and united into one Compositum; we shall
have a hard task of it, to find in either of them, or indeed in any other
material Subject whatsoever, any thing to which we may reasonably attribute
such a Power of perceiving and selfmoving. But, if we consider the whole Brute,
as a Body animated, and by Divine Art of an infinite Wisdom designed, framed
and qualified for certain actions, Uses and ends: then we may safely conclude,
that a Brute is, by the law of the Creation or institute of Almighty God, so
made and comparated, as that from such a Soul and Body united, such a
confluence of Faculties should result, as are necessary and convenient to the
uses and ends for which it was designed. Do but convert your thoughts awhile
upon Mechanic Engines, and seriously contemplate the motions, powers and
effects of them. Composed they are all indeed of gross, solid and ponderose
Materials; and yet such is the design, contrivance and artifice of their
various parts, as that merely from their Figures, positions and motions of them
conjoined into one complex Machine, there do necessarily result certain and
constant operations, answerable to the intent and scope of the Artists, and far
transcending the forces of their divided ingredients. Before the invention of
Clocks and Watches, who could expect, that of Iron and Brass, dull and heavy
Metalls, a Machine should be framed; which consisting of a few Wheels indented
in the circumference, and a Spring commodiously disposed, should in its motions
rival the Celestial Orbs, and without the help or direction of any external
mover, by repeted revolutions, measure the successive spaces of Time, even to
Minutes and Seconds, as exactly almost as the revolutions of the Terrestial
Globe it self? And yet now such Machines are commonly made even by some
Black-Smiths, and Men's admiration of their pretty artifice long since ceased.
If then in vulgar Mechanics, the contrivance and advantageous dispositions of
matter, be more noble and efficacious than matter it self: certainly in a
living Automaton or Animal consisting of an active Soul and organic Body
intimately united, the Powers emergent from the force of such a Soul, and from
a conspiracy and cooperation of so many, and so various Organs, all so
admirably formed, ought to be esteemed incomparably more noble, more Energetic.
If the art of Man, weak and ignorant Man, can give to Bodies, of themselves
weighty, sluggish and unactive, figure, order, connection and motion fit to
produce effects above the capacity of their single Natures: What ought we to
think of the Divine art of the Creator, whose Power is infinite, because his
Wisdom is so? Cum magnes (cui Thales propterea animam attribuit) ferrum ad se
attrahit, domitrixque illa rerum omnium materia (ut ait Plinius, l. 36. c. 16.)
ad inane nescio quid currit; and acus ferrea eidem affricta, mundi cardines
perpetuo respicit: cum horologia nostra singulos diei noctisque hor as
constanter indicant: an non corpus aliud (praeter elementa) idque divinius
participare videntur? Quod si ex artis' dominio and gubernatione, tam praeclara
quotidie supra rerum ipsarum vires efficiantur; quid ex Naturae praecepto ac
regimine fieri putabimus, cujus ars solum imitatrix est? Et si hominibus
serviendo, tam admiranda perficiant; quid, quaeso, ab iis expectabimus, ubi
instrumenta fuerint in manu Dei? Harv. in lib. de generat. Animal. exercit. 70.
Could not He, think ye, who by the voice of his Will called the World out of
Chaos, and made so many myriads of distinct beings out of one and the same
universal Matter; could not He, I say, when he created Brutes, so fashion and
organize the various Parts and Members of their Bodies, thereto adjust the
finer and more active contexture of their Souls, and impress such motions upon
them, as that from the union and cooperation of both, a syndrome or confederacy
of Faculties should arise, by which they might be qualified and enabled to
live, to perceive, to know their perceptions, to move and act respectively to
the proper ends and uses of their Creation? Undoubtedly He could; and it is an
Article of my belief, that He did.

When ye hear a Church Organ, is it not as delightful to your Mind, as the
Music is to your Ear, to consider how so many grateful Notes and Consonances,
that compose the charming Harmony, do all arise only from Wind blown into a set
of Pipes, gradually different in length and bore, and successively let into
them by the apertures of their Valves? and do ye not then observe, the effect
of this artificial instrument highly to excel, both the Materials of it, and
the Hand of the Organist that play's upon it? The like Harmony perhaps ye have
sometimes heard from a musical Water-Work, that played of its self, without the
Fingers of a Musician to press down the Jacks, merely by the force of a Stream
of Water opening and shutting the Valves by turns, and in an order predesign'd
to produce the harmonical Sounds, Consonances and Modes requisite to the
composition, to which it had been set.

Now to this Hydraulic Organ ye may compare a Beast, whose Soul being indeed,
by reason of a certain modification of her matter, qualified to perceive the
various impressions made by objects upon the Nerves of the instruments of the
Senses; and to perform many trains of Actions thereupon: is yet so limited in
her Energy, that she can perform no other actions, but such as are (like the
various parts of an harmonical Composition) regularly prescribed (as the Notes
of a Tune are prict down on the tumbrell of our Instrument) by the Law of her
Nature, and determined for the most part to the same scope, the Conservation of
herself and the Body she animates. So that she seems qualified only to produce
a Harmony of Life, Sense and Motion: and this only from a certain contexture of
the spirituose Particles of the matter of which she is made, and from the
respective Organization of the Body in which she acts.

But from what kind of texture or modification of the supposed Particles, does
the faculty of Perceiving or discerning Objects arise? For, what I have
hitherto said, is too general to explain the particular reason of the thing
here inquired, viz. qua ratione fiat, ut res sentiens creetur ex rebus
insensilibus; whence it is, that a corporeal Soul, composed of matter in it
self wholly void of Sense, acquires the power of Sensation.

I say therefore, that this is indeed the difficulty that remain's here to be
solved: but such a difficulty, that I dare not attempt to solve; having much
more reason to believe, that it will to the end of the World remain
indissoluble. For, to comprehend, what particular Mode of composition or
contexture of insensil Matter, that is, that gives to it the nature of essence
and faculties of a sensitive Soul; seems to me far to transcend the capacity of
human understanding: and whosoever shall with attention and Judgment read what
that most acute, and no less profound Philosopher, Gassendus has written on
this Aenigmatic Question, Qui sensile gigni ex insensilibus possit? (in lib.
10. Diogen. Laertii) will (I presume) with him conclude, Hanc rem videri omni
humana perspicacia, and sagacitate superiorem. Leaving then this Problem, as I
found it, desperate; and ending the halt I, with your permission, made, to
consider the nature, Life and Principal Faculties of a sensitive Soul: I
proceed to the THIRD capital Enquiry designed in this discourse.

WHAT Opinions I at present hold to be most probable, as well concerning the
nature of Life in general, as touching the different origines of Human, and
Brutal Life in particular; ye have with obliging patience heard. Be pleased
with like patience to hear also what I have to say, concerning the SUBJECT
wherein the Life both of Man and Brutes seems primarily to Subsist.

That the Life of all Animals is originally as it were kindled in their Blood,
we may learn from the wisest of Men and Kings, Solomon himself. Who in his Book
of Wisdom (Cap. 2. v. 2. according to the Graec version of the LXX
Interpreters) introduces impious Men discoursing among themselves of the
short, uncertain and easily extinguishable Life of Man, in this manner; (...);
quoniam fumus est afflatus in naribus nostris, and serino scintilla in motu
cordis nostri; which our last Translators have thus englished; for the Breath
in our Nostrils is as Smoke, and a little Spark in the moving of our Heart. For
if by (...), and (...), Life be understood; we may from this remarkable text
safely infer, that Solomon was not far from holding the same Opinion concerning
the Fountain or Origin of Life, that is asserted by all our modern Anatomists,
viz. that Life first arises from, and is perpetually as it were kindled a new
by the motion of the Blood: though it be scarce probable, he had any the least
knowledge of the perpetual Circuition or Circulation of the Blood, first
discovered to the World by our thence immortal Dr. Harvey.

And by one infinitely greater than Solomon, even by the Author of Truth, and
giver of Life, God himself, we are certainly taught; that the Life of all
Animals, of what kind soever, is seated primarily, and does continually subsist
in the Blood, tanquam in subjecto suo primordiali; or at least in some certain
humor analogous to Blood, and therefore not unworthy to be called a vital
Humor. For (in Levit. cap. 17. v. 14.) He says expressly, (...): Ye shall eat
the Blood of no manner of Flesh; for the Life of all Flesh is the Blood thereof.

Being then by Divine Authority assured, that Life is the Offspring of the
Blood, and perpetually resident therein; we may with good reason distinguish
Life into Original, and Influent.

The Former is that, which is perpetually as it were kindled in the Blood
passing through the Ventricles of the Heart, not from the influx of any
adventitious Principle, but by the Sole power and energy of the vital Spirit
itself contained in, and ruling the Blood. For, the vital Motion itself comes
immediately from no other Principle but that ruling Spirit: and therefore the
Act of the same Spirit is, by consequence, Vital. And forasmuch as the reason
of the actual Heat of the Blood, consists only and wholly in that vital
Motion; that Heat also must be Vital, and the regent Spirit, that suscitates
that motion, first in it self, and then in the Blood, must be the true Fountain
and Origin of the vital Heat. This great truth certainly was not unknown to the
Ancients. For Virgil seems to more than hint it in that Verse of his (Aeneid.
lib. 10.). Una eademque via sanguis animusque sequantur:


And Suidas, where he says, (...); also (as Aristotle relates) Critias, who
held, Sentire, maxim proprium esse animae, atque hoc inesse propter sanguinis
naturam. To these may be subjoyned Thales Milesius, Diogenes, Heraclitus,
Alcmaeon etc. who all consented in this position, id animam esse, quod sua
natura vim movendi obtineret. Evident it is then, that this Doctrine, that the
vital Spirit is the principle of motion or heat, and consequently of Original
Life in the Blood, was taught by some of the ancient Philosophers; though
probably not so clearly and fully, as by the Anatomists of our Age, who have
had the advantage to know the whole mystery of the Circuition of the Blood,
whereof the former seem to have been ignorant.

Hence it appears, how far those of our late Writers have erred from the Truth,
who permitting their Phantacy to overrule their Judgment, and indulging I know
not what Chemical shall I say, or Chimerical Hypotheses drawn from the
contrariety between Alchali's and Acids, have confidently taught, that Life
arises from a conflict or Fight, of two Antagonists, whether of an Acid or
Saline and a Lixiviose; or of a Saline and Sulphureose; or of the Bile, Chyle,
or nitroaereal Spirit and the Blood. For, the vital Motion really proceeds (as
I said) from the very nature of the thing which causes it; that is, in the
Blood, from the vital Spirit regent of the Blood; which being naturally agil,
active and votatil, and always endevoring to extricate itself, necessarily
contends with the grosser parts that clogg and restrain it, and by that
contention excites motion in the Blood, and such a motion upon which the
vitality of the Blood depends. Impossible therefore it is, that Life should
come to the Blood from a mutual conflict of extraneous or foreign Principles,
whatsoever they are supposed to be.

The Later or Influent Life is communicated from the Blood now impregnated with
vital Spirits, to all parts of the Body. Of which much remains to be spoke in
its proper place.

Meanwhile, that we may know what is to be understood per curriculum vitae, the
race or course of Life; it is necessary for us to run through all the Uses and
Acts of the Blood, while it flows in a Circle to and through all parts of the
Body. For, these being attentively surveyed, will at last reward our diligence
with Light enough to direct us to judge more clearly of the Power and Energy of
as well Original, as Influent Life. But first (for perspicuites sake) we must
advert, that Arteriose Blood seems to differ from Venose, chiefly in this; that
in Arteriose Blood, the Heat or Motion Vital (for both are one thing, and so we
shall by and by find them to be) is actual; in venose, only in the way or
disposition to become actual; as will appear from our following discourse
concerning the Acts of the Blood in the race of Life.

Which are accounted in number five, viz. (1) Actual Generation of Original
Life, or of vital motion or heat in the Blood itself; (2) Excitation of the
Pulse of the Heart and Arteries; (3) Distribution of the Blood by virtue of
that pulsation; (4) Communication of Life to all parts of the Body, by means of
that distribution; and (5) Reduction of arteriose Blood to the state of Venose;
the exhalations of it being first, partly consumed, partly condensed and
absorp't into the Lympheducts. Of each of the Acts we must particu-larly
enquire.

The FIRST Act, viz. the Generation of Original Life in the Blood it self,
seems to be performed in this manner. The vital Spirit, rector of the Blood, by
its own natural force and expansive energy endevors to exagitate and expand the
Blood now again brought into the Ventricles of the Heart: while the grosser
parts of the Blood, by their nature more sluggish and unactive, resist and
hinder that endevor to expansion. From this resistance or checking, instantly
arises a certain Colluctation or mutual striving between the expansive motion
or endevor of the vital Spirits, on one part; and the renitency of the grosser
parts of the Blood, on the other. And from this Colluctation, an actual Heat is
quickly excited or kindled in the Blood: actual Heat being nothing else but an
expansive Luctation of the Particles of the Body or Subject in which it is; as
the illustrious Lord Chancellor Bacon has with admirable sagacity, from many
instances collected, in historia calidi, in novi Organi Page 218. Seeing
therefore, that this motion of the Blood consists in the expansive endevor of
the Spirits, and the reluctation of the other parts of it; this Motion,
consequently is actual Heat. But, because this expansive Luctation is not
hostil or noxious, but Amicable, Benign, and tending not only to the
conservation of the Blood, but also to the exaltation of all its Faculties and
Operations; and because it comes (as I said a little before) from within, from
the Spirit contained in, and ruling the Blood: therefore the Motion or Heat
thence resulting, is also Vital. For in that very expansive motion of the
Blood, does the formal reason of Life originally consist.

This being a Theorem not a little abstruse, and of very great Moment, chiefly
to Physicians; it is requisite, I should endevor both to clear and establish it.
That I may do so, I beg leave to set before you a short Series or Train of
certain Propositions; of which the subsequent depending (like the Links of a
Chain) upon the antecedent, they may at length convince you of the Truth from
thence to be concluded.

PROPOS. I.
The Heat is only Motion.

THe verity of this is apparent (1) From Flame, which is perpetually and
violently Moved. (2) From the like agitation of all parts of servent or boiling
Liquors; (3) From the incitation and increment of Heat caused by Motion; as in
blowing up Fire by Bellows or Winds: (4) From the very extinction of Fire and
Heat by all strong compression, which arresteth the Motion thereof, and
instantly causes it to cease: (5) From hence, that most Bodies are destroyed,
at least sensibly altered by all Fire, and by strong and vehement Heat; which
introducing a Tumult, Perturbation, and rapid Motion upon their parts, by
degrees totally dissolves the cohesion or continuity of them. Nevertheless this
Proposition is to be understood with due limitation, or as it stands for the
Genus of Heat: not that Heat generates Motion, or that Motion generates Heat
always (tho both these be in some things true (but that Heat it self, or the
very essence of Heat is Motion, and nothing else; yet a certain peculiar sort
of Motion, or limited by the differences to be subjoyned.

PROPOS. II.
That Heat is an Expansive motion, by which a Body strives to dilate it self,
and recede into a larger space, than what it before possessed.

THis also is evident (1) In Flame, where the Fume or Fat Exhalation manifestly
widens itself, and spreads into Flame; (2) In all boiling Liquors, which
sensibly swell, rise up, and emit Bubbles; still urging the process of
self-dilation, until they become more extense, and are turned into Vapor, or
Smoke, or Air; (3) In Wood and all other combustible matter set on Fire, where
is sometimes an exudation of moisture, always an evaporation; (4) in the
melting of Metals; which being most compact Bodies, do not easily swell and
dilate themselves; and yet the Spirit of them, being once excited by Fire,
begins instantly to dilate itself, and continues to push away and drive off the
grosser parts, till their coherence being interrupted, they become liquid: and
if the Heat be more and more intended, it dissolves and converts much of the
fixed Metal into a volatile Substance; Gold only excepted: (5) in a Staff of
Wood or Cane, which being heat in hot Embers, becomes easily flexible; a sign
of internal dilatation: (6) In Air above all things, which instantly and
manifestly expands itself by a little Heat: (7) In the contrary nature of Cold;
which contracts most Bodies, forcing them into narrower spaces, and shrinking
their dimensions; so that in extreme Frosts, Nayls have been observed to fall
out of Doors, and Vessels of Brass to crack, with many other admirable effects
of great Cold, noted by the Honorable Mr. Boil in his most accurate History of
Cold. So that Heat and Cold, though they do many actions common to both, are
yet e diametro contraries in this; that Heat gives a Motion expansive and
dilating, but Cold gives a Motion contractive and condensing.

PROPOS. III.
That Heat is a Motion expansive, not uniformly through the whole Subject, but
through the lesser Particles thereof; not free, but checked, hindered, and
repulsed or reverberate: So that the Motion becomes interrupt, alternative,
perpetually trembling, and striving, and incited by that resistance and repuls.
Whence comes the Fury of Fire and Heat pent in and opposed in their Expansion.

OF this we have instances. (1) In Flame, boiling Liquors, melted Metals, glass
Furnaces etc. all which perpetually tremble, swell up, and again subside
alternately: (2) In Fire, which burns more fiercely, and scorches more ardently
in frosty Weather: (3) in common Weather-glasses; in which when the Air is
expanded uniformly and equally, without impediment or repuls, no Heat is
perceived: but if you hold a Pan of burning Coals near the bottom, and at the
same time put a Cloth dipped in cold Water upon the top; the check and repuls
thereby given to the expansion of the Air, will cause a manifest trepidation
in the Water, and intend the borrowed Heat of it. (4) In Winds pent in, which
though they break forth with very great violence, so that their motion must
needs be extremely rapid and dilating; do not yet from thence conceive any
sensible Heat: because the motion is in all the particles of them equally, and
proceeds uniformly, without check or interruption: whereas in the burning Wind,
from thence called by Aristotle (in Meteor.) (...), great heat seems to be
generated from the frequent repulses and repercussions of its rapid Motion,
insomuch that it scorches where it blows; chiefly in narrow and deep Valleys,
where it is kept in on both sides, and wheeled about into eddies or
Whirle-Winds. (5) In the very manner of Ustion or burning, which is always
transacted through the minute Pores of the Body burnt; so that Ustion does
always undermine, and penetrate, and prick, as if it were done by the points of
a great many Needles. Thence it seems to come also that Aqua Fortis, Chrysulca
and other dissolving Liquors (if proportionate to the Body on which they act)
do the work of Fire, by their penetrating, pungent, and corroding Motions.

PROPOS. IV.
That this expansive, repulsed, alternative and penetrating Motion requisite to
the generation of Heat, ought to be also rapid; and to be made by Particles,
minute indeed, but not reduced to extreme subtilty.

THe verity of this proposition may be collected (1) From a comparation of the
works of Fire, with the works of Time or Age. For, Age dries, consumes,
undermines, and incinerates, no less than Fire, yea far more subtly: but
because the motion that causes these effects, is both very slow, and performed
by Particles extremely minute; therefore no sensible Heat is thereby produced.
(2) from comparing the dissolution of Gold, with that of Iron; the first, in
Aqua Regis; the other in Aqua Fortis. For Gold is dissolved calmly, without
tumult or effervescence raised in the dissolvent: Iron, not without vehement
excitation of Heat: probably because in Gold, the ingress of the Water of
Separation is slow, mild, and subtly insinuating, and the yiedling of the
parts of the Gold easy; but in Iron, the ingress is rough, difficult, and with
conflict, the parts of the Iron with greater obstinacy resisting the motion of
the dissolvent. (3) From Gangrens and Mortifications; which invade and spread
without inducing much either of heat or pain, by reason the motion of
putrefaction is both slow, and performed by Particles extremely subtle;
otherwise it would certainly cause Pain in the part affected.

Now from these Propositions (the three latter of which are certain necessary
Limitations of the first) we may deduce this genuine conclusion; That Heat is a
certain Motion, expansive, checked or repulsed, striving, quickened or incited by
opposition, performed by minute Particles, and with conflict and some
impetuosity.

Which to me (I declare) seems to be so perspicuous and convincing, that I dare
promise, that if any man be able to excite a Motion tending to dilatation or
expansion of the Movent, and then to repress that motion, so as the dilatation
may not proceed equally and uniformly, but prevail and be repulsed alternately:
he shall thereby most certainly generate Heat in the Body whose parts are so
moved, of what kind or constitution soever the Body shall be. For, whether it
be a Body Elementary (as they speak) or luminose or opaque; rare, or dense;
locally expansed, or contained within the bounds of its first dimensions;
tending to dissolution, or remaining in its stare; whether it be Animal,
Vegetable, or Mineral, Water, or Oil, or Air, or any other substance
susceptive of the Motion described; it will make no difference, as to the
effect aimed at, the production of actual Heat.

Why then should I not believe, that Nature has instituted such an actual
Motion or Heat in the Blood of Animals, that Life Original might be therein
perpetually generated: since to make that actual Heat also Vital, nothing more
is required (as I said before) but that it arise from an internal Principle or
Mover, viz. the vital Spirits ingenite in the Blood; and that it be amicable,
benign and placid, as in the State of Health it always is; and since both those
requisite conditions or qualifications are found in the motion of the Blood? If
in the assertion of the precedent Propositions, or in the deduction of my
conclusion from them, I have from weakness of Judgment, admitted any
Paralogism; I shall receive the discovery thereof as a singular favor from any
man of greater perspicacity, and more skilful in the art of reasoning rightly,
and will ingenuously acknowledge and retract my error. Meanwhile I acquiesce in
this persuasion, that the vital Heat of Animals, is an expansive Motion of the
Spirits of the Blood, somewhat checked or repulsed, but still endevoring with
sufficient force, and alternately prevailing: which I owe, partly to the Ld.
Chancellor Bacon (in novo Organo, ubi agit de praerogativis instantiarum, in
vindemiatione 1.) partly to his equal sectator, Dr. Glisson, who had the
felicity to improve whatsoever he had borrowed, and to raise illustrous
Theories from obscure hints.

But hold a little, and give me space to reflect upon what I have lately said.
Have I not in this place incurred the danger of being accused of contradicting
myself? It Is not half an Hour since I declared my assent to that common
Doctrine of all Theologs, and most Philosophers, that the Life of a Man does
originally spring from, and perpetually depend upon the union of his rational
Soul with his Body. And now I affirm, that the Life of all Animals (Man himself
not excepted) consists in the expansive motion of the Spirits in their Blood.
Are not these two assertions to be numbered among (...), things inconsistent,
yea manifestly repugnant each to the other? If either of them be true, is not
the other necessarily false?

To obviate this formidable accusation, I say; that these two positions, though
seemingly opposite, are yet really capable of reconciliation each to the other;
and by consequence, both may be true. For (1) well known it is to all versed in
the Jewish Commentaries upon the Pentateuch, that the most learned Rabbis,
interpreting these words in the History of Man's Creation; Deus inspiravit in
faciem hominis spiraculum vitae; to show the excellency of Man above all his
fellow Creatures, give this Paraphrase upon them: Homini Deus in creatione
imaginem suam indidit, and inspiravit halitum vitae duplicis, mortalis and
immortalis. So that according to the Sense of this Paraphrase, at least if I
understand it rightly, God was pleased to give to Man a double Life, not two
lives successive, one before Death, the other after; but two conjoined in the
Body: one Immortal, which can be no other but that which is essential to the
rational Soul, and communicated to the Body, by virtue of the intimate union of
those two so different substances; the other Mortal, common to Brutes also, and
extinguishable by death, which I deduce from the expansive motion of the
Spirits of the Blood. Nor has this interpretation of the Jewish Doctors been
(for ought I know) rejected by the Christian Schools, as unsound, much less as
Heretical: and therefore I humbly conceive, it is not unlawful for me to
embrace it.

(2) That in this Life, every individual Man has also two distinct Souls; one
Rational, by which he is made a reasonable Creature; the other, Sensitive, by
virtue of which he becomes a Sensitive Animal: and that these are coexistent,
conjunct, and cooperating in him, until death, which delivers the first into a
free enjoyment of her essential immortality, but dissolves the latter into the
Elements or matter, of which it was composed; is an opinion very ancient,
highly consentaneous to reason, and defended, not only by many eminent
Philosophers as well antique as modern, but even by some Divines of great
learning, Piety and Fame; among whom I need name only Gassendus, of the Roman,
and Dr. Hammond, of our Church. The former of which has professedly asserted
it in Physiologia Epituri, cap. de Animae sede: the other in Notes on the 23.
Verse of the 5 Chap. of St. Paul's first Epist. ad These. Where interpreting
these Words of the divinely inspired Author; (...), integer vester spiritus,
and anima, and corpus etc; he conceived, that the Apostle divides the whole Man
into his three constituent parts, viz. the Body, which comprehends the Flesh
and Members; the Sensitive or Vital Soul, which is common also to Brutes; and
the Spirit, by which is denoted the reasonable Soul originally created by God,
infused into the Body, and from thence after death to return to God; and this
his exposition he confirms by agreeing Testimonies of many Ethnic Philosophers,
and some ancient Fathers. Much more I should here have said in defense of this
opinion, had I not thought it less labor to direct the unsatisfied, to a
little Treatise entitled a Natural History of the Passions, published about
three Years past, where the Author professedly handles it. Now if either of
these two recited opinions be granted to be true (and it is no easy task to
refute either of them) then both my positions, that occasioned my recital of
them, may be also true; and so the supposed inconsistency of them solved.
Presuming then, that what I have said concerning the First Act of the Blood, or
the Generation of Original Life in the Blood, and the manner how it is
performed, is probable, and sufficient to explicate the Theorem; I here
conclude my discourse of it.

The SECOND Act of the Blood in the race of Life is, the Excitation of the
Motion or Pulsation of the Heart and Arteries, which seems to be done in this
manner. The Blood descended partly out of the Trunc of the Vena Cava, partly
from the Arteria Venosa, into the Ears or Portals of the Heart; and there
beginning its expansive motion, fills them even to distention; and by that
distention irritates or incites their Fibers, which are numerose and strong, to
contract themselves, by the motion of Restitution. By this constriction of the
Fibers on all sides, the cavities of the Ears of the Heart are necessarily
closed or straightened; and by consequence, the Blood newly admitted into them
is sequeez'd out into the two Ventricles of the Heart, forcing the Valves
called Tricuspides, or Trisulcae, which are seated at the Gates or Mouths of
the Ventricles, and open from without inward, to open themselves and give way.
The Blood thus propuls'd into the Ventricles of the Heart, and somewhat
increasing or intending its expansive Motion, fills them even to distention,
and to the shutting of the Valves, which it so lately opened, so that at that
time no more Blood can be admitted, nor what is admitted, recoyl or return by
the Wicket through which it entered. The Ventricles of the Heart being thus
filled and distended, and by virtue of their Fibers spontaneously contracting
themselves into a much narrower compass, strongly compress the Blood contained
in them, and force it to thrust back three other Valves called Sigmoides, which
open outward, and to rush forth, partly into the Venae Arteriosa leading it
into the Lungs from the right Ventricle, partly into the Aorta or great artery
from the left. By this constriction of the two Ventricles of the Heart, which
is their proper and natural Motion, the Circulation (as they call it) of the
Blood is chiefly effected: that Blood which is out of the right Ventricle
expressed through the Vena Arteriosa into the Lungs, being impelled forward
till it arrive in the Arteria Venosa that brings it into the left Ventricle;
and that which is expelled from the left Ventricle into the great Artery, being
by the Branches thereof distributed into all the parts of the Body. The Blood
being in this manner squirted out, and the irritation ceasing; the Ventricles
instantly restore themselves to their middle position, and make way for the
reception of more Blood from the Ears of the Heart, as before; and then being
by the Influx and expansive Motion thereof, again distended and irritated,
repeat their Constriction, and thereby eject it: and this reciprocation or
alternate dilatation and constriction, or Diastole and Systole of the two
Ventricles of the Heart, together with the Arteries continued to them, is what
we call their Pulsation, and the grand cause of the perpetual Circuition of the
Blood: as the alternate expansion and repression of the Spirits, during that
pulsation, is that motion which Dr. Glisson first named, the Mication of the
Blood, comprehending the double motion in that single appellation.

The Blood then it is, that alone excites the Pulsation of the Heart and
Arteries by distending them; not by reason of any actual Ebullition, or any
considerable Rarifaction, it undergoes in either of the Ventricles, or in their
avenues; but (as I humbly conceive) merely by its quantity rushing in.

Not by Ebullition or Effervescence, as Aristotle, who gave it the Name of
(...), believed; (1) Because no ebullition of any Liquor whatsoever, proceeding
either from external Heat, or from intestine Fermentation, is constantly equal
or uniform; whereas the Pulse of the Heart and Arteries, and consequently the
motion of the Blood that causes it, is in Men healthy, temperate, and
undisturbed by Passion, constantly equal or of the same tenor and rhythm. (2)
Because the greater the Ebullition of the Blood, the greater would be the
pulsation of the Heart: but in burning Fevers, though there be a very great
effervescence of the Blood, arising from an extraordinary effort of the vital
Spirits contending against oppression by the putrefactive or febrile Ferment;
yet the Pulse most frequently is low and weak, as Galen himself observed. (3)
Because, in living dissections, if either of the Ventricles of the Heart, or
the great Artery be pierced with a lancet; pure and florid Blood indeed will
spring from the Wound, in every Systole; but not frothy, not boiling, nor
meteorized; nay, not to be, by any sign of difference, distinguished from Blood
at the same time emitted from the Vena Cava of the same Animal. An Argument
certainly of itself sufficient to subvert the Ebullition of the Blood in the
Ventricles of the Heart, excogitated by Aristotle (at least if he were Author
of the Book de Respiratione vulgarly ascribed to him) to solve the Phenomenon
of the Pulse, and to this day obstinately defended by many learned men, seduced
by the Authority of his great name. (4) If the Blood suffered any such
Ebullition, an immersion or plunging of the Body into cold Water, would depress
and calm it, and consequently repress the motion of the Heart: but the
experience of diverse attesteth the contrary. For these reasons, therefore,
among many others here, for brevities sake, omitted, I reject the supposed
Ebullition of the Blood passing through the Ventricles of the Heart.

I reject also the sudden and impetuose Rarifaction attributed to it by the
greatest of Aristotle's Rivals, Monsieure des Carts, and strenuously propugned
by Regius and others his Disciples. For (1) If you open the Thorax of any more
perfect Animal alive, and while the Heart yet continues to beat strongly,
thrust an incision Knife into either of the Ventricles, or into the great
Artery; the Blood thence issuing will not appear spumose or rarefied at all,
but indistinguishable from Blood taken out of the Vena Cava, just at its
entrance into the right Ear of the Heart. (2) If you cut out the Heart itself,
and squeez out all the Blood contained in it; you shall observe it to vibrate
itself a little, and to continue the rhythm of its Pulses, till it be grown
cold; and this, not from Blood rarefied, for now there remains none within its
Ventricles; but most probably from the relics of the vital Spirits, which yet
inhering in the Fibers and little Pullies of the Heart, are the cause that they
alternately contract and relax themselves. (3) The musculose Flesh of the Heart
is of a contexture too firm and solid, to be inflated by a little Froth; and a
greater force is required so nimbly to agitate so massive and ponderose a
Machine. (4) If the Blood were so impensly rarefied in both the Ventricles of
the Heart, doubtless the Orifices both of the Vena Arteriosa, and of the Aorta,
ought to be much larger; because the rarefied Blood would require more of space
to its egress, than to its ingress. (5) There would arise a confusion of the
motion of the Heart and its Valves; for the diastole of these would be
coincident with the diastole of that, which would annihilate the use of the
Valves: both which are repugnant to experience, and to the institute of Nature.
(6) No reason, why the Blood should be pufft up by great rarifaction in the
Heart, only that it may sink and be condensed again, so soon as it is thence
emitted into the Arteries: for, what use can there be of the supposed
rarifaction, which the very next moment cease? These then are the reasons
that hinder me from believing, that a drop or two of Blood can be, by the heat
of the Heart, so extremely rarefied, as to replenish and distend the Ventricles
thereof, when the Cavity of the least of the Ventricles, in a Man of middle Age
and Stature, will easily contein, according to Dr. Harvey's account, two
Ounces; much more, according to Dr, Lower's (lib. de cord cap. 3. and when I
am fully convinced, that in the State of Health and Quiet, the whole mass of
Blood is transmitted through the Heart at least thirteen times in the space of
an Hour, supposing no more than 2000 Pulses in that time: which would be
impossible, if only a few Drops were received into each Ventricle, in every
Diastole, and expelled again by the following Systole. For, evident it is even
to Sense, that in the Diastole, both Ventricles of the Heart are filled with
Blood even to distention; so that if you feel them at that time with your Hand,
they will be found tense and hard: and that by the Systole, all the Blood
received is expressed; the Sides being then strongly drawn together, and the
Cone pulled up toward the Basis, so that little or no room can be left within
to contein Blood. If you open an Eel or Viper alive, you may observe the Heart
to become white in the Systole, because all the Blood contained in it, is then
squeezed out: and red again in the Diastole, from new Blood admitted and
filling it. Nor are we to doubt, but the same happens in the Hearts of greater
Animals also, though the Parenchyma or muscular Flesh of the Heart be in them
so thick, as to hinder the Eye from discerning the like alternate change of
Colors, in their constriction and dilatation.

Taking then the total Repletion of the ventricles in every Diastole, and the
total Exinanition of them, by every Systole, for granted; and Supposing, that
in a Man of a middle size, each of the Ventricles of the Heart conteins about
two ounces of Blood, when it is filled; and that the Pulses of the Heart made
in the space of an Hour, exceed not the number of 2000 (which yet is the lowest
computation I have hitherto met with among Anatomists) it will necessarily
follow, that no less than 4000 Ounces of Blood are transmitted through the
Heart in the space of an Hour, which amount to 332 Pints at 12 Ounces to the
Pint; whereas the quantity of Blood contained in the Body of a Man of a
Sanguine complexion, tall Stature, and plentiful Diet, is not allowed by
accurate Anatomists to exceed 25 Pints at most. Let us therefore grant our Man
to have that proportion of 25 Pints, to be transmitted through his Heart by 2
Ounces at every pulsation: and the consequence will be, that the whole Mass of
his Blood must pass and repass through his Heart thirteen times in the space of
an Hour, or else the pulsation of his Heart, and his Life too must cease, for
want of Blood to continue the Motion. But since few Men have either so much
Blood, or (in the state of Health) so few Pulses, as we have now supposed; it is
highly consentaneous, that in most Men all their Blood runs through the Heart
oftener than thirteen times in every Hour. Now to come to the scope or use of
this Computation; if only a few drops of Blood rarefied be transmitted through
the Heart of a Man at every Pulse, 2000 pulses could not transmit so much as a
fourth part of 25 Pints in an Hour; and in the mean time all the rest of it
must stagnate, and grow cold; and then what would become of his Life, which
depends upon the actual Heat and perpetual Circuition of the Blood? This
argument certainly is, if not apodictical, yet morally convincing, that
Monsieur des Carts his opinion of the impense Rarifaction of the Blood, in the
Ventricles of the Heart, is manifestly erroneous.

There remain's then nothing to which the Diastole of the Ventricles of the
Heart can be reasonably attributed, but the Quantity of Blood flowing into and
distending them. For, the substance of the Heart being, as well without as
within, Musculose, Robust, Thick, and intertext with Fibers of all orders or
positions; and furnished also with fleshy Columns, which being commodiously
placed in the Ventricles, help much to the constriction of them: so soon as the
Blood flowing in, has distended them, they being thereby irritated, instantly
begin to contract themselves, by that contraction girding in the Ventricles,
and squeezing out the Blood. After the same manner, that the Stomach, Gutts,
Bladder, Womb, etc. membranose and fibrose Cavities of the Body, when they are
above measure filled and distended, do, by spontaneously constringing
themselves, forcibly expel whatever irritates them. And that in every Diastole
of the Heart, Blood rushes into the Ventricles in a quantity sufficient to
distend them; seems inferrible even from this, that it is abundantly brought
in, both by the Vena Cava, and by the Arteria Venosa; and that it is
continually driven on thitherward, partly from the habit of the Body, by the
tonic motion of the parts, partly from the Lungs by help of their motion,
according to the fundamental Laws of its Circuition. But why do I insist upon
Reasons, when an easy Experiment offers itself to determine the Question? In a
Dog opened alive, if the two Vessels that bring Blood into the Heart, namely
the Vena Cava and Arteria Venosa, be girt with Ligatures, so that the course of
the Blood be there intercepted; the Ventricles by three or four Systoles
emptying themselves, their orderly pulsation will cease, only a little
undulating Motion, and irregular vibration will thereupon immediately succeed:
and upon solution of the Ligatures, and influx of Blood, the Heart will
instantly repete its pulsation. I conclude therefore, that the Blood causes
the Dilatation of the Heart, not by its Ebullition, nor by its Rarifaction, but
only by its replenishing and distending the Ventricles thereof: and that the
Heart, by its spontaneous constriction expresses the Blood into the Lungs and
great Artery; and so the motion of both is perpetuated.

I admit nevertheless a certain gentle and pacate expansive Motion of the Blood
to be excited in the Ears and Ventricles of the Heart, as necessary to the
generation of Original Life, though not of force sufficient to move the whole
Machine of the Heart. For the vital Spirits in the Blood, though brisk and
vigorose in their endevor to expansion, chiefly when they are agitated by the
motion of the Heart, are notwithstanding somewhat checked and repulsed by the
reluctance of the grosser Particles of the Blood; and therefore it cannot be
imagined, they should suffice to dilate the Heart also.

I admit also a constant invigoration of the Fibers and fleshy Columns or
Pullies of the Heart, by a continual Influx from the Brain; that they may the
more expeditely and strongly, and without lassitude, perpetuate the Systole of
the Heart. For, that such an Influx is necessary every Moment to recruit their
Vigor, and conserve the due firmness of their tone, is evident from this
singular Experiment. If the Nerves of the eight pare be constringed closely by
ligatures, in the neck of a Dog; ye will admire what a sudden and strange
mutation will thereupon ensue. The Heart* which before performed its motions
moderately and regularly, will instantly begin to tremble and palpitate, and
the poor Animal will labor of anxiety and extreme difficulty of breathing,
while the ligatures continue on the Nerves above: but upon removing them, all
those dismal Accidents (which are perhaps to be ascribed to the surcharge of
the Heart and Lungs by Blood not so fast discharged, as it is imported; and
that by reason the Systoles are rendered weak and languid, the influx from the
Brain, that should invigorate the contracting Fibers and Pullies, being
intercepted) all the Accidents, I say, will foon cease, and the Heart renew its
pulsation, as before. To this Anatomic Experiment I might have added Arguments
of the same importance, drawn from the Palsy and Convulsions to which the
Heart itself is liable, had not the industrious Dr. Lower, Author of the
alleged experiment, prevented me, lib. de motu cordis cap. 2. and were I not
conscious, that I have staid too long upon the cause and manner of the
Excitation of the Pulsation of the Heart and Arteries, or second Act of the
Blood in the race of Life..

Proceed we therefore to the THIRD, viz. the Distribution of the Blood into all
parts of the Body; which is an act wholly Mechanic, and to be attributed to the
Systole of the Heart and Arteries thereto continued. To the Constriction of the
Heart, because the Blood contained in the right Ventricle, is thereby of
necessity expressed into the Vena Arteriosa, and so into the Lungs; and that in
the left, is thence expelled into the great Artery, and driven on through the
Branches thereof into all the parts of the Body. Nor can it seem strange, that
this Constriction of the Heart should be effected with force sufficient to
impell the Blood in a continued stream through the Pipes of the Arteries, till
it arrive at the extremities of them, yea till it enter into the very substance
of the parts in which they are terminated. For if we attently consider (1) the
structure of the heart, that it is a Muscle of a substance Solid, thick, and
firmly compacted; every where intertext with various Fibers, and corroborated
within with fleshy Columns and fibrose Pullies; and of a Figure fit to perform
vigorose Motions: (2) that if you put your Hand upon the Heart of any large
Animal opened alive, you shall find it hard and tense, not easily yielding to
the Gripe: and if you thrust a Finger into either of the Ventricles, you shall
feel it to be with great violence girt and pincht by the Systole thereof: (3)
that if you pierce the great Artery near the Original of it, with a Lancet,
the Blood will be in every contraction, squirted thence with incredible
impetuosity, and to great distance: (4) that in some Men the Heart invaded by
Convulsions, has vibrated itself with such stupendous Force, that the very
Ribbs have been thereby broken; as the observations recorded by Fernelius,
Hollerius, Forestus, and Carolus Piso attest: (5) that in Horses and Dogs,
after they have run, the beating of their Hearts may be plainly and distinctly
heard to a considerable distance: If (I say) we consider these things, we shall
soon be induced to believe, that the Systole of the Heart is more than
sufficient to impell the Blood to the extreme arteries. And as for the
spontaneous Constriction of the Arteries; that also must needs contribute
somewhat to the Pulsion of the Blood, by lessening the Pipes through which it
flows. Remarkable it is, that the Contraction of the Arteries is not
Synchronical or coincident with the contraction of the Heart. For, the Systole
of the Heart is performed in the time of its contractive Motion; and the
Diastole, in the time of the remission thereof: but on the contrary, the
Diastole of the Arteries is performed when they endevor to contract themselves;
and their Systole, when they remit that endevor. The reason is, because the
exclusion of a sufficient quantity of Blood out of the Ventricles of the Heart
being performed, the first cause that impugned the contraction of the Arteries,
viz. their distention by that Blood rushing into them, instantly ceases, and
the three Semilunar Valves are shut, to prevent the regress of it; and at the
same time, the rest of the Blood in the Arteries remits its expansive Motion,
which was the other cause that hindered the Arteries from contracting
themselves, and those two impediments removed for that time, the Fibers of the
Arteries now prevail, and by contracting themselves, return to their middle
posture of quiet; by that contraction pressing the Blood forward on its
Journey, till it be impelled into the substance of the Parts.

From, whence after it has done its Office, it is soon forced to return toward
the Heart, through the Veins; partly by more Blood flowing after and pressing
it behind; partly by the renitency and tonic Motion of the parts; partly by the
tension of the Muscles in the habit of the Body; and in fine, by the Pulsation
of the Vena Cava, which though but light, is yet perceptible at its approach to
the Heart, where (to that end) it is furnished with fleshy Fibers; so that from
thence Walaeus (in Epist. de motu Sanguinis) concluded, that the circular
Motion of the Blood beginn's from that part of the Vena Cava. If I do not here
particularly explain the reason and manner how each of these various Causes
conduces to the effect ascribed to their Syndrome or concurse; it is because I
presume, that the whole History of the Circuition of the Blood, with all its
helps and circumstances, is well known to the greatest part of my Auditors; and
because I have to the

FOURTH Act in the race of Life, which beginns where the distribution of the
Blood through the Arteries end's: and is the Communication of Life from the
Blood distributed, to all parts of the Body. For these receiving the Blood
impregnate with Original Life, are thereby in a moment heated anew,
invigorated, incited to expand themselves, and made participant of Life
Influent; i. e. they are stirred up to the actual exercise of Augmentation or
nutrition, and of all other their Faculties. And this Participation of Life is
that vital Influx, with so great Encomiums celebrated by Anatomists; and the
Heat of the Body, both actual and vital; and the general cause (at least Sine
qua non) of all the noble Actions of the whole Body. I say, the General Cause;
because it is this influent Vital Heat, that revives and stirrs them up to
activity, when without it all parts would be dull, flaggy and torpid: and yet
notwithstanding it is not sufficiently able of itself to produce those Effects,
unless so far forth as it is at the same time contemperated and determinated
to this or that particular effect, by that which some call the peculiar
temperament, and others the Spiritus insitus, of that Member or Part, whose
proper Office it is to cause that effect. For, this vital Heat, or general
enlivening and invigorating influence operates one thing in the Liver, another
in the Spleen, another in the Stomach and Gutts, another in the Kidneys, and
Sic de caeteris: assisting and promoting the faculties of all parts, so that no
one can execute its proper function without it: as, the irradiation of the Sun
is requisite to make the Ground fruitful, and to excite the Seeds of all
Vegetables lying in it; and indeed this vital Heat is to Animals, the Sun
within them, their Vesta, perpetual Fire, familiar Lar, Calidum innatum,
Platonic Spark pepetually glowing: not that (like our common Fire) it shines,
burns and destroys; but that by a circular and incessant Motion, from an
internal Principle, it conserves, nourishes and augments, first itself, and
then the whole Body. Unde (Entius noster (in Antidiatribae page 6.) in hunc
finem extructum est cor, quod calentis sanguinis rivulis totum corpus perpetim
circumluit. Cumque Plantae omnes, a Solis benigna irradiatione vigorem,
vitamque adeo suam praecipue mutuentur: animalibus caeteris cordis calor
innascitur; unde, tanquam a Microcosmi sole, parts omnes jugiter
refocillantur. Ac propterea minus placet, quod plantarum germen Corculi nomine
indigitaveris. Good reason then had our most Sagacious Harvey, to sing so many
Hymns, as it were, to this Sol Microcosmi, that continually warms, comforts,
and revives us. Discoursing of the Primogeniture of the Blood in an Embryon
(Lib. de Generat. Animal. exercit. 50.) he falls into this elegant encomium of
it. Ex observatis constat, Sanguinem esse partem genitalem, fontem vita, primum
vivens and ultimo* moriens, sedemque animae primariam; in quo (tanquam in
font) calor primo, and praecipue abundaet, vigetque and a quo reliqu^^ omnes
totius corporis parts calore influente foventur, and vitam obtinent. Quippe
calor Sanguinem comitatus, totum corpus irrigat, fovet, and conservat. --
Ideoque concentrato, fixoque leviter sanguine (Hippocrates, (...), nominavit)
veluti in lipothymia, timore, frigore externo, and febrium insultu contingit,
videas illico totum corpus frigescere, torpere, and pallore livoreque perfusum
languescere: evocato autem rursum sanguine, hui! quam subito omnia calent
denuo, florent, vigent, splendentque? -- Nec jecur munus suum publicum
exsequitur, sine influentia sanguinis and caloris per arteriam Caeliacam. Imo
vero Cor ipsum, per Arterias Coronarias, influentem una cum sanguine
caliditatem vitamque accipit. Quippe nullibi est caloris affluentia, citra
sanguinis influxum per arterias. -- Sanguis denique totum corpus adeo
circumfluit, and penetrat, omnibusque ejus partibus calorem and vitam jugiter
impertit; ut Anima primo and principaliter in ipso residens, illius gratia,
tota in toto, and tota in qualibet part (ut vulgo dicitur) inesse, merito
censeatur. In another place (Exercit. 51.) vindicating the Supremacy of it over
all parts of the Body, he breaks forth into this memorable expostulation: Si
Neoterici quidam vere dicant, animalium semen coitu emissum, esse animatum;
quidni pari ratione affirmemus, animam esse in sanguine; cumque hic primo
generetur, nutriatur, and moveatur; ex eodem quoque animam primum excitari, and
ignescere? Certe sanguis est, in quo vegetativae, and sensitivae operationes
primo elucent; cui calor, primarium and immediatum animae instrumentum,
innascitur; qui corporis animaeque commune vinculum est* and quo vehiculo,
animae omnibus totius corporis partibus influit. In a third place, (Exercit.
70.) where he, with cogent reasons, refutes the vulgar error de calido innato,
he puts an end to all false notions, and all disputes concerning that Subject,
and then concludes in these words: Solus sanguis est calidum innatum, seu primo
natus calor animalis. -- Habet profecto in se animam primo ac principaliter,
non vegetativam modo, sed sensitivam etiam and motivam: permeat quoquoversum,
and ubique praesens est; eodemque ablato, anima quoque ipsa statim tollitur:
adeo ut sanguis ab anima nihil discrepare videatur; vel saltem substantiae,
cujus actus sit anima, aestimari debeat. These remarkable texts I have recited,
not to prolong my discourse, but to confirm whatsoever I have said of the
generation of Life original in the Blood, and of the communication of influent
Life, from the same Blood to all parts of the Body; that so I might with more
assurance leave this fourth Act of the Blood fully explained, and pass to the:

FIFTH and last. Which consists in the dffusion of the exhalations of the
Blood, raised by the expansive Motion or actual Heat of it; and which reduces
it from the State of Arteriose Blood, to that of Venose. For the Blood newly
impregnate with Life, and kept a while in restraint by the thick Walls of the
Heart, and firm Coats of the Arteries, no sooner arrives at the habit of the
parts, but instantly it begins to disperse its more volatile Particles in
Steams or Exhalations: and those being diffused, it becomes calm and sedate,
and is in that composed condition transferred into the capilray Veins, to be at
length brought again to the Heart. Of these Exhalations, the more subtle and
fugitive part exspires into the Air by insensible transpiration; the rest
striking against membranose and impervious Parts, or perhaps against the very
Parenchyma of them, is stopped and repercuss'd, and condensed into a Dew. Which
after it has moistened the parts, is by their tonic motion squeezed into the
Lympheducts, and by them carried off toward the Center of the Body. In the mean
time, the Blood after this manner calmed and recomposed, returns quietly and
slowly toward the Heart, therein to be quickened, heated and impregnated anew by
the expansive Motion of its Spirits: being driven on all the way by more Blood
continually following and pressing it, and by other concurrent Causes, by me a
little before particularly mentioned. And this I believe to be the manner and
reason of the perpetual Circuition of the Blood during Life.

Now reflecting upon the five Acts of the Blood described in the circular Race
of Life; the Sum of all my perplex and tedious disquisition concerning it,
amounts to no more but this. That the Mication of the Blood proceeds originally
from the expansive motion of the Spirits of it, somewhat restrained and
repulsed by the gross and less active parts, and incited by that opposition:
that from this Mication, Life Original is as it were kindled in the Blood
passing through the Heart: that Life influent is communicated to all parts of
the Body, from the Blood transmitted to them through the Arteries; and from the
union of the vital Spirits contained in the Blood, so brought into them, with
the Spiritus insitus of every part that receives it: that to that noble end,
Nature has ordained, that the Blood should be speedily distributed to all
parts through the Arteries, by the Heart spontaneously contracting itself: and
so soon as it has done that its grand Office of reviving them, and diffused
its exhalations, be brought back again to the Heart, therein to conceive vital
Heat anew: and in fine, that the Life of all Animals depends immediately or
primarily upon the regular Mication, and next upon this perpetual Flux and
reflux of the Blood, by the glorious Inventor of it, Dr. Harvey, rightly called
(not the Circulation, but) CIRCUITION of the Blood, Quod ejus semper redeat
labor actus in orbem.


How probable these things are, Ye, who are Philosophers and Anatomists, have
indeed a right to Judge: but ye must pardon me, if I adventure to say, that ye
have no right to Judge, whether they be true, or not. For, what Seneca
(Natural. Quaest. lib. 7. cap. 29) with great Wisdom and Modesty, spoke of his
own reasonings about the nature and causes of Comets, may be with equal reason
applied also to mine concerning Life (which in more then one thing resembles a
Comet) viz. Quae an vera sint, Dii sciunt, quibus est scientia very. Nobis
rimari illa, and conjectura ire in occulta tantum licet, nec cum fiducia
inveniendi, nec sine spe. Huc item referri potest, quod Atheniensis hospes
respondebat Clinio apud Platonem: (...): Vera haec esse approbare, cum multi de
iis ambigant, solius Dei est. If you grant them to be consentaneous to right
reason and observations Anatomic; I may then not impertinently conclude this
Disquisition with the same Sentence with which my Master Gassendus is said to
have concluded his Life; Quantula res est vita hominis?:

EPILOGUE.
AUGUSTUS (ye know) notwithstanding he had long enjoyed whatever the greatest
part of mankind calls Happiness, could not yet, when dying, afford to call
Human Life by any better Name than that of a Comedy or Farce: asking his
Friends that stood by him, Ecquid iis videretur mimum vitae commode
transegisse? And that this Farce consists of five natural Acts too, I have
endeavored in my precedent Discourse to evince.

Why then may not ye expect, that I should, in keeping of Decorum, so far
pursue this double Analogy, as to my short History of Life, to subjoyn an
Epilogue? Supposing therefore that ye do, I hold myself obliged to add one;
such as seems to me to be neither indecent, nor impertinent. It shall be a
short History or Tale (call it whether ye please) Written by Philostratus in
lib. 4. cap. 16. de vita Apollonii Tyanei: Which, I, through have forgot to
touch upon in its due place, and in which there occurrs more than one thing
worthy to be remarked. Be pleased then to hear, first the Story itself, in the
Authors own Words; and then my brief reflections upon the things therein
chieflly considerable. The Story is this. -- The things I thence collect, are
these.


1. That the Maid was not really Dead, but only seemed to be so: and
consequently that the raising of her by Apollonius was no Miracle. For the
Author himself, though in the first Line so bold as to call it, (...), a
Miracle; is yet so modest in the second, as to render it doubtful, by these
Words; (...), Virgo mori visa est, the Maid seemed to be Dead, i. e. She was
not really Dead: and after in his Philosophical descant upon the act of her
resuscitation, in these; Utrum vero scintillam animae in ipsa [Apollonius]
invenerit, quae ministros, medicosque latuerat; an decidens forte pulvia
dispersam, and pene jam extinctam animam calefaciens, in unum congregaverit,
difficile conjectatu est. Which is a plain confession, that probably she was
only in a Swoun; because the Rain that fell upon her Face might raise her.

2. That it is probable, the Maid lay intranced from a violent fit of the
Mother. For, this terrible Accident invaded her, (...), in the very Hour of her
Marriage: a time when Virgins commonly are most prone to have their Blood and
other Humors violently agitated by various Passions, which many times cause
great commotions Hysteric, and contractions of the Nerves descending ad uterum,

3. That the custom of sprinkling cold Water upon the Face of Women in Swouns,
is more ancient than Philostratus. Otherwise he could not have been so easily
inclined to believe, that a few drops of Rain that fell upon the Maids Face,
might conduce to her restoration; especially when the reason he brings, why an
effect so considerable should proceed from so mean a cause, is weak and
trivial; and when a sprinkling with hot Water might have been more efficacious.

4. And lastly. That Philostratus nevertheless shows himself no small Natural
Philosopher in this very Phrase; (...), an scintillam animae in ipsa invenerit:
than which none could have been more proper, more significant, more emphatic;
at least if the notion of Original Life, inkindled and perpetually glowing in
the Blood, which I have labored here to explain, be consentaneous to Truth.
And ye may remember, that Solomon uses the very same Word, (...), in his
description of Life, in the forecited place of Ecclesiastes. Which is alone
sufficient, as to give credit to the Expression itself, so also to excuse my
induction of this Story into the place of an Epilogue. Now this Animae
Scintilla is liable to Languors and Eclipses, chiefly in Women of more frigid
and delicate Constitutions, i. e. of little Heat. and certainly, in every
Syncope there is (...), or (as Plato calls it) (...), animula infirma; the
vestal Fire in the Heart dwindling into a Spark. Whence it is, that, at such
times, all parts of the Body, wanting a due influx of warm Blood, during the
cessation of the Heart, become pale, wan, liveless, and torpid, imitating the
Cold of Death. But when the same Vital Spark begins to glow again, and renew
the Mication of the Blood; it soon restores to the whole Body that vividam
(...), or brisk Effulgency, whereof it was deprived, during the Eclipse. And
this probably was the case of our Virgin. No wonder then, if Apollonius, either
perceiving by her feeble Pulses, the Mication of her Blood not utterly
extinguished; or coming luckily in the very Article of Time, when the same
began to be more discernible to the touch, than it had been awhile before to
the Physicians that were retired; made his advantage thereof, pretending to
restore her to life by Miracle: He being an Impostor of singular cunning, and
watching all occasions to raise his reputation among the credulous Vulgar, by
appropriating to himself the causing of Events, which in truth, though perhaps
rarely contingent, were yet nevertheless merely Natural. For, who can believe,
that this Spark of Life, when once utterly extinct, can ever be rekindled in
whatsoever Animal; unless by a Power that can reverse, change, and surmount the
fundamental Laws and Constitutions of Nature? and that any such supernatural
Power was at any time given to Apollonius, Philostratus himself was not able to
prove. Safely then may we conclude, that this Bride was not really, but
seemingly Dead, when Apollonius came to her. The same I dare say also of those
Animals, which Malpighi, and some of our English Virtuosi have imagined, and
written, they had restored to Life after Strangulation, only by blowing Air,
sometimes into their Lungs, sometimes into the Ductus Pecquetianus. For, that
those Animals had been propemodum suffocata, or brought by the Experimentors
and confinium usque mortis; is easy to believe: but that they were quite dead,
and then revived; extremely difficult to a Philosopher, who knows, that the
Laws of Nature permit no regress to habit from total privation. I conclude
therefore with Sr. G. Ent's most judicious reflection upon this so magnified
Experiment (Antidiatribae page 143.) Mirandum sane magis, illis [Authoribus]
cum Atropo, fatalia abscindente stamina, eam intercessisse necessitudinem, ut
ipsum mortis articulum tam accurate persentiscerent; etc. For, in Patients
oppressed by the Apoplexy, Epilepsy, Lethargy, Syncope, or Hysteric Passion;
chiefly where no Pulse is perceptible, and the outward parts of the Body are
grown cold and stiff; it is extremely difficult to distinguish, utrum scintillula
illa vitalis tantum delitescat, an sit in cord penitus extincta. So that even
Physicians themselves, and those too of the highest classis for learning,
Experience and Judgment, have sometimes mistaken the Living for the Dead. Of
which we have an eminent example in that Prince of Anatomists, but most
unfortunate Man, Andreas Vesalius: who (as Hubertus Languettus has left upon
record, in an Epistle to Casper Pucerus; and Melchior Adamus, in vita Vesalii)
dissecting the Breast of a certain Grandee of Spain, whom he thought to be dead
the Day before, found his Heart yet panting, to his own and the spectators
astonishment, to his eternal disgrace, the danger of his Life, and exile, in
which he miserably perished upon the Shore of the Island Zant, in his return
from Palestine. Does any Man here expect from me other Examples of the like
Mistakes? Let him seek them in Pliny (Not hist. l. 7. C. 52.) Georgius
Pictorinus (Sermon. Convival. l. 1.) Alexander Benedictus (Practic. l. 10. c.
10.) Paraeus, Forestus, Albertus Bottonus, Schenckius, Levinus Lemnius,
Fabricius Hildanus, etc. for now I have not time to recount them. Prudenter
itaque faciunt Magistratus (says Hildanus, Observat. Chirurgic. centur. 2.
observe. 95.) (uti ego Genevae, and in quibusdam aliis locis observavi) qui
neminem sepeliri permittunt, nisi prius a quodam viro artis Medicae perito, and
ad hoc negotium destinato, inspecto atque explorato Cadavere.

For the same reason, I approve not the vulgar Custom of setting great Pewter
Dishes, Turfs of Earth, or other the like cold and ponderose things, upon the
Breast and Belly of Men newly defunct. For by that means, though the
putrefaction and consequent fermentations of Humors congested within those
Cavities, may perhaps be somewhat checked and retarded, chiefly in Dropsies, and
great Apostems: yet in other cases, and where the person is not really, but
only in appearance Dead; the spark of Life, which is only eclipsed, and
otherwise may shine forth again, is liable to be totally extinguished. Nor am I
singular in this opinion. For I could at this very instant of time convert my
eye upon one of the most Eminent Physicians, not only of this Royal College,
but of the whole World; who languishing of a grievous and long Sickness, and
well prepared for a decent Exitus: did nevertheless, in my hearing (for I had
the honor of watching with him that night) give order to his Attendants, to
omit that kind of treatment of his Body, after all signs of Life should cease
in him; adding the very same Reason I have here given. And this I have good
reason to believe he did, not from fear of Death, but only from his deep
insight into the Nature of Life; of which he ceased not to Philosophize, even
when he expected to arrive at the Period of his own within few Hours after.:

PRAELECTIO V. Of Fevers.
IT is the custom of Mathematicians (as ye, most Candid Auditors, well know)
when from a Series of Propositions premised and verified, they have inferred
the conclusion they sought; to add, as overplus, certain useful Theorems or
consectaneous Speculations, by the Graecs called (...), and Consectaria sive
Coroltaria by the Latins; the knowledge of which is many times of equal moment
with that of the Verity on which they depend. Give me leave then (I beseech
you) so far to imitate this Method of those great Masters in the art of
Reasoning rightly, as from my discourse on Saturday last in the morning,
concerning the Primordia, perpetual Source, and circular race of Life; to
deduce a few Pathological Consectaries, such as may perhaps afford some glimses
of Light toward the discovery, and nature, and causes of a certain Malady,
which is of all others incident to Man's frail Body, the most common, most
grievous, and most dangerous. And this Leave I with the greater confidence ask,
because I intend not to abuse it, by digressing impertinently from either my
present Subject, or my Duty. For, the Subject of my Speculation designed, is
the same with that of my antecedent disquisition, viz. the Blood: and to find
out the most probable Causes, and reason of curing great Diseases, is the
principal scope and end of all our Enquiries, as well Physiological, as
Anatomical. Of which none can be ignorant, who has perused that little, but
oraculous Book of Hippocrates de Prisca Medicina, where he teaches; that it is
the great Duty of all Physicians, who desire to render themselves worthy of
that honorable appellation [(...)] not by discourse alone, but also by their
Works and real succoring of the Sick; to be solicitous about investigating the
true Nature, Causes and Remedies of Maladies, above all things. Nor is it new,
to find in the Writings of Anatomists, Pathological reflections subjoyned to the
description of the part, which is known to be the primary Seat of the
preternatural Assections incident thereunto. Secure then, that what I have
resolved with my self at this time to speak, cannot in the end be justly
esteemed a Parergon, or beside the principal purpose I have taken in hand; and
conceiving great Hope, both from the frequency, and from the benign Aspect of
this learned Assembly, that hitherto my dullness has not been able wholly to
overcome your Patience: I will presume, ye are not unwilling to grant my so
equitable Petition.

In my last Exercitation, I endeavored to evince (as ye may be pleased to
remember) that the Vital Heat or Motion of the Blood does formally consist in a
certain expansive luctation of the spirituose Particles thereof, with the less
moveable or unactive, repulsed and prevailing alternately; but mild, amicable,
benign, and conducing to the exaltation of all the faculties and Uses of the
Blood. Now I come to add, that it is not only possible, but that it often
happens, that this Vital Motion, although proceeding only from the Spirits that
conserve and rule the Blood, is by causes beside the institute of Nature
invading it, perturbed, interrupted, perverted, and sometimes also wholly
extinguished: the vital Economy being thereby sooner or later utterly
subverted. Of this we have instances almost innumerable. Nor is there any one
kind of preternatural Causes assignable, by which Nature may not be impeded in
her production of this Vital Motion, and more or less perturbed: as we cannot
but observe it within our selves to come to pass, sometimes from the immoderate
Heat of the Air surrounding us, as in Ephemera; sometimes from Meats and
Drinks potentially too Hot, as in Surfets and drunkenness; sometimes from
vehement Passions of the Mind, as in anger, Fear, Grief, etc. Sometimes from a
fermentation of the Blood, as in putrid Fevers; sometimes from venenate
effluvia of Bodies, as in pestilential and contagious Fevers; sometimes from a
simple solution of continuity of the Parts, as in Wounds: so that in fine, to
enumerate all the various causes, by the hostility of which this Life
conserving work of the vital Spirits may be hindered and perverted, is a thing
extremely difficult, if not plainly impossible. But in all these so various
cases, this is worthy to be noted, as a general verity; that the vital Spirits
of the Blood are always preternaturally affected, and that the disorder from
thence emergent, ought to be imputed to a p. n. Cause. Every thing then that
pollutes the Blood, and that putts Nature to an effort or essay to separate and
eject it from thence, as alien and hostile; is wont more or less, according to
the diversity of its Nature and Malice, to impugn and repress the vital Motion
of the Blood. But nothing has been observed to do it, either more frequently,
or more contumaciously, than impurities arising from Crude Humors congested in
the Mass of Blood, which cannot be separated and extirpated without previous
Concoction or Digestion. For, these constituting a certain peculiar Inquinament
or Pollution of the Blood, put on the nature, and acquire to themselves the
efficacy of a Ferment; not indeed such as the Leven of Bread, or as the Yest of
Ale and Beer; but such, that being in our Bodies mixed with the Blood, which
perpetually conceives new vital Heat in itself, produces the like commotions
therein, that those domestic Ferments do in their respective Subjects; and may
therefore be not unfitly called a Ferment, according to the Name given to it by
all Modern Physicians.

For, it causes a manifest Tumult, or intestine War in the Blood, after this
manner. The inquinament of the Blood, by reason of the crudity and viscidity of
its parts, impugnes and hinders the benign expansive Motion of the Spirits, in
which I have declared the Generation of the vital Heat of it to consist: and
the Spirits, on the contrary, by their natural tendency to expand themselves,
oppose that repressive Force, and strive to defend themselves from oppression;
producing by their energy, a continuation of the Mication of the Blood,
imperfect indeed, and mixed with Fermentation, but the best they are able, till
they have gained the Victory, to produce. So that the Fermentation of the Blood
in Fevers, seems to proceed, not from the impurities mixed with the Blood alone;
but partly from them, and partly from Nature, i. e. from the vital Spirits
conserving the vitality of the Blood. For, while these are impugned, checked,
and hindered, by those; the Motion resulting from that conflict, is indeed a
certain Mication of the Blood, but tumultuous, violent, unequal, and
interrupted with little Bubles and Froth. I say therefore, that this civil War
in the Blood, as it includes a certain Vital, though imperfect and irregular
Mication of the Blood; cannot be denied so far forth to be the work of Nature:
but as that Mication is supposed to be tumultuose, seditiose, hostil, and
unequal; it must be, in that respect, the product of the Fermentation arising
from the inquinament or corruption of the Blood.

This Fermentation certainly is the very same thing that the Ancient Physicians
meant by the Putrefaction of the Blood in Fevers: calling, for distinction
sake, all such Fevers, which they conceived to arise from thence, Putrid
Fevers. For it is not credible, that Men of so acute Judgment, and so curiose
in observing, as their Writings declare them to have been; by the Word Putredo,
intended to signify that sordid and noysom Corruption observed in dead and
rotting Carcases, which is absolutely inconsistent with the Principles of Life;
but only a more mild manner of dissolution of the Blood, and such as does
impugn and hinder, but not wholly suffocate the vital Expansion of it. And of
this we are certain, that they used to affix the Epithet, Putrid, to whatsoever
does by a swift Motion degenerate into the nature of Pus or Quitter. Which is
generated, either slowly, by degrees, by a gentle and long process, and also
without tumult; as when any Humor is, without a Fever, digested and converted
into purulent matter: or speedily, and with great Tumult and disorder of the
State of the Body; as in putrid Fevers, when the Materia Febrilis, or
inquinament of the Blood hastens to Concoction, and the Disease runs through
all its Times quickly and swiftly. Of these two so different ways of producing
Purulent Matter in the Body, the former, which is always simple and without a
Fever, is called by the Ancients, (...), Maturation or Ripening of the Matter:
the Later, which is always with a Fever, is called (...) and (...), Putredo.
Whence that Aphorism of Hippocrates (lib. 2. aph. 47.) Dum pus confititur,
dolores atque febres incidunt magis, quam jam confecto. In their Sense
therefore, Putredo, is the very motion of the matter of a Fever tending to
purulency: and this Motion is the very same, that most of the Neoterics Name
Fermentation. For, in Fevers, it is the Fermentation that brings the impurities
to digestion or Concoction, and disposes them to separation from the Blood: and
therefore the Putrid Matter, and the Fermenting Matter signify one and the same
thing; and by consequence, the Materia Febrilis, and Fermentum Febrile, are but
two different Names of the Cause whence the Fever or fermentation of the Blood
comes. Now if this be granted to be consentaneous to Reason and Experience (as
to me it seems to be) We need no longer amuse our selves with inquiring,
either wherein the formal reason of a putrid Fever consists, or how those two
Enemies, Life and a Fever can subsist together in the same Subject, the Blood;
for what I have said may serve to expound both those riddles.

Confiding therefore in the firmness of this Foundation, I design to erect
thereupon a short Theory of the nature, causes, differences, and principal
Symptoms of Fevers; and that according to the Model left to us by that most
accurate Surveyor of Natures Works, Dr. Fr. Glisson, in his last incomparable
Book; reputing it well worth my diligence, to paraphrase upon the Text of so
great an Author.

And because to Physicians accurately investigating the differences of
preternatural causes inducing Fevers, there occur to be considered more than
one kind, as of Crudities, so likewise of Ferments: that I may not leave myself
sticking in the shallows of Ambiguties, it is requisite that I clearly and
distinctly explain, first what I understand by CRUDE HUMORS commixt with the
Blood. Which I take to be generally the Material Causes of putrid Fevers; and
then what I mean by the Fermentum FEBRILE, which I suppose to be the Efficient
cause of them, for by this means, the Fogg of Equivocations being discussed, we
shall by a clearer light of distinct notions, contemplate the nature of the
things sought after.

As to the FIRST thereof, viz. the CRUDITY of Humors; it is well known, that
Physicians observing two kinds of Concoction or Digestion performed by Nature
in the Body, viz. One of what is natural and familiar, of the Aliment requisite
to the continual reparation of the Body; which they call (...): the other, of
what is preternatural and hurtful, as the material cause of Diseases; which is
named, for distinction sake, (...): have accordingly constituted two sorts of
Crudity, one Alimenti, the other, Inquinamenti. Of which the former, that
respects nutrition, is ordinary; arising for the most part from some error
committed in the use of the six Nonnaturals, and consisting chiefly in this,
that the Spirits of our Food are either not sufficiently excited, or if
excited, yet not sufficiently tamed and subdued by the concoctive faculty of
the Stomach, to serve to promote the vital mication of the Blood.

The Later, viz. Cruditas inquinamenti, is in the general, any pollution or
corruption of the Blood whatsoever, arising from defect of its due preparation
and fitness to admit the vital Mication. And this, being the Mother of Fevers,
is that intended by Hippocrates in that most remarkable Aphorism; (...);
Concocta medicamento purgare ac movere oportet, non cruda

This Crudity is subdivided into two sorts; one Simple, which consisting only
in defect of due preparation of the Blood, may be corrected per pepasmum or
maturation, necessarily previous to Evacuation either natural, or artificial:
the other Malignant, which always includes certain seminal Relics of some
precedent form of the matter mixed with the Blood, highly Hostile to the vital
Spirits, and incapable of correction or mitigation, and many times of
expulsion. Now from this Malignant crudity of matter mixed with the Blood,
arises a Malignant Fever; and from the simple Crudity, comes a Putrid. Of both
which we shall speak more copiously, when we come to consider the differences
of Fevers.

As to the SECOND, viz. the difference of FERMENTS incident to our Bodies; I
advertise, that they also may be (as to my present disquisition) commodiously
referred to two kinds. Of which the one may be called Fermentum irritans,
because it does primarily, by it self, and directly irritate the vital Spirits
of the Blood, to begin an extraordinary commotion, and seditious Tumult, with
the grosser parts of it; and to endevor to deliver themselves from confinement,
and by dissolving the common Bond of the whole Mass thereof, to fly away. And
under this kind are comprehended all fermenting mixtures abounding with saline
Spirits, highly volatile, and not easily tameable by the digestive faculty of
the Stomach: among which the Stum of Wine is eminent.

The other deserves to be named Fermentum Opprimens; because it at first and
immediately oppresses the vital Spirits of the Blood, impugning their expansive
Motion; tho afterward, secondarily, and by accident, it irritates them to a
Pneumatic Fermentation; not to dissolve the whole mixture thereof, and so to
make way for themselves to fly away: but only to attenuate, discuss, eject and
exterminate the Ferment, that by clogging and oppressing them, hinders their
spontaneous expansion, and the vital Mication of the Blood thereon depending.
And this to me seems to be that kind of Ferment, by which a Fermentation of the
Blood is wont to be excited in putrid Fevers; and which for that very cause,
ought to be nominated Fermentum Febrile. It seems also to consist of any crude
humor whatsoever commixt with the Mass of Blood. For, this doubtless is that
Crudity, which Hippocrates (in the newly cited Aphorism) forbids to be
importunely attempted by purging Medicaments, until Nature has mitigated,
tamed, and prepared it for evacuation, by gradual digestion

Of which Counsel, though many reasons have been, by the learned Commentators
on his Aphorisms, chiefly by Cardan, alleged; yet the most credible, and
therefore the most considerable seems to be this; That Nature has provided no
Organs for the Separation or Secretion of such Crude Humors from the Blood, the
Spirits of which are not yet exhausted.

Most true indeed, and evident it is, that Nature has with amirable Wisdom and
Providence taken care to preserve the Blood pure and undefiled; and to that end
framed, and most advantagiously placed three conspicuous Secretory Organs, for
the purifaction of it, viz. the Liver, Kidneys and Stomach with the conjoined
Intestines: and yet it is no less true, that none of these is, by her primary
institution destined to separate and drein from the Mass of Blood, any matter
yet remaining in the state of Crudity, or no yet despoiled of its Spirits; but
all three ordained, lest the Blood, after it has spent and consumed the sweet
and profitable Spirits of the Aliment, and becomes thereby effete and
ungenerose, should be longer detained in the Body; and like a dead Body bound
to a living, pollute and infect the Blood newly made of Chyle lately imported,
and replenished with sweet and useful Spirits.

Now the Humors here by us supposed to be both the antecedent and conjunct
Causes of Fevers, are not such as have already been spoiled of their Spirits,
and apt to turn vappid; but such as abound with Spirits yet unvolatilized, and
infest to the vital Mication of the Blood. For, the matter not sufficiently
digested, altered, and elaborate in the Stomach, becomes at length apt to
produce Fevers, in this respect only, that the Spirits contained in it, are
either not sufficiently excited, or not sufficiently subdued and tamed.
Likewise the matter that grows crude and apt to generate Fevers, either from
defect of due eventilation by insensible transpiration, or from want of free
motion, is not vitiose, because the Spirits of it are already dissipated, but
only because they are, contrary to the institute of Nature detained, and
because they at the same time impede and somewhat suppress the vital Mication
of the Blood. In fine, the Seminia heterogenea, unalterable relics of some
precedent form remaining in the crude Matter commixt with the Blood, cause a
Malignant Fever; not because the Spirits of that matter have been already
exhaled, but because they are hostile, highly infense and pernicious to the
Vital Spirits, and incapable of being tamed. We have reason then to believe,
that the material causes of Fevers are not the dead, useless and
excrementitious parts of the Blood: not the Phlegm, not the Bile, nor that thin
Humor consisting of the Serum, Salt and Tartar of the Blood, which is separated
in the Kidneys: for all these have their peculiar Secretory Organs, by which
they are daily separated and carried off: nor do they require any other
Preparation to their Separation, but what consists in their transmutation into
those Humors in Specie. Which is done only by the gradual deflagration of the
Blood, by which the vital Heat is sustained. For, hence it is, that in tract of
Time, the nobler parts of the vital Juice are dissipated and consumed, and the
remaining Parts, which they had before kept united, divided into various
parties, and becoming excrementitious, pass some into Bile, some into Phlegm,
and more into the matter of Urine: and all these now unprofitable Humors, being
brought together with the Blood, to the respective Organs in which they ought
to be separated, are there by way of percolation secerned, and by their proper
excretory Vessels carried off and ejected.

If this be admitted for true, what then are we to think of the long-lived and
even to this Day flourishing Doctrine of the Ancients, that attributes tertian
Fevers to Choler, Quotidian to Phlegm, and Quartan to Melancholy?

I answer (with Dr. Glisson, who in all arguments endeavored, as far as his
Devotion to Truth would permit him, to sustain the auctority of the Ancients)
that those Humors were, or at least might be taken, either for the relics of
the Stale and vapid Blood, or for Humors analogous to them.

The Relics of the Blood are (as was just now said) resolved into Bile,
Phlegm, and Urine; in the last of which are contained four other kinds of
Excrements, viz. the potulent matter, Salt, Serum, and a certain earthly
liquamen, commonly distinguished by the name of Tartar. But as for Melancholy,
no place is to be found for it among the relics or stale and rejected parts
of the Blood. For in the whole Body we find no peculiar Organ provided by
Nature for the Secretion, reception and exclusion of any such Humor: and
therefore, saving the respects and veneration due to those Fathers of our Art,
the interest of Truth, which is still more sacred and venerable, obliges us to
affirm, that they erred most egregiously, when they assigned that Office to the
Spleen.

The Humors Analogous to the newly enumerated Relics of the Blood, are
signified by the same Names; in particular, the viscid, insipid, and white part
of the Blood, is called Pituita or Phlegm; the hot, dry, acrimonious, and
pungent or corroding, Bilis or Choler; the cold, dry, blackish, and adust,
Melancholy (if at least any such Humor may be admitted to lie concealed in the
Mass of Blood.) For, we must confess, we usurp more than a Physical License,
when we call this an Analogous Humor, to which nothing that holds any the least
resemblance or analogy, can be any where in the whole Body found: and yet
nevertheless it may be lawful to say, that the Analogy that some parts of the
Blood seem to have to that fictitious Humor, which the Ancients imagined to be
separated and received by the Spleen; may serve to excuse us, if, out of
compliance with custom and the vulgar Doctrine of the Schools, we retain the
denomination, while we rectify the Notion of Melancholy. For, though the
Analogatum be wanting; yet if in reality a thing respondent thereto, has
existence in Nature; the supposed Analogy is enough to justify the appellation.

Considering this, I assert, that in the Mass of Blood are most commonly
contained. (1) A sharp, pungent or corrosive Serum, such as is wont to be cast
out by exsudation, in an Erysipelas, and in the little Bladders or Blisters
raised by Epispastic emplasters; which answers to the Bile or Choler. (2) A
whitish and fibrose Grumus, that resembles Phlegm. (3) A duskish or blackish
and friable Grumus, comparable to the Melancholy of the Ancients; for other
Humor that may deserve that Name, there is none to be discerned in the Blood.

Now, that we may see how far these Elements or constituent Principles of the
Blood, can be brought to consist with the Humors of the Ancients; let us
equitably compare these with those. According to their several Characters or
descriptions, the pure and natural Serum, by which mixed with the Lympha, the
Blood is made and kept fluid, seems to be the same with the natural and pure
Biliose Humor of the Ancients; and the same corrupted, and thereby grown
acrimonious and corrosive, what they understood by Choler, analogous to the
Gall. (2) The white and viscid Grumus, while incorrupt and in a natural State,
seems to agree with their natural Phlegm; when degenerate and corrupt, with
that morbific Humor, which they called Pituita Analoga. (3) The black and
friable Grumus, when pure and sincere, is the Humor Sanguineus specially so
called, and that very part of the Blood, which impregnate with vital Spirits
and the nitrose Spirit of the Air, gives it a florid red Color: but despoiled
of those Spirits, and receding from that Scarlet toward a sooty or black
(whence probably it received the Name of Melancholy) is the Melancholy they
imagined to be like the Humor of the Spleen. This Parallelism being granted,
there seems to remain no difficulty in reconciling the Doctrine of the Ancients
concerning the Humors contained in the Blood, with the constituent Parts of it
now observed by us: and by consequence, nothing hinders, but these Analogous
Humors, as we have distinguished and described them, may be the Material causes
of putrid Fevers: yea more, it is necessary, that one or more of them be peccant
in every putrid Fever. Which is what we sought, toward the establishing our
present Genealogy of putrid Fevers, without demolishing what the Ancients have
delivered of the same.:

Let us then proceed to enquire into the Origin of Malignant Fevers, which
ought to be deduced from a certain Ferment of another kind, not yet described.
For, malignant Fevers being by their Nature always more pernicious, than
simply putrid, and often also contagious: it must be therefore, that they take
their Original from some Ferment more malicious, and more grievously hostile to
the vital Motion of the Blood. This Ferment then, whatsoever we shall at length
discover it to be, may justly be named in the general, FERMENTUM MALIGNUM; as
coming near to the nature of Poison properly so called, about the reason of
whose fierce and pernicious Operation upon the very principles of Life,
Physicians are strangely divided in their Opinions. Omitting all which, I
humbly conceive, that the deleterious or deadly force of any Poison whatsoever,
does consist, not in any manifest quality, but in some Seminal Nature highly
adverse and destructive to the Mication of the Blood in Man, upon which his
Life immediately depends. There are, (I must confess) too many other things,
that with equal speed and cruelty break asunder the slender Ligaments of Life,
even by their manifest qualities, if once admitted into the Stomach; as Fire,
Oil of Vitriol, strong Spirit of Salt, Aqua Fortis, Lixivial Caustics, Arsenic,
Sublimate, etc. Which by reason of the extreme subtility and most rapid Motions
of their Particles, and of their force of Penetrating, cutting, corroding and
dissolving almost all Bodies to which they are applied, are as mortal as a
Sword or Bullet: but all these, if they be sufficiently diluted, lose their
fatal Virtue, and become innoxious; nor can they be rightly reckned among
Venoms, no more than a Dagger or Halter, because they destroy by manifest
Qualities, and ways evident to the Sense. But Poison, whose Power is founded
in a seminal Nature; secretly repugnant and pernicious to human Nature, whether
it be bred in the Body, or introduced by contagion or otherwise, is always more
or less noxious in a small quantity, and in a full Dose deadly; so that it is
dangerous to trust to a dilution of any such Venom. And to this kind are the
Malignant Ferments, of which I am now speaking, to be referred: though some of
them be more venomous than others, and some more contagious. For, the Malignity
of all seems to consist in a Seminal Nature, which being communicated to the
Blood, is apt to impugn, retard, oppress, and (when it prevails) totally
extinguish the expansive Motions of the vital Spirits that conserve it.:

HAVING thus concisely explained the formal reasons, and distinct proprieties
of both sorts of Febrile Ferments, the Putrid and the Malignant, that work
immediately and per se, by way of Oppression of the vital Spirits; it is
opportune for us to inquire into the Nature of them considered, first
absolutely, and then respectively to the manner of their Operation upon the
Blood in generating Fevers.

I advertise therefore, that when I speak of Crude Chyle brought into the Mass
of Blood, and by degrees inducing putrefaction or Fermentation upon it, as I
have briefly shown in the Paragraph concerning putrid Humors rendering the Blood
impure; I do not call such Chyle Crude, because I think it wholly unfit to
afford some nourishment to the solid Parts though impure and imperfect; but
because it is not sufficiently concocted and prepared, so as that being united
with the Blood, it should be made the immediate Subject of the vital Spirits,
or (which is the same thing) be impregnated with Vitality. Now Chyle in this
sense Crude, has not yet attained to a degree of inquinament high enough to
give it the nature and force of a Febrile Ferment; which strikes at the very
Root of the vital Motion or Heat. For it consists in a certain Aptitude to
infringe, diminish, retard, oppress, and (if not overcome and expelled by the
Spirits of the Blood) utterly extinguish the vital Mication of the Blood,
whence Life results. For, consentaneous it is both to experience and to reason,
that this appitude is not acquired in a few moments of time after Crudities
have been commixt with the Blood; nor does it actually attack the vital Spirits
so soon as the Ferment is diffused, but does exsert its Power slowly, by
insensible degrees, and as it were by creeping on, like an Enemy that designs
to steal a Victory. First it gently, and by little and little insinuates itself
into the Mass of Blood, and diffuses itself equally through all the parts of
it. Then it comes to be united with the Spirits that conserve the Blood, as if
it were a natural ingredient of the mixture. That done, if either the quantity
or contumacy of it be so great as that the vital Spirits be unable to moderate
and reduce it to conformity, or to expel and dissipate it; it begins to
operate, to weaken, and suppress them, affecting them with a kind of Torpor,
and clogging them so as they cannot with requisite Vigor endevor to expand
themselves, and then the Fever first invades, as shall be more fully explicated
when we come to examine the process of Fermentation in the Paroxysm of an
intermittent Fever.

In the mean time it follows to be inquired, wherein this Aptitude of the
Fermentum Febrile to fix the Spirits of the Blood, does chiefly consist. I
conceive with Dr. Glisson that it is radicated in a certain Lentor or
clamminess of the Crudities mixed with the Blood; analogous perhaps to that
viscidity observed in Wine and Beer not perfectly fermented, which are
therefore called Pendula, or Ropy; nor can they be ever corrected unless by a
new Fermentation, which exciting the oppressed and sluggish Spirits contained
in the Liquor, and dissolving the clammyness of the grosser Parts, quickly
clarifies it. For, what can be imagined more apt to Clog, oppress and fix the
Spirits of the Blood, so as to hinder their expansive Motion, than such a
pendulous clamminess of Crude Humors diffused through the whole Mass of it? I
believe therefore, that the formal reason of every febrile Ferment in putrid
Fevers, does consist in such a Lentor of the Blood. As for that kind of it,
that arises from defect of Concoction in the Stomach, and that may therefore
rightly enough be distinguished by the Name of Crude Chyle; it seems not at
first to be affected with the pendulous Clamminess here described, but only
with a certain disposition or tendency toward it, by reason the Spirits of the
Chyle have not been sufficiently excited and exalted from the State of Fixation
to that of moderate fluxility, as they ought to have been: and yet this
tendency may be sufficient by degrees to induce a clamminess upon the whole
Mass of Blood, when crudities are daily increased and accumulated, as commonly
they are before a Putrid Fever is generated. Other kinds of it are almost all
derived, either from transpiration intercepted, or from extravasation of
Humors, as in internal Apostems and in the Dropsy; or from inflammations and
tumors, where the course of the Blood is stopped. For part of the Blood so
arrested, and for want of due Motion corrupted, being at length carried off by
the Veins, and remixt with the whole Mass thereof, must of necessity more or
less pollute it,

But if we convert the Eyes of our Curiosity upon the Effects of this febrile
Ferment, and consider the manner and process of its acting upon the Blood; we
shall soon find, that what has been said of the narcotic and fixative Power of
it, will be sufficiently consentaneous and evident to engage our Belief. For,
from thence it will appear, by what reason and way the Ferment is wont to exert
its forces, and exercise its tyranny upon the Vital Spirits, in the diverse
times of a Paroxysm or fit of a Fever, viz. in the beginning or invasion, in the
augment or increase, in the vigor or Achme, and in the declination.

I say then, that before the actual invasion of a Paroxysm, the febrile Ferment
is already diffused through the Blood, and united with the vital Spirits. Upon
this, it of necessity comes to pass, that the Spirits being clogged and as it
were inviscated by the pendulous clamminess thereof, remit somewhat of their
vigor and endevor to expansion: and consequently with less briskness irritate
the Ears and Ventricles of the Heart, and Arteries conjoined to them, to
contract themselves, in order to the distribution of the Blood. Hence it comes,
that the free transpiration of the halitus or steams of the Blood is more or
less checked, and rendered more slow and weak than it ought to be. And this
makes the first insult or surprise of the Cold Fit, which though scarcely
perceptible in the beginning, comes creeping on more and more, till the Eclipse
it brings upon the vital Spirits, be manifest from the weakness and languid
Motion of the Pulse, and from the chilness of the whole Body, and dead paleness
of the Face, etc.

A little after, the Pulse is more retracted and languid, and the Eclipse
increasing, the Nails of the Fingers become pale and of a leaden Blew, the
extreme parts grow sensibly cold, and all the other symptoms grow more strong
and vexatious, so that the Patient is now compelled to feel the Attacque his
Enemy is making upon the Guards of his Life. And this is the second step of the
cold Fit.

Which ceases not yet, but is continued a good while after its first sensible
Invasion; the depression of the vital Spirits, the retraction of the Pulse, and
the consequent diminution of Heat, still by degrees increasing. Nevertheless,
soon after the beginning, the irritation of the vital Spirits to rise up and
oppose their intestine Enemy, and to repel it by their spontaneous expansion,
begins. For, first they strive to resist oppression by the clamminess of the
febrile Ferment, and to shake off the Clogg, by their natural agility. Then the
Mass of Blood, being slowly and heavily diffused into the parts of the Body,
does in some degree stagnate in the Avenues of the Heart, and by its resistance
burden the Heart and Arteries, and so incite them to make more frequent Pulses,
to discharge it. Then the Effluvia of the Blood, being by intercepted
transpiration retained, and by the Veins returned to the Heart, serve somewhat
to excite the Spirits, and to discuss a little of the clammy Ferment repressing
them. But yet these three irritations conjoined, are not from the beginning of
so great Moment, as quickly to hinder the increase of the Cold, or farther
depression of the vital Motion: only they so far avail, as to hinder the
influent Life from being wholly eclipsed. And at this time it is, that the
first certain Signs of actual Fermentation of the Blood, show themselves to
Physicians accurately observing them. For, so soon as the certain Signs of an
universal oppression of the vital Spirits appear; we may from that time date
the commencement of the Fermentation immediately consequent thereunto: because
they declare that the Ferment has already actually begun its Work.

These Signs and Symptoms then are (as I have said) first, retraction of the
Pulse, chilness, paleness and sometimes blewness of the extreme Parts, chiefly
of the Nayls, tipp of the Nose and Lips, and some light constriction of the
whole Skin. Because at that time there happens some oppression of the vital
Heat, which governs the Pulse, renders all parts actually hot, gives a vivid
and grateful tincture of red to all, and plumps up the Skin that otherwise
would shrink itself up.

Secondly, a troublesome Sense of Cold, accompanied with a Horror, trembling,
shivering or shaking. All from the difficult passage of the Blood through the
habit of the Parts. For the Blood being but weakly emitted from the Heart, and
passing slowly through the substance of the muscular Parts, hurts and offends
them by vellication or attrition.

Thirdly, a weak and quivering Voice, and shortness of Breath for the most part
trembling and unequal: which seem to arise, partly from a depression of the
vital Heat, partly from Cold unequally affecting the Lungs, and hindering the
free ingress and egress of the Air; and partly from the difficult passage of
the Blood, either through the Lungs themselves, or through the Muscles, helping
to move them.

Fourthly, the moisture of the Mouth, and in the Glands circumjacent, begins to
be dried up, and thereupon ensue thirst and dryness of the Tongue. The reason
of which seems to be this, that the Latex Serosus is, in the febrile
Fermentation, so confounded with other Humors, that it cannot be separated from
them in the Glandules destined to the Secretion of it. Other Effects or Signs
of the Fermentation observable in this beginning of the Paroxysm, I reserve
till we come to the Augment, in which they become more conspicuous.

In the AUGMENT therefore, no new Motion arises, only the former are either by
degrees lessned, or increased. Those that belong to the simple depression of
the vital Spirits, are gradually diminished: but those that are referrible to
the incitation or suscitation of them, are by little and little augmented. Of
the former sort are, Chilness, Sense of Cold, shivering, trembling, quaking;
all which by degrees cease and vanish: because upon the raising of the Pulse,
the Blood is transmitted more briskly and speedily through the habit of the
Parts. The Voice also becomes more strong and uninterrupt, and the respiration
more frequent and equal, for the same reason. On the contrary, the provoked
vital Spirits now rising up against their intestine Enemy, cause a manifest
increase of the febrile Fermentation and Tumult. For, the expansive luctation
grows more and more fierce and exorbitant, and recedes farther from the natural
State, till it becomes turbulent, hostile, and frothy, and unequal. The
consequents of these irregular Motions are (1) inquietude, jectigation, and
sometimes Pain of the outward parts, but chiefly of the Head; all from the
difficult transmission of the Blood through them. (2) Frequency of the Pulse,
and now and then robust vibration of the Heart and Arteries; probably from the
intercepted course of the Blood, and the augmentation of Heat. (3) Diminution
of Transpiration; which though now somewhat greater than from the beginning,
continues much less than it ought to be, considering the abundance of Effluvia
or exhalations of the Blood raised by the intense Heat. (4) Greater Consumption
of the Latex in all parts of the Mouth, and consequently more grievous Thirst.
(5) Nauseousness, and sometimes vomiting or Flux of the Belly. For the Stomach
and Gutts are of all parts most troubled and offended by the tumultuose afflux
of the Blood, as well because of their nervose Texture, and their exquisite
Sense thence arising; as by reason of the matters contained in their Cavity,
which (the containing Parts being irritated) fluctuate, and so become more apt
to be moved and ejected upward or downward: and for the same Causes, the same
parts are often molested with Winds and Eructations; all Pneumatic
Fermentations (in the number of which our febrile Fermentation has a place)
conducing much to the generation of Winds. During this time of the Paroxysm,
the Fermentation and Heat, and all the consequents of them here recounted
(excepting perhaps the last) are augmented by degrees, till they arrive at the
Achme or State. But so soon as the Transpiration comes to be more free, and
answerable to the abundance of Exhalations steaming from the Blood, so as they
no longer recoyl by the Veins to increase the estuation of the Blood; the
Augment ends, and the State of the fit succeeds.

In which the Fermentation and Ardor persist a while in their Violence and
Fury. And though at this time some parts of the oppressing Ferment, begin to be
discussed and expelled by laboriose Sweat: yet the vital Spirits are by that
tumultuose Motion so profusely spent and exhausted, that nature suffers almost
as much of loss by that exhaustion, as she receives relief from the Victory and
Expulsion. Whence perhaps it comes, that yet the conflict appears doubtful and
equal, till the beginning of the Declination, when the febrile Heat, and all
its concomitants are by degrees mitigated.

And then it is, that the Victory of the vital Spirits being complete, the
remaining parts of the febrile Ferment are by an universal Sweat flowing
without any considerable detriment of the strength of the Patient, dispersed
and exterminated. For, this Sweat is a kind of despumation of the impurities of
the Blood that caused the Paroxysm; whereupon soon ensue a remission of the
burning Heat, a cessation of anxiety and Pains, and a fresh diffusion of the
Latex Serosus into the Throat and Mouth for the quenching of Thirst, and in
fine a Cessation of all other vexatious Symptoms of the late Conflict; and so
at length the Paroxysm is ended. Now from this our congruous Solution of all
the Phenomenon of the fit of a Fever, ye may easily judge of the reasonableness
of the precedent Hypothesis, according to which I have endeavored to explicate
them; and how far the same may deserve your approbation, or dislike.:

Nevertheless I am willing, ye should suspend your Sentence, till I have
carried on the Hypothesis farther. For there yet remain many other Appearances
to be solved. I proceed therefore to the primary DIFFERENCES of Fevers, in hope
that they also may be commodiously deduced from the same Principles.

Forasmuch as it is probable from what has been said of the nature of a Fever
in general, that all Fevers arise from, and essentially consist in a
Fermentation of the Blood: We may with reason infer, that the diversity of
Fevers, how great soever it be, proceeds from nothing else but the diverse
fermentations of the same Blood. For the diversity of Effects is for the most
part respondent to the diversity of efficients. And since it is scarce
possible, but that from various Ferments, various kinds of Fermentations should
arise; it necessarily follows, that the various sorts of Fevers are to be
deduced from equally various Ferments actually hindering the vital mication of
the Blood. And I hold, that there are so many differences of febrile Ferments,
as there are diverse Natures or Dispositions of Crudities incident to the Blood,
and apt to inquinate it. To know all these distinctly, and to explicate each of
them by a particular description, is perhaps impossible: so great is the
variety of crude Humors that may be admitted into the Blood, and so manifold
the Combinations of them that may happen to pollute it. Let it suffice then, if
reflecting upon the chief sorts of Crudities already described, we shall from
thence congruously derive the Primary, i. e. the most frequently observed
Differences of Fevers.

By Crudity I here understand any inquinament or depravation of the Blood
whatsoever, proceeding from defect of due preparation thereof, for the
generation of vital Spirits; as I before declared. Now the matter in this Sense
Crude, may be distinguished into Ordinary or familiar to human Nature, such as
arises from the erroneous use of the six non-naturals: and Extraordinary or
alien and hostile to human Nature. From the former come all Fevers called
simply Putrid: from the Later, Malignant and Contagiose or Venenose.

The Ordinary may be subdivided into (1) Recent or lately generated, such as is
either carried out of the Stomach and Guts in the form of crude Chyle, or
reduced from some part or other inflamed or otherwise corrupted: and (2)
Inveterate or in a long tract of time by little and little congested, and
adhering to the substance of the solid Parts. The former, if it happens to pass
into a febrile Ferment, produces a Fever putrid indeed, but of only one
Paroxysm. The Later likewise generates a Fever Putrid, either accompanying some
other Malady, or Symptomatic; but each of them, either Continual of uncertain
exacerbation, or intermittent of uncertain Paroxysms.

The Etraordinary or Malignant which includes some certain seminal Principle
dangerous and hostile to human Nature, is also double, viz. either it is
disseminated by contagion, or is primarily bred in the Body affected. The
Former, though resolved into an exhalation and dispersed through the Air, still
retains its poisonous Virtue, as the Miasma Pestilentiale, or infection of the
Plague. The other is either not resolved into exhalations, as Arsenic; or is,
in the very resolution, despoiled of its seminal malignity, as the Breath of a
mad Dog, which seldom or never infects alone, without the Saliva in forth.

Having exhibited to your consideration this plain and brief Scheme of the
different material Causes, from which I suppose the principal differences of
Fevers to proceed; I must reflect upon the Heads thereof more particularly, and
in the first place resume the explication of Crudity not Malignant; as that
which both more frequently occurs to our observation, and is less obscure.

The Matter of Putrid Fevers Not-Malignant, proceeds (as I lately insinuated)
either (1) From defect of Concoction of the Chyle in the Stomach and
Intestines, or (2) From defect of due eventilation and free motion of the Blood
in its Circuit.

Defect of Concoction of the Chyle, is a thing so common, and so fully
explained by Physicians in their practical Writings, that it is sufficient for
me to name it. And indeed in all Fevers, the concoctive faculty of the Stomach
is wont so much to languish, that scarce any thing of aliment can be, without
detriment, taken into the Stomach already troubled and inquinated with vicious
and corrupt Humors. For then the Food is not digested, but whatever of either
Juice or Tincture is drawn from it, remains crude, and turns to the Augment of
the matter of the Fever. Whence it comes, that fasting and a thin Diet are so
much commended by all, in putrid Fevers. Only in Pestilential, a Diet less
spare, is sometimes allowed with good Success: because the benignity and sweet
Spirits of the Aliment, are found to contemperate the Seminium Pestiferum, and
reduce it to a milder disposition. Not of these Fevers therefore, but only of
those are we to understand the Counsel given by Hippocrates (Aphorism. n. Lib.
2.) Corpora impura quo plus alimenti assumunt, eo pluribus damnis augentur: and
(Aphor. 7. Lib. 1.) si morbus sit peracutus, tenuissima diaeta est utendum.

Defect of due Transpiration, or Eventilation, and of free Circuition of the
Blood, is sometimes the Cause, sometimes the Effect of Fermentation therein.
The Cause, if no other vice, before disposing the Blood to Putrefaction, has
given fit matter for the Generation of a Fever: for, want of free Transpiration
and Interception of the course of the Blood in any part of the Body, is alone
sufficient to infer putrefaction upon the Blood; but then the Fever is for the
most part easily discussed, and with one universal Sweat wholly solved. It
arises commonly from the diminished perspirability and permeability, either of
the whole Body, or of some private part, whose inconspicuous pores are
constipated, or obstructed; and this happens either with, or without
extravasation of Blood. With extravasation, comes a Tumor, if not an Aposteme,
which most commonly produces a Fever of uncertain Exacerbation; as is
frequently observed in great Obstructions and Abscesses of the Lungs.

Having concisely recounted the Procatartic or Antecedent Causes of crude
Matter apt to induce putrid Fevers, I must come to explain what I said of the
Aptitude of crude Chyle received into the Blood, to corrupt it Miasmate
Febrili. That I may do this with perspicuity and coherence, two things occur
here to be considered. One is, when that supposed Aptitude or Disposition of
Chyle imperfectly concocted, comes to be matured or exalted to an actual
fermentation of the Blood: the other, where that crude Chyle is wont to lurk or
lie concealed, until attaining to ripeness, it has acquired forces sufficient
to induce fermentation upon the Blood.

To the FORMER of these two questions therefore I answer, that crude Chyle,
though from its first admission into the Blood it continually tend toward a
febrile Ferment; does yet notwithstanding rarely attain to that last Degree of
depravity, where it meets not with an Apparatus of like matter before congested
in the Body, sufficient to augment its Forces, and serve for convenient Fuel
to a Fever. For, it is by long experience found, that very few fall into any
simply putrid Fever, unless after many errors admitted in the use of the six
Non-naturals: nor is the febrile Ferment it self wont, so soon as it is
existent in the Body to kindle a Fever, by breaking out into acts of open
hostility upon the sudden, but by secretly creeping on, as it were, and passing
through certain degrees of operation successively. First, it is insensibly
diffused through, and intimately commixt with the whole Mass of the Blood,
after the manner of other Ferments. Then inwrapping the vital Spirits by little
and little with its clammyness, it diminishes their Agility, and disposes them
to sloth. After this, it endeavors to inviscate, bind, and as it were
suffocate them; and then it is, that from their expansive reluctation, the
conflict and fermentation commences. All which may be collected from
intermittent Fevers, at least, if it be true (what many eminent Physicians
hold) that the whole Febrile Matter that causes a Paroxysm, is as it were
burned out and consumed in that Paroxysm: as in an intermittent Tertian, there
intervenes a whole day of vacancy from a Fever, and of quiet betwixt every two
Paroxysms; during which interval, the febrile Ferment is only dispositive, and
preparing to unite it self intimately with the vital Spirits. But in a simple
Quartan, two whole days intervene betwixt the precedent Paroxysm and the
Subsequent; the febrile Ferment all that while recruiting its Forces. From
whence it is highly probable, that the crude matter does not presently produce
a Fermentation, but by degrees, and by way of disposition. Which may be
sufficient to solve the first Question, viz. When the crudities commixt with
the Blood come to acquire he degree of exaltation requisite to induce an actual
fermentation upon the Blood.

As for the OTHER, viz. Where the same crude Matter is wont to be congested,
and to lie in ambush till that time; if the whole matter of the precedent
Paroxysm, be spent and consumed in the Paroxysm, as has been supposed: then it
necessarily follows, that the matter of the subsequent Paroxysm, must either be
generated anew, in the time intervenient betwixt the two Fits, or lie concealed
somewhere in the Body, either in the Vessels carrying the Blood, or out of
them; from whence, as from its Fomes, it may after certain intervals of Time,
sally forth to infect the Blood and invade the vital Spirits. For both these,
cannot be true; and therefore it remains to be inquired, which of the two is
most likely to be so. My Opinion is, that the matter of every subsequent
Paroxysm is not generated anew; and my Reasons are these.

(1) So soon as any Paroxysm is ended, the very essence of the Fever Ceases for
that time, and the Blood quickly returns to an Apyrexia. Now if the Cause be
extirpated together with the Disease, nothing will be left remaining in the
Body to continue it: and by consequence, every new Paroxysm will be a new
Fever; which no experienced Physician, who has observed the Disease to be of
the same genius or nature from the first Fit to the last, will easily be
brought to grant. (2) The same may be confirmed by this, that intermittent
Fevers, even in poor Country People, frequently run through alll their times
regularly, by degrees ascending to their State, and thenceforth gradually
tending to their Declination, when no Physician is called to Succor Nature: So
that merely from diligent Observation of the motion of the Fever, a certain
prognostication of the State and final cessation of it, may be collected, which
would be impossible, if the matter of the Disease were every Day generated de
novo: for who could foresee, when that new Generation would Cease?

(3) The cause of the Fever coming ab extra, is accidental, and depends on a
less or greater Error committed in Diet, and is constituted extra Febris
essentiam; nor can any indication be from thence desumed. And our Dr. Glisson
affirms, that he knew a Man, who being of a strong Constitution, and afflicted
with a Tertian Intermittent, obstinately abstained from all Meat and Drink,
from one Fit to another; and yet could not thereby elude the return of his
Fever. It may be therefore with good reason inferred, that putrid Fevers have
an internal Focus some where in the Body, whence the material Cause of them
breaking forth, and gathering fresh Forces, invades and irritates the Vital
Spirits again and again, even till the Fomes be utterly exhausted and consumed.

There are (I confess) many great Wits, who in every intermittent Fever, seek
for a peculiar Fomes or Seat of the Cause. I confess also, that sometimes such
a particular and partial Fomes may be found; as for Instance, in the Stomach,
or in the Pancreas, or in the Mesentry, and other Parts of the Abdomen; and an
inflammation of the Lungs, is in some sort the Fomes of a Peripneumonia; an
inflammation of the Pleura, the Fomes of a Pleurisy, and sic de multis aliis
partibus: So that itcannot be denied, but both intermittent and continual
Fevers may arise from particular Seats; and that an Aposteme, chiefly an
Empyema, may minister Fuel to a Fever; yea more, that an inflammation
repercu'st from the outward parts, and a Gangrene in any the remotest Member of
the Body, may produce a continual Fever, by sending forth corrupt matter to
pollute and infect the Blood. All this (I say) must be confessed. And yet
nevertheless it must be acknowledged, that besides these particular Fomites of
Fevers, there is a certain General one, common to all putrid Fevers: and this
general Fomes I hold to be the very Parenchyma of the Parts nourished out of
impure Juices.

For this FOMES is of all others hitherto supposed, most consistent with the
Circuition of the Blood, by which it is commodiously carried to all Parts; and
diffused universally: whereas other impurities can scarcely be so accumulated
in the Solid Parts, but they must, when extravasated, obstruct the free course
of the Blood. If they be supposed to stick, and be congested in the capillary
Vessels, or in the inconspicuous Pores of the Parts; they must be a manifest
and intolerable Obstacle to the pertransition of the Blood. If out of the
Vessels, they stagnate in the habit of the Parts, they must induce, not a
Fever, but a Cachexia, or an Anasarcha. Compelled therefore we are to fly to
the very Parenchyma of the Parts; which in every putrid Fever are necessarily
fused or melted by degrees, and being fused, as necessarily become Fuel to
continue the Fever. For, in continual Fevers, the substance of the Parts
amassed out of Crude and impure Chyle, is continually melted, and so maintains
the fermentation without intermission, until all the Fuel be consumed, and
then the Fever is extinguished. But in intermittent, the same impurities are
melted by turns, or Intervals; and in every Paroxysm, some portion of them is
colliquated into a kind of Sanies or putrid Matter; which being remixt with the
Blood, becomes, in a Tertian, the Fuel of a Paroxysm to recur on the third Day
from its Fusion; in a Quartan, of a Paroxysm to invade on the fourth; in a
Quotidian, of a Fit to return on the next Day; and sic de caeteris,

And as to the Duplication and Triplication of these intermittent Fevers: it is
probable, that when of a Simple Tertian, is made a double one, the Simple is
not the direct Cause of the double: but the later arises from Causes like to
those, from which the former took its beginning: So that a double Tertian may
be rightly enough accounted to be two single Tertians alternately succeding and
complicated with each other. And the same, mutatis mutandis, may be said, with
equal congruity, also of the origin of a double and treble Quartan.

But there remains yet another Difficulty greater than either of the two
precedent; viz. concerning the Suspension of the Action of the crude Matter, to
the time of the Paroxysm, in which it is actuated. That the State of which
Question may be the better understood, let us (for instance Sake) suppose, that
in a double Tertian, A. B. C. D. are four distinct crude Matters, melted and
set afloate in the Mass of Blood in four successive Paroxysms. Let us suppose
also, that this Fever first invaded the Patient upon Monday, and that in the
first Fit, it melted so much of the crude Parenchyma of the solid Parts, as may
suffice to produce a new Fit on Wednesday following. Let us suppose farther,
that on Tuesday another Tertian began, and during that first Fit in like manner
melted so much of the Crude Parenchyma, as may be sufficient to raise a second
Fit on Thursday following. These things being supposed, the Question is, why
the crude Matter B. melted on Tuesday, is not dissipated or corrected on the
Wednesday following, when the crude Matter A. causing a Fit, is by the
Fermentation rarefied, and expelled by Sweat: Why, I say, the Matter B. being
remixt with the Blood all Wednesday, when the Matter A. was fermented, is not
by that Fermentation corrected and dissipated at the same time; but suffered to
lie dormant, and cause a Fit on Thursday following.

To untie this Knot therefore, I say, that the febrile Fermentation does not
much alter any crude Matter, that does not yet actually impede the vital motion
of the Blood. For, the Fermentation is regulated by the vital Spirits, which in
the Case proposed, chiefly oppose and dissipate the Matter A. which alone by
its clamminess actually hinders their expansive Motion. Hence it is, that in
the Fermentation happening on Wednesday, the vital Spirits are not much offended
with the new Matter B. then melted and sloating in the Blood, because it is not
actually Febrile, nor does it oppress them, so as to incite them to vindicate
their Liberty by their expansive Motion. And thus the difficulty seems to be
solved.:

WHAT has been said a little before, of the general Fomes of all putrid
Fevers, as well continual, as intermittent, viz. that it is in the very
Parenchyma or Substance of the solid parts amassed out of crude or impure
Chyle; may perhaps to some of my Auditors, long accustomed to the vulgar
Doctrine of Physicians, concerning the Genealogy of Fevers, seem to be only
precarious, and as easily denied, as affirmed: because it still remains
doubtful, how Chyle crude or impure can be, instead of good and laudable Succus
Nutritins, or Aliment, converted into the substance of the solid parts. To
obviate this their doubting therefore before it settle into a prejudice more
difficult to be removed; it concerns me to assert, that there is many times an
imperfect Nutrition, or Vegetation and Augmentation, as well as a perfect,
observed in the Bodies of Men; and consequently, that the Succus Nutritious, or
proxime Aliment of all parts, is either pure, i. e. perfectly concocted; or
impure, i. e. imperfectly concocted. Whence it comes, that the Bodies of some
Men are even vulgarly said to be more or less pure than those of others.

Those few, who are so happy as to have Bodies in all parts pure and clean from
crude and vitiose humors, do not only from the right use of the six
Non-naturals, enjoy perfect health; but have this farther advantage, that their
solid parts not being augmented by the accretion of crude matter, they carry in
them neither any Febrile Fomes congested in the habit of their solid parts, nor
the least disposition to any other Disease. When on the contrary, impure
Bodies, either through intemperance, or too full Diet, Surfeits, Compotations,
and other Debauches and Disorders; or from want of exercise to correct and
dissipate the crudities they have congested; are crammed and plump'd up with
impure nourishment, and perhaps also augmented to an unprofitable and unwieldy
Bulk. These then must of necessity abound with a great stock of crude Matter,
accumulated chiefly in the Substance of their solid Parts. Which when a Fever
comes, from what cause soever, are melted by degrees, and daily afford new
Matter, to serve as prepared Fuel to the long and dangerous Fever, whether
continual, or intermittent. But Bodies clean and pure, though perhaps liable to
be surprised with a light feverish Distemper; are in much less Danger from
thence: because their solid Parts have not been imperfectly recruited with
impure Nourishment; and consequently the Liquamen of them is not so Crude, as
to suffice to renew often, or long continue the Fermentation. From the
Testimony of our very Senses it is evident, that in all putrid Fevers, the
parts of the Body are more or less extenuated and colliquated: and that the
Crude Liquamina of them are the material Causes of new Exacerbations in
continual Fevers, and of new Paroxysms in intermittent, is highly consentaneous
to reason. Hence it is, that Men recovering from long Fevers, if they manage
their Health circumspectly and with temperance, attain to a renovation as it
were of their Youth: because all the substance of their Parts, that was amassed
out of Crude and impure Matter, being by the Fever consumed, their Bodies are
now repaired with pure and convenient Juices, such as abound with sweet Spirits
duly exalted and excited by Concoction in the Stomach. Hence also we are led to
a clear understanding of the true Reason of that Aphorism commended to our
Observation by Hippocrates: Si febricitanti, nec omnino leviter, suo in statu
maneat corpus, nihilque concedat morbo; aut hoc etiam plus aequo gracilescat,
calamitosum: hoc enim aegri infirmitatem significat, illud vero diuturnitatem
morbi. For, the prognostic holds certain, ratione tum causae, tum signi. If the
habit of the Body be not extenuated in proportion to the Violence or duration
of the Fever, the Cause must lie either in the abundance, or in the contumacy,
that is the great viscidity or clamminess of the crude Matter congested and
affixt to the Parenchyma of the Parts: and therefore an observing Physician may
from thence safely predict, that the Fever will prove of long continuance at
best, if not fatal in the end. On the other side, if the extenuation be too
great, it must come from the great force of the heat or fermentation in the
Blood, that dissipates all things, not only the crude Matter preexistent in the
habit of the Parts, but even the vital Spirits themselves, and the insite
Spirits, that being intimately united with the Vital, should reinvigorate the
Parts with Life and conserve them. And therefore such impetuous Extenuation, is
likewise both cause and sign of extreme Calamity. Exhaustis enim supra modum
and spiritibus, and partibus Solidis, omnis ratio pepasmi desideratur.

All these Reasons duly considered, it must be granted that Bodies cannot
possibly continue in all points pure and clean, if they be nourished with
impure or crude Juices. Sound indeed and healthy they may be said to be at
present, because they seem to foster no proxime Cause of Sickness discernable
by a Physician: and yet nevertheless, since they carry about Crudities secretly
congested in the very substance of the solid Parts, which by occasion of any
light feverish Distemper, that would not otherwise last above a Day or two, may
be melted and remixt with the Blood, and long protract that Distemper: we are
obliged to acknowledge, that such Bodies are really foul or impure, and contain
in them a Disposition to a Fever more or less remote. Otherwise it will follow
that all Bodies actually sound, are in respect of the habit of their Parts,
either equally disposed, or equally indisposed to Fevers, and to the
continuation of them: than which nothing certainly can be more false. For, have
we not observed frequently, that Fevers, as well continual as intermittent,
have in the beginning appeared mild and gentle, so long as they were fomented
only by Matter before contained in the Veins and Arteries: and yet afterward,
when they began to be supplied with new Matter or Fuel from the colliquated
Crudities that had been long congested in the habit of the Body, they have
raged in extremity, and continued long before Nature, however accurately
assisted and succored by our Art, could bring them to a Crisis? Conclude we
therefore, that in putrid Fevers, there is no other Fomes, but the described
Crudities, by long intemperance and other errors in Diet, congested in the
babit of the solid Parts. For, these are in all putrid Fevers daily resolved or
fused into a certain Sanies or corrupt Matter, and constitute a new febrile
Ferment: which is the thing we have gone so far about to find.

But yet I must not omit to subjoin, that these Liquamina of the solid Parts
imperfectly nourisht, are not confined within the narrow compass of one single
Genus, but diffused through a large Field of indefinite variety. For, as
indulgent Nature has granted to us various kinds of Aliments, each of which is
in its peculiar qualities or proprieties in some sort distinct from all the
rest; and as the Juices or Tinctures extracted from them by the concoctive
Faculty of the Stomach, are in diversity respondent to the diversity of our
Meats and Drinks: So must it be granted, that the Crudities after imperfect
digestion admitted, first into the Blood, and then into the habit of the Body,
and there affixed to the solid Parts, and at length resolved into a certain
kind of Sanies, that is most apt to afford Fuel to putrid Fevers (as has been
often affirmed) cannot be all of a Sort, but some different from others,
respectively to the different matters of which they were generated. And of
these doubtless the variety is greater than can possibly be known by any
Physician however curiose; so far are we from hope to reduce them all to
Computation. It were hard then for me, if any here present should exact from me
an account of more of these obscure Differences, than what my present institute
requires me briefly to explain: and all my learned Hearers will (I presume) be
contented, if I do my devoir to reduce them in general to the Analogous Humors
of the Ancients above described, namely Choler, Phlegm, and Melancholy; not
pure or natural, but Corrupt. For, from these Humors taken in the Sense before
explicated, may be commodiously and congruously deduced, both the principal
differences of putrid Fevers, and the most probable causes of those Differences.

First therefore, I must put you in remembrance of what I have more than once
asserted, viz. That the Humors by this Hypothesis assigned to putrid Fevers for
their Causes both antecedent and conjunct, are such which are not exolete or
stale and despoiled of their Spirits, and grown vappid; but sufficiently stored
with Spirits, noxious and infest to the vital mication of the Blood.

Then I with good reason suppose, that when the Crudities received first into
the Mass of Blood, and after into the substance of the Parts, come near to the
nature of the Serum of the Blood, now corrupt, and by that putrefaction
rendered acrimonious and well nigh Corrosive (which emulating the Bile
contained in the Bladder of Gall, makes the Choler of the Ancients) there is
congested and prepared Matter most apt and disposed to produce Biliose Fevers,
as they are called Tertians, either continual or intermittent.

That in case the congested Crudities nearly resemble the white and viscid
Grumus of the Blood (which makes the Analogous Phlegm of the Ancients) but
corrupt: then there is laid up Fuel most convenient to foment Pituitose
Fevers, Quotidians continual or intermittent.

That if it happens, that the Crudities congested be of such a Nature and
Condition, as to be affine to the Analogous Melancholy of the Ancients, i. e.
to the blackish Grumus of the Blood, degenerate from its natural purity, and
corrupt: then the Bodies carrying them about are obnoxious and prone to a
Quartan ere long to invade them. And this may suffice to explain the Sentiments
suggested to me by Dr. Glisson's new Doctrine, concerning the most general and
obvious Differences of Crudities apt to produce Fevers, so far forth as they
may be taken for the Conjunct Causes of putrid Fevers.:

I come then to the Fundament of the so often mentioned division of putrid
Fevers into CONTINUAL and INTERMITTENT; that we may opportunely investigate,
what that is, on which this remarkable difference seems immediately to depend.
This in probability is nothing else but the very Fermentation of the Blood, in
which alone the formal Reason of all Fevers does consist; and which by
vehemently exagitating the whole Mass of the Blood, sometimes continually,
sometimes by Intervals, and those one while certain and ordinate, another while
uncertain and inordinate; induces that Intense and afflicting Heat, in which
alone the Ancients have unanimously placed the essence of a Fever; and renders
the Pulses of the Heart and Arteries more frequent than they ought to be; so
that from thence alone, as from a Pathognomonic Sign, a Physician may certainly
conclude of the presence of a Fever.

A continual Fever therefore is that which from the first Moment of its
Invasion, to the last of its duration, continnes and afflicts without
Intermission, never coming in all that time to a perfect Apyrexia or utter
Extinction. This Fever, if it be mild, gentle, unaccompanied with grievous
Accidents or Symptoms, and but of one days continuance; is thence called an
Ephemera or Diaria: if in like manner mild, but of two, three, or four Days
duration, it is denominated accordingly a Diaria of a few Days, or more
properly, Synochus Simplex.

An Intermittent Fever is that, in which the febrile Fermentation does not dure
from the beginning to the end continually, but is intermitted, and returns with
diverse Paroxysms after Intervals, now shorter, now longer: and these Paroxysms
running through their peculiar times, namely their beginning, augment, state,
and declination, there alternately, i. e. after the end of every single
Paroxysm, succeds an Apyrexia, not perfect perhaps, but quoad Sensum. From this
vicissitude, or rather from the various Intercalation of the Paroxysms, various
sorts of intermittent Fevers have, for distinction sake, obtained various
Names. In particular, when a new Fit, in proportion respondent to the former,
returns daily, i. e. once in every twenty four Hours, the Fever is named an
intermitting Quotidian. When a Paroxysm recurs every other Day, or on every
third Day, it is called a Tertian, and by the Vulgar, a third-Days Ague. When the
Paroxysm recurs not till after two whole Days of intermission, it is called a
Quartan, or fourth-Days Ague: and so forward; for there have been observed also
Quintans and Sextan's, though very rarely. Here give me leave en passant to
note, that the word Ague, by which the common People understand an intermittent
Fever, is derived from the French adjective, Aigu, which signifies Acute or
sharp: perhaps because an intermittent Fever is acute during the Paroxysm at
least, and afflicts the Patient with sharp Pains; though by Physicians,
respecting rather the duration, than the vehemence of this Disease, it is
numbered, not among acute, but among Chronic Fevers. How properly therefore the
English call an intermittent Fever, an Ague, I leave you to judge, while I
return into my way.

There is yet another Species of Fevers referrible neither to continual, nor to
intermittent, but compounded of both kinds; which though it continually augment
the natural heat of the Blood, nor ever comes to an absolute Apyrexia, no not
so much as quoad sensum, before it be wholly judged or ended; and in that
respect may pretend to a place among continual Fevers: yet has certain
Exacerbations and remissions of burning by intervals, and those sometimes every
day, sometimes every third, sometimes only every fourth; and in that respect
seems to belong to Intermittent. Hence it is, that such a Fever is called a
continual Quotidian, or a continual Tertian, or a continual Quartan, according
to the time of its Exacerbation or grieving anew.

Besides these three kinds of simple Fevers, Physicians have in all former Ages
believed, that there are others, compounded of two or more intermittent. Of
this sort are supposed to be.

(1.) Double, or Triple Quotidians; when on one and the same Day, two, or three
Paroxysms invade, in proportion respondent each to other successively.

(2.) Tertians double, or triple; believed hitherto to consist of two, or three
Tertians, whether in a double, two Paroxysms return in one Day, or single
Paroxysms recur every third Day: or whether in a Triple, two Fits come in one
Day, and a third on the next Day after; or three in one day, and none the next
Day. An intermittent Fever of this sort is distinguished from a simple
Quotidian, by the time of its invasion, by the time of its duration, and by the
Symptoms that are wont to accompany it. For, in all these Circumstances, the
first Paroxysm answers to the third, and the third to the fifth; but the second
is respondent to the fourth, and the sourth to the sixth, and so forward.
Whenever therefore we shall observe this Analogy betwixt the Paroxysms
alternately invading, we may with confidence pronounce, that the Fever is of
that sort, which Physicians call a double Tertian. When we observe on the other
side, that the first Fit is in all things like the second, the second like to
the third, and so forward through the whole course of the Fever; we may
certainly judge, that the Patient labors under a simple Quotidian. Besides
these Characters of distinction, Physicians have recorded one more, and it is
this: If a simple Tertian has preceded: recurring every third Day, and after
return every day; we may be sure, the Fever is of that kind, which heretofore
has been taken for, not a simple Quotidian, but a double Tertian.

Here perhaps ye will interrogate me about a Simple Quotidian, so frequently
mentioned by me; namely, Whether there be any such thing in nature, or not? And
ye have reason; there being a kind of Civil War among the Sons of Aesculapius
upon the question. For, some of the Princes among them have with great
eagerness contended to blot out of the Catalogue of Diseases, the very name of
a Quotidian, as if really there were no such intermittent Fevers: and others no
less renowned, as fervently, but somewhat more modestly, maintain, that of six
hundred sick Men that suffer new Paroxysms every day, scarce one is afflicted
with a Quotidian. I answer therefore, that true it is indeed, that a Quotidian
has been by some Authors, of greatfame, banished into the darksome Island of
Chimaeras; but unjustly, and by those who being carried away by prejudice, and
the authority of their Predecessors, rather than conducted by the light either
of certain Experience, or of right Reason, have by their prevarication
entangled their Followers in a gross and dangerous error: as I hope to evince,
when I shall come to explain the causes of intermittent Fevers in particular;
if what has been delivered just now of the distinct signs of a simple
Quotidian, be not thought sufficient to end the Dispute. For now I must hasten
to the third sort of supposed compound Intermittents, viz. (3) Quartans,
double, or triple. For as often as it happens, that a sick Man, remaining free
from a Fit only one day, is afflicted with two new Fits on the two days next
following: so often it is concluded, that he has a double Quartan. And when a
new Fit recurrs every day; but so, that the first Fit answer to the fourth, the
fourth to the seventh; the second to the fifth, and the fifth to the eighth; in
fine, the third to the sixth, the sixth to the ninth, and so forward: they
conclude, that of a simple Quartan produced, first is made a double; and then
of a double, a triple Quartan. And this seems to be confirmed (as Sylvius
rightly observes) sometimes from the reason of curing such Fevers, viz. if one
Fit be first taken away, and then on the two consequent days the Fits yet
return, one day of intermission interposed; or if two Fits be taken away, one
only remaining, and returning every fourth day: but more frequently from the
symptoms, namely, the shivering, quaking, long-lasting cold, etc. which being
more proper to Quartans, seldom occur in Tertians, and never but where the
Tertians decline toward the nature and type of Quartans.

Besides all these sorts of intermittent periodical Fevers, there have been
observed others, intermittent also, but of uncertain Periods; which they have
therefore named Inordinate and Wandering or Erratic.

Having thus briefly run through all the most remarkable differences of putrid
Fevers, simple and malignant, continual and intermittent, intermittent ordinate
and inordinate, single and double or triple; and deduced the causes of those
differences from diversity of febrile Ferments operating upon the Blood, either
without or with intermission, by certain or uncertain intervals: pursuing the
Glissonian Hypothesis I designed to assert and explain; it remains, that to
prevent misunderstanding of what has been said of the duplication and
triplication of intermittent Fevers, according to the vulgar doctrine of
Physicians, as if I adhered thereunto; I repete what was before said of that
nice point: namely, that when a double or triple Intermittent follows upon the
Heels of a single, the single is not (as has been heretosore believed and
taught) the direct cause of the double or triple: but the double or triple
arises from the causes of its own, like to those whence the single at first
arose. So that every double or triple intermittent ought to be accounted for
two or three single or simple intermittents of the same Species, alternately
complicate among themselves.:

COROLLARIUM THERAPEUTICUM.
MY Pathalogic disquisition being now at length ended, before all the Sands in
my Hourglass are fallen down; I cannot (as I think) employ the short remainder
of my time more profitably, than if I subjoyn a brief Therapeutic Corollary,
pertinent to my precedent discourse, and useful to Younger Students in
Medicine; for whose instruction chiefly it was, that the wise and prudent
Authors of the Statutes of this our so worthily renowned College, first
instituted and ordained Anatomic Lectures to be therein read by the learned
Fellows thereof, whenever it should seem fit to the venerable President.

I will therefore do my devoir to explicate, wherein chiefly consists that
Pepasmus or Concoction of crude Humors, which Nature, and her great Minister,
Hippocrates, require to their opportune Evacuation in putrid Fevers; and by
what kinds of Remedies the same may be best assisted and advanced. For, these
things being well understood, will afford much of Light toward the direction of
the younger Sons of Art, in the true and most rational method of curing Fevers;
in which no error can be little, no caution too great.

I begin from that never to be forgotten precept of the Divine old Man, before
recited: (...): Concocta medicamento purgare oportet, ac movere; non cruda;
neque ineunte morbo, nisi materia turgeat. To which Seneca seems to have had
respect, when he said, in morbis nihil est magis periculosum, quam immatura
medicina: and Livy, when he affirmed, Medicos plus interdum quiet, quam
movendo and agendo proficere.

The Concoction or digestion here meant, is by Hippocrates expressed sometimes
by the word (...), sometimes by (...), to contradistinguish it from (...),
which properly signifies the digestion of Aliment; as I have before advertised:
and according to the general Notion of all learned Physicians, Ancient and
Modern, it is, eorum quae sunt in corpore praeter naturam, ad moderatam and
secuturae expulsioni percommodam temperiem deductio. In which Sense Duretus,
the most faithful interpreter of the Oracle of Cous, expounds that place (Lib.
1. Epidem. Anutii Foesii edit. Page 365.) (...) eorum quae exeunt, concoctiones
spectandas esse. Upon which Galen copiously commenting, gives this memorable
definition of the thing: (...); nempe coctio est quaedam eorum quoe sunt
praeter naturam, morbi maturatio. And most rightly. For the Word (...), was
properly used by the Graecians to express the ripeness of the Fruits of Trees,
by which they are advanced from the State of Crudeness or immaturity, to that
of maturity or perfection; and metaphorically, to signify that maturity of the
matter of Diseases, which Nature by degrees induces, in order to the seasonable
and beneficial expulsion of it, when she attempts a Crisis by ways most
convenient.

Not that this Maturation is always to be expected in acute Diseases. For we
are to remember, there are two sorts of Crudity of Causes apt to induce Fevers:
one capable of being brought to moderation and ripeness; as that of the Blood
in a Phlegmon, of the phlegm in a Quotidian, of Choler in a Tertian, etc.
Another, incapable of correction and mitigation; as the Febrile Ferment that
causes Malignant and Pestilential Fevers, which being by its seminal Nature and
unalterable Form, pernicious to the very principles of Life in Man, is
sometimes by the force of Nature expelled and utterly exterminated out of the
Body, but never can be so changed and brought into subjection, as to be made
less hostile to the vital Spirits that conserve the Blood. And therefore in
such Fevers, wise Physicians are not wont to stay expecting Maturation of the
Poison mixed with and fermenting the Blood, in the mean time losing the
Opportunities of relieving Nature by proper Alexiterial and Sudorific remedies.

To come then to the Marrow of the Question proposed. Considering: (1) That the
Crudity of Humors inducing Fevers simply putrid, consists only in this, that
the Spirits lodged in them are not sufficiently educed, excited, and prepared,
so as to be fit to promote the vital mication of the Blood; (2) that all Fevers
are essentially founded in the fermentation of the Blood; and (3) That the
vital Motion or Heat of the Blood is always more or less impeded and perturbed,
and often utterly extinguished by that Fermentation: considering these things, I
say, it is not difficult thence to infer, that the Pepasmus or Concoction
requisite in all Fevers simply putrid, i. e. not Malignant, must consist
chiefly in three things e diametro opposite to those now mentioned; namely (1)
In the Dissipation and Consumption of the crude Spirits mixed with the Blood;
(2) In the Moderation of the Fermentation begun; and (3) In the Conservation
and Corroboration of the vital Powers. And these certainly are the three
principal Scopes to which a Physician ought to direct his Counsels, in the cure
of putrid Fevers; and which for their great importance, require to be singly
explained.

To the first of these principal Scopes, viz. the Dissipation and absumption of
crude Spirits, and requisite eventilation of the Blood by them inquinated, we
may most commodiously attain, by fasting, at least by a thin Diet; by Remedies
extenuating, acid, predatory and conducing to leanness; by Diaphoretics,
Sudorifics, and by letting of Blood. For (1) Fasting tends directly to
dissipation of the crude Spirits; because the Spirits, if not by intervals
recruited out of new supplies of Aliment, must necessarily be soon exhausted
and resolved into Air. But no mortal being able long to abstain from all sorts
of Meat and Drink, or to endure absolute fasting; we are therefore compelled to
substitute a thin and spare Diet, in the place of strict abstinence; for the
most part thin Broths made of things moystning, cooling, not prone to
corruption, subacid, and of easy digestion. To these (2) are added moderate
and grateful Acids, apt to attenuate, resolve and dissipate the Crudities
congested in the habit of the Parts, and therefore predatory. (3) Diaphoretics,
which promoting insensible Transpiration, must conduce to the dispersion and
exhalation of the same Crudities. (4) Sudorifics, which do the same thing, but
by a more expedite and conspicuous operation, at once rendering the Crudities
fluxile, and exciting Nature to drive them forth by Sweat. For Medicaments of
this Family, by the tenuity and mobility of their Particles, penetrate the
inmost Recesses and slenderest Pores of the Body, cut, attenuate and rarefie
Humors into Vapors, and irritate the Parts to expel them together with the
Serum of the Blood, in the form of Sweat. But in the use of these Hidrotic
Medicaments great circumspection is required, lest the matter of the Fever,
being not yet mature and prepared for this evacuation, be both importunely and
with too much Violence exagitated, to farther corruption of the Blood, and
increase of the Fermentation. So that they cannot be safely administerd to
impure Bodies, in the beginning, nor indeed in the augment, until certain Signs
of some Concoction have been observed. (5) Letting forth of Blood by opening a
Vein, which evidently detracts part of the Crude Matter floating in the Blood,
and makes room for the remainder to be more freely fermented, and prevents
eruption of the Blood out of its Vessels into some noble part.

To satisfy the Second capital Intention, various things are required; viz.
such as may facilitate the Motion of Fermentation in the Blood; such as may
moderate the same, when it is excessive in point of velocity; such as may
incite nature to quicken and accelerate it, when too slow; such as may keep it
within due Bounds, lest it bring a dangerous flood upon any noble part. For,
the motion of Fermentation is sometimes too turbulent and tumultuose, and in
that respect exceedingly laboriose, requiring remedies to make it more sedate
and easy: sometimes too dull and slow, and to be quickened; sometimes it
threatens a Flux upon some nobler parts, and then ought to be restrained. In
particular, (1.) The laboriose Fermentation (which the Ancients seem to have
meant by the name of Orgasmus or Turgescentia) indicates remedies apt to
compose it, and render it less prone to molest and offend the Vessels
containing the Blood: such as taking away some Blood by Phlebotomy, which by
diminishing the Mass, lessens the burden of nature, and makes room for the
freer Fermentation of the rest; such also are Acids and Refrigerating, and
Moistning Juleps (not given actually cold, but lukewarm, nor in the least
vinose) all which allay the ebullition of the Blood, and make it less prone to
be frothy. (2.) The too swift or vehement Fermentation, which makes the Fever
more acute than the strength and spirits of the Patient can well bear, and by
consequence ought to be moderated; requires remedies that may somewhat retard
it, and procure a truce to nature, that she may have respite to recollect and
rally her Forces. Of which sort are Blood-letting, Anodynes, Hypnotics, and
sometimes even Narcotics, either taken in the Mouth, or applied outwardly to
places convenient.

(3.) On the contrary, the too slow and lingering Fermentation, such as causes
Lent Fevers, calls upon the Physician for Spurs to incite and stimulate nature
to accelerate the Conflict. In this case therefore he ought to have recourse
sometimes to Purging Medicaments, to be by Intervals repeated; sometimes to
Sudorifics, and those pretty hot, efficacious, vinose or rich in spirits: for
all these quicken the Fermentation, and dissolve the clammyness of the Febrile
Matter, and in both those respects bring great relief to the Patient. (4.) The
Turgent Fermentation, which threatens a Flux upon some noble part and imminent
danger thereupon; directs to the speedy use of the best means for Diversion.
Here therefore the most urgent Symptom is without delay to be opposed, by
Remedies Revellent, Divertent, Repellent; as Phlebotomy, Cupping-Glasses,
Leeches, Ligatures, Vesicatories, and other Topics.

In sine, the Conservation of the vital powers, is in putrid Fevers of greatest
moment; because the Febrile Matter tends directly to the oppression of the
vital Mication of the Blood, and the Fermentation it self proceeds no less from
the Luctation of Nature, endeavoring to continue that motion in which life
consists; than from the Ferment that hinders it. Hence it comes, that the
lighter causes of Fevers are sometimes discussed by Cardiacs only, by a bitter
decoction of Chamomil Flowers, and the tops of Wormwood, by Carduus Benedictus
boiled in Posset Drink, and the like Euporista or domestic Remedies. For, if
the expansive motion of the vital spirits be so far assisted and corroborated,
as to enable it to overcome the clamminess of the febrile Ferment, that tends
to the suppression of it; Nature certainly will soon obtain the Victory, and
easily exterminate her Enemy. Here then is the opportunity of giving Cordials
(as they are called) Antidotes, and Specifics or Appropriate remedies, vulgarly
so named: all which conduce to the Conservation of the vital Faculty.:

Besides the just now described preparation of the matter in putrid Fevers
offending, to the opportune expurgation of it, there is required also a certain
preparation of the WAYS or passages, through which the same is to be most
commodiously carried off, that so the evacuation, whether by nature her self
critically, or by her Minister the Physician artificially instituted, may be
not only seasonable, but easy too and beneficial. For, these being, either by
their asperity, or by their narrowness, or by obstruction, less passable than
they ought to be; to attempt purgation, is vain and unsafe. Of which our
Lawgiver, Hippocrates, being fully conscious, left us this most prudent
counsel (Aphor. 10. lib. 2.) (...); Si quis corpora purgare voluerit, meabilia
ut reddat, est necesse. But how is the Body to be made more permeable? By
opening all the passages of it, and by cutting, dissolving and attenuating the
gross and viscid humors that stick in them: which may be best effected, by
Remedies Lubricant, Abstergent, and Aperient: the particular reasons of all
which I shall endeavor briefly to explain.

(1) Lubricantia certainly render the ways more fit to give passage to humors
that require purgation, by smoothing their roughness, and inducing instead
thereof a manifest slipperiness; so that the humors slide along through them
without any sensible renitency or attrition, which always causes Gripes in the
Stomach and Belly. Now of these Medicaments that are apt to induce
slipperiness, some are simply Aqueous, and remove asperity only by their
moisture, as Barley Water, thin Broaths, Whey, etc. Others are Mucilagineous,
smoothing the ways with a certain friendly and pleasing Lentor, as the Syrups
of Althaea, of the Flowers of Mallows, de Mucilaginibus, of Jujubs, etc. Others
Oleagineous, as Oil of sweet Almonds, Linseed Oil, fresh Butter, Lard, etc.
Others, Saline, as the Salt, Cream, and Magistery of Tartar. Others,
Spirituose; as New-laid Eggs, but little boiled, the Pulp of ripe Fruits. Again
of these, some loosen the Belly also; as the Pulp of Cassia and Damasco Prunes,
which above all things contemperate the roughness of purging Medicines, being
for that reason chiefly admitted into the composition of the Diaprun. Solut.

(2) Abstergentia seem to have the like good effect, in facilitating the
operation of purging Medicaments; as Soap has in cleansing of Linen. For,
whatsoever sticks to the inside of the Stomach and Guts, they wipe away; and
are found, in that respect perhaps, to conduce much to the correction of strong
and churlish Cathartics; by preventing their rough and grating Particles from
pertinaciously adhering to the Coats of the Ventricle and Intestines, and so
inducing Gripes and Contorsions. Hence it is familiar to Physicians to tame
fierce Purgers with Salts, viz. Sal Gemme, Salt of Tartar, of Nitre, Spirit of
Vitriol, and of Nitre dulcified, Cremor Tartari, and the like. Not that they
confer to the bridling of the fierceness of stronger Cathartics in this name
only, but because they are usually prescribed chiefly to this end.

(3) Nor are Aperient, i. e. cutting and attenuating Medicaments of less
utility in this business, where the ways through which peccant humors are to
be educed, are obstructed by any vitiose matter crammed into them. For,
remedies of this Classis, by reason of the great tenuity, acuteness and agility
of their Particles, penetrating into the smallest Vessels and Pores, and
attenuating viscid and tenacious humors therein sticking, open all passages in
the Body. No wonder then, if by rendering the clammy matter of Fevers more thin,
fluid, and more obedient to nature endeavoring, upon irritation by Purgers, to
expel it; they conduce mightily to the more facile, and more successful
operation of Purges. Nevertheless, we are to advert, that not all sorts of
humors are to be made fluxil, before any be exterminated by artificial
purgation: but that we are, in pertinacious obstructions of the Viscera, to act
with Aperients and gentle Cathartics by turns. For, as there are degrees of
Concoction, so likewise ought there to be degrees of evacuation; and so soon as
any part of the peccant matter is concocted and prepared; we must attempt to
carry it off; to the end that nature being thereby exonerated of part of her
Load, may with more facility digest the Remainder; at least when we perceive
her to be oppressed by too great weight. Of Aperients some are hot, which ought
to be administered to Men of robust Bodies, and cold complexion, and such as
labor of inveterate Oppilations: some cold, which are proper for persons of
hot constitutions, and prone to abound with Biliose or Choleric Humors: others
Temperate, and therefore most convenient to tender, soft, delicate and crazy
Bodies. But these three sorts being judiciously contemperate, mutually refract
each the others qualities, so as to reduce them to mediocrity. Other
differences of Aperients there are, which I must lightly touch. Some remove
Oppilations by attenuating simply, without the least of Astriction; as the five
opening Roots, the Bark of Tamarise, and of the Roots of Capers, the Leaves of
Maiden hair, Hearts tongue, Ceterach, and Fern Roots, etc. Others both open,
and moderately bind; as Endive, Cichory, Agrimony, Rhubarb, Sage, etc. Others
again are endowed with an aperitive faculty, but are withal vehemently
astringent; as Steel, which has no fellow. Now, as to the seasonable use of
these differences; in the beginning, Aperients without Astriction are most
convenient, because they best dispose the humors to fluxility, and clear the
passages: yet are they to be prescribed with this caution, that the tone of the
parts be not by the importune use of them dissolved, or irritated to a
cruentation. The safer way therefore is, to mix with them one or two of the
second Tribe, that have somewhat of Astriction in them. Aperients moderately
astringent, are indeed in themselves most safe; but they are given with best
success after a general Evacuation. And more vehement Astringents are to be
kept in reserve, to finish the cure, by restoring the weakened parts to their
pristine tone and vigor.

But is it not plainly dissonant to reason, ye will say, that the same remedies
should be at once both Aperient and Astringent? I answer, therefore, with
Doctor Glisson; that Aperients and Astringents are not directly opposite each
to the others. For, the contraries to Aperients are Obstruents; and to
Astringents, Laxants. Besides, in a Cachexy and Dropsy, which either proceed
from, or are commonly accompanied with great Obstructions; the natural tone of
the parts is always relaxed more or less. It must be confessed indeed, that in
those maladies the tension of the Nerves is for the most part too great, by
reason of their continual irritation by vitiose humors: but nevertheless it
cannot be denied, that their natural tone is less firm than it ought to be. If
therefore Obstruction may consist with Laxity, why may not Deoppilation as well
consist with Astriction?

And thus have I run over the three principal things praerequisite to
Evacuation in putrid Fevers, viz, correction of the peccant matter,
conservation of the vital Mication of the Blood, and permeability of the ways.
It remains only, that I adjust what has been said, to a certain Rule of
Hippocrates, that seems to render it doubtful. The precept is this (Aphor. 29.
lib. 2.) (...); Ineuntibus morbis, si quid movendum videatur, move: Which some
perhaps may think plainly repugnant to the former Aphorism, upon the
explication whereof I have so long insisted.

To reconcile therefore these two equally true Aphorisms, I must acknowledge,
that it is not always requisite to expect a Pepasmus, or maturation of the
Morbific Matter in Fevers simply putrid. For, there are various cases, in which
whether they happen to be single, or concurrent; the counsel of this latter
Aphorism is to be preferred to that of the former. And all these Cases may be
reduced to the number of five.

The FIRST is, when any vitiose humor, either by its abundance, or irritating
quality, or motion does molest the patient, in the first region of the Body,
that is, in the Stomach, or Guts, or Pancreas, or Liver, etc. which requires to
be speedily expelled upward or downward. For it is not to be doubted, but that a
Physician may, and ought, in this case, to relieve molested nature, as soon as
is possible, by carrying off the irrequiet humor [(...)] by ways most
convenient. And by the Oracle of frequent experience we are taught, that not
only intermittent, but continual Fevers also, are much diminished, if not
totally eradicated by safe Vomits or Purges administered in the beginning. For,
the fovent cause being taken away, the proxime cause is much more easily
discussed; which seems not to be any humor stagnating or congested, either in
the Viscera themselves, or in their Confines, as has been already shown; but
floating in the Mass of Blood within the Arteries and Veins. This therefore is
not to be attempted by any purging Medicament, until Concoction has preceded:
and the latter Aphorism advising Purgation in the beginning of putrid Fevers,
is restrained to crude humors contained in the first Region of the Body; nor
does it respect the times of Diseases, so much as the strength of the sick,
(which is very rarely exhausted in the beginning) according to the judgment of
Galen (libr. ad Thrasybulum, cap. 38.) who gives this reason of the Aphorism,
Quod natura, adhuc satis valida existens, detracta oneris quo premitur, part,
quod reliquum est and facilius far, citiusque concoquendo mitigare possit.
Hence it is, that not only Glysters, that rinse the Guts, but gentle Solutives
also, such as may without any great tumult or commotion carry off any vitiose
humor lodged in primis viis; are commended by the most experienced Physicians
in the beginning of putrid Fevers.

The SECOND Case is, when any matter incapable of mitigation by Concoction,
begins to show its Turgescence, i. e. either from its abundance, or from its
malign quality, flying from place to place, induces a frequent mutation or
shifting of Symptoms: all which Hippocrates comprehended in the word (...),
which signifies rage or fury. Which for the most part happens in the beginning
of the Fever; and then arise various Symptoms, and dangerous, according to the
various Temperament, Irritability, Action, Use, and Situation of the part upon
which the turgent matter rusheth. As for instance, in Phrenetic Patients we
observe an admirable change of Symptoms; sometimes their Sight, sometimes their
Hearing, sometimes their Tongue being invaded and disordered by the wandering
humor that causes their Delirium, and often shifts the scene of its tragical
fury. And the Reason seems to be this, that the enraged matter of the Disease
is so highly offensive to Humane Nature, that no part of the whole Body can
suffer it so much as one moment of time, without uniting the Forces of all its
irritated Fibers to squeeze it out, so that it is transmitted from some parts
to others in a trice. If it happen therefore, that any crude humor be in this
impetuose manner transmitted to any Secretory Organ (even though it be not
redundant in the whole Body (a considerable part of it may be, by help of
purging Medicaments, respective to that Organ, speedily carried off to the
preservation of the Patients life. For, the humor, so turgent, and rushing into
the Organ, does by its very motion irritate the Fibers of it to contract
themselves vigorously to expel it; no less than if it were redundant in the
whole Body. If the storm then fall upon the Stomach, the danger thence
impendent may be easily prevented by a moderate Vomit, given before the humor
be removed to some other part; if upon the Guts, a convenient Purge may serve
to turn it downward. And yet I must confess, that such early Evacuations are
commonly tumultuous and painful; as promiscuously educing all humors they meet
with; and therefore never to be instituted, but where the matter of the Disease
is turgent.

The THIRD Case is, when some little portions of any one, or more of the
Analogous Humors formerly described, chance to be carried, together with the
stale and dead recrements of the Blood, to the Secretory Organs. In particular,
when some of the acrimonious and corroding Serum of the Blood, is by nature
therewith offended, transmitted, together with the Biliose Excrement of it, to
the Liver: or some of the whitish and viscid Grumus of the Blood, together with
the Pituita emortua, to the Stomach; or finally, some of the aqueous or
potulent matter, with that of the Urine to the Kidneys. Because Nature tends
that way, and being assisted by a convenient Parge in the first Case; in the
second, by a gentle Vomit; and by temperate Diuretics in the third; may
continue the same course, until she has brought the remainder of the peccant
matter to a perfect Crisis.

The FOURTH is, when any vitiose matter yet crude, is so redundant in the
Blood, that nature, reduced to her last shift, is compelled to exclude it by
parcels, by any Secretory Organ, not by that which is most proper and congruous
to the nature of the humor. As it happens in the Yellow Iaundise, when part of
the corrupt Choler is separated from the Blood in the Kidneys, and makes the
Urine thick, turbid and yellow: and in that dreadful Disease called Cholera,
all the Bilis ejected upward and downward, is not concocted and truly felleous,
but for the greater part crude and only analogous to that which is separated
from the Blood in the Liver, and thence brought into the Bladder of Gall, and
seems to be generated by a certain malign or venenose corruption of the Blood.
For, improbable it is, that so prodigious a quantity of biliose matter has
been separated, in so little time, by the Liver, or excreted by the Porus
Bilarius; but most probable, that the same is separated from the whole Mass of
Blood in the inmost Coat of the Stomach and Guts. In like manner, they who
drink Mineral Waters, or Wine profusely, make Urine indeed in abundance, but
thin and crude.

The FIFTH and last Case is, when the Febrile Fermentation appears to be slow
and lingering. For, here it is lawful, by just intervals, to ordain Evacuations
by milder Cathartics; not only in respect of the Focus, which in such Cases is
wont to be recruited often, and therefore requires to be subtracted by repeted
Evacuations; but also that the Fermentation it self may be quickened, and so
nature excited to perform her work of digesting the Crudities with more vigor
and expedition. Besides, since in lent and lingering Fevers, the crude matter is
not brought to the state of maturation all at once; but first some part, and
then more and more successively: it is fit the same should be evacuated per
Epicrasin, or part after part accordingly: and this, lest that part of the
matter that is first digested, remain still mixed with the Blood, and inquinate
it; or at least, being separated in the inmost Coat of the Stomach and Guts,
pervert either the Concoction or Distribution of the Chyle, and so foment the
Disease.

And thus have ye at length succinctly set before you all the opportunities in
which it is not only lawful, but expedient for a Learned Physician, directing
his judgment [(...), as our Master Hippocrates speaks] by certain observation
of Signs and Symptoms in the sick; to institute convenient Evacuations, at
least by milder purging Medicaments, even in the beginning of putrid Fevers.
Nor does any thing else remain for me now to subjoyn concerning this Argument;
but this brief admonition, that no young Practitioner be so rash, as to purge,
where he finds not one or more of these opportunities offered to him. For, if
he attempt crude matter by strong and fierce Catharticks; it is ten to one, but
he will exhaust much of the vital spirits, colliquate the Blood, and render the
Disease mortal..

CONCLUSION ANAGNOSTICK.
It Is the custom of Travelers (ye know) when they have with panting Breast,
and painful Steps, ascended to the top of a steep Mountain, to turn about, and
look back upon the places and ways they have with so much labor and patience
passed: and this, not only to take breath a while, but to imprint more deeply
in their memory, the Images of whatever things they had in transitu observed;
uncertain whether or no Fortune may ever bring them that way again. Let us then
(most judicious, and most candid Auditors) who are all Travelers too in the
most darksome and rocky ways of Natural Knowledge, follow their Example; and
having now at length attained to the end of this Mornings Journey, take a short
review of the things offered to your notice, as we passed along: to the end ye
may the more easily recall them to mind, whenever ye shall be pleased to think
them not altogether unworthy your Examen; it being unlikely, that I shall at
any time hereafter have the honor to serve you, in the quality, not of a
Guide, but Torch-bearer in this place.

The Heads therefore of the various things proposed by me to your
consideration, are these. I showed in the first Stadium,
(1.) That the vital motion of the Blood is sometimes disordered, impeded, and
impugned by causes praeternatural; and chiefly by crude humors constituting a
peculiar Fermentative Inquinament of the Blood: and that from thence arises a
duel or conflict between the vital spirits, on one side, and that Inquinament
on the other; which conflict, in putrid Fevers, is called by the Ancients,
Putrefaction; and Fermentation, by the Moderns. (2.) That the same Ferment, in
Fevers, tends naturally to the oppression of the vital Mication of the Blood,
in which life it self immediately consists. (3.) That the crudity of humors
generating that Ferment, and consequently Fevers, does consist chiefly in this;
that the spirits of our food received into the Stomach, either have not been by
the concoctive faculty thereof sufficiently exalted (which always happens in
Fevers simply putrid) or though excited, have not been subdued and tamed, so as
to become useful and fit to promote the vital Mication of the Blood (which
always happens in Malignant Fevers. (4.) That the principal reason, why in
putrid Fevers it is unsafe to purge, before nature has concocted the crude
matter mixed with the Blood, seems to be this; that in the whole Body are no
Secretory Organs destined peculiarly to the separation of humors yet crude,
from the Mass of Blood. (5.) That the Analogous Humors of the Ancients are
coincident with the Elements, by the Moderns supposed to constitute the Blood:
and that it is plainly necessary, that in every Fever, of whatever sort, some
one, or more of those Analogous Humors be in fault. (6.) That the formal reason
of a Malignant Ferment is radicated in some seminal nature pernicious to the
principles of Life in Man.

In the Second,
(1.) That the oppressive Energy of the Febrile Ferment described, comes
immediately from the pendulous Lentor, or clamminess of it, by which it is apt
to render the Blood soul and roapy, and to inviscate the vital spirits, that
should by their expansive motion conserve its purity. (2.) That these vital
spirits are incited to raise a Fermentation, not by the exhalations of the
Blood retained, but only by the said clamminess of the crude matter inducing
the Fever.

In the Third,
(1.) That the Symptoms contingent in the beginning of a Febrile Paroxysm, may
be most commodiously referred to the aforesaid Conflict or Colluctation betwixt
the expansive endeavor of the vital spirits, and the opposite clamminess of
the Febrile Ferment. And (2.) that the Symptoms succeeding in the Augment,
State, and Declination, may be with equal congruity solved by the same
Hypothesis.

In the Fourth,
(1.) That the cardinal Differences of Fevers are most probably derived from
the Different Ferments that induce them immediately. (2.) That the Origin of
all Fevers, simply putrid, i. e. free from all Malignity, may be most
congruously deduced mediately from defect, either of Chylification, or
Transpiration, and free motion of the Blood, whether this happen with, or
without extravasation thereof. (3.) That the Blood, when inquinated by crude
Chyle, does not presently conceive a Fermentation, but after some time, and by
degrees. (4.) That in intermittent Fevers, the matter of each single Fit is not
generated anew; but comes from a general Fomes, existent in the very substance
of the solid parts imperfectly nourished with crude juices. (5.) That this very
substance of the solid parts is melted into a kind of Sanies or putrid matter,
and remixt with the Blood, in all putrid Fevers. 6. That the Analogous Humors
of the Ancients, result from various Crudities mixed with the Blood: and that
from thence arise various sorts of Fevers; namely, biliose, pituitose, and
melancholic. (7.) That the division of Fevers into continual, and intermittent,
does immediately depend upon the Fermentation, sometimes continual, sometimes
ceasing and recurring diversely by intervals. (8.) That an intermittent Fever
simple, is not the direct cause of an intermittent double or triple.

In the Fifth, and Last,
(1.) That to the Maturation of the crude matter, are required three things,
viz. Dissipation and Consumption of the unexcited spirits therein remaining,
Moderation of the Fermentation already begun, and Conservation of the Vital
Faculties. (2.) That in order to safe and opportune Evacuation of the same
peccant matter, is required also due preparation of the Ways or Passages, by
which it is to be educed; and that by Remedies Lubricant, Abstergent, Aperient.
(3.) That sometimes even in the beginning of putrid Fevers, Purgation is
requisite; specially when vicious humors molest in the first Region of the
Body, or when the Febrile Matter is turgent, or when part of it is transmitted,
together with the stale Recrements of the Blood, to any one or more of the
three Secretory Organs; or when Crudities are highly redundant in the Mass of
Blood; or finally, when the Fermentation it self is too sluggish and lingering:
but in no other case whatsoever.

And this, most candid Auditors, is the Sum of what has been in this Session
said concerning Fevers. Nor have I any thing more to add, but only this; that
if I have, by offering you this Abridgement, usurped the Office of your
Anagnostes; it was not from a vain conceit, that the positions therein
contained, are worthy your belief: but only from hopes, that ye might be
thereby more easily inclined, to let me understand from your judgment of them,
how far they may be worthy mine. For, in this Argument, (as in all others,
whether Physical, or Pathological) I pretend not to know truth, but to seek it:
nor to seek it contumaciously and arrogantly, but modestly and doubtingly; as
becomes a Man, a Philosopher, and a Fellow of this Royal College of
Physicians, into which I entered with no other ambition, but that of being more
and more instructed in Natural Science and all other Virtues..

PRAELECTIO VI. OF MOTION VOLUNTARY
IN the beginning of time, when it pleased the Divine Majesty to call this
visible University of things, the World, out of nothing, and to create Subjects
whereon to exercise his infinite goodness; having endowed all living Creatures
with Appetites requisite to the conservation of their peculiar Beings; and
accommodated them with Objects proportionate to those Appetites: He saw it
convenient, to consummate that Emanation of his Bounty, by furnishing them also
with Faculties, by which they might be impowerd, not only to discern what
Objects are good or convenient, what evil or inconvenient to their particular
Natures; but also to pursue, or avoid them accordingly. Now, among these so
necessary Faculties, that by which all Animals are enabled to prosecute what is
presented to them under the appearance of Good, and to eschew what they
apprehend to be Evil; is what Physiologists call (...), the faculty LOCOMOTIVE;
and rightly enough define to be, the Power by which a living Creature is
enabled to move or transferr from place to place, either is whole Body or any
Part thereof at pleasure.

To the putting this noble Power into Act, are required as absolutely necessary,
besides the Member or part of the Animal to be moved, three things; which
according to the Order of their Succession, are,

(1.) The Object, (...) (as Aristotle Lib. de communi Animalium motu cap. 7.
terms it) (...), that which Invites; or (...), that which Offends.

(2.) The Efficient, call it what you please, the Soul, Mind, or Intellect, in
Man; the Imagination, Fantasy, or Brain, in Brutes; or Locomotive, Animal
Faculty, in both: which being invited, or offended by the Object, moves the
whole Body; or some Member of it, in pursuance or avoidance thereof: and,

(3.) the Instrument used by the Efficient; which seems to be double: viz.
Mediatum, that, by the mediation or intervention of which the Appetite, Soul,
or Imagination does as it were dispense its Command, and Communicate Virtue
motive to the Organ to be used: and Immediatum, that by which immediately the
Command given is executed, and the intended Motion performed.

As for the Necessity of the first and second of these three requisites to
animal or voluntary Motion; I think it needless for me to insist upon the
explication thereof: because it is most evident, and on all Hands confessed,
that the Soul, whether Rational, or Irrational, is the primary Agent in all
voluntary Motions; and that the same is thereunto incited by the good, or evil
appearing in the Object.

But as for the Instrumentum mediatum sive primum, that upon which the Soul or
Appetite immediately acting, does by the help thereof produce a Motion, first
in the ultimate Instrument (which undoubtedly is the Muscle) and then in the
Member, whose Motion conduces to the attainment of its end; it is a Question,
and a great one too, whether there be in truth a necessity of any such thing,
or not.

The Ancients (it is well known) unanimously taught, that the Soul effects Motion
in the Muscles, at pleasure, by transmitting from the Brain, by the Nerves,
into them, a certain most thin, most subtle, and most agil Substance, (which
they call therefore Animal Spirits) by whose swift and copiose Influx the
Muscles to be moved being in an Instant as it were inflated and distended
Secundum latitudinem, they are forced to contract or shorten themselves
Secundam longitudinem, and by that Contraction to pull and move the Members to
which they are fastened. And this Opinion has been without any dispute embraced
and asserted, through a long train of Ages, down to this in which we live.

But in this our more illuminate Age, Fate has brought forth some Physicians of
this Nation and College, of most profound Learning, and admirable sagacity of
Spirit; who laying aside that so antique Hypothesis of Animal Spirits, as both
improbable and unnecessary: hold it to be sufficient to solve all the
Phenomenon of voluntary Motion, if it be supposed, that the dictates of the
Soul are transmitted from the Brain to the Nerve and Muscle to be used, not by
emission of any Substance whatsoever, but by a mere contraction of such Fibers
of the Brain as are continued to that Nerve. For the Nerve (say they) having
its origin from the Fibers of the Brain, and being at one end continued to
them, at the other inserted into the Head of the Muscle; so as to make one
continued Cord all along: if a Motion be excited, ad nutum animae, in the
Fibers of the Brain, the same must be at the same time excited in the Nerve
also and in the Muscle, by reason of their Continuity.

Betwixt these two so different and irreconcilable Opinions, I am forced to
suspend my Judgment, not yet able to discern, which has the advantage above
the other, in point of Verisimilitude. To reject either of them, as Erroneous;
would hardly consist with the modesty of a Philosopher, who cannot but be
conscious, and ought to confess, how abstruse a thing the nature of a Soul is;
how imperfect and confused the Notions are, that Men have formed of their own
Mind; and how extremely difficult it is for human Reason to compose a congruous
and satisfactory Discourse, concerning the Economy of the Brain in a living
Creature, which is as obscure to our understanding, as the Effects of it are
manifest to our Senses. To reject Both, because they are both embroyled with
many Difficulties, some of which seem to me to be insuperable; were to make my
slender Capacity the Measure of Probability, to prefer the horrid darkness of
Midnight to the hopeful dawning of Light in the Morning, and to oblige my self
to excogitate some third Hypothesis less liable to incongruities and
Objections, which is above my Power. What then remains for me to do in this
perplexity of Thoughts? Only this, to bring the whole Cause to the tribunal of
your Judgment, Most wise and most equal Arbiters, there to be finally decided.
I resolve therefore, by your Leave, to handle this weighty controversy,
tanquam problema utrinque disputatum; and while ye hold the Beam of the
Balance, to put into the Scales the principal Arguments alleged on both Sides,
together with their respective difficulties not yet sufficiently solved: to the
end, that ye may, afer due perpension, give Sentence, which of the two Opinions
is the more probable.

I begin from the FORMER, out of respect to the Ancients; assuming to myself,
pro tempore, the Person of a Defendant of Animal Spirits, as the immediate
instrument of the Soul in voluntary Motion, in Man.

In the first place, therefore, I say; That seeing every Instrument ought to be
accommodate, both to the nature of the Agent that is to use it; so as to hold
some proportion to the Energie of the one, and to the Conditions of the other;
and seeing that voluntary Motion is commanded and executed in one and the same
moment of Time, with Velocity equal to that of Lightning: considering this, I
say, it seems necessary, that the Instrument upon which the Soul immediately
impresses her Power motive, should be such, as is naturally fit to convey the
same from the Brain, by the Nerves, into the Muscles, tanquam in instanti, and
most easily. But in the whole Body nothing is found so easily and swiftly
moveable, as that most subtle and meteoriz'd Substance, of which the Spirits
Animal are supposed to consist; and therefore it is consentaneous, that they
are the immediate Instrument of the Soul in voluntary Motion.

Here I foresee it will be Objected, that although these Spirits be supposed to
consist of Matter the most refined, and most agil imaginable, more subtle than
the Particles of Light, or Des Cartes's subtilis materia; yet still they must
be Bodies, and therefore can hold no conceivable proportion to the Soul, which
is believed to be Incorporeal. Nor indeed am I so vain as to hope ever to hear
this Objection fully Selved. Nevertheless I take liberty to observe, that it
lies as heavy upon the other Hypoth sis of the Muscles being moved by the
Nerves excited or invigorated at their original by Motion, begun in the Fibers
of the Brain, by the Soul: it being no less difficult to conceive, how an
incorporeal Agent cna Act upon a Corporeal Organ, by way of simple contact or
impression than how it can communicate a forse by Trancmission of Spirits most
subtle, most active: nay more, I may adventure to say, this latter supposition
is so much the less inconceivable than the former, by how much more easily a
most light and most agil Substance is put into Motion, than a heavy and gross
one.

Secondly, evident it is, that the motive Power of which we are speaking, is
not inherent in the Muscles themselves, nor in the Nerves inserted into them;
but derived and immitted into them from the Brain, ad nutum animae, as she has
occasion to use them. If so, what notion can we have for such a Power, unless
we conceive it to be a certain invigoration or force, suddenly communicated
to, or impressed upon the Fibers of the Muscles? and wherein can we imagine
that invigoration to consist, if not in a distention of those Fibers, by some
influx from the Brain? This very consideration seems to have induced that great
Man, Galen, to deliver this for an undoubted truth (in lib. de motu musculor.
cap. 2.) Adeo certe magna quaedam vis est in nervis, superne a magno principio
affluens: non enim ex seipsis eam, neque connatam habent. etc.

Thirdly, if there be no invigorating Influx from the Brain through the Nerves;
how comes it, that an Obstruction, or Compression of any one of them forthwith
causes a Palsy in that part, to which the obstructed or compressed Nerve
belongs? Is it not only from hence, that the intercourse betwixt the Brain and
Muscles of that part, is wholly stopped? If the Nerves were designed and
fraimed by Nature to do the office of Strings or Cords only; why were they not
made of one continued Substance, but of many slender Filaments or Threads? And
why were not these small Threads closely twisted together into a strong Cord,
but extended, as parallels, side by side, and intercepted with many narrow
Canales or passages betwixt them, and all enclosed within a membraneous Coat
extremely thin and tender? Certainly, if we attently contemplate the artifice
of Nature, in the Figure and contexture of a Nerve; we shall find our selves
almost obliged to acknowledge, that the Fibers were so disposed in Parallels,
with small Canales running along betwixt them, to give free and quick passage
to the subtle influence to be transmitted from the Brain into the Muscles, for
the invigoration of their Fibers. And Galen reflecting upon this, that if a
Nerve be cut asunder, the Muscle into which it was inserted, becomes ever after
incapable of being used to voluntary Motion; from thence with great assurance
concludes; Nervi igitur, rivorum in morem, a cerebro, ceu ex quodam font,
deducunt musculis vires. Where it is remarkable that he compares the Nerves, not
to Strings or Cords, but to rivuletts or Conduit-Pipes, framed for the
conveyance of the invigorating influence, or (...) (as he calls it) first
impetus, from the Brain, as from a Fountain. And what could he have said,
either more intelligible in it self, or more favorable to the doctrine of
animal Spirits?

Fourthly and lastly, it is not unworthy consideration, that the voluntary
Motion [(...)] of Reptils, such as Earthworms, Snails, and such like (whose
progression the Greeks call by a most proper Word, (...) and (...); most
accurately described by Aristotle, lib. de incessu animal. cap. 9.) is
performed by the help of a certain aerial or spirituose Substance issuing from
their Heads; discernable, in Snail, by the sight. For, if you put a large gray
Snail into a clear glass Phial, and hold him up against a good Light; you may
plainly perceive, that when he begins to creep, a Chain of little Bubbles will
come from his Tail, and move along one after another to the middle of his Back,
and thence up to his Head. When the Snail remains quiet, the motion of the
Bubles cease: and as he again begins to advance, they also begin their Course
anew; passing, by a kind of slow Circulation, from the Tail to the Head, along
the Back; and from the Head to the Tail, along the Belly. So that it seems
probable, that these Bubbles being protruded or propelled in the manner
described, are instrumental to the Motion of the Snails forepart, to which he
afterdraws up his hinderpart, arcuatim, making an Arch in the middle; and so
advances. Quia postquam priore part processerit, mox posteriorem ad illam, se
convolvendo, trahit; ita ut videatur arcuatim and annulatim progredi; as the
many-tongued Monsr. Bochart says, in his description of the Motion of a
Horse-leech; in Hierozoic. lib. 5. cap. 19. Now, though Nature be observed to
diversifie the Instruments of voluntary Motion, in various Sorts of living
Creatures, according to the diversity of their Bulks, Shapes, Functions, and
necessities of Life; and therefore to infer a parity of contrivance of them in
more perfect Animals, from an observation of the Action of those in less
perfect, be but an inartificial Argument: yet forasmuch as she seldom varies
her more general ways of formation, but upon necessity; and when she does, her
deflections from her common Method, are never so wide, but still they carry
some Analogy to them: it seems not improbable, that as the progressive Motion
of Reptils is performed by the help of an Aerial Substance, so likewise our
muscular Motion is made by the help of a spirituose Influx from the Brain into
the Nerves and Muscles.

And this is the sum of the principal Arguments urged, partly by the Ancient,
partly by the modern defenders of animal Spirits, and of their necessary use in
voluntary Motion.

I will now, according to my promise, change my Person, and putting on that of
an Opponent, plead a while against both their Existence, and their supposed
use: taking the liberty to allege, what at present I remember to have been said
by others, and what I humbly conceive may with reason be said, to weaken at
least, if not wholly subvert the former doctrine.

We Physicians indeed speak magnifickly of Spirits Animal, as of the
plenipotent and immediate instrument of the Soul in all her operations upon the
Body: confidently attributing to them, veluti Demiurgis quibusdam, whatever of
designed Motions are performed by the Nerves and Muscles, whatever of natural
Motions are performed by the Diaphragm, and Heart, whatever of violent Motions
happen in our exorbitant Passions, in fine, whatever of commerce or
communication there is betwixt the Brain and all inferior Parts, in the state
of Nature, as if we assented to the Dream of Heraclitus Ephesius, (...). Diog.
Laert. in vita. Yea more, in a Preternatural State also we make them only not
omnipotent. For, what Disease of the Brain can ye name, which has not been
referred to their Vices, either to their defect, or excess; to their stupidity
and sluggishness, or their fury and tumults; to their interception, or too
copiose and impetuose Influx; to their fixation, or incessant exagitation; to
their depravation by exotique and inconvenient Mixtures, to their dissipation
by Opiates and Narcoticks; or to some other of a thousand accidents, to which
they are supposed to be Obnoxious. Nay some have gone yet much farther, and
(were it not-indecent to divert to Romantic Writings) I could quote an Author
of no small Fame, who has not many Years past enriched the Commonwealth of
Philosophy with a whole Legend of the Empire of Animal Spirits, their Laws and
Constitutions politic, their quickness of perception, presagition of Dangers,
Passions of Love, Anger, Hate; their Seditions, Tumults, Insurrections,
military Rangings, Sallies, Excursions, Combats, Incampings, Marches and
Countermarches, Explosions or Fireings, Retreats in order, confused Flights,
and infinite other admirable things, such as I, for my part, should not have
had Wit enough to ascribe to any but Reasonable Creatures. Nor shall I blush to
confess, that when I was reading this Fanciful Book, I could not but recall to
mind many of the Witty Fictions of Lucian (verar. historiarum Lib. 1.)
concerning the Militia and adventures of his Hippogypi, Lachanopteri,
Cencroboli, Scorodomachi, Psyllotoxotae, Anemodromi, Struthobalani,
Nubecentauri, Aeroculices, Solarii, Lunarii, Nephelococcygians, and other
chimerical Nations by him in Drollery described; and all the pleasant Dreams of
a certain great Lady, recounted in her most delightful Histories of the Blazing
World, and of the Kingdoms of Fayries in ever Man's Brain: though I at the same
time considered, that Lucian and the Lady had written only in Jest, to exercise
their Wit: but the other, in serious earnest, and with design to reform the
State of Physic, by new discoveries. So true is that saying of a late ingenious
Writer; Ubi semel occupatum ingenium est novis Hypothesibus, licet solis
innitantur conjecturis; in infinitam conceptuum libertatem se diffundit: ne
disputare quidem cum rei veritate amplius sustinet. Tam irrequieto and
exultante impetu stimulat in ulteriora voluptas gloriosa.

And yet notwithstanding, after all our speciose discourses of these Emissaries
of the Soul, Animal Spirits; we are distracted by various Opinions concerning
them: still anxiously inquiring, of what matter, in what place, and how they
are generated; what are their Qualities, Motions, Ways, and Manner, of acting;
and in fine, uncertain, whether they be real Creatures of Nature, or only the
Idols of human Imagination. Risum teneatis amici, an lachrymas? Certe res est
hand perfunctorie lugenda.

Some have affirmed, that the Fluid contained in the Pores and Fibers of the
Nerves, is the more subtle part of the Blood, separated and sublimed in the
Brain; giving it the noble Name of Spirits: but they have not yet by certain
reasons or Experiments, taught us, to which of all the Fluids that are known to
us, that is like. Others therefore proceeding somewhat farther, pronounce that
these Spirits consist of Saline and Sulphurous Particles highly analogous to
the Spirits of Wine. But this is to feed our curiosity with fine Words that
signify little of certainty. True it is indeed, that upon drinking a little
Glass of Spirit of Wine, we find our Strength suddenly recruited: but whether
from the Humor we call Spirit, or from that other Matter that makes that Spirit
Fluid, or is perhaps for some other reason joined to it; who hitherto has
determined? Besides, the animal Spirits (if any such there be) seem to be so so
far remote from the subtility, Acrimony, and volatility of Spirit of Wine; that
we want not just reasons to convince us, they are nor volatile, nor actually
Rarefied into Exhalations, nor acrimonious. Not Volatile; because if they were
such, certainly they would offend and trouble the Brain; as may be inferred
from the Lassitude, Headache, giddiness and other Symptoms that commonly invade
Men next Morning after a Debauch with Wine; all which come from the volatile
Spirits of the Wine. Not actual Exhalations; because in that State, being mixed
with other Humors of the Body, they would produce Bubles or Froth, or cause
also an inflation of the Parts containing them: neither of which is to be
endured. Not Acrimonious, pungent, or offensive by asperity of their Particles;
because if such, they would continually irritate, prick, and corrode the Brain
and Nerves, and necessarily force them into Convulsions, and other tumultuose
Motions. I add, that they are not (as Fr. Sylvtus imagined them to be) apt to
Ferment; because if such, they could not but fret and dissolve the soft and
tender Substance of the Brain, and the Pith of the Nerves.

By these and other Reasons induced, our most excellent Dr. Glisson (de
Ventric. and Intestin. Cap. 8. number. 7.) formed his animal Spirits of a
constitution exempt from all these inconvenient Qualities. He describes them to
be Mild, Placid, Sedate, Fixed, Sweet, Nutritive, Corroborating, and apt to
consolidate; and in all these respects exactly like the Spirits contained in
the white of an Egg. Their Subject he held to be, the true Succus Nutritious,
distributed from the Brain, through the Nerves, to all spermatick Parts: which
he would have to be generated only in the Brain (corticem inter and medullam)
by way of Secretion; and that the matter of which they are in that manner
generated, is the more mild and spermatic part of the Blood; the acrimonious
and more elabourated Part being reduced thence by the Veins, for that purpose
perhaps distributed into the Cortex of the Brain: concluding, that the select
part is changed into animal Spirits, not by sublimation or meteorization (as
all others held before) but by mitigation, refrigeration, and Whitening. So
that in fine, if their Nature agree with this Character; I do not see by what
right they can be called Spirits, according to the common notion Men have of
all things known by that Name.

In so dense a Mist of our understanding, in so great and irreconcilable a
dissension of Opinions, concerning the matter, generation, and qualities of
animal Spirits; how shall we discern the truth? Whom can ye give me, so
sagacious, so happy above all other Mortals, in explicating the Secrets of the
Economy of man's Brain; as to be able, by clearly defining what they are,
whence they proceed, and how they are generated, to put an end to the Dispute?
For, till this be done, we shall still be to seek, how they can conduce to
invigorate the Nerves and Muscles in voluntary Motion. In the mean time we can
be certain only of this; that so great a War of Opinions among the Princes of
Philosophy, is a strong Argument, that the thing about which they contend, is
not yet sufficiently understood.

Equally uncertain it is, by what kind of Motion these invisible Emissaries are
transmitted from the Brain through the Nerves; whether they fly swiftly, or
creep along slowly. For, some there are, who fond of the Chimera's of their own
Imagination, and carried away by affectation of Glory from the invention of I
know not what new Theories in Physic, as if Philosophers were, like young
Ladies, best pleased with Novels; have confidently taught, that these Spirits
are not only moved most rapidly in the Brain and Nerves, as Lightning is darted
through the Air; but as it were shot out, at command of the Fantasy, into the
Nerves, and recalled again by the same ways, in an instant, according to the
exigence of the Actions to be performed by them. And yet neither of these seems
consonant to right Reason.

Not the Former; because in their supposed Motion from without inward, by which
these Gent. would have all sensation to be made; the perception of a tangible
Object (for example) which is made in the top of a Finger, is in the very same
Moment perceived within in the Brain: and the Action of the Finger, and the
Action of the Brain, make one continued total sensation of the whole Object.
Which could never be, in case that Sensation were performed immediately by the
Ministry of Animal Spirits. For, these Spirits, so soon as they are informed in
the external Organ of Touching, of what nature the Object is; cannot bring in
tidings of what is done there unless they recur and fly in to give an account
of their Embassy, and at the same time desert the outward Organ: So that the
action of the outward Organ cannot be coincident with the action of the Brain:
unless you can obtain of them, that the very same animal Spirits are in the
Finger, and in the Brain, at the same time; which is manifestly absurd.
Evident therefore it is, that Sensation cannot be made by the mediation of
animal Spirits, as these Positive Wits have defined.

Not the Later; because we do not find, that Nature has any where in the Body
instituted contrary Motions of the same Fluid in the same Vessels; unless in
the branches of the Windpipe, and in the Guts. In respiration, the Air is both
received into the Lungs, and thence quickly emitted, together with the Vapors
of the Blood, by the aspera arteria: which being to that end made of round or
circular Gristles, is always open; and the Thorax is always organically
dilated and contracted alternately. In the Gutts also Nature has ordained a
Flux and reflux of the Chyle; but they have a Peristaltic motion granted to
them, to that end, in order to the frequent inversion, and more expedite
distribution of the Chyle. But in the Nerves there occurs no sufficient reason,
why the Spirits should be carried sometimes outward, and sometimes inward;
unless we attribute to them a Peristaltick motion, or imagine that the Spirits
themselves, like Gnats playing in the Air, fly to and fro in the Nerves, at
their own pleasure. Farther, to what end should they recur to the Brain through
the Nerves? To relate to the commmon Sense what is done in the external Organs?
If so, with what Tongue can they deliver their relation? By what signs can they
give notice of their meaning? Do they bring in with them the idea of the
impression made by the Object upon the external Organ? Certainly, the idea in
the outward and inward Organ, is one continuate representation, as the Object
represented is one. But the sensation of the same Object does sometimes dure
two or three Hours together. Do the Animal Spirits all that while run forth and
back uncessantly, to continue the sensation both without and within? These
truly are to me inextricable difficulties, Riddles never to be expounded, or
rather extravagant fictions, such as might dissolve even Heraclitus himself
into laughter.

No wonder then if Dr. Glisson, plainly discerning the incongruity of this most
rapid and reciprocal motion attributed to the animal Spirits, not only wholly
rejected it, but excogitated another plainly contrary thereunto. For, he
concludes, that the Spirits lodged in the Succus Nutritious, are carried from
the Brain through the Nerves by a Motion, not impetuose or rapid, but gentle,
Slow, and placid, inperceptible by the Sense, and tending only outward; as the
nourishing Juice of Plants is believed to creep up from the Roots along by
their Fibers: and that they do not immediately move the Muscles, but by
recruiting their Vigor, and corroborating the tone of their Fibers, render them
habil to execute their Offices promptly and strongly. He adds, that in all
voluntary Motion, the Fibers of the Muscles do, by their own proper vital
Motion, abbreviate or contract themselves; needing no copiose and sudden
afflux of Spirits, either Animal or Vital, to shorten them by way of inflation,
and put them upon performing the Motions commanded by the Fancy.

How then are the votes or mandates of the Ruling Faculty in the Brain,
communicated and made known to the Fibers of the Muscles destined to put them
in execution?

He answers, that the motion of the Brain from within outward, by which it
rules the Fibers of the Muscles, is made known to the Fibers to be moved, not
by sense (for the Intellect has no notice or cognizance of it at all) but only
by Natural perception: and consequently that the Brain, by mediation of this
Perception Natural, does, at command of the Fancy, excite the Fibers of the
Muscles to Motion, and recompose them, at pleasure. And to explain more clearly
his sentiments concerning this supposed motion of the Brain ad extra, that is,
to the originals of the Nerves, which he seems first to have excogitated: he
soon after subjoyns, that the Motion is not to be understood of the whole
Brain, but only of that little part of it, the Fibers of which are conjoined to
the Fibers of the Nerve peculiarly designed to perform the action commanded by
the Fancy; and that this Motion is no other but a certain Striate or Streakt
invigoration, running along the Threads of the Brain, toward the beginning of
the Nerve to be excited, and requiring a Motion of the Nerve conform thereunto:
By invigoration, meaning a Motion tending to a greater contraction of the part
of the Brain then acting, than before. Contractio enim hic requisita (says he)
fortasse ducentesimam partem crassitiei digiti transversi non superat; nec
refert, quam exigua sit mutatio situs, modo tensura sit nervo perceptibilis,
and gradibus variari possit, prout appetitus fortiorem aut debiliorem actionem
a nervis exigit. An Hypothesis (I must confess) most subtle, and worthy the
sublime Wit of the Author, and perhaps coming nearer to Truth, than any other
hitherto excogitated.

And yet notwithstanding, had not fate, by taking the Author from us, prevented
me; I should ere this have taken the liberty to beg his pardon of my
foolishness, if out of an honest desire of learning from him, I presumed to
trouble him with one or two Questions about things delivered in this
Hypothesis, which to me seem doubtful, and extremely difficult to be conceived.

The first is this. He supposes the Brain, not only to have power of moving
itself at pleasure, but (what is yet more amusing) to be also the principle of
our cogitations, of our Appetite and Motion Animal: which I cannot (such is my
dullness) comprehend. For, though it be granted, that the medullary substance of
the Brain, however soft and tender to the touch, may nevertheless, in respect
of the small Fibers of which placed in streaks it is composed, be capable of
some Tension and Remission: yet do I not see, by what reason it can, either
think, desire, or move itself at pleasure, in order to voluntary Motion.
Hitherto I have been so great a Bigot in the catholic Doctrine of
Philosophers, as to believe the Brain to be merely an Organ of the Soul
(whether Rational, or Sensitive) and governed, and invigorated to motion by the
Mandates thereof, not by it self alone: and that it is of the Nature of every
Organ, as an Organ, not to give Motion to it self, as absolute and independent,
but to receive Motion from that, whose Organ it is; never so much as dreaming,
that the Brain itself has the Faculties of thinking and desiring, which I
always took to belong of right to the Soul alone. But now I hear one of the
Princes of Anatomists expressly teaching the contrary, viz. Cerebrum per se
percipere, and, quia sic percipit hoc vel illud objectum esse bonum vel malum,
etiam appetere hoc fugere, illo frui; and quia sic appetit, mox se movere, ut
quod appetit, consequatur: and yet am not able to discern, how this new
Doctrine can possibly be brought to consist with that ancient and universally
granted Axiom Physical; nihil corporeum a seipso moveri, sed ubique in
universitate rerum dari movens and mobile inter se quidem distincta; ita tamen,
ut movens and mobile sint simul, motusque hoc modo sit compositum quid ex
utroque.

Ye will here tell me, I presume; that my most sagacious Author speaks in this
place, not of Animal, but Natural Perception, Appetite and Motion; which three
Faculties he asserts to be by so firm a confederation colligued, as to be
inseparable, and to render their Subject sufficiently instructed to perform
every work congruous to its Nature.

I say therefore; that although we should grant to the Brain this supposed
Natural Perception, with its inseparable adjuncts; yet this would by no means
suffice to excite and cause Animal or Voluntary Motion, first in the Fibrills
of the Brain, then in the Nerves, and after in the Muscles: because this Motion
is far nobler than any Motion merely spontaneous, and proceeds from, and
depends upon a principle incomparably more sublime and energetic; namely the
Soul, which (if all Mankind be not most grossly deceived,) is Author of all
Motion directed by Counsel and design to this or that certain end; and which is
always excited by the appearance of Good or Evil in the Object, when an Animal
desires what is convenient, or flies the contrary, and accordingly moves to
obtain, or eschew it. Otherwise, or I am shamefully sottish, or no living
Creature would need a Soul to excite him to intend and perform Motions
convenient to his nature and end: Because the Brain it self, endowed with
natural Perception and its Concomitants, would alone serve to do all the
Offices of a sensitive Soul. And this is one of the two doubts, that has
hitherto perplexed my weak Head, and withheld me from assenting to this new
Hypothesis: chiefly when I recalled to mind, that a Chicken begins to move
himself in the Egg on the sixth day of the incubation; though at that time
nothing of Brain, besides clear Water included in vesicula, can be discerned.

The other, this; How so small a contraction of the Fibrils of the Brain, in
that part which is moved by the Appetite, as He sapposes not to exceed the
200th. part of a Fingers breadth, can suffice to make a much greater Contraction
in the Nerve destined to perform the action commanded. For, since the Fibrils
of the Brain are not only conjoined with the Fibers of the Nerves thence
produced along to the Tendons of the Muscles, but so united also, as to
constitute so many little Strings or Cords continued from their Original to
their ends or insertions; and since it is from mechanic experiments constant,
that all Cords, when pulled or stretched at one end more or less, are equally
extended all along quite home to the other; and this is by reason of the
continuity of their Parts: considering these two certain and evident Truths, I
cannot conceive, how in the said little Cords of the Brain and Nerves any
Contraction or Tension can be made, that shall be in one of their Extremes, at
least two hundred times less than in the other. It is indeed, among
Physico-mathematicians, a mighty controversy, whether or no the Strings of a
Lute, Viol, Harp or any other musical Instrument, when wound up, be equally
stretched or strained in all their Parts; because when they are strained above
their strength, they are for the most part broken at the ends, rarely in any
other part: which yet seems to happen only from hence, that the Strings are at
both ends weakened by winding up the Peggs, and being tied in a knot, whereby
their coherence of Parts being violated, they must needs be more fragil there,
than in any other part to which that Violence has not extended. Nevertheless,
that a Lute-String stretched by a Plummet hung perpendicularly at one end, and
held by a Man's Fingers at the other, is extended in all parts alike; is beyond
all controversy. And that is sufficient to my purpose. For from thence it is
most evident, that howsoever, and in what part soever a Nerve is contracted,
the contraction must be equal in all Parts of it: not only a Hairs breadth at
one end, and two or three Inches perhaps at the other.

But perhaps the Sense of my most judicious Author is this. That even the least
vigoration of the Brain (which he supposed to be the principal part of the
whole Animal, the original of Cogitation, Appetite and Motion, composed of
Fibrills, and endowed with a faculty of stretching and relaxing itself by
turns, at pleasure) may suffice to excite a much greater contraction in the
Nerves; not so much by immediately contracting them, as by so affecting their
perception natural, as they may presently contract themselves by spontaneous
Motion, and that so much as is sufficient to execute strenuously the command of
the Phansy.

Admitting therefore this interpretation of his words, I enquire, if that
(...), or invigorating Virtue which he confers upon the Brain, consist only in
the tonic Motion of its Fibrils, to which the Fibers of the Nerves are
continued; if this be so, I enquire (I say) first, whence it is, that a greater
and stronger Force or Vigoration is excited in the Threads of the Nerves, than
in the Fibrils of the Brain that move them? Is the Spontaneous Motion of the
Nerves, (always conjoined with natural perception) more potent than the animal
Motion of the Fibrils of the Brain, enjoined or commanded by the Will, or
Fancy? so, certainly, it must be granted to be by all who embrace this
Hypothesis; because a far greater Contraction is supposed to be made by the
natural or spontaneous Motion, than by the animal or commanded Motion: and
because it is of absolute necessity, that this disparity of the Effects arises
from the like disparity in the Powers of the Agents. But to me (I confess) it
seems alien from all belief, that Nature, whose Wisdom and Providence is so
admirable in all things else, has taken so little care of the Economy of Man's
Brain, as to subject the principal Instruments of voluntary Motion, the Nerves,
more to the simple instinct of natural perception, than to the Empire and rule
of the Will conceived from the dictates of Reason: chiefly when it is most
evident, that the same Nature has granted to us a power of varying, intending,
and remitting our voluntary Motion, as we please; without control or impediment
from the instinct of natural perception, of which we are not conscious. I
inquire also, whether the so often mentioned Fibrils of the Brain have
requisite Notice, both of the command given by the Phansy, and that it is their
Office to put the same in execution? My Author expressly affirms, they have:
deducing the knowledge of this from their natural perception, and the notice of
that, from their Tension by the Phansy. His Words are these; Cum hae fibrae
tensiles sint, and naturali perceptione advertant, exsecutionem voti cupiti ad
suum officium spectare; mox (cum simul sint agentia naturalia, nec deliberent)
se vigorant, and nervos, quibus continuantur, ad consimilem motum excitant.
Naturalis enim perceptio (seu Archeus) innumer a prope novit, quae sensum
latent; and totam fabricam corporis, quam ipsa formaverat, and usum omnium
partium, modumque quo omnia peragenda sint, callet. But if this be granted,
certainly either the Fancy must be deprived of its dominion over the Fibers
of the Brain, or (what seems to be no less unjust) there will be set up in the
Brain a new Government by a kind of Duumvirate, the Regimen being divided
betwixt the Will and natural Perception, so that neither of them can, without
the assent of the other, excite any the least animal Motion. And how unstable,
how obnoxious to Divisions must that State be, that has two Heads?

Other Knots there are in this most intricate Hypothesis, which my weak Reason
is not able to untie. But I pretermit them; those two I have touched, seeming
sufficient to evince, how little, how uncertain that knowledge is, which even
the greatest Wits have attained unto, of the regiment of the Brain, of the
Motion of animal Spirits, and of the reason of voluntary Motion.

Perhaps then we are equally uncertain, whether there be in rerum natura any
such things as animal Spirits, of a distinct Species from the vital Spirits, or
not. Truly, my Opinion is, that we are so: and no less Man than Dr. Harvy
expressly denied their Existence; de generat. animal. exercit. 70. Nihil sane in
corpore animalium, (inquit) sanguine prius aut praestantius reperitur; neque
spiritus, quos a sanguine distinguunt, uspiam ab illo separati inveniuntur. So
do all the Peripatetiques hold against Galen, unum esse duntaxat Spiritum,
vitalem singulis partium omnium officiis deservientem. Joan. Imperial. de
ingen. human. page 52. And Scaliger (exercit. 339. Sect. 2.) affirms, Animam
non egere spiritibus ad motum. Etenim si animae opus est instrumento ad
movendum; etiam opus erit instrumento ad movendum instrumentum. And Sr. G. Ent
(Antidiatribae p. 141.) Ego, praeter unum sanguinis calorem, nullos in animali
Spiritus agnosco: sed in partibus singulis privum hospitari sensum, qui ad
animae imperium excitetur. So does that most excellent Man here present, to
whose incomparable Pen Dr. Harvey ows half his Glory, and to whose diving Wit
both Natural Philosophy and Anatomy owe the hints at least of the best part of
their new Discoveries. And truly if any man shall seriously, and without
prejudice consider the great bulk, cold temperament, various parts, fabric and
texture of the Brain; he will at length find but little reason to believe, that
Nature has framed it chiefly for a Laboratory of Spirits. They tell us, that
these spirits are made of the most subtle, most refined, and volatilized parts
of the arteriose blood, by way of sublimation. But can a part so dense, so
cold, so clammy, and to like a bogg, as the brain seems to be, be thought an
instrument fit for sublimation or rectification of a spirituose substance? What
Chemist has at any time attempted to rectify spirit of wine in a vessel whose
head was stuffed with damp raw silk, or other the like villose matter, more apt
to repercuss and condense, than to refine it? Sure I am, that even Malpighius
himself, a most accurate Enquirer into the structure of the brain, has after
all his Microscopic researches, made this ingenuous confession (de structura
viscerum, page 66.) Ut verum fatear, quo magis manifesta mihielucescit cerebri
structura, eo magis tot mirabilium operationum explicandi methodum spes
excidit. Simplicem tandem dum agnoscocexebri structuram, ineptum omnino ad
exponenda sensuum, and tam nobilium operationum phoenomena reor. It a ut hoc
tantum conjicere possim, a Cerebri and Cerebelli glandulis in continuatos
nervos separari succum quendam, sicut in caeteris glandulis proprio vase
Excretorio ditatis etc.A poor account of so long and diligent a scrutiny! and
yet would I could see the man that is able to give a better.

Were it not a Parergon, I might here recount many observations, recorded by
Eminent writers, of men, who retained the use of all their Senses, imagination,
memory, reason, and voluntary motion, even to the last minute of life; and yet
notwithstanding, in their heads opened after death, there was found (as in most
fishes) but very little of brains, and that too altogether confused and diluted
with water. For a memorable Example of this kind, give me leave to put you in
mind of that registered by Nichol. Tulpius, an Author of good credit (observat.
Medicar. lib. 1. cap. 24.) Who thereupon gravely concludes with this Laudable
acknowledgment of his ignorance. Quantum est, quod nescimus! velut namque in
aliis, sic certe credibile est, potissimum nos caecutire in genuino Cerebri
regimine: Cujus opera multo fortassis sunt diviniora, quam quispiam bactenus
suo comprehendit captu. Ye may add, two other Examples no less wonderful: one
observed by Gregor. Horstius, of a man who after a great abseess or aposteme in
the head, and the taking away of a lib. de morb. agiosts par.
vast quantity of his brain, yet retained the use of all the Animal faculties:
the other, by Kerckringius (observat. anatomic. 46.) of an infant, whose skull
he had found full of a mucose water, in the place of the brain. Hither may be
brought two other examples: one from Fontanus (resp. med. and annot. in Vesal.)
of a boy, cui caput erat cerebro vacuum; another from Arnoldus Villanovanus (in
Spec. intr. med.) of a man whose skull was found likewise empty. Now if these
be true Histories, what will become of the supposition, that the Animal spirits
are generated in the brain? Can they be made, and conserved in water, and after
most part of the brain has been taken away? Here I am at a stand; wanting the
wit of Thom. Bartholin. Who (in observat. centur. 6. Hist. 91.) having told a
very strange story of a Swedish Ox, whose brain was wholly converted into a
stone; and desirous still to prop up the antique opinion of Animal spirits,
which that observation impugned: was first so ingenuous as to suspect, and
after so lucky as to find certain holes and open passages reserved for them in
the petrified brain, through which they might freely pass into the nerves to
carry the heavy headed beast to and fro in the meadows for pasture. A wonderful
providence of Nature this, to continue both the poor Animal in motion, and the
doctrine of the spirits in reputation. And therefore lest ye should think I do
the learned. Author wrong, I am obliged to recite his very words in the clause
of the History. Quam prima ad nos fama rem novam and hactenus inauditam
deferret, dub rare caepi, and hinc inde cogitationes volvere, quomodo integer
bovi remanserit matus ad horam usque a lanione indictam, cerebro lapideo;
suspicabarque in vivi bovis cerebro indurato sinus patulos remansisse, per quos
libere spiritus animales ex arteriis nervisque commearent; alioqui bovi omnis
fuisset motus dudum ademptus. Nec vana fuit conjectura. Testabatur enim mihi
Illustris Bielkius, foraminula hinc inde in lapide nominato conspici dispersa
and perforata, per quae paleae possint intrudi. Here to question the truth of
his relation, would be Incivility; to believe all parts of it, shameful
credulity; and to conclude from thence, that there are Animal spirits, down
right folly: the Author having omitted to bring any good reason to support his
conjecture, that the holes observed in the petrified Brain, had been left for
no other cause, but only to give free passage to them. I add, that in the head
of the Rana piscatrix which yet is a fish of singular cunning in taking his
prey, and of great strenght, no Brain, but only clear water, is to be found.

To come then to a conclusion of this desperate Argument; from what has been
said, it sufficiently appears, that we are still in great uncertainty, not only
of the matter, generation, Nature, qualities, and motion of Spirits Animal; but
of their very existence also. I had reason therefore to appeal to your more
discerning judgment, for a decision of this so difficult controversy
concerning them: being my self unable to determine what I ought to conclude, of
the Ancient, and at this day vulgar opinion, of their being absolutely
requisite, both to all sensation, and to all voluntary motion

Nor do I blush to acknowledge this my ignorance of a thing which Nature seems
to have wrapped up in clouds of impenetrable darkness, ne veritatis
Inaccessibilis lux teneram ingenii humani aciem splendore nimio perstringeret:
But frankly confess with Lucretius; Multa tegit sacro involucro Natura neque
ullis
Fas est scire quidem mortalibus omnia. Multa
Admirare modo, nee non venerare: neque illa
Inquires, quae sunt arcanis proxima. Namque
In manibus quae sunt, haec nos vix scire putandum est;
Est procul a nobis adeo praesentia very.


And enquire with Casper Barlaeus (de anim. Human. admirandis) Qua ratione, et
quibus apparitoribus mandata mentis deferri possint momento ad membra
remotissima? cum nec membra haec, nec spiritus internuncii, aut mandata capiant
aut mandantem norint. Volo Currere pedes? currunt: quiescere? quiescunt. etc.
Quin illud omni sapientia humana majus est, quomodo pulsantes citheram digiti,
pari motu celerimas cogitationes assequantur; ut nec a mente digitus, nec a
digito men's relinquatur.

But this my ignorance must not deter me from proceeding in the administration
of my province. I come therefore to the instrumentum proximum sive ultimum, by
which immediately and sensibly the act of voluntary motion is performed. This
all men rightly hold to be the MUSCLES: in which there occur three Generals to
be chiefly considered by the Anatomist; viz. their common Constitution and
structure; their principal and senseble Differences; and the Reason by which
they move the parts to which they are affixt. For, these things being duly
explained, may perhaps bring us at length to such a degree of knowledge of the
manner of voluntary motion, as may, if not satisfy our Curiosity yet at least
advance the noblest of all our intellectual delights, the grateful admiration
of the infinite Wisdom of our Creator. Which as it is the principal End of our
Being: so ought it to be also the grand scope of all our studies and Natural
inquiries.

Concerning the FIRST, therefore; obvious it is to every man's reason, that the
immediate organ of voluntary Motion ought to be of such a Constitution, as may
render it apt both to receive invigoration, i. e. to be excited to motion, by
the Brain, at the command of the will, appetite, or fancy: and to move the
member or part to which it is affixt. Manifest therefore it is, that a hard
inflexible, rigid and bony substance is so far incompetent to both those uses,
that Galen (de motu musculor. lib. 1. cap. 2) affirmed, that any part casually
becoming hard and stiff, though only from a thick cicatrice or skar, is thereby
rendered unfit for motion: and that consequently, the substance of a Muscle
ought to be, as Nature has made it, soft, rare, flexible, extensible, and
furnished with great store of fibers.

Requisite it is also, in respect of the distance betwixt the Brain and the
Muscle, that there should be some third thing intermediate and continued to
both, by which the (...), or first impetus in the former, may be communicated
[(...)] to the other, whether the invigoration be effected by influx of any
substance from the Brain, or by Dr. Glissons way formerly described. And the
Nerves being the only part of the whole body qualified for this use, Nature
has therefore most prudently inserted one, or more of them into each Muscle.
Now these two parts, Flesh and Nerves, are the principal ingredients requisite
to complete the essence of a Muscle: as may be inferred from hence, that there
are some perfect Muscles, particularly those of the Forehead, the Temples,
Bladder, the fundament etc. In the composition of which neither Tendon, nor
Ligament is to be found.

But because there is in some parts to be moved, by reason of their greater
Gravity, a greater resistance to Motion, than the musculous Flesh, in respect
of its softness and tenderness, is of itself able to overcome, chiefly in some
positions: therefore ought there to be an addition of some stronger and tougher
Substance, which being connected or united to the Flesh of the Muscle, may both
corroborate the same, and more firmly conjoyn it to the Bones, so as to enable
it to overpower that resistance. Hence it is, that some Muscles, especially
such as are destined to bear great stress, in surmounting the weight of great
Members, or in strong Motions; are furnished with Ligaments, as well for their
better firmation to the Bones, as for augmentation of their strength. All which
Galen (de usu partium lib. 12. cap. 2. and de motu muscul. lib. 1. cap. 2.)
intimates in these few words; Vinculo enim tuto quodam opus erat musculis, cum
osse ab ipsis movendo; nec erat aliud ad hoc aptius Ligamento.

But this necessity not extending to all Muscles, and a ligament being of it
self immovable and insensible, and the Nerves being, in respect of the
softness and laxity of their Substance, not sufficiently strong to pull great
and heavy Bones, without some accession of strength: it was requisite, there
should be of both those parts composed a Third, that might be firmer and
stronger than a Nerve, but softer and weaker than a Ligament. Such is a Tendon,
which in Sense, and Aptitude to Motion much exceed's a ligament; and in
strength a Nerve: and is therefore made a part of many Muscles. I say, of many
Muscles, not of all: because some have no need of Tendons, as the Muscles of
the Tongue, of the Testicles, of the Penis, Lips, Forehead, and all
Sphincters; but those only that are; framed for Motions either strong or
continual. Those that were destined to the motion of Bones, do all end in
Tendons, greater or less; and are inserted, not into the Syntax or conjunction
of two Bones, nor into the end of the same Bone from which they arise; but near
to the Head of another which they are to move. Those which are to be kept long
in Motion, have likewise need of Tendons both to corroborate and facilitate
their Motions: as is most evident in the Muscles of the Eye, all which are
furnished with Tendons. Hence we come to understand, why Tendons are by Nature
conferred upon all Muscles designed to perform strong Motions in Hexion, in
extension, and in that which holding a part in a stiff and steady Posture, is
termed Motus Tonicus: as in the Arms and Legs, and in the Back for erection of
the Spine, etc. and why other Muscles are made up without Tendons, being as in
their Originals, so likewise in their ends, only Fibrose.

That these four parts of a Muscle, namely Flesh, Nerve, Ligament, and Tendon,
might not want either Covering, or Combination; Nature has providently invested
and bound them together with a proper Membrane or Coat which seems to have
these two farther Uses; to cause Muscles touching or incumbent upon each other,
to slip up and down smoothly, easily, and without interfering; and to unite the
force of all the Fibers when they act.

And finally, because the whole Organ requires to be continually supplied with
Life, as being Pars Corporis Vivens; therefore is it copiously furnished with
Arteries and Veins: those to bring in Blood, by whose vital Heat all parts are
impregnated with influent Life; these, to return the same Blood to the Heart,
after it has performed that Office. And this may be sufficient to explain the
Constitution of a Muscle: upon which if we reflect, we may conveniently enough
define a Muscle to be; an organical part of an Animal, participant of Life,
composed (always) of Flesh and a Nerve, and (many times also) of a Tendon and
Ligament; covered with its proper Membrane; and so framed to be the proxime
instrument of voluntary Motion.:

As for the SECOND general to be considered, namely the DIFFERENCES observed
among various Muscles; these are many, as being desumed from their diversity in
Substance, Quantity, Figure, Position, Origination, Insertion, Parts, Actions
and Uses: all which I will run over lightly.

In respect of Substance; some Muscles are mostly Carnose, as all the
Sphincters, the Muscles of the Tongue, etc. others, mostly nervose or
membraneous, as the fascia lata, abducing the Tibia, the Quadratus, called by
Galen (...), musculosa expansio, by others, Distortor oris, because it is first
contracted involuntarily in that Convulsion named Spasmus Cynicus; and some
others.

In respect of Quantity (which comprehends all the three dimensions of
Longitude, Latitude, and Profundity) some are Long, as the Rectus abdominis,
the Longissimus dorsi, the Sartorius in the Thigh, etc. Others, short, as the
Pyramidales in the bottom of the Belly, Surrogates of the oblique ascendent
Muscles, and by a peculiar right conducing to compression of the Bladder of
Urine, when we make Water: Others, broad; as the Oblique and Transverse Muscles
of the Abdomen, the Latissimus dorsi, depressing the Arm, etc. Others, narrow,
as those of the Fingers and Toes: Others, thick and bulky; as the two Vasti of
the Thigh, the Glutei of the Buttocks, etc. Others, thin and slender, as the
Gracilis bending the Leg, etc.

In respect of Figure, some are Triangular, some Square, some Pentagonal, some
Pyramidal, some Round, some of other Shapes; as is exemplified in the
Deltoides, Rhomboides, Scalenus, Trapezius: etc.

In respect of the Position or course of their Fibers, some are Oblique, some
Transverse, some above, some below, some before, some behind, some on the
Right, others on the Left Side. Where we may observe in the general, that all
oblique Muscles serve to oblique Motions, all Right, to direct flection or
extension; all internal, to flection; all External, to extention.

In respect of their Origination; some arise from Bones; and that either from
the Heads of them, as most of the greater Muscles do; or a little below, or
from some Glene, some Sinus or small cavity in the Bone: some only from one
Bone, some from two or three: others from Cartilages or Gristles, as the
Muscles proper to the Larynx: others from the Membrane inshrouding the Tendons,
as the Musculi Vermiculares sive I umbricales in the Hands and Feet: and others
again from other Parts, as the Sphincters.

In respect of their Insertion, some are inserted into Bones, some into
Cartilages, as the Muscles of the Eyelids, and of the Larynx; others into a
Membrane, as the Muscles moving the Eye; others into the Skin, as those of the
Lips: some arising from diverse parts are inserted into one; and on the
contrary, others single in their Original, are divided in their terminations.

In respect of their Parts (by which we are now to understand, not only the
Parts constituent already particularly described, but those also into which a
Muscle is commonly divided in dissection, viz. the Beginning or Head, the
Middle or Belly, and the Tail or Tendon.) The differences are various: most
Muscles have but one head, yet some have two, some three; whence they are named
Bicipites and Tricipites. Most have but one Venture, yet some are double
bellied, as the Muscle shutting the lower Jaw, that of the Os Hyoides, whence
they are called Digastrici and Biventres: Of some the Tails are broad and
membranose, of others round and slender; of some short, of others long; of some
perforate, of others entire; of some single, of others double, triple, etc. In
some places are found two, three, or more Muscles ending in one common Tendon,
as the Gemelli in the Leg, and the Soleus are united into one Cord above the
heel: In others, though contiguous, single and distinct Tendons; as the
Plantaris, though concealed betwixt the Gemelli and the Soleus, from a fleshy
beginning dwindles into a long Tendon, that spreading it self again covers the
whole plant of the Foot, and is inserted into the Roots of the Toes. Lastly,
some borrow their Names from the parts upon which they are seated, as the
Crotaphitae or Temporal Muscles, the Rachitae or Spinati of the Spine, the
Iliaci, etc.

In fine, in respect of the diversity of their Actions, the Muscles admit of a
triple difference. The first this, that some are Confederates, both concurring
to one and the same motion either of Flection or of Extension; one being placed
on the Right the other on the Left of the Member: Others Antagonists, which
perform motions contrary each to the other; and indeed there are but few
Muscles that have not their Opponents; to every flexor is opposed an extensor,
to every adductor an abductor, to every Elevator a Depressor; excepting only
the Sphincters, the Cremasters, and the Oesophagus. The Confederates generally
are equal in magnitude, number, and strength; the Antagonists not, but
different according to the weight of the part to be moved, and to the force of
the motion. Thus the Muscles that bow down the head are but two; when there are
twleve to lift it up: Likewise those that pull up the lower Jaw are many, but
no more than two suffice to draw it down, because the weight of heavy parts
makes them easily fall down of their own accord. The second difference
consists in this, that some of the Muscles move only themselves as the
Sphincters, others move other parts besides themselves. The third and last
difference arises from their proper motions; whence some are named Flexores,
others Extensores; some Elevatores, others Depressores; some Adductores, others
Abductores; some Rotatores, some Masseteres, some Cremasteres or Suspensores,
some Constrictores, etc. And this is more than enough concerning the
differences of the Muscles.

As for the last general Theorem, namely the REASON and MANNER of the Muscles
moving the parts to which they are affixt, when themselves are invigorate by
the Will or Appetite; forasmuch as the loco-motion of the whole body or any
part thereof, if considered per se, i. e. merely as motion; must be considered
either as it is a certain Commensuration of the length of space, betwixt the
terminus a quo and the terminus ad quem; or as it is a countervailing of
Gravity: In both these respects it requires to be explained by the help of
Principles Mathematick. Let me therefore deprecate your impatience, if in
compliance with this necessity, I now and then bring you to reflect
occasionally upon a few Geometrical Propositions of Euclid and mechanic
fundamentals; such from whence we may borrow some beams of light to lessen, if
not wholly overcome the obscurity of our subject.

In the First place then, I observe: That every Muscle has a double motion,
the one Natural, in which the Fibers spontaneously retracting themselves,
return to their native Position, after the cessation of that force that
extended them; as all other Tensil Bodies do by the motion of Restitution: The
other Animal, in which the same Fibers are farther contracted or abbreviated by
a force communicated to them from the brain, in order to the performance of
some Action intended by the Will or Appetite.

Now that the Natural Contraction of a Muscle is not sufficient to motion
voluntary, though we should suppose it to have been at first made upon the
stretch, is evident from hence, that betwixt every Muscle and its Antagonist,
the natural power of retracting or relaxing themselves is equal, according to
that remarkable Assertion of Galen, (de motu musculor, lib. 1. cap. 9.)
Musculum suapte natura in extremam contractionem progredi, quantum in structura
corporis est positum. Cum enim per sectionem solutus fuerit continuitate, quam
habet cum osse obnitente, tunc quasi vinculo solutus, and perfect liber
factus, suam ipsius naturam ostendit: Quamdiu vero a Musculo in opposito
constituto pars retrahitur, qui and ipse eandem naturam habet, ut statim ad
extremam contractionem festinet, alter Musculus ab altero aequaliter privatur
coitu in seipsum. Atque it a conting it oppositorum in membris musculorum
utrumque in dimidio contractionis laedi. So that betwixt two contrary powers
drawing equally, the Member must remain tanquam in aequilibrio, unmoved. The
Reason of which Equilibration, may be illustrated by that proposition of
Vitruvius; quae corpora aequalia aequaliter and sub uno diametro a centro
distant; illa secant perpendicularem lineam ad angulos rectos: And may be thus
demonstrated.

Figure I. Page 528


Let two bodies of equal weight be placed, the one at A, the other at B, upon
the Diameter of the Circle, whose Center is at E; and neither of them shall
move because their Gravity is equal at that distance from the Center E; but
supposing both to move, they shall hasten to the Center of Gravity with equal
velocity, because A and B make equal Angles with the Perpendicular D E C.

Necessary it is then, that in voluntary motion of a Member, aequilibrated by
two Antagonist Muscles of equal force, one of the opposite Muscles overpower
the other; not by its natural or spontaneous contraction which is equal on both
parts; but by the animal force derived from the Brain, which makes the natural
contraction greater, and the invigorate Muscle to prevail: Whence it comes to
pass, that the Member, which before the accession of the animal force was held
unmoved, and as it were, suspended betwixt two contrary equal powers; is
determined to Motion according to the Command of the Will or Appetite. Which is
much more elegantly expressed by Galen in these few words: Aequipollens motus
ipsius corporis Musculorum sit, quando neuter tonum Animalem habet auxiliarem;
non aequipollens vero, quando alter solus dominatur: Quare necessum est ut
vincat contractio illius Musculi, qui ab Animali facultate adjuvatur, de motu
Musculor. lib. 1. cap. 9.

I observe Secondly, that in all voluntary motion of whatsoever Member, there
are two Terms to be acknowledged: One is the part quiescent or fulciment, to
which the head of the acting Muscle is fastened; because all motion is made upon
something that is at rest, according to that Maxim of the Philosopher: (...),
quicquid movetur, movetur super aliquo, cui innititur. The other is in the part
moved, at the insertion of the Muscle moving, and from whence the same Muscle
does, by contracting it self, draw the Member toward it self. And this is
sometimes less sometimes more, elonged or remote from the Fulciment, according
to the less or greater resistance of gravity in the Member to be moved, and
according to the less or greater vehemence required to the motion it self.
Which Nature (whose Art is not more admirable in any thing, than in
proportioning the length of the Insertion of every Muscle, from the
Hypomochlion or point of Rest, to the weight of the part thereby to be moved,)
respecting, has, with great sagacity, supplied the little strength of many
slender Muscles, by inserting them at great distance from the Center of their
motion, or that point about which the Member whereto they belong, is to be
moved. The Reason of which mechanical Contrivance seems to be this; that all
such remote insertions, by subtracting part of the length of the Bone to be
moved, substract also part of the weight of it, and so render the Muscle able
to countervail the remaining weight with less force. For, since there is no
motion in the Center, according to that proposition in Mechanics, In centro
omnis gravitas cessat, adeo ut neque grave, neque leve ad centrum
deprehendatur: We may easily understand, why in many Muscles designed for
strong motions, the Terminus stabilis is farther elonged from the Terminus
mobilis, than in others destined to motions less strong, viz. that by even a
small force, the Muscle (which considered in its proper bulk, or inserted at
less distance, would be insufficient to the effect intended) might contrevail
and elevate a great weight; as is exemplified in the Muscles of the Hand, Arm,
Thigh, and some other parts.

Whence that excellent Mathematician and Painter, Lionardo da Vinci of
Florence, seems to have deduced that universal maxim of his, delivered in
Trattato de le Pittura, cap. 199. Concerning the tardity and velocity of
Animals in the motion of their Legs. Quell' animale hara il centro delle gambe
suo sostentacolo tanto piu vicino al perpendicolo del centro della gravita, il
quale saradi piu tardi movimenti; e cosi di converso, quello hara il centro de
sostentacolo piu remoto dal perpendicolo del centro della gravita sua, il guale
fia di veloce moto.

Now this Reason may be both confirmed and illustrated, by three mechanic
Propositions; of which the first is this: Omnis potentia motus variatur ratione
centri ad peripheriam: The second is this, Quo quid remotius a centro, eo
velocius movetur: The third this, Quo circuli peripheria est major, co major
est diameter, and motus velocior. Which may be demonstrated from the former
diagram, supposing a weight to be placed first at F upon the Diameter A B, and
then at A; for this weight falling from A, will be carried to the Center C with
greater velocity, than if it fall from F, by reason of its greater distance
from E; the degrees of Velocity and consequently of facility of the motion,
always holding proportion to the degrees of Elongation from the point of rest
or Center E.

For the same reason, (viz. to augment the force of some Muscles, considered
simply without the advantage of Position) it was also that Nature has in many
bones superadded to their ends, certain Knobs or buttings out, called Epiphyses
and Apophyses to which the Muscles are fastened: Nor does it seem to be of
simple convenience alone, that she has thus contrived the Originals of all
great, and most other Muscles, higher or more elevated (more or less) than
their insertions, but of absolute necessity: For

First, were the Head of any Muscle incumbent upon another, or upon any other
sensible part, placed lower then its Tail or Tendon; the Muscle could not be
contracted without manifest pressure and pain of the subjacent part. For
demonstration sake,

Figure II. Page 532


Suppose A B to be the bone to be moved or pulled upward, and B C to be another
bone, upon which as the Fulciment or Rest, the first is to be moved, and from
which the two contiguous Muscles D E, and F G arise; having their Heads at E F,
and their Tails or Insertions at D and G. I say then, that the contraction of
the incumbent Muscle D E, shall not press upon the subjacent Muscle F G,
because the Head of it at E is raised higher than the Tail D. Whereas if we
should invert the position of the incumbent Muscle, and make it lower at its
Original E, than at its insertion D; it could not possibly be contracted or
abbreviated toward E, without pressure of the subjacent Muscle F G: which is an
incommodity inconsistent with the Providence of Nature, and which she has
wisely prevented by elevating the Heads of all incumbent Muscles higher than
their Insertions.

Secondly, Had the Head of any Muscle designed for the elevation of a bone,
been placed upon the same level, or in a straight line with the Tail of it;
then could not the Muscle have been contracted at all, nor consequently could
the bone, into which it is inserted, have been raised upward, because the
Fulciment or Bone from which the head of the Muscle arises, being in a direct
line to the other Bone that is to be raised, and into which the Tail of the
same Muscle is inserted; the ends of the two Bones must necessarily press one
the other in a direct line, and by their mutual resistance hinder the
contraction of the Muscle; as may be thus demonstrated.

Figure III Page 533


Let us imagine G H to be the Fulciment or immovable Bone, and H I to be the
other Bone, to be raised by the Muscle K L, whose Original is at K on the first
Bone, and Insertion at L on the second: Then because the line K L is parallel
to the lines G H, or the Original of the Muscle K, upon the same level with its
insertion L; if the Muscle pull toward K, the Bone H I must either penetrate
the Bone G H, or oppose and wholly hinder the contraction of the Muscle. But
the penetration of one Bone by the head of the other being impossible, the
contraction of the Muscle must be impossible also, which is what I affirmed.
Safely we may then conclude, that both to prevent pressure of the subjacent
parts, and to facilitate the contraction of the Muscles themselves; it was of
absolute necessity, that the Originals of all muscles destined to the motion of
Bones, especially great and heavy bones, should be elevated above their
insertions.

But Nature perhaps had yet another reason of this mechanic Artifice, which I
conjecture to be this: Forasmuch as the use of all Muscles is to move the parts
into which they are inserted, and that they cannot move those parts that stand
in a direct Line with their Insertions, but by bringing them to make obtuse
Angles with the Bone upon which they rest; and that obtuse Angles cannot be
made by contraction of the muscles, unless their Originals be higher than their
Insertions, as was just now demonstrated; therefore was it necessary they
should be so framed: For where the Bone to be moved, is articulated in a direct
Line with the Bone that remains quiet, as the Bones of the Limbs generally are,
the movable Bone cannot possibly be moved, but it must make an Angle first more
obtuse, and then less and less obtuse, until it come to a right Angle with the
other Bone, that is the Hypomochlion or Rest. For the motion of a Bone made by
contraction of a muscle, is but an Elevation or Translation of it from its
former position in a right line with the superior Bone to which it is
articulate, toward a perpendicular or right Angle with the same. And that
Transition from a posture direct to a position rectangular, is made by Angles
less and less obtuse successively betwixt the two Bones: And as for the
elevation of a heavy Bone, by a muscle, in this manner; that cannot be
effected, where the force moving is either in a line parallel to, or lower than
the Bone to be moved (as has been demonstrated.) But where the movent is
superior or higher, and by how much the higher the movent power is placed above
the bone to be moved, by so much more easily is the motion performed; as may be
evinced by this mechanic Demonstration.

Figure IV. Page 535


Let A B represent a Vectis or Leaver, C a weight hung at the end of it under
A, B the fulciment or rest, D F a perpendicular Cord, and D G and D E two other
Cords, but oblique. I say then, that the weight C, and the end of the Vectis A,
are much more easily or with less force lifted up by the perpendicular Cord D
F, than by either of the oblique Cords D G and D E: For since the power placed
at E draws by the line E D, when the Vectis A B is pulled toward its fulciment
B, part of the power is employed against the fulciment, the drawing of the
oblique cord D E rather bringing the Vectis to bear against the Fulciment, than
raising the weight C, and by consequence a great part of the force is spent in
vain upon the Fulciment. But when the perpendicular Cord F D is pulled, the
whole force is employed only in raising of the weight; and therefore by how
much nearer to the perpendicular F, the points G and E are advanced; by so much
the more easily is the Vectis moved and the weight elevated: And on the
contrary, by how much the farther they recede from the perpendicular toward a
parallel with the Vectis, by so much the greater force is required to raise the
weight; because, in a position parallel, the Traction or Force is either
directly from, or directly toward the Fulciment, and consequently can never
raise the Vectis.

Whence we may easily collect the Reason, why the Muscles generally have their
Originals somewhat higher than their Insertions; and why their motions are so
much the stronger, by how much the higher their Heads are raised; which is what
was to be inquired.

There is yet another mechanic artifice of Nature, both to facilitate and
corroborate the force of Muscles, designed to effect strong motions or elevate
weighty bones, and that is (as has been before hinted) by prolonging their
Tendons to greater length, than those of other Muscles: For although, to the
sustaining of a weight upon a Vectis, it be all one whether the sustaining Cord
be shorter or longer, provided the same degree of its advance toward a
perpendicular be observed; yet to the elevation of it by traction, the traction
of a long oblique cord, is more powerful than that of a short oblique cord,
which may be thus demonstrated.

Figure V. Page 537


Imagine A B to represent a Vectis whose Fulciment is at A, and upon whose
other end B a weight is hung; C D a shorter oblique cord, and C E a longer in
the same degree of Obliquity. Now to the sustaining of this weight at the end
of the Vectis B, both these oblique cords are equally accommodate, as being
equally remote from a parallel with the vectis, according to the Angle D C A,
or E G A. But as to the raising of the same weight, there is need of a less
force to draw by the longer cord E C, than to draw by the shorter cord D C; for
let the vectis be raised from B to G, and the point C to F, and then the cord D
C will be transferred to D F, and the cord E C to E F; and because the cord E F
is more elevated over the vectis than the cord D F (for the Angle E F A is
greater than the Angle D F A) by the proposition newly demonstrated, the weight
will be raised with less force by the longer cord E F, than by the shorter cord
D F; and by consequence a Muscle with a longer Tendon, is more powerful to
motion, than it would be if it had a shorter. Quod exat probandum.

Again, as in the fuze of a Watch, the greatest strength of the Spring is made
to work upon the shortest Vectis, and the least upon the longest, so as to
adjust the whole traction to an equality; so has Nature contrived the like
artifice in the traction of Muscles upon two bones, with a turning joint
between their ends: For the two Bones, and the Muscles moving them, make a
Triangle; of which the acting muscle is the Basis, subtending the angular
joint; and in the act of pulling the muscle is strongest, where the vectis is
smallest, as lying most obliquely; and vice versa, when the muscle moving and
the Bone moved, come to make a right Angle.

These things being explained, I observe in the Third place, that no motion
voluntary (nor indeed involuntary) can be effected, but the Figure, both of the
muscle moving, and of the member moved, must be at the same time changed: The
Reason of which Necessity may be drawn from that well known Proposition
Geometrical of Euclid, Angulos aequales in triangulis, aequalia latera
subtendunt.

And because the altoration of Figure depends on the alteration of Angles,
therefore must we admit a triple Figure, according to the triple difference of
Angles; namely a Right, in which neither of the two Antagonist or opposite
muscles acts; an Obtuse, which being greater than a right, is consequently
subtended by a greater side; and an Acute, which being less than a right,
requires a less subtending Line.

Taking it then for granted, that in the middle Figure no motion can be made,
because therein both the opposite Muscles are equally contracted by their Nixus
or natural contraction: It remains to be inquired, how motion is effected in
each of the extreme Figures. Now certainly this is done, when one of the two
Antagonist Muscles is more contracted by the animal virtue or invigoration
derived from the Brain, than the other is by its natural tendency to
restitution; whence it necessarily comes to pass, that the Figure of the
prevailing muscle is at the same time altered, and the Angle of Articulation
made more or less acute by that animal contraction; and the segment detracted
from the line, is in proportion to the space comprehended by the member moved.
To explain this by an Example,

Figure VI Page 540


Imagine the upper half of the Arm from the shoulder to the Elbow to be C A,
and the Cubit or lower half from the Elbow to the Hand to be A B, the Muscle
bending the Arm to be C F, and its Antagonist extending the Arm to be C G, and
the Object to be apprehended by the Hand at D. Now I say, while these two
opposite Muscles C F and C G, remain equally contracted, the Appetite must
continue unsatisfied, i. e. the Hand cannot be brought up to lay hold of the
Object desired, because the Figure of the Arm, or Angle of Articulation is kept
unchanged. But that the Hand may be raised to the object at D, it is necessary
that Angle be made more acute, by a farther contraction of the Muscle C F, and
an extension of its Antagonist C G, in proportion to the motion of the Line B
D; and because that Angle is less than the former right Angle, therefore is the
side subtending it also proportionately less or shorter, according to the Sixth
Proposition of the First Book of Euclid. Again, Since the Line or Arch E F, is
in proportion to the Arch D B; it follows, that just so much is detracted from
the length of the Muscle bending the Arm: Not that so much is really defalk'd
from the body of the Muscle, because then the Muscle would be incapable of
Motion ever after; but only that by the animal contraction of its Fibers it is
made so much shorter, the Line C F that was before straight, being now changed
into the Arch C H; which is what I proposed to my self to prove.

In the Fourth and last place I observe, that notwithstanding this alteration
of the Figure of a Muscle by its contraction, yet is not the belly of it
swelled or augmented in bulk, as has been believed by all, who held the
Muscles when they act, to be inflated as it were by a Gale of Animal Spirits
immitted into them from the Brain: But on the contrary rather lessened, as may
appear from the Experiment described by Dr. Glisson (de Ventric. and Intestin.
cap. 8. numer. 9.) which is this.

Let there be provided a Tube of Glass, in length and bore capacious enough to
hold a man's Arm; and to the upper Orifice of it on the outside, affix another
Tube of Glass of about an Inch Diameter in the Bore, shaped like a common
Weather-glass, only with a wide mouth like a Tunnel; so as the lower end may
open into the greater Tube whose bottom is firmly stopped: Then having erected
both Tubes, let a Man of strong and brawny Muscles thrust his whole naked Arm
into the greater Tube up to the very Shoulder, about which the Orifice of the
Glass must be closely luted, that no water may flow out that way. This done,
let as much water be poured in by the Tunnel as both Glasses will receive,
leaving only a little space at the top of the lesser, empty. In fine, let the
man strongly vigorate all the Muscles of his Arm by clinching his Fist, and
relax them again by turns; and you shall observe that when he vigorates his
Muscles, the water in the less Tube will sink somewhat lower, but rise again
when he relaxes them: Whence it is evident, that the Muscles do not swell up,
nor are inflated at the time of their invigoration or acting; but rather are
minorated and contracted in all their three dimensions, otherwise the water
would at that time, not descend, but ascend in the Neck of the Tunnel. Good
reason then had Dr. Lower to affirm, (lib. de cord c. 2. page 76.) Musculum in
omni motu [voluntario] admodum arcte, and in sese introrsum constringi,
minorari, and durescere; adebque motu instationi prorsus contrario moveri.

There is then (it seems) no necessity of any influx of Animal or Vital
Spirits, to puff up the Muscles when they act; but that their Fibers,
invigorated by motion begun in the Brain, perform their work by simple
abbreviation. But how this abbreviation can be made, without augmentation of
the Muscles, either secundum latitudinem, or secundum profunditatem, or
secundum utramque, in proportion thereunto; seeing that all tensile Bodies have
somewhat more of depth, or breadth, or both, when they are contracted, than
when they suffer extension in length: This (I confess) I do no more comprehend,
than I do how the Soul causes the Abbreviation it self. To say with Dr.
Glisson, Musculorum Fibers proprio vitali motu se abbreviare; seems to me
rather to farther entangle, than untie the Gordian knot; amusing us with the
Hypothesis of Natural Perception, and yet not solving the difficulty here
pressing us, viz. how the Fibers lose somewhat of all their dimensions, in the
act of their Contraction or Abbreviation. Leaving therefore this Problem to the
consideration of wiser Heads than mine, and sitting down content with my
Ignorance, lest I should farther expose it, I have to a Conclusion.

Reflecting upon what has been said, we may easily understand, why most
Muscles have their proper Antagonists, there being contrary motions to be
successively performed by every Member, and it being impossible that one and
the same Instrument should serve to both. Of these Antagonists, one bends the
member by being it self contracted; the other extends it again by being in like
manner contracted successively, and both extend each other alternately. The
contracted Muscle always acts, the extended always suffers, and is
transferred with the part moved.

Some Muscles there are that have no Antagonists, because they need none, such
are all circular Muscles, the reason of whose motion is very obvious: For,
having circular Fibers, and all contraction being necessarily made secundum
continuitatem lineae; it is most evident, that all Muscles of that figure close
or draw together the parts to which they are affixt, by contraction of their
Fibers toward their Center, as is exemplified in the sphincters of the Bladder
and Fundament, and in the shutter of the Eyelids.

Nevertheless it may be inquired, why the Sphincters have no Antagonists, when
to the clausor palpebrarum is opposed the Elevator? The reason of which
difference seems to be this, that the neck of the Bladder and the Fundament are
forced open, not by Muscles, but by the excrements themselves, which being
strongly pressed downward by the Midriff and the Muscles of the Abdomen, thrust
open the sphincters by extending their circular Fibers from the Center to the
Circumference; so that in strictness of truth, the excretion of the Urine and
excrements of the Guts, is not an action altogether and immediately voluntary,
as the closing of the Eyelids is.

And this is all the shortness of my time permits me to say at present,
concerning the mediate and immediate Instruments of voluntary motion,
concerning their common differences; and concerning the reason and manner of
their Actions in general. If in my devoir, to explain some few of the many
Geometrical and Mechanical contrivances of Nature in the Fabric of the
Muscles, both to facilitate their motions and to augment their Forces; I have
not so well acquitted my self as the Argument deserves, and as ye expected; I
must entreat you to believe, that what I have adventured to deliver touching
this Theme, extremely abstruse in it self, nor yet sufficiently handled by any
man; was designed only as an Essay, rather to excite the Industry, than to
prescribe to the curiosity of the more perspicatious and more learned, to whose
judgment mine shall be always ready to Conform. Mean while I content my self
with this hope, that what has now been said, may fuffice to raise up the minds
of my Auditors to a just and pious admiration of the infinite Wisdom of our
Omnipotent CREATOR, all whose works both in the greater World and in the less,
the Body of Man, are most exactly adjusted by number, weight, and measure. How
manifold are thy works, O Lord, in Wisdom have thou made them all. Psalm. 104.
v. 24.

EPIPHONEMA.
I Nunc, quisquis Assecla es Epicuri, and dic, casu idfactum, quod non potuerit
fieri sapientius: quodque si factum aliter fuisset, in hunc ipsum quo jam se
habet modum, ut recte haberet, necessario restituendum fuisset. Scilicet, ut
tibi casu factum detur, finge saltem fieri debuisse ex industria; and agnosces
fieri non potuisse praeclarius; agnoscendumque idcirco industrium potius
Artificem, quam temerariam fortunae manum.

Quid de Humano ulterius corpore, quod jam dissectum hic, and ad intima usque
vitae sensusque penetralia reclusum vidisti, dicam? Cum illius ne una quidem
pars sit, in qua ubi molem, substantiam, formam, connexionem, situm, ac
officium simul usumve consideraveris; esse te captum mente oporteat, nisi
extemplo agnoscas, nihil esse fortuitum, nihil non provisum, nihil non a
solertissima sapientissimaque mente destinatum. Ac si una quidem, alterave aut
paucae tantum essent parts, ex quibus foret corpus hominis; tum esset
fortassis minus obstupescendum. At vero esse in ipso, ac una sub cute,
varietatem prope infinitam partium inter se commistarum, durarum cum mollibus,
solidarum cum cavis, quiescentium cum motis, fixarum cum fluentibus,
excipientium cum subeuntibus, etc. ac nullam tamen nulli esse vel minimo
obstaculo; quinimo mutuas esse vices, coadjuvantesque operas; and sic quidem ut
si cujusquam magnitudinem augeas, vel imminuas, si figuram mutes, si
cohaesionem solvas, si situm invertas, si in tota demum machina quid moveas:
tum omnia pejus habitura, vel etiam pessum ruitura sint; quomodo id tandem
stuporem non creet? Horum equidem cogitatione adeo mihi confusum esse animum
sentio, ut aequum sit, imo plane necessum hic conticescam.

Mentis enim vocisque meae praecluditur usus.

Nihil vos moramur, Patres conscripti; discedite:

FINIS.
Books to be Sold by Robert Boulter, at the Turks-Head in Cornhil, over against
the Royal Exchange.
FOLIO.
Rushworth's Collections.

Baronage of England, in two parts, by William Dugdale, Esquire.

Hooker's Ecclesiastical Policy.

Cursellei Opera.

Spiritual refinings, in two parts, by Anthony Burgess.

-- His 145 Sermons on John 17.

-- His Treatise of Original Sin.

Curia Politiae, or the Apologies of several Princes, justifying to the World
their most eminent Actions by Reason and Policy.

Reynold's Works.

Sturmy's Magazin.

Sixty five Sermons by the Right Reverend Father in God Ralph Brownrig, late
Lord Bishop of Exeter, Published by William Martin M. A. sometime Preacher at
the Rolls, in two Volumes.

QUARTO.
An Exposition with Practical Notes and Observations on the five last Chapters
of the Book of Job, by Ios. Caryl.

Husbandry spiritualized, or the Heavenly use of Earthly things, by I. Flavel.

A Treatise of the Sabbath, in four parts, by Mr. Dan. Cawdry.

Vindiciae Legis, or a Vindication of the Law and Covenants from the Errors of
Papists, Socinians, and Antinomians by Anthony Burgess.

The Saints Everlasting Rest, or a Treatise of the Blessed State of the Saints,
in their enjoyment of God in Glory, by Richard Baxter.

-- His plain Scripture proof of Infant Baptism.

Thesaurus medicinae practicae, ex praestantissimorum tum Veterum tum
Recentiorum Medicorum Observationibus, Consultationibus, Cunsiliis et
Epistolis, summa diligentia collectus ordineque Alphabetico Aispositus, per
Tho. Burnet.

A Treatise of the right use of the Fathers, by John Daily.

Annotations on the Book of Ecclesiastes, by a Reverend Divine.

Norwood's Works.

Lightfoot in Lucam.

Seamans Calendar.

The Doctrine of Justification by Faith, by John Owen, D D.

Man of Sin, or a Discourse of Popery; wherein the numerous and monstrous
Abominations in Doctrine and Practice of the Romish Church are by their own
hands exposed to open sight, that the very Blind may see them. By no Roman, but
a reformed Catholic.

De Origin, Moribus and rebus Gestis Scotorum Libri december, Authore Ioanne
Leslaeo Episcopo Rossensi.

Large OCTAVO.
A Discourse of Growth in Grace, in sundry Sermons; by Samuel Slater, late of
St. Katherine's near the Tower.

The Grounds of Art, teaching the perfect work and practice of Arithmetic,
both in whole Numbers and Fractions, by R. Record.

A Cloud of Witnesses, or Sufferers Mirror; made up of the Swanlike Songs, and
other choice Passages of several Martyrs and Confessors, to the sixteenth
Century, in their Treatises, Speeches and Prayers, by T. M. M. A.

Norwood's Epitome.

Philip's Manual.

How Is Blessedness of the Righteous.

Wilson of the Scripture.

A Treatise of the Divine Promises in five Books, by Edw. Leigh, Esquire.

The unreasonableness of Infidelity, in four parts, by R. Baxter.

A Discourse of the State of Health in the Island of Iamaica, by Tho. Trapham,
M. D. Coll. Med. Land. Soc. Hon.

Quakerism no Christianity clearly and abundantly proved out of the Writings of
their chief Leaders, with a Key for the understanding their sense of their many
usurped and unintelligible words, by John Faldo.

(...). Hesiodi ASCRAEI quae extant, Cum notis Cornelii Scrivelii.

A Treatise of the Bulk and Selvedge of the World, wherein the Greatness,
Littleness, and Lastingness of Bodies, are freely handled, with an Answer to
Tentamina de Deo, by N. Fairfax, M. D.

Small OCTAVO and DUODECIMO.
Saint indeed, or the great Work of a Christian opened and pressed from Prove.
4. 23. by I. Flavell.

Artificial Arithmetic in Decimals, showing the Original, Ground, and
Foundation thereof, by R. Iagar.

FINIS.

