A Brief DISCOURSE Concerning the Different WITS of MEN: Written At the Request
of a Gentleman, Eminent in Virtue* Learning, Fortune. In the Year 1664.

And now Published with Consent of the Author.

LONDON, Printed by R. W. for William Whitwood at the Sign of the Golden-Lion
in Duck-Lane, near Smithfield, 1669.

THE CONTENTS.
SECT. I. ARticle 1. The Occasion of this Discourse. 2. The Difficulty, and 3.
Usefulness of the Argument. page 1. SECT. II. Art. 1. What is meant by
Ingenium. 2. What by Docility, and the three Parts thereof. 3. The Difference
betwixt Docility and Wit. 4. The Ambiguous signification of our English Word
Wit. 8 SECT. III. Art. 1. The Faculty of the Mind named Judgment, and its
proper Act described. 2. Of Imagination, and its difference in respect of
Celerity and Tardity. 3. The different proportions of Judgment and Imagination
required in Poets, in Historians, in Panegyrists and Satyrists, in Orators, in
Philosophers and Counselors. 4* A constant Prosecution of their End or Scope,
required in all, for prevention of Extravagancy. 5. Wherein Prudence consists.
6. And wherein Cunning an^ Evasion. 7. The Difference betwixt Natural and
Acquired Wit. 1 SECT. IV. Art. 1. The Authors conjecture concerning the Final
Cause of the great diversity of Wit observed in Men. 2. The great obscurity of
the Natural Causes of that diversity, in respect of our Ignorance of the
Economy of the Brain, and of the nature of the Mind. 3. Men of Sanguine and
hot constitutions generally Acute, and those of the contrary Temperament, Dull;
upon the auctority of Hippocrates, and of Reason. 35 SECT. V. Art. 1. Why the
Author here attempts to describe only the most remarkable Differences of Wit,
as the Sources of many Virtues and Vices. 2. The First General difference, or
Ready Wit characterised. 3. A subdivision of the same. 4. And its Defects. 52
SECT. VI. Art. 1. The Character of the Ranging Wit, its Vanity and Levity. 2.
With their proper Remedies. 62 SECT. VII. Art. 1. The Third general
Difference, or Slow but Sure Wit, and its Character. 2. The Obscurity to which
it is subject. 3. And the way to overcome that obscurity. 74 SECT. VIII. Art.
1. The Fourth general difference, or Ample Wit. 2. And its distinction from
the Narrow Wit. 3. The use of that Distinction. 4. An Error of some Learned
men, who hold, that no Wit can be great and of Public use, without the help
of Scholastic Erudition. 5. The Refutation of that Error. 6. The Advantages
arising to the Ample wit from solid Learning. 7. Self-confidence an impediment
to the Best-tempered Wit. 8. And Study a help even to Barren ones. 9. The
Finest wits most impatient of Study, and why. 10. The Cure of that impatience.
79 SECT. IX. ^rt. 1. A character of the sixth general difference, or Malignant
Wit, with some of its disingenuous Artifices. 2. Three eminent examples of
this Malignant Wit, viz. Cratinus, 3. Aristophanes, 4. And Tacitus. 5. Whence
it comes, that the most abject Spirits are most prone to Mali^^ worthy Men. 6.
Mali^^nity of wit derived fr^^ Ill Nature or Perversi^^ of Disposition. 7. The
di^ference betwixt Malign^ty and Festivity; with justification of innoce^^
Jests. 8. The Conclu^^on..
OF THE DIFFERENT WITS OF MEN.
SECT. I.
ARTICLE 1.
Noble Sir,
IF I have taken a whole Month to answer your last Letter, it has been only
because I ^ould not so much as show my willingness to do it in less time: the
Command You were pleased therein to send me, being of so abstruse and difficult
a nature, that to perform it with accurateness in any proportion correspendent
to either its own dignity, or Your Curiosity, would require not one, but many
Months, yea Years, though my Abilities were much greater than even the Ignorant
and Envious believe them to be. You have, therefore, more of reason to blame me
for Haste, than for Delay; in that I now render You so negligent an account of
my diligence in managing the Province You assigned me: and if this Paper bring
rather an end to Your Expectation, than satisfaction to Your Judgment; You are
obliged in Equity to look upon it as a Specimen rather of my Obedience, than of
my Learning. For, ^ad I not preferred the suggestions of my Duty, as a friend,
to the ^ounsel of my Reason, as an Inquirer into Nature; You may as^ure Your
self, it would have been very long, before I should have been brought thus
freely to expose my Weakness to You, who are so well able to discern it. But my
comfort is, though You are sharp-sighted, You are also Good-natured: not more
apt to discover than to conceal men's infirmities and failings. Having then the
same excuse both for my Tardity and for my Haste; and confiding entirely in
Your Candor: behold, I put into Your hands the following Discourse, to which
Your Command gave the first and sole Occasion, and in which I have plainly and
briefly delivered both my thin Collections, and present Thoughts, concerning
the Different Wits of Men.

ART. 2.
For, though Wit, or Natural Capacity of Understanding, seems to be the only
thing wherein Nature has been equally bountiful to all Mankind; every one
thinking he has enough, and even those who in their Appetites and Desires of
other things are insatiable, seldom wishing for more of that excellent
Endowment: Yet nothing is more evident than this, that some have more Wit than
others, and that Men are thereby no less distin^uishable each from other, than
^y their several Faces and Tem^ers.

ART. 3.
To enumerate, then, all these Differences, would be a work almost infinite; to
define where^n they generally consist, ex^reamly hard; to select and describe
the most remarkable of them, highly useful. For, when Men should by the help
of such Descriptions be brought to see the Principal and Ruling Inclinations
(for the most part the inseparable Concomitants of their Wits) that advance or
depress their Estimation and Fortunes in the World, reduced to a few Heads or
Kinds: it would be no hard matter for them to find out the several Advantages
deducible from thence. First, every one might contemplate, as in a Mirror,
some part at least of his own Image, and know in what Classis to rank himself.
Then; by observing what is beautiful or deform in the picture of another, he
might the better judge of what himself either desires or fears to be. Again,
since Virtues and Vices mutually incroach upon each others confines, and that
no Ingeny is so propense to Vices, but that it* retains a capacity of being
kept from Exorbitancy, and by the strict rains of Prudence inflected to their
neighboring Virtues; and on the other side, none is so nearly allied to this
or that Virtue, but may by imprudence be corrupted, so as to swerve toward some
bordering Vice: it could not be unprofitable to view the Copies of such
Inclinations, attended by their good or evil Consequents, and from thence to
collect how far they might benefit or hurt, if followed. In fine, by such
general Characters, we might learn how to moderate our Praises of some Persons,
and our causeless Aversation from others; than which nothing is more necessary
in Conversation, especially in election of a Friend.

But, alas! Sir, such a Work as this does yet remain among the Desiderata in
Philosophy, and so is likely ever to do for me, who am so conscious of the many
Herculean Difficulties therein to be encountered and overcome; that I find my
self more inclined to wish, than capable to perform it. You ought not,
therefore, to wonder, if instead thereof I adventure to present You this rude
Essay.

SECT. II.
ART. 1.
THat Faculty of the Mind, which is commonly understood by the word WIT, being
a thing whereof Men have formed to themselves various Conceptions, and for
which they have accordingly invented vari^us Names; it must needs be dif^^cult
to determine what is there^y meant, and what denomina^^on is most agreeable and
pro^er thereunto. Nor is it less dif^^cult to investigate the Nature ^hereof,
and wherein it does ^hiefly consist: the Economy of the Brain of Man being one
of those Arcana of Nature, whose know^edge the wise Creator seems to have
reserved to Himself.

As for the several Names or Words by which it is most usually expressed; I am
obliged to recount and explain them to you briefly, that so being delivered
from Ambiguity (one of the greatest impediments to Science) You may soon be
able to judge which of them is Equivocal, which Adaequate and proper.

The Latin word, Ingenium though sometimes used even by the best and most
accurate Writers, and who lived in the Golden Age of that Language, to signify
the power of Understanding proper to Mankind; as may be instanced in that
memorable sentence of Sallust, (in initio Belli Catilinarii) Mihi rectius esse
videtur, ingenij, quam virium opibus gloriam quaerere: Yet we find it most
frequently used to denote a man's natural Inclination or Propension to some
things or actions more than to others, whether virtuous or vicious; as may
appear, among a thousand other instances, from that saying of the same
judicious Historian, in his Character of Catiline; Fuit magna vi and animi and
^orporis, sed ingenio malo, and pravo; and from that of Suetonius, re^ating
that Tiberius connived at ^ome youthful debaucheries of Caligula, Si per has
mansuefieri posset ^erum ejus ingenium.

ART. 2.
Sometimes by Wit is understood Aptness to Discipline, or Promptitude to learn:
which the ancient Graecians, both Philosophers and Orators, called (...); the
Latins, Docilitas, and bona indoles, to which our Language has no word
answerable, but Towardliness, now almost obsolete. If you enquire wherein this
happy Faculty does consist, they tell you, that it is not simple, but composed
of three others.

The First of which is named (...), Acumen, and ((...)) celeritas discendi, or,
as Xenophon, (...), a quick or nimble apprehension of what is taught: though I
remember the word (...) to be not seldom applied to Acerbity and Cruelty of
disposition; as by Arrianus in that phrase, (...).

The Second, (...) ( ab (...), prope, and (...), animadverto, cogito, inspicio)
which is defined to be (...), a Faculty whereby a man, from what he has
learned, hunts after what he has not learned: the same with that the Romans
termed Sagacitas, and our incomparable Mr. Hobbs renders Ranging.

The Third, (...), Memoria; (...), Retention of what is learned.

ART. 3.
Here, Sir, You have both the true Notion and Parts of Docility conveniently
expressed; but yet you are to seek, whether Wit and Docility be always one and
the same thing. For, Docility, if restrained only to Arts and Sciences, though
it necessarily implies a good capacity of understanding in the Person, by the
bounty of Nature, therewith enriched: yet can it not be thence inferred, that
all men who want this Docility, want also wit; because then none could have
wit, but Scholars alone, and because Experience sufficiently demonstrates that
many laudable Wits are naturally averse from the study of Letters, and in that
respect perhaps also incapable of proficiency in them. So that what Anatomists
generally say of the signs of Virginity, namely that the appearance of them is
a certain evidence of the Brides Chastity; but the nonappearance, no proof of
her deflowerment before Marriage; may with equal truth be said of this
Docility; it cannot be without a good Wit, but a good Wit may sometimes be
without that. Learning, You know, is but Wit cultivated; the seeds thereof are
Natural, and grow up of themselves, and many times bring forth fruits both
pleasant and useful, without the help of Art, especially where their Luxuriancy
is prevented by virtuous education, and their maturity promoted by ingenious
conversation. If wit, then, may subsist without Learning, certainly it may
subsist without Docility, i. e. a facility of learning Arts and Sciences.

Besides, if we divide Docility into its three parts newly described, and
distribute them among three Men, allowing to one quickness of Apprehension, to
the second Sagacity in hunting after consequences, and strength of Memory to
the third: this will not be sufficient to direct us to make a judgment, which
of the three ought to have the praise of the best Wit: because therein they may
all be Equal. For, we want not the testimony of daily observation, that many
excellent Wits have but weak Memories, and as many of admirable Memories are
yet dull of Apprehension; and again many, who are good at Ranging after
Consequences, though it be necessary that they remember well (because it is
from the reminiscence of what they have known, that they infer what they seek)
are yet but slow of Conception. Hereupon I am of opinion, that Wit and
Docility, though frequently Concomitant, are yet distinct Faculties, and
therefore require both Names and Notions distinct.

Many other words there are used also by the Romans to signify Wit; as
perspicacia, solertia, subtilitas, dexteritas, felicitas ingenij, etc. but
these being all Metaphorical, are therefore Ambiguous, nor worthy a particular
examination.

ART. 4.
Nor is our English word, Wit, (which some of our Glossaries derive from the
Teutonic Witz, to understand; and others from the Latin Videlicet contracted
into viz. because instead thereof we say to wit) altogether exempt from
Ambiguity: as being indifferently used to signify either the Faculty of
understanding it self, or the Act or Effect of that Faculty, in the former
sense, when we say, such a man has a great Wit: in the latter, when we give
the name of Wit to a jest, pleasant conceit, or facete expression, such as the
Latins call sales, lepores, facetiae; the Italians, Scherzo, giuoco, burla; and
the French, raillerie and gaudisserie.

SECT. III.
ART. 1.
FRom the recital of the Names, we pass to the consideration of the Nature of
Wit.

The Understanding of a Man. (You know, Sir) is commonly measured either by the
rectitude of his Judgment, or the celerity of his Imagination.

By Judgment, we distinguish subtilty in objects nearly resembling each other,
and discerning the real dissimilitude betwixt them, prevent delusion by their
apparent similitude. This Act of the Mind the Grecians term (...), the Latins,
Judicium and Dignotio; and we, Discretion. The Faculty it self, Aristotle
(Ethic. 6. c. 7.) names (...), the Latins, subtilitas ingenij; from them the
Italians, sottigliezza, and sottilita; the French, subtilite; and we, subtilty,
which is no other but a certain perspicacity of the Mind, whereby it is able to
compare things one with another, and discern the difference betwixt them,
notwithstanding they appear very much alike. Herein Old men ( caeteris paribus)
usually excel Young; because by long Experience (which is nothing else but
Remembrance of what Antecedents have been followed by what Consequents) they
have learned the Marks or signs, by which things are to be compared and
distinguished: and Men of nimble Apprehension (caeteris paribus) have the
advantage of those who are of slow; because they observe more signs of
difference in less time.

ART. 2.
By Imagination, on the contrary, we conceive some certain similitude in
objects really unlike, and pleasantly confound them in discourse: Which by its
unexpected Fineness and allusion, surprising the Hearer, renders him less
curious of the truth of what is said. This is very evident in the use of
Simile's, Metaphors, Allegories and other Tropes and Figures of Rhetoric;
which are therefore called the Ornaments of speech, serving rather for
plausibility, than for demonstration. And, indeed, their power over the
Affections of the greatest part of Mankind, whether by the word Affection we
understand what the Grecians call (...) Passion, or what they term (...) Mores,
Manners; is so great, that the whole Art of Oratory is grounded thereupon, and
he is the most Excellent in that Art, who by the help of those (...) or Images,
of things absent formed in his Imagination, does represent them in so lively
colors, that they appear present. Hereupon doubtless it was, that Quintilian
(institut. Orator. lib. 6. cap. 11.) says, a good Orator must be (...) qui
sibi res, voces, actus, secundum verum optime fingat.

Now the Imagination be in common to all Men (yea and to Brute Animals also)
yet is it not equal in all Men. Some are naturally endowed Celeritate
imaginandi, with a quickness of imagination, that is, an easy succession of
one thought upon another: others are but slow of imagination, which defect of
the Mind is called Tarditas ingenij, dullness, and if great, stupor, stupidity
or sottishness.

From Celerity of Imagination there arises a twofold difference of Wit. Some
are naturally inclined to indulge their thoughts the liberty of Ranging, and
love not to confine them: Others delight in fixing their mind upon one object,
and narrowly examining it. The former sort are allowed to have Laudabilem
Phantasiam; and have a Genius disposed to Poesy and Invention: unless their
Fancy be immoderately quick and ranging; for then it passes into Folly, such
as theirs, who are not able to finish the discourse they have begun, being
suddenly taken off and carried away by new thoughts altogether impertinent.
Which undecent shifting of thoughts is properly named Extravagancy. The Latter
are said to have Judicium probabile; and therefore are fit to study Philosophy,
Civil Law, and Controversies.

ART. 3.
For the most part both these Virtues of the Mind are indeed conjoined in the
same Persons; but seldom equally eminent: and the several degrees of
pre-dominion of the one over the other, constitute the chief differences of
Men, as to Wit or Understanding. Fancy without moderation of Judgment,
seldom attains to commendation: but judgment or Discretion, though unassisted
by Fancy, always deserves praise.

In Poets, both Fancy and Judgment are required; but Fancy ought to have
the upper hand, because all Poems, of what sort soever, please chiefly by
Novelty.

In Historians, Judgment ought to have the chair; because the Virtue of
History consists in Method, Truth, and Election of things worthy narration:
nor is there need of more Fancy, than what may serve to adorn the style with
elegant language.

In Panegyries, and Invectives, Fancy ought to take place; because they have
for their end not truth, but praise or dispraise, which are effected by
comparisons illustrious, or vile or ridiculous: and Judgment does only suggest
Circumstances, by which the action is rendered laudable or blameable.

In Hortatives and Pleadings of Causes, according as verity or simulation does
principally conduce to the advantage of the Argument; so Judgment, or Fancy
is to have pre-eminence.

In Demonstration, in Counsel, and in all severe investigation of Truth, only
Judgment is required; unless perhaps sometimes there be occasion for some
convenient similitude, to illustrate what is alleged. But as for Metaphors,
they are wholly to be excluded, as equivocal and introductory to fallacy: and
therefore to admit them in grave Counsel, or strict Ratiocination, is no less
than manifest folly and impertinency. In all serious discourse, if there appear
want of Discretion, however pleasant Fancy shall show it self, yet Wit will
be defective: but if Judgment be manifest, though the Fancy be but vulgar,
the Wit shall be commended.

ART. 4.
But in all, besides that discretion of times, places and persons, which
renders Fancy commendable, and wherein Civil prudence and the good Menage of
affairs does principally consist; there is required also Constant Prosecution
of the Scope or End proposed, that is frequent application of our thoughts to
the subject about which we are conversant. For, so there will occur to us apt
similitudes, such as will not only illustrate, but also adorn our discourse,
and excite pleasure in the hearers by the rarity of their invention. Whereas if
there be not a constant regulation of thoughts to some certain End; the more we
are conducted by heat of Fancy, the nearer we come to Extravagancy, which is
a degree of Madness; such as is observed in those Rambling Wits, who (as we
said even now) having entered into discourse of one thing, are by every new
hint, however remote and impertinent, transported from their subject into so
many digressions and Parentheses, that not recovering what at first they
intended to speak, they lose themselves, as in a Labyrinth. The Reason of which
Error seems to be grounded upon defect of Experience, which makes them imagine
that to be new and remarkable, which to more knowing heads is really stale and
trivial; and that to be great and considerable, which to others of more
observation is not so. For, whatever is new, great and memorable, if it occurr
to the Mind of one speaking of another subject, is wont to seduce him from his
purpose.

ART. 5.
When a man, therefore, having proposed to himself some certain End, and in
his thoughts running over a multitude of things, as means conducible thereunto,
does quickly perceive which of them is most probable, and how it may be brought
to effect his design: this man is said to have a good Wit, and the Habit hereof
is called (...) and (...) Prudence. Which depends upon Experience and
Remembrance of many the like Antecedents, with the like Consequents. But herein
men differ not one from another so much as in Judgment and Phansy; because men
of equal age, may not be very unequal in Experience, as to the quantity, though
one has more of experience in some things, and another in others; since every
one has his particular affairs, concernments and ways of managing them: and a
Husbandman, though rude and illiterate, is yet wiser in his own business, than
a Philosopher in another man's. Whence that rule, Cuique in sua art credendum.

ART. 6.
To this Prudence if there be conjoined the use of Means unjust, or dishonest,
such as Fear, or Poverty does too often suggest: then it degenerates into that
sinistre Prudence, which is called Astutia, Craft or Cunning; which is for the
most part a sign of Pusillanimity or poorness of Spirit. For, a great Mind
scorns unjust and dishonest helps to bring him to his aims. There is also
another sort of Cunning, called Versutia, Evasion; which is deferring or
putting off for a little time some danger or incommodity impendent, by running
into worse: and the word seems a derivative from Versura, which signifies
borrowing of one, to pay another.

Having given You, Noble Sir, this short and imperfect account of what I have
collected concerning the Nature and diverse Notions of those Intellectual
Faculties, which are vulgarly comprehended under the name of Wit; and deduced,
according to probability, the principal Differences thereof from the various
degrees of Eminency of Judgment and Phansy: the remaining part of the Task You
have been pleased to assign me, is to enquire briefly into the Causes of those
Differences, as well Final as Efficient; and then describe each of them singly
with as much truth and evidence, as my small observation, and less Learning
shall enable me to do.

ART. 7.
But, to prevent mistake, I am obliged first to advertise You (what I had
almost forgotten) that by the Wit I have hitherto spoken of, I mean that which
is Natural, or which grows up together with us, accrewing only from Use and
Experience, without the help of Method, culture or Doctrine. For, as to that
which they call Ingenium Acquisitum, acquired by study of Learning and polite
Education; I conceive it to be no other but Reason, which arising from the
right use of speech, produces Arts and Sciences; and seems to be only an Effect
or Product of the former cultivated by industry.

SECT. IV.
THus freed from all Ambiguity of Words and Notions commonly applied to Wit,
which otherwise might perhaps have led us out of our right way, or at least
darkened the prospect of our Reason; let us proceed in our Disquisition softly
and fairly to prevent stumbling: following the conduct of the Method newly
proposed. Which brings us in the next place to consider the Final Cause of the
great Diversity of Wits observed in Men.

ART. 1.
What was the End, which the Omniscient Creator designed to Himself, when He
was pleased to constitute this so great and admirable variety; You, Sir, (I
know) are too wise, too conscious of the immense disparity betwixt a Finite
Nature and an Infinite, to expect I should be able to determine: all His
Counsels being to us, poor ignorant things, impervestigable, as His Perfections
are incomprehensible. However, since we are not forbidden with due reverence to
conjecture; You (I hope) willnot refuse to hear my foolish sentiments
concerning this problem: especially while I offer them rather to Your
Examination, than to Your belief.

When, therefore, I observe, that Men are no less discriminable each from other
by the various Inclinations, Affections and Capacities of their Minds, than by
the dissenting features, lines and aires of their Faces; I am apt to persuade
my self, that God Almighty, in making so vast dissimilitude, and in that
distribution of His several Donatives among Individuals of the same Species,
intended thereby to accommodate Mankind to a Civil life: it being no more
possible for a Society of Men, or Commonwealth, to be composed of Members all
of the like endowments of Mind; than it is for an Animal to exercise various
Functions with many Organs all of the same parts, shape and fabric; or for
Musical Harmony to result from a multitude of Unisons. I am not ignorant, that
even the best Philosophers, when they contemplate the diversity of Natures
Endowments, and the most probable Reason thereof, modestly bound their
Curiosity with this clause, that Nature delights her self in variety, as well
in this as in all other kinds. Nor do I deny what they here say to be thus far
true, that Nature, as being the Art of God, can have no other perfection, but
what is derived from her Author and Governor, whose Goodness cannot be
terminated but in it self; and consequently all Emanations and Effects of that
Goodness must redound to the delight of their first Fountain. Yet this
(methinks) does not oblige us to acquiesce in that consideration alone, without
all reflection upon our selves; there being perhaps some other Reason or End of
such Variety, wherein Mankind may be highly concerned. I conceive, then, that
the Creator having one Eye directed to the pleasure redounding to Him from the
manifestation of His Power and Goodness; aimed with the other at some general
benefit and favor to Man, to whom He purposed to be singularly indulgent and
gracious in all things: and that foreseeing how much more securely,
commodiously and happily Men might live in Societies, than single and
dispersed, as wild Beasts; He ordained this great diversity of Ingenies among
them, as a means to accommodate them to mutual assistance and association. But
this I deliver as only probable, not definitive: and leaving it to Your better
judgment to be approved or rejected, I pass on to the Natural Causes of the
diversity under enquiry.

ART. 2.
Wherein I meet with no less obscurity, than in the former. For, though it be
sufficiently evident, especially to Physicians conversant about diseases of the
Head, that the Seat and principal Organ of the Intellectual Faculties is the
Brain; and that they are more or less perfect in their Operations, according to
the diverse temperament, magnitude, figure and schematism of that noblest Organ;
and to the greater or less Mobility of the Animal spirits (if any such there
be) contained and exercised therein: though thus much (I say) be sufficiently
manifest, yet what temperament, what magnitude, figure and Schematisme of the
Brain produces Acuteness of Wit, and what causes Dullness, is hitherto
unknown. Nor have Anatomists, even in this dissecting and most curious Age,
been yet able certainly to inform themselves, in what part of the Brain that
Celestial Guest, the reasonable Soul, keeps her Court of Judicature; what part
she makes use of in Sensation, what in Imagination, what for Memory, or what
for Ratiocination. Vesalius (I remember) the Prince of Anatomists in the last
Age, expressly, nor without derision of those who believed and taught the
contrary, affirms, that the Fabric of Man's Brain is not in the least different
from that of the Brains of Brutes. The Text is remarkable, the great Authority
of the Man considered; and therefore I will here transcribe it. ( de Corpor.
Human. fabric. lib. 7. cap. 1.)

Qui in Imaginatione, Ratiocinatione, Cogitatione, Memoria, Cerebrum suo
fungatur munere; haudquaquam ex sententia apprehendo: neque quicquam insuper ab
Anatomico, vel Theologorum omnem rationis vim, ac totam fere Principis nobis
vocatae Animae facultatem, Brutis Animalibus adimentium occasion, indagandum
puto. Quum Cerebri nimirum constructione Simia, Canis, Equus, Felis and
Quadrupeda quae hactenus vidi omnia, and Aves etiam universae, plurimaque
Piscium genera, omni propemodum ex part Homini correspondeant: neque ullum
secanti occurrat discrimen, quod secus de Hominis quam de illorum Animalium
functionibus statuendum esse praescribat. To this You Will answer perhaps, that
such indeed was the judgment of Vesalius; but You are not obliged to acquiesce
therein, because You have lately not only read a certain Book, de
Proprietatibus Cerebri Humani, wherein the Author observes many considerable
Differences betwixt the Humane Brain, and those of all other Animals; but also
with Your own eyes behold those Differences demonstrated by the same Author, in
some Dissections for that end made by him at the command of the Royal Society:
and that therefore You hope, if Anatomists proceed in their discoveries, with
the same accurate scrutiny, and the like happy success, as of late Years they
have done; some one of them may at length be so fortunate, as to find out the
true uses of all the several parts of the Brain of Man, and so solve all the
difficulties that now amuse those, who profoundly consider the wonderful
Economy thereof.

I reply, therefore; that granting Vesalius to have been much mistaken in that
his Opinion concerning the Brain; and that there really are those Differences
betwixt Man and all other Animals, which the Book you mention declares: Yet (
Sir) what I have here said concerning the abstrusity of the Nature, immediate
Instruments, and ways of operation of the Intellectual Faculties, is
nevertheless too true. For, You cannot but remember, that even the Author of
that Treatise himself does in the end of it ingenuously confess, that
notwithstanding his frequent observation of those Differences, he was still as
ignorant of the principal seat of the soul, and what parts she made use of in
her several Functions, as before he first entered into the Anatomick Theater.
And were it not a Parergon, I could collect, and here recount many
observations, recorded by Eminent Physicians, of such, who retained the use of
their Senses, Imagination, Memory and Reason, without any the least defect,
even to the last minute of life; and yet in their Heads opened after death,
there was found (as in most Fishes) but very little of Brain, and that little
altogether confounded and dissolved in Water. For a memorable Example of this
astonishing Phenomenon, I take liberty to refer You to lib. 1. cap. 24. of the
Medical observations of Nich. Tulpius, a late learned and judicious Physician,
and Senator of Amsterdam: who relating the various Conjectures of some of his
Colleagues thereupon, gravely concludes with this free confession of his
ignorance; Quantum est, quod nescimus! Velut namque in aliis, sic certe
credibile est, potissimum nos coecutire in genuino Cerebri regimine: cujus
opera multo fortassis sunt diviniora, quam quispiam hactenus suo comprehendit
captu. As for Your expectation of further discoveries from Anatomy, that may
afford more light to direct the Virtuosi in their researches into this dark
Argument; I cannot indeed divine what time may bring forth: but am of Opinion,
that there is less reason for Your Hope, than for Your Wish for any such
discovery; the nature of Man's Mind being such, that it cannot understand it
self.

Adeo Animo non potest liquere de caeteris rebus, ut adhuc ipse se quaerat:
Senec. Nature. Quaest. lib. 7. cap. 24.

ART. 3.
You are not then to wonder, if I acknowledge my self unable to define from
what various Constitutions of the Brain the Differences of Wit arise, as from
their proxime Causes. All I dare observe to You, concerning that Aenigma, is
only this; that for the most part Men of hot and sanguine Constitutions,
caeteris paribus, are more ingenious and acute; and those of cold, gross and
Phlegmatic, are more dull and slow of Imagination. If for this You require
Authority, I can allege that of Hippocrates himself, who has two texts
expressly favorable and pertinent to the same: one concerning the Sanguine; the
other, the Phlegmatic Temperament. The first is this; (...): quod humidissimum
est in igne, and siccissimum in aqua, si in corpore temperamentum acceperint,
sapientissima sunt. (...) lib. 1. sect. 29. The other, this; (...): porro si in
aliqua Anima defectuosiorem vim ignis accipiat quam aqua, eam tardiorem esse
necesse est; and appellantur tales Stolidi. Ibidem Sect. 32. If Reason; it is
obvious, that the Blood being the fountain of Natural Heat, and in truth the
only Calidum innatum, by which all parts of the body are perpetually warmed,
enlivened and invigorated; and out of whose purest and agilest parts the Animal
Spirits are supposed to be extracted: by how much more copious and pure the
Blood is, by so much more of heat is thence communicated to the Brain and its
Appendix of Nerves (thereby made more firm and apt both to receive and retain
the Images or impressions of external Objects; and more pervious to the Animal
spirits) and a greater supply of Spirits generated out of it, for the uses of
the Animal Faculties therein residing, and thereon depending, and e contra.
Hence doubtless it was, that Empedocles held the Blood to be both the seat and
cause of Sapience: and that Dr. Harvey, somewhere in his Book of the Generation
of Animals, affirms it to be of no small advantage to the Brain, that Students
and contemplative Men preserve their mass of Blood pure and incorrupt.

But I remember that my present task belongs rather to Morals than to Physic,
and therefore superseding all further enquiry concerning the diversity of
constitutions from whence the diversity of Wits may arise; and remitting You to
the serious consideration of what that Excellent Man, Mr. Hobbes has delivered
( lib. de Homine, cap. 13.) concerning the Mutation of Men's Ingenies by
Passions, Custom, Experience, the goods of Fortune, Opinion of ones self, etc.
I pass to the principal Differences themselves, and their Descriptions; which
animated by Your Command, I proposed to my self chiefly to handle in this hasty
exercise of my blunt and unequal Pen.

SECT. V.
ART. 1.
TO go about to describe the great variety of Ingenies among Men, though of but
one and the same Nation, were an attempt equally vain with his, who should
endeavor to number the Sands; nor less impossible than for a Painter to
pourtrey all the several faces in an Army upon one table. As it is sufficient,
therefore, to a welldrawn Landscape, to contain the most eminent hills,
buildings, trees and other objects situate in the prospect of the Eye within
that Horizon: so may it be some satisfaction to You, if among a vast number of
different Wits I select the most Eminent, such as appear to be the springs or
Sources of many Virtues, and not fewer Vices; and then represent them in
Colors so suitable to their several Natures, that You may be able to discern
and distinguish each from the rest, notwithstanding the near affinity and
resemblance, which some of them have with others. I call them the Sources of
many Virtues and Vices; because this may pass for a Maxim, Ingenia quando
assuescendo ita confirmata sunt, ut facile, nec reluctante ratione, suas edant
actiones, dicuntur Mores: qui si boni sunt, Virtutes; sin mali, Vitia
appellantur.

ART. 2.
To address then to their Descriptions. That which occurs in the first place is
the READY or nimble Wit. Wherewith such as are endowed have a certain
Extemporary acuteness of conceit, accompanied with a quick delivery of their
thoughts, so as they can at pleasure entertain their Auditors with facetious
passages, and fluent discourses even upon very light occasions. They have
indeed much of that (...) sive habilitas in promptu excogitandi quid dicto sit
opus, formerly described; and are therefore excellent at sudden Repartes: but
being generally impatient of second thoughts and Deliberation, they seem fitter
for pleasant Colloquies and Drollery, than for Counsel and Design. Like
Fly-boats, good only in fair weather and shallow waters: and then too more for
pleasure, than traffic. If they be, as for the most part they are, narrow in
the Hold, and destitute of Ballast sufficient to counterpoize their large
Sails; they reel with every blast of Argument, and are often driven upon the
sands of a Nonplus: but where favored with the breath of common Applause,
they sail smoothly and proudly, and, like the City Pageants, discharge whole
Volleys of Squibbs and Crackers, and skirmish most furiously.

ART. 3.
Of these You meet with two sorts. Some carry away the bell in Table-talk and
familiar conversation, with short, but piquant touches of Fancy, such as
plays chiefly upon the defects or misfortunes of others in the company, yet
without gall: their teeth are sharp, but not venomous: and they rather nibble,
than bite. Others, approaching nearer to the dignity of Eloquence, are
provided, whenever they please to employ their talent, either in public or
private, to speak volubly, and to the purpose; yet not so much from solidity of
Judgment; as strength of Memory, which instantly supplies them with whatever
they have heard or read agreeable to their Theme. The fine descants and poinant
remarks of both sorts are commonly admired not only by ignorant Ears, but also
by some of Scholastic Erudition; who observing the facility of their vein in
breaking sharp jests, and pouring forth a torrent of not undecent expressions,
are apt to grow out of love with themselves, and to be offended with their own
flowness of Conception, which permits them not to do the like without
premeditation and pumping. And they have reason. For, what can You imagine more
speciously resembling true industry, and graceful Elocution, than the
opportune and pertinent Hitts of these facetious Spirits? what more Elegant,
than to make acute reflections upon every occurrent; and to give hometouches
with gentleness; which are the less resented, because they appear sudden and
jocular. If to this Promptness and Jocundity of Wit, either Nature has been so
liberal as to add comeliness of Person, or Fortune so propitious as to conjoyn
dignity of Condition; especially if it be animated by great and secure
Confidence: then is their liberty of jesting as it were authorized in all
places, nor ungrateful to those whom it provokes: yea oftentimes, by its very
Galliardise, it wins the Palm from solid and exact Prudence, if lodged in Men
of excellent abilities, but slow Expression. Of the advantages rebounding to a
ready Wit from that Gracefulness of Person, which the Grecians termed (...),
and the Latins, dignitas oris; You have an eminent Example in Dion the
Syracusan, who thereby much ingratiating himself to the people, was so
prosperous in his ambition, that he ruined Dionysius, and succeeded him in the
Sovereignty of Sicily: and Corn. Nepos puts the same in his Character; where
among his natural Endowments he reckons as chief, ingenium docile and come;
magnamque corporis dignitatem, quae non minimum commendatur.

ART. 4.
But this so charming swiftness of both Fancy and Tongue is not exempt from
its Failings, and those shameful ones too sometimes. For, take them from their
familiar and private conversation, into grave and severe Assemblies, whence all
extemporary flashes of Wit, all Fantastic allusions, all Personal reflections
are excluded; and there engage them in an Encountre with solid Wisdom, not in
light skirmishes, but a pitched field of long and serious debate concerning any
important question: and then You shall soon discover their weakness, and
contemn that barrenness of understanding which is incapable of struggling with
the difficulties of Apodictical knowledge, and the deduction of truth from a
long series of Reasons. Again, if those very concise sayings, and lucky
Repartes (for the Court has now naturalized that Word) wherein they are so
happy, and which at first hearing were entertained with so much of pleasure and
admiration; be written down, and brought to a strict examination of their
Pertinency, Coherence and Verity: how shallow, how frothy, how forced will they
be found! how much will they lose of that Applause, which their tickling of the
ear, and present flight through the Imagination had gained! In the greatest
part therefore of such Men You ought to expect no deep and continued River of
Wit; but only a few Plashes, and those too not altogether free from mudd and
putrefaction.

SECT. VI.
ART. 1.
IN the second place comes the RANGING Wit, whose Pregnancy is so diffused,
that it flies at all things; and commonly assisted with prolix Eloquence,
discourses copiously rather than closely; without premeditation supplying it
self with words and sentences, as out of a treasury inexhaustible. Men of this
Talent are usually in high esteem with the People, if of such Professions as
give them opportunities to show their Copiousness in public Assemblies or
Councils: nor ungrateful in private Conversation, at least when once they have
learned as well to be silent at some times, as to speak profusely at others.
Which they cannot easily do. For, as all Brute Animals know, by natural
instinct, in what part their chief power lies, and delight in the frequent use
of that part above all the rest of their members: so these Men, highly
delighted with their faculty of Eloquence, wherein alone they excel, are
hardly brought to observe Decorum, and opportunities when to contract or
expatiate, when to speak or hold their peace; but carried violently on by an
itch of declaiming on every subject, how trivial or impertinent soever, often
entangle themselves in Arguments above their understanding, and so satiate, but
not satisfy their Hearers. So that even a Wise man may justly wonder, their
imprudence considered, how they are able to speak so much and so little at
once, so well and to so little purpose. Having at length ended (not finished)
their fine Harangues, they scarcely refrain from openly applauding themselves:
and if their Auditors show any signs of Complacency and good Humor, they are
apt to refer it only to a satisfaction of judgment resulting from the Elegancy
of their discourses, though the same arises rather from Joy that they are at
length delivered from the importunity of them. Notwithstanding this Vanity it
must be confessed, these Wits have long wings* and incited by a secret impetus
of Nature, delight to fly abroad* and range over the whole field of Sciences:
but then again such is their speed and praecipitancy, they stay no where long
enough to examine, select and gather; like Bees in a windy day, they take only
a superficial taste of various flowers, and return to their hives unloaded.
Whence it comes, that while they are discoursing of one part of Learning, if a
new hint chance to arise and intrude it self into their Imagination, instantly
quitting their former Theme, they as ardently pursue the new one; and so often
divert* to fresh Arguments, till they have wholly forgotten the question first
started; as unstanch Hounds, meeting with a new scent, follow it with full cry,
and lose the Beast first chased. And this is that Defect of Mind, which is
commonly called Levity: arising perhaps chiefly from an excessive Mobility of
the Animal spirits in the seat of Imagination.

No wonder, then, if these Rambling Heads be so far from attaining to sublime
and extraordinary Wisdom, that for the most part they come short of even Vulgar
ones in ordering their affairs according to the rules of Domestic Prudence.
Some of them becloud themselves with the Vapors of Philauty, self-love, and
over-valuation of their own Opinions, and hu^^ing after Praise: Others lose
their credit by too-visible Affectation: Others attempt things above their
reach, and sink themselves by aspiring: and Most prove wanting to themselves
and Friends in such offices, where constant sedulity, and steady adherence to
one purpose is required. For, they are naturally light, unconstant even to
their own Hopes, variable in their Designs, fixed to nothing but their own
Opinions, in which they so absolutely confide, that they look not into the
advantages of others proposals and counsels. And yet for all this some of them
so dazel weaker Eyes with the polish and luster of their superficial Parts,
that they pass for Accomplished Persons, and are at length admitted to reap
that harvest of Fame and Wealth, which ought to be the reward of solid and
profound Abilities: especially when they have acquired the Art of understanding
as well how to conceal their Defects, as how to set forth their good Qualities.

ART. 2.
This Art consists principally in moderating their fervency of speaking; in
frequent change of Arguments; and always choosing such, in which they may most
easily impose upon their Hearers. For instance; among Military men, let them
discourse of matters of Religion, of the rites and customs of the Ancients, of
the Origines and Migrations of Nations, and such like Themes, wherein Soldiers
generally have but little knowledge, among men bred up in the shades of the
Schools, and unconversant in Polities; let them discourse of the foundations
and periods of Empires, of the Fates of Kingdoms, of the revolutions in
Commonwealths, of the Virtues and great actions of particular Princes, of State
Maxims, etc. In a word, Let them provoke none in his own Way or Art. For, in
familiar conferences, and sociable Colloquies, it is not ungrateful, so it be
dexterously done, to divert to things of which the Company is ignorant: both
because Errors then escape discovery, and because Novelty begets pleasure, and
by how much more we esteem things of which we never heard before, by so much
more do we admire him who delivered them. But above all let them take heed of
Writing; which to Roving and Superficial Wits is as difficult, as their Gift of
speaking fluently is easy, and for the most part proves no less destructive to
their Fame, than their ex tempore Oratory has been favorable. For, that which
gives due sharpness and grace to the Style of a Writter, and recommends it to
the present and succeeding Ages, is exquisite and elaborate Judgment; which is
very rarely conjoined with natural fluency of speech. The Reason may be this;
that a prompt, but turbulent Mind, when in retirement (which all know to be
necessary to a Writer) it comes once to reflect upon it self, and examine its
own strength; burdened with multiplicity of things together offering
themselves, and confounded with variety of thoughts, soon faints under the
weight: and having neither judgment to select, nor patience to digest, falls
at length into Distraction, or Despondency. In fine, the Faculty of writing
well is so different from that of talking volubly, and requires so much more of
both Attention and Deliberation; that most of your Fine Speakers, when once
they find the wings of their Fancy clipped, and their understanding entangled
in strong and knotty Reasonings, are miserably at a loss how to extricate
themselves, and despairing of success, return to their former liberty. Yet some
of this Classis, either blinded with self-conceit, or deluded by adulation of
their Admirers, have adventured to publish Books; and out of vain Ambition to
enlarge and eternize their Reputation by their Pen, have utterly ruined what
they had acquired by the nimbleness of their Tongue. My advice, therefore, to
such shall be this; that they raise in the World an Expectation of some
considerable Volume from them, and keep that expectation alive as long as they
can: but be so wise as never to satisfy it with so much as a single Sheet. But
Wits of this temper are commonly too Hot to moderate their Efforts; too
opinionated to take caution from the Counsel of even their truest Friends: and
therefore I leave them to please themselves.

SECT. VII.
ART. 1.
YOu have beheld the Ready, and the Roving Wits, together with their Advantages
and Defects; be pleased now to remove Your eye to the Image of a Third sort,
which seeming contrary to both, and yet more useful than either, may therefore
not unfitly be called the SLOW, but SURE Wit. Some Heads there are of a certain
close and reserved Constitution, which makes them at first sight to promise as
little of the Virtues wherewith they are endowed, as the former appear to be
above the Imperfections to which they are subject. Somewhat Slow they are
indeed of both Conception and Expression; yet no whit the less comparated to
solid Prudence. When they are engaged to speak, their Tongue does not readily
interpret the dictates of their Mind; so that their Language comes as it were
dropping from their lips, even where they are encouraged by familiar
entreaties, or provoked by the smartness of jests, which sudden and nimble
Wits have newly darted at them. Costive they are also in their Invention; so
that when they would deliver somewhat solid and remarkable, they are long in
seeking what is fit, and as long in determining in what manner and words to
utter it. But, after a little consideration, they penetrate deeply into the
substance of things, and marrow of business, and conceive proper and Emphatick
words, by which to express their Sentiments. Barren they are not, but a little
Heavy and Retentive. Their Gifts lie deep and concealed; being furnished with
Notions, not aerie and umbratil ones, borrowed from the Pedantism of the
Schools, but true and useful: and if they have been manured with good
Learning, and the habit of exercising their Pen; oftentimes they produce many
excellent Conceptions worthy to be transmitted to Posterity.

ART. 2.
Though they have no reason to accuse Nature of any unkindness to them; yet
they have just cause to complain of the iniquity of Fortune, in this respect;
that having an Aspect very like to narrow and dull Capacities, at first sight
most Men take them to be really such, and strangers look upon them with the
eyes of neglect and contempt. Hence it comes, that Excellent Parts remaining
unknown, often want the favor and patronage of Great Persons, whereby
otherwise they might be redeemed from obscurity, and raised to employments
answerable to their Faculties, and crowned with honors proportionate to their
Merits: as the most precious wares seldom invite buyers, if kept in darksome
corners, nor decently exposed, and adorned with splendid titles.

ART. 3.
The best course, therefore, for these to overcome that Eclipse, which
prejudice usually brings upon them, is to contend against their own Modesty,
and either by frequent converse with noble and discerning spirits, to enlarge
the Windows of their Minds, and dispel those clouds of Reservedness, that
darken the luster of their Faculties: or by Writing on some new and useful
subject, to lay open their Talent, that so the World may be convinced of their
intrinsic value.

SECT. VIII.
ART. 1.
IN the middle betwixt the two Opposites, too much Heaviness, and too much
Lightness, Nature seems to have placed the most happy Indoles or AMPLE Wit:
which is seldom out of love with it self, yet never too indulgent to it self,
and often advances its possessors to the highest honors and dignities, of
which Subjects are capable. This usually is attended with no more of Eloquence
than decency allows, or occasion requires; and that, if cultivated by
Erudition, or matured by Time, is always neat and graceful even in familiar
Conversation; neither precipitate, nor slow in delivery: as guided by a
Judgment, though not sharp on the sudden, yet strong and solid after a little
recollection. In fine, this is the Man most fit to harbor all Virtues; as by
Natures benignity comparated to great Prudence, as well Public as Private: and
if touched with a Temperamental Propensity to some certain Vice, yet seldom
tainted with any evil Habit.

ART. 2.
Betwixt these Ample Wits and the Narrow ones, Nature her self has a certain
Criterion or Character of Distinction, easily discernable: and it is this. The
Former, being duly conscious of their own dignity, do all things with a Bon
Mine or good Grace, and becoming Freedom, far from the vices of Affectation and
Constrained Formality: as being actuated by Spirits not bold, but Generous and
Erect, always addressed to noble Ends, and contemplating somewhat diffusive
and above vulgar aims. And this is that Semi-divine Temper of the Mind, which
Aristotle calls (...), the Latins, Felicitas ingenit; and we, an Universal
Capacity. On the contrary, Narrow and Grovelling Wits condemn themselves to
abject Cogitations and low Counsels, never daring to aspire above the common
suggestions of their pusillanimous Humility: yet in little matters, and such as
transcend not the Sphere of their Capacity, they often proceed with exact
diligence, and sometimes also with good success; there being annexed to them a
certain Astutia, sinistre or spurious Wisdom called Cunning and Wisdom for
ones self, such as is common also to weak and timorous Animals, which keeps
them intent wholly upon their own safety, and (as we have before deduced it)
arises only from diffidence of sufficiency in themselves; than which there can
be no greater Enemy to noble and generous Undertakings. Besides, if they at any
time (as sometimes, puffed up with prosperity of their Crafty and undermining
designs, they will) offer at ingenuity; it is with so much constraint,
formality and starch'dness, that they expose themselves to the smiles and
contempt of Judicious Men.

ART. 3.
This Thau or Mark of difference is well worthy Your observation, because these
Half-witted or Cunning Men for the most part make advantage of even their
Inability, building rather upon deceiving others, who confide in them, than
upon any soundness of their own proceedings: and because (as the Lord
Chancellor Bacon most judiciously observes) nothing does more harm in a State,
than that Cunning men pass for Wise men; like Empiricks in Physic, they may
indeed have a great Collection of Experiments, but not knowing the right and
seasonable use of them, pervert them to base and sinister Ends.

Leaving them therefore as unworthy further consideration, let us return to our
Bon. Esprit, and for a few minutes entertain our selves with contemplating the
excellency thereof.

ART. 4.
There are among the Literati, who misled either by too much favor to their
own Disciplines, or by an immoderate esteem of the advantages of Scholastic
Sciences (which were never denied to be very great by any but the Barbarous)
allow no Wit to be Happy and of Public use, but that which is not only capable
of, but also naturally addicted to Letters; none to have attained to the just
height of Prudence, that was not advanced thereto by the Scale of various
Learning. Thus Men eminently fruitful in Public Virtues, and as it were
constellated for Polity or the great Art of Governing the Multitude, they
exclude from the Senate, and from true Greatness, by a Prejudice more allied to
Envy than to Discretion. For,

ART. 5.
On the contrary, it is much more reasonable to hold, that none are so fit for
affairs of State, as those blessed Favorites of Nature, upon whom she has
accumulated her noblest and richest Donatives: Since that Sagacity of Spirit
which enableth a Man not only to know the Resorts and Opportunities of
Business; but also to sink into the Main of it; and then to form Counsels both
for Conduct and Dispatch (the two Principal Virtues in a Statesman) is rather
the free Gift of Heaven, than the purchase of Labor and Study. Which seems to
be no more than what the great Roman Orator averrs, upon his own observation.
Ego multos homines (says he) in Orat. pro Archia Poeta) excellenti animo ac
virtute fuisse, and sine doctrina, naturae ipsius habitu prope divino, per
seipsos and moderatos and graves extitisse fateor: and illud adjungam, soepius
ad laudem, atque Virtutem naturam sine doctrina, quam sine natura valuisse
doctrinam. Again, Time has furnished us with Examples of some, who had
acquired high estimation in the Schools by extraordinary acuteness in sundry
kinds of Learning, and yet proved very weak, when they were transplanted into
the more subtle and fine region of Princes Courts and Councils: their Reason
then confessing it self too dull-sighted to discern the Finesses of Civil
Prudence, to which all other Learning must give place.

You will not, Sir, I presume, be long in determining which is the truer
Wisdom, his, who can foresee discontents and Motions of a Nation, and provide
seasonable and safe Remedies for them; or his, who, after long contemplation,
is able to predict Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, and to calculate the journeys
and returns of all the Planets; but cannot presage what dangers threaten the
Commonwealth, what Changes and Revolutions are impendent over the State.

Besides, those very Men, who thus cry up the usefulness of Languages and
Sciences, restrain not the title of Learned and Polite to him alone, who has
with equal felicity run through the whole Encyclopedie or Round of Arts and
Sciences: but think it sufficient, if a Man acquire excellency in any one of
them: for instance, if an Orator singularly dextrous in managing Arguments, and
happy in all the Exornations of speech, be yet dull and heavy in comprehending
the secrets of Natural Philosophy; or if a profound Philosopher be yet
destitute of Eloquence, or unconversant in History, and Politics and other
parts of Learning; they nevertheless deny him not the Honor of an Eminent Wit.
That Pre-eminence therefore, which is due from any one part of Learning, why
are they so partial, so unjust, as to detract from that Science, which is
conversant in the regulation of whole Societies of Men, and which in that very
respect ought to be preferred to all other Human Knowledge? Think they, that
Wisdom speaks to her Disciples only in Greek, or Latin, or Hebrew; and not
rather in a secret Vivacity of Spirit, and a piercing Judgment or Reason that
understands all Languages? To be born with a pregnant Wit, is no such high
indulgence of Nature, if no more be required therein, than a Propension to, and
Capacity of Erudition Scholastic. Those of the Ancients, whom we acknowledge
to have been the Patriarchs of Sciences, and great Examples of Wisdom, never
consumed much of oil and sweat in the shades of the Schools: and yet certainly
they were born under Stars highly propitious. To found Republics, to make
wholesome Laws for conservation of public Peace, to support their Country by
wise Counsels, to observe the Constitutions, Rites and Customs of other
Nations, and transferr into their own whatever they found worthy imitation; so
far to note and register the motions of Celestial Bodies, as to keep a a true
account of Time, and accommodate their negotiations both at home and abroad to
the most convenient seasons of the year, and benefit of the People: This, this
was chiefly called Science in those elder and purer Times.

To be a little more particular; while those Primitive Sages labored to
reclaim savage and rude Multitudes, and mollify their iron Minds by mansuetude
and other Virtues necessary to common safety and the maintenance of Right in
Civil Societies; by little and little there grew up that Knowledge, which is
called Moral Philosophy. And while, being disjoined by mutual emulation and
contention, they endeavored to persuade the People to favor and adhere to one
or the other side, they made speeches to them to move their Affections
accordingly; that gave the first beginning and credit to Eloquence or Oratory.
In a word, the Monuments of History have conveyed down to us the Prudence and
Artifices of those Ancients, so as to be Precedents to our Modern Literati; at
least if they be able to bear the like weight of cares: if not, the best use
their weaker Heads can make of such Monuments, will be only to boast of their
Reading, by showing them to others; as Priests show Relics of Saints, but
want the power of working Miracles; or as keepers of antic and magnificent
Structures can perhaps name the Founders and Architects, but imitate neither.
For, to read History only for Contemplation, is a vain and idle pleasure, that
leaves no fruit behind: but to imitate the glorious actions and achievements
of such worthy Patriots, that is true and noble Erudition. This was the use
Cicero made of his vast readings, as appears by that profession of his ( in
Orat. pro Archia Poeta.) Quam multas nobis imagines, non solum ad intuendum,
verum etiam ad imitandum, fortissimorum hominum expressas Scriptores and Graeci
and Latini reliquerunt? quas Ego mihi semper in administranda Rep. proponens,
Animum and mentem meam ipsa cogitatione Virorum excellentium conformabam, etc.

ART. 6.
Nevertheless it is not to be doubted, but the most Absolute Wit is that, which
(like the First Matter of the Aristoteleans) is capable of any Form, and can
with equal facility employ it self in all kinds of Studies; having an Universal
Acuteness, and strength as well to grasp the difficult and slippery Mysteries
of State, as to unravel the knotty Methods of Arts and Sciences professed in
Universities. For, Studies perfect Nature; and both are perfected by
Experience: natural Abilities being like Fruit Trees, that need proyning and
culture by learning; and Studies themselves giving forth directions too much at
large, except they be bounded by Experience. All together make the happiest
conjunction, and by mutual assistance advance their Owner to the pinnacle of
Humane Wisdom and Honor: that sublime Sagaicty of judgment requisite in a
Statesman, and conformed to the Genius of the present Age, and comporting with
the constitution of Affairs, so governing Learning, as that it can neither
degenerate into Pedantism, nor rust in vain and solitary Speculation: and
Learning, on the other side, so supporting and enriching the Judgment, as that
it need not rely only upon single Experience and Observation of its own time,
but may have recourse also to the Oracles of all former Ages, and furnish it
self with Examples out of the treasury of Antiquity.

Yet if any Man (as many such there are) naturally addicted to Public
business, and fit to serve his Prince and Country in quality of a Counselor,
be not equally in favor with the Muses, nor prosperous in Scholastic
speculations; I hope, Sir, You will not stick to allow him to be a Person of a
more erect Mind, and nobler Parts, than a mere Contemplative Book-man; who
though perhaps skillful in Languages, and Logician enough to unriddle and
impose Sophisms, and to dispute long and formally about Non-entities, is yet
too narrow of understanding to measure the vastness of Civil Prudence, which is
founded upon mature observation, and built up of solid Experiences, squared by
exact Judgment, and adjusted to present Emergencies in State. So that I am apt
to believe, that Favorinus was in very good earnest, though he seemed to jest,
when he measured the Knowledge of Adrian the Emperor by the greatness of his
Power. The Story is in short this. Adrian, not a little ambitious of the fame
of extraordinary Learning, accidentally meeting Favorinus, an eminent
Philosopher, fell instantly upon him with a whole Volley of Syllogisms, and
pressed him with Sophistical Arguments: to which the wary Philosopher made but
sparing and modest answers, such as intimated his being overcome, and left the
Emperor to please himself with his imaginary victory. Soon after, to his
Friends reprehending him for making so weak defense, he returned this
vindication: I were to blame (said he) if I should not grant him to be the most
learned, who has daily twenty Legions at his command. Which I understand to be
more than a Complement; the Regiment of so many Millions being a piece of
greater skill, and sublimer Science, than to manage a disputation with
Dialectical subtlety, and argue in Mode and Figure.

Having thus in a short digression, endeavored to refute the Error of such who
hold, that no Wit, however Ample and Happy in its native capacity, can yet
attain to solid Prudence, without the improvement of Scholastic Erudition: it
follows, that we observe briefly both the Vice, to which even the Best tempered
Wits sometimes are prone; and the principal Remedy thereof.

ART. 7.
As Pusillanimity or Self-diffidence makes of Narrow Wits Cunning men: so
self-confidence, if immoderate, often checks the growth, and hinders the
fertility of even the Best Wits. For, some of greatest hopes, too soon trusting
to the native pregnancy of their Mind, and desisting from Lecture, Meditation
and all other labor of the Brain, as not only unnecessary, but also
burdensome, and expensive of time: thereby clipp their own wings, render
themselves unfit for any generous flight, and ever after flagg; so far from
aspiring above others, that they come short even of themselves, and suffering
those igniculi aetherei or Celestial sparks of Wit, by which they were in
their Youth actuated, to languish and go out for want of industry to fan them,
degenerate into a barren dullness, so much the more difficult to be overcome, by
how much the longer ere acknowledged. Whereas Others, conscious of their native
imbecility, endeavor with labor and sweat to acquire what the austerity of
Nature denied them; and by continual culture of Study, and seeds of good
Discipline, so enrich the field of their Understanding, that at length they
exceed in fertility of Science not only their former selves, but others also to
whom Nature has been much more bountiful. By which it is manifest, that,

ART. 8.
The proper Remedy for this Obstruction, that not seldom brings an Atrophy or
defect of nourishment upon the best tempered Wit, can be no other but constant
Study and Meditation, by which the Faculties of the Mind are exercised and kept
in vigor. Not that it is requisite Men of this order should over-curiously
search into each punctilio or nicety of the thing they contemplate: for, though
that be the way to attain exactness in some Particulars; yet it would at the
same time greatly retard their progress in the Main, and make it long before
they advance so far, as to make a liberal and genuine inspection into the whole
of that very Science, which they so ambitiously affect. Besides the same would
habituate them to confine their Cogitations within too narrow a compass; by
impaling their Curiosity upon Notions, though perhaps of great subtlety in
speculation, yet of little use in the occurrents of life: nor could they easily
let loose their thoughts to other things, which though sometimes of an
inferior nature, yet may be more necessary to be looked into. To these
therefore I am bold to prescribe Study as a daily Exercise, not as their sole
employment.

ART. 9.
Nor do I condemn those Fine Wits, that spend most upon the Stock of Nature;
because they have this for excuse, That all Heads are not equally disposed to
patience in Study, and diuturnity of labor. For, the finer and acuter the Wit
is, by so much the more easily indeed does it penetrate into things difficult,
and divide things involved; but then again it grows the sooner blunt with
length of labor and intention. The Reason perhaps is this; that Nature does
rarely commit such Fine Wits to the custody of gross and robust Bodies; but for
the most part chooses to lodge them in delicate and tender Constitutions, such
as produce the purest and sublimest spirits: which as by their greater Mobility
they conduce to quickness of Apprehension; so are they for the same cause more
prone to Expense or Exhaustion, upon continued intention of the Mind, nor
capable of reparation unless after due repose and pleasant divertisement.
Again, not only the Labor of these Ethereal Wits, but even their Relaxation
and Leisure is therefore precious; because no sooner are their Brains at
liberty, but they acquire new Vigor, and their Acuteness spontaneously ranging
abroad, brings in fresh Hints, and replenishes them with serious reflections,
and useful cogitations: as rich ground, when left a while fallow, of its own
accord puts forth abundance of Excellent Plants, in nothing inferior to the
best cultivated Gardens. This seems pathetically expressed in that Apothegm of
Cosmus de Medicis, the Politic Founder of the flourishing Dukedom of
Florence. When in a morning he had lain long in bed, as wholly resigned up to
an incurious repose, one of his Favorites coming into his Bedchamber, salutes
him with this Complement; Sir, (said he) where is Cosmus the Great, to whose
Vigilance, as to a Pilot, we have all entrusted the conduct of our State? are
not his eyes open at high noon? I have been abroad some hours since, and
dispatched much business. The Duke smartly returns; boast not Your diligence
thus, Sir; my very Repose is more profitable, than all Your pains and industry.

ART. 10.
Nor is this Delicacy of Constitution, which hinders the Choicest Wits from
undergoing the hardship of constant Study and long watchings, so Universal, but
that some are exempted from it. But these are, I confess, very rare, and as the
noblest Presents Nature can make to Kingdoms and States, seldom produced by
her: being of that most happy temper, that they can stoop their lofty Parts to
the anxiety of tedious Meditations, and drudgery of vast Readings and
Collections. To this they bring themselves chiefly by Resolution and Custom:
whose Effects are no less admirable in the Faculties of the Mind, than in those
of the Body. Hence our incomparable Mr. Hobbes (who was pleased not long since
to tell me, that he was in the fortieth Year of his age, when he first began to
study with due intention of Mind) speaking of the power of Custom upon the
various Ingenies of Men, has this remarkable sentence: Quae nova offendunt,
eadem saepius iterata naturam subigunt; and primo quidem far se, mox autem
amare cogit. Id quod in regimine corporis maxim, deinde etiam in operationibus
Animi perspicuum est. de nature. Homin. cap. 13. sect. 3. When they have thus
conquered themselves, then it is they make the truly Brave Men. When Time,
Perseverance in Study, and Experience have brought them to Maturity; You may
worthily call them Living Libraries, walking Epitomes of all Sciences, and
Magazins of Knowledge. For, in them may be found the Piety of Divines, the
Wisdom of Histories, the Wit of Poets, the Solidity of the Mathematics, the
depth of Natural Philosophy, the Gravity and Uprightness of Moral, the wariness
of Logic, the strength and sweetness of Rhetoric, the distinguishing subtlety
of the Schoolmen, the Exactness of Critics, and the right Use of all. And
when they are fixed in Public employments, abeunt Studia in mores, they become
fit to bare a continual load of cares; not prone to be confounded with
Multiplicity of affairs, nor discomposed with the diverse aspects of Occurrents,
nor startled at unexpected and cross Events; but constantly calm, and equally
sedulous, and what more can be expected from Humane frailty?

In this rude Draught of the charming Beauties of the Ample and Studious Wit,
more of art might have been shown, and better Colors used. But, considering
that it contains, tanquam in compendio, all the several Virtues that lie
dispersed and single in the precedent sorts; and that You ( Noble Sir,) are so
happy as to need no more lively Image thereof, than what You may daily
contemplate (the curtain of Your great Modesty withdrawn) by reflecting upon
Your Own: I thought my self at liberty to run the same over only with light
touches, and a hasty Pencil. Which I now* remove to a work much less grateful
both to Your Genius and my own, namely the Character of the Malignant Wit:
which I therefore reserved for the last place, that the Deformity thereof might
set off the Beauties of those already described; as Satyrs and Negro's painted
by fair Ladies make them appear more amiable.

SECT. IX.
ART. 1.
BY the MALIGNANT Wit, then, I understand that which is indeed quick of
Apprehension, but void of Humanity: being prone to exercise it self chiefly in
re-searching into the Defects, Errors, and even the Infortunes of Others, such
especially who by their Virtues have rendered themselves Conspicuous; and to
delight in both aggravating and publishing them to their dishonor. Wits of
this evil temper may not unfitly be resembled to Chemical Spirits, which are
subtle and penetrating, but they also corrode: and the Spirits by which they
are actuated, seem to be extracted, not out of the purest parts of their Blood
(as other Men's are) but from their Gall; as if they desired to verify the new
opinion of Sylvius de la Boe, that that bitter and acrimonious Excrement is the
Natural Ferment of the Blood, and necessary to not only the Vital, but also the
Animal actions, in all living Creatures, in which it is found. Out of
Self-conceit, they affect to be thought highly Ingenious; because nothing is
more nearly allied to Reason, the proper good of man, than Ingenie: whence that
of the Poet, Qui velit ingenio cedere rarus erit. Whereupon Claud. Donatus,
relating how one Filistus, a Favorite to Augustus, used to cast reproaches
upon Virgil, and carp at all he said, even in the Emperors presence; adds that
he did it, non ut verum dignosceret, quod Socrates facere consuevit; sed ut
eruditior videretur. But conscious of their own Vices, and studious to conceal
them; they endeavor by detraction to make it appear, that others also of
greater Estimation in the World, are tainted with the same or greater: as
infamous Women generally excuse their personal debaucheries, by incriminating
upon their whole Sex, calumniating the most chaste and virtuous, to palliate
their own dishonor. To this base end, they rejoice to expose the secret faults
of men any way renowned: which being no otherwise so easily effected as by the
Pen, they addict themselves mostly to Writing, among all Sects choosing that of
Critics, that so under the innocent liberty of judging, they may usurp the
most pernicious license of Censuring. In which inhumane practice they are sure
to make use of one, or more of these cunning artifices. Having found an
opportunity to mention some evil, whether true or only suspected, in the
Person, whose Merits they intend to disparage; either they industriously
pretermit what they know, and ought to conjoyn toward the excuse thereof; or
they pretend (forsooth) not to believe it, when yet they revive the memory of
it for no other end, but that it may be more firmly believed by others. Where
they meet with notorious failings, there they seem to extenuate, and as it were
to compensate them with slight Commendations, only to disguise their
detraction: as I have heard of a certain Courtier, who desirous to obstruct the
preferment of a poor Country Vicar, and yet not daring to oppose his Master,
King James his charitable inclination thereunto; said to the King, Your Majesty
may do well to give him a better Living, for though he has not much of
Learning, he is a very good Fellow, too hard for all his Parishioners at
Cudgels, and has a singular knack in catching Dotrells. Another of their
tricks is this; where they cannot blame the Fact it self, they suggest sinistre
Motives or inducements to the doing of it, and deprave the Counsel and
intention. To these may be added one more, no less detestable; where rumor
has dispersed various conjectures concerning one and the same action of some
Eminent Man, omitting or suppressing the more benign and favorable, they
select the worse and more derogatory, and largely comment thereupon; with
design to pervert the belief of their Hearers, or Readers, in deteriorem
partem. Thus drawing suspicions from the crooked rule of their own insincere
Mind and depraved inclinations; they labor to persuade themselves and others,
that there is among Men no such thing as true Virtue, but only a Shadow or
artificial representation of it: thereby vainly promising to themselves the
reputation of singular acuteness of judgment, and more than vulgar Wisdom. If
they can Eclipse the glory of Worthy Men, by fomenting obscure and uncertain
rumors concerning their Achievements, or by maliciously ascribing the same,
not to prudent Counsels and honorable Motives, but to Ambition, or Avarice, or
Hypocrisy, or Simulation; or Captation of popular favor, or any the like
sinistre aims: they then imagine they have raised to themselves a Monument of
Honor out of the ruins of theirs, whom they thus inhumanly calumniate.

ART. 2.
To this Classis may be referred all the ill-natured Disciples of Momus,
Derisores, Scoffers, such who, like Beetles, seem hatched in dung, or Vermin
bred out of Ulcers; perpetually feeding upon the frailties and imperfections of
Human nature. Nor will it be easy for Satyrists and Comical Poets, those
especially of the more licentious and railing sort, to exempt themselves from
the same Tribe. This Sir, perhaps You Will think to be a little severe: but it is
not my judgment alone; for among the ancient Comical Wits of Greece, You may
find more than one deservedly accused, and clearly convicted of uncivil
obtrectation. In one or two of the most famous I shall instance, for
justification of what I here say.

Cratinus, one of the Triumvirate, which first reformed Comedy from its
primitive rudeness, and began to purge the Stage from obscenity and personal
invectives; is nevertheless noted by the Great Scaliger (Poetices lib. 1. cap.
7.) to have been not only sharply censorious, but bitterly Malignant also, and
grossly inurbane: insomuch that at last it cost him his life. For, having in one
of his Comedies, entitled (...) (unduly ascribed to Eupolis, by Politian,
Miscellan. cap. 10.) too palpably inveighed against, and personated some of
eminent Quality, and exposed them to the derision of their Fellow-citizens, the
Athenians (described by Aelian (2. variar. Historiar. cap. 13.) to have been
natura invidiosi, and ad detractandum optimis quibusque proclives) he thereby
so far provoked them, that in revenge they bound him hand and foot, and cast
him into the Sea, in the manner of his Death alluding to the Title of his Play,
which signifies one drencht or dipped in water. An Example well worthy to be
remembered by his Sectators in this uncharitable Age.

ART. 3.
To this Cratinus I take liberty to conjoyn another of the same Triumvirate,
his Equal, the so much celebrated Aristophanes: and this I do, as well because
of his most inhuman persecution of the Divine Socrates, both in that Fable,
which he called (...), the Clouds, and which he invented only to render that
best and wisest of Mortals odious to the base Vulgar; as because he was one of
the Conspirators against his life: being thereto suborned partly by private
Hate (because Socrates frequented and applauded the Tragoedies of Euripides,
but would hardly be brought to honor with his presence any one of Aristophanes
his Satirical Comedies) partly by Anitus and Melitus, who not long after by
false accusations robbed the innocent Philosopher of his life, and the world of
its richest Treasure. Again, all the rest of Aristophanes Comedies are more or
less besprinkled with the venom of Detraction and Dicacity. It was not then
without just cause, that Plutarch, a most grave and judicious Philosopher, in
his Comparation of Aristophanes with Menander, among many other Criminations of
the former, gives him this Character: Aristophanis Sales amari sunt and asperi;
acrem and mordentem, adeoque exulcerantem vim habent. -- Nulli enim moderato
videtur is homo suum poema scripsisse, sed turpia and libidinosa
intemperantibus, maledica and acerba invidis atque malignis hominibus, etc. Nor
does that most Learned Man, Nicodemus Frischlinus, who wrote his Life, together
with a defense of him against the faults objected by Plutarch, vindicate him
from inhonest Acerbity and Malignity; otherwise than by transferring it upon
the licentiousness of the Times in which he wrote, and use of ancient Comedy:
his words are these, Equidem non inficior, rem ita esse, ut ille [Plutarchus]
dicit. Sed vitio temporum illorum potius quam Poetae hoc, quicquid
reprehensionis est, ascribi debet; and ita ferebat Comoediae veteris
consuetudo, ut omnia argumenta essent salsa, festiva, mordacia, maledica; nec
quicquam diceretur a quoquam, quod non ad perniciem alicujus accommodaretur.
Which You have the more reason to believe, because in Your travells You have
sometimes resided in a certain City, much more populous, under a better
Government, and more civilized than ever Athens was, yea more inhabited by such
as make profession of Christianity; in which notwithstanding that scandalous
License of exposing well-deserving and honorable Men upon the public Stage,
and dashing even Virtue it self out of Countenance, by the scurrilous
reproaches and mimical actions of Comedians, seems to be revived; so many Ages
after it has been condemned by Wise Princes, polite Nations, and by the best
of Modern Comical Poets themselves, as a thing not only inconsistent with
Humanity and Christian Charity, but pernicious to the public peace of
Societies, by raising discontent, animosities, quarrels and factions. But being
long since returned into your own native Country, You are here out of danger
of suffering by any such undecent license: our Theaters being regulated by
stricter Laws, and our Poets for the most part Gentlemen of liberal Education.

In this short reflection upon the Malevolence of some Modern Poets, I have
rather stood still a while, than gone out of my way: their Example serving no
less to justify my ascribing Wits immoderately Satirical to this Order,
whereof I am now treating, than those of the Grecians I have named. However,
that I may hasten to the end of our walk, especially now You are tired with the
uneveness of the way, and my dull company; I proceed.

This virulent Humor of disgracing the Merits of Others, seems to have
poisoned the Pens, not only of some Poets, but many also of other sorts of
Writers, who yet had not so specious a pretext for the liberty they therein
took; and who undertook by their Works to teach Men good Manners and Civility.
So that I might, without much exercise of my Memory, call to mind Examples
thereof among Authors of no obscure fame in all Arts and Sciences; not
excepting the graver, even Historians, Philosophers and Divines. But lest, by
making a Catalogue of such, I should bring my self also under the same
condemnation; I leave them to Your own Collection.

ART. 4.
Only I think it no offense briefly to observe, that even Tacitus himself,
esteemed the Prince of Latin Historians, and the Oracle of Politicians, has
been accused of Malignity, in not only censuring the Counsels and Affections of
all Great Men, whose most memorable Actions, together with their several
Successes and Events, he records in his Histories; but also in interpreting
the same according to his private Conjectures, and wresting them for the most
part to sinistre and ungenerous ends or intentions: thereby depriving those
Heroes of the best part of their Glory, Virtue; and leaving to Posterity both
Maxims and Precedents rather of Cunning and Violence, than of true Wisdom and
sound Policy. Whether this Venerable Author, to whom the World is in other
things so highly obliged, has deserved this accusation, or not; I leave to
Your judgment, who are sufficiently conversant in his Writings to direct mine.
In the mean time, I am obliged, in my own defense, to produce one of his
Accusers at least. Permit me, then, to referr You to that famous Critic, and
excellent Grammarian, Gaspar Scioppius, who in many parts of his Writings, but
more expressly in his Dissertation de Historici Officio, delivers a charge
against Tacitus of this among other faults. You Will object perhaps, that
Scioppius himself is generally condemned for the same Vice of Malignity: and I
think not without desert; but yet you cannot deny him to have been a man of
admirable acuteness in discerning the faults, errors and lapses of other
Writers; nor have I any where observed him to want reason for his
Animadversions. So that though I am always offended at his bitter invectives,
yet I confess, I am often pleased with the Sagacity of his Criticisms.

ART. 5.
Now if such Men, who had ground enough within the compass of their own great
Parts, whereon to build to themselves perpetual Monuments of Fame, were not
altogether free from this malignant Humor; what may we think of those poorer
Spirits, those Sons of Earth, who dream of erecting Obelisks to their own
obscure Names, only out of the ruins of others? and like the Soldier Crabb,
which Aldrovand calls (...), and Eremita, have no Mansion for their credit, but
that from whence they have extruded the right owner? These certainly have the
Cancer of Envy rooted in their very breast: it being an Aphorism of daily
Experience; that the more imperfect men are in themselves, the more prone they
are to defame and scoff at others. The Reason of which, because I know You to
be a great lover of the Philosophy of Monsieur Des Carts, Lib* de Passion.
part. 3* art. 179.
I shall give You in his Words; quia cupiunt caeteros omnes in pari secum gradu
videre; since they are unable to raise themselves to the height of their
Superiors in Virtue and honor, they endeavor, by calumny and derision, to
bring them down to the same ignoble level with themselves.

ART. 6.
This disease, therefore, of the Mind being almost Epidemick; and the Cause
thereof consisting in a certain Perversity of disposition, whereby the Patient
is strongly inclined to be inwardly vexed and troubled at the Virtues or
Felicities of others, and to do all he can to diminish their credit and
estimation: the Cure of it, I fear, is above the Art which I profess.

ART. 7.
By this, Sir, You plainly discern the great Difference betwixt Malignity, and
Festivity of Wit. For, as to this latter, which the Greeks name (...), the
French, Raillerie, and we Jesting; whereby a Man modestly and gently touches
upon the Errors, Indecencies, or Infirmities of another, without any suspicion
of hate or contempt of his Person, pleasantly representing them as only
ridiculous, not odious: I do not think it ought to be condemned as a vice of
the Mind, but allowed as a Quality consistent both with Honesty and good
Manners, as denoting the Alacrity of his Disposition, and Tranquillity of his
Spirit (both signs of Virtue) and often also the Dexterity of his Wit, in that
he is able to give a delightful and new color to the absurdity at which he
moves his company to smile. Nor is it disingenuous to laugh, when we hear the
Jests of others: nay some jests are so facete and abstracted from Persons, that
it would savor of too much dullness or Morosity, not to be affected with their
elegancy. But when we our selves break a jest, it is more decent to abstain
from Laughter, as well lest what we say seem to occurr to our imagination
unexpectedly, and by chance rather than choice; as lest we be thought to admire
the felicity of our own Wit, in finding out that allusion, which had escaped
the notice of others present: both which are obnoxious to dispraise; the
former, as a mark of slowness of Conception; the latter, as an evidence of
Self-love. To which may be added two other Reasons. First, whoever laughs at
his own jest spoils it, by rendering it less apt to surprise the Hearers. Then
again he puts all the company into jealousy and examination of themselves.
Besides all this (as Mr. Hobbes excellently observes, in his Book of Humane
Nature) it is Vainglory, and an argument of little worth, to think the
infirmity of another sufficient matter for his Triumph.

ART. 8.
But I have too long detained Your curious Eyes upon an object, in which You
can take no other delight, but what must redound to You from Your observation
of the vast disparity betwixt the Deformities of it, and the charming beauties
of Your own Candid and sweet Disposition. And being ashamed, that I have led
you all this while in a path so much trodden by others; I wish, the Province
You were pleased to assign me, had lain somewhat farther from the road, wherein
most Philosophers have traveled before me, that I might have entertained You
with remarks less obvious and common; whereas now I have been rather Your
Remembrancer than Guide. Having at length waited on You to the End of it, good
Manners oblige me, without desiring You to turn about and review the little
things observed as You passed along (for that were to disparage Your excellent
Memory, as well as to abuse Your Patience) to resign You up to Your own more
useful speculations, and the pursuit of that Generous Emulation, which incites
You to Studies worthy Your choice, native Endowments, the Eminency of Your
Condition, and the Place to which not Fortune, nor popular Favor, but Your own
great Merits have raised You in the grand Council of this Kingdom.

THE END.

