C2 R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION Prohibiting the Importation of EARTHEN WARE.
CHARLES R.

WHereas by the Statute made in the Third year of the Reign of King Edward the
Fourth, it is Enacted, That no Merchant Native born, Denizen or Stranger, nor
other person, shall bring, send or convey from beyond the Sea into the Realm of
England, or Dominion of Wales (among other things) any Painted Wares to be
Uttered and Sold within the said Realm or Dominion, by way of Merchandise, upon
pain to Forfeit the same, as often as they be found in the hands of any person
or persons to be Sold; The one half of the said Forfeiture to go to the use of
His Majesty, and the other half to him that shall first Seize the same. And
whereas Complaint has been made to His Majesty by several persons using the
Trade of Potters in and about the City of London, and Suburbs thereof; That
notwithstanding the said Statute, several persons, as well Subjects of this
Kingdom, as Foreigners, have presumed to Import, and daily do bring several
great quantities of Painted Earthen Wares privately into the Port of London,
and publicly into the Out-Ports (where there is little or no care taken to
prevent it) to the inevitable ruin of many hundred of His Majesty's poor
Subjects, who get their Subsistence and Livelihood by the said Trade, and to
the great hazard of losing the said Manufacture within this Realm; the said
Manufacture being made to as great perfection by His Majesty's said Subjects,
as by any Foreigners, and that for the most part with Materials of English
growth: His Majesty therefore (with the Advice of His Privy Council) out of His
Princely care of the Artificers of this His Kingdom (to whom He resolves to
give all good Encouragement) and for prevention of like mischiefs for the time
to come, has thought fit by this His Royal Proclamation, particularly to take
notice of the said Statute, and the Penalties therein mentioned, to the end
that all persons concerned, may not for the time to come pretend ignorance
thereof: And His Majesty does also (by like Advice) by this His Royal
Proclamation straightly Charge and Command all Merchants, as well Natives,
Denizens, as Strangers, and all other persons whatever, not to presume at any
time hereafter, to bring, send, or convey into the Kingdom of England, or
Dominion of Wales, from any part beyond the Seas, any Painted Earthen Wares, be
the same Painted with White, Blew, or any other Colors, by way of Merchandise,
or to be Sold, Bartered or Exchanged, contrary to the said Statute, upon the
Pain and Penalties therein expressed, and such others as can or may be
inflicted upon the Offenders, according to the utmost severity of Law and
Justice. And for that end His Majesty does hereby strictly Charge and Command
all Searchers, Waiters, and other Officers of His Customs whatsoever, to use
their utmost care and diligence to discover the Wares abovesaid which shall be
Imported contrary to the said Statute, and to Seize the same, to the end such
proceedings may be thereupon had, as shall be agreeable to Law, and as they
will answer the contrary at their utmost peril.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Fifteenth day of December 1676. in the
Eight and twentieth year of Our Reign.
LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers
to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1676.


