THE TWO CHARTERS Granted by King CHARLES IId. TO THE PROPRIETORS OF CAROLINA.

With the First and Last FUNDAMENTAL CONSTITUTIONS OF THAT COLONY.

LONDON: Printed, and are to be Sold by Richard Parker, at the Unicorn, under
the Piazza of the Royal Exchange.

THE FIRST CHARTER Granted by King CHARLES IId. TO THE PROPRIETORS OF CAROLINA.
CHARLES IId. by the Grace of God, etc.
To all to whom these Presents shall come Greeting.
Whereas, our right Trusty, and right well-beloved Cousins and Counselors,
Edward Earl of Clarendon, our high Chancellor of England, and George Duke of
Albemarle, Master of our Horse, and Captain General of all our Forces; our
right Trusty and well-beloved William Lord Craven, John Lord Berkeley, our
right Trusty, and well-beloved Counselor, Anthony Lord Ashley, Chancellor of
our Exchequer, Sir George Carterett Knight and Baronet, Vice-Chamberlain of our
Household, and our Trusty and well-beloved, Sir William Berkeley Knight, and Sir
John Colleton Knight and Baronet, being excited with a laudable and pious Zeal
for the propagation of the Christian Faith, and the Enlargement of our Empire
and Dominions, have humbly besought Leave of us by their Industry and Charge,
to transport and make an ample Colony of our Subjects, Natives of our Kingdom
of England, and elsewhere, within our Dominions, unto a certain Country,
hereafter described, in the Parts of America not yet cultivated or planted, and
only inhabited by some barbarous People, who have no Knowledge of Almighty God.

And whereas, the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle,
William Lord Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George
Carterett, Sir William Berkeley, Sir John Colleton, have humbly besought us to
give, grant and confirm unto them and their Heirs, the said Country, with
Privileges and Jurisdictions, requisite for the good Government and Safety
thereof. Know ye therefore, That We favoring the pious and noble Purpose of
the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle, William Lord
Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, Sir
William Berkeley and Sir John Colleton of our special Grace, certain Knowledge
and mere Motion, have given, granted and confirmed, and by this our present
Charter, for Us, our Heirs and Successors, do give, grant and confirm unto the
said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle, William Lord Craven,
John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, Sir William
Berkeley and Sir John Colleton, their Heirs, and Assigns, all that Territory or
Tract of Ground situate, lying, and being within our Dominions in America;
extending from the North End of the Island called Luck Island, which lies in
the Southern Virginia Seas, and within six and thirty Degrees of the Northern
Latitude; and to the West as far as the South Seas; and so Southerly, as far as
the River St. Matthias, which bordereth upon the Coast of Florida, and within
one and thirty Degrees of Northern Latitude, and so West in a direct Line, as
far as the South Seas aforesaid; together with all and singular Ports,
Harbors, Bays, Rivers, Isles and Islets, belonging unto the Country aforesaid.
And also, all the Soil, Lands, Fields, Woods, Mountains, Ferms, Lakes, Rivers,
Bays and Islets, situate* or being within the Bounds or Limits aforesaid, with
the fishing of all sorts of Fish, Whales, Sturgeons and all other Royal Fishes
in the Sea, Bays, Islets and Rivers, within the Premises, and the Fish therein
taken. And moreover, all Veins, Mines, Quarries, as well discovered as not
discovered, of Gold, Silver, Gems, precious Stones, and all other whatsoever;
be it of Stones, Metals or any other thing whatsoever, found, or to be found
within the Countries, Isles and Limits aforesaid.

And furthermore, the Patronage and Avowsons of all the Churches and Chapels,
which as Christian Religion shall increase within the Country, Isles, Islets
and Limits aforesaid, shall happen hereafter to be erected; together with
License and Power to build and found Churches, Chapels and Oratories in
convenient and fit Places within the said Bounds and Limits; and to cause them
to be dedicated and consecrated, according to the Ecclesiastical Laws of our
Kingdom of England; together with all and singular, the like, and as ample
Rights, Jurisdictions, Privileges, Prerogatives, Royalties, Liberties,
Immunities and Franchises, of what Kind soever, within the Countries, Isles,
Islets and Limits aforesaid.

To have, use, exercise and enjoy, and in as ample Manner as any Bishop of
Durham in our Kingdom of England, ever heretofore have held, used or enjoyed,
or of right ought, or could have, use or enjoy; and them the said Edward Earl
of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle, William Lord Craven, John Lord
Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, Sir William Berkeley and
Sir John Colleton, their Heirs and Assigns. We do by these Presents, for Us,
our Heirs and Successors, make, create and constitute the true and absolute
Lords and Proprietors of the Country aforesaid, and of all other the Premises,
saving always the Faith, Allegiance and Sovereign Dominion due to Us, our Heirs
and Successors, for the same; and saving also the Right, Title and Interest of
all and every our Subjects of the English Nation, which are now planted within
the Limits and Bounds aforesaid, (if any be:) to have, hold possess, and enjoy
the said Country, Isles, Islets, and all and singular, other the Premises to
them, the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle, William
Lord Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, Sir
VVilleam Berkeley and Sir John Colleton, their Heirs and Assigns for ever, to
be holden of Us, our Heirs and Successors, as of our Manor of East Greenwich,
in our County of Kent, in free and common Soccage, and not in Capite, nor by
Kn^ghts Service, yiedling and paying yearly to Us, our Heirs and Successors,
for the same, the Yearly Rent of Twenty Marks of Lawful Money of England, at
the Feast of All Saints, Yearly for Ever. The first Payment thereof, to begin,
and to be made on the Feast of All Saints, which shall be in the Year of our
Lord One Thousand Six Hundred Sixty and Five, and also the fourth Part of all
Gold and Silver Oar which within the limits aforesaid, shall from Time to Time,
happen to be found.

And that the Country thus by Us granted and described, may be dignifyed by us
with as large Titles and Privileges as any other Parts of our Dominions and
Terretories in that Region. KNOW Ye, That We of Our further Grace, certain
Knowledge, and mere Motion, have thought fit to Erect the same Tract of Ground,
Country and Island, into a Province, And out of the Fullness of Our Royal Power
and Prerogative; We do, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, Erect, Incorporate
and Ordain the same into a Province; and do call it the Province of CAROLINA:
And so, from henceforth, will have it called. And forasmuch as We have hereby
made, and ordained the aforesaid Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of
Albemarle, William Lord Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir
George Carterett, Sir William Berkeley and Sir John Colleton, their Heirs and
Assigns, the true Lords and Proprieters of all the Province aforesaid. KNOW ye
therefore moreover, that We reposing Especial Trust and Confidence in their
Fidelity, Wisdom, Justice and Provident Circumspection for Us, Our Heirs and
Successors, do Grant full and absolute Power by virtue of these Presents, to
them, the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle, William Lord
Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, Sir
William Berkeley and Sir John Colleton, and their Heirs for the good and happy
Government of the said Province, to Ordain, Make, Enact, and under their Seals
to publish any Laws whatsoever, either appertaining to the public State of the
said Province, or to the private Utility or particular Persons, according to
their best Discretion, of and with the Advice, Assent and Approbation of the
Freemen of the said Province, or of the greater Part of them, or of their
Delegates or Deputies, whom for enacting of the said Laws, when and as often as
need shall require, We will that the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Guke
of Albermarle, William Lord Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley,
Sir George Carterett, Sir William Berkeley and Sir John Colleton and their
Heirs, shall from Time to Time, Assemble in such Manner and Form as to them
shall seem best, and the same Laws duly to execute upon all People within the
said Province and Limits thereof, for the Time being, or which shall be
Constituted under the Power and Government of them, or, any of them, either
Sailing toward the said Province of Carolina, or, returning from thence
toward England, or any other of our, or Foreign Dominions, by Imposition of
Penalties, Imprisonment, or any other Punishment; yea, if it shall be needful,
and the Quality of the Offense requires it, by taking away Member and Life,
either by them the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle,
William Lord Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George
Carterett, Sir William Berkeley, and Sir John Colleton, and their Heirs, or by
them, or their Deputies, Lieutenants, Judges, Justices, Magistrates, Officers
and Ministers, to be ordained, or appointed according to the Tenor and true
Intention of these Presents; and likewise, to Appoint and Establish any Judges,
or Justices, Magistrates, or Officers whatsoever, within the said Province, at
Sea or Land, in such Manner and Form, as unto the said Edward Earl of
Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle, William Lord Craven, John Lord Berkeley,
Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, Sir William Berkely, and Sir John
Colleton, and their Heirs, shall seem most convenient. Also to remit, Release,
Pardon, and Abolish, (whether before Judgment, or after) all Crimes and
Offenses whatsoever against the said Laws, and to do all and every other Thing
and Things which unto the Complete Establishment of Justice unto Courts,
Sessions and Forms of Judicature, and Manners of Proceedings therein, do
belong, although in these Presents, express mention be not made thereof, and by
Judges, and by him, or them delegated to award, process, hold Pleas, and
determine in all the said Courts and Places of Judicature, all Actions, Suits
and Causes whatsoever, as well Criminal as Civil, real, mixed, personal, or of
any other Kind or Nature whatsoever; Which Laws, so as aforesaid to be
Published, Our Pleasure is, and We do Require, Enjoin and Command, shall be
Absolute, Firm and Available in Law, and that all the Liege People of Us, Our
Heirs and Successors within the said Province of Carolina, do observe and keep
the same inviolably, in those Parts, so far as they concern them, under the
Pains and Penalties therein expressed, or to be expressed; Provided
nevertheless, That the said Laws be Consonant to Reason, and as near as may be,
conveniently agreeable to the Laws and Customs of this our Kingdom of England.

And because such Assemblies of Freeholders cannot be so conveniently called,
as there may be Occasion to require the same; We do therefore by these
Presents, Give and Grant unto the said Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of
Albemarle, William Lord Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir
George Carterett, Sir William Berkeley, and Sir John Colleton, their Heirs and
Assigns, by themselves, or their Magistrates in that Behalf Lawfully
Authorized, full Power and Authority from Time to Time, to make and ordain fit
and wholesome Orders and Ordinances within the Province aforesaid, to be kept
and observed, as well for the keeping of the Peace, as for the better
Government of the People there abiding, and to Publish the same to all to whom
it may concern; which Ordinances We do by these Presents, straightly charge and
Command to be Inviolably observed, within the said Province, under the
Penalties therein expressed, so as such Ordinances be reasonable and not
repugnant, or contrary, but as near as may be, agreeable to the Laws and
Statutes of this our Kingdom of England, and so as the same Ordinances do not
extend to the Binding, Charging, or Taking away of the Right or Interest of any
Person or Persons, in their Freehold Goods, or Chattels whatsoever.

And to the end the said Province may be the more happily increased by the
Multitude of People resorting thither, and may likewise be the more strongly
Defended from the Incursions of Savages, and other Enemies, Pirates and
Robbers; Therefore, We for Us, Our Heirs and Successors do Give and Grant by
these Presents, Power, License and Liberty unto all the Liege People of Us, Our
Heirs and Successors in our Kingdom of England, or elsewhere within any other
our Dominions, Islands, Colonies, or Plantations (excepting those who shall be
especially forbidden) to Transport themselves and Families unto the said
Province, with convenient Shipping, and ^itting Provisions and there to settle
themselves, dwell and inhabit, any Law, Statute, Act, Ordinance, or other
thing, to the contrary in any wise, notwithstanding: And We will also, and of
Our more special Grace for Us, Our Heirs and Successors do straightly Enjoin,
Ordain, Constitute and Command that the said Province of Carolina shall be of
our Allegiance, and that all and singular the Subjects, and Liege People of Us,
Our Heirs and Successors Transported, or to be Transported into the said
Province, and the Children of them, and of such as shall Descend from them,
there Born, or hereafter to be Born, be, and shall be, Denizons and Leiges of
Us, Our Heirs and Successors of this Our Kingdom of England, and be in all
Things Held, Treated and Reputed as the Liege Faithful People of Us, Our Heirs
and Successors, Born within this Our said Kingdom, or any other of Our
Dominions, and may Inherit, or otherwise Purchase and Receive, Take, Hold, Buy
and Possess any Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments within the same Places, and
them may Occupy Possess and Enjoy* Give, Sell, Aliene and Bequeath; as
likewise, all Liberties, Franchises and Privileges of this Our Kingdom of
England and of other our Dominions aforesaid, and may freely and quietly have,
possess and enjoy as our Liege People born within the same, without the least
Molestation, Vexation, Trouble or Grievance of Us, our Heirs and Successors,
any Statute, Act, Ordinance or Provision to the contrary notwithstanding.

And furthermore That our Subjects of this our said Kingdom of England and
other our Dominions, may be the rather encouraged to undertake this Expedition
with ready and cheerful Minds; Know ye, That we of our special Grace, certain
Knowledge and mere Motion, do give and grant, by virtue of these Presents, as
well to the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle, William
Lord Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, Sir
William Berkeley and Sir John Colleton and their Heirs, as unto all others as
shall, from Time to Time, repair unto the said Province, with a Purpose to
inhabit there, or to trade with the Natives of the said Province, full Liberty
and License to lade and freight in any Ports whatsoever, of Us, our Heirs and
Successors, and into the said Province of Carolina, by them, their Servants and
Assigns, to transport all and singular their Goods, Wares and Merchandises; as
likewise, all sorts of Grain whatsoever, and any other Things whatsoever,
necessary for the Food and Clothing, not prohibited by the Laws and Statutes
of our Kingdoms and Dominions, to be carried out of the same without any Let
or Molestation of us, our Heirs and Successors, or of any other of our Officers
or Ministers whatsoever, saving also to Us, our Heirs and Successors, the
Customs, and other Dutys and Payments, due for the said Wares and Merchandises,
according to the several Rates of the Places from whence the same shall be
transported. We will also, and by these Presents, for Us, our Heirs and
Successors, do give and grant License by this our Charter, unto the said Edward
Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle, William Lord Craven, John Lord
Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, Sir William Berkeley, and
Sir John Colleton, their Heirs and Assigns, and to all the Inhabitants and
Dwellers in the Province aforesaid, both present and to come, full Power and
absolute Authority to import or unlade by themselves, or their Servants,
Factors or Assigns, all Merchandises and Goods whatsoever, that shall arise of
the Fruits and Commodities of the said Province, either by Land or by Sea, into
any the Ports of Us, our Heirs and Successors, in our Kingdom of England.
Scotland or Ireland, or otherwise to dispose of the said Goods in the said
Ports; and if need be, within one Year next after the unlading, to lade the
said Merchandises and Goods again into the same, or other Ships, and to export
the same into any other Countries, either of our Dominions, or foreign, being
in Amity with Us, our Heirs and Successors, so as they pay such Customs,
Subsidies and other Dutys for the same to Us, our Heirs and Successors, as the
rest of our Subjects of this our Kingdom, for the Time being, shall be bound to
pay, beyond which, we will not that the Inhabitants of the said Province of
Carolina shall be any way charged.

Provided nevertheless, and our Will and Pleasure is, and We have further for
the Considerations aforesaid, of our more especial Grace, certain Knowledge and
mere Motion, given and granted, and by these Presents, for Us, our Heirs and
Successors, do give and grant unto the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George
Duke of Albemarle, William Lord Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord
Ashley, Sir George Carterett, Sir William Berkeley and Sir John Colleton,
their Heirs and Assigns, full and free License, Liberty and Authority at any
Time, or Times, from and after the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel, which
shall be in the Year of our Lord Christ, One Thousand Six Hundred, Sixty and
Seven; as well to import, and bring into any of our Dominions, from the said
Province of Carolina, or any Part thereof, the several Goods and Commodities
herein after mentioned; that is to say, Silks, Wines, Currants, Raisons,
Capers, Wax, Almonds, Oil and Olives, without paying or answering to us, our
Heirs or Successors, any Custom, Impost or other Duty, for, or in respect
thereof, for and during the Term and Space of Seven Years, to commence and be
accounted from and after the first Importation of Four Tons of any the said
Goods in any one Bottom Ship or Vessel, from the said Province, into any of our
Dominions; as also, to export and carry out of any of our Dominions into the
said Province of Carolina, Custom-free, all sorts of Tools which shall be
useful or necessary for the Planters there, in the Accommodation and Improvement
of the Premises, any Thing before in these Presents contained, or any Law, Act,
Statute prohibition, or other Matter or Thing heretofore had, made, enacted or
provided or hereafter to be had, made, Enacted, or provided to the contrary in
any wise notwithstanding.

And furthermore, of our more ample and especial Grace, certain Knowledge and
mere Motion, We do for Us, our Heirs and Successors, grant unto the said Edward
Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle, William Lord Craven, John Lord
Berkley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, Sir William Berkeley and
Sir John Colleton, their Heirs and Assigns, full and absolute Power and
Authority to make, erect and constitute within the said Province of Carolina,
and the Isles and Islets aforesaid, such and so many Seaports, Harbors,
Creeks and other Places, for discharge and unlading of Goods and Merchandises
out of Ships, Boats and other Vessels, and for lading of them in such and so
many Places, and with such Jurisdictions, Privileges and Franchises, unto the
said Ports belonging, as to them shall seem most expedient; and that all and
singular, the Ships, Boats and other Vessels, which shall come for
Merchandises, and trade into the said Province, or shall depart out of the
same, shall be laden and unladen at such Ports only as shall be erected and
constituted by the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle,
William Lord Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George
Carterett, Sir William Berkeley and Sir John Colleton, their Heirs and Assigns,
and not elsewhere any Use, Custom, or any thing to the contrary in any wise,
notwithstanding.

And We do furthermore will, appoint and ordain by these Presents, for Us, our
Heirs and Successors, do grant unto the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George
Duke of Albemarle, William Lord Craven, John Lord Berkely, Anthony Lord Ashley,
Sir George Carterett, Sir William Berkeley and Sir John Colleton, their Heirs
and Assigns, That they the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of
Albemarle, William Lord Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir
George Carterett, Sir William Berkeley and Sir John Colleton, their Heirs and
Assigns, may from Time to Time, for ever, have and enjoy the Customs and
Subsidies in the Ports, Harbors, Creeks and other Places within the Province
aforesaid, payable for Goods, Merchandises and Wares there laded, or to be
laded or unladed, the said Customs to be reasonably assessed upon any Occasion
by themselves, and by and with the Consent of the free People there, or the
greater Part of them, as aforesaid; to whom We give Power by these Presents,
for Us, our Heirs and Successors, upon just Cause and in a due Proportion to
assess and impose the same.

And further, of our especial Grace, certain Knowledge and mere Motion, we have
given, granted and confirmed, and by these Presents, for Us, our Heirs and
Successors, do give, grant and confirm unto the said Edward Earl of Clarendon,
George Duke of Albemarle, William Lord Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony
Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, Sir William Berkeley and Sir John Colleton,
their Heirs and Assigns, full and absolute License, Power and Authority, that
the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle, William Lord
Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett. Sir
William Berkley and Sir John Colleton, their Heirs and Assigns, from Time to
Time, hereafter for ever, at his and their Will and Pleasure, may assign,
alien, grant, demise or enfeoft the Premises or any Parts or Parcells thereof
to him or them, that shall be willing to purchase the same; and to such Person
or Persons, as they shall think fit, to have, and to hold to them the said
Person or Persons, their Heirs and Assigns in Fee simple or Fee Tail, or for
Term of Life or Lives, or Years to be held of them, the said Edward Earl of
Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle, William Lord Craven, John Lord Berkeley,
Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, Sir William Berkeley, and Sir John
Colleton, their Heirs and Assigns, by such Rents, Services and Customs, as
shall seem meet to the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle,
William Lord Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George
Carterett, Sir William Berkeley and Sir John Colleton, their Heirs and Assigns,
and not immediately of Us, our Heirs and Successors: And to the same Person and
Persons, and to all and every of them, We do give and grant by these Presents,
for Us, our Heirs and Successors, License, Authority and Power, that such
Person or Persons, may have or take the Premises, or any Parcel thereof, of the
said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle, William Lord Craven,
John Lord Berkely, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, Sir William
Berkeley and Sir John Colleton, their Heirs and Assigns, and the same to hold
to themselves, their Heirs or Assigns, in what Estate of Inheritance
whatsoever, in Fee simple, or in Fee Tail, or otherwise, as to them and the
said Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle, William Lord Craven, John
Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, Sir William Berkeley
and Sir John Colleton, their Heirs and Assigns, shall seem expedient. The
Statute made in the Parliament of Edward, Son of King Henry, heretofore King of
England, our Predecessor, commonly called, The Statute of Quia Emptores Terrae;
or any other Satute, Act, Ordinance, Use, Law, Custom, or any other Matter,
Cause or Thing heretofore published or provided to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

And because many Persons born or inhabiting in the said Province, for their
Deserts and Services may expect, and be capable of Marks of Honor and Favor,
which in respect of the great Distance cannot conveniently be conferred by Us;
our Will and Pleasure therefore is, and We do by these Presents, give and grant
unto the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle, Willliam Lord
Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, Sir
William Berkeley and Sir John Colleton, their Heirs and Assigns, full Power and
Authority to give and conferr unto, and upon such of the Inhabitants of the
said Province, as they shall think, do, or shall merit the same, such Marks or
Favor, and Titles of Honor, as they shall think fit, so as these Titles of
Honor be (...) conferred upon any the (...) of this Our Kingdom of (...).

And further also, We do by these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors,
give and Grant, License to them the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke
of Albemarle, William Lord Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir
George Carterett, Sir William Berkeley and Sir John Colleton, their Heirs and
Assigns, full Power, Liberty and License to Erect, Raise and Build within the
said Province and Places aforesaid, or any Part or Parts thereof, such and so
many Forts, Fortresses, Castles, Cities, Borroughs, Towns, Villages and other
Fortifications whatsoever, and the same or any of them to Fortify and Furnish
with Ordinance, Powder, Shot, Armory and all other Weapons, Ammunition,
Habiliments of War, both Offensive and Defensive, as shall be thought fit and
convenient for the Safety and Welfare of the said Province, and Places, or any
Part thereof, and the same, or any of them, from Time to Time, as Occasion
shall require, to Dismantle, Disfurnish, Demolish and pull down, and also to
Place, Constitute and Appoint in, or over all, or any of the said Castles,
Forts, Fortifications, Cities, Towns and Places aforesaid, Governors, Deputy
Governors, Magistrates, Sheriffs, and other Officers, Civil and Military, as
to them shall seem meet, and to the said Cities, Buroughs, Towns, Villages, or
any other Place, or Places, within the said Province, to Grant Letters or
Charters of Incorporation, with all Liberties, Franchises, and Privileges
requisite, and usual, or to, or within any Corporations within this Our Kingdom
of England granted, or belonging; and in the same Cities, Buroughs, Towns and
other Places, to Constitute, Erect and Appoint such, and so many Markets, Marts
and Fairs, as shall in that Behalf be thought fit and necessary; and further
also, to Erect and Make in the Province aforesaid, or any Part thereof, so many
Manors as to them shall seem meet and convenient, and in every of the same
Manors to have and to hold a Court Baron with all things whatsoever, which to
a Court Baron do belong, and to have and to hold Views of Franck Pledge and
Court Leet for the Conservation of the Peace, and better Government of those
Parts, within such Limits, Jurisdictions and Precincts, as by the said Edward
Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle, William Lord Craven, John Lord
Berkely, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, Sir William Berkeley and
Sir John Colleton, or their Heirs, shall be appointed for that purpose, with
all things whatsoever, which to a Court Leet, or view of Franck Pledge; do
belong, the said Court to be holden by Stewards, to be Deputed and Authorized
by the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle, William Lord
Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, Sir
William Berkeley and Sir John Colleton, or their Heirs, or by the Lords of
other Manors and Leets for the Time being, when the same shall be Erected.

And because that in so remote a Country, and Situate among so many Barbarous
Nations, and the Invasions as well of Salvages as other Enemies; Pirates and
Robbers may probably be feared; Therefore We have Given, and for Us, Our Heirs
and Successors do give Power by these Presents, unto the said Edward Earl of
Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle, William Lord Craven, John Lord Berkeley,
Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, Sir William Berkeley and Sir John
Colleton, their Heirs and Assigns by themselves, or their Captains, or other
their Officers to Levy, Muster and Train all sorts of Men, of what Condition,
or wheresoever Born in the said Province, for the Time being; and to make War
and pursue the Enemies aforesaid, as well by Sea, as by Land; yea, even within
the Limits of the said Province, and by God's Assistance, to Vanquish and Take
them, and being Taken, to put them to Death by the Law of War, or to save them
at their Pleasure; and to do all and every other thing, which unto the Charge
and Office of a Captain General of an Army, belongs, or has accustomed to
belong, as fully and freely as any Captain General of an Army has ever had the
same.

Also, Our Will and Pleasure is, and by this Our Charter, we give unto the said
Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle, William Lord Craven, John
Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir Gorge Carterett, Sir William Berkeley
and Sir John Colleton, their Heirs and Assigns, full Power, Liberty and
Authority in Case of Rebellion, Tumult, or Sedition (if any should happen)
which God forbid either upon the Land within the Province aforesaid or upon the
main Sea, in making a Voyage thither, or returning from thence, by him and
themselves, their Captains, Deputies or Officers, to be authorized under his or
their Seals, for that purpose: To whom also for Us, our Heirs and Successors,
We do give and grant by these Presents, full Power and Authority to exercise
Martial Law against mutinous and seditious Persons of those Parts, such as
shall refuse to submit themselves to their Government, or shall refuse to serve
in the Wars, or shall fly to the Enemy, or forsake their Colors or Ensigns, or
be Loyterers or Straglers, or otherwise howsoever offending against Law, Custom
or Discipline Military, as freely, and in as ample Manner and Form as any
Captain General of an Army, by virtue of his Office, might, or has accustomed
to use the same.

And Our further Pleasure is, and by these Presents, for Us, our Heirs and
Successors, We do grant unto the said Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of
Albemarle, William Lord Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir
George Carterett, Sir William Berkeley and Sir John Colleton, their Heirs and
Assigns, and to the Tenants and Inhabitants of the said Province of Carolina,
both present and to come, and to every of them, that the said Province and the
Tennants and Inhabitants thereof, shall not from henceforth, be held or reputed
a Member, or Part of any Collony what^oever, in America or elsewhere, now
transported or made, or hereafter to be transported or made; nor shall be
depending on, or subject to their Government in any Thing, but be absolutely
separated and divided from the same: And our Pleasure is, by these Presents,
That they be separated, and that they be subject immediately to our Crown of
England, as depending thereof for ever. And that the Inhabitants of the said
Province, nor any of them, shall at any Time hereafter, be compelled or
compellable, or be any ways subject, or liable to appear or answer to any
Matter, Suit, Cause, or Plaint whatsoever, out of the Province aforesaid, in
any other of our Islands, Collonies or Dominions in America or elsewhere, other
than in our Realm of England and Dominion of Wales.

And because it may happen, That some of the People and Inhabitants of the said
Province, cannot in their private Opinions conform to the Public Exercise of
Religion according to the Liturgy, Form and Ceremonies of the Church of
England, or take and subscribe the Oaths and Articles made and established in
that Behalf* And for that the same, by reason of the remote Distances of these
placees will we hope, be no Breach of the Unity, and Uniformity, Established in
this Nation. Our Will and Pleasure therefore is, and We do by these Presents
for Us, Our Heirs, and Successors, Give and Grant unto the said Edward Earl of
Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle, William Lord Craven, John Lord Berkeley,
Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, Sir William Berkeley, and Sir John
Colleton, their Heirs and Assigns, full and free License, Liberty and
Authority, by such Legal Ways and Means as they shall think fit to Give and
Grant unto such Person and Persons, Inhabiting, and being within the said
Province, or any Part thereof, who really in their Judgments, and for
Conscience sake, cannot, or shall not Conform to the said Liturgy and
Ceremonies, and take and subscribe the Oaths and Articles aforesaid, or any of
them, such Indulgences and Dispensations, in that Behalf, for, and during such
Time and Times, and with such Limitations and Restrictions as they the said
Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle, William Lord Craven, John
Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, Sir William Berkely
and Sir John Colleton, their Heirs, or Assigns, shall in their Discretion think
fit, and reasonable, and with this Express Proviso, and Limitation also, that
such Person and Proviso, to whom such Indulgencies and Dispensations shall be
Granted as aforesaid, do, and shall from Time to Time, Declare, and continue
all Fidelity, Loyalty and Obedience to Us, Our Heirs and Successors, and be
Subject and Obedient to all other the Laws, Ordinances and Constitutions of the
said Province, in all Matters whatsoever, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, and
do not in any wise Disturb the Peace and Safety thereof, or Scandalize, or
Reproach the said Liturgy, Forms and Ceremonies, or any Thing relating
thereunto, or any Person or Persons whatsoever, for, or in respect of his, or
their Use, or Exercise thereof, or his, or their Obedience, or Conformity
thereunto.

And in Case it shall happen, That any Doubts or Questions should arise
concerning the True Sense and Understanding of any Word, Clause or Sentence,
contained in this Our Present Charter, We will Ordain and Command, that at all
Times, and in all Things, such Interpretation be made thereof, and allowed in
all and every of Our Courts whatsoever, as Lawfully may be Adjudged most
Advantageous and Favorable to the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke
of Albemarle, William Lord Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir
George Carterett, Sir William Berkeley and Sir John Colleton, their Heirs and
Assigns, although Express Mention be not made in these Presents, of the True
Yearly Value and Certainty of the Premises, or any part thereof, or of any
other Gifts and Grants made by Us, our Ancestors, or Predecessors, to them the
said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle, William Lord Craven,
John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, Sir William
Berkeley and Sir John Colleton, or any other Person, or Persons whatsoever, or
any Statute, Act, Ordinance, Provision, Proclamation, or Restraint heretofore
Had, Made, Published, Ordained, or Provided, or any other Thing, Cause, or
Matter whatsoever, to the contrary thereof, in any Wise Notwithstanding.

In Witness, etc. Witness the KING, at Westminster, the Four and Twentieth Day
of March, in the Fifteenth Year of Our Reign.

Per ipsum Regem.

THE SECOND CHARTER Granted by King CHARLES IId. TO THE PROPRIETORS OF CAROLINA.
CHARLES IId. by the Grace of God, etc.

Whereas, By Our Letters Patents, bearing Date the Four and Twentieth Day of
March; in the Fifteenth Year of Our Reign, We were Graciously Pleased to Grant
unto Our right Trusty, and right Well-beloved Cousin and Counselor Edward Earl
of Clarendon, our high Chancellor of England, Our right Trusty, and Right
Entirely Beloved Cousin and Counselor, George Duke of Albemarle, Master of our
Horse, Our right Trusty, and Well Beloved William, now Earl of Craven, our
right Trusty and well-beloved Counselor, John Lord Berkeley, our right Trusty,
and well-beloved Counselor, Anthony Lord Ashley, Chancellor of our Exchequer,
our right Trusty and Well-beloved Counselor Sir George Carterett Knight and
Baronet, Vice-Chamberlain of our Household, Our right Trusty and well-beloved,
Sir John Colleton Knight and Baronet, and Sir William Berkeley Knight, all that
Province, Territotory, or Tract of Ground, called Carolina, situate, lying and
being within our Dominions of America, Extending from the North End of the
Island, called Luke Island, which lies in the Southern Virginia Seas, and
within six and thirty Degrees of the Northern Latitude; and to the West, as far
as the South Seas; and so respectively as far as the River of Mathias, which
bordereth upon the Coast of Florida, and within One and Thirty Degrees of the
Northern Latitude, and so West in a direct Line, as far as the South Seas
aforesaid.

Now, Know Ye, that We, at the Humble Request of the said Grantees in the
aforesaid Letters, Patents named, and as a further Mark of Our especial Favor
toward them, We are Graciously Pleased to Enlarge Our said Grant unto them,
according to the Bounds and Limits hereafter Specifyed, and in Favor to the
Pious and Noble Purpose of the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of
Albemarle, William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir
George Carterett, Sir John Colleton* and Sir William Berkeley, their Heirs and
Assigns, all that Province, Territory, or Tract of Ground, Situate, lying, and
being within Our Dominions of America aforesaid, extending North and Eastward,
as far as the North End of Carahtuke River, or Gulet, upon a straight Westerly
Line, to Wyonoake Creek, which lies within, or about the Degrees of Thirty Six,
and Thirty Minutes Northern Latitude, and so West, in a direct Line as far as
the South Seas; and South and Westward, as far as the Degrees of Twenty Nine
Inclusive Northern Latitude, and so West in a direct Line, as far as the South
Seas; together with all and singular Ports, Harbors, Bays, Rivers and Islets,
belonging unto the Province or Territory, aforesaid. And also, all the Soil,
Lands, Fields, Woods, Mountains, Ferms, Lakes, Rivers, Bays and Islets,
situate, or being within the Bounds, or Limits, last before mentioned; with
the Fishing of all sorts of Fish, Whales, Sturgeons, and all other Royal Fishes
in the Sea, Bays, Islets and Rivers, within the Premises, and the Fish therein
taken; together with the Royalty of the Sea, upon the Coast within the Limits
aforesaid. And moreover* all Veins, Mines and Quarries, as well discovered as
not discovered, of Gold, Silver, Gems and Precious Stones, and all other
whatsoever; be it of Stones, Metal, or any other thing found, or to be found
within the Province, Territory, Islets and Limits aforesaid.

And furthermore, the Patronage and Avowsons of all the Churches and Chapels,
which as Christian Religion shall increase within the Province, Territory,
Isles and Limits aforesaid, shall happen hereafter to be erected; together with
License and Power to build and found Churches, Chapels and Oratories in
convenient and fit places, within the said Bounds and Limits; and to cause them
to be Dedicated and Consecrated, according to the Ecclesiastical Laws of Our
Kingdom of England; together with all and singular, the like, and as ample
Rights, Jurisdictions, Privileges, Prerogatives, Royalties, Liberties,
Immunities and Franchises, of what Kind soever, within the Territory, Isles,
Islets and Limits aforesaid. To have, hold, use, exercise and enjoy the same as
amply, fully, and in as ample Manner as any Bishop of Durham in Our Kingdom of
England, ever heretofore had, held, used, or enjoyed, or of right ought, or
could have, use, or enjoy; and them the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George
Duke of Albemarle, William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord
Ashley, Sir George Carterett, Sir John Colleton, and Sir William Berkeley,
their Heirs and Assigns; We do by these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs and
Successors, make, create and constitute the true and absolute Lords and
Proprietors of the said Province, or Territory, and of all other the Premises,
saving always the Faith, Allegiance and Sovereign Dominion due to Us, Our Heirs
and Successors, for the same; to have, hold, possess and enjoy the said
Province, Territory, Islets, and all and singular, other the Premises, to them
the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle, William Earl of
Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, Sir John
Colleton and Sir William Berkeley, their Heirs and Assigns, for Ever, to be
holden of Us, Our Heirs and Successors, as of Our Manor of East Greenwich, in
Kent, in free and common Soccage, and not in Capite, or by Knights Service,
yiedling and paying yearly to Us, Our Heirs and Successors, for the same the
fourth Part of all Goods and Silver Oar, which within the Limits hereby
Granted, shall from Time to Time, happen to be found, over and besides the
Yearly Rent of Twenty Marks and the fourth part of the Gold and Silver Oar, in
and by the said recited Letters Patents reserved and payable.

And that the Province, or Territory hereby granted and described, may be
dignifyed with as large Titles and Privileges as any other Parts of our
Dominions and Territories in that Region. Know ye, That We, of our further
Grace, certain Knowledge and mere Motion, have thought fit to annex the same
Tract of Ground and Territory, unto the same Province of Carolina; and out of
the Fullness of our Royal Power and Prerogative, We do for Us, our Heirs and
Successors, annex and unite the same to the said Province of Carolina. And
forasmuch as We have made and ordained, the aforesaid Edward Earl of Clarendon,
George Duke of Albemarle, William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony
Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, Sir John Colleton and Sir William Berkeley,
their Heirs and Assigns, the true Lords and Proprietors of all the Province or
Territory aforesaid. Know ye therefore moreover, That We reposing especial
Trust and Confidence in their Fidelity, Wisdom, Justice and provident
Circumspection for Us, our Heirs and Successors, do grant full and absolute
Power, by virtue of these Presents, to them the said Edward Earl of Clarendon,
George Duke of Albemarle, William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony
Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, Sir John Colleton and Sir William Berkeley*
and their Heirs and Assigns, for the good and happy Government of the said
whole Province or Territory, full Power and Authority to erect, constitute, and
make several Counties, Baronies, and Colonies, of and within the said
Provinces, Territories, Lands and Hereditaments, in and by the said recited
Letter, Patents, and these Presents, granted, or mentioned to be granted, as
aforesaid, with several and distinct Jurisdictions, Powers, Liberties and
Privileges. And also, to ordain, make and enact, and under their Seals, to
publish any Laws and Constitutions whatsoever, either appertaining to the
public State of the said whole Provi^^^ or Territory, or of any distinct or
particular County, Barony or Colony, of or within the same, or to the private
Utility of particular Persons, according to their best Discretion, by and with
the Advice, Assent and Approbation of the Freemen of the said Province or
Territory, or of the Freemen of the County, Barony or Colony, for which such
Law or Constitution shall be made, or the greater Part of them, or of their
Delegates or Deputies, whom for enacting of the said Laws, when, and as often
as need shall require, We will that the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George
Duke of Albemarle, William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord
Ashley, Sir George Carterett, Sir John Colleton and Sir William Berkeley, and
their Heirs or Assigns, shall from Time to Time, assemble in such Manner and
Form as to them shall seem best: And the same Laws duly to execute upon all
People within and the said Province or Territory, County, Barony or Colony the
Limits thereof, for the Time being, which shall be constituted under the Power
and Government of them, or any of them, either sailing toward the said
Province or Territory of Carolina, or returning from thence toward England, or
any other of our, or foreign Dominions, by Imposition of Penalties,
Imprisonment, or any other Punishment: Yea, if it shall be needful, and the
Quality of the Offense require it, by taking away Member and Life, either by
them, the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle, William Earl
of Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, Sir
John Colleton and Sir William Berkeley and their Heirs, or by them or their
Deputies, Lieutenants, Judges, Justices, Magistrates, or Officers whatsoever,
as well within the said Province as at Sea, in such Manner and Form as unto the
said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle, William Earl of
Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, Sir John
Colleton and Sir William Berkeley, and their Heirs, shall seem most convenient:
Also, to remit, release, pardon and abolish, whether before Judgment or after,
all Crimes and Offenses whatsoever, against the said Laws; and to do all and
every other Thing and Things, which unto the ^ompleat Establishment of Justice,
unto ^o^^ts, Sessions and Forms of Judicature, and Manners of proceedings
therein, do bel^^g, al^^^ in these Presents, express (...) made thereof, and by
Judges, to (...) process, ^^^d Pleas, and determine (...) Judicature all
Actions* Suits and Causes whatsoever, as well criminal as civil, real, mixed,
personal, or of any other Kind or Nature Whatsoever: Which Laws so as
aforesaid, to be published. Our Pleasure is, and We do enjoin, require and
command, shall be absolutely firm and available in Law; and that all the Liege
People of Us, our Heirs and Successors, within the said Province or Territory,
do observe and keep the same inviolably in those Parts, so far as they concern
them, under the Pains and Penalties therein expressed, or to be expressed;
provided nevertheless, that the said Laws be consonant to Reason, and as near
as may be conveniently, agreeeble to the Laws and Customs of this our Realm of
England.

And because such Assemblies of Freeholders cannot be so suddenly called as
there may be Occasion to require the same. We do therefore by these Presents,
give and grant unto the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of
Albemarle, William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir
George Carterett, Sir John Colleton and Sir William Berkeley, their Heirs and
Assigns, by themselves or their Magistrates in that Behalf, lawfully
authorized, full Power and Authority from Time to Time, to make and ordain fit
and wholesome Orders and Ordinances, within the Province or Territory aforesaid,
or any County, Barony or Province, of or within the same, to be kept and
observed, as well for the keeping of the Peace, as for the better Government of
the People there abiding, and to publish the same to all to whom it may
concern: Which Ordinances we do, by these Presents, straightly charge and
command to be inviolably observed within the same Province, Countys,
Territorys, Baronys and Provinces, under the Penalties therein expressed; so as
such Ordinances be reasonable and not repugnant or contrary, but as near as may
be agreeable to the Laws and Statutes of this our Kingdom of England; and so as
the same Ordinances do not extend to the binding, charging or taking away of
the Right or Interest of any Person or Persons, in their freehold, Goods or
Chattels, whatsoever.

And to the end the said Province or Territory, may be the more happily
increased by the Multitude of People resorting thither, and may likewise be the
more strongly defended from the Incursions of Savages and other Enemies,
Pirates and Robbers.

Therefore, We for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, do give and grant by these
Presents, Power, License and Liberty unto all the Liege People of Us, our Heirs
and Successors in our Kingdom of England, or elsewhere, within any other our
Dominions, Islands Colonies or Plantations; (excepting those who shall be
especially forbidden) to transport themselves and Families into the said
Province or Territory, with convenient Shipping, and fitting Provisions; and
there to settle themselves, dwell and inhabit, any Law, Act, Statute,
Ordinance, or other Thing to the contrary in any wise, notwithstanding.

And we will also, and of Our especial Grace, for Us, our Heirs and Successors,
do straightly enjoin, ordain, constitute and command, That the said Province or
Territory, shall be of our Allegiance; and that all and singular, the Subjects
and Liege People of Us, our Heirs and Successors, transported, or to be
transported into the said Province, and the Children of them, and such as shall
descend from them, there born, or hereafter to be born, be, and shall be
Denizens and Leiges of Us, our Heirs and Successors of this our Kingdom of
England, and be in all Things, held, treated and reputed as the Liege faithful
People of Us, our Heirs and Successors, born within this our said Kingdom, or
any other of our Dominions; and may inherit, or otherwise purchase and receive,
take, hold, buy and possess any Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, within the
said Places, and them may occupy, and enjoy, sell, alien and bequeath; as
likewise, all Liberties, Franchises and Privileges of this our Kingdom, and of
other our Dominions aforesaid, may freely and quietly have, possess and enjoy,
as our Liege People born within the same, without the Molestation, Vexation,
Trouble or Grievance of Us, Our Heirs and Successors, any Act, Statute,
Ordinance, Provision to the contrary, notwithstanding.

And furthermore, That Our Subjects of this Our said Kingdom of England, and
other our Dominions, may be the rather encouraged to undertake this Expedition,
with ready and cheerful Means. Know Ye, That We, of Our especial Grace, certain
Knowledge and mere Motion, do give and grant, by virtue of these Presents, as
well to the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle, William
Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett,
Sir John Colleton and Sir William Berkeley and their Heirs, as unto all others
as shall, from Time to Time, repair unto the said Province or Territory, with a
Purpose to in habit there, or to trade with the Natives thereof* Full Liberty
and License to lade and freight in every Port whatsoever, of Us, our Heirs and
Successors; and into the said Province of Carolina, by them, their Servants and
Assigns, to transport all and singular, their Goods, Wares and Merchandises; as
likewise, all sort of Grain whatsoever, and any other Thing whatsoever,
necessary for their Food and Clothing, not prohibited by the Laws and Statutes
of our Kingdom and Dominions, to be carried out of the same, without any Let
or Molestation of Us, our Heirs and Successors, or of any other our Officers or
Ministers whatsoever; saving also to Us, our Heirs and Successors, the Customs,
and other Duties and Payments due for the said Wares and Merchandises,
according to the several Rates of the Places from whence the same shall be
transported.

We will also, and by these Presents, for Us, our Heirs and Successors, do give
and grant License by this our Charter, unto the said Edward Earl of Clarendon,
George Duke of Albemarle, William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony
Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, Sir John Colleton and Sir William Berkeley,
their Heirs and Assigns, and to all the Inhabitants and Dwellers in the
Province or Territory aforesaid, both present and to come, full Power and
absolute Authority to import or unlade by themselves, or their Servants,
Factors or Assigns, all Merchandises and Goods whatsoever, that shall arise of
the Fruits and Commodities of the said Province or Territory, either by Land or
Sea, into any the Ports of Us, our Heirs and Successors, in our Kingdom of
England, Scotland or Ireland, or otherwise, to dispose of the said Goods, in
the said Ports. And if need be, within one Year next after the unlading, to
lade the said Merchandises and Goods again into the same, or other Ships; and
to export the same into any other Countries, either of our Dominions or
foreign, being in Amity with Us, our Heirs and Successors, so as they pay such
Customs, Subsidies and other Duties for the same to Us, our Heirs and
Successors, as the rest of our Subjects of this our Kingdom, for the Time
being, shall be bound to pay. Beyond which We will not that the Inhabitants of
the said Province or Territory, shall be any ways charged. Provided,
nevertheless, and our Will and Pleasure is, and We have further, for the
Considerations aforesaid, of our (...) certain Knowledge and mere Motion, given
and granted, and by these Presents, for (...) Heirs and Successors, do give and
grant unto the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle, William
Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett,
Sir John Colleton and Sir William Berkeley, their Heirs and Assigns, full and
free License, Liberty, Power and Authority, at any Time or Times, from and
after the Feast of S^ Michael the Archangel, which shall be in the Year of our
Lord Christ, One Thousand Six Hundred, Sixty and Seven; as we^^ to import and
bring into any our Dominions from the said Province of Carolina, or any Part
thereof, the several Goods and Commodities herein after mentioned; That is to
say, Silks, Wines, Currants, Raysons, Capers, Wax, Almonds, Oil and Olives,
without paying or answering to Us, our Heirs and Successors, any Custom,
Impost, or other Duty, for, or in respect thereof, for an during the Time and
Space of Seven Years to commence and be accounted from and after the first
Importation of Four Tons of any the said Goods, in any one Bottom Ship or
Vessel, from the said Province or Territory, into any of our Dominions; as
also, to export and carry out of any of our Dominions into the said Province or
Territory, Custom-free, all sorts of Tools, which shall be useful or necessary
for the Planters there, in the Accommodation and Improvement of the Premises,
any thing before in these Presents contained, or any Law, Act, Statute,
Prohibibition, or other Matter or Thing, heretofore had, made, enacted or
provided, or hereafter to be had, made, enacted or provided, in any wise
notwithstanding.

And furthermore, of our more ample and especial Grace, certain Knowledge and
mere Motion, We do for Us, our Heirs and Successors, grant unto the said Edward
Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle, William Earl of Craven, John Lord
Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, Sir John Colleton and Sir
William Berkeley, their Heirs and Assigns, full and absolute Power and
Authority to make, erect and constitute within the said Province or Territory,
and the Isles and Islets aforesaid, such and so many Seaports, Harbors,
Creeks and other Places for discharge and unlading of Goods and Merchandises
out of Ships, Boats, and other Vessels, and for lading of them in such and so
many Places, (...) such Jurisdictions, Privileges and Franchises, unto the
said Ports belonging, as to them shall seem most exped(...) And (...)ngular,
the Ships, Boats and other Vessels, which shall come for Merchandises, and
trade into the said Province or Territory, or shall depart out of the same,
shall be laden and unladen at such Ports only, as shall be erected and
constituted by the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle,
William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George
Carterett, Sir John Colleton and Sir William Berkley, their Heirs and Assigns,
and not elsewhere, any Use, Custom, or any thing to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

And We do furthermore will, appoint and ordain, and by these Presents, for Us,
our Heirs and Successors, do grant unto the said Edward Earl of Clarendon,
George Duke of Albemarle, William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkely, Anthony
Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, Sir John Colleton and Sir William Berkeley,
their Heirs and Assigns, That they the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George
Duke of Albemarle, William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord
Ashley, Sir George Carterett, Sir John Colleton and Sir William Berkeley,
their Heirs and Assigns, may from Time to Time, for ever, have and enjoy the
Customs and Subsidies in the Ports Harbors, Creeks and other Places within the
Province aforesaid, payable for the Goods, Merchandises and Wares there laded,
or be laded or unladed, the said Customs to be reasonably assessed to upon any
Occasion by themselves, and by and with the Consent of the free People, or the
greater Part of them, as aforesaid; to whom We give Power by these Presents,
for Us, our Heirs and Successors, upon just Cause and in a due Proportion to
assess and impose the same.

And further, of our especial Grace, certain Knowledge and mere Motion, we have
given, granted and confirmed, and by these Presents, for Us, our Heirs and
Successors, do give, grant and confirm unto the said Edward Earl of Clarendon,
George Duke of Albemarle, William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony
Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, Sir John Colleton and Sir William Berkeley,
their Heirs and Assigns, full and absolute Power, License and Authority, that
they the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle, William Earl
Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett. Sir John
Colleton and Sir William Berkley, their Heirs and Assigns, from Time to Time,
hereafter for ever, at his and their Will and Pleasure, may assign, alien,
grant, demise or enfeoff the Premises or any Part or Parcel thereof to him or
them, that shall be willing to purchase the same, and to such Person and
Persons, as they shall think fit, to have, and to hold to them the said Person
or Persons, their Heirs and Assigns in Fee simple or in Fee Tail, or for the
Term of Life or Lives, or Years to be held of them, the said Edward Earl of
Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle, William Earl of Craven, John Lord
Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, Sir John Colleton and Sir
William Berkeley, their Heirs and Assigns, by such Rents, Services and Customs,
as shall seem fit to them the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of
Albemarle, William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley,
Sir George Carterett, Sir John Colleton and Sir William Berkeley, their Heirs
and Assigns, and not of Us, our Heirs and Successors: And to the same Person
and Persons, and to all and every of them, We do give and grant by these
Presents, for Us, our Heirs and Successors, License, Authority and Power, that
such Person or Persons, may have and take the Premises, or any Parcel thereof,
of the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke Of Albemarle, William Earl
of Craven, John Lord Berkely, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, Sir
John Colleton and Sir William Berkeley, their Heirs and Assigns, and the same
to hold to themselves, their Heirs or Assigns, in what Estate of Inheritance
soever, in Fee simple, or in Fee Tail, or otherwise, as to them the said
Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle, William Earl of Craven,
John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, Sir John
Colleton and Sir William Berkley, their Heirs and Assigns, shall seem
expedient. The Statute in the Parliament of Edward, Son of King Henry,
heretofore King of England, our Predecessor, commonly called, The Statute of
Quia Emptores Terrar; or any other Satute, Act, Ordinance, Use, Law, Custom, or
any other Matter, Cause or Thing heretofore published or provided to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

And because many Persons born and inhabiting in the said Province for their
Deserts and Services may expect, and be capable of Marks of Honor and Favor,
which in respect of the great Distance cannot conveniently be conferred by Us;
our Will and Pleasure therefore is, and We do by these Presents, give and grant
unto the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle, William Lord
Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, Sir John
Colleton and Sir William Berkeley, (...) Heirs and Assigns, full Power and
Authority to give and conferr unto, and upon such of the Inhabitants of the
said Province, or Territory, as they shall think, do, or shall merit the same,
such Marks of Favor, and Titles of Honor, as they shall think fit, so as
their Titles or Honors be not the same as are enjoyed by, or conferred upon
any of the Subjects of this Our Kingdom of England.

And further also, We do by these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors,
give and Grant, License to them the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke
of Albemarle, William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley,
Sir George Carterett, Sir John Colleton and Sir William Berkeley, their Heirs
and Assigns, full Power, Liberty and License, to Erect, Raise and Build within
the said Province and Places aforesaid, or any Part or Parts thereof, such and
so many Forts, Fortresses, Castles, Cities, Buroughs, Towns, Villages and
other Fortifications whatsoever; and the same or any of them to Fortify and
Furnish with Ordnance, Powder, Shot, Armor and all other Weapons, Ammunition
and Habiliments of War, both Defensive and Offensive, as shall be thought fit
and convenient for the Safety and Welfare of the said Province, and Places, or
any Part thereof; And the same, or any of them, from Time to Time, as Occasion
shall require, to Dismantle, Disfurnish, Demolish and pull down; And also to
Place, Constitute and Appoint in, or over all, or any of the said Castles,
Forts, Fortifications, Cities, Towns and Places aforesaid, Governors, Deputy
Governors, Magistrates, Sheriffs and other Officers, Civil and Military, as to
them shall seem meet; And to the said Cities, Buroughs, Towns, Villages, or
any other Place, or Places, within the said Province or Territory, to Grant
Letters or Charters of Incorporation, with all Liberties, Franchises and
Privileges requisite, or usual, or to, or within this Our Kingdom of England
granted, or belonging; And in the same Cities, Buroughs, Towns and other
Places, to Constitute, Erect and Appoint such, and so many Markets, Marts and
Fairs, as shall in that Behalf be thought fit and necessary; And further also,
to Erect and Make in the Province or Territory aforesaid, or any Part thereof,
so man Manors with such Signories as to them shall seem meet and convenient,
and in every of the same Manors to have and to hold a Court Baron with all
Things whatsoever, which to a Court Baron do belong, and to have and to hold
Views of Franck Pledge, and Courts-Leet, for the Conservation of the Peace, and
better Government of those Parts, with such Limits, Jurisdiction and Precincts,
as by the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle, William Earl
of Craven, John Lord Berkely, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, Sir
John Colleton, and Sir William Berkeley, or their Heirs, shall be appointed for
that purpose, with all things whatsoever, which to a Court Leet, or view of
Franck Pledge; do belong, the same Courts to be holden by Stewards, to be
Deputed and Authorized by the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of
Albemarle, William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir
George Carterett, Sir John Colleton, and Sir William Berkeley or their Heirs,
by the Lords of the Manors and Leets, for the Time being, when the same shall
be Erected.

And because that in so remote a Country, and Situate among so many Barbarous
Nations, the Invasions as well of Salvages as other Enemies, Pirates, and
Robbers may probably be feared; Therefore We have Given, and for Us, Our Heirs
and Successors do give Power by these Presents, unto the said Edward Earl of
Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle, William Earl of Craven, John Lord
Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, Sir John Colleton and Sir
William Berkeley, their Heirs or Assigns by themselves, or their Captains, or
other Officers to Levy, Muster and Train up all sorts of Men, of what Condition
soever, or wheresoever Born, whether in the said Province, or elsewhere, for
the Time being; And to make War and pursue the Enemies aforesaid, as well by
Sea, as by Land; yea, even without the Limits of the said Province, and by
God's Assistance, to Vanquish and Take them, and being Taken, to put them to
Death by the Law of War, and to save them at their Pleasure; And to do all and
every other thing, which to the Charge and Office of a Captain General of an
Army belongs, or has accustomed to belong, as fully and freely as any
Captain General of an Army has had the same.

Also, Our Will and Pleasure is, and by this Our Charter, We do give and grant
unto the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle, William Lord
Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir Gorge Carterett, Sir John
Colleton and Sir William Berkeley, their Heirs and Assigns, full Power, Liberty
and Authority in Case of Rebellion, Tumult, or Sedition (if any should happen
which God forbid) either upon the Land within the Province aforesaid, or upon
the main Sea, in making a Voyage thither, or returning from thence, by him and
themselves, their Captains, Deputies or Officers, to be authorized under his or
their Seals, for that purpose: To whom also for Us, our Heirs and Successors,
We do give and grant by these Presents, full Power and Authority to exercise
Martial Law against mutinous and seditious Persons of those Parts; such as
shall refuse to submit themselves to their Government, or shall refuse to serve
in the Wars, or shall fly to the Enemy, or forsake their Colors or Ensigns, or
be Loyterers or Straglers, or otherwise howsoever offending against Law,
Custom, or Military Discipline, as freely, and in as ample Manner and Form as
any Captain General of an Army, by virtue of his Office, might, or has
accustomed to use the same.

And Our further Pleasure is, and by these Presents, for Us, our Heirs and
Successors, We do grant unto the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of
Albemarle, William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir
George Carterett, Sir John Colleton, and Sir William Berkeley, their Heirs and
Assigns, and to the Tenants and Inhabitants of the said Province, or Territory,
both present and to come, and to every of them, that the said Province, or
Territory, and the Tennants and Inhabitants thereof, shall not from henceforth,
be held or reputed any Member, or Part of any Collony whatsoever, in America or
elsewhere, now transported or made, or hereafter to be transported or made; nor
shall be depending on, or subject to their Government in any Thing, but be
absolutely separated and divided from the same: And our Pleasure is, by these
Presents, That they be separated, and that they be subject immediately to our
Crown of England, as depending thereof for ever. And that the Inhabitants of
the said Province or Territory, nor any of them, shall at any Time hereafter,
be compelled or compellable, or be any ways subject, or li^^^^ to appear or
answer to any Matter, Suit, Cause, or Plaint whatsoever, out of the Province or
Territory aforesaid, in any other of our (...), Collonies or Dominions in
America, or elsewhere, other than in our (...) of England and Dominion of Wales.

And because it may happen, That some of the People and Inhabitants of the said
Province, cannot in their private Opinions conform to the Public Exercise of
Religion according to the Liturgy, Forms and Ceremonies of the Church of
England, or take or subscribe the Oaths and Articles made and established in
that Behalf: And for that the same, by reason of the remote Distances of those
Places will as we hope, be no Breach of the Unity, and Conformity, Established
in this Nation. Our Will and Pleasure therefore is, and We do by these Presents
for Us, Our Heirs, and Successors, Give and Grant unto the said Edward Earl of
Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle, William Earl of Craven, John Lord
Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, Sir John Colleton and Sir
William Berkeley, their Heirs and Assigns, full and free License, Liberty and
Authority, by such Ways and Means as they shall think fit, To Give and Grant
unto such Person and Persons, Inhabiting, and being withi the said Province or
Territory, hereby or by the said recited Letters Patents, mentioned to be
granted as aforesaid, or any Part thereof, such Indulgencies and Dispensations,
in that Behalf, for, and during such Time and Times, and with such Limitations
and Restrictions as they the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of
Albemarle, William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir
George Carterett, Sir John Colleton and Sir William Berkely, their Heirs, or
Assigns, shall in their Discretion think fit and reasonable. And that no Person
or Persons, unto whom such Liberty shall be given, shall be any way molested,
punished, disquieted, or called in question for any Differences in Opinion or
Practice, in Matters of Religious Concernment, who do not actually disturb the
civil Peace of the Province, County or Colony, that they shall make their abode
in. But all and every such Person and Persons, may from Time to Time, and at
all Times, freely and quietly have and enjoy his and their Judgments and
Consciences, in Matters of Religion, throughout all the said Province, or
Colony, they behaving them selves peaceably, and (...) this Liberty to
Licentiousness, nor to the Civil Injury or outward Disturbance of others. Any
Law, Statute or Clause contained, or to be contained, (...) or Customs of our
Realm of England to the contrary hereof: any (...) notwithstanding.

And in Case it shall happen, That any Doubts or Questions should arise
concerning the True Sense and Understanding of any Word, Clause, or Sentence,
contained in this Our Present Charter, We will, Ordain, and Command, that at
all Times, and in all Things, such Interpretations be made thereof, and allowed
in all and every of Our Courts whatsoever, as Lawfully may be Adjudged most
Advantageous and Favorable to the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke
of Albemarle, William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley,
Sir George Carterett, Sir John Colleton and Sir William Berkeley, their Heirs
and Assigns, although Express Mention etc.

Witness our Self at Westminster, the Thirtieth Day of June, in the Seventeenth
Year of our Reign. Per ipsum Regem.

THE Fundamental Constitutions OF CAROLINA.
OUR Sovereign Lord the King having out of His Royal Grace and Bounty, granted
unto us the Province of Carolina, with all the Royalties, Proprieties,
Jurisdictions and Privileges of a County Palatine, as large and ample as the
County Palatine of Durham, with other great Privileges; for the better
Settlement of the Government of the said Place, and establishing the Interest
of the Lords Proprietors with Equality, and without Confusion, and that the
Government of this Province may be made most agreeable to the Monarchy under
which we live, and of which this Province is a Part; and that we may avoid
erecting a numerous Democracy, we the Lords and Proprietors of the Province
aforesaid, have agreed to this following Form of Government, to be perpetually
established amongst us, unto which we do oblige our selves, our Heirs and
Successors, in the most binding Ways that can be devised.

. 1. THE Eldest of the Lords Proprietors shall be Palatine, and upon the
Decease of the Palatine, the Eldest of the Seven surviving Proprietors shall
always succeed him.

. 2. There shall be Seven other Chief Offices erected, viz. The Admirals,
Chamberlains, Chancellors, Constable, Chief-Justices, High-Stewards and
Treasurers; which Places shall be enjoyed by none but the Lords Proprietors, to
be (...) at first (...) upon the Vacancy of any one of the Seven Great (...),
or otherwise, the Eldest Proprietor shall (...) the said Place.

. 3. The whole Province shall be (...) into Counties; each County shall consist
of Eight (...), Eight Baronies, and Four Precincts, each Precinct shall consist
of Six Colonies.

. 4. Each Signiory, Barony and Colony, shall consist of Twelve Thousand Acres,
the Eight Signiories being the Share of the Eight Proprietors, and the Eight
Baronies of the Nobility, both which Shares being each of them one Fifth part
of the Whole, are to be perpetually annexed the one to the Proprietors, the
other to the Hereditary Nobility, leaving the Colonies, being Three Fifths,
amongst the People; that so in setting out, and planting the Lands, the
Balance of the Government may be preserved.

. 5. At any Time before the Year One Thousand Seven Hundred and One, any of the
Lords Proprietors shall have Power to relinquish, alienate, and dispose to any
other Person, his Proprietorship, and all the Signiories, Powers, and Interest
thereunto belonging, wholly and entirely together, and not otherwise. But after
the Year One Thousand Seven Hundred, those who are then Lords Proprietors,
shall not have Power to Alienate, or Make over their Proprietorship, with the
Signories and Privileges thereunto belonging, or any Part thereof, to any
Person whatsoever, otherwise than as in. 18. but it shall all descend unto
their Heirs Male; and, for want of Heirs Male, it shall all descend on that
Landgrave or Cassique of Carolina, who is descended of the next Heirs Female of
the said Proprietor; and for want of such Heirs, it shall descend on the next
Heir general; and for want of such Heirs, the remaining Seven Proprietors,
shall, upon the Vacancy, choose a Landgrave to succeed the deceased Proprietor,
who being chosen by the Majority of the Seven surviving Proprietors, he and his
Heirs successively shall be Proprietors, as fully to all Intents and Purposes
as any of the Rest.

. 6. That the Number of Eight Proprietors may be constantly kept; if upon the
Vacancy of any Proprietorship, the Seven surviving Proprietors shall not choose
a Landgrave to be a Proprietor, before the Second biennial Parliament after the
Vacancy; then the next biennial Parliament but one, after such Vacancy, shall
have Power to choose any Landgrave to be Proprietor.

. 7. Whosoever after the Year One Thousand Seven Hundred, either by Inheritance
or Choice, shall succeed any Proprietor in his Proprietorship, and Signiories
thereunto belonging, shall be obliged to take the Name and Arms of that
Proprietor whom he succeeds; which from thenceforth shall be the Name and Arms
of his Family and their Posterity.

. 8. Whatsoever Landgrave or Cassique shall any way come to be a Proprietor,
shall take the Signiories annexed to the said Proprietorship; but his former
Dignity, with the Baronies annexed, shall devolve into the Hands of the Lords
Proprietors.

. 9. There shall be just as many Landgraves as there are Counties, and twice as
many Cassiques, and no more. These shall be the Hereditary Nobility of the
Province, and by Right of their Dignity be Members of Parliament. Each
Landgrave shall have Four Baronies, and each Cassique Two Baronies,
hereditarily and unalterably annexed to, and settled upon the said Dignity.

. 10. The first Landgraves and Cassiques of the Twelve first Counties to be
planted, shall be nominated thus; that is to say, of the Twelve Landgraves, the
Lords Proprietors shall each of them separately for himself, nominate and choose
One; and the remaining Four Landgraves of the First Twelve, shall be nominated
and chosen by the Palatine's Court. In like manner of the Twenty Four first
Cassiques, each Proprietor for himself shall nominate and choose Two, and the
remaining Eight shall be nominated and chosen by the Palatine's Court; and when
the Twelve first Counties shall be planted, the Lords Proprietors shall again
in the same Manner nominate and choose Twelve more Landgraves, and Twenty Four
Cassiques for the Twelve next Counties to be planted; that is to say, Two
Thirds of each Number by the single Nomination of each Proprietor for himself,
and the remaining One Third by the joint Election of the Palatine's Court, and
so proceed in the same Manner till the whole Province of Carolina be set out
and planted, according to the Proportions in these Fundamental Constitutions.

. 11. Any Landgrave or Cassique at any time before the Year One Thousand Seven
Hundred and One, shall have Power to alienate, sell, or make over to any other
Person, his Dignity, with the Baronies thereunto belonging, all entirely
together. But after the Year One Thousand Seven Hundred, no Landgrave or
Cassique shall have Power to alienate, sell, make over, or let the Hereditary
Baronies of his Dignity, or any Part thereof, otherwise than as in. 18. but
they shall all entirely, with the Dignity thereunto belonging, descend unto his
Heirs Male; and for want of Heirs Male, all entirely and undivided, to the next
Heir general; and for want of such Heirs, shall devolve into the Hands of the
Lords Proprietors.

. 12. That the due Number of Landgraves and Cassiques may be always kept up, if
upon the Devolution of any Landgraveship or Cassiqueship, the Palatine's Court
shall not settle the devolved Dignity, with the Baronies thereunto annexed,
before the Second biennial Parliament after such Devolution, the next biennial
Parliament but one after such Devolution shall have Power to make any one
Landgrave or Cassique in the Room of him, who dying without Heirs, his Dignity
and Baronies devolved.

. 13. No one Person shall have more than one Dignity, with the Signiores or
Baronies thereunto belonging. But whenever it shall happen, that any one who
is already Proprietor, Landgrave, or Cassique, shall have any of these
Dignities descend to him by Inheritance, it shall be at his Choice to keep
which of the Dignities, with the Lands annexed, he shall like best; but shall
leave the other, with the Lands annexed, to be enjoyed by him, who not being
his Heir Apparent, and certain Successor to his present Dignity, is next of
Blood.

. 14. Whosoever by Right of Inheritance shall come to be Landgrave or Cassique,
shall take the Name and Arms of his Predecessor in that Dignity, to be from
thenceforth the Name and Arms of his Family and their Posterity.

. 15. Since the Dignity, of Proprietor, Landgrave, or Cassique, cannot be
divided, and the Signiories or Baronies thereunto annexed must for ever all
entirely descend with, and accompany that Dignity, whenever for want of Heirs
Male it shall descend on the Issue Female, the eldest Daughter and Heirs shall
be preferred, and in the Inheritance of those Dignities, and in the Signiories
or Baronies annexed, there shall be no Coheirs.

. 16. In every Signiory, Barony, and Manor, the respective Lord shall have
Power in his own Name to hold Court Leet there, for Trying of all Causes both
Civil and Criminial; but where it shall concern any Person being no Inhabitant,
Vassal, or Leetman of the said Signiory, Barony, or Manor, he upon paying down
of Forty Shillings to the Lords Proprietors use, shall have an Appeal from the
Signiory or Barony Court, to the County Court, and from the Manor Court to the
Precinct Court.

. 17. Every Manor shall consist of not less than Three Thousand Acres, and not
above Twelve Thousand Acres in one entire Piece and Colony; but any Three
Thousand Acres or more in one Piece, and the Possession of one Man, shall not
be a Manor, unless it be constituted a Manor by the Grant of the Palatine's
Court.

. 18. The Lords of Signiories and Baronies shall have Power only of granting
Estates not exceeding Three Lives, or Thirty One Years, in Two Thirds of the
said Signiories or Baronies, and the remaining Third shall be always Demesne.

. 19. Any Lord of a Manor may alienate, sell, or dispose to any other Person,
and his Heirs for ever, his Manor, all entirely together, with all the
Privileges and Leetmen thereunto belonging, so far forth as any other Colony
Lands, but no Grant of any part thereof, either in Fee, or for any longer Term
than Three Lives, or One and Twenty Years, shall be good against the next Heir.

. 20. No Manor, for want of Issue Male, shall be divided amongst Coheirs; but
the Manor, if there be but one, shall all entirely descend to the eldest
Daughter and her Heirs. If there be more Manors than one, the eldest Daughter
first shall have her Choice, the Second next, and so on; beginning again at the
Eldest, till all the Manors be taken up; that so the Privileges which belong
to Manors being indivisible, the Lands of the Manors to which they are
annexed, may be kept entire, and the Manor not lose those Privileges, which
upon parcelling out to several Owners, must necessarily cease.

. 21. Every Lord of a Manor, within his Manor, shall have all the Powers,
Jurisdictions, and Privileges, which a Landgrave or Cassique has in his
Baronies.

. 22. In every Signiory, Barony, and Manor, all the Leet-Men shall be under
the Jurisdiction of the respective Lords of the said Signiory, Barony, or
Manor, without Appeal from him. Nor shall any Leet-Man or Leet-Woman have
Liberty to go off from the Land of their particular Lord, and live any where
else, without License obtained from their said Lord, under Hand and Seal.

. 23. All the Children of Leet-Men shall be Leet-Men, and so to all Generations.

. 24. No Man shall be capable of having a Court Leet or Leet-Men, but a
Proprietor, Landgrave, Cassique, or Lord of a Manor.

. 25. Whoever shall voluntarily enter himself a Leet-Man in the Registry of the
County Court, shall be a Leet-Man.

. 26. Whoever is Lord of Leet-Men, shall upon the Marriage of a Leet-Man or
Leet-Woman of his, give them Ten Acres of Land for their Lives, they paying to
him therefore not more than one Eighth part of all the Yearly Produce and
Growth of the said Ten Acres.

. 27. No Landgrave or Cassique shall be tried for any Criminal Cause, in any
but the Chief-Justice's Court, and that by a Jury of his Peers.

. 28. There shall be Eight Supreme Courts. The First called, The Palatine's
Court, consisting of the Palatine, and the other Seven Proprietors. The other
Seven Courts of the other Seven Great Officers, shall consist each of them of a
Proprietor, and Six Counselors added to him. Under each of these latter Seven
Courts shall be a College of Twelve Assistants. The Twelve Assistants of the
several Colleges shall be chosen; Two out of the Landgraves, Cassiques, or
eldest Sons of Proprietors, by the Palatine's Court; Two out of the Landgraves,
by the Landgraves Chamber; Two out of the Cassiques, by the Cassiques Chamber;
Four more of the Twelve shall be chosen by the Commons Chamber, out of such as
have been, or are Members of Parliament, Sheriffs, or Justices of the County
Court, or the younger Sons of Proprietors, or eldest Sons of Landgraves of
Cassiques; the Two other shall be chosen by the Palatine's Court, out of the
same Sort of Persons out of which the Commons Chamber is to choose.

. 29. Out of these Colleges shall be chosen at first by the Palatine's Court,
Six Councellers, to be joined with each Proprietor in his Court; of which Six,
one shall be of those who were chosen into any of the Colleges by the
Palatine's Court, out of the Landgraves, Cassiques, or eldest Sons of
Proprietors, one out of those who were chosen by the Landgraves Chamber, and
one out of those who were chosen by the Cassiques Chamber, Two out of those who
were chosen by the Commons Chamber, and one out of those who were chosen by the
Palatine's Court, out of the Proprietors younger Sons, or eldest Sons of
Landgraves, Cassiques, or Commons, qualified as aforesaid.

. 30. When it shall happen, that any Councellor dies, and thereby there is a
Vacancy, the Grand Council shall have Power to remove any Councellor that is
willing to be removed out of any of the Proprietors Courts to fill up the
Vacancy, provided they take a Man of the same Degree and Choice the other was
of, whose vacant Place is to be filled up. But if no Councellor consent to be
removed, or upon such Remove, the last remaining vacant Place in any of the
Proprietors Courts, shall be filled up by the Choice of the Grand Council, who
shall have Power to remove out of any of the Colleges, any Assistant, who is of
the same Degree and Choice that Councellor was of, into whose vacant Place he
is to succeed. The Grand Council also shall have Power to remove any Assistant
that is willing, out of one College into another, provided he be of the same
Degree and Choice. But the last remaining vacant Place in any College, shall be
filled up by the same Choice, and out of the same Degree of Persons the
Assistant was of, who is dead or removed. No Place shall be vacant in any
Proprietors Court above Six Months. No Place shall be vacant in any College
longer than the next Session of Parliament.

. 31. No Man, being a Member of the Grand Council, or of any of the Seven
Colleges, shall be turned out but for Misdemeanor, of which the Grand Council
shall be Judge, and the Vacancy of the Person so put out shall be filled, not
by the Election of the Grand Council, but by those who first chose him, and out
of the same Degree he was of, who is expelled. But it is not hereby to be
understood, that the Grand Council has any Power to turn out any One of the
Lords Proprietors, or their Deputies, the Lords Proprietors having in
themselves an inherent original Right.

. 32. All Elections in the Parliament, in the several Chambers of the
Parliament, and in the Grand Council, shall be passed by Balotting.

. 33. The Palatine's Court shall consist of the Palatine, and Seven
Proprietors, wherein nothing shall be acted without the Presence and Consent of
the Palatine or his Deputy, and Three others of the Proprietors or their
Deputies. This Court shall have Power to call Parliaments, to pardon all
Offenses, to make Elections of all Officers in the Proprieters dispose, and to
nominate and appoint Port-Towns: And also shall have power, by their Order to
the Treasurer, to dispose of all public Treasure, excepting Money granted by
the Parliament, and by them directed to some particular public Use: And also
shall have a Negative upon all Acts, Orders, Votes, and Judgments, of the Grand
Council and the Parliament, except only as in. 6. and 12. And shall have all
the Powers granted to the Lords Proprietors, by their Patent from Our Sovereign
Lord the King, except in such Things as are limited by these Fundamental
Constitutions.

. 34. The Palatine himself, when he in Person shall be either in the Army, or
in any of the Proprietors Courts, shall then have the Power of General, or of
that Proprietor in whose Court he is then present, and the Proprietor, in whose
Court the Palatine then presides, shall during his presence there be but as one
of the Council.

. 35. The Chancellor's Court, consisting of one of the Proprietors and his Six
Counselors, who shall be called Vice-Chancellors, shall have the Custody of
the Seal of the Palatinate, under which all Charters of Lands or otherwise,
Commissions and Grants of the Palatine's Court, shall pass. And it shall not be
lawful to put the Seal of the Palatinate to any Writing which is not signed by
the Palatine, or his Deputy, and Three other Proprietors, or their Deputies. To
this Court also belongs all State Matters, Dispatches and Treaties with the
Neighbor Indians. To this Court also belongs all Invasions of the Law, of
Liberty of Conscience, and all Disturbances of the public Peace upon Pretense
of Religion, as also the License of Printing. The Twelve Assistants belonging
to this Court shall be called Recorders.

. 36. Whatever passes under the Seal of the Palatinate, shall be registered in
that Proprietor's Court to which the Matter therein contained belongs.

. 37. The Chancellor or his Deputy shall be always Speaker in Parliament, and
President of the Grand Council, and in his and his Deputy's Absence, one of his
Vice-Chancellors.

. 38. The Chief-Justice's Court, consisting of one of the Proprietors and his
Six Counselors, who shall be called Justices of the Bench, shall judge all
Appeals in Cases both Civil and Criminal, except all such Cases as shall be
under the Jurisdiction and Cognizance of any other of the Proprietors Courts,
which shall be tried in those Courts respectively. The Government and
Regulation of the Registries of Writings and Contracts, shall belong to the
Jurisdiction of this Court. The Twelve Assistants of this Court shall be called
Masters.

. 39. The Constables Court, consisting of one of the Proprietors and his Six
Counselors, who shall be called Marshals, shall order and determine of all
Military Affairs by Land, and all Landforces, Arms, Ammunition, Artillery,
Garrisons and Forts, etc. and whatever belongs unto War. His Twelve Assistants
shall be called Lieutenant-Generals.

. 40. In time of actual War, the Constable, whilst he is in the Army, shall be
General of the Army, and the Six Counselors, or such of them as the Palatine's
Court shall for that Time or Service appoint, shall be the immediate great
Officers under him, and the Lieutenant-Generals next to them.

. 41. The Admiral's Court, consisting of one of the Proprietors and his Six
Counselors called Consuls, shall have the Care and Inspection over all Ports,
Moles, and Navigable Rivers, so far as the Tide flows, and also all the public
Shipping of Carolina, and Stores thereunto belonging, and all Maritime Affairs.
This Court also shall have the Power of the Court of Admiralty; and shall have
power to constitute Judges in Port-Towns, to try Cases belonging to
Law-Merchant, as shall be most convenient for Trade. The Twelve Assistants
belonging to this Court shall be called Pro-Consuls.

. 42. In time of actual War, the Admiral whilst he is at Sea, shall command in
Chief, and his Six Counselors, or such of them as the Palatine's Court shall
for that Time and Service appoint, shall be the immediate great Officers under
him, and the Pro-Consuls next to them.

43. The Treasurer's Court, consisting of a Proprietor, and his Six
Counselors, called Vnder-Treasurers, shall take Care of all Matters that
concern the public Revenue and Treasury. The Twelve Assistants shall be called
Auditors.

. 44. The High-Stewards Court, consisting of a Proprietor and his Six
Counselors, called Comptrollers, shall have the Care of all Foreign and
Domestic Trade, Manufactures, public Buildings, Workhouses, Highways,
Passages by Water above the Flood of the Tide, Drains, Sewers and Banks,
against Inundations, Bridges, Posts, Carriers, Fairs, Markets, Corruption or
Infection of the common Air or Water, and all Things in order to the public
Commerce and Health; Also Setting out and Surveying of Lands; and also setting
out and appointing Places for Towns to be built on in the Precincts, and the
prescribing and determining the Figure and Bigness of the said Towns, according
to such Models as the said Court shall order, contrary or differing from which
Models, it shall not be lawful for any one to build in any Town. This Court
shall have Power also to make any public Building, or any new Highway, or
enlarge any old Highway, upon any Man's Land whatsoever; as also to make Cuts,
Channels, Banks, Locks, and Bridges, for making Rivers Navigable, or for
draining Fens, or any other public Use. The Damage the Owner of such Lands (on
or through which any such public Thing shall be made) shall receive thereby,
shall be valued, and Satisfaction made by such Ways as the Grand Council shall
appoint. The Twelve Assistants belonging to this Court, shall be called
Surveyors.

. 45. The Chamberlain's Court, consisting of a Proprietor and his Six
Counselors, called Vice-Chamberlains, shall have the Care of all Ceremonies,
Precedence, Heraldry, Reception of public Messengers, Pedegrees, the Registry
of all Births, Burials, and Marriages, Legitimation, and all Cases concerning
Matrimony, or arising from it; and shall also have Power to regulate all
Fashions, Habits, Badges, Games, and Sports. To this Court also it shall
belong, to convocate the Grand Council. The Twelve Assistants belonging to this
Court, shall be called Provosts.

. 46. All Causes belonging to, or under the Jurisdiction of any of the
Proprietors Courts, shall in them respectively be tried, and ultimately
determined, without any farther Appeal.

. 47. The Proprietors Courts shall have a Power to mitigate all Fines, and
suspend all Executions in Criminal Causes, either before or after Sentence in
any of the other inferior Courts respectively.

. 48. In all Debates, Hearings or Trials, in any of the Proprietors Courts, the
Twelve Assistants belonging to the said Courts respectively, shall have Liberty
to be present, but shall not interpose unless their Opinions be required, nor
have any Vote at all; but their Business shall be, by the Direction of the
respective Courts, to prepare such Business as shall be committed to them; as
also to bear such Offices, and dispatch such Affairs, either where the Court is
kept, or elsewhere, as the Court shall think fit.

. 49. In all the Proprietors Courts, the Proprietor, and any Three of his
Counselors shall make a Quorum; provided always, That for the better Dispatch
of Business, it shall be in the Power of the Palatine's Court to direct what
sort of Causes shall be heard and determined by a Quorum of any Three.

. 50. The Grand Council shall consist of the Palatine and Seven Proprietors,
and the Forty Two Counselors of the several Proprietors Courts, who shall have
Power to determine any Controversies that may arise between any of the
Proprietors Courts, about their respective Jurisdictions, or between the
Members of the same Court, about their Manner and Methods of Proceeding: To
make Peace and War, Leagues, Treaties, etc. with any of the Neighbor Indians:
To issue out their general Orders to the Constable's and Admiral's Courts, for
the Raising, Disposing, or Disbanding the Forces by Land or by Sea.

. 51. The Grand Council shall prepare all Matters to be proposed in Parliament.
Nor shall any Matter whatsover be proposed in Parliament, but what has first
passed the Grand Council; which after having been read Three several Days in
the Parliament, shall by Majority of Votes be passed or rejected.

. 52. The Grand Council shall always be Judges of all Causes and Appeals that
concern the Palatine, or any of the Lords Proprietors, or any Councellor of any
Proprietor's Court, in any Cause which otherwise should have been tried in the
Court in which the said Councellor is Judge himself.

. 53. The Grand Council by their Warrants to the Treasurer's Court, shall
dispose of all the Money given by the Parliament, and by them directed to any
particular public Use.

. 54. The Quorum of the Grand Council shall be Thirteen, whereof a Proprietor
or his Deputy shall be always one.

. 55. The Grand Council shall meet the first Tuesday in every Month, and as
much oftener as either they shall think fit, or they shall be convocated by the
Chamberlain's Court.

. 56. The Palatine, or any of the Lords Proprietors, shall have Power under
Hand and Seal, to be registered in the Grand Council to make a Deputy, who shall
have the same Power to all Intents and Purposes as he himself who deputes him,
except in confirming Acts of Parliament, as in. 76. and except also in
Nominating and Choosing Landgraves and Cassiques, as in. 10. All such
Deputations shall cease and determine at the End of Four Years, and at any Time
shall be revocable at the Pleasure of the Deputator.

. 57. No Deputy of any Proprietor shall have any Power whilst the Deputator is
in any Part of Carolina, except the Proprietor, whose Deputy he is, be a Minor.

. 58. During the Minority of any Proprietor, his Guardian shall have Power to
constitute and appoint his Deputy.

. 59. The Eldest of the Lords Proprietors, who shall be personally in Carolina,
shall of Course be the Palatine's Deputy; and if no Proprietor be in Carolina,
he shall choose his Deputy out of the Heirs Apparent of any of the Proprietors,
if any such be there; and if there be no Heir Apparent of any of the Lords
Proprietors above One and Twenty Years old in Carolina, then he shall choose for
Deputy any one of the Landgraves at the Grand Council; and till he have by
Deputation under Hand and Seal chosen any one of the forementioned Heirs
Apparent or Landgraves to be his Deputy, the Eldest Man of the Landgraves, and
for want of a Landgrave, the Eldest Man of the Cassiques, who shall be
personally in Carolina, shall of Course be his Deputy.

. 60. Each Proprietor's Deputy shall be always one of his own Six Counselors
respectively; and in case any of the Proprietors has not in his Absence out of
Carolina a Deputy, commissionated under his Hand and Seal, the Eldest Nobleman
of his Court shall of Course be his Deputy.

. 61. In every County there shall be a Court, consisting of a Sheriff and Four
Justices of the County, for every Precinct one. The Sheriff shall be an
Inhabitant of the County, and have at least Five Hundred Acres of Freehold
within the said County; and the Justices shall be Inhabitants, and have each of
them Five Hundred Acres apiece Freehold within the Precinct for which they
serve respectively. These Five shall be chosen and commissionated from Time to
Time by the Palatine's Court.

. 62. For any Personal Causes exceeding the Value of Two Hundred Pounds
Sterling, or in Title of Land, or in any Criminal Cause, either Party, upon
paying Twenty Pounds Sterling to the Lords Proprietors Use, shall have Liberty
of Appeal from the County Court unto the respective Proprietor's Court.

. 63. In every Precinct there shall be a Court, consisting of a Steward and
Four Justices of the Precinct, being Inhabitants, and having Three Hundred
Acres of Freehold within the said Precinct, who shall judge all Criminal
Causes, except for Treason, Murder, and any other Offenses punishable with
Death, and except all Criminal Causes of the Nobility; and shall judge also all
Civil Causes whatsoever; and in all personal Actions, not exceeding Fifty
Pounds Sterling, without Appeal: But where the Cause shall exceed that Value,
or concern a Title of Land, and in all Criminal Causes, there, either Party,
upon paying Five Pounds Sterling to the Lords Proprietors Use, shall have
Liberty of Appeal to the County Court.

. 64. No Cause shall be Twice tried in any one Court, upon any Reason or
Pretense whatsoever.

. 65. For Treason, Murder, and all other Offenses punishable with Death, there
shall be a Commission, Twice a Year at least, granted unto one or more Members
of the Grand Council, or Colleges, who shall come as itinerant Judges to the
several Counties, and, with the Sheriff and Four Justices shall hold Assizes to
judge all such Causes: But upon paying of Fifty Pounds Sterling to the Lords
Proprietors Use, there shall be Liberty of Appeal to the respective
Proprietor's Court.

. 66. The Grand Jury at the several Assizes, shall, upon their Oaths, and under
their Hands and Seals, deliver in to the itinerant Judges, a Presentment of
such Grievances, Misdemeanors, Exigences, or Defects which they think necessary
for the public Good of the County; which Presentment shall by the itinerant
Judges, at the End of their Circuit, be delivered in to the Grand Council at
their next Sitting. And whatsoever therein concerns the Execution of Laws
already made, the several Proprietors Courts in the Matters belonging to each
of them respectively shall take Cognizance of it, and give such Orders about
it, as shall be effectual for the due Execution of the Laws. But whatever
concerns the making of any new Law, shall be referred to the several respective
Courts to which that Matter belongs, and be by them prepared and brought to the
Grand Council.

. 67. For Terms, there shall be Quarterly such a certain Number of Days, not
exceeding One and Twenty at any one Time, as the several respective Courts
shall appoint. The Time for the Beginning of the Term in the Precinct Court,
shall be the first Monday in January, April, July and October; in the County
Court, the first Monday in February, May, August and November; and in the
Proprietors Courts, the first Monday in March, June, September and December.

. 68. In the Precinct Court no Man shall be a Jury-man under Fifty Acres of
Freehold. In the County Court, or at the Assizes, no Man shall be a Grand
Jury-man under Three Hundred Acres of Freehold; and no Man shall be a Petty
Jury-man under Two Hundred Acres of Freehold. In the Proprietors Courts no Man
shall be a Jury-man under Five Hundred Acres of Freehold.

. 69. Every Jury shall consist of Twelve Men; and it shall not be necessary
they should all agree, but the Verdict shall be according to the Consent of the
Majority.

. 70. It shall be a base and vile Thing to plead for Money or Reward; nor shall
any one (except he be a near Kinsman, not farther off than Cousin-german to the
Party concerned) be permitted to plead another Man's Cause, till before the
Judge in open Court he has taken an Oath, that he does not plead for Money or
Reward, nor has nor will receive, nor directly nor indirectly bargained with
the Party whose Cause he is going to plead, for Money or any other Reward for
pleading his Cause.

. 71. There shall be a Parliament, consisting of the Proprietors, or their
Deputies, the Landgraves and Cassiques, and one Freeholder out of every
Precinct, to be chosen by the Freeholders of the said Precinct respectively.
They shall sit altogether in one Room, and have every Member one Vote.

. 72. No Man shall be chosen a Member of Parliament, who has less than Five
Hundred Acres of Freehold within the Precinct for which he is chosen; nor shall
any have a Vote in choosing the said Member that has less than Fifty Acres of
Freehold within the said Precinct.

. 73. A new Parliament shall be assembled the first Monday of the Month of
November every Second Year, and shall meet and sit in the Town they last sat
in, without any Summons, unless by the Palatine's Court they be summoned to
meet at any other Place. And if there shall be any occasion of a Parliament in
these Intervals, it shall be in the Power of the Palatine's Court to assemble
them in Forty Days Notice, and at such Time and Place as the said Court shall
think fit; and the Palatine's Court shall have Power to dissolve the Parliament
when they shall think fit.

. 74. At the Opening of every Parliament, the first Thing that shall be done,
shall be the Reading of these Fundamental Constitutions, which the Palatine and
Proprietors, and the Rest of the Members then present, shall subscribe. Nor
shall any Person whatsoever sit or vote in the Parliament, till he has that
Session subscribed these Fundamental Constitutions, in a Book kept for that
Purpose by the Clerk of the Parliament.

. 75. In order to the due Election of Members for the Biennial Parliament, it
shall be lawful for the Freeholders of the respective Precincts to meet the
first Tuesday in September every Two Years, in the same Town or Place that they
last met in to choose Parliament Men, and there choose those Members that are to
sit the next November following, unless the Steward of the Precinct shall by
sufficient Notice Thirty Days before, appoint some other Place for their
Meeting, in order to the Election.

. 76. No Act or Order of Parliament shall be of any Force, unless it be
ratified in open Parliament during the same Session, by the Palatine or his
Deputy, and Three more of the Lords Proprietors, or their Deputies, and then
not to continue longer in Force but until the next biennial Parliament, unless
in the mean time it be ratified under the Hands and Seals of the Palatine
himself, and Three more of the Lords Proprietors themselves, and by their Order
published at the next biennial Parliament.

. 77. Any Proprietor or his Deputy may enter his Protestation against any Act
of the Parliament, before the Palatine or his Deputy's Consent be given as
aforesaid, if he shall conceive the said Act to be contrary to this
Establishment, or any of these Fundamental Constitutions of the Government. And
in such Case, after a full and free Debate, the several Estates shall retire
into Four several Chambers, the Palatine and Proprietors into one, the
Landgraves into another, the Cassiques into another, and those chosen by the
Precincts into a fourth; and if the major part of any of the Four Estates shall
vote, that the Law is not agreeable to this Establishment, and these
Fundamental Constitutions of the Government, then it shall pass no farther, but
be as if it had never been proposed.

. 78. The Quorum of the Parliament shall be one half of those who are Members,
and capable of Sitting in the House that present Sessions of Parliament. The
Quorum of each of the Chambers of Parliament, shall be one half of the Members
of that Chamber.

. 79. To avoid Multiplicity of Laws, which by Degrees always change the right
Foundations of the Original Government; All Acts of Parliament whatsoever, in
whatsoever Form passed or enacted, shall at the End of a Hundred Years after
their Enacting, respectively cease and determine of themselves, and without any
Repeal become null and void, as if no such Acts or Laws had ever been made.

. 80. Since Multiplicity of Comments, as we ^^a^ of Laws, have great
Inconveniences, and serve only to obscure and perplex; All manner of Comments
and Expositions on any Part of these Fundamental Constitutions, or any Part of
the Common or Statute Law of Carolina, are absolutely prohibited.

. 81. There shall be a Registry in every Precinct, wherein shall be enrolled
all Deeds, Leases, Judgments, Mortgages, and other Conveyances, which may
concern any of the Land within the said Precinct; and all such Conveyances not
so entered or registered, shall not be of Force against any Person nor Party to
the said Contract or Conveyance.

. 82. No Man shall be Register of any Precinct, who has not at least Three
Hundred Acres of Freehold within the said Precinct.

. 83. The Freeholders of every Precinct shall nominate Three Men, out of which
Three the Chief Justice's Court shall choose and commission one to be Register
of the said Precinct, whilst he shall well behave himself.

. 84. There shall be a Registry in every Signiory, Barony, and Colony* wherein
shall be recorded all the Births, Marriages, and Deaths, that shall happen
within the respective Signiories, Baronies, and Colonies.

. 85. No Man shall be Register of a Colony that has not above Fifty Acres of
Freehold within the said Colony.

. 86. The Time of every one's Age that is born in Carolina, shall be reckoned
from the Day that his Birth is entered in the Registry, and not before.

. 87. No Marriage shall be lawful, whatever Contract and Ceremony they have
used, till both the Parties mutually own it before the Register of the Place,
where they were married, and he register ^^ with the Names of the Father and
Mother of each Party.

. 88. No Man shall administer to the Goods, or have Right to them, or enter
upon the Estate of any Person deceased, till his Death be registered in the
respective Registry.

. 89. He that does not enter in the respective Registry, the Birth or Death of
any Person that is born, or dies in his House or Ground, shall pay to the said
Register One Shilling per Week, for each such Neglect, reckoning from the Time
of each Birth or Death respectively, to the Time of Registring it.

. 90. In like manner the Births, Marriages, and Deaths of the Lords
Proprietors, Landgraves, and Cassiques, shall be registered in the Chamberlain's
Court.

. 91. There shall be in every Colony one Constable, to be chosen annually by
the Freeholders of the Colony: His Estate shall be above a Hundred Acres of
Freehold within the said Colony, and such subordinate Officers appointed for
his Assistance, as the County Court shall find requisite, and shall be
established by the said County Court. The Election of the subordinate Annual
Officers shall be also in the Freeholders of the Colony.

. 92. All Towns Incorporate shall be governed by a Mayor, Twelve Aldermen, and
Twenty Four of the Common Council. The said Common Council shall be chosen by
the present Householders of the said Town; the Aldemen shall be chosen out of
the Common Council, and the Mayor out of the Aldermen by the Palatine's Court.

. 93. It being of great consequence to the Plantation, that Port-Towns should
be built and preserved; Therefore whosoever shall lade or unlade any Commodity
at any other Place but a Port-Town, shall forfeit to the Lords Proprietors for
each Tun so laden or unladen, the Sum of Ten Pounds Sterling, except only such
Goods, as the Palatine's Court shall License to be laden or unladen elsewhere.

. 94. The first Port-Town upon every River, shall, be in a Colony, and be a
Port-Town for ever.

. 95. No man shall be permitted to be a Freeman of Carolina, or to have any
Estate or Habitation within it, that does not acknowledge a God, and that God
is publicly and solemnly to be Worshipped.

. 96. As the Country comes to be sufficiently Planted and Distributed into fit
Divisions, it shall belong to the Parliament to take care for the Building of
Churches, and the public Maintenance of Divines, to be employed in the
Exercise of Religion, according to the Church of England, which being the only
true and Orthodox, and the National Religion of all the King's Dominions, is so
also of Carolina, and therefore it alone shall be allowed to receive public
Maintenance by Grant of Parliament.

But since the Natives of that Place who will be concerned in our Plantation,
are utterly Strangers to Christianity, whose Idolatry, Ignorance, or Mistake,
gives us no Right to expel, or use them ill; and those who remove from other
Parts to plant there, will unavoidably be of different Opinions concerning
Matters of Religion, the Liberty whereof they will expect to have allowed them,
and it will not be reasonable for us, on this Account, to keep them out; that
Civil Peace may be maintained amidst the Diversity of Opinions, and our
Agreement and Compact with all Men, may be duly and faithfully observed, the
Violation thereof upon what Pretense soever, cannot be without great Offense to
Almighty God, and great Scandal to the true Religion which we profess; and also
that Jews, Heathens, and other Dissenters from the Purity of Christian
Religion, may not be scared and kept at a distance from it, but by having an
Opportunity of acquainting themselves with the Truth and Reasonableness of its
Doctrines, and the Peaceableness and Inoffensiveness of its Professors, may by
good Usage and Persuasion, and all those convincing Methods of Gentleness and
Meekness, suitable to the Rules and Design of the Gospel, be won over to
embrace, and unfeignedly receive the Truth; therefore, any seven, or more
Persons agreeing in any Religion, shall Constitute a Church or Profession, to
which they shall give some Name, to distinguish it from others.

. 98. The Terms of Admittance and Communion with any Church or Profession,
shall be written in a Book, and therein be subscribed by all the Members of the
said Church or Profession; which Book shall be kept by the Public Register of
the Precinct where they reside.

. 99. The Time of every ones Subscription and Admittance, shall be Dated in the
said Book, or Religious Record.

. 100. In the Terms of Communion of every Church or Profession, these following
shall be three, without which no Agreement or Assembly of Men, upon Pretense of
Religion, shall be accounted a Church or Profession, wiehin these Rules: I.
That there is a GOD. II. That GOD is publicly to be Worshipped. III. That it
is lawful, and the Duty of every Man, being thereunto called by those that
Govern, to bear Witness to Truth; and that every Church or Profession shall in
their Terms of Communion set down the external Way whereby they witness a Truth
as in the Presence of GOD, whether it be by laying Hands on, or kissing the
Bible, as in the Church of England, or by holding up the Hand, or any other
sensible Way.


. 101. No Person above seventeen Years of Age, shall have any Benefit or
Protection of the Law, or be capable of any Place of Profit or Honor, which is
not a Member of some Church or Profession, having his Name Recorded, in some
one and but one Religious Record, at once.

. 102. No Person of any other Church or Profession, shall disturb or molest any
Religious Assembly.

. 103. No Person whatsoever, shall speak anything in their Religions Assembly,
irreverently or seditiously, of the Government or Governors, or State-Matters.

. 104. Any Person subscribing the Terms of Communion in the Record of the said
Church or Profession, before the Precinct Register, and any five Members of the
said Church or Profession, shall be thereby made a Member of the said Church or
Profession.

. 105. Any Person striking out his own Name, out of any Religious Record, or
his Name being struck out by any Officer thereunto authorized by each Church or
Profession respectively, shall cease to be a Member of that Church or
Profession.

. 106. No Man shall use any reproachful, reviling, or abusive Language, against
the Religion of any Church or Profession, that being the certain way of
disturbing the Peace, and of hindering the Conversion of any to the Truth, by
engaging them in Quarrels and Animosities, to the hatred of the Professors and
that Profession, which otherwise they might be brought to assent to.

. 107. Since Charity obliges us to wish well to the Souls of all Men, and
Religion ought to alter nothing in any Man's Civil Estate or Right, it shall be
lawful for Slaves as well as others, to enter themselves, and be of what Church
or Profession any of them shall think best, and thereof be as fully Members as
any Freeman. But yet no Slave shall hereby be exempted from that Civil Dominion
his Master has over him, but be in all other Things in the same State and
Condition he was in before.

. 108. Assemblies, upon what Pretense soever of Religion, not observing and
performing the abovesaid Rules, shall not be esteemed as Churches, but unlawful
Meetings, and be punished as other Riots.

. 109. No Person whatsoever, shall disturb, molest or persecute another for his
speculative Opinions in Religion, or his Way of Worship.

. 110. Every Freeman of Carolina shall have absolute Power and Authority over
his Negro Slaves, of what Opinion or Religion soever.

. 111. No Cause, whether Civil or Criminal, of any Freeman, shall be Tried in
any Court of Judicature, without a Jury of his Peers.

. 112. No Person whatsoever shall hold or claim any Land in Carolina by
Purchase or Gift, or otherwise, from the Natives or any other whatsoever, but
merely from and under the Lords Proprietors, upon pain of Forfeiture of all his
Estate, moveable or immovable, and perpetual Banishment.

. 113. Whosoever shall possess any Freehold in Carolina, upon what Title or
Grant soever, shall at the farthest from and after the Year One Thousand Six
Hundred Eighty Nine, pay yearly unto the Lords Proprietors for each Acre of
Land, English Measure, as much fine Silver as is at this present in one English
Penny, or the Value thereof to be as a Chief Rent and Acknowledgment to the
Lords Proprietors, their Heirs and Successors for ever. And it shall be lawful
for the Palatine's Court by their Officers at any Time, to take a new Survey of
any Man's Land, not to out him of any Part of his Possession, but that by such
a Survey the just Number of Acres he possesses, may be known, and the Rent
thereupon due, may be paid by him.

. 114. All Wrecks, Mines, Minerals, Quarries of Gems, and Precious Stones, with
Pearl-fishing, Whale-fishing, and one Half of all Ambergreece, by whomsoever
found, shall wholly belong to the Lords Proprietors.

115. All Revenues and Profits belonging to the Lords Proprietors, in common,
shall be divided into ten Parts, whereof the Palatine shall have three, and
each Proprietor one; but if the Palatine shall Govern by a Deputy, his Deputy
shall have one of those three Tenths, and the Palatine the other two Tenths.

. 116. All Inhabitants and Freemen of Carolina above Seventeen Years of Age,
and under sixty, shall be bound to bear Arms, and serve as Soldiers whenever
the Grand Council shall find it necessary.

. 117. A true Copy of these Fundamental Constitutions shall be kept in a great
Book by the Register of every Precinct, to be subscribed before the said
Register. Nor shall any Person, of what Condition or Degree soever, above
seventeen Years old, have any Estate or Possession in Carolina, or Protection
or Benefit of the Law there, who has not before a Precinct Register subscribed
these Fundamental Constitutions in this Form: I A. B. do promise to bear Faith
and true Allegiance to our Sovereign Lord King CHARLES the Second, His Heirs
and Successors; and will be true and faithful to the Palatine and Lords
Proprietors of Carolina, their Heirs and Successors, and with my utmost Power
will defend them, and maintain the Government according to this Establishment
in these Fundamental Constitutions.

. 118. Whatsoever Alien shall in this Form, before any Precinct Register
subscribe these Fundamental Constitutions, shall be thereby Naturalized.

. 119. In the same Manner shall every Person at his Admittance into any Office,
subscribe these Fundamental Constitutions.

. 120. These Fundamental Constitutions, in Number a hundred and twenty, and
every Part thereof, shall be and remain the Sacred and unalterable Form and
Rule of Government of Carolina, for ever. Witness our Hands and Seals, the
First Day of March, 1669.

RULES of PRECEDENCE.
1. THE Lords Proprietors, the eldest in Age first, and so in order.

2. The eldest Sons of the Lords Proprietors, the eldest in Age first, and so
in order.

3. The Landgraves of the Grand Council, he that has been longest of the Grand
Council first, and so in order.

4. The Cassiques of the Grand Council, he that has been longest of the Grand
Council first, and so in order.

5. The seven Commoners, of the Grand Council that have been longest of the
Grand Council, he that has been longest of the Grand Council first, and so in
order.

6. The youngest Sons of Proprietors, the eldest first, and so in order.

7. The Landgraves, the eldest in Age first, and so in order.

8. The seven Commoners, who next to those before mentioned have been longest
of the Grand Council, he that has been longest of the Grand Council first, and
so in order.

9. The Cassiques, the eldest in Age first, and so in order.

10. The seven remaining Commoners of the Grand Council, he that has been
longest of the Grand Council first, and so in order.

11. The Male Line of the Proprietors.

The rest shall be determined by the Chamberlain's Court.

COPY OF THE Fundamental Constitutions OF CAROLINA. Agreed on by all the Lords
Proprietors, and Signed and Sealed by them, (the Original being sent to
CAROLINA by Major DANIEL:)
April the Eleventh, School.
OUR LATE SOVEREIGN LORD KING CHARLES IId, Having out of his Royal Grace and
Bounty, granted unto Us, the Province of CAROLINA, with all the Royalties,
Properties, Jurisdictions and Privileges of a County Palatine, as large and
ample as the County Palatine of Durham, with other great Privileges; for the
better Settlement of the Government of the said Place, and establishing the
Interest of the Lords Proprietors with Equality, and without Confusion; and
that the Government may be made most agreeable to the Monarchy under which we
live, and of which this Province is a Part; and that we may avoid erecting a
numerous Democracy, We the Lords Proprietors of the Province aforesaid, with
the advice and consent of the Landgraves and Cassiques and Commons in this
present Parliament assembled, have agreed to this following Form of Government,
to be Perpetually established amongst us, unto which we do oblige our selves,
our Heirs and Successors, in the most binding ways that can be devised.

1. THE Proprietor's Court shall consist of the Palatine, and seven
Proprietors; wherein nothing shall be acted without the Presence and Consent of
the Palatine, and three others of the Lords Proprietors: This Court shall have
Power to call and dissolve Parliaments, to pardon all Offenses, to make
Elections of all Offices in the Proprietor's Disposal, to nominate and appoint
Port Towns; and also, shall have Power by their Order, to the Treasurer, to
dispose of all public Treasure, excepting Money granted by the Parliament, and
by them directed to some particular public Use: And also, shall have a
Negative upon all Acts, Orders, Votes and Judgments of the Parliament. And
shall have all Power granted to the Lords Proprietors, by their Patent, from
our Sovereign Lord the King, except in such Things as are limited by these
Fundamental Constitutions.

2. DURING the Absence of the Palatine and Proprietors from Carolina, the
Governor, commissionated by the Proprietors, together with their respective
Deputies, shall be the Proprietor's Court there, and shall have all the Powers
above mentioned, excepting in pardoning Offenses, and constituting Port-Towns.

3. IN the Proprietor's Court, the Palatine, and any three of the Proprietors
or the Governor, and any three of the Proprietor's Deputys shall make a Quorum.

4. NO Deputy of any Proprietor shall have any Power, whilst the Deputator is
in any Part of Carolina, except the Proprietor (whose Deputy he is) be a Minor.

5. DURING the Minority of any Proprietor, his Guardian shall have Power to
constitute and appoint his Deputy.

6. THERE shall be a Parliament, consisting of the Proprietors or their
Deputies, by themselves, the Landgraves and Cassiques in the upper House, and
the Freeholders out of every County, to be chosen by the Freeholders of the
said County, respectively; together with the Citizens and Burgesses, to be
elected by the Cities and Borroughs (which shall be hereafter created) in the
Lower House.

7. AND since all Power and Dominion is most naturally founded in Property, and
that it is reasonable that every Man, who is empowered to dispose of the
Property and Estate of others, should have a Property of his own, whereby he is
tied in Interest to the Good and Welfare of that Place and Government, whereby
he is entrusted with such Power; it is therefore declared and appointed, That
no Person shall be admitted, or shall continue to sit or vote in Parliament as
a Landgrave, who has not actually taken up, and has in his Possession at least,
(...) Acres, part of the Land granted him in his Patent and (...) Slaves, or in
the Possession of his Tennants, (...) Acres of Land. And whose real and
personal Estate shall not be worth at least, (...) Pounds: Nor as a Cassique to
sit or vote in Parliament, who has not actually taken up, and has in his
Possession at least, (...) Acres, Part of the Land granted him in his Patent
and (...) Slaves, or in the Possession of his Tenants (...) Acres of Land. And
whose real and personal Estate shall not be worth at least, (...) Pounds

8. NO Person shall be admitted, or continue to sit or vote in Parliament as a
Representative of the Commons of Carolina, who is not possessed of at least,
(...) Acres of Land: And whose real and personal Estate is not worth (...)
Pounds.

9. NO Person shall be capable of giving his Voice for the Election of a Member
to serve in Parliament, that is not actually possessed of (...) Acres of Land,
and is a Householder, and has a Family, and whose real and personal Estate does
not amount to (...) Pounds.

10. THE present Number of the Representatives of the Commons shall be (...)
who (as the Country shall increase) shall also proportionably be increased, if
the Commons do so desire, but shall in no future Time be increased, beyond one
hundred.

11. AND pursuant to that just Maxim of Government above mentioned, and for the
Preservation of the Balance of Power, according to the Proportion of the
Property, it is declared and appointed, That the Number of the Representatives
of the People to be sent from any County or Place, shall be more or less,
according to the Charges born, and Money paid by each Respective Division of
the Country, in the last General Assessment foregoing such Election.

12. THE Landgraves and Cassiques who compose the Upper-House, shall not at any
time exceed half the Number of the Commons.

13. THE Landgraves and Cassiques shall be created by the Lords Proprietors
Letters Patents, under their Great Seal, by the joint Election of the
Proprietors, or a Quorum of them, which shall be the Hereditary Nobility of the
Province of Carolina; and by Righ^ of their Dignity, be Members of the
Upper-House of Parliament, each Landgrave shall have (...) Acres of Land, to be
taken up in (...) several Counties and each Cassique (...) Acres of Land to be
taken up in (...) several Counties, and the said Honor and Dignity shall
descend to the Eldest Son, unless by Deed or Will Devised to any other of the
Sons, or for want of Sons to the Eldest Daughter; unless as aforesaid; and for
want of such to the next Heir (unless devised as aforesaid by Deed or Will) to
be attested by Three credible Witnesses, whereof one at least to be of the
Nobility) to any other Person.

14. AND to the End, that such an Order of Persons being made Noble, and
invested with great Powers and Privileges, whereby to engage them in a more
particular Affection toward this Settlement and Country of Carolina, may not
fall into Contempt, or be any ways injurious to the Constitution of the
Government, It is Declared and Appointed that whatsoever Landgrave or Cassique,
his Heirs and Successors, shall not be qualified as in Article 7th, and so be
excluded from the aforesaid Privilege of Sitting and Voting in the Upper
House, and shall continue defective in the said Qualification for the space of
Forty Years successively, such Landgrave or Cassique, his Heirs and Successors
shall from thenceforth be for ever utterly Excluded, and his or their Dignity,
Honor, Privilege and Title of Landgrave or Cassique shall cease and be
utterly lost, and the Letters Patents of Creation of such Dignity shall be
vacated.

15. AND in order to the due Election of Members for the Biennial Parliament,
it shall be lawful for the Freeholders of the respective Precinct to meet the
first Tuesday in September every Two Years, in the same Town or Place they last
met in, to choose Parliament Men, and there to choose those Members that are to
sit* next November following, unless the Proprietors Court shall by sufficient
Notice (...) Days before, appoint some other Place for their Meeting.

16. A New Parliament shall be assembled the first Monday of the Month of
November every second Year, and shall meet and sit in the Town they last sat
in, without any Summons, unless by the Proprietors Court in Carolina they be
summoned to meet at any other Place, and if there shall be Occasion of a
Parliament in these Intervals, it shall be in the power of the Proprietors
Court to assemble them in (...) Days Notice, and at such Time and Place, as the
Court shall think fit.

17. AT the Opening of every Parliament, the first thing that shall be done,
shall be the Reading of these Fundamental Constitutions, which the Palatine and
the Proprietors, and the Members then present, shall subscribe; Nor shall any
Person whatsoever Sit or Vote in the Parliament, till he has in that Session
subscribed these Fundamental Constitutions, in a Book kept for that purpose, by
the Clerk of the Parliament.

18. ANY Act or Order of Parliament that is Ratifyed in Open Parliament, during
the same Session, by the Governor and Three more of the Lords Proprietors
Deputies, shall be in Force, and continue till the Palatine himself and Three
more of the Lords Proprietors themselves signify their Dissent to any of the
said Acts or Orders, under their Hands and Seals. But if Ratified under their
Hands and Seals, then to continue according to the time limited in such Act.

19. THE whole Province shall be divided into Counties by the Parliament.

20. NO Proprietor, Landgrave or Cassique, shall hereafter take up a Signory or
Barony that shall exceed Four Thousand Acres or thereabouts for a Proprietor or
Landgrave; and Two Thousand Acres or thereabouts, for a Cassique in one County.

21. NO Cause, whether Civil or Criminal, of any Freeman, shall be tried in any
Court of Judicature, without a Jury of his Peers.

22. NO Landgrave or Cassique shall be tried for any Criminal Cause in any but
the Chief Justices Court, and that by a Jury of his Peers, unless a sufficient
Number of such cannot be legally had, and then to be supplied by the best and
most sufficient Freeholders.

23. IF upon the Decease of the Governor, no Person be appointed by the Lords
Proprietors to succeed him, then the Proprietor's Deputies shall meet and
choose a Governor, till a new Commission be sent from the Lords Proprietors,
under their Hands and Seals.

24. BALLOTTING shall be continued in all Elections of the Parliament, and in
all other Cases where it can conveniently be used.

25. NO Man shall be permitted to be a Freeman of Carolina, or to have any
Estate or Habitation within it, that does not acknowledge a GOD, and that GOD
is publicly and solemnly to be Worshipped.

26. AS the Country comes to be sufficiently planted and distributed into fit
Divisions, it shall belong to the Parliament to take care for the Building of
Churches, and the public Maintenance of Divines to be employed in the Exercise
of Religion, according to the Church of England, which being the only True and
Orthodox, and the National Religion of the King's Dominions, is so also of
Carolina, and therefore it alone shall be allowed to receive public
Maintenance by Grant of Parliament.

27. ANY seven or more Persons agreeing in any Religion, shall constitute a
Church or Profession, to which they shall give some Name to distinguish it from
others.

28. THE Terms of Admittance and Communion with any Church or Profession, shall
be written in a Book, and therein be subscribed by all the Members of the said
Church or Profession, which shall be kept by the public Register of the
Precinct wherein they reside.

29. THE Time of every one's Subscription and Admittance, shall be dated in the
said Book of Religious Records.

30. IN the Terms of Communion of every Church or Profession, these following
shall be three, without which no Agreement or Assembly of Men upon Pretense of
Religion shall be accounted a Church or Profession, within these Rules: I. That
there is a GOD. II. That GOD is publicly to be Worshipped. III. That it is
lawful, and the Duty of every Man, being thereunto called by those that govern,
to bear Witness to Truth, and that every Church or Profession shall in their
Terms of Communion set down the external Way whereby they witness a Truth as in
the Presence of God, whether it be by Laying Hands on, or Kissing the Bible, as
in the Church of England, or by holding up the Hand, or any sensible way.


31. NO Person above Seventeen Years of Age, shall have any Benefit or
Protection of the Law, or be capable of any Place of Profit or Honor, who is
not a Member of some Church or Profession, having his Name recorded in some
one, and but one Religious Record at once.

32. NO Person of any Church or Profession shall disturb or molest any
Religious Assembly.

33. NO Person whatsoever shall speak any thing in their Religious Assembly,
irreverently or seditiously of the Government or Governor, or of State-Matters.

34. ANY Person subscribing the Terms of Communion in the Records of the said
Church or Profession before the Precinct Register, and any Five Members of the
said Church or Profession, shall be thereby made a Member of the said Church or
Profession.

35. ANY Person striking out his own Name out of any Religious Records, or his
Name being struck out by any Officer thereunto Authorized by each Church or
Profession respectively, shall cease to be a Member of that Church or
Profession.

36. NO Man shall use any reproachful, reviling or abusive Language against the
Religion of any Church of Profession, that being the certain Way of disturbing
the Peace, and of hindering the Conversion of any to the Truth, by engaging
them in Quarrels, and Animosities, to the Hatred of the Professors and that
Profession, which otherwise they may be brought to assent to.

37. SINCE Charity obliges us to wish well to the Souls of all Men, and
Religion ought to alter nothing in any Man's Civil Estate or Right, It shall be
lawful for Slaves as well as others, to enter themselves, and be of what Church
or Profession any of them shall think best, and thereof be as fully Members as
any Freeman; but yet no Slave shall hereby be exempted from that Civil Dominion
his Master had over him, but be in all other Things in the same State and
Condition he was in before.

38. ASSEMBLYS upon what Pretense soever of Religion, not observing and
performing the abovesaid Rules, shall not be esteemed as Churches, but Unlawful
Meetings, and be punished as other Riots.

39. NO Person whatsoever shall disturb, molest or prosecute another for his
Speculative Opinions in Religion, or his way of Worship.

40. EVERY Freeman of Carolina shall have Absolute Power and Authority over his
Negro Slave, of what Opinion or Religion soever.

41. ANY Person at his Admittance into any Office or Place of Trust whatsoever,
shall subscribe these Fundamental Constitutions in this Form: I A. B. do
promise to bear Faith and true Allegiance to our Sovereign Lord King WILLIAM,
and will be true and faithful to the Palatine and Lords Proprietors of
Carolina, their Heirs and Successors, and with my utmost Power will defend
them, and maintain the Government according to this Establishment, in these
Fundamental Constitutions.

THESE Fundamental Constitutions in Number Forty One, and every Part thereof
shall be and remain the Inviolable Form and Rule of Government of Carolina, for
Ever. Witness our Hands and Seals, this Eleventh Day of April, School.

BATH PALATINE. A. Ashley. CRAVEN. BATH for the Lord Carterett. William
Thornburgh for Sir John Colleton. Tho. Amy. William Thornburgh.


FINIS.

