INNOCENCE VINDICATED: BY A Brief and Impartial Narrative OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF
THE Court of Sessions IN BRISTOL AGAINST Ichabod Chauncy, Physician in that
City: TO HIS Conviction on the Statute of the 35th Eliz. on the 9th. of April,
and to his Abjuration of all the Kings Dominions for ever, Aug. 15. 1684.

TOGETHER, With some Passages Subsequent thereunto.

Published by the said I. CHAVNCY.

Prove. 27.4. Wrath is cruel, and Anger is outrageous, but who can stand before
Envy? Psalm. 9.9. The Lord will be a Refuge for the Oppressed, a Refuge in times
of Trouble. LONDON: Printed by George Larkin at the lower End of Broad street,
next to London-Wall. 1684.

Innocence Vindicated, etc.
THough the Law under which I suffer, be by far the most severe of any in
England, that Respects Religious matters, (yea far beyond any that concerns the
Papists as such) yet had not I judged that there had been open Violence offered
to several plain Statutes in the Management of my Prosecution, and bringing me
under present Circumstances; and all other Ways and Attempts for Redress to my
present Grievances, rendered utterly ineffectual through the restless
Solicitations, and false Representations of my implacable (though causeless)
Adversaries. I had saved both my Self and the World the trouble of this present
Narrative. But now having no other way left to Vindicate my self; That the
World may pass a right Judgment both of my Person and Sufferings, I am fain to
give a plain Account, both of the one, and of the other; and leave them to
judge of both: Hoping also, that hereby his Majesty may take Occasion to see
how much many of his Subjects are abused and oppressed, by the malicious
Prosecutions of some inferior Officers, who prosecute Penal Laws upon them
rather to satisfy their own Lusts, and personal Revenge, then for any true
Zeal they have either to Justice or Loyalty. And when they have Oppressed any
by illegal Proceedings, least their unjust Practices should be detected, and
they suffer shame for the same; (being afraid to be brought to the Light, least
their Deeds should be Reproved) The next Design is, by Calumnies and false
Insinuations, to Render the Persons of those whom they have injured, as
dangerous to the Government, and only fit to be destroyed; yea to Obstruct and
Obviate all possible Attempts, that their Oppressed Adversaries can make for
their just Vindication; which they do by frustrating their Endeavors in
seeking Justice by Appeals, either by Way-laying them in all their steps, and
so hindering their Access unto; or by Prae-occupying the minds of those with
Prejudices against them, who only are capable to Vindicate, or do them Right.

These having been the Methods of my chiefest Adversaries; first, by rendering
my Person Vile and Contemptible, and then as Dangerous and Disaffected to the
Government: And next, by putting a fair Gloss upon their own Proceedings
against me, and Obviating all my Applications for a Relief, by Writ of Error
and Self-vindication, I am forced in a way of Self-Defence to undertake a
double work; First, to give the World an Account of my Person and Principles;
and then, of the Beginning as well as Progress of my present Persecution.

As to my civil Profession, I am a Physician, was born of Pious and Generous
Parents, of Competent Estate; was bred a Scholar from my Childhood, and
(through the Bounty of the Almighty) was never driven to the Straits of taking
upon me the mean Employment of a Drummer; (as some of my Adversaries have often
scornfully and against Knowledge Reproached me) I have been a Master of Arts
almost this thirty years, have been a Licentiate of the College of Physicians
in London, well toward twenty years; have practiced Physic in Bristol with
considerable Success, and general Acceptance, near this eighteen years; dare
Challenge the worst of mine Adversaries, to say, and prove it, wherein I have
all this while Acted any thing that looks Disloyal to the King: Yea, I Account
it my Duty, to be subject to the Higher Powers, and believe that whosoever
resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God, and shall receive unto
themselves Damnation: and that this Subjection among Christians should not be
only for Wrath, but for Conscience sake: And as matter of Duty, and a thing
that is good and acceptable in the fight of God; I do daily heartily pray for
the Kings Person, and for all that are in Authority under him; and therefore
profess my self an open Enemy to any Plots or Attempts against the Kings Person
and Government; and as a Testimony of my Loyalty, am is ready as any of my
Adversaries, to give all reasonable Assurance of my Fidelity to the Government,
by taking the usual Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy. And let them also, if
they can, testify against me of any Injustice or Unmercifulness toward my
Neighbor, or Insobriety and Intemperance toward my self.

And as for my Religion, I own my self a Protestant; and for my Faith, do
believe all the Doctrinal Principles Contained in the Articles of the Church of
England; and as for Worship, have Accomodated the same (as near as I could) to
the Rule of Gods Word, and the best Examples of Primitive Saints; and wherein I
have in any thing differed, from the public instituted way of Worship, have
always labored to manage my self, with the least Offense imaginable, toward
those from whom I have Dissented; avoiding all Censoriousness of others
differing from me.

If these things be otherwise, I dare say with Job, Chap. 31.35, 36, 37. Let my
Adversary write it in a Book, and (if he can) prove the contrary, etc.

As to my present Sufferings, in Order to a due Understanding thereof, it is
needful to Reflect upon the Cause and Occasion, as well as the manner of
managing thereof: The internal moving cause thereof, I take to be an implacable
Prejudice formed in the mind of Mr. Romsey our Town-clark of Bristol, against
me; occasioned chiefly after this following manner, if I mistake not, (though
he had declared before that, some Prejudice against me.) Soon after the
breaking out of the late Plot, it became a common Discourse, that all the Kings
Head Club in London, were concerned in it; and that the Horse-shooe Club in
Bristol (so called, because during the time of the last Election of
Parliament Men, several Citizens intending to choose Sir Robert Atkins and Sir
Jonathan Knight Senior, Parliament men for that City, did frequently Assemble
there, about that Affair) were a Branch of the same; and that all the said Club
should be Indicted, and diverse of them sent for up to the Councel-Table; in
order to which, diverse were convened before our Justices, to be examined about
it, among which I was one; when I came before them, among other things they
questioned me, what Persons used to meet there? Seeing Mr. Romsey Siting by,
(and writing Letters as I judged about that matter) I named him for one, who
met (though not in the same place yet) at the Mare-maid Tavern, with the same
Persons, about the same thing, and was as Zealous for Sir Robert Atkins as any
of them; this is notoriously known, and he confessed it before he departed the
Room.

I Nominated him for one, because I thought it hard and unreasonable, that he
should be a means to bring so many scores, if not Hundreds, in trouble, (merely
for his own Advantage) in a matter wherein he was equally concerned with them,
and knew them all innocent, upon this he was greatly displeased with me, as
supposing this Discovery might threaten his place at that Juncture of time;
though I told the Justices, that I knew of no unlawful Act committed by the
said Club, neither did charge him with any. Howbeit, ever since this, he
entertained an implacable Prejudice against me, and threatened to diverse, that
he would speedily either cast me in a Goal, or make me fly the Country. (This I
suppose he will not deny.)

In pursuance whereof, though I stood indicted two years before on the same
35th of Eliz. by him, yet the very next Quarter Sessions, prefers two more
heavy indictments against me, at one and the same time, either of them enough
to ruin me; The one upon the Statute of Eliz. 23. for twenty pound a Month for
eleven Months: The other on the 35th Eliz. on which last, for want of any later
Crime, he charge me for one Committed above four years before the Indictment.
And having got the Bills found by the Grand Jury, so earnestly was he bent upon
their Prosecution, that he exacts of me Recognizances more than double to what
was required of others in the like Case, viz. 200 l. to each of mine; whereas
another indicted on the 35th. of Eliz. was bound but in 80 l. -- But because my
chief concern lies with this last Indictment, which threatens my Estate,
Liberty, and Life, it is most reasonable I should be most concerned about the
Management thereof against me. But it is not fit for me to judge, (as being too
partial in my own Cause) I had rather therefore, that those whose part it is,
would undertake it on my behalf. But before any true Judgment can pass for, or
against me, it is needful the Indictment should be produced, which runs after
this manner.

Comitat. Civit. Bristol. THE Jurors for Our Lord the King, do upon their Oath
present, That one Ichabod Chauncy, late of the City of Bristol, in the County
of the said City, Physician; Who on the third Day of August, in the Thirty
first Year of the Reign of Our Soveraegn Lord Charles the Second; by the Grace
of God, of England, Scotland, France and Ireland King; etc. Being of the Age of
Sixteen Years and upwards, did Obstinately, willingly, and without any
Reasonable Cause, refuse accedere (Anglice to Repair) to any Church, Chapel,
or usual Place of Common Prayers, to hear Divine Service, now Established by
the Laws and Statutes of this Realm of England. And as before, from the
foresaid third Day of August, in the Thirty first Year aforesaid, Obstinately,
Voluntarily, and without any Reasonable Cause, Abstained from Hearing Divine
Service in any Church, Chapel, or Usual Place of Common Prayer; unto the
fourteenth Day of September, in the Year beforementioned, viz. by the Space of
one Month and more, thence next following. And the aforesaid Jurors upon their
Oaths aforesaid, do further say, that the aforesaid Ichabod Chauncy, the same
fourteenth Day of September, in the One and Thirtieth Year aforesaid, in the
Precincts of the Castle, within the said City and County of Bristol, in a
certain House, was there of himself present, at an Unlawful Assembly,
Conventicle or Convention; under Color and Pretense of the Exercise of
Religion, against the Form of the Statute, in such Case made and Provided. And
also, against the Peace of Our Sovereign Lord the King, etc.

Whether this Indictment be faulty or not in point of Law it is not proper for
me (who am the Party concerned, and no Lawyer) to determine; but I Will tell the
Reader, that the day before my Trial, 'twas the judgment of a cunning Lawyer,
(that pleaded earnestly against me upon it the next day) the first letters of
whose name is Mr. J. H. that 'twas so illegal and faulty, that 'twas not worth
a F -- and that they could not touch an hair of my head by it, and that 'twas
not worth a Fee to be quit of such an Indictment; thus he expressed himself.
That which to me seems hard in the management thereof, is,

First, That notwithstanding 'twas by my Council pleaded, that Justices in
Sessions had no Power or Authority to inquire into, and judge upon Crimes
relating to that Statute, which Plea was according to the Sentiments of many,
if not most of the ablest Lawyers in England; yea, and of one of the Learned
Counsel which pleaded against me, who but the Sessions before did with great
strength of Law and Reason plead against the Jurisdiction of that Court, to try
a Gentleman in the very same Circumstances, and that Mr. Vincent either was
actually, or like to be discharged by Writ of Error upon the Plea, viz. That he
was Tried Coram non Judice (i. e. by Justices of the Peace in Sessions) that
yet they would proceed to assume that Power to themselves, though to make me
the first example which has been in England upon this Statute for many years:
and when my Counsel told them of how ill consequence it might be for them to
proceed, in case upon a review it should prove, that they had not Authority so
to do; this they were told was to Hector the Court.

Secondly, That notwithstanding the Statute (urged by my Counsel) of Eliz. 31.
chap. 5. Paragr. 5. where it is expressly said, That no Indictment shall lie upon
any Penal Statute beyond two years, but if it be laid for a Crime beyond, it
shall be void and of none effect; any Statute to the contrary notwithstanding:
And my Indictment appears to be laid for Crimes more then four years backwards
(before the Indictment,) yet must it be allowed for Legal.

Thirdly, That whereas the Indictment charge me, that obstinately and
willingly I refused to come to some Church or Chapel to hear Divine Service
(wherein doubtless the Stress of the Act lies) for a bare abstinence for four
weeks another Law punishes but at four shillings; and being at a Conventicle,
at five shillings, or ten at the most. but these punishes these two put
together with Imprisonment, loss of the whole Estate, and perpetual Banishment
or Death) therefore doubtless lies the chief of the Crime upon obstinate
refusing to come to Church; this my Counsel told them necessarily supposed some
legal Premonition, viz. either by the Ordinary or Parson of the Parish, etc.
but no such thing was attempted to be proved against me, and yet I must be
found guilty of the whole Indictment.

Fourthly, They did moreover admit of so light a proof of the Conventicle,
(which was one Essential Branch of the indictment,) in this weighty case, as
would scarce have been admitted by a considering Justice of the Peace, to
impose on the Offender the Penalty of Five Shillings, viz. One Person swears
that he came into a certain house in the Castle where a Sermon was Preaching,
and that I was there present; (whereas the Conventicle Act expressly requires
two Witnesses to swear the Fact, if it be proved that way) and what is this to
prove an unlawful Assembly, contrary to the Liturgy of the Church of England;
to prove which as he ought, he should have been there from the beginning, and
then he might have swore there was no Common Prayer.

Fifthly, Though 'twas objected by Counsel, that I had been punished before for
this Offense, (which was proved by a Copy of the Record produced in open Court,
which showed that I had been punished Ten Pound for this Conventicle, and the
Town-clark also owned in open Court, that he had drawn this Indictment by that
Record) yet exprelly contrary to that clause of the 22. Caroli Secundi Cap. 1.
Par. 14. which says, That any Person who shall be punished for any Offense by
virtue of this Act, shall not be punished for the same Offense, by virtue of
any other Act or Law whatsoever; yet notwithstanding this Plea added to all the
former in favor of my Cause, the Jury according to the instructions given them
by Mr. Town-clark, bring me in guilty; whereupon I am immediately sentenced to
Goal till Conformity, and making this following submission in the Church or
open Court, viz. That

I A. B. Do humbly confess and acknowledge, that I have grievousty offended
God, in contemning his Majesty's godly and lawful Government and Authority, by
absenting my self from Church, and from hearing Divine Service, contrary to the
Godly Laws and Statutes of this Realm, and in using and frequenting disordered
and unlawful Conventicles and Assemblies, under color and pretense of exercise
of Religion; and I am heartily sorry for the same, and do acknowledge and
testify in my Conscience, that no other person has or ought to have any power
or authority over his Majesty. And I do promise and protest, without any
dissimulation, or any color and means of any dispensation, that from
henceforth, I will from time to time obey and perform his Majesty's Laws and
Statutes, in repariring to the Church, and in hearing Divine Service, and do my
utmost endeavor to maintian and defend the same.

Neither does the Wrath of mine Adversaries cease at my Imprisonment, but
follows me still, to bring me within the reach of the utmost Severity and
Penalty of the said Law. ( viz. the loss of my whole Estate, and Abjuration at
the end of three Months) Whereupon within the three Months, viz. the 16th Day
of June; I was by the Justices twice in one Day Summoned to Conform, and to
make the above recited Submission.

And to make this pinch the closer upon me, my chief Adversary (being all this
while in London) is using his utmost endeavors, to Obviate all Attempts made
by my Friends, both in Reference to a Pardon, or Writ of Error. And so fearful
is he least a Writ of Error should be obtained, and thereby his Acts of
Injustice be exposed to the World, that when he understood that through a just
Report of my Cause, made by Mr. Attorney General to the King and Council, a
Writ was like to be granted: He takes a Coach on purpose, and rides away to
Hampton Court, where the Council was that day to sit; and desiring to be called
in when the Report of my Cause was made, by Mis-representing my Person and
Cause, procured a stop to be put to the Writ of Error. -- Sometime after this,
He returns for Bristol, where he boasts of his great Success in hindering my
Writ of Error; supposing that now he had me at his Mercy* and that I must come
up to his Terms, or be undone. Therefore sends me word, that except I would
subscribe to a Petition, acknowledging that I had been legally Convicted, there
was no pardon or Writ of Error to be procured: but in Case I would do that, he
would not Obstruct but promote it.

This I refused to do, as judging that several illegalities had been acted in
Proceedings against me. At length, about the 8th of this instant August, a good
friend of mine came unexspectedly to Town, who coming to visit me in Newgate,
and Commiserating my Condition, resolved to discourse Mr. Town Clark about me,
which he accordingly did. The Town Clark after much Discourse, and many
Complaints, told him what kind offers he made me, and that I was so stout, I
would not Petition the King; my Friend told him, he did dare to engage for the
contrary, and undertook to draw a Petition which both of us should like, which
accordingly he did, and delivered it to the Town Clark, who with his own Pen
altered several things, by Addition and Substraction. Agreeing, that if a
Petition according to this model were consented to, then he would prefer the
said Petition, either to procure a Pardon, or a Writ of Error. I consented to
the same, and caused it to be new drawn and prepared for him, when my Friend
went out of Town, the Town Clark promised all Aid and Dispatch, according to
these Terms. The Person who new drew the Petition acquainted him that the
Petion was drawn; which Petition was as follows.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
The Humble Petition of Ichabod Chauncy Physician, Prisoner in the Prison of
Newgate, in Your Majesty's City and County of Bristol.
Most Humbly Shows,
THat at a Sessions held for the said City and County, on the 9th Day of April
last past; Your Petitioner was Co^v^cted upon the Statute made the 35th of
Eliz. Entitul^d, An Act to retain Her Majesty's Subjects in their due
Obedience. That your Petitioner is advised, These two Clauses he added with his
own Pen.
that the Court of Sessions has ^o Jurisdiction in that Cause. And also, that
the Fact ought to be drawn in Question within two years; which in this Case was
not for the space of four Years and more. But notwithstanding your Petitioner
is Imprisoned, and is liable to abjure Your Majesty's Realms and Dominions, and
lose his Real and Personal Estate; unless he Conform to the Lyturgy of the
Church of England That Your Petitioner has endeavored to satisfy himself in
such Conformity, yet cannot. But has always in all other matters behaved
himself as a Loyal Subject to Your Majesty, and shall always so do, if Your
Majesty will be pleased to extend Your Grace to him, so as to continue him Your
Subject.

That Your Petitioner has always been, and is ready to give Assurance of his
Fidelity to your Majesty and Government, by taking the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, and is willing to leave his Habitation in the said City of Bristol,
He required these Terms before he would promise any Assistance which I thought
better to yield unto, then to lie in a nasty Goal.
if that be Your Majesty's Pleasure.

Your Petitioner most Humbly prays, That your Majesty would be graciously
pleased either to grant Your Majesty's gracious Pardon, or to give leave that
your Petitioner may bring a Writ of Error to Reverse the said Proceedings
against him.

And Your Petitioner (as in Duty bound) shall ever Pray, etc.
When he heard the Petition was ready, he seemed to demur, and to signify that
something else must be done by me, before he could prefer or promote it; and
accordingly the next Day sends me this following Letter.

Doctor Chauncy,
I have of late been desired by some friends of yours, Sure he for got that he
had before assented to my Loyalty asserted in my Petition.
to be kind in asisting your Enlargement; but not without a sting in the Tail,
as if my malice to you, had been the single reason of your Confinement, without
any sense of your Offense to the Law in that particular, or the fair Trial and
other legal Proceedings that you had for it, or any reluctance for your often
daring, and defyance of the Governors of this City, as often as you were
called before there: In the first place, I call God to witness, I never had any
malice against you; He had now forgot that I was a chief instrument to help him
into his Office. For which I have been often enough reproached since.
nor had I any motive so considerable to induce me to your Prosecution (that is
the share I had in it) but the Apprehension that your Inclinations were devoted
against, and your Interest very dangerous to the Kings Interest here; besides
those many Arguments, I have of your particular prejudice against me for the
sake of my Office; and endeavors to supplant me even in that. This I don't lay
to your charge. But if you will do any thing to give satisfaction of your
behavior for the future to the Kings Service: I will be so far from opposing
your enlargement, that I will do what you never had Religion nor good nature
enough to think on, which is, I will use my small endeavor to promote it.

Your Servant John Romsey.


One that reads this Letter, and knows not the Gentleman, would imagine him a
person entirely devoted to his Majesty's Interest, as if that were the Pole
Star by which he sails in the management of all his actions. How sincere he
may be in his affections to it, I Will not undertake to censure; but I believe
very many (and those not Dissenters) do question his judgment in Prosecuting
thereof; as judging that discouraging the chief Traders of this City, by severe
Prosecutions, on Penal Laws, too heavy Fines and Imprisonments, whereby some
are forced to quit the City; and others to withdraw themselves from Trade, that
they may live retiredly; are very unintelligible methods to promote the same.
Whether by this means the Trade of this sometime flourishing City has not been
greatly abated, to his Majesty's great detriment, needs no other proof then
comparing the Kings Customs in this Port since these things began, with what
they were before: Which, if I am not greatly misinformed fall short some years
20000 l. per Annum of what they were before; I verily believe did this
Gentleman find by this management of Affairs, his own Interest did suffer
proportionably, he would soon change his measures. But these things bring
Grists to his Mill.

Well as to the Letter the person to whom he sent it, to convey it to me,
writes me word after this manner.

SIR,
Mr. Townclark has sent the enclosed, and expects your answer, I perceive if
he like not your answer, he will hinder your Pardon and Writ of Error.

Whereupon I sent him the following Answer, which I thought as modest as the
matter would bear.


SIR,
That any of my Friends have been using endeavors for my Enlargement, I esteem
as matter of great obligation, they proceeding chiefly from their own good will
toward me; what expressions they used, (as of Malice being the single Reason
of Proceedings against me,) I know not, neither had they any such Advice from
me; but if they said that there was more than a little mixture of Prejudice
therein, I believe they are not single in their Sentiments; and whether diverse
Passages in the Management of my Prosecution gave not Suspicion of such a
thing, I leave you to judge: But you call God to Witness of the contrary,
therefore all Arguments of that sort, must vanish; my often defyance and daring
Carriage toward the Governors of this City, whenever called before them,
(wherewith you charge me) has been observed (for ought I know) by none but
your self. How fair my Trial was, and how Legal the Proceedings against me have
been, is fitter for more indifferent Persons to judge, then either Mr. Rumsey,
or my self. And therefore I desired a Writ of Error, which (I am told) you
Obstructed. Your Apprehensions that my Inclinations were devoted against, and
my Interest dangerous to the Kings Interest here, were altogether groundless;
for neither word or deed of mine have ever signified any such inctinations; He
kenw nothing to allege, when he agreed to the Petition.
if they have, allege them against me. Your Apprehensions of my prejudice
against you for the sake of your Office, are as groundless as the former;
whatever I said or did (which you judge was with a design to supplant you) was
to your face, and that which you acknowledged true in my hearing. As to the
latter clause wherein you expect I should give satisfaction of my behavior for
the future, I know not what you mean by it; you know in my Petion, I declare my
self ready to take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, which I think are the
highest obligations of fidelity any honest man can lay himself under; and as
little Religion as I may be thought to have, when once I have taken them, shall
look upon my self more bound thereby, then by all pecuniary obligations. Sir,
if you think fit (upon your own Proposals) to prefer the Petition to which you
agreed, and to use your interest toward my inl^regement, you may be sure it
shall be thankfully acknowledged by

Your Friend and Servant J. Chapter


He had no sooner received this answer, but the very same day, viz. Aug. 15
after I had suffered eighteen weeks close Imprisonment in a nasty Goal, (it
being an adjourned Sessions) sends for me to Court. Being called to abjure, I
craved Jeave to give some reasons to the Court why they could not legally call
me to it; and that

First, Because 'twould be contrary to an express Statute in their own sense.
For upon my Trial, when my Counsel objected that my Indictment was void, as
being laid for a Crime committed above four years before, whereas the Statute
of Eliz. 31. says, That no Indictment upon any Penal Statute shall be of force
that calls in question a Fact beyond two years] It Was then answered, that that
Law did extend only to those Penal Statutes which did impose Pecuniary
Punishments limited to the King, and not Corporal Punishments: Now if they made
me abjure, I should then forfeit my Estate by the same Indictment; contrary to
the Law in their own sense.

Secondly, According to this Statute of the 35th, before abjuration, I ought to
have been Summoned thereto by a Justice of the Peace, which yet I had not been.

Thirdly, That they had Convicted me as as a Recusant, and the same Statute
says, That no Popish Recusant should be required to abjure by virtue of that
Act; they replied that I was not Convicted as a Popish Recusant. I told them I
thought that if they did not find in any Statute mention of Protestant
Recusants, then it must be supposed that (Coram Lege) all Recusants were
Popish. But all these Pleas being overruled, I was forced to abjure. I do
desire to asign me London or Harwich but they refused both
The Justices appointed me within three Months to depart from the Port of
Bristol.

Now having abjured, one would think the Penalties I had already sustained, viz
the loss of a very considerable Practice, eighteen weeks close Imprisonment,
the forfeiture of my whole Estate both personal and real; Banishment from all
the Kings Dominions for ever might have surfeited the most exalted malice; but
as though the Law on which I am Prosecuted had not been severe enough, before I
depart the Kingdom, I must be further stigmatized by a kind of Remonstrance
preferred to the Grand Jury at our General Goal Delivery, which was about five
days after my abjuration; The Paper our T. Cl. presents to the Grand Jury,
contained such black Characters and high Charges against me, that they
absolutely refused to subscribe it. Upon which refusal many hard words of
displeasure passed from him to the Grand Jury. Whereupon they were desired to
draw up such a Paper as they would subscribe, concerning me; and accordingly,
to gratify his importunity, they produced this following Declaration.

We whose Names are hereunto Subscribed, being the Grand Jurors for the Body of
the City and County of Bristol, in the Court of Oyer and Terminer, and General
Jail-delivery, holden the 20th of August, 1684. Do in the Names as well of Our
Selves, as of all His Majesty's Faithful and Loyal Subjects within this City,
return Our most Hearty Thanks to this Court, and all others concerned in the
Prosecution against Ichabod Chauncy, (late of this City) upon the Statute of
35. Eliz. for that to Our Knowledge during the time of his abode in this City,
(which has been for some Years) he has been a great Zealot for the Factious
Party, and by Reason of his Employment of Practicing Physic; We have Reason to
believe that he has had very Advantageous Success, in gaining to their Cause,
and Cherishing in it, very great Numbers of Proselytes. He was their Champion
to fight out the Battles of that Party, whenever it came in Question before
Our Magistrates; by which means, though he got of them the Character of a stout
Combatant, yet by the Magistrates of the City, he was still Reputed a saucy
Criminal. And this has not only induced them and us, but may also every one
that may come to the Knowledge of it, to be of the same mind, when they
consider that he has not only impudence to menace the deliberate, just, and
temperate Proceedings of this Court, with a Libel; But also, to part from it
with an Imprecation against it. And We do therefore Declare to this Court, and
to all the World, That it is Our Opinion, that the Proceedings against Him, to
the Abjuration of the Realm, was not only fair in all the Particulars thereof,
but of absolute necessity, for the quiet and peaceable Government of this City,
and for His Majesty's Service.


The plain Design of which in general, is partly to help Dun out of the Mire,
by justifying the Town-clark in all his Proceedings against me; to load me with
a Charge of such heavy Crimes, as may dash any Hopes of a Pardon, and blast my
Reputation for the future, wheresoever I may go hereafter. Wherefore, I think
all men would count me very unjust to my self, should I not endeavor to wipe
of those grievous Scandals, which this Remonstrance has unjustly, cast upon
me; which if not Answered, will for the future destroy my Credit, and so may
undo both my self and Family: And therefore cannot but make a few Remarks upon
it.

First they say, That in the Names as well of Our Selves as of all His
Majesty's Paithful and Loyal Subjects within this City, We return Our most
Hearty Thanks to this Court, and all others concerned in the Prosecution
against Ichabod Chauncy, upon the Statute of 35 Eliz.] There are 1000 (besides
Dissenters) in Bristol (and about it) that will neither concur with you in, nor
thank you for your Thanks.

For that to Our Knowledge he has been a great Zealot for the Factious Party.]
It Is no new thing to have the best of men so Reputed, Ast. 24.5.

We have Reason to believe, by Reason of his Employment, he has had very
advantageous Success, in gaining to their Cause;] I verily believe there is not
one Dissenter the more for me in England. (Unless my severe Prosecution have
made some.) Neither can they name one (of those many Numbers of Proselytes
which they say, I have made and cherished) that I ever solicited to forsake the
Church.

He was their Champion to fight out the Battles of that Party, whenever it
came in Question before Our Magistrates.] I was never before the Magistrates of
that City, but when forced to it, and that in my own Cause, except once to
vindicate my Wife, who was near five of the Clock in the Afternoon on a Sabbath
Day, taken up in the Streets, and sent to Bridewel; as supposing she was coming
from a Conventicle.

By which means he got of them the Character of a stout Combatant.] I never
till now thought my Reputation had been so great among them for Valor.

Yet by the Magistrates of the City, he was still Reputed a very sawey
Criminal.] If the Magistrates had so ill an Opinion of him, it is strange they
should almost all so far Encourage him, as to make use of him, for a Pliysician
to themselves or Relations.

When they Consider, that he has not only Impudence to menace the deliberate,
just, and temperate Proceedings of this Court with a Libel.] Produce any Person
that ever heard me so menace the Court, and I Will be content to suffer the
Punishment of a Libeller.

But also to part from it with an Imprecation against it.] The Words wherewith
I parted from the Court were these: Mr. Town-clark, you have now had a full
stroke at me; all the harm I wish you, is, that God may not have as full a
stroke at you Living or Dying. If this be an Imprecation, let the World judge.
Methinks some one in the Grand Jury, should have known the just difference
between a Deprecation, and an Imprecation.

Against it.] The words were by name directed to the Town-clark, and I never
thought (till now) that the Town-clark had been the Court.

We Declare therefore, That it is Our Opinion, that the Proceedings against him,
to the Abjuration of the Realm, was not only fair in all the Particulars of it]
Sure now the Town-clark will be confirmed in his Opinion, that there is no need
of a Writ of Error, since he has the Opinion of the Grand Jury in Favor of
all his Proceedings. But who besides him, did ever value the Opinion of Grand
Juries, in matters of Law?

But of absolute necessity for the quiet and peaceable Government of this
City;] Is he any whit altered from what he was formerly? If not! How came the
City to be peaceably Governed while he was in it near eighteen years together.

And for his Majesty's Service,] His Majesty is only then served, when his just
Laws are Executed, and not when His Subjects by Arbitrary Proceedings of his
Ministers are Oppressed.

Thus I have given a true and impartial Account, of my present Case: The main
Design whereof, is not to cast any undue Reflections on the Law, or the King
and his Government; but to inform the World, that I am not the Turbulent,
disaffected, and disloyal Person, which my Adversaries have Represented me to
be; and that my Cause was not managed with so much Evidence and Impartiallity,
but that there was and is a just ground for me to expect (as a matter of right)
a Writ of Error. But if after all this, I shall still be denied from men,
either wilfully, or through Prejudice and Misinformation, that which I judge to
be my Right, I Will commit my Cause to Him that judges Righteously.

FINIS.

