A Consolatory Discourse For the support of Distressed WIDOWS AND ORPHANS: Of
General use to all Christians, who either are, or may be, left in such
Circumstances.

Psalm XL. 17. As for me, I am poor and needy; But the Lord thinks upon [or
cares for] me.

Psalm CXIX. 49.50. Remember the Word unto thy Servant, upon which thou have
caused me to hope.

This is my comfort in my affliction; for thy word has quickened me.

Psalm XCIV. 19. In the multitude of my thoughts within me thy comforts delight
my Soul.

Lament. III. 21. This I recall to my mind, therefore have I hope. It is of the
Lords mercies that we are not consumed, because his compassions fail not.

They are new every morning: Great is thy Faithfulness.

The Lord is my Portion, says my Soul; Therefore will I hope in him.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.



LONDON, Printed for John Newton, at the three Pigeons, over against the Inner-
Temple-Gate in Fleet Street. 1690.

THE PREFACE.
Christian Reader,
I Have only to pre-admonish, that this small Treatise is designed for the
Consolation of the Religious and Virtuous; they are the persons who have the
security of God Almighty's peculiar Providence over, and most Gracious promises
to them. He is nigh unto the righteous, his eyes are upon them, and his ears
are open unto their cry, to deliver them out of all their Troubles; and none of
them shall be desolate: Ps. 34.15, etc.] All things shall work together for
good to them that love God: [Rom. 8.28.] To them he will be better than a
Father, and Mother, and Husband, [ 2 Cor. 6.18. Ps. 123.13. Isa. 66.13. Isa.
49.15. -- 54.4. etc.] They are the Poor and Brokenhearted, whom he sends good
tidings to; They the mourners whom he will have comforted, [Isa. 61.1, 2, 3.]
Comfort ye, comfort ye my People, (says your God,) speak ye comfortably to
Jerusalem, [Ch. 40.1.] -- As for others, though they partake of the scatterings
of his Common Bounty, who makes his Sun to rise on the Evil and on the Good,
and sends Rain on the Just and on the Unjust, (St. Mat. 5.45.) and are
accordingly, the Objects of our general charity also in their extreme
necessities, who, as we have opportunity, must follow that pattern of doing
good to all; yet they fall not under that more special regard, which God
himself bears, and has commanded us in like manner to express, to the
Household of Faith, [Gal. 6.10.] -- The truth is, as they are not capable of
these divine Consolations, so they as little mind or relish them; and the
Apostle speaking of that sort of Widows, says, they are dead while they live,
1 Timothy 5.6.]

And now there will not need an Apology, I hope, for committing of these
Papers to the Press, any more than for contributing toward a public Benefit,
and putting it into the hands of many to gratify their afflicted Friends, at a
very small expense, with what may prove a Cordial to their Spirits beyond any
other; at least will add considerably to those other, supplies they are able to
afford for their relief. -- This I will say, for their greater encouragement,
that nothing is here offered, which affects the Differences and Disputes among
several societies of Christians, as now they stand unhappily divided; but only
what is agreeable to their common Sentiments, and that good Profession wherein
they all agree together, and I know not of any such entire Collection upon the
Subject, as is to be found in the ensuing Pages. -- Which that they may obtain
the end, whereunto they are intended, is the earnest desire of the Compiler and
Publisher, who is an hearty Lover of all sincere Christians, and zealously
concerned for the Widows and Fatherless among them; from whose Prayers and
Blessings he expects an abundant retribution. B. Camfield.

Scripture Consolations FOR DISTRESSED WIDOWS AND ORPHANS.
HAVING had occasion lately, with a more than ordinary sense and compassion, to
reflect upon the disconsolate estate of poor distressed Widows, and their
Fatherless Children, (Three Families of my Relations, and those of the Clergy
too, being fallen, in less than the space of a year, under that heavy
affliction,) I have for their sakes chiefly, and those that may be reduced to
the like calamity, on purpose collected such Scripture comforts, as relate more
especially to their sad and mournful condition; and do now most heartily
recommend the same unto their frequent perusal and serious meditations, That
they may learn, In Patience to possess their Souls, and through comfort of the
Scriptures to have hope. St. Luke. 21.19. Romans 15.4.
For which care also, I bow my knees to the Father of all Mercies and
compassions, that his Grace and Blessing may accompany these well meant
endeavors to their hearts, and That he would grant them, according to the
riches of his Glory, Ephesians. 3.16. Colos. 1.11.
to be strengthened with might, by his spirit in the inward man unto all
long-suffering with joyfulness.

Were not Divine Providence particularly concerned in taking care for such
Objects of Charity, the World it self could hardly subsist in any tolerable
state, abounding with so many instances of them in every Age and Place: But
then the assurance of this good Providence is no where to be had with like
advantage, both of certainty and fullness, as from that Book of Books, that
inexhaustible Fountain and Treasure of choicest Consolations, the Holy word of
God. From whence therefore,

First, I observe, That God is pleased to represent himself, as delighting in
the Title of their peculiar Friend and Patron, and desirous to be known and
glorified by it. He proclaimed this by Moses of old to the Israelites, Deuteronomy.
10.17, etc. The Lord your God is God of Gods, and Lord of Lords, a Great God,
and a Mighty, and a Terrible, who regards not Persons, nor takes reward: He
does execute the Judgment of the Fatherless and Widow, and loves the Stranger,
in giving him Food and Raiment; and the sense of this is often repeated in the
Psalms, and elsewhere.

Psalm 10.14. The Poor commits himself unto thee; Thou art the helper of the
Fatherless, [or Friendless,] And again, ver. 17.18. Lord, thou have heard the
desire of the humble, [or Poor,] Thou will prepare [or establish] their heart,
Thou will cause thine Ear to hear; To judge [or help] the Fatherless and
oppressed to their right, that the Men of the Earth be no more exalted against
them. Psalm. 68. [A Psalm in imitation of that of Moses at the setting forward
of the Ark, Numb. 10.35. and formed by King David, probably on like occasion,
at the bringing up the same from the house of Obed. Idem.] ver. 4. and 5.
Extol him that rides upon the Heavens, by his name Jah, and rejoice before
him. A Father of the Fatherless, and a Judge of the Widows, is God in his holy
Habitation. -- His name Jah (a contract of Jehovah) signifies his necessary
Existence; and as certainly as he is, he will show himself also a Father of the
Fatherless, and a Judge of the Widows; to hear and defend their Cause; And,
though he inhabits the highest Heaven, yet he is pleased here below to exhibit
himself in a peculiar manner the Protector and Patron of such distressed ones,
Psalm 72.12, 13, 14. He shall deliver the needy when he cries, the Poor also,
and him that has no helper. He shall spare the Poor and Needy, and shall save
the Souls of the needy. He shall redeem their Soul from deceit and violence,
and precious shall their blood be in his sight. It is spoken of God our
Savior, the Messiah, See Dr. Hammond in Loc.
whose Kingdom is there resembled to the Government of a just and merciful
Prince, that is ready to relieve all that are oppressed and wronged; A Prince
of bowels and compassions, to them that are in any kind of distress, to defend
and deliver them out of it, to rescue them from the hands of the injurious and
Oppressor, and preserve their lives from all that invade them, as persons that
are much valued and highly esteemed by him.

Psalm. 146. Having represented the variety of depending upon the best of mortal
Men, who at death must needs fail, and all their projects with them; He goes on
to proclaim their happiness, who have the Eternal God of Heaven and Earth for
their Helper; of whom he farther adds for their encouragement, ver. 7, etc. Who
executes Judgment for the oppressed, who gives food to the hungry; The Lord
loses the Prisoners; The Lord opens the Eyes of the blind; The Lord raises
them that are bowed down; The Lord loves the righteous, [or cares for the
righteous;] The Lord preserves the Strangers, he releiveth [or defendeth] the
Fatherless and Widow; But the way of the wicked he turns upside down. -- The
sense of all which is, that it is God^s peculiar property to interpose his Aid
most seasonably, when our Distresses are the greatest; To undertake the defense
and patronage of those, who are most unjustly oppressed; To work even Miracles
of mercy for them that stand in most need of them, signally to express his
favor to pious and charitable minded Men, in all their necessities, and under
all their restraints, and afflictions; and, if there be any more destitute than
other, more shut out from all sorts of humane superstition, as those that have
neither House, nor Parent, nor Husband to relieve and comfort them, [the
Stranger, the Fatherless, the Widow:] These are the first Objects of his Grace
and Compassion, of whom he will have a peculiar care, if in the absence of
worldly aids they sincerely apply themselves, and constantly adhere to his
Obedience; he will never leave, or forsake them. When my Father and Mother
forsake me, the Lord will take me up, says the Psalmist in another place,
Psalm. 27.10. And again, I have been young, and now am old; yet have I not seen
the Righteous forsaken, nor his Seed begging bread. Ps. 37.25. I will close
this with that significant expression of the Prophet, Hosea 14.3. In thee the
Fatherless finds mercy.

So then, by this gracious Style and Title which God assumes to himself, he
says plainly to his Servants, and Worshippers, what the Prophet Jeremiah
relates as spoken of, or unto Edom, (it may be in some different sense,) Jer.
49.11. Leave thy Fatherless Children, I will preserve them alive; and let thy
Widows trust in me.

-- He will establish the border of the Widow, says Solomon, Prove. 15.25. And
again, Enter not into the Fields of the Fatherless, for their Redeemer is
mighty; he will plead their cause with thee. Chap. 23.10, 11. to which effect
also he had said before, Rob not the poor because he is poor, neither oppress
the afflicted in the Gate; for the Lord will plead their cause, and spoil the
Soul of those that spoiled them, Chap. 22.22, 23.

And here I call to mind a memorable passage of Tertullian, in a Book written
to his own Wife, Ad uxorem. L. 1. C. 8.
where having quoted that of the Prophet Isaiah, Chapter 1. [Judge the Fatherless,
Plead for the Widow; come now and let us reason together,] as a sufficient
instance of the honor and esteem God has for Widows, He adds, that these two
names, (viz. the Fatherless, and Widows,) are no less open to the Divine mercy,
than they are exposed to humane contempt; and that the Father of all has
undertaken the Tuition of them: See, says he, how favorably he is looked
upon, who has done the Widows a good turn. But then, how considerable is the
Widow her self, whose right the Lord will assert, and whose Cause he will plead
and manage?

Secondly, This now leads me to observe, how God has displaid, and made good
this most gracious Title of his, by those special Commands which he has given
forth about them: Isa. 1.17.
-- Such was that I just now quoted, wherein he calls upon the Rulers of
Israel, as ever they looked for mercy at his hand, to Relieve the oppressed,
judge the Fatherless, and plead for the Widow: And so the charge to all earthly
Judges runs, Ps. 82.3. Defend the Poor and Fatherless, do justice to the
afflicted and needy.

And the Transgression of this Law of Righteousness, whoever they be that are
found guilty of it, is severely threatened, Exodus 22.22, etc. Ye shall not
afflict any Widow, or Fatherless Child. If thou afflict them in any wise, and
they cry at all unto me, I will surely hear their cry; and my wrath shall wax
hot, and I will kill you with the Sword; and your wives shall be Widows, and
your children Fatherless, i.e. I will in the same kind meet with and requite
you. And the words are all along Emphatical on the behalf of every Widow and
Orphan; If thou afflict them in any wise, and if they cry at all unto me, I
will hear, I will surely hear, and be Wrath upon it; yea, my Wrath shall wax
hot, and I will retaliate it upon you; I will kill you with the sword, etc.

It was one of the solemn Curses denounced from mount Ebal, to the Equity of
which all the people subscribed, Deuteronomy. 27.9. Cursed be he that perverteth the
judgment of the Stranger, the Fatherless, and the Widow: And all the people
shall say, Amen.

And accordingly it is taken notice of in the Prophets, as matter of the
highest Provocation, and the ominous forerunner of God's heaviest Judgments.
So Isa. 1.23. They judge not the Fatherless, neither does the Cause of the
Widow come unto them; upon which therefore it follows immediately, Therefore
says the Lord of Hosts, the mighty are of Israel, Ah! I will ease me of mine
Adversaries, and avenge me of mine Enemies: -- So also, Jerem. 5.28. They
overpass the Deeds of the wicked; they judge not the Cause, the Cause of the
Fatherless, yet they prosper, and the Right of the needy do they not judge; --
upon which therefore it immediately follows: Shall not I visit for these
things? Shall not my Soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? -- And Chap.
21.12. O house of David! thus says the Lord, Execute judgment in the morning,
and deliver him that is spoiled out of the hand of the Oppressor, lest my Fury
break out like fire, and burn that none can quench it, because of the evil of
your doings; which again he repeats, Chap. 22.3, etc. Execute ye judgment and
righteousness, and deliver the spoiled out of the hand of the Oppressor, and
do no wrong, do no violence to the Stranger, the Fatherless, and the Widow;
neither shed innocent blood in this place: -- But if you will not hear these
words, I swear by my self, says the Lord, that this house shall become a
desolation: -- And thus in the Prophet Ezekiel we find it reckoned up by name
among those Abominations for which Jerusalem was judged, and burnt as dross in
the furnace, Chap. 22.7. In the midst of thee have they dealt by Oppression
with the Stranger; in thee have they vexed the Fatherless, and the Widow: --
See it again once more in the Prophet Zechary, Chap. 7.9, 10, etc. Thus
speaks the Lord of Hosts, saying, Execute true judgment, and show mercy and
compassions every man to his Brother: And oppress not the Widow, nor the
Fatherless, the Stranger, nor the Poor, and let none of you imagine evil
against his Brother in his heart: -- But (alas! says the Prophet) they refused
to hearken, and pulled away the shoulder, and stopped their ears that they
should not hear, etc. -- Therefore (says he) came a great Wrath from the Lord
of Hosts. Therefore it is come to pass, that as he cried, and they would not
hear, so they cried and I would not hear, says the Lord of Hosts: -- Yea, and
our blessed Lord and Savior having said, Woe unto you Scribes, Pharisees, and
Hypocrites, for you devour Widows houses, and for a pretense make long prayer:
Saint Mat. 23.14. adds forthwith upon it, Therefore you shall receive the
greater Damnation, viz. upon both these accounts; first for devouring Widows
houses, and then doing of it under a devout pretense, or color.

The Psalmist represents it as the utmost Impiety and Atheism together, to
commit such an horrid wickedness, and yet to think that God will connive at it,
Psalm. 44.6, etc. They slay the Widow, and the Stranger, and murder the
Fatherless: Yet say they, the Lord shall not see, neither shall the God of
Jacob regard it: Understand, O ye Brutish among the People, and ye Fools, when
will you be wise? --

And it is a peculiar Curse which he leaves upon some heinous sinners, (such
especially as had been unmercifull themselves, and delighted in Cursing
others,) that they shall leave their Children Fatherless, and their Wives
Widows, and that in so destitute and forlorn a condition, they shall find none
to pity or relieve them; Psalm 109.9, 12. -- And so likewise in the Prophet
Isaiah, we read, Chap. 9.17. Therefore the Lord shall have no joy in their
young men, neither shall have mercy on their Fatherless, and Widows; for every
one is an Hypocrite, and an Evil doer. -- And this is the Retaliation
particularly threatened unto those who afflict the Fatherless, and Widows; and I
noted before from Exodus 22.

But then, Thirdly, Let it be farther observed, what singular care it pleased
God to take among his People, the Jews, in the stated Provisions which he
appointed to be made for them; of which there are sundry instances.

(1.) For these, by name, it was as well as for the Levites, that he allotted
the third year's Tith of their increase to be brought in and laid up, Deuteronomy.
14.29. And the Levite, because he has no part, nor inheritance with thee, (as
the other Tribes had,) and the Fatherless, and the Widow within thy Gates,
shall come and eat, and be satisfied, that the Lord thy God may bless thee in
all the work of thine hand which thou do. -- For the right understanding of
which you must know, that there was a first Tith given to the Levites, See Mr.
Ainsworth on Exodus 14.22.
out of which they also paid a tenth part again to the Priests; ( Number. 18.24,
-- 28. Nehe. 10.37, 38.) And then, of that which remained, the owners separated
a second Tith, which themselves did eat before the Lord the first and second
year; and this was that which on the third year (and so on the sixth year) was
to be given unto the Levites, and the Poor here specified: -- Now this third
years Tithing had a solemn Confession and Prayer annexed to it, Deuteronomy. 26.12,
etc. When thou have made an end of Tithing all the Tiths of thy increase the
third year, which is the year of Tithing, and have given it to the Levite, the
Stranger, the Fatherless, and the Widow, that they may eat within thy Gates,
and be filled; then thou shall say before the Lord thy God, (viz. by way of
appeal unto him, as Witness and Compurgator of thy integrity in the Case, and
Judge and Avenger, if it be otherwise;) I have brought away the hallowed things
out of my house, and also have given them unto the Levite, and unto the
Stranger, to the Fatherless, and to the Widow, according to all the
Commandments which thou have commanded me; I have not transgressed thy
Commandments, neither have I forgotten them: Look down from thy Holy habitation
from Heaven, and bless thy People Israel, and the Land which thou have given
us, as thou swarest unto our Fathers, a Land that flows with Milk and Honey:
[thus regularly claiming the promised Blessing upon their conscientious
performing the condition of it.]

And the violation of this Commandment God sometimes punished them for, with a
great Dearth and Famine, Nehem. 5.3. -- 13.10. And unto this that notable
expoustlation in the Prophet Malachi seems to referr, See Dr. Peacock on the
place.
Mal. 3.8, etc. Will a man rob God? yet ye have robed me: But ye say, wherein
have we robbed thee? In Tiths and Offerings; ye are cursed with a curse, even
'this whole Nation. [In this they were generally guilty, that they detained
part of these Tiths, which they ought according to God's Law to have paid, and
thereby did abridge God of his due.] Bring ye all the Tiths [therefore, says
he] into the Storehouse, that there may be meat in my house, [not only
provision for the daily and annual Sacrifices, and for the Priests and Levites
waiting on the Altar; but for the Residue also of the Poor of God's Family, the
Fatherless, and the Widow; who are mentioned particularly among those, in whose
behalf he threatens to appear as a swift witness in judgment against them,
verse 5.] And prove me now herewith, says the Lord, if I will not open you the
windows of Heaven, and pour you out a Blessing, that there shall not be room
enough to receive it: And I will rebuke the devourer for your sakes, and he
shall not destroy the fruits of your Ground, neither shall your Vine cast her
fruit before the time in the field, says the Lord of Hosts; and all Nations
shall call you Blessed, for ye shall be a delightsome Land, says the Lord of
Hosts.

But then again, (2.) Besides this, God strictly required a peculiar regard to
be had unto the Fatherless, and Widows, in their solemn feasts every year,
Deuteronomy. 16. -- So it is expressed in the sacred Text, for the Feast of Weeks, or
Pentecost, verse 10. Thou shall keep the Feast of Weeks unto the Lord thy God
with a Tribute [ or sufficiency, as the margin reads it] of a free will
offering of thine hand, which thou shall give unto the Lord thy God, according
as the Lord thy God has blessed thee; and thou shall rejoice before the Lord
thy God, thou and thy Son, and thy Daughter, and thy Manservant, and thy
Maidservant; and (then immediately next to these Domestics it follows) the
Levite that is within thy Gates, and the Stranger, and the Fatherless, and the
Widow, that are among you. -- So likewise for the feast of Tabernacles, verse
14. And thou shall rejoice in thy Feast, thou, and thy Son, and thy Daughter,
and thy Manservant, and thy Maidservant, and the Levite, and the Stranger,
and the Fatherless, and the Widow, that are within thy Gates. And it is plainly
signified, that they were to rejoice in so doing, and not to part with their
contributions hereunto grudgingly, as well knowing, that it was the way of
God's own appointment in order to the securing unto themselves a greater
blessing, ver. 15. Seven days shall thou keep a solemn Feast unto the Lord thy
God, in the place which the Lord thy God shall choose, because the Lord thy God
shall bless thee in all thy increase, and in all the works of thine hands;
Therefore shall thou rejoice. -- And though it is not so distinctly mentioned
in what is said of the Passover, or Feast of unleavened Bread, yet that also
is not only to be inferred by way of just consequence, (it being the Principal
and leading Feast,) but manifestly included in the general clause which
follows, and names them all together, ver. 16, 17. Three times a year shall all
thy Males appear before the Lord thy God in the place which he shall choose, in
the Feast of Unleavened Bread, and in the Feast of Weeks, and in the Feast of
Tabernacles, and they shall not appear before the Lord empty; Every man shall
give as he is able, according to the Blessing of the Lord thy God, which he
has given thee.

And, according to this Law of theirs three solemn anniversaries, the days of
Purim also were afterward ordained to be kept yearly, As days of Feasting and
Joy, sending portions to one another, and gifts to the Poor [among whom, we may
be sure, the Fatherless and Widow were not forgotten;] Esther 9.22. And indeed,
such are the most proper Guests for true and religious Feasting, whose
entertainment God himself stands engaged to see abundantly paid for and
recompensed, St. Luke 14.13, 14. These least deserve the name of Feasts of
Charity, St. Jud. 12.

But then, (3.) Over and above this two, there were three or four things in
their yearly Harvest allotted to the Poor, and among them chiefly to the
Fatherless and Widow; viz. A nook or corner of the Field, the forgotton sheaf,
the Gleanings, and single or fallen Grapes, and ungathered Olives, Levit. 19.9,
10. When ye reap the Harvest of your Land, thou shall not wholly reap the
corners of thy Field, neither shall thou gather the Gleanings of thy Harvest;
And thou shall not glean thy Vineyard, neither shall thou gather every Grape of
thy Vineyard, thou shall leave them for the Poor, and Stranger, I am the Lord
your God. Which place we may compare with Deuteronomy. 24.17, etc. Thou shall not
pervert the Judgment of the Stranger, nor of the Fatherless, nor take a Widows
Garment to pledge, but thou shall remember that thou wast a Bondsman in Egypt,
and the Lord thy God redeemed thee thence; therefore I command thee to do this
thing. When thou cuttest down thine Harvest in the Field, and have forgotten a
sheaf in the Field, thou shall not go again to fetch it, it shall be for the
Stranger, and for the Fatherless, and for the Widow, that the Lord thy God may
bless thee in all the work of thine hands. When thou beatest thine Olive Tree,
thou shall not go over the boughs again; It shall be for the Stranger, for the
Fatherless, and for the Widow. When thou gatherest the Grapes of thy Vineyard,
thou shall not glean it afterward; It shall be for the Stranger, for the
Fatherless, and for the Widow. And thou shall remember, that thou wast a
Bondsman in the Land of Egypt: therefore I command thee to do this thing. -- We
cannot but note here, what a stress God Almighty lays upon it, and how all
along he disciplined the Jews, as in a School of continual Charity, especially
toward the Stranger, the Fatherless, and the Widow.

Fourthly, Let us next observe, how he has thought good sometimes to go out of
the common road of his Providence, and work sundry Miracles, on purpose to
testify and confirm the merciful respects he bears to such.

(1.) I know not well, whether I should place the instances of Naomi and Ruth
under this Head of Discourse, or rather have allotted them one by themselves.
Sure I am, they were virtuous and religious Widows, and left in a desolate,
distressed, and poor condition, and yet by a wonderful conduct of Divine
Providence most seasonably relieved, provided for, and advanced, as may be read
at large in the Book of Ruth, made up wholly of this argument, and which, next
to the clearing of our blessed Savior's Genealogy, may seem to have been
written and preserved among the sacred Records, chiefly for the encouragement
of others in all succeeding Ages, to become followers of their Piety, Faith,
and Patience; and as a Book, I may say, of Peculiar comfort unto Widows in
their Afflictions; The abstract of it is this:

Elimelech, a Man of some note in Bethlehem-Judah, with his Wife Naomi, and
their two Sons, Mahlon and Chilon, is forced at first by a sore Famine, in the
time of the Judges, to quit his Habitation, and with what moneys he could
gather up, to travel and provide sustinence for himself and Family in the
Country of Moab, a strange and heathenish Country. And there now, not long
after, he dies, and leaves Naomi a sorrowful Widow among strangers: And there
also, after this, to the increase of her sorrows, she Buried her two Sons the
only remaining supports of her Widowhood; who, during there abode there, had
married two Moabitish Women, now also made disconsolate Widows, Orpah and Ruth.
-- Orpah upon a little entreaty, betakes her self to her own Friends for
maintenance; and we hear no more of her. But Ruth resolves to abide by her
Mother-in-Law, whatever became of it, out of love to her and her Religion.

These two Widows therefore having spent all they had, return together unto
Bethlehem, entertaining each other with dolesome complaints of their mutual
losses as they go; and God's good Providence was all the way over them in that
hazardous journey of theirs, till they came safe to the desired place. -- But
upon their coming thither, all the City, says the Text, was moved about them,
Chapter 1.19.
and they said, Is this Naomi? That is, so soon as they had heard the mournful
story, and seen her great Affliction, and what necessities she was reduced
unto; How that going out from them in a wealthy estate, accompanied with her
Husband, and two Sons, grown up to manhood, she was now returned in so
calamitous and destitute a condition, without Husband or Children, or Goods,
and only a young distressed Widow hanging on her; They were all astonished, the
Women especially, who had formerly known her in her latter days of Prosperity;
and they could scarce believe their senses, that this miserable object, they
now behold, was the same Matron. Is this Naomi, say they? And she, hereupon
takes the occasion offered her, (as passion is often quick and witty in venting
of it self,) to show the sense she lay under of her own sad condition. Well may
you ask, Is this Naomi? Call me not Naomi, ( says she, ver. 20, 21.
reflecting upon the signification of that name, that is pleasant, or
delectable) but call me Marah, (that is, Bitter,) For the Almighty has dealt
very bitterly with me. I went out full, and the Lord has brought me home
empty. [That is, deprived of all those comforts and means to subsist on, which
I formerly had, and exposed as you see, to want and penury.] Why then call you
me Naomi, seeing the Lord has testified against me, and the Almighty has
afflicted me. -- But, all this while she thought not of God's more gracious
design in thus humbling of her, that in due time he might raise and exalt her.
-- Hither his good Providence brought them at the beginning of Barley Harvest.
ver. 22.
And so the young Widow bestirs her self immediately to glean for the present
relief both of her self and Mother, in this pinch of their necessity. And the
hand of Heaven directs her (a perfect stranger in the Country) unto a wealthy
Kinsman's Field, whose name was Boaz, and inclined his heart also to be very
kind and compassionate toward her; not only to permit her quietly to gather
after his Reapers, but to speak friendly to her, and give special charge to all
his Servants about her, that none should do her wrong or Reproach; Nay, that
they should let some handfulls fall on purpose for her, and call her to eat and
drink with them. -- And to make short, at last, upon farther knowledge and
consideration had of his Relation to her, and her own Virtues, Chap. 4.
according to the Jewish Law and Custom he charitably fulfills the right of a
nearest Kinsman, and redeems the Land which was left, and takes her for his
Wife before the Elders in the Gate, where all the people accompanied their
Marriage with joyful acclamations, and pious good wishes; ver. 11, 12. And God
himself blessed it, by giving him soon after by her a Son, named Obed, the
Father of Jesse, and Grandfather of King David, of whose Seed the Messiah was
to come, and to be born too in that City of Bethlehem, (Saint Matthew. 2.5, 6.)
-- So that by this means, the Pilgrim Moabitish Widow became, not only a
Proselite to the true Religion, but a Glorious Mother in Israel; And Aged Naomi
also is both comforted and exalted with and by her; made a joyful Nurse to
dandle that on her knees, which she was past bearing in her Womb; sees her Name
and Family revived, after the loss of her Husband and Children, and her poor
Daughter in Law, who loved her entirely, better unto her in the Issue, than
seven Sons. And so the Women, who at her first arrival lamented and wondered at
her fall and unhappiness, did now earnestly congratulate the Blessed change and
alteration of her Fortune, as we call it, but (if we speak religiously) of
God's providence toward her. Saying, Upon the birth of the Child; Blessed be
the Lord, which has not left thee this day without a Kinsman, (or, Redeemer)
that his name may be famous in Israel! And he shall be unto thee a Restorer of
thy life, and a nourisher of thine old age, For thy Daughter-in-Law, which
loves thee, which is better to thee than seven Sons, has born him. --

You perceive by this time, how deservedly I called this History of Naomi and
Ruth, the Widows Book of Consolation. I will now pass on to some more
miraculous instances of God's especial favor and goodness toward them.

(2.) Upon this errand principally it was, that he sent Elijah the Prophet unto
Zarephath, or Sarrepta, Luke 4.26. to seek relief of the indigent Widow there,
because he purposed to requite her kindness with a mavelous blessing upon her
own head, 1 Kings 17.9, etc. Arise, says God unto him, get thee to Zarephath,
which belongs to Zidon, and dwell there: Behold, I have commanded a Widow
Woman there to sustain thee. [And here indeed was the Fountain head of all her
sufficiency.] So he arose, and went to Zarephath, and when he was come to the
gate of the City, behold, the Widow Woman was there gathering of Sticks: And he
called to her, and said, fetch me, I pray thee, a little Water in a Vessel,
that I may drink. And as she was going to fetch it, he called to her, and said,
bring me, I pray thee, a morsel of bread in thine hand. -- Whereunto when she
had mournfully replied, As the Lord thy God lives, I have not a Cake, but an
handful of Meal in a Barrel, and a little Oil in a Cruse, and behold I am
gathering two sticks, that I may go in and dress it for me and my Son, that we
may eat it and die. He presently answered her, Fear not, go, and do as thou
have said: But make me a little Cake thereof first, and bring it unto me, and
after make for thee and for thy Son. [ Do me this office of Charity, and trust
in God that thou shall be no looser by it.] For thus says the Lord God of
Isreal, the Barrel of Meal shall not waste, neither shall the Cruse of Oil
fail, until the day, that the Lord sends rain upon the Earth,] viz, to make
it bring forth Corn and Oil in abundance. -- Now observe the event: She went,
and did according to the saying of Elijah: And She and He, and her House,]
which seems to intimate, that She had more in Family than her Son only, though
Nature put her upon providing for him before them,] did eat it many days, the
Margin reads it a full year: and others conjecture, three years at least, from
what is mentioned Chapter 18.1. of the third year of the Prophet's being there. The
Famine is said to continue three years and six months. Luke 4, 25. Jam. 5.17.
And the Barrel of Meal, says the Text, wasted not, neither did the Cruse of
Oil fail, according to the word of the Lord, which he spoke by Elijah. Such was
the reward of this poor Widows Faith and Charity. And here we have an example,
how God can lengthen out a little, and that our life is supported by his word
of Blessing only. Deuteronomy. 8.3. Mat. 4.4.
After this the Widow's Son sickens, and dies, ver. 7. and she passionately
resents it as a stroke of God's anger, saying to Elijah, Oh thou Man of God art
thou come unto me, to call my sin to remembrance, and to slay my Son? He
therefore, in pity to her case, (upon a Divine instinct,) undertakes the
restoring of him again. How his affections were moved, you may perceive by his
Prayer, ver. 20. He cried unto the Lord, and said, O Lord my God, have thou
brought evil upon the Widow, with whom I sojourn, by slaying her Son? -- And
then it follows. He stretched himself upon the Child three times, and cried
unto the. Lord, and said, O Lord my God, I pray thee let this Child's Soul come
into him again. And the Lord heard the voice of Elijah, and the Soul of the
Child came into him again, and he revived. And Elijah took the Child, and
brought him down out of the chamber into the house, and delivered him to his
Mother, and Elijah said, See, thy Son lives. -- And this is the first we read
of in Holy Scripture, that was raised up from the dead. The first instance is,
the Son of a poor Widow.

(3.) This Prophet afterward was taken up into Heaven, and Elisha succeeded
him in a participation of the same Spirit, and he also was a comforter of the
Widows. To this purpose we read, How strangely he multiplied the distressed
Widows oil for the discharge of her Husbands Debts, and the Ransom of her
Sons, and her and their future maintenance, 2 Kings 4.1. There cried a certain
Woman of the Wives of the Sons of the Prophets, [that is, who had been Wife to
one of the Sons of the Prophets] unto Elisha, (who was now Head of their
College,) Saying, Thy Servant my Husband is dead, and thou know that thy
Servant did fear the Lord: (He was, it seems, a very good and Religious man,
and known to the Prophet for such, the greater was her loss of him: But this
was not all, he left her in debt.) And the creditor is come, says she, to take
unto him my two Sons to be Bondmen. -- This deplorable case now moves the
Prophet to say unto her. What shall I do for thee? Tell me, what have thou in
the house. And she said, thine Handmaid has not any thing in the house, (viz.
of that nature, as to raise money from,) save a pot of Oil. ( A poor stock! but
enough for that power to work upon, which can create out of nothing.] Then he
said, go, borrow thee Vessels of all thy neighbors, even empty Vessels; borrow
not a few; (or scant not.) And, when thou art come in, thou shall shut the door
upon thee and thy Sons, and thou shall pour out into all these Vessels, and
thou shall set aside that which is full. -- And now, let us note the success:
So she went from him, and shut the door upon her, and upon her Sons, who
brought the Vessels to her, and she poured out; and it came to pass when the
Vessels were full, that she said unto her Son, (one of her Sons then next her,)
bring me yet a Vessel; and he said unto her, there is not a Vessel more. And
the oil stayed, viz. That there might be no waste, having run freely as long as
there was any thing to receive it in. Then she came and told the man of God.
Gratefully acknowledging the miracle wrought for her. -- And he said, go, sell
the Oil, and pay thy debt, and live thou and thy Children on the rest. -- Such
was the bounty of God by Elisha, to this Prophet's Widow, exceeding her first
request. She was sollicitous only for the redemption of her Children from the
creditors Arrest: But she receives, wherewithal both to discharge the debt her
Husband left her in, and provide a competency for her self and her children to
subsist a while upon.

(4.) Unto these instances now, I will annex that Miracle of our Blessed Lord
and Savior, the great Prophet whom Elijah and Elisha were but Types of,
recorded in the New Testament, St. Luke 7.11, 12, etc. It came to pass, that he
went into a City called Naim, and many of his Disciples went with him and much
People. Now when he came nigh to the gates of the City; behold there was a dead
man carried out, the only Son of his Mother, and she was a Widow: This was the
compassionableness of the case. A desolate Widow, following the Corpse of her
Son, her only Son, the stay of her Age, the comfort of her Widow-hood, to the
grave: And it was matter of general Lamentation among her neighbors also, for
much People of the City was with her. -- And when the Lord saw her, (says the
Evangelist, his Bowels too were moved,) he had Compassion on her, and said unto
her, weep not: -- But alas! Good words alone were not able to cheer up one in
her condition; and therefore unto those he forthwith adds a miracle of
Beneficience; and indeed most of his miraculous Works were of this nature, so
many Evidences of his divine Power in showing mercy, and doing good: And he
came and touched the bier, (or Cossin,) and they that bare him stood still; and
he said, young man, I say unto thee arise; [thus he commanded his Soul into his
Body again;] and he that was dead sat up, and he began to speak, and he
delivered him to his Mother: -- Whereby he did not only stay her Tears, but
turned her mourning into Joy and Gladness.

And now this instance prompts me to observe, in the fifth place, That God has
planted soft and tender Hearts, or natural Bowels in the generality of men (who
have not out-sinn'd their Humanity) to resent the sad Circumstances of the
Widows and Fatherless; but these in good men are in a more eminent manner
renewed and improved, who are required to put on as the Elect of God, Bowels of
Mercy and Kindness, Colos. 3.12.

What Rhetoric there is in the naked Representation of so destitute an estate,
is visible in that parable, which the wise Woman of Tekoah artificially used to
move King David to recall Absalom, 2 Samuel 14.4, etc. She fell on her face to
the ground, and did obeisance, and said, Help, O King! And the King said unto
her, what aileth thee? And she answered and said, I am indeed a Widow woman,
and mine Husband is dead, and thine Handmaid had two Sons, and they two strove
together in the field, and there was none to part them; but the one smote the
other, and slew him: And behold, the whole Family is risen against thine
Handmaid, and they said, deliver him that smote his Brother, that we may kill
him for the Life of his Brother, whom he slew; and we will destroy the Heir
also; and so they shall quench my Coal which is left, and shall not leave to my
Husband, neither name nor remainder upon the Earth: -- And the King said to the
Woman, go to thine house, and I will give charge concerning thee: -- There
needed not any farther request, than what the case it self made for her.

But then, a Widow's Importunity is capable of adding much hereunto: To which
purpose we are instructed from our Savior's Parable of the Importunate Widow,
who wearied out a careless and unjust judge, (who neither feared God, nor
regarded man,) by her continual solicitations, to take pity on her, St. Luke
18. Upon which the Evangelist gives us also our Blessed Savior's Remark: And
the Lord said, hear what the unjust judge says: And shall not God avenge his
own Elect, which cry day and night to him, though he bear long with them? I
tell you that he will avenge them speedily. --

But we will turn from him to a much better man; a man that has the Testimony
from God himself, of being perfect and upright, fearing God, and eschewing
Evil, Job 1.1. It Is the expression he describes the utmost stretch of
wickedness, and oppression by, Job 24.3, 4. They drive away the Ass of the
Fatherless, they take the Widow's Ox for a Pledge, they turn the Needy out of
the way; the Poor of the Earth hide themselves together. And again, verse 21,
He does not good to the Widow: -- And Eliphaz indeed had charged him with this
horrid guilt, as the cause of his present Calamities, Chap. 22.9, 10. Thou have
sent Widows away empty, says he, and the Arms of the Fatherless have been
broken: Therefore snares are round about thee, and sudden fear troubles thee:
-- But the good man was of quite another Character and Practice; and therefore
had just occasion upon this injurious Charge to make mention of it for his own
Apology, Chap. 29.12, etc. I delivered the Poor that cried, (says he,) the
Fatherless, and him that had none to help him; the Blessing of him which was
ready to perish came upon me; and I caused the Widow's Heart to sing for joy:
-- Yea, and he appeals to God for his witness in this matter, and denounces a
most heavy Imprecation against himself, should he have been found to have done
otherwise, Chap. 31.16, etc. If I have with held the Poor from their desire, or
have caused the eyes of the Widow to fail, or have eaten my morsel my self
alone, and the Fatherless have not eaten thereof; (for from my Youth he was
brought up with me, and I have guided her) that is, the Widow, (from my
Mother's Womb;) if I have seen any perish for want of Clothing; or any Poor
without Covering; if his Loins have not blessed me, and if he were not warmed
with the Fleece of my Sheep; if I have lift up my hands against the Fatherless,
when I saw my help in the gate; then let mine Arm fall from my Shoulder Blade,
and mine Arm be broken from the Bone: [i. e. as I am falsely traduced to have
served the Fatherless:] Chap. 22.9.
No, I had a greater dread upon me of the Divine Vengeance, than to dare to
venture on such a piece of insolence: For destruction from God was a Terror to
me, and by reason of his Highness I could not endure: -- This alone would have
restrained him, had nothing else; but it was moreover clean contrary to the
biass of his Temper and Inclination, who looked upon the meanest of his
Servants as his Fellow-Brethren and Sisters; and therefore reckoned with
himself that he could never answer it to their common Father, should he wrong
or abuse any one of them, as he had said just before, verse 13, etc. If I did
despise the Cause of my Manservant, or of my Maidservant, when they contended
with me; what then shall I do when God rises up; and when he visits what
shall I answer him? Did not he that made me in the womb, make him? And did not
one fashion us in the Womb?] that is, plainly, have we not all one Father? Are
we not all the same Flesh and Blood? But now, if there be found so much
goodness and compassion in Men; who at best have their Defects and
Imperfections; how much more is there in God? It Is the way of arguing which our
Blessed Savior has taught us for our great encouragement, St. Matthew. 7.11. If
ye then being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your Children; how much
more shall your Father which is in Heaven, give good things to them that ask
him?

This goodness of Nature is but a Beam from his Sun, or a drop from his
Fountain: -- And this is yet farther advanced in the World by the Principles of
Christianity; which urge us to the perfection of Charity; and there cannot
certainly be a fitter Object of it, than the distressed Widow and Fatherless:
Such a charity was Tabitha, or Dorcas; a Disciple of our Savior's at Joppa,
famous for Acts 9.36. This woman was full of good Works, and Alms-deeds which
she did; who therefore sickening and dying, the Disciples there, upon so great
a loss, sent presently for St. Peter to come to them; and when he was come he
found all the Widows standing by weeping, and showing the Coats and Garments
which Dorcas made while she was with them: -- And this proved an effectual
motive to the miracle of her Resuscitation; the restoring of so serviceable a
Member to the Church: -- And this now is made by St. James, the Proof and Trial
of the Purity of our Religion, Chap. 1.27. Pure Religion and undefiled before
God, even the Father, is this (says he,) to visit the Fatherless and Widows in
their affliction;] -- that, as we have experienced, the goodness, Eras. Par.
and great Mercy, and Beneficence of God toward our selves; so we also show
the same in all the instances we can toward those who are most necessitous,
and from whom we can expect the least requital.

Lastly, I will close these Scripture Observations with a brief reflection upon
the special regard both of Christ and his Apostles unto these.

As to our Blessed Savior, I have already instanced in his Compassion to the
Widow of Naim, in raising up her only Son: But you may note farther with me,
(1.) That he honored a Widow with the manifestation of himself in the Temple;
when, according to the prediction of the Prophets, he made his first appearance
there, St. Luke 2.36, etc. (2.) That he admired, and commended the poor Widow's
mites of Charity, above all the richer one's Oblations, St. Mark 12.41, etc.
And Jesus sat over against the Treasury, and beheld how the People cast money
into the Treasury: And there came a certain poor Widow, and she threw in two
Mites, which make a Farthing: And he called unto him his Disciples, and says
unto them; Verily I say unto you, that this poor Widow has cast more in than
all they which have cast into the Treasury; for all they did cast in of their
abundance, but she of her want did cast in all that she had, even all her
Living: -- And this I the rather note, because a principal grievance of good
and religious Persons, when reduced to a low Estate, is usually this; that they
have not wherewith to do the works of Charity, which formerly they did, or
others do: Whereas from hence they may gather, how graciously God will accept
and reward the meanest of their offerings, and take the Will for the Deed from
them: According to the condition and circumstances he has brought them to. --
(3.) That he recommended such Guests especially to the Feasts of Charity: I
touched on this occasionally before; but here I will transcribe the Text for
it, St. Luke 14.12, 13, 14. When thou make a Dinner, or Supper, (says he,)
call not thy Friends, nor thy Brethren, neither thy Kinsmen, nor thy rich
Neighbors; lest they also bid thee again, and a recompense be made thee:] This
is only a Traffic, or Merchandise, and Exchange of Courtesies and Civilities,]
But when thou make a Feast call the Poor, the Maimed, the Lame, and the
Blind, and thou shall be Blessed, for they cannot recompense thee; for thou
shall be recompensed at the Resurrection of the Just.] This is the genuine
Hospitality which makes God himself a Debtor to his Creatures; and for which he
undertakes that it shall not lose it is reward. -- (4.) That he took all
opportunities to inculcate, and enlarge upon the precepts of Charity: -- (1.)
When some had Indignation at the good Woman's cost who anointed him, upon a
pretense that the ointment might have been sold for much, and given to the
poor; he so vindicates her kindness, as to allow also of that Charity which
they pretended to: Jesus said, why trouble you the Woman; she has wrought a
good work on me: For you have the Poor with you always, and whenever ye will
ye may do them good; but me ye have not always, etc. compare St. Matthew. 26.10,
11. with St. Mark 14.6, 7. Where he seems to refer to what was said in the Law,
Deuteronomy. 15.11. The Poor shall never cease out of the Land; therefore I command
thee, saying, thou shall open thine hand wide unto thy Brother, to thy Poor,
and to thy needy in the Land. And in another place; Give to him that asks,
says he, and from him that would borrow of thee, turn thou not away, St.
Matthew. 5.42. Which was also the prescription of the Law, Deuteronomy. 15.8. -- (2.) He
often cites and approves of the great Commandment; Thou shall love thy Nighbour
as thy self; and he tells a particular story, or parable, to show them, that
every one in necessity, and not a Jew only, was to be looked upon as our
Nighbour; and having therein mentioned a compassionate and merciful Samaritan,
bids all to imitate him: Go, says he, and do thou likewise, Saint Luke 10.30.
etc. -- (3.) He gives an admirable Paraphrase upon this Command, and such as
would be a perpetual relief to the Widow, and Fatherless, particularly in that
golden Rule of his, St. Matthew. 7.12. All things whatsoever ye would that men
should do unto you, do you even so to them; for this, says he, is the Law,
and the Prophets. -- (4.) He commends secret Alms, with the assurance, that our
Father who sees in secret shall reward them openly, St. Matthew. 6.4. And
elsewhere he asserts, that whosoever gives to any one of his Disciples a Cup
of cold water only, in the name of a Disciple, shall in no wise lose his
Reward, St. Matthew. 10.42. That is, he that does the least kindness on that
score to them, shall be sure of a Retribution for it. -- (5.) In other places
he calls upon them that are rich and able, to lay up their Treasures in Heaven,
where neither moth nor rust corrupt, nor Thieves break through and steal, St.
Matthew. 6.20, etc. as St. Luke has it; To provide themselves bags which wax not
old, a Treasure in the Heavens that fails not, St. Luke 12.33. And, as
prudent Stewards of their abundance, to make themselves friends of the Mammon
of unrighteousness, [which is truly so, when withheld from Charitable uses;]
that when they fail they may receive them into everlasting habitations, St.
Luke 16.9. -- (6.) And which is most of all considerable; he acquaints us, that
in the last day, when he shall come to judge the World, and doom all men to
their eternal, and unalterable estate of Happiness, or Misery, he will proceed
especially by their omission, or practice of the Laws of Charity, and interpret
the doing, or not doing of it to the least and most despised Christian, as done
or not done to himself, St. Matthew. 25. -- (7.) Once more yet, observe, that
while he was hanging upon the Cross, and amidst his Torments there, he was
nevertheless mindful of a comfortable Provision for his desolate Mother after
his departure, St. John 19.26, 27. When Jesus saw his Mother, and the Disciple
whom he loved, standing by; he said unto his Mother, Woman, behold thy Son; And
to that Disciple, behold thy Mother. And from that hour, says the Evangelist,
that Disciple took her to his own Home.

And now, in the next place, for the Apostles of our Blessed Savior, it shall
suffice to note, that they appointed a daily Ministration for poor Widows; and
when the number of them increased, ordained an order of men, by the name of
Deacons, particularly to attend on that work, Acts 6. And St. Paul has left
especial Rules concerning them, 1 Timothy 5. As for them who had Children, verse 4.
or Nephews, able to do for them: He requires that they learn first to show
Piety or Kindness at home, and requite their Parents; for that says he, is
good and acceptable before God: verse 3.
But as for them who were Widows indeed, That they should have an Honorable
maintenance out of the public stock.

After which I shall not mention those many Hospitals, and Almshouses, and
Funds of Charity, which God has excited several worthy Benefactors to erect,
and contribute to, upon this account, throughout the Christian World: And will
only add, that the Liturgy of the Church has in all ages been mindful of
them, and recommended them by name unto God Almighty; as we still retain it in
our excellent Litany: That it may please thee to defend and provide for the
Fatherless Children and Widows, and all that are desolate and oppressed. We
beseech thee to hear us, Good Lord!

Now therefore, so long as there is a God, who with a Paternal Providence
presides over and governs the World, who is a very present help in Trouble,
Isa. 25.4.
and (as the Prophet Isaiah speaks) a strength to the poor, a strength to the
needy in his distress, a refuge from the storm, and a shadow from the heat, a
Father to the Fatherless, (as has been showed,) and an Husband to the Widow:
And so long as there are men of compassions, or men truly and sincerely
religious left; a Church of God, and genuine Christian upon Earth, the Widows
and Fatherless may rest secure of it; that they shall not be utterly forsaken,
or destitute: They have an Heavenly Father and Friend, who is All-sufficient,
evermore with them; who knows what is really best and most profitable for them,
and wants not for Wisdom, or Power, or Goodness, to relieve them; Isa.
9.6.63.16.
an everlasting Father and Husband, infinitely beyond all others. And they have
as many Brethren and Sisters to sympathize with them, as there are Good men and
Christians, to whom their Case is made known.

Let them take notice of that eminent Title of Grace, whereby God is peculiarly
acknowledged and addressed unto, under the New Testament: The Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, from whom the whole Family in Heaven and Earth is named,
Ephesians. 3.14, 15. That is, in short, the Father of Christ, and all Christians, as
he said before his Ascension, Go to my Brethren, and say unto them; I ascend
unto my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God, St. John 20.17.

The Father of our Lord Jesus Christ] by a natural and ineffable generation,
who is therefore called his own, his Onely-begotten, his Dearly-beloved Son,
born before all the Creation: And he that spared not his own Son, but delivered
him up for us all; how shall he not with him also freely give us all things?
Romans 8.32. Or what good thing will he now deny us, which we ask in the
prevailing name, and for the sake and merits of this Son of his Love, who died
for us, and ever lives to make intercession on our behalf?

And then through him our Father also,] of whom the whole Family in Heaven and
Earth is named,] See Dr. Hammond on Ephesians. 3.15.
that is, the whole World, Gentiles as well as Jews, are now acknowledged for
his Children by special Adoption and Grace, his select and peculiar Household;
who are never from under his Eye and Care; whom as he has commanded others,
Galat. 16.10. so he will much more himself, especially upon all opportunities,
do good unto the Household of Faith.

I will conclude with the good and seasonable Advice, First of our Blessed Lord
and Savior, and then of his Apostles. The Lesson from our Blessed Savior, is
that of his Sermon on the Mount, as it is called, St. Matthew. 6.25, etc. 'Take
no thought for your Life, [that is, no unbelieving, anxious, corroding,
disquieting, or disturbing Thought,] what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink;
nor yet for your Body, what ye shall put on. (1.) Is not the Life more than
Meat, and the Body than Raiment? [that is, Have you not in hand a pledge of
what is greater than that you are apt to be sollicitous for? He that gave and
continues your Life, cannot he as easily give you Meat? And he that made and
maintains your Body, cannot he also as easily cloth it]? (2.) Touching Food,)
Behold the Fowls of the Air, for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather
into Barns; yet your Heavenly Father feeds them; Are ye not much better than
they? [may you not therefore much rather rest secure of his Blessing upon your
ordinary prudence, and industry?] (3.) Which of you by taking thought can add
one Cubite to his Stature? [And is it not then a manifest point of Folly, to
trouble and molest your selves with that, which is no ways beneficial, and
advantageous; but many ways are hurtful to you?] (4.) And why take ye thought
for Raiment? Consider the Lilies of the field, how they grow; they toil not,
neither do they spin; and yet I say to you, that even Solomon in all his Glory
was not arrayed like one of these: [The greatest Art falls short of Nature's
work, and the best of humane skill and cunning is infinitely below the meanest
instances of Divine Power and Wisdom;] Wherefore if God so cloth the Grass of
the Field, which to day is, and to morrow is cast into the Oven, [and there is
an end of it] shall he not much more cloth you, [being of an Higher form, a
far more considerable rank, and made for immortality,] O ye of little Faith? --
Therefore take no thought, saying what shall we eat, or what shall we drink, or
wherewithal shall we be clothed: For (5.) after all these things do the
Gentiles seek. [The Heathens, who want your Light of Knowledge, whose Portion
and Hopes are confined to this life only, and who live without a Sense of God
and his Providence in the World; make these the Object of their continual
Solicitude:] For (6.) your Heavenly Father knows that you have need of all
these things; [you have a Father, and so of goodness, an Heavenly Father, and
so of Power sufficient to relieve you; and none of your wants or necessities
are hid from him. He knows what you stand most in need of, and what supply is
most fitting for you, and when is the most seasonable time for it: Nay, and you
have his promise, if you be not wanting to that great and principal business,
he has given you in charge to mind.] (7.) But seek ye first the Kingdom of
God, and his Righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you: [Take
but care of your Christian Duty, and God will provide for the Rest. Faithful
is he that has promised, and you may rely upon him for it.] Thus you are not
to disquiet and trouble your selves for your present provision, much less to
enlarge your cares and concerns for a long while to come: -- So he proceeds;
Take no thought therefore for the morrow; for (1) the morrow shall take thought
for the things of it self. [You are not sure of the morrow, or what shall
befall you on it; you know not, what a day may bring forth: It Is time enough to
look after that, when it comes.] (2) Sufficient unto the day is the evil
thereof. [You need not anticipate Labor and Affliction, every day brings
enough with it to Exercise both your Patience and Diligence; to watch against
the Evils of Temptation that assault you; and to bear the evils of calamity and
affliction, that may light upon you. This you see is an incomparable discourse,
and full of most powerful Arguments and Considerations to ease and quiet our
Minds, if we attend as we ought unto them. -- And hereunto I would have you add
his Farewell Sermon, as it may be styled to his drooping Disciples, when he was
about to take his leave of them, in the 14.15 and 16 Chapt. of St. John too
long for me in this place to write over, or gloss upon, -- I will but touch
here and there. Let not your heart be troubled: Chapter 14.1. Verse 2.3.
ye believe in God, believe also in me. I go to prepare a place for you: And if
I go and propare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you unto my
self, that where I am, ye may be also. Whatsoever ye shall ask in my Name,
Verse 13.
that will I do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son. Verse 15. Verse
16.
-- If ye love me, keep my Commandments; And I will pray the Father, and he
shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever. Verse 18.
-- I will not leave you comfortless, (or Orphans as the margin reads it,) I
will come to you. -- If a man love me, Verse 23.
he will keep my words, and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him,
and make our abode with him. -- How can they be solitary, whom each of the
three Persons engage thus graciously to visit and dwell with? Peace I leave
with you, my peace I give unto you; not as the world gives, give I unto you:
Let not your heardbe troubled, neither let it be afraid. -- These things have
I spoken to you, that my joy might remain in you, and that your joy might be
full. -- If the world hate you, ye know that it hated me before it hated you.
-- Remember the word that I said unto you, The Servant is not greater than the
Lord. -- Ye shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be turned into Joy: --
And your joy no man takes away from you. -- These things I have spoken unto
you, that in me ye might have peace, in the World ye shall have tribulation:
but be of good cheer, I have overcome the World.

After all which, he betakes himself to Prayer, Chap. 17. To teach us, what we
should do also.

And unto this now Saint Paul directs us, as the most effectual cure of all
our griefs and troubles, Philip. 4, 6, 7. Be careful for nothing, but in every
thing by Prayer and Supplication let your requests be made known to God; And
the Peace of God, which passes all our understanding, shall keep your hearts
and minds through Christ Jesus. To which I will only subjoyn St. Peter's
Counsel, 1. Ephesians. 5, 6, 7. Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God, that
may exalt you in due time; casting all your care upon him, for he cares for
you.

To whom now be Glory, and Dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

The Distressed Widows Prayer.
MOST Gracious God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom the whole
Family in Heaven and Earth is named; who know what things we stand in need
of before we ask; and art able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we
ask or think; and have promised to hear the Prayers of thy Children and
Servants in their distresses: Upon this encouragement I do now prostrate my
self before the Throne of thy Grace, that I may obtain Mercy, and find Grace
for my seasonable help in this time of need. I humble my Soul, with all the
submission I can, under the sense of thy mighty Hand, which has reduced me to
this afflicted condition. Thou Lord have given, and thou have taken away; for
ever Blessed be thy Name! Good and Righteous art thou in all thy disposals, and
have a Sovereign unquestionable Power to do with thine own Creatures as it
pleases thee. Not what I would, but what thou will; not as I would, but as
thou will: Not my sinful and foolish Will, but thy All-wise and Holy Will be
done. Yea, I will bear thy indignation, O Lord, because I have sinned against
thee. It is of thy Mercies, that I am not consumed: Wherefore should the living
complain, and that for the punishment of their Sins, who are always punished
less than their iniquities deserve? Sanctify, I beseech thee, all the dealings
of thy Providence toward me, that it may be good for me in the Issue to have
been afflicted; and however grievous my loss and sufferings are unto me for the
present, they may bring forth the peaceable fruits of Righteousness, when I
shall have, during thy pleasure, been exercised with them: In the mean while, I
pray thee, support and strengthen me by thy Holy Spirit with all might in the
inward man, unto all patience and long-suffering with joyfulness; Raise me up a
supply of Friends to pity and compassionate my forlorn and destitute estate,
and do thou reward all their kindnesses. Provide for me and mine, as it shall
seem best unto thee, the Food which is convenient for us, our daily Bread; and
give us Contentment with, and Thankfulness for thy Allowances, whatsoever they
are. Lord, I believe, help thou my unbelief, and increase my Faith in thy
All Sufficiency, who art every where with me; a Refuge unto which I may always
resort, a strong Tower, into which I may run to be safe. Protect and defend me
from all evil Temptations, and grant that I may do nothing at any time to
offend or displease Thee, or forseit that Blessed Privilege which thou give
me in thy Holy Word, of applying to, and resting on thee in my present
circumstances, under that most comfortable Title of the Patron of Widows, and
Father of the Fatherless. Make me a follower of Holy and Godly Matrons, and
those Widows indeed whom thou put Honor upon, who trust in thee, and serve
thee, continuing in Prayers and Supplications night and day.

Hear the voice of my Sighs and Tears; Let my cry come unto thee, O Thou that
hear Prayer, and art a present help in the day of trouble, and deal with
thine Handmaid according to the multitude of thy tender mercies, for the merit
sake of thy dearly Beloved Son, Jesus Christ the Righteous, the Propitiation
for our Sins, and our Advocate at thy right Hand; To whom with thee, O Blessed
Father, and thy Holy Spirit of Grace and Comfort, be all Honor and Glory World
without end. Amen.

Why art thou cast down, O my Soul, and why art thou disquieted within me? Hope
thou in God: For I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my contenance and
my God.

O God, my Soul is cast down within me: therefore will I remember thee. -- I
will say unto God, my Rock, why have thou forgotten me? etc.

Why art thou cast down, O my Soul? And why art thou disquieted within me? etc.

Psalm 42.5, 6, 9, 11. - 43.5.
FINIS.

