The Gallant Hermaphrodite. An Amorous NOVEL.

Translated from the French, OF The Sieur de Chavigny.

Licensed,

June 7. 1687. R. P.



LONDON: Printed by F. C. for N. C. in Oxon. MDCLXXXVII.

The Preface.
WEre it not to put an end to the Booksellers Importunities, I should not
trouble you with a Preface; but having given him the Novel, I am not to oblige
him by halves. Though I am altogether at a loss what to say, when I call to
mind the Reflection of a witty Author, In vain the Preface does for Favor
plead,
Where the damned Book displeases all that read.
For whatsoever this Piece of the Sieur de Chavigny be in the Original, I am
sure it has suffered much in my hands. Translations are for the most part like
a Suit of Arras, turned the wrong side outward; and therefore you must expect
to find This full of Knots and Thrums, since it is my first Coup d'Essay (as Sir
Fopling says) in this kind. Such as it is, I make a free Present of it to the
lovely Sex, in hopes of their Patronage; especially to that part of it who have
a Kindness for what is originally French. As to those Ladies who delight in the
sight of the Elephants, Hairy Maids, Turks, etc. I hope our Gallant
Hermaphrodite will be kindly entertained by them, since they may, without
scandal, even in their Alcoves, freely view and converse with this -- what
shall we call it? Sir, or Madam, choose you whether;
Nature twists them both together.
All the further Favor I desire, Ladies, is, that you would put bounds to your
Curiosity, and not endeavor to pull off my disguise; but content your selves
with laughing at my Pains, without laughing at my Face. But if any of you will
be so malicious to lay this Monster of a Translation at my door, I am resolved,
in revenge, impudently to maintain it is a Bastard of your own, and falsely put
upon me to Father.

The Gallant Hermaphrodite.
ARagon, Portugal, and Castile, acknowledged each of them a Sovereign; this
last Court, where Magnificence reigned, attracted from the Borders of the West
and South, so great a concourse of young Princes, that it had been very hard,
should it not have served for a Theater to some extraordinary Adventure. Some
public Sports instituted for the Exercise of such Illustrious young Persons,
and in the celebration of which, those of both Sexes had changed their Names to
those of some Deity in Poetry, gave birth to the first Flames of a young Prince
of the Royal Family of Braganza, named Alphonsus, who represented Mercury; and
to the mutual inclinations of the Duchess Anna Iphigenia, the High Admiral's
Daughter, who personated Flora. That nimble God having bore away the honor of
the Course, this Goddess presented him with a Chaplet of Flowers (as an Emblem
of her Divinity) with so good a grace, that he could not forbear from requiting
her agreeable ways of procedure, by the return of his Heart. He stayed not for
the day following the Feast, to show her how sensible he was of the Favor
which he had received from her, more valuing the having received the Garland
from so fair a Person's hands, than the having gained the Victory. He declared
to her openly before all the Court, that she triumphed over the Conqueror, and
laid at her feet the Prize with which his Valor and Address had been
recompensed. 'Twas from this moment, that these two tender Hearts were united,
that they began to sigh the one for the other, and that they formed an
inviolable Union. If Mercury grew passionately in love with Flora, Flora was in
love with Mercury; so that they courted every occasion to signalize their love
to each other.

Iphigenia had all the Charms that could render a Princess of sixteen
infinitely lovely, and the young Prince who was about two and twenty, was
endowed with all the Qualities that accomplish a Grandee. The love that
Alphonsus conceived for this Sovereign Beauty, was from its birth, of the
character of that which is termed vehement. It made a noise at Court, insomuch
that the Queen, whose Virtue had drawn this young Princess from another Court,
fearing lest so mutual and strong a Passion might produce something prejudicial
to the Ladies Honor, took her into the number of her Favorites, that she
might keep her always by her, and committed her to the care of an old
Governess, whose Eyes it was very difficult for her to deceive. Nevertheless,
as Love is exasperated by Resistance, the more Obstacles Alphonsus found to
surmount, the more his Passion increased. There was no opportunity offered it
self of entertaining privately the Duchess Iphigenia, which he let slip. He
very rarely was out of her presence, insomuch that he gave occasion to some
other young Lords to divert themselves, at his cost, so far, that one of the
wittiest amongst them composed this Raillery upon his Assiduities. Of his
Devoir himself t'acquit,
Alphonsus everywhere does watch,
(With his best Care and utmost Wit)
A Glance from the bright Fair to catch;
But hardly does he her epsy,
When at the presence of her Charms,
Struck with the Luster of her Eye,
He yields his Heart up to her Arms.


All the Precautions of her who watched our fair ones Conduct, could not deprive
Alphonsus of the pleasure of entertaining her often in private. The more the
Queen, who looked upon their Alliance as impossible (for very different reasons
than those which hindered it indeed) opposed their desires, the more their Love
became impatient, and contrived means to surprise the vigilance of the
Governess. Iphigenia bethought her self to make a Visit to the Princess
Christina, Alphonsus's Sister, with whom she was very familiar; but as he was
at variance with her, he could hardly resolve to sacrifice the resentment of
many stinging Reproaches which she had made him, to some sweet moments that
might be recovered elsewhere. This Consideration induced our Illustrious Fair
One (to avoid disobliging the Queen, and opening a hundred young Ladies mouths
who would railly her Passion) to propose to Prince Alphonsus a Truce, to whom
she suggested the common Correspondence by Letters. Nevertheless, as all things
are discovered at long run, and as it is difficult to find trusty Confidents at
Court, our Illustrious Lovers sufficiently thought upon the intercepting of
their Letters, to agree together of a way to conceal their intelligence from
the curiosity of People that are apt to laugh. They contrived then to reject
the first word of every Line as useless to the sense, and to search after the
Coherency of the Discourse, in skipping over one word to the next, and so going
backwards again in the same manner, being at the end, even to the beginning.
This is a Copy of the Letter which the Amorous Prince made, according to this
mystery.

The Irregular Order of Prince Alphonsus his Letter.
THE) the Answer Destiny an of with great me men honor curious) is Lovers more
of cruel faithful will) than most the the Destiny faith of his those of of day
a this meaner you be) fortune makes if that we engage-enrag'd) meant were the of
Flora that charming Rank approve we resolution not) should generous be a freer
of what to) capable always is Slaves age in our our that independency see when
them enter) shall make I shall be we able love into) to in say passionately
that am I I adore that you sensible extremely but our) because are that you you
if are Union absolutely our lovely to what Secrets) bring so can ever Interest
hindrance.


This innocent Artifice succeeded ill to our Lovers. How faithful soever a Maid
of the Duchess Iphigenia seemed to Alphonsus, and whatsoever protestations she
made him to put his Letter faithfully into her Mistress's hands; the Governess
so absolutely disposed of all her Domestics, frighted by her threats, that she
intercepted the Letter, whereof notwithstanding she could not understand the
sense. She made a Copy of it to be taken, which she went to communicate to the
Queen, and ordered that the Original should be delivered in secret to the young
Duchess.

The Queen trusted this mysterious Note with her Secretary, who after an hours
meditation, decypher'd it with much ease, and read it thus.

Prince Alphonsus's Letter, in its natural Order.
THE Destiny of great men is more cruel than the Destiny of those of a meaner
Fortune. If we were of that Bank, we should be freer. What! always Slaves in
our Independency? when shall I be able to say, that I adore you extremely,
because that you are absolutely lovely? Whatsoever hindrance Interest can bring
to our Union, if you are but sensible that I am passionately in love, we shall
make them see that our Age is capable of a generous Resolution. Approve,
charming Flora, the Engagement that makes you of his Faith, the most faithful
of Lovers. Honor me with an Answer.


The Queen, who was a very wise Princess, judged by this Letter, of the great
Familiarity of these tender Lovers, and the consequences that it might produce.
Her Prudence suggested nothing else to her, only to order the Governess to
interrupt this Amorous Commerce, as much as decency would allow, and to forbid
her taking notice of any thing to the young Duchess concerning the
intercepting of her Letter. Whilst Iphigenia was busied in answering the Billet
that she had received, the Governess entered her Chamber. Her unexpected arrival
made her put her Papers together with the greatest haste imaginable, and
appeared some time disturbed. After some ordinary Conversation, the Governess
having purposely brought in Prince Alphonsus into the Discourse, the Duchess
seemed very indifferent on that Chapter, and let nothing appear that might
betray her Love. That cunning Woman observing by the disorder that appeared in
Iphigenia's looks, that she had been surpised, and that she should be
troublesome if she kept her company long, retired to leave her at liberty to
betake her self to her former Employment.

This Fair One found her self perplexed, to make an Answer conformable to the
Note; she spared her pains, in hopes that one of Alphonsus his Sisters Maids
would do her the Courtesy to convey a Letter writ the common way, to the Party
concerned. In effect, this complaisant Maid, whose name was Cornelia, found
opportunity to satisfy her, and to deliver the young Prince her Letter, who
immediately gave her marks of his Acknowledgement. This is the substance of the
Letter.

The Duchess Iphigenia's Answer.
IF you love me as sincerely as you would persuade me, speak well of Destiny,
that makes you born a Prince. Persons of our Rank are born free, or are at
most, Slaves but for a very little time. The vicissitude of Seasons will change
the face of Affairs. Let us consider for some time. Be you faithful to Love,
and he will sufficiently espouse your Interest. I love as much as you love,
because I have not a lower Soul, and that I love to the utmost extent.

Prince, Adieu

A Letter written in terms so plain and passionate, strongly flattred
Alphonsus's amorous inclination, who after that, remained some time in Repose.

Although Iphigenia suspected not the fidelity of her perfidious Confident, she
perceived nevertheless, by the Assiduities that the Queen required from her,
and the frequent Visits of her Governess, that they had a spite against her
liberty. One day that she met Alphonsus near enough at a Comedy, whose motions
the Queen observed, and studied all his looks, she took so well her time, that
she told him, without being understood by any one whatsoever; Alphonsus, we
shall not be able to see one another again with liberty, but at your Sisters;
reconcile your self to her, and let none but the Maid that has given you my
Answer, know of your Reconciliation. I will prepare her Mind, and I will manage
your Honor and Interest as my own.

There was nothing but Love that could persuade Alphonsus to that mortifying
advance, to see again a Sister that had a thousand times provoked his Nature.
It was the greatest trouble to him in the World, to resolve on it; and without
the meeting with one of his Sisters Maids, which was the Confident of the
Duchess Iphigenia, I question if his Love had been able to have carried it
above his Resentment. He engaged this Maid, equally witty and discreet, to
incline his Sister afar off, to court his Friendship, in representing to her,
that when Heaven could not but have in horror their separation, it was
shameful to see Persons of their Quality and near Relation, live in a
misunderstanding, that rendered them the sport of the Court. He promised to this
Mediatrix to acknowledge her Services, and that if Heaven made him obtain the
possession of Iphigenia, she might flatter her self with the hope of a
considerable Fortune. Now for fear that their Interview should become
suspected, he showed her the Wife of a Steward of the Kings Household, to whom
she might give an account of her Negotiation.

Cornelia instructed in the designs of Alphonsus, run to communicate them to
the Illustrious Mistress of this Prince, who suggested to her the manner
whereby she should insinuate her self into the mind of the Princess Christina,
she counseled her to move this matter the same Evening, that she would come to
see this Princess on purpose, whereby she would strongly try her Inclination,
in respect of Alphonsus her Brother.

Cornelia was playing the fool with the Princess Christina, who hid none of her
thoughts from her, when she told her that she had had a Dream during which, she
found her self the most happy Maid in the World. There was a likelihood that
the sight of some agreeable Object had entertained her, and that there passed,
during this Dream, something too wanton to be related, since that she made a
mystery of it to this Confident, to whom she would never reveal it, what
entreaty soever she made. They contested yet agreeably together with that
privacy that she permitted to Cornelia, when one came to advertise the Princess
Christina of the arrival of Iphigenia, whose Coach was in the Court. She bid
her tell her that she thought her self much honored by her Visit, and that she
was ready to receive her.

She mounted the Staircase with her ordinary freedom, when she heard in an
adjacent Parlour many Maids laughing at the Tales, which an old Woman told
them, who by looking in their hands told them their good Fortune. As she was
familiar and beloved by all the House, she stopped there, and informed her self
of the cause of so extraordinary a Gaiety: She understood it, and prayed them
not to dismiss this Fortune Tellers, till that she had spoke of her in the
Chamber of the Princess.

The Prince Alphonsus, who knew the free humor of his Sister, had suborned
this Woman, who was famous for her knowledge in Chiromancy, even to the
foretelling of things to come. He had instructed her in part of his Sisters
Life, and ordered her above all things, to predict to her, that dismal
Consequences would spring from the misunderstanding that was between her
Brother and her. This Prince knew well, that Cornelia would serve his
Interests, and would yet add as much as was possible for her, to the impression
of Predictions; and 'twas this that induced him to advertise her to ask for her
at the Palace, in case that the Swiss should deny her Entrance. This old Woman
was beginning to act her part to the satisfaction of the whole house, when
Iphigenia, that was not pre-acquainted with his design, heard her.

After the ordinary Complements passed between these two Princesses, their
discourse, after having been some time serious, turning to freedom, Iphigenia
entreated the Princess Christina to be willing to permit the old Woman to come
up, who without doubt would afford them divertisement. The Princess, who was
not less curious than Iphigenia, agreed presently to the Proposition: The old
Woman was brought into the Chamber, and there arose an agreeable Contest
between the two Princesses, which should present their Hand first. They were
curious to hear the Recital of each others Adventures, and each defended her
self from having the first Experiment made on her. Cornelia, who was more an
Enemy to Gallantry than the Princesses, and who had as well as they, her secret
Intrigues, fearing to be forced first to pass the Pikes, pretended some
occasion to go out; and 'twas this pretense that made them cast their Eyes on
her, and order her to present her Hand. She obeyed and this cunning old Woman
told her presently a thousand obliging things, for fear of frighting the
Princesses: But as she received Commands from them not to spare her, she told
this Maid, amongst other things, that she was beloved by three several Persons;
by two Cavaliers, and another Person whom she named Baptem, and whose Birth
equaled not his Wealth. She added, that she had an inclination for the ugliest
of the three, which nevertheless seemed to her to have something amiable; which
made the Princess say, that without doubt 'twas Monsieur such a one; which
Cornelia so little agreed to, that she forgot even what she was, through the
backwardness she showed at the earnest demand that was made her, to confess if
it was true. Iphigenia, who would not vex this Maid, of whose intercession she
might stand in need, pretended not to observe her ill humor, and diverted the
business so handsomely, that she ory'd out laughing, and addressing her self to
the Princess Christina, Madam, your Turn's next. This Princess waver'd so very
much, and had so great trouble to present this pretended Mirror of her Soul,
that the particular inclination of Iphigenia, seconded by the impression of
Destiny, made her consent to give her Hand, on condition that the Princess
should follow her Example. This Agreement made between them, the old Woman
enlarged upon a hundred passed Adventures that surpised Iphigenia so very
much, that she believed her truly a Sorceress. She was not for all that, so
scrupulous as to fear venturing her Conscience, and therefore she let her make
an end of saying all that her evil Genius suggested to her. After having heard
a thousand probable things, she had the smarting satisfaction to hear the most
cross Prognostications imaginable: You shall be loved, says she, and you shall
love. You shall sigh only for Objects worthy of you. You shall be perfidious
and faithful* You shall furnish Occasion for a Tragedy. You shall obtain the
Object of your Vows. You shall be a happy Rival, and you shall lead a happy
Life, full of Prosperity and Tranquillity, with the Person that thinks least to
obtain you. So many obscure and confused Predictions passed in the mind of
Iphigenia, for mere Fancies and Prognostications in the Air. Nevertheless, the
sequel of this Princess's Adventures justified their truth. But let us pass
over to what was made known in examining the Lines of the Princess's hand, the
Sister of Alphonsus, for whose Instruction our old Woman was sent thither.

The great seriousness which this Princess affected, who had heard too much
upon Iphigenia's account, not to fear hearing some disagreeable Truths,
disordred presently the old Woman, who endeavored to utter none but Events
whose Remembrance should extremely please, till Iphigenia having told her, that
she would not be satisfied that the Princess hated Reserve and Flattery, so
that she need not act against her knowledge, she ventured to speak more freely.
All your Wishes, pursued she, are fulfilled; you shall experience a favorable
Destiny, and altogether resembling that of Madam, said she, showing her the
Princess Iphigenia. One thing, nevertheless, is wanting to you, Madam; but
unless you expressly command me to reveal it to you, I shall pass it over in
silence. One may well imagine, that in stopping thus, she stirred up the
curiosity of the one and the other. The Princess not being able handsomely to
defend her self from entreating her to tell her freely her Thoughts, the old
Woman added, with assurance, That it was not very commendable for her to live
in misunderstanding with one of her nearest Relations: That the delay of a
Reconciliation might be prejudicial to her; and that if she would do Justice to
her self, she ought to consider, that this Relation was not altogether to
blame; and that in fine, it was her Interest to make some Advances, and to
court his Friendship. This confident Declaration, which very much pleased
Iphigenia and the Maid, surpised the Princess, who would know no more, and
called the old Woman Dotard. She was then dismissed. After some Reflections that
our Ladies made together upon what had been foretold them, Iphigenia took her
time to express that she was altogether astonished, that this old Woman had
been able to reveal the difference of the Princess and Alphonsus her Brother.
The Princess, whom such plain Declarations astonished not less than the others,
could not keep from crying out, Fables! Fables! Conjectures found upon nothing!
Iphigenia, who interrupted her, told her, that in truth she was not of opinion
that one ought to be superstitious to that point, to give credit to all things
uttered, nor to fear very much the application and effect of Predictions: But
that nevertheless, it was prudence to use precaution against Events the least
dangerous; that as for the rest, for what regarded the falling out between her
and the Prince Alphonsus her Brother, it would always be a thing to be
commended in her to dissipate it, or to contribute at least in what depended
upon her, that the fire of their dissension might be extinguished as soon as
possible. Although this kind of Lesson did not extremely please the Princess,
she received it, without confusion, from her Friend, from which it came,
because she believed her not to speak for Interest. Iphigenia seeing her not
far from an Accommodation, said to her, Madam, without having regard to the
Chimerical Threats of a Superstitious Old Woman, but purely through a Principle
of a Christian Charity, it is necessary that your Generosity now triumph over
your Resentment, and that you suffer the Lord Alphonsus to repair hither this
Evening. I have authority enough over him; and I know besides, that he esteems
and loves you too tenderly, not to be willing to make the first step. I grant
you but two hours to resolve on it. He shall himself do all that I shall
prescribe him by a Note under my Hand, which Cornelia shall give him. I am
persuaded, interrupted she the Princess, that my Brother adores you, that he
has conceived so high an Idaea of your Merit, that he cannot resist obeying
you; that you rule all his Motions, not to say, that you are the Sovereign of
his Heart. I, Madam, replied Iphigenia. I think not advantageously enough of my
Charms, to pretend to that glory. The Prince Alphonsus is altogether judicious,
and it is that makes me hope that he will give ear to Reason, and not keep
himself from following it. The Princess relished the Proposal of Iphigenia. It
was agreed on, that Cornelia should follow her, and that she should receive
from her a Note for the Lord Alphonsus.

Iphigenia, at her return, took her Pen in hand, and writ, with the greatest
diligence, this Word of Advice to Prince Alphonsus.

The Billet of IPHIGENIA, TO Prince ALPHONSVS.
IF your Love ought to be without partition, you ought not, Prince, to be
entire in any thing. The House of the Princess Christina, will be most
favorable to your Vows. I desire this Evening to discourse with you there;
fail not at the Assignation. You ought to make the first Advances in the
Project of your Reconciliation, because you ought to seem the most generous: go
not from my word in any thing. If it is in any manner to humble your self, know
that Submissions of this nature are Heroic Treaties; that the Stoics will
give you the Title of a Valiant Spirit, and the Sages that of a Christian. A
true Lover cannot do an unworthy Action. If he commits any, they pass for
Virtues, when he relates them to the Object for which he sighs. The rest anon.

Prince, Adieu.

Cornelia charged with this Billet, carried it to the Lord Alphonsus, who knew
so well to counterfeit the Recital she made him concerning the Predictions of
the old Woman, that she could never suspect that she had been his Emissary. He
promised to repair to the House after the Play, and really did so about Eight a
Clock at Night. Iphigenia, who had prevented him there, and who had given the
last motion to the Resolution of the Princess, was no sooner informed of his
coming up Stairs, but she went to meet him, and called to him at the door, My
Lord Alphonsus, enter without Retinue, and leave below your Fierceness and
Resentment. She had hardly finished these words, when the young Prince, who
carried Serenity drawn on his Face, and Love in his Eyes, appeared. She
informed the Princess of his approach, who rose from her Chair of State, and
went to meet him as far as the Door. Some tender Embraces, without many words,
put an end to their Difference. After that moment, there appeared no more
Coldness between them; and Alphonsus entertained his Sister with, as much
familiarity, as if they had never been at difference. After some moments spent
in a free Conversation, to which Iphigenia had almost all the while
contributed, the Princess asked the Lord Alphonsus. If he was yet Master of his
Heart; to which the Prince answered, That he had sacrificed it to the Graces of
the Charming Iphigenia: and that lovely Duchess answered him so tenderly, that
she had given him her own in requital. That the Princess sung upon the account
of this exchange of Hearts, very much to the purpose, this Stanza of a Song
made upon a like Subject.

Burn, happy Lovers, burn in Love;
See that your Flames immortal prove.
Be you but constant, faithful, kind,
And you will the sweetest moments find
Lovers ere tasted; let each Heart
In mutual Love still bear a part:
And Love your Souls will so confound,
In kind Embraces they will be drowned.
The good humor of the Princess Christiana, excited Freedom in our two
Illustrious Lovers, who began to tell one another tender things, and to make
Protestations of Fidelity to each other. The Princess, who had not in so young
years a Judgment ripe enough to discern the Interests of States compromis'd in
the Alliance of Princes, flattered at that time their Passion; and counseled
them not to dispute so long time with each other, but to search out the best
means to give each other Assurances of their Love.

This Advice, although ill weighed, agreed extremely to the Sentiments of
Alphonsus. It infinitely pleased the Duchess Iphigenia, who conjured the
Princess to agree, that she might come every day to her House to pass some
moments with the Prince Alphonsus, until that Heaven had appointed their
Marriage. The Princess very well perceived by this Proposition, that her
Brother had not again courted her Amity, but for having the liberty of her
House, where Iphigenia might come alone, without giving Umbrage to her
Governess, who would not imagine that the Lord Alphonsus would so easily
hearken to a Reconciliation. In effect she did it with so little noise, that
during more than a month our Illustrious Lovers had the convenience to
entertain one another privately, and to open their Hearts to each other.

Nevertheless, as it was difficult that such a Commerce should remain secret at
Court, where great Persons are watched by as many Eyes as Argus had, and have
as many Historians of their Life, as they have Domestics; Iphigenia's
Governess, who never could meet her at home in the Evening, having informed her
self of the Rendezvous of our Lovers, went to give an Account to the Queen, of
their secret practices; who obtained from the King, that Alphonsus should not
see Iphigenia any more.

Our Illustrious Lovers began but to taste the preliminary Sweets of Love, when
the Malice of a barbarous Fate came to traverse their springing Pleasure. The
Duchess, to whom the Queen on her side had read very disagreeable Lectures,
frequented no more almost the House of the Princess, for fear to meet her dear
Alphonsus there, who lost also the habit of coming to the House, not to seem a
Rebel to the King's Orders. They endeavored, the one and the other, to ward so
rude a Blow, by the most flattering considerations that Hope could produce.
Iphigenia did her self so much violence to hinder her Grief from breaking out,
that she fell into a drooping that reduced her to extremity; she kept her Bed
fifteen days, during which time, it was not permitted Prince Alphonsus to come
to comfort her with his presence. Her oppression in the mean time became so
prodigious, that in her Raving Fits, with which she was agitated, and which
differed nothing from Madness, she would not speak but of her dear Alphonsus,
to whom Cornelia made a tender Report of the state of her Health. She was but
some days recovered, and went not yet out of her Chamber, when Alphonsus who
altered visibly, and was fallen into a profound Melancholy, writ this
Billet-doux.

MY Heart is without motion, charming Princess, and resents all the Alterations
of yours. Are we then so criminal, that they condemn us to death? The
Melancholy which devours me, gives me it. I expire every time that I hear of
your pitiful Condition; and as I inform my self of it each moment, I presume to
tell you, that I no longer live. Uphold your self, adorable Iphigenia, and let
the thoughts of what is to come, elevate you above the present Persecutions. In
the deplorable Estate Inhumanity has reduced me to, I can yet dispute it even
to Death, if I hear that in that little Life is left you, you yet turn your
Thoughts toward the faithful Alphonsus.

Iphigenia steeped this tender Letter in her Tears. She was very desirous in
the extremity wherein she was to answer it: But besides, that her weakness
would not suffer her to hold a Pen, her Bed was always so besieged with Ladies
that made her troublesome Visits, that she could not find the convenience of
discoursing one moment with Cornelia, the Confident of her and her Lover.

This Letter revived her Love. She became so impatient to see her dear
Alphonsus, that so long an absence threw her into a Melancholy that caused her
Relapse. Her Distemper increased, and her Raving Fits recommenc'd. Her Mind was
wholly taken up with the Answer that she would make to her Lovers Billet, which
she searched for oftentimes between the Pillows where she had put it. Her
trouble appeared so visible one day to her Spies, that they had the boldness to
take away from her this Note, whilst she took some Repose, and to put it into
the hands of her Governess, who read what it contained, and made it be put in
its place, for fear of increasing her Distemper. She went in the mean time to
give an Account to the Queen, who complained of it to the King.

This prudent Monarch, fearing that if any Alliance of this consequence should
be made without the knowledge of the Princes who honored his Court with their
Children, they should be scandalized at it, and recall them home, judged it
proper to give notice to Prince Philip Alphonsus his Father, and to the Admiral
Father to Iphigenia, of the violent Inclination that they had one for the
other. This Alliance being advantageous for Prince Philip, his Answer was, That
he would leave Heaven to act in it: and the Admiral not judging that she had
provided for her self to her advantage, he believed that it would be easy to
divert this Inclination, in giving another Lover to his Daughter. He conjured
then his Majesty most humbly to be willing to recommend to her the old Duke of
Alvaro, who was a Lord extremely rich, and whom the fear to meet with a young
Heart already disposed of, hindered to declare himself to Iphigenia

The King, informed of the Sentiments of these Princes, sent afresh to
Alphonsus, to forbid him to see Iphigenia, who was then absolutely out of
danger. The Queen undertook to prepare her to hearken favorably to the Duke of
Alvaro. This lovely Princess, who at first understood her Intention, told her
Majesty, That although it appeared that nothing in the World ought to be freer
than the Choice of a Husband, she had so much Respect and Esteem for the Lord
that she had proposed to her, that she would endeavor to fancy him 40 years
younger, that she might have more reason to love him. The Queen, who judged by
this Answer, that it was not easy to persuade a young Maid to love
indifferently all sorts of Objects, contented her self with this beginning, and
made the Amorous Old Man comprehend it would be a hard matter to surprise a
place possessed by a powerful Enemy: That he might nevertheless render his
Assiduities to Iphigenia, and that he might put in practice all his Industry,
to endeavor to make himself be beloved. The Duke, who was a little sensible of
the weakness of Age, was not capable to remove so many Engines. He went the
same Evening to the Queen's Apartment, where he had been informed Iphigenia
would be; and it was in her Majesty's presence that he made her his first
Declarations. It is not to be believed how wittily this young Duchess answered
the old Count, and how she made him flote between Hope and Despair. She droll'd
a long time upon the difference of years, and ended at last with protesting
that she loved better a white and experienced Head, than a vigorous and
well-made Body.

Iphigenia, who conceived that they had designed this Old Man for her, was
impatient to inform Alphonsus of this Comedy. But the promises she had made to
the Queen to think no more of him, and to have Eyes only for him that Heaven
seemed to have chose for her by the hand of her Father, made her fear to renew
with Alphonsus a new Commerce. Nevertheless, she run to the House of the
Princess Christina, to whom she imparted the Adventure, and where she writ
these Lines, which she left upon the Table of her Cabinet for her Lover.

The Letter of Iphigenia.
THey would force me to love a decrepid Old Man; as if Love ought to be
enslaved by Interest. Teach me the Art to feign; for I assure you I am troubled
to seem all Fire near a Frost. The good man they propose to me, reckons me his
already. But after what a way does he make his Court? He enters, he kisses my
Hand, he sits over against me with his Face so near mine, that if he take not
care, I shall some day by fetching my Breath with strength, meet with his, and
snatch from him his last Sigh. What a Sympathy of Humors, and what a
Resemblance of Complexions is here! They say he has need of four or five
Blankets, besides a suit of Furs, to keep him warm a Nights in the Month of
July. I thank my Fate for furnishing us with any Subject that may contribute to
our divertisement, when on the one side it deprives us of the satisfaction of
seeing one another. If you are discreet and constant, none but you must pretend
to my Esteem. Beg of Love to furnish us with some new Stratagem and sure Means
to put an end to our prohibition, and to content us. You know the hand of her
that loves you. This suffices.


As soon as Alphonsus entered the House of the Princess his Sister, Cornelia put
him in mind of the place where he might find this Note. His meeting her,
moderated his Sorrow; he read it over and over, with the greatest satisfaction
imaginable, and carried it away without having thought it necessary to make an
Answer to it.

In the mean time, the Lord Alvaro gave no rest to Iphigenia, he pressed her,
he solicited her, he employed the Credit of all those that had any power over
the mind of this Duchess, he offered her a thousand Jewels of value, gave her
Comedies, Balls, Serenades, treated magnificently on her account a party of the
Ladies of the Court, went not from her house till it was very late, was at her
Toilet, and performed admirably well all the Devoirs of a young Gallant; during
which, she rallied his Weakness: And Alphonsus, who believed himself only
beloved, published everywhere, that he was collecting the Memoirs of what
passed between the old Duke, and the lovely Iphigenia, to compile a Gallant
Novel, which he would call, The Impotent Gallant.

Old Age is always distrustful and suspicious. The Duke maintained very many
Persons up and down to watch Alphonsus, who informed him that he turned his
Conduct into Ridicule, and that he endeavored to render him the Proverb of the
Court. This Presumption exasperated the Old Man to such a degree, that he
resolved to be revenged of him. If his Strength had been answerable to his
Courage, he would not have employed any other Arm but his own to demand
satisfaction of Alphonsus. Having one day met him two Leagues from the Town,
following the first motions of his great Heart, he alighted from his Coach, and
obliged Alphonsus to alight, with a resolution to fight him, if Count Angelo,
his Nephew, who was with him, had not taken his Uncles part, who was more than
Threescore and fifteen years old, against a Prince that was hardly Nine and
twenty.

These two young Lords having drawn their Swords, pusht for some time very
vigorously. It was not the Dukes fault, that his Nephew, whom he animated by
all powerful Exhortations, remained not Master of the Field. He was
nevertheless worsted, having received a very dangerous Wound in the Arm, by
which he lost very much Blood. This sad Spectacle, very far from cooling the
Duke's Courage, inflamed it more; he put himself in a posture to second the
Wounded, when Alphonsus, who was too brave to engage with unequal strength,
smiling, prayed the Duke not to oblige him to do an Action which would be
always reproachful to him, although even he should have the better of it. Then
remounting his Horse, he returned the same way toward the Town upon a
Hand-gallop. The noise of this Rancounter was spread abroad half an hour after,
and came even to the Ears of the King, who gave command to Alphonsus to confine
himself to his house, till new Orders.

Iphigenia heard, almost at the same time, the success of Alphonsus his Arms.
Whatsoever inclination she had for this Prince, she could not but compassionate
the Duke's Fortune, whose Courage she admired. She took his part in some sort
also against this young Rival, because that she heard that he insolently
vaunted of his advantage; she suffered with regret that a young man should
insult over one of so great Age, and conceived for the Duke as high Sentiments
of Esteem, as she had Love for Alphonsus. She received a Visit from that Old
Man that very same Evening, where he told her things that touched her very much.

'Twas after a serious Conversation that she had had with him, where he had
painted out the Advantages she might draw from her Alliance, that she passed a
part of the Night in meditating upon the Duke's Proposals. Amongst other
Reflections which she made, she considered that it would be always commendable
to obey a Father who was more understanding in Affairs than her self, and who
only looked after her Interests; that the Pleasures of the Bed made not up the
greatest Delights of Life; that if she tasted not presently of those Sweets
which wise men accounted but superficial and imaginary, she should yet, after
the death of a man within two inches of the Grave, in the middle of her Age,
experience them; that Alphonsus passed amongst those who kept him company, for
a fantastic Spark, and rash; and that it might be hazardous and troublesome to
sacrifice her Liberty to a young man, who loved less on the account of Reason
than Passion. Sleep having surpised her in the midst of these confused
Thoughts, the first that possessed her when she was awake, was to make trial by
Wit and Address, of the true Temper of Alphonsus; whereby she resolved to sound
his Heart by an Artifice that I shall tell you, after that I have described the
Discourse which she had that day during some hours with the Duke.

She took a little rest in the inner part of an Alcove, all alone. She was
there reading some pages of a Romance which she had in her hand, when the Old
Duke was brought in to her Chamber. He sat down by her, and discoursed with
her of indifferent subjects, till she fetched a sigh, which made the
Conversation change. He took it for a token of the desire she had to hear him
to speak of other matters, and 'twas that made him begin in this sort: I know
not, Madam, whether you have heard favorably the Declarations of Love that I
have made you. I am persuaded that you would be sensible of those that should
be made you by Persons of more merit and fewer years. It is true, that Youth
has powerful Charms, and that old Age cannot but cause disgust to a young
Duchess, accomplished as you are; but it must also be acknowledged, that that
has for its share Transports of Anger and Fury, and this, Prudence and good
Conduct. It is true moreover, that the first joins to external Charms the
Subtilties of Discourse, and that the Language of the other is not very
persuasive. Nevertheless, I have this advantage, Madam, above those who may
pretend to the honor of your Alliance, that if I explain my self more plainly,
I speak with more sincerity. You may believe besides, that if it be my good
Fortune to possess you, I will endow you with all the Estate which Birth and
Fortune have heaped upon me. I should be nevertheless in despair that the World
should one day reproach me with having done violence to your Inclination. You
have in your young years more understanding than any Princess of this Court;
and therefore you are of your self capable of determining in an Affair of this
consequence. As for the rest, I can assure you, pursued he laughing, that
against the custom of those of my years, I am neither troublesome nor jealous.

Iphigenia, who had till then kept silence through respect, answered the Duke
with very much modesty, That she would think upon the things which he had urged
to her; that his Reasons were very strong; and that in a little time he should
know her Resolution. That as for the rest, she was infinitely obliged to him
for the choice that he was pleased to make of her, in the midst of a Court
where he might dispose absolutely of the Heart of the Fairest and most
Accomplished of all those Princesses that made up its Delights. She prayed him,
pursuant to this Discourse when he took leave of her, to demand of the King the
liberty of Alphonsus, which would not be refused him. I have a strong
inclination, said she to him, to tax this Prince of Rashness, to treat him with
Haughtiness, and to break off with him for ever, as little regard as he has to
the Lessons I shall prescribe him.

Although this Intention to break with him was only conditional, the Duke,
without troubling himself to dive into it, went to demand of the King
Alphonsus's liberty, and to entreat his Majesty to permit him once more to see
Iphigenia; which having obtained from his Mercy, he went himself to assure
Alphonsus of the King's favor, to conjure him to forget what was past, and to
inform him that the Princess Iphigenia desired to see him.

This Prince was very much surpised at the Advances of the Duke, which made
him suspicious of some Stratagem that he was contriving against him.
Nevertheless, he thanked him handsomely for the good Offices that he had just
then done him, and promised to go to receive the Orders, of the Duchess. He
went to her House two hours after, and Iphigenia was no sooner informed of his
arrival, but she dismissed the Company that was with her.

The love which she had had for this Prince, and which was not yet extinguished
in her Heart, made her seem to feel very much joy at his return: Come, said she
to him, smiling, wicked man, I have many things to tell you. Prepare your self
to hear such as will be disagreeable to you. To which Alphonsus replied, A
tender Princess cannot speak harsh things; and were I as culpable as I am
faithful, you could not so handle me, that your Mortifications would be of
force to make me repent of my Crime, because you would mortify me with so good
a grace, that I should always esteem my self Innocent. You are too
presumptious, added Iphigenia, and I believe you will change your mind at the
Propositions I have to make you. You may try me, Madam, pursued he, as much as
you please; I flatter my self to be able to justify what I have said. Very
well, continued the Duchess, since you have so strong a Wit, and that I see
you armed against all sorts of Attaques, sit you down there, and delay not to
answer me. They had no sooner taken Seats, but she said to him, The business
is, my Lord Alphonsus, that you give your Consent that I become your Rival's
Wife. I believe I need not tell you that the Admiral is a man solid and
interessed, who will never consent to our Alliance; that he will make me marry
the Duke Alvero, whose great Wealth is able to uphold our Family; and that the
King will agree to no other Match. Let me then do a thing against my
Inclination: Permit me to put a man in his Grave that cannot live longer
almost, that we may be in a better condition to pass our live times happily and
quietly. You need not doubt but to find me always the same in Body and in Mind.
Thus I do not properly break with you, I only propose a delay that may last but
a very little time.

Although it is true that Alphonsus did not expect a Complement of this nature,
having a little consulted with himself, and appeared for some time thoughtful,
believing himself banished from the Heart of Iphigenia, he would show her that
he was as indifferent as she was changeable, and 'twas that which put this
Answer in his mouth. Are these, Madam, the Promises of an inviolable Fidelity.
Have you so soon forgot the mutual Protestations which we have made? Can I
believe that you have loved, since you now cease from loving? What can I hope
from a Flame which is extinguished in the heat of its vigor? No, Madam, I
cannot, without dying, see you in the Arms of a Rival, if you do not promise me
that the Marriage which you are contriving shall only serve as a Vail to the
Favors which you will grant me. Alphonsus thought he might very well insult
over the Princess's Virtue, since she seemed to have no more love for him.
Iphigenia offended at so insolent an Answer, dissembled then and replied
nothing, only that he should have cause to praise her Fidelity. They parted
thereupon dissatisfied with each other, insomuch that some Servants perceived
that Alphonsus shook his head, and muttered between his teeth at the foot of
the great Staircase.

After so surprising a Proposal, Alphonsus abated much in the Sentiments of
Esteem which he had for the Princess, who became almost indifferent to him; and
Iphigenia after a Proposition so offensive, showed her coldness to Alphonsus,
who did all he could to turn the Duke en Ridicule, and to render the Duchess
the Object of the Court-Raillery, He composed Verses for this effect which he
spread everywhere, under an unknown Name, wherein he described the ridiculous
Fires of an Old Man and the Infidelity of his Mistress. Here is a Copy of them,
agreeable to the Original.

Upon an Old Man in love with an Inconstant Princess.
An EPIGRAM.
A Duke, within two inches of the Grave,
His Head with Snow quite covered over,
To carry on a new Amout,
Uses all means the Fair One to engage.
This Candle that is just ready to expire,
Is in a Dutchess's false Heart
Worthily suffered to have part,
Who does against his liberty conspire.
She by this means has all her Heart can wish;
For Death the Duke will soon remove,
And then this Weathercock of Love,
Who change affects, will choose another Dish.
These Verses made noise enough to come to the knowledge of the Duke, and of
her who was made the subject of them; upon which she threatened Alphonsus to
play him an ill trick for it: he betrayed the Secret which he owed to
Iphigenia's trust in him, and manifested his Levity, in making the Letter
public; wherein this poor Lady declaimed against the rigor of Destiny, which
ordained for her an impotent Old Man. Iphigenia outrag'd at such a proceeding,
went to complain to the Princess Christina, who told her, That she ought to
have known better Alphonsus's humor, before she had trusted him; that he was
the most giddy-headed Lover in the World, and a young man without discretion,
who considered not, provided he could divert himself, at whose cost it were;
that she was in the same apprehension on the score of such a like indiscreet
Spark, to whom she had entrusted something which she would very fain keep
secret; that it was not very difficult to make this Letter pass for
counterfeit; and that as to the rest, she should refer her self to common
Report; that Calumny was the Vice of Courts, and that she should be before
assured of the truth of the Fact, from his own Confession, who had been
accounted the Author of the Report. Iphigenia, who relished these Reasons,
represented to the Princess Christina, that to tax Alphonsus of it, were to
expose her self to new Railleries; that he would be cunning enough to deny the
thing, and malicious enough to add Satyr upon Satyr, and to divert himself
with her Fears.

Whilst our intimate Princesses were deliberating together of the means to
avoid hazarding themselves with Alphonsus, in extorting the truth from him, the
Duke came to pay a Visit to the Princess Christina, with whom he hoped to find
Iphigenia, who made her the Repositary of all her Secerets. He entered, they
discoursed for some time together, every one was in a good humor, when the
Conversation having turned upon the Chapter of the Duke's Marriage with
Iphigenia, the Old Man to whom she had as it were engaged her Faith, told her,
That he was too much her Friend, and too sincere to conceal any thing from her.
And drew a Paper out of his Pocket which was an exact Copy of the Letter which
we have been speaking of, wherein Iphigenia showed her aversion for the Duke,
on the back of which Alphonsus his Verses were written.

The reading of the Epigram in the first place, mortified Iphigenia in the
highest degree. But that which confounded her, was the shock which that Letter
gave her, which Love had heretofore dictated to her, and which Treachery had
now made public. The Princess Christina, who saw her in this perplexity, drew
her out of trouble, in making pleasant Reflections upon that Letter. Iphigenia
believing it would be to her advantage to turn the business into Raillery, grew
pleasant in her turn, and own to the Duke, That she was the Author of that
Letter; that in reality, the first proposal that had been made her of an
Alliance with him, had made her wild at the time that she had an Inclination
for Alphonsus: But that this fault ought to be forgiven her; that it was a
proof of her Constancy and Fidelity; that having never had the honor to have
been in his company, she had given way too much to the Impression which his Age
made on her Spirit; and that as the Fire which is difficult to be kindled, is
likewise difficult to be extinguished, the greater Aversion she had for him
before she knew him, the greater Esteem she had conceived for him since she had
known him, and that this Esteem should never be blotted out. She spoke too
well, and defended her self with too much Wit, not to obtain her Pardon. The
Old Man tore the Letter, and discoursed no more of any thing, but of demanding
satisfaction from Alphonsus.

They might freely consult of the means to be revenged of him in the presence
of the Princess his Sister. For besides that she loved him not, the hopes to
become the only Heiress of her Family, made her desire his death. They
concluded then that the Count St. Angelo, the Duke's Nephew, should challenge
Alphonsus, and that they should decide together the difference that was between
them. I will go send for him this Evening, said the Old Man; you will inspire
him with a Spirit of Revenge; and although I esteem him valiant, I doubt not
but he will become a hundred times fiercer, when you shall your self have put
your Interests into his hands. It will be an honor to fall in my service, and
in the Quarrel of that Person whom I most honor. According to this Promise,
the Duke withdrew, and left the two confident Princesses at liberty to resume
their Conversation.

They judged it convenient, after some deliberation, to send for Alphonsus, who
came to them an hour after. The Princess Christina, as soon as he was sat
down, began to speak, by asking him, when he would give over abusing his
Relations, and when he would leave the World in Repose. He was going to reply
something, when Iphigenia, impatient, without any transport of Anger, called
him Perfidious, and put into his hands the pieces of the Copy of the Letter
which had been torn but a little before. This Letter was so dispersed, that he
knew not the Character of the Person who had transcribed it. He pretended to be
ignorant of what it was, and employed above half an hour in seeming to fit
again the pieces of Paper, though he still placed them wrong. Iphigenia
perceiving that he mistook on purpose, took the pieces again out of his hand,
and told him, that they contained the Copy of a Letter which she had through
confidence writ to him: That she could never have thought that he had been so
base to divulge it, and to employ his Pen in composing the most bloody
Railleries that could be read. That it could never be any Credit for him to be
revenged after so base a manner, of a Person whose tender Sentiments he had not
been acquainted with. Alphonsus, counterfeiting astonishment, seemed to
understand nothing of Iphigenia's discourse, and thereupon she her self fitted
the pieces of the Letter, so that they might be read. He swore after a great
exclamation, that that Treachery should cost the Keeper of his Wardrobe his
Life. That that Letter had been stolen out of his Pocket; that he would punish
the boldness of the Author of this Crime, and protested that for his part he
was innocent of what he was accused of. His Hypocrisy was too visible: His
Excuses were not at all received, and he endeavored in vain to justify
himself. There was no Trick which he made not use of, to dissuade Iphigenia
even to the shedding of Tears: He threw himself on his Knees, and asked her
Pardon for a Fault which he would efface with the Blood of any Man, and for the
expiation of which, he would voluntarily give his own, were he guilty of it.
It Is not that which I demand, said Iphigenia, you will never kill the guilty;
if you spare him who terms himself innocent, we expected suchlike
Justifications. Know that I solemnly retract the Word that I have given you.
Take what is passed for a Foolery; you shall know toward the Evening the cause
for which I have entreated you to come hither. To morrow you -- She was going
on further, when the Princess Christina having pulled her by the Arm, made her
stop there. Alphonsus, who understood by half a word what she was about to say,
rose up as soon as she was silent, and saluting the company, told her, To
morrow, Madam, to morrow whatever you please. He thereupon withdrew and was
just getting into his Coach, when the Count de St. Angelo entered. This
Rencounter made him suspect that it was he with whom they threatened him. But he
was in no great trouble, and he went home to expect with patience what was
meant by that word, To morrow.

St. Angelo had scarce presented himself before these Princesses, when
Iphigenia said to him, I doubt not, Sir, but you are already informed what I
demand from your generous Friendship; you know how Alphonsus has offended me,
and how much the Duke has reason to complain of him: The business is to demand
satisfaction of this injurious Prince. He is valiant, and will accept all
Challenges. If my Interests affect you, you will not be troubled that I have
made choice of you as of an undaunted Lord, whose Courage is universally known.
Are you disposed to second my Intentions, and to fight for the Duke's Honor. I
am fully resolved of it, Madam, replied the Count, if you do me right, you
ought to be persuaded of it, before I assure you of it. Prince Alphonsus uses
you after a very uncivil manner. All the Court blames him, and will without
doubt approve the design which you project with Justice, and which I shall
endeavor to execute with all the Ardour I am capable of. After whatever manner
things go, whose success we cannot foresee, pursued Iphigenia, I shall be
sensibly indebted to you all my Life. Send then this Evening to advertise
Alphonsus to meet you to morrow with his Pistol, accompanied with his Second,
between the hours of Seven and Eight, at a place which you shall appoint him.
You shall find at your Lodging, at the time appointed, the Person who will be
your Second.

This was enough for Count Angelo, who, besides these Considerations, had on
his own score Reasons for Enmity against the Prince Alphonsus, with whom he had
a hundred times sought an occasion of quarrelling. He took leave of the
Princesses, after he had testified very civilly to the Duchess, that he had
the greatest Obligations in the World to her, that she had judged him worthy to
maintain her quarrel. Iphiginia at last took leave of the Princess, to whom she
said, That she was going to think of a Comrade for St. Angelo.

This generous Maid (who had more Courage than is usually found in her Sex)
believed she could not find any Person whatsoever that could revenge her Honor
with more Valor than her self. Armed with the resolution of a Heroine, she
sent to borrow the Habit of a Cavalier, which she put on the next day. She
provided a Case of Pistols, of which she made trial, and took Coach early in
the Morning, accompanied only with a Gentleman Usher, who imagined nothing
else, but that she was going to some Hunting Match, whom she dismissed as soon
as she was alighted at the Count of St. Angelo's Lodgings.

That Count, who immediately knew her in this Equipage, was very much surpised
when she told him the resolution she had of demanding satisfaction her self of
her Treacherous Gallant. He endeavored by all the pressings Reasons in the
World, to make her alter her thoughts. But he found so much opposition on her
part, and so much eagerness, that he was flattered with the hopes of seeing her
a Conqueror. They both eat a light Breakfast, equipped themselves, mounted on
Horseback, and went to the place appointed, where Alphonsus was before them
half a quarter of an hour.

As far off as Iphigenia could discern him, she took her Pistol in her hand,
and made him a signal to make ready, not being willing to be detained by all
the common Ceremonies, for fear of being known. But Alphonsus cried out, that
that was not the custom here; that they ought not to fight without agreeing
before on what Conditions. Then they approached each other, and St. Angelo
having showed Alphonsus the unknown Cavalier who was to fight with him, he so
attentively considered the Face of the Person would duel him, that he knew
Iphigenia under her disguise. He then changed Color, and our Duchess Cavalier
having observed it, levelled her Pistol at him: He escaped the shot of her
Pistol, and having shot off his into the Air, he cried out, What is it you,
adorable Duchess! is it you that would take away my life? If I have merited
Death, I consent to lose it, and that you should take it from me, without
disputing it with you. It will be always glorious for me to fall under the
strokes of a Heroine. Iphigenia, incensed then, replied, No, Ungrateful, I have
not so mean a Soul, as thou have a perfidious Heart. How thirsty soever I am
for thy Blood, I am not resolved to drink it, until I have justly spilt it.
Defend thy self like a gallant man; and if thou have any Esteem for me, either
deprive me of Life, or furnish me with fair means to take it away from thee.

How great a mind soever our Amazon made appear to fight, she could never
obtain from Alphonsus the satisfaction which she desired. The Seconds, after
their Example, would not discharge; and Alphonsus represented to them, that
they could not gain Honor in a Combat so singular. Our Illustrious Heroine did
an Act which would have been blamed in any other but a Woman; for hurried away
by her spite, having clapped the muzxle of her Pistol to Alphonsus' Horse's
head, she shot three Bullets into it, wherewith he fell under the Cavalier that
rid him. Alphonsus could not save himself, in the fall, from a Sinew-strain,
wherewith he was incommoded a long time. As soon as he was on the ground, he
laughed and said calmly to the Duchess, You have dismounted me, Madam, you
have bore away the honor of the Combat.

There passed nothing more remarkable in this occasion; each one returned Home;
and this Expedition was immediately divulged at Court, where she was called no
more the Duchess, but the Handsome Cavalier. The Princess Christina, whom
Iphigenia had not pre-acquainted with her design of disguising her self, was
extremely surpised when she heard what had passed. She was so impatient to
hear the recital of the Adventure from the Dutchess's own mouth, that she went
to her Lodgings to see her as soon as she had an incling of it. She immediately
commended her for the greatness of her Soul, and her undauntedness, and at last
conjured her to make her a Relation of the Action. She informed her of all the
Circumstances of it, and was still discoursing with her on that subject, when
Alphonsus, who was unwilling to be seen, entered the House by the Garden-gate,
and ascended by the back Stairs to the Chamber where they were. Cornelia, who
had seen him cross a little Court, run to acquaint the Princesses with his
Arrival, so that Iphigenia had had time to hide her self behind the Hangings,
from whence she could hear the Conversation of the Princess and Alphonsus her
Brother. He suspected that his Sister would have the curiosity to learn the
History of the designed Combat. He told it her like a Cavalier, he extolled at
first Iphigenia's Courage, whom he afterward called a Rash Woman. As he was
beginning to grow hot upon her account, she could forbear no longer: She came
out from the place where she was hidden, and said to him fiercely, If it is
true that I have wanted Conduct, it has been because I have spared a Coward
who did not deserve to live. But it is no matter; it is more glorious to
conquer ones Resentments than to let it break out. I have showed you, that I am
sensible of the Injuries. If I have preserved your Life, when at the hazard of
some light Reproaches, I could have taken it from you; I may say, that I have
given you it to leave you time to repent of your Ingratitude, and that you may
be punished as often as you see her whom you have so basely betrayed.
Alphonsus, whom the unexpected presence of Iphigenia had not a little
surpised, was much troubled, to reply to the harsh things which she had said
to him. He no more justified himself, and was contented to reply to her, Yes,
Madam, I owe you my life, and I believe you have spared it, only to publish
your generosity. I will own freely to you, that the Passion to which your
Charms had given birth, has not been able to brook a Rival. In effect, Madam,
was it not a very hard thing, to have been able to boast of having been heard
favorably by the most Accomplished Princess of Europe, to have been
congratulated a thousand times by all the Court for this Honor, to have acted
nothing that I know of which has blemished the profound Respect that is due to
her divine Qualities, and nevertheless, to see ones self forced to give consent
that another should enjoy a Beauty for which one had sighed all his Life. They
are these Considerations, and this Pill so hard to swallow, that has made me
forget my self. Hence our breach of Friendship began: These in fine, are the
Considerations that have brought things to the extremity in which they are.
What, interrupted Iphigenia, is it not then permitted to put a Lover to the
Trial? Ought you to take things in a wrong sense? My ways of indifference
ought, instead of cooling, to animate your Pursuits. I pretended to fly, and
you have immediately forsaken me. What Zeal, what Ardour, or rather what weak
and feeble Passion, it is then when I seemed to escape from you, that you
should signalize your Love. You ought to pray, conjure, and fix by your
Fidelity, my pretended Inconstancy: You ought to be more assiduous, to write
Elegies, to sigh, and shed Tears.

When a strong Passion does Men's Hearts inspire,
And they a tempting Beauty do adore,
They sigh, look pale, and languish with desire;
But you nor sigh, or languish any more.
As there is nothing so Eloquent as a witty Woman in Love, Iphigenia had never
appeared to Prince Alphonsus so Eloquent as that very day. After he had heard
her, he threw himself at her Feet, and with Tears in his Eyes, cried out,
Pardon, Divine Duchess, pardon. You are innocent, and I am culpable; I will
shut my Eyes to all that may make me question your Fidelity. How happy should I
be, if you were so indulgent as to account of what is past as a Dream! How
should I bless my Stars, if I could yet enter again into your favor! Command,
Madam, what punishment you please for the expiation of my Crime. There is none
so rigorous, to which I will not submit: There is nothing that I will not
undertake and perform, if you assure me of my Pardon. He spoke from the bottom
of his heart, and his Sighs were such infallible Testimonies of it, that
Iphigenia was mollified at the sight of his submissions. If he wept, she shed
Tears; so that their common Grief became of that character which Violence
renders dumb. She recovered her self at last, and permitted him to pretend to
be still beloved.

The Quarrels of Lovers are ofttimes Motives to, and Renewings of Love.
Iphigenia, after this humble satisfaction from Alphonsus, loved him in
appearance more tenderly than ever, at least he flattered himself so. He
suffered himself to be so strongly pre-possess'd with this opinion, that there
was not a day past, but he visited her at the Princess her Sisters Lodgings,
whither she went every day. Nevertheless, he was too much lost in her favor,
to be so easily reestablish'd there. A Passion extinguished, is seldom revived
in a witty Woman's Heart, and those of that character hardly forget the
resentment of Injuries once received. Alphonsus his Treason had made a deep
impression in Iphigenia's mind, and wrought unanimously with certain natural
motions, which will grow more sensible in the conclusion to render him the
Object of her Indifference.

Alphonsus was alone in the Kings Chamber, when News was brought to his
Majesty, that the Duke of Alvaro who had withdrawn two days since to his Castle
six Leagues from the City, died suddenly that very day. He thought that at the
recital of this News he might judge of the Dutchess's Inclination on his
account. He went to her Lodgings at the ordinary time, where he found the
Princesses conferring together. He meditated sometime upon the Air that he
should affect, and what course he should take to acquaint them with what he had
newly learnt. Iphigenia observing him more silent than ordinary, asked him,
What cause could render him so melancholy, him whom all the World commended for
his good humor. I am troubled, replied he, at a Loss which all the Court
should be sensible of, and which will, I make no question, afflict you. The
Duke of Alvaro is dead this morning in the Castle which bears his Name. I have
learnt the News of it from the same Courrier which has brought it to his
Majesty.

Whether Iphigenia had never had much inclination for that Lord, or that she
would dissemble to make good a Fidelity which was but pretended to Prince
Alphonsus, she seemed not to be much troubled for his Death, she only said,
That Count St. Angelo's Nephew, who was his only Heir, would be a good Match,
and that though he were not handsome, the great Estate which was fallen to him,
would very much adorn him. That was all that was said then on the occasion of
the Deceased, in whom Alphonsus lost the greatest, but not the most to be
feared, of his Rivals.

This Prince, who whilst the late Duke courted Iphigenia, with approbation had
had all sort of access to her, feared that his Majesty, at the Queens
solicitation, might renew his former Prohibitions to him not to see her. He
prevented her, and conjured his Goodness to permit him to render his
Assiduities to that Duchess, since he presumed the Admiral the Dutchess's
Father would no more reject his Alliance. The King having learnt that the
Admiral left to his Daughter the absolute liberty of the choice of a Husband,
gratified Alphonsus's Request, so that he spent every Afternoon with his
Mistress.

About that time there arrived at the Court two young Princes from the Borders
of Italy, Twins, very well made as to their Persons, and able to make a great
Figure. They made themselves presently eminent by their Magnificence, and took
a pride in conversing with the most Witty of the Court-Ladies. The Duchess,
Alphonsus's Mistress, was continually visited by the younger, who had as much
Briskness, and as little Judgment, as his elder Brother, who courted the
Princess Christina, had Wit and Fineness of Thought.

Although this young Prince frequented Iphigenia only to pass away some
agreeable moments, without carrying his desires further, Alphonsus took Vmbrage
at it, and labored under so strong a Jealousy, that he fell sick upon it. The
Duchess assured him, what she could, that she found nothing amiable in that
Neopolitan; that only complaisance, and the thoughts that he would quickly
leave the Court, made her approve of his Visits. Her absence from the Princess
Christina's House, whither she went every day before the arrival of those
Princes, and the whole Afternoons which she gave to the Charms of that strange
Prince's Conversation, made him fear all, from the familiarity which begun to
be between them. He proceeded so far, that one day he had the confidence to ask
him, If he cast his Eyes on the Duchess, and if he pretended to her Alliance?
To whom the Prince answered. That he was not yet sufficiently acquainted with
Madam Iphigenia, to discover whether she would receive Addresses of Love from
him; but that he would attempt to push on his Fortune. This Answer threw
Alphonsus into a fearful Melancholy. All things seemed to him to concur to
destroy him in the Breast of that Fair One; and he really believed, by the
coldness which she expressed to him, that her Inclinations were only for the
Stranger. That handsome Neopolitan judging well by Alphonsus's Demand, who had
ever Iphigenia's Name in his Mouth, that he courted this Duchess, jested at it
the very first Visit that he made her. He made a description to her of this
Lover's Passion, under a young Lord's name with whom he said he was acquainted
at Venice; and being entreated to tell his Name to the whole Company, he sooner
hit upon that of his Mistress than his, which he was never able to call to
mind; which made the Duchess tell him, That he should have imprinted it
stronger in his mind; but that she believed the greatest part of the Histories
which were related of such Amors, were a little fabulous. I daily read some of
this nature, pursued she, to which I can hardly give credit. Here the
Neopolitan replied, It is true, Madam, that the Poets have seign'd such like
Passions: But History will furnish us with an infinity of undoubted Examples in
the most famous Persons of Antiquity. Have we not seen one of the Cato's forget
what he was, and enter into an Alliance with a Maid who had neither Riches nor
Birth? Did not Pisistratus, the Athenian Tyrant, marry a Country Girl? What did
not Pompey the Great for Flora? Did not Julius Caesar, after fifty Battles won,
yield to the Charms of a Servirca? The History of the Death of Anthony, who
loved Cleopatra, is sufficiently known to you. Did not the Conqueror of Asia
love excessively that Campaspe whom for the overcoming of himself, he gave to
the famous Painter Apelles? To what submissions did not the Charms Polioratia
reduce Philip? without speaking of the impression which the Beauty of Vria's
Wife made upon the Royal Prophets heart. Who does not -- He was going on still
to lay open the like Litanies, and as impertinently, when the Duchess
interrupting him, told him, I know not what he has not done, nor the truth of
these Histories at the bottom; but of what I know, and of which I am fully
convinced, is, that you have an excellent memory, and that there is never a
Pedant in all this Kingdom, that dare dispute with you the glory of having
heaped up more words in his Head. Have you never heard that the like Passions
are common to the Monomotapoez, and the Topinambri? added she. Are there Women,
Sir, as foolish as Men on this account? This young Lord not having the wit to
find out the Duchess Raillery upon his inclination to show his Reading, fell a
laughing, and continued his Discourse by an innumeration as fit to be laughed
at. Women, said he, Madam, are not exempt from this Weakness; and if I
remember, Phaedra loved Hippolitus even to excess: Atalanta, Hippomanes;
Galathea, Atis; Egeria, Numa; Circe, Glauchus; Penelopo; Ulysses; Hypsicrata,
Mithridates; Portia, Brutus; Julia, Pompey; Phocris, Cephetus. He stopped, and
would have staid there, when Iphigenia rose up, took a Book which lay upon the
Table, and having opened it, said to him, Listen, Sir; you know not yet all
this Romance by heart, you forget that Semiramis loved Ninus excessively;
Biblis, her Brother; Mirra, her Father; Calphurnia, Appian; Servilia, Lucullus;
and others yet, with which these two Pages are full. But let us return, I
beseech you, said she, to our first discourse. On what occasion have you made
so many fine Remarks? On a Prince's occasion who adores you, replied he, and is
horribly melancholy, because I take the freedom to come to you so often to pay
you my Respects: On Alphonsus his occasion, the most passionate, and the most
jealous of all your Lovers. How! pursued she, does that Prince love me at the
cost of his Reason? I can hardly persuade my self, that so prudent a Lord
cannot put bounds to Passion. Let us experiment what you say, and to that end
do you meet me to morrow at the Princess Christina's House, and put him
insensibly upon this Chapter, and endeavor to railly him so fiercely that his
Jealousy may serve for Divertisement to the Circle which we shall form. Do you
make upon him the Epitaph of a Jealous man. This young Lord, who had not yet
gained experience enough of the World, to foresee that he was going himself to
become the May Game of others, promised the Dutcaess to prepare himself upon
that subject, and withdrew very well content with that Proposal, and with
himself.

In the mean time Iphigenia went the same Evening to discourse with the
Princess Christina, whom she entreated to agree to a Comedy the next day at her
house, where a young indiscreet Spark and a jealous Lover would appear upon the
Stage: After that, she told her all that was passed, and asked her if the
eldest of the two Brothers Manfeldi, made her no Proposals, as the Report went,
He has, replied the Princess, and such pressing ones, that it is almost no more
time to act the Indifferent, without absolutely discouraging him; which I
should be averse from doing, for the reasons of good Breeding, although I have
but little inclination for him. When he sees me not, I am pestered with his
Letters. He has gained, through his liberality, all my Domestics even to
Cornelia, and all the World will implant tenderness in me for that young
Prince. I acknowledge that he has Wit, and very sine Qualities: but in fine,
there is not I know not what, which captivates; and I cannot believe that ever
he will obtain me with my good will. When the Fancy takes me to marry, I will
make choice of a Prince in whom nothing shall be wanting that may render him
infinitely lovely to me, and worthy to be beloved eternally, I should be of
your Taste, interrupted Iphigenia in this place, if Marriage could charm me; and
if I am not deceived, I know a Prince who has all that you can desire: He
loves you, he adores you, and bears you so deep a Respect, that he durst not
discover his Passion; and if it does bring him to you one day, it will not be
till he shall see you resolved to love. What is he, replied immediately the
Princess, can I love an unknown person? She had scarce made an end of speaking,
when Alphonsus entering the Chamber, diverted their discourse.

Iphigenia had no sooner perceived him, than she told him laughing, Poor
jealous Creature, they endeavor already at your Epitaph; you are a dead man,
if we may believe the Italian Cadet. You have a troublesome Rival in him, who
will give you no repose. You will be put to the Test to morrow. Prepare your
self to sustain a thousand fine Attacks, for the Enemy who is to engage you,
has an infinite stock of Wit. Alphonsus taking the word here, said, It is then.
Madam, since he has the honor to frequent you, that he has gained it. You
are very fit to have communicated it to him. Raillery apart, Prince, added
Iphigenia, the youngest of our Neopolitans will make you pass for a jealous
Person. He came to me upon your account to relate a History the most silly in
the World, which was followed with very many other things yet more ridiculous.
He is a young man just come from the University, of a good memory, but wanting
yet discretion and understanding. He is a presumptuous Novice, who thinks
himself ignorant of nothing. In fine, he is a pretended Droll, who to morrow
will turn you into Ridicule. We will divert our selves with his Boyishness and
Extravagances. Fail not to come hither to morrow after Dinner. You shall suffer
him immediately to discourse, and lead him insensibly to the subject that I
will put on foot. Pray, above all things, do not drive him to a nonplus, but
rather seem to like of all that he shall offer to your consideration.
Alphonsus, to whom what was said, had restored his ordinary Tranquillity,
promised to execute all that was ordered him by the Duchess. He was about to
withdraw the most satisfied of Lovers, when the eldest of the Neopolitans sent
to ask if the Princess Christina might be visited. He came too seasonably not
to be admitted. Our two Princesses entreated Alphonsus to keep them company a
little longer, but he begged them to dispense with him, under pretext of having
business of the greatest consequence. The Neopolitan meeting him upon the
Staircase, complemented him, and told him, That he was very unhappy not to have
come sooner, because he should have had the advantage of his Conversation for
some time. Alphonsus made answer to his Civility, and entreated him to put off
the Match to the morrow, that some persons would form a Circle at his Sisters,
where he should meet him without fail. Then they took leave of one another,
after having contested to whom the upper hand should be given at parting.

The Lover of the Princess Christina had acquired Acquaintance sufficient with
her, not longer to be obliged to all those superstitious Formalities which are
observed at the meeting of Great Persons. At his entrance into the Chamber he
saluted those Princesses, and addressing himself to her who was the Object of
his Vows, he said to her, Am I not unhappy, Madam, to have desired a hundred
times to be in the Prin. Alphonsus's company at your Lodgings, and to have
missed this day so narrowly the opportunity of satisfying my desire. You will
recover it to morrow, replied she with the same Familiarity, if you will meet
here. Your Brother has promised to Regale us with the Recital of some Verses,
and some other Gallantry.

As this young Prince was very Eloquent above all things on the subject of
Love, the two hours which he spent in these Ladies company, he talked only of
sympathy of motions of Tenderness, of the means to please, and of the sweetness
of a lovely Union. He withdrew very late, so that our intimate Princesses had
very little time to entertain themselves upon the subject of this Lover. Things
not being so advanced, but they could discourse of him any other day at their
leisure, Iphigenia embraced her Companion, and remounted her Coach.

She returned next day to the Frincesses, where she was preceded by Alphonsus,
and followed a little time after by the two Neopolitans. The Duchess Iphigenia
opened the Conversation, in praying the younger of the two Brothers to keep his
word, and to let them see the Epitaph which he had promised them on a jealous
man. He defended himself sometime by a sort of affected modesty, from exposing
Verses, of which they would without doubt suspect him to be the Author, and
drew them at last out of his Pocket, after having said, That those that were
infected with this Distemper, were doubly unhappy; because instead of moving
compassion, the were do the contrary, the Laughing Stock of the whole World.

The Epitaph of a Jealous Man.
Here in this Tomb a Jealous person lies,
Who of all Sots and Blockheads was the Prince;
His Heart his Mistress purchased with her Eyes,
His Happiness his Rivals have shared since.
Passengers, don't his Destiny bewail;
A Jealous man deserves no pity sure:
His fears were groundless, yet could naught prevail
Over his suspicions, till Death wrought his Cure.
These Verses seemed, not to the Company ill turned, every one praised them;
and Alphonsus, who knew himself the Subject of them, gave them his approbation.
Iphigenia prayed the Author of the Epitaph, to give her all the sense which it
contained; which he did more pedantickly than a Regent of a College would have
done. Alphonsus remembering the Order he had received the day before, was
impatient that Iphigenia would set a foot the Subject upon which she was
desirous to hear this Parrat discourse. That subtle Duchess had no trouble to
bring this discourse to the point she desired. She fell upon the Subject of
Violent Passions, which gave Alphonisus occasion on to ask the Company for
Examples of some Persons who had been violently in love. Whereupon the Princess
Christina taking the word, said, That History could furnish him but with too
many Amorous Men for Amorous Women, and so on the contrary. But that it seemed
as if Marriage were the Destroyer of Love, and 'twas to railly a Wife, but to
say that she loved her Husband, and that she could hardly believe there were
Women to be found who had preserved an ardent Love for their Husbands. The
young Neopolitan, who was on fire to display his Knowledge, added, Antiquity
can furnish us with a very great number, and the last Ages are not unprovided.
Without doubt, my Lord can produce some Examples, said Alphonsus. Yes, my Lord,
replied that young man, who had an itch to speak, I will, for the satisfaction
of the Company, relate upon that Subject those which my Memory shall furnish me
with. Artemisa swallowed the Ashes of her Husband. Hypsicratea followed the
King her Husband to the Army, and fought till Death by his side. Not to dwell
upon what Virgil has written of Dido and Andromache; Panthaea the Wife of
Abradates, killed her self upon the dead Body of her Husband. Phila the Wife of
Demetrius, that King having lost his Life in a Battle, poisoned her self. And
not to go so high, does not our Age afford us a Wife who passionately loved her
Husband, in that Isabella, Princess of Salem, who not being able to obtain
leave to follow him to the Army, writ to him, that there passed not a Night but
she embraced him, and tasted the sweetest Pleasure with him: That she made Vows
for the changing the Days which she employed in weeping, into Nights, that she
might always enjoy his sweet Embraces. I perceive that this last Wife loved a
little for Interest; (interrupted the eldest Prince, who made a sign to his
Brother to conclude, judging those kinds of Narrations Pedantick) and I believe
that all Wives who have amiable Husbands, resemble her. The Historian held his
peace, and 'twas then that Alphonsus burst out a laughing, which put him out of
countenance. This young Prince taking his laughing for an Affront which he did
him, asked him if he believed not the truth of those Histories? whereupon he
answered him, That he had likewise read them all in a Book of Fables, except
the last, which showed more the Character of a voluptuous Wife, than of one
transported by a virtuous Passion. This younger Brother said nothing else, but
that Truth would always pass for a Lie, from a Rivals mouth. Alphonsus, who
understood well enough what he drove at, prayed him to explain himself. But the
prudent Princesses fearing that the Dispute growing hot, it might have
dangerous consequences, rose up; which made them thereupon break off, and gave
them notice it was time to withdraw.

The Princesses being left alone, Iphigenia addressing her self to her dear
Companion, said to her, My God! Madam, how self-conceited is this young
Neopolitan? How full of himself? Is his Brother's Wit as ill turned? He is more
moderate, replied she, but his Conversation is somewhat duller, it is not
lively; and how well made soever he be outwardly, he has not the Secret to
please me. But now you put me in mind on it, What is the unknown Lover whom you
now and then discourse to me of? If you will conceal his Name, draw me his
Picture at least; for I doubt not but you have seen him. Without question,
Madam, replied Iphigenia, and I will satisfy your curiosity thereupon. Know
then, in the first place, that he is born a Prince, and that he has been
sufficiently favored by Fortune. He is young, and has never felt true Love for
any but your self. He loves you, he adores you, he studies your Humor, he
knows what Temper you are of, and he knows you as well as himself. He has Wit
enough, which is sparkling, lively, gay, and loves not trifles. He is generous
and liberal: He has already given proof of his Courage in a single Duel. He has
a great Soul, and is as much an Enemy to Cowardice as Quarrelling. As to his
Person, although he hardly is of a middle size, he is well set, and has a good
Carriage: He is a little long Visag'd, his Nose a little turned up; he has
black Eyes, large and even with his Head; and above all, passionate. His Mouth
is little, his Eyebrows and Hair of a bright Chestnut, and of an admirable
gloss. This is somewhat near his Picture; to which I ought to add, to turn it
to the light, that he has very much Love and Tenderness; that you are the only
Object of his Vows; that he sighs continually at the fight of your Charms, and
that the admiration of your Divine Qualities, make him so fearful, that he has
not dared to declare his Passion to you. You draw me a Picture so charming in
the Graces, that distinguish this unknown Lover, interrupted the Princess, that
I cannot but give the Lie to Poets, who maintain that an unknown Object cannot
excite Motions of Love. I love this Prince; and since we may speak freely
together, the favor I have to ask of you, is, to inspire him with Courage,
that I may have the satisfaction to see him speedily. I will endeavor, replied
Iphigenia, to raise him above that respectful Fearfulness which retains him;
and I will assure you, that to morrow he shall have the honor to entertain you
in Person, or by Letter. You cannot, added the Princess, oblige me more, than
to procure me one of his Letters, if you cannot make him resolve to come to see
me. I shall judge by his Writing, if that Prince has Sentiments as tender as
you have told me. To morrow then, Madam, you shall hear of him, said the
Duchess, retiring her self.

The Picture of so accomplished a Lover, made such an impression on the
Princess's Spirit, that she was employed with it all Night, insomuch that the
eldest of our Neopolitans, who failed not a day of giving her marks of his
Love, presenting himself in the Morning at her Toilet, found her thoughtful,
and very cold. This young Prince having never observed in her any inequality of
Humor, was extremely surpised to meet with so much indifference: But as a
Lover always flatters himself, he thought that the Princess would try his Love;
which made him tell her, That in her melancholy Fit, and her gay Humor, she
was equally amiable.

The first Coldness put not this Prince in trouble. He examined himself upon
what he might have done, which was displeasing to that Fair Ones Eyes, and
thinking himself guilty of nothing, he believed that the day following might
change her disposition.

In the mean time Iphigenia, who was engaged to bring a Letter to the Princess,
writ one, which she caused to be transcribed by a young Gentleman who dived not
at all into the Commerce of her Pleasures, and who judged only that the
Duchess had a mind to divert her self. The Letter contained what follows.

The Unknown Lover To the Princess, The most worthy to be beloved.
MY Name and my Person, Divine Princess, are sufficiently known to you. You are
not ignorant of the disposition of a Prince's heart, who would esteem himself
infinitely happy, if he could make you understand to what extremity your
Charms have reduced him. But how should he draw you a Passion of the Character
of his? I acknowledge that as accomplished as you are, you are neither
disdainful, nor insensible, and that I may freely discover my Love to you. But
who shall assure me of Life? one Refusal, or the defect even of the return of
your Tenderness, being capable to give me Death. I have a hundred Reasons to
prohibit me your House. Some Princes adore you; and I am the Subject of the
Pursuits of a tender Love. I can only sigh then, Madam, till Heaven disposes of
my Destiny, and inspires you to be altogether favorable to the most faithful
and passionate of your Lovers.


Iphigenia found the Princess in the expectation of the Letter, whereby she
should understand the Sentiments of her unknown Lover. Having received it, she
read it with an incredible satisfaction. It had such an Effect upon her Spirit,
that she became so impatient, and so curious to see him who was the Author of
it, that nothing could entertain her so agreeably, as the repetition of the
Promises which Iphigenia made her of making him resolve to come to kiss her
hands. She believed she ought not to answer this Letter. She imagined that the
Duchess, who would not divert her from her Love, was but too capable to assure
that unknown Prince, of the esteem that she her self had made her conceive for
him. Wherefore she contented her self to pray her to animate his Resolution, to
flatter him with some hopes, and to persuade him to become as bold as
passionate.

The young Neopolitan, impatient to try if the Princess were on his account
what she had been the day before, came to ask if he might have the honor to
visit her. But she was so employed in thinking on the Billet which she had
received; that she sent him word she was indisposed. Although this Answer was
an ill Omen to him, he nevertheless did not despair of his Destiny, since he
saw not any Person haunt her House, whom he might fear to be his Rival. He
returned the next day to the Charge, and had the freedom to entertain the
Princess in discourse; whose Answers, for the most part, showed absence of
mind. He ventured to tell her, That he believed there was some Accident
befallen her, which carried away her Thoughts. But he could not draw any thing
from her; only that she was taken up with considering with her self whether
having made choice of an Object she could be capable to love always.

This was an Enigma to our young Lover, I whom she entreated to leave her some
days at liberty. He went away overwhelmed with the most cruel Melancholy that
can be imagined, and was going to abandon himself, to his despair, when he met
an old Chaplain of his Nation, to whom he discovered all the Secrets of his
Soul. He prayed him to assist him with his Council, and asked him if he knew
what he might do to please. This old Fox, who had almost the direction of all
the Consciences of the Court, had experience enough to be able to give him some
advice. He asked him first, if he had sufficiently studied the Humor of her
whom he loved, to have discovered if his manner of Apparel, and his Trimming
pleased her; and above all things, if his Garniture were of the color which
she loved, or was such that it might discover to her his Disposition. And he
answering, That he had followed in that only the Mode, and Chance; the other
replied to him, That those sort of things, when we have fine Qualities besides,
have a great power to shake the resolution of a Maid; whom the least Trifle may
surprise. To instruct himself in the virtue of different Colors, this Prince
led the Chaplain into the Kings Garden, where, in four or five turns of an
Alley, he learnt from him the meaning of the several sorts of Symbols. See here
how that old man explained them to him.

White, which is the most simple of all Colors, bears the character of Purity,
Innocence, and Sincerity.

Black shows Perseverance, because it cannot be defaced by any other Color.

Red denotes Revenge. It frights a Rival.

Brown, and all dark Colors, represent Patience, and a serious Temper.

Carnation represents, extremely well, the Grief which we feel for a lost
thing, which we hope to recover.

Aurora Color is a sign of Joy.

The clear Violet Color, the Gredelin, and the Peacock Color, is proper to
inspire Love; they call it the Livery of Venus.

Azure is a Token of Fidelity, because it corresponds to Heaven, which appears
always the same, when it is not obscured by Clouds.

Gray or Ash Color, expresses Melancholy or Sadness.

Green has always represented Hope, as the Fillemot Despair.

Our sad Lover minded not the old man had finished. He interrupted him here,
and asked how he figured Indifference and Despite. By a mixture of all
Colors, replied he. Good, replied the Prince. But at last, before I make use
of this last Symbol, which of these Colors will suit me best, the Carnation,
the clear Violet, the Blue, or in fine, which of all the others? It is not very
easy for me, replied the Chaplain, to satisfy you positively thereupon. The
choice which you ought to make, depends very much upon circumstances, which you
must have examined before. A Lover ought not only to consult himself and his
Passion, but he ought to know perfectly the Temper of her whom he would please.
White, as that which is mingled with it, sympathices with the humor of
Phlegmatic Persons. The melancholy Ladies love Black, and all which tends
toward that Color. Red, and all that comes near that Color, is seen with
pleasure, by those in whom Choler predominates: And Sanguine Complexions regard
willingly Blue, Carnation, and Gredelin Aurora Colors, and all that are clear
and shine. What! must one make all these observations, added the Prince? As far
as I see, one must be a good Philosopher, to please. Without question, replied
the Old man, one must be very perfect in Physic, or otherwise instead of
gaining the glory of having pleased, one is exposed to the discontent of being
turned into Ridicule. But, Sir, replied he, if the Princess for whom you sigh,
has a good Wit, as I question not, it is probable that if she has looked on
you favorably heretofore, and that she is grown cold, without your having
given her cause, you have a Rival. And it is what may put you to some trouble to
discover. If you are not too scrupulous, I can show you a Person, who without
doubt can inform you. Is he a Sorcerer, interrupted the Prince? He passes for
such a one, continued the Old man; but I, who believe it not, I look upon him
as a man who through the knowledge that he has in Natural Causes, can with the
help of certain Sands, who have received the illustration of certain Stars, in
a certain situation, and under a certain Aspect, to smooth certain pieces of
Earth with melted Flint-stones, which by virtue of certain blasts, can render
Objects at a distance present; and above all, represent all sorts of Letters,
which have not been torn. So many Certainties, said the Prince, laughing,
promise me a very uncertain knowledge. Nevertheless, pray show me the Lodgings
of this great Philosopher. The Old man having informed him where he dwelt, he
went thither all alone the same Evening, where he received the satisfaction
which I am going to relate. This Magician having led him, without Light, into a
Cave, and having forthwith asked him if he were afraid, and the Prince having
answered with assurance, that he was not, he drew a Circle with Cole, in the
middle of which he placed him. Having after that, drawn out a certain dark
piece of Earth out of a hole which he enlightened with certain Ashes; and after
some intelligible words, which frighted the Prince a little, who would have
been very willing not to have been there, he made appear to him, through that
transparent Body, the Letter which the Princess his Mistress had received;
which he read from end to end. And this was all the knowledge which he could
receive from the Magician, whom he satisfied according to his desire.

He had learnt but too much for his Repose; his Troubles increased. The Idaea
of an unknown Rival, added to his despair. He returned to see the Princess, and
found her still the same; he gained all her Servants: he turned Spy himself; he
posted Sentinels all round the House, and could not discover him who disputed
his Love with him; sometimes he is hot, and sometimes fearful. He becomes a
Prey to a deadly Melancholy, and has recourse again to Magic. He requests a
Charm, and gives his consent and all things necessary to the composition of a
Pomatum, which he designs to convey by stealth upon the Princesses Toilet, from
whence he took away for this purpose a little Pot which he caused to be filled
with the following Ingredients, viz. the Scrapings of Skins, the Cuttings of
Hoofs, and Hairs imperceptibly cut off, burnt, and calcined with some drops of
a certain Liquor, the whole at last mingled and incorporated with Soap, and
common sweet Powders; which Pot he cunningly substituted in the place of the
other, and whose virtue had no Effect.

Alphonsus on his side agreeably persecuted Iphigenia, who upon the great
change of her outward Dispositions, changed also her Inclinations, and
entertained him with fair hopes, whilst she endeavored to inspire the Princess
with Love for the Unknown. She made her from day to day more exquisite
descriptions of that Princess's Passion, of which she expressed her self to be
sensible, when at last overcome by her Prayers, she engaged to bring him to her
on the morrow in the Evening. The Princess impatient to see the Cavalier,
conjured her by the Union that was between them, to procure her the
satisfaction of seeing him, and promised her, provided he was such as she had
described him, to hearken favorably to his Passion.

As soon as Iphigenia was returned home, whether she had carried Cornelia, she
sent her to seek for the best Tailor of the Court, whom she made to take
measure of her, and to whom she gave private orders to make her a magnificent
Habit, with its Ornaments, by Eight a Clock the next Night exactly, and to
bring her choice of all things necessary to equip a Cavalier for a Ball. The
Tailor acquitted himself with an admirable diligence of his Commission. The
Duchess sent all the Equipage to Cornelia, whom she had prepared to receive
it, and went to dress her self in her Chamber, from whence she sent to demand
if a strange Prince might be admitted to make his Complements to Madam. The
Princess, who expected, according to Iphigenia's promises, an unknown Lover,
sent to meet this Prince; she was much surpised to see him enter alone,
believing that the Duchess would have bore him company. She advanced some
steps to receive him, made a Seat be given him, and ordered her Attendants to
withdraw, to enjoy all alone the pleasures of this new Lovers Conversation, who
began thus: You see, Madam, the Person that the Duchess Iphigenia has
discoursed of to you, according to what she has told me; she has made you a
description of me which scarce resembles me. It Is the Effect of a bountiful
Inclination, to which I shall be obliged all my Life. As eloquent as she has
been upon the subject of my Passion, she has nevertheless not amplified it, it
is such that I my self who feel it, cannot describe it to you.

She had not finished speaking, when the Princess, who knew her again under her
disguise, replied to her thus: I have always well presumed, Sir, that you were
a Railleur who sought to divert your self. But I should have been troubled to
persuade my self that you had been desirous to push your Raillery so far. It is
no matter; I find you lovely, and I am very ready to second your Passion. Give
me your hand, Princess, said the Duchess then, and promise me that you will
keep your word. The season of the Carnival, which invites us to Joy, leaves us
but just time enough to execute the Thing. I entreat your company to morrow at
the Comedy which I will cause to be presented before all the Court, and my Lord
your Father. I will appear such as I am, and in the Conclusion we will finish
the Ceremonies of our Marriage.

The Princess, who imagined nothing loss than what happened, believed always that
the Propositions which Iphigenia had made her, on the score of an unknown
Lover, were not feigned; that she would one day declare what he was, and that
in the mean while the time of Shrovetide would permit extraordinary Diversions.
This made her give her Hand; pursuant to which, Iphigenia went to give order
for all that was necessary for the celebration of their Nuptials on the morrow.
She went to the King's Apartment, the Queen's, and all the Princes Lodgings, to
pray them to honor that solemn Feast; who expressed themselves to be well
satisfied with the divertisements which the Duchess would procure them All the
Court were at the Comedy, and afterward went to the Dutchess's House, where
there was a splendid Supper provided.

Iphigenia travesty'd en Cavileer, and the Princess Christina, received there,
with the consent of them Majesty's, all the Complements of the Court. The
Articles of Contract were exhibited after the Regale* All the Court, after the
King's Example, and the Princess's Father himself subscribed it. The rest of
the common Formalities were observed. Our Lovers mutually plighted their Faith
to each other, and the Action was finished, at which the eldest of the
Neopolitans and Alphonsus, showed all their good Humor.

The Duchess Iphigenia and the Princess her Spouse, bore the quality of King,
and the other Queen at the Ball which followed. During the three hours which it
continued, a witty Poet met them, presented them with an Epithalamium, whose
Composition was approved of. It was proposed to conduct our new-married People
to Bed. The King accompanied them to the Chamber which had been prepared for
them, at the door of which, it was believed that the last Scene would have a
conclusion. They were notwithstanding undressed, and the Princess tired as much
with Dancing, as with the other Exercises of the Day, put her self to Bed with
Iphigenia, who instructed her with admiration in what she was ignorant of till
then. The Curtains have robbed me of the rest. What? What we may believe as a
Truth is, that the Bride was very much surpised to find that Nature, liberal
to Iphigenia, had endowed her with both Sexes; that our Illustrious
Hermaphrodite had obtained from the bounty of a laudable Stock, what the
weakness of a tender Age had scarce made her sensible of; that the Court
imform'd of the Fact, at the solicitation of the Bridegroom's Father, who was
very sure of things, took all that had been done for substantial and
authentic; and that in fine, by the Alliance of this Gallant Hermaphrodite,
Alphonsus had his Sister for his Rival.

FINIS.

