Ecclesia Enucleata: The Temple Opened: Or, A Clear DEMONSTRATION Of the True
Gospel Church IN ITS Nature and Constitution, According to the DOCTRINE and
PRACTICE OF Christ and his Apostles. By I. C.

In that day seven Women shall take hold of one man, saying, We will eat our
own bread, and wear our own Apparel; only let us be called by thy Name, to take
away our Reproach: Isa. 4.1. London, Printed by George Larkin at the lower End
of Broadstreet, next to London-Wall. 1684.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Candid Reader,
TRue Religion, and the Church of Christ, are Twins; they were conceived and
born together, and have grown up together in the World; and I may say of them,
as of all the Sons of God in particular, That they are born, not of Blood, nor
of the will of the Flesh, nor of the will of Man, but of God: John 1.13. They
are only from God, and for God, and his revealed mind and will. In his Word is
the great prescribing Rule of both, and the only Touchstone for an unerring
Trial of the Truth of either. All Pretentions of humane Wisdom, Law, and
Authority, must here vail their Bonnet; for if these could justly claim a
binding Power in matters of this Nature, I know no Reason why the Great Turk
has not as strong Arguments for his Religion in all his Dominions, as
Christians have any where for theirs; We find (whatever Prerogative Secular
Powers lay claim to) that they are fully assured that Religion never takes
place upon men's minds by their Authority only, they must pretend to at least a
Divine, as we see. The Turk must have his false Prophet Mahomet, and his Mufti;
and the Ten-horned secular Beast must have his two-horned Ecclesiastical Brute.
So the Heathen Kingdoms and Pagan, have always had their Diabolick Priests, to
influence the Minds, and sham the Consciences of Men, by the awe of some
Divinity, or supposed Divine Authority, into a Reverend esteem of that Religion
they designed to establish, suitable to their own carnal designs and advantages.

Since the knowledge of the True God, and the breaking forth of the light of
the Gospel in the Kingdoms of the darkness of this world, the Devils Mask has
been much removed, he is found to be what he is: His wiles and deceits, whereby
he has so long imposed upon the minds of men, are very much discovered, in so
much that it may be said of him in these latter days, that he is fallen as
lightning from heaven, since the Reforming Angels mentioned Rev. 14. have been
employed in the Wilderness, the three Gospel flying Angels to bring in that
glorious light, and the two Sicle Angels that cut down the Harvest and Vintage,
the Thick^ts and shading poysonsome Antichristian Trees have been in a great
measure in many places cut down; yea Reformation has been carried on to such
degrees, that the Angels have been seen, having the seven last Plagues, and
those that have got the Victory ovcr the Beast, over his Image, and over his
Mark, and over the number of his name, standing on the Sea of Glass, having the
Harps of God, and singing the Song of Moses the Servant of God, and the Song of
the Lamb, etc. Yea, the Temple of the Tabernacle of the Testimony has been
open: and I doubt not but the seven Vial-Angels are coming out of the Temple,
though Smoke fill it at present, from the glory of God, and his power. In
answer to the old enquiry, Where was your Church ( according to Article 19. of
the Church of England) before Luther? We say, It has been for above 1200 years
in the Wilderness; it was before that, ever since the Apostles tim^s, under the
Draconick Tyranny and Persecution, till it fell under the Beast and False
Prophet, in the midst of Spiritual Egypt, Sodom and Babylon, out of which it
has been bringing under the conduct of the Angel that was with the Church in
the Wilderness; by several removes, steps and degrees of Reformation, sometimes
too woefully lusting and turning back again. But God will be a Refiners Fire to
all the Sons of Levi, he will thoroughly purge away all the Churches dross, and
take away all her Tin; he will wash away the Filth of the Daughters of Zion,
and purge the Blood of Jerusalem from the midst thereof, by the Spirit of
Judgment, and Spirit of Burning; by his trying Providence, and bright shining
searching Light of the Gospel. In order to the last, I have presumed to cast in
some fire from the Altar, have run to and fro a little, that knowledge may
increase, and that many may be purified and made ^hite. Reader, what thou see
of ^arkness and ignorance of the Mind and Will of Christ concerning a Sub^^ct
of so great concern, overlook it of, but lend thy Light also, as thou ^ast
received from the Lord Jesus christ; and remember partiality is to ^e laid
aside, and who ever decrea^eth, Christ must increase. If thou ^st no other
Argument to resist the ^ght offered, then that the Cross attends truth, deny thy
self, and take up ^e Cross and Truth, and follow ^^rist; this Life and World is
but for a ^tle while; take heed of b^ggling ^th Conscience, and sophisticating
^ Word of God, by shifting Glosses, to make it serve thy own corrupt designs
and ends; the Word of God ^ pure and consonant to it self: Christ is, and will
make it manifest and confessed at last, notwithstanding all opposition, that he
is the only Lawgiver his Church; he seeks such Wo^shippers as shall serve him
i^ Spirit and in Truth: he hates a^ abhors all Whorish Babylonish Dr^ses of his
Worship and Ordinance Let Christ be found and embrace^ his Church sought out in
the place ^che Wilderness where it has honourished: Get true Union to Cbr^ the
Head, becoming a Member of ^ Mystical Body, and maintain t^ Gospel-communion of
Saints, ^ none can harm you.

The noise that some men make ^e World of Schism and Separation, ^ nothing but
some of Antichrists ^ust, that he throws into the eyes of ^ose that he cannot
quite blind; for ^ere was never any Schism in the Mystical Body of Christ, his
Vesture ^as never divided, and there was ne^^r any true constituted
Gospel Church ^t by Separation; and as for Schism, it concerns Visible
Churches, there none spoken of in the New Testa^ent, but such as was found in a
^^rticular Congregational Church, and ^^ey but superficial Divisions that ^re
soon healed. He that walks in ^e bond of peaceable communion with ^ particular
Gospel Church of Christ, ^ll never be hurt by all the Nick-^^mes of Schismatic
or Dividing-^eparatist, that any of the Worshippers of the Beast or his Image,
or o^ any carrying the mark or number o^ his name, can cast upon him. It Is a^
easy thing for men of corrupt minds t^ call what they please by the name o^
Church, and then to stigmatize the Servants of Christ in not holding communion
with it, by all reproachf^ names of the Devils invention: It ^ the greatest
interest of every true Fo^lower of Christ, to count the cost of h^ Profession,
and resolve that he must ^ through good report and evil, an^ must take a share
in the Sufferings ^ Christ, who is now crowned wi^ Glory and Honor, as all his
Fait^ful Members shall be, for he has sa^ that where he is, they shall b^
also: and doubtless there is a rewa^^ for the Righteous, there is a Go^ that
Judges in the Earth. And ^is is the Faith and Patience ^ the Saints, and of
him who shall ^eem it honor enough to be found ^e of the least, and am,

Thy Servant for Christ's sake I. C.

The Contents of the Chapters contained in this Treatise.
CHap. 1. The Design of this Undertaking. Page ^ Chap. 2. Showing that a place
of Meaning is no where taken in the New Testament for a Church of Christ Page
1^ Chap. 3. Of a National Provincial Church. Page 2^ Chap. 4. Of
Parochial-Churches. p. 4^ Chap. 5. Of the Catholic Visible Church. Page 6^
Chap. 6. Of the most usual acceptance of the word Church in the New Testament.
Page 6^ Chap. 7. Of a Particular-Church. P. 7^ Chap. 8. Of the Inferences
necessary from the foregoing Chapter. P. 99. Chap. 9. Of the Bond of Union in
the Church. Page 115. Chap. 10. of Church Communion. Page 136. Chap. 11. The
Conclusion. Page 155.
ERRATA
The Reader is desired (before he read the Book) to Correct the following
Errata's

PAge 24. line 21. after Ceremonies, add at. line 22. after Antitype, add were.
Page 31. l. 2. read destined to. Page 37. l. 25. for jugeled, read juggled.
Page 39. l. 11. for (...) read (...) Page 41. l. 3. after that, add though.
Page 50. l. 15. for munching read mouching. Page 72. l. 21. after only, read
of. Page 78. l. 23. after Churches, add of Judea. Page 91. l. 14. for (...),
read (...). Page 96. l. 24. for who they, read they who. Page 100. l. 4. blot
out and. Page 106. l. 4. blot out in. Page 120. l. 14. after one Body, add so
also is Christ Page 125. l. 23. for (...), read (...). Page 126. l. 12. for
(...), read (...). Page 141. l. 3. for parterition, read preterition. Page 142.
after Christ, add into.
THE TEMPLE OPENED: OR A Clear Demonstration OF THE TRUE GOSPEL CHURCH.
CHAP. I. The Design of this Undertaking.
AS the true Church of Christ is the most glorious Fabric that ever God
created; in the fashioning of which, his infinite Wisdom, Power, Goodness and
Truth did most trancendently appear, and wherein he ^ath and will magnify all
his glorious Attributes, and his Son Chri^ Jesus the Image of the Fathers
Person, above what he has done in a^ the Artifice of the Old Creation: S^
there is no one thing in the wor^ that Satan and his Instruments ha^ levied
their Counsels, Power, an^ Malice more at, since the first a^pearance of it in
the World. B^ seeing he could never prevail by a^ the powers of Hell to destroy
it, ^ has managed and carried on ^ design principally for the darknin^
clouding, and obscuring the Glo^ of it; and finding the unbelievi^^ world began
to have their Eyes ^pened, and to behold the Glory ^ Christ and his glorious
Body t^ Church; He provides a Fob Chr^^ and Sham-Church, which he set (...) the
world on wondering after. A^ when by the light of the Gosp^^ breaking forth
with greater brigh^ness, that spiritual Egyptian darkne^^ which had overspread
the Europe^^ Hemisphere, began to vanish, and that Church was discovered to be
a Sy^agogue of Satan, and a Diabolical Sheat, by her Heathenish Idolatries,
^piritual Whoredoms, and whorish ^ttire; the grand Deceiver betook himself to
new measures, and con^rived ways and methods for con^ounding and darkning the
minds of men, that upon the dawning of Gospel light were studiously intent upon
a Reformation. And among other Bombs of Hellish Mixture that ^e flung in and
brake among them, ^or the distracting and dividing them in this great
Undertaking, this was not the least, To confound their Language. Fain they
would ^or the most part have Extricated themselves from the Antichristian
Labyrinth; and found the way by the Clue of Gods word through that Chymerian
Monkish darkness, in matters of Doctrine, and arrived at ^o great a clearness
and full Understanding of the most weighty and necessary Points for Life and
Salvation, and were so abundantly satisfied in what they believed, and
professed, in Opposition to all the Romish Lies and Hypocrisies, that
Triumphing in their cause, they loved not their Lives unto Death; and having
weathered this Cape of good hope even through a Sea of blood, and many a
Hurricane of smart Persecutions: They began anon to be becalmed, just as they
should have Entered the Haven of a full Reformation: For falling now under the
the Countenance and Favor of Protestant Princes, they found not only that ease
and rest from Persecution was very delightful; and that seeing they were safe,
through the Faith and Patience of their Predecessors, as to the main points of
Salvation, they thought it not advisable to run any further adventure in
matters, as they thought, of lesser moment: Seeing the passage was also
Hazardous in respect of worldly Pomp and Interest; finding that if they went so
far as the humility, plainess and simplicity of the Gospel in the worship of
Christ, they must lay aside all that gaudy dress of Church Dignities and
Ceremonies which the Curtizan of Rome had bedaubed it with; and hence, because
the Love of Money is the Root of all Evil, they came to treat with her for the
Mammon of Unrighteousness; and it was agreed that the Reformed Religion in all
matters of worship, should for the most part appear in the Romish dress and
attire, and should be accompanied with the like Profit, Honors and Pleasures,
that so the honest woman might not be distinguished from the whore by the
Dress, and this exposed in the street. And now I say, behold Satan's great
Subtilty; when he has obtained thus much, that these two Ladies walk up and
down in one fashion, he calls them both by one Name; so that now men begin to
question their difference, and suspect they are related to each other, as
Aholah and Aholibah; and many finding the Reformed Church so like unto the
Romish, they doubt whether there be any such thing as a true Church of Christ
on Earth; and seeing so many women play the whore, do question whether there is
any honest woman living: But many run to and fro, and knowledge increasing,
some tell us, and confidently affirm, they have found this Church or Christ;
and that all this while it has been in the Antichristian Wilderness: And
others entering into it, say, Surely it is so; there is much of the Sweetness of
Christ's Love, and consolations of the Spirit: But yet there are many things
dark and obscure, and so will be, until such time as this Babylonish cheat be
perfectly discovered to the minds of men, and that whole fabric destroyed.

Among all the Mists and Foggs that this Mistress of Sorceries has raised to
lose the true Spouse of Christ in it, there is not many has been greater then
the confusion of Languages, and especially about the word Church and Schism,
that all Enquirers spoke of the Church, but no two meant the same thing; men
generally agreed there was a Church, and a true one; (excluding Rome) but could
not tell what a kind of thing it should be; and great contentions have been and
are to this day about it. Some say, Here is the Church; and others, that it is
there; and every one cries up his Church, and calls others Schismatics; and
they that get power into their hands, deal with others as such.

Now it would be worth our while to search after many (who have found) for
confirmation of those that will be persuaded of the Truth, and to examine every
Church that pretends to that Name, by the Test of the Gospel, that we may be
fully resolved what metal each is made of. I know all Christians of what mould
or size whatever, do pretend to lay no other Foundation then Jesus Christ: and
its well if it were true of all professing themselves Protestants; for that
Foundadation is a Rock, and they are so far wise that lay Christ as such in
their writings and doctrine; but yet that will not bear an ill Superstructure:
as a good one will not long stand on a bad foundation, so a good foundation
will not long bear up an ill Superstructure, 1 Cor. 3.11, 12. Other Foundation
can no man lay then that is laid, which is Jesus Christ. Now if any man build
upon this Foundation, Gold, Silver, Precious-stones, Wood, Hay, Stubble; Every
man's work shall be manifest, for the day shall declare it, because it shall be
revealed by fire, and the fire shall try every man's work of what sort it is,
verse 14. If any man's work abide which he has ^uilt thereupon, he shall
receive a reward, verse 15. If any man's work shall be burnt, he shall suffer
loss, but he himself shall be saved, [provided he lay a good foundation] yet so
as by fire; I doubt not but many good men's and Ministers Church-works will be
burnt, and they will suffer loss; it will be manifest one day to be the great
blemish of the Reformation, that so many good men that have Preached Christ
clearly as to his Sonship, Natures, Offices, Merits and Satisfaction for
Justification and Sanctif^cation, have from interest, prejudice or ignorance,
extremely fumbled in most of the concerns of his Gospel Church. I have much
admired to hear some men's Pulpit-zeal against sin in general, and for the
advancement of holiness, even to a justifying condition; and when we come to
enquire of the particular cases for the practice of it in Gospel and revealed
Religion, in duties toward God, they can tell you of nothing but moral natural
Religion, and reduce all the Service of God under the Gospel thereto; saying
they have no other Rule to direct us there, but such as this, Let every soul be
subject to the Higher Powers, Romans 13.1. So as for revealed Religion under the
Gospel, our judgments and practice must be wholly regulated by, and resolved
into the wills, laws and commands of men.

But to come to the matter we intend, seeing the word Church is clothed with
so great ambiguity, and so much dust raised about it, to the perplexing of men's
minds and Consciences, we shall principally fix our Enquiries for the true
sense and notion of the word upon the tenure of the Gospel, and the meaning of
the Spirit of God there; knowing that it is That has the greatest power upon
the Consciences of men, when it comes with evidence and demonstration, to
convince us of Truth; and whereas fire and sword, yea men's great words and
looks, may terrify flesh and blood: yea Pulpit Thunderclaps, discharged on the
behalf of Error and Nonsense, do keep many weak judgments and consciences in
bondage and thraldom, afrighting them from an impartial search for truth, by
hard names, equivocating words, passionate and zealous ways of expression; yet
a Conscience truly enlightened by Divine Testimony is very little concerned at
such things, any more than to pity such passionate Soul-confounding blind
guides, and much more their poor deluded enslaved Followers.

I shall handle this word Church two ways, for our more distinct understanding
its true Gospel meaning.

1. Show in what sense it is not usually taken.

2. In what sense it is*

CHAP. II. Showing that a place of Meeting is no where taken in the New
Testament for a Church of Christ.
It Is necessary to intimate concerning the word (...) in General, that though it
be taken for a Congregation or Assembly of people, yet it is not always limited
to a religious one, but is used by Classick Authors, for any Assembly;
profane, civil or religious; and so it is used expressly, Acts 19. for a
profane and tumultuous assembly, (...) and for a civil lawful Court or
Assembly, ver. 39. (...) the first of which was dismissed ver. 40. But in the
proper and usual sense of the Spirit of God in the New Testament, it is every
where, except in the place above mentioned, taken for a Church of Christ in one
sense or another; and therefore that we may be assured in what senses it is
understood, it is necessary to winnow the Chaff from the Wheat, and set aside
such things as through the mistakes of men, error, custom and carnal interest,
are usually called so, and imposed as such upon erring or unthinking judgments,
when Christ and his Gospel never called them so.

First there is nothing more frequent among us, then to call a place of meeting
for Publick-Worship, a Church: I affirm there is no just reason of
understanding it so in the New Testament, no not in a Metonymy-sence: though
Learned Mr. Joseph Mede takes a great deal of pains to prove that the word
(...) [1 Cor. 11.22. Have ye not houses to eat and drink in, but despise you
the Church of God?] is there to be understood for the material place of
ordinary assembling together for the Worship of God, and says, that their
Oratories where they frequently met, were called Churches; and yet in the
beginning of his discourse he says, It is taken for granted in a manner by the
most of our Reformed Writers, and affirmed by some of the other side, that in
the Apostles times, and ages next after them; (whilst the Church lived under
Pagan and Persecuting Emperors) Christians had no Oratories or places set
apart for Divine Worship; but that they assembled here and there promiscuously
and uncertainly, as they pleased, or the occasion served, in places of common
use, and not otherwise; which thing undoubtedly is justly enough (and upon
grounds more evident) believed, then any reasons brought to prove the contrary
by that worthy person, wherein he acknowledges himself almost singular in this
undertaking, and lays his first and greatest stress on that expression, 1 Cor.
11.22. Here (says he) I take the word (...) or Church, to note not the
Assembly, but the place appointed for sacred duties, and that from the
opposition thereof to (...), their own houses; these are places proper for
common and ordinary repast, and not the Church or house of God. This is the
only argument which he brings, besides some obscure passages of some Fathers
whose opinions will not sway here, but as in other things, so far as we see
them consonant to the truth, manifest in Scriptures, compared together; and it
seems strange that the word should have a tropical meaning in this place, and
every where else a proper one: and besides, the reason from the opposition will
not hold, especially if we consider what Mr. Mede understands those Oratories
or Churches of theirs to be. It is not to be imagined that in the first three
hundred years before Constantines time, that they were such goodly and stately
structures as the Church had after the Empire became Christian -- At the first
some capable and convenient Room within the walls or dwelling of some pious
Disciple, dedicated by the religious bounty of the owner, to the use of the
Church, and that usually an (...) upper room, or Caenaculum; It Is very probable
that all the Disciples houses were at the service of the Churches; but that any
one house (or room in a house) was dedicated so to that religious use, as to be
separated for it from common uses when the Church met not, is not probable at
all: for in times and places of Persecution, if Churches meet in any certain
house or place, though in a private house, they shall be sure to be interrupted
and broken in upon by Persecuting Officers and Informers. The only place met in
for some time considerable, that we read of, was Paul's own hired house at Rome;
but we find not that it was consecrated or called a Church. I am sure
consecrated Barns, Garrets, Cellars, or Dining Rooms, would be esteemed by our
devout Ecclesiastics a great Abomination.

But how will the Opposition hold, if the Room called the Church, was in the
same house they eat and drank ordinarily in? He should have rather said, Have
ye not Kitchens or Parlours of common use to eat and drink in, but you must
despise or put a Profanation on the Garret, which is the Church of God?
Besides, if that Addition had not been made to the Church, I should much rather
have inclined to Mr. M^des sense, if he had said only, despise ye the Church?
But I take it, that it would be a very audacious and highly abusive Expression,
to say, That a Meeting House is a Church of God, or a Church of Christ: And why
is not the Opposition as full thus? Have you not houses to eat and drink in, or
Families [for so the word is used] But you must do it in the Church Assemblies?
for they made their Love Feasts in their Assemblies. It is evident enough that
the Apostle takes (...) for the Assembling of the Church together, as verse. 18.
where its used: when you meet together in Assembly, ( i. e. when you are
Congregated together) I hear that there have been Divisions (or Schisms) among
you, and those he means had the Divisions, who were the Church, for the Gospel
ascribes culpable Schisms no where, but to Body Politics, or Assemblies, not
to Houses. But if we grant Mr. Mede all that he so industriously labors to
squeeze out of the Text, only to favor the Relative Holiness of such places;
its not to be supposed that he intended that they were real and proper
Churches, but only Metonymical Churches, by a Trope, and improperly so named;
no otherwise allowable names; putting the Continens pro contento, to
distinguish places allotted to convenient assembling in Religious Worship, from
Town-halls, and other houses of meeting together for public concerns, or more
private Society and Conversation. And so we lose nothing by it, if such a place
be called improperly a Church, its not the Church of Christ intended in the
Gospel which Christ purchased with his blood; nor built of living stones, nor
such as Christ is the Head of; nor such as Paul wrote his Epistles too; nor the
Church of Corinth, which he exhorts, rebukes, and commends in the Epistles that
he wrote: And therefore we may with the greatest assurance conclude, that no
place where Religious Assemblies frequently use to be, is a Church of Christ;
or may properly be so called.

They that plead the Expression in the Ephesian Town-Clerks, Speech, [Act.
19.37. Ye have brought hither these which are neither Robbers of Churches.]
Show their little skill in the Original Text, the word is, (...) Robbers of
Temples, such as were dedicated to the Heathen Gods and Godesses, to which they
ascribed not only Relative, but inherent Holiness; and therefore adapted that
name to them.

CHAP. III. Of a National and Provincial CHURCH.
CHrist never instituted any such Church under the Gospel Administration, as a
National and Provincial, or Diocesan: there is as much for one as for the
other, there is no seeming pretense can be made for any of them, from any Gospel
Expression: when I say this, I mean not a Church in a Nation, Province or
Diocese, nor all the particular Churches in such place, collectively and
co-ordinately considered. But I mean in the usual acceptance of such Churches
in our day, as of France, of Spain, of Denmark, etc. and in the sense that a
National Church was taken in under the Old Testament, viz. an Organized
National, Provincial, or Diocesan Church, that have Officers or Members suited
to their respective Natures and Constitution, as Pastors, and other Officers,
Exercising National, Provincial, or Diocesan Jurisdiction in Ecclesiastical
Courts, or elsewhere; and Members, quatenus Natives of such places, being
therefore said to be born within the Pale of the Church, or by virtue of such
Nativity have immediate right to baptism, and made so.

I say, that that word (...) no where signifies such a Church in the New
Testament, except when there is mention made of the Church of the Jews, and the
word is but once used in Application to them, Act. 7.38. This was he who was in
the Church in the Wilderness; this we own was a National Church: but elsewhere
in the New Testament, I know not of one place where (...) can with any fair
pretense be understood of a National Church.

Besides it may be argued from undeniable reasons, that Christ instituted or
intended not such a Church for the days of the Gospel.

If it be duly weighed, that Christ by his Death put a full Period to the
whole Jewish Ceconomy, Nationality being the form of its constitution; Having
Officers, Members, Assemblies and Ordinances suited to its Nature. The Aaronick
Priesthood was National, a Type of Christ's Priesthood, relating to his
universal Church; this Priesthood with all the appertaining Sacrifices,
Ordinances, Ceremonies, the Manifestation of the Antitype abolished; yea that
kind of Church Membership was utterly abolished, ( viz. that none could be a
Member of that Church but a Jew born, or one Proselyted to that Nation) it
being the only Nation in the Earth that God had chosen, with Exclusion of all
other, till Christ came and brake down the Partition Wall between Jew and
Gentile, after which no man was any longer to be reckoned ever the more a
Churchmember, because he was a Native of this or that Country; Col. 3.11 But
in the conforming to Christ's likeness, There is neither Greek nor Jew,
Circumcision nor Uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, Bond or Free; but Christ
is all in all: and therefore of whatever Nation a man be of, if he believe on
the Lord Jesus Christ he shall be saved, and becomes a capable Member of the
visible Church; and wherever he is born, without Faith in Christ, he cannot
be saved; neither is without a visible credible Profession thereof, capable of
communion with the Visible Church in all Ordinances.

Moreover Christ Jesus abolished all the National Church Assemblies and
Ordinances; for the Jews as they were one Organized Church, so they were to be
but one Congregation; (which is not known now of any one Nation) assembling
together for the Worship of God in one place, where their Ark of the Covenant
was, and therefore the Tabernacle of Public Worship was called the Tabernacle
of the Congregation; where all the Males were required to appear before the
Lord thrice a year, Exodus 14.23, 24. whereby they showed themselves assembled
and a Congregated Nation, all in actual communion in the same
Church-Administrations, and in one place, all which was duly to be observed
during the time of the Tabernacle and standing of the Temple; and though they
corruptly retained their high places for offering some Sacrifices during most
of that time, till the full Reformation in Hezekiahs and Josiahs days; yet the
Lord still charged it on them as their great sin, and witnessed against it by
his Messengers the Prophets as such. And though they had their several
Synagogues, they were but for reading of the Law, not for Sacrifice or
Burnt-offering, which were National Services, and were to be dispensed only at
the Tabernacle of the Congregation, or at the Temple; yea, all Sacrifices and
Expiations, Purifications, etc. appertaining to particular Levitical
Uncleanness, or moral transgressions, were there to be performed.

Now our Lord Jesus Christ never erected such a Gospel Worship after this was
abolished, either for matter or form; neither a National Congregation, nor a
National Pastor, as Aaron; nor Ordinances adapted to a National communion, as
the Sacrifices of old were, he never intended in this way or manner to edify
his Gospel Church.

Besides, As Christ established the Church of the Gospel, it was not capable of
such a constitution, such being impossible to be sustained without the
countenance, if not the compulsive power of civil powers; and we see that de
facto it came into the ruins, when ever in the Jewish Nation, Wicked Kings
swayed the Scepter; we well enough are assured that our Savior and his
Apostles formed the Gospel-Churches every where under Heathen Princes and
Governors, who were for the most part severe Persecutors of them, witness
their Sufferings in the Apostles days, and during the Christians bloody
Persecutions, till Constantines time, for 300 years, at which time of
prosperity, this National or then rather Provincial corrupt grandeur of
Church-constitution began to enter, proceeding from the corrupted minds of
Church Officers, aspiring to the accumulation of riches and honors. Soon after
they fell under the Arrian Heresy, under which the same Church pomp continued,
and proceeded to grow with much Persecution, and confusion, and distraction in
the world; with the daily increase of all manner of corruptions in doctrine and
worship, even to the introduction of Heathenish Abominations in the worship of
God, till the mortal wound was given to one of the seven heads of the Romish
Empire, and was healed by the eighth, which was the false Prophet the Grand
Church Imposter; under which the great Apostasy has so manifestly prevailed,
and during whose Usurpation the true Church of Christ has been in the
Wilderness, and the Witnesses Prophesying in Sackcloth. So that our Blessed
Lord and Savior seeing the present state of his little Flock when he ascended,
and foreseeing their future Suffering State for so many Ages to come, under
Rome Heathen, and after pretendedly Christian, constituted such a frame of
Gospel churches, that were capable of being Spiritual Polities under Heathen
and Antichristian Princes and Governors, and fitted Officers and Ordinances
for their communion and edification suited to such a state; which constitution
was to last by his commission to the end of the world, not alterable to another
kind by the will of man in the ensuing prosperous estate that the Church might
he blessed withal in after ages; (which has been very rare hitherto) nor much
to be prejudiced as to its truly intended Economy by the afflictions and
sufferings that it was destined by faith and patience to encounter withal.

Hence it will appear, there being a Politic Impossibility, that the
Church-constitution Established by Christ and his Apostles, could be National,
because of the Power of the Dragon raging so much against it in Governors, and
Rulers of the Earth; during the time of the first Ages of it, and afterward for
the most part, by reason of the Tyranny and Usurpation of the false Prophet.
And when that any time in any Nations, it was favored with the countenance of
Christian Kings and Princes, had it been National, it must have been subject to
all the Alterations, Additions, and Diminutions in Form and Worship, which the
corrupt and changeable minds of men in Power would invent and impose,
especially upon change of Governors and Governments, though Christian, yet
diverse in their Tempers, Understandings, and Opinions concerning Gods true
Worship, as also, in their Interests and carriages toward the Church, that it
would be the most difficult thing in the World to have known the manner and
Fashion of Christ's house. Wherefore (the Apostle says, Heb. 3.1.) Holy
Brethren, Partakers of the Heavenly calling, Consider the Apostle and High
Priest of our Profession, Christ Jesus; verse. 2. Who was faithful to him that
appointed him, as also Moses was faithful in all his house, [i. e. in all
things appertaining to the Worship of God in his Church,] verse. 3. For this man
was counted worthy of more Glory then Moses, in as much as he who builded the
house, has more Honor then the house; verse. 5. Moses verily was faithful in
all his house as a Servant, for a Testimony of those things that were to be
spoken after; verse. 6. But Christ as a Son over his own house, [in which he is
a chief corner stone, and has a greater Propriety then Moses had upon all
respects] whose house are we, etc. i. e. The faithful in the times of the
Gospel are the house and Church of Christ, and not this or that Nation or
Province, lying continually at the mercy and dispositions of the wills of
Princes, guided by carnal interests, and acted by corrupt minds, to the
modelling of it, by mutable Laws, as they shall correspond most with their
State-designs and purposes, which had been a great ground to have suspected the
faithfulness of Christ, if he had left his Church under such a Proteus-like
form and constitution, as to be liable to all the models, changes and
alterations of future ages, that the powers of the world would form them into;
under a pretense of profession of Christianity, when as very few of them, if
they were duly weighed in the balance of the Sanctuary, will prove to be much
more then almost Christians.

Lastly, The purpose and design of the Lord Jesus Christ by his Incarnation,
Sufferings, Miracles wrought, and Doctrine Preached by himself and Apostles,
was the gathering both Jews and Gentiles Elect into one Body, his Church,
wherever scattered or dispersed, not respecting one Nation or people more
then another, any further then in respect of the Elect Ones among them, nor
designing any Kingdom as yet in this world with External Pomp and Grandeur, but
rather a continuation of a Suffering State, with very little intermission,
under the powers of the Earth, exercising the rage and cruelty of the Dragon
against the Church; and afterward the Tyranny and Usurpation of the Seven
Headed Romish Beast and False Prophet; neither designed he the calling of many
wife men after the Flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, 1 Cor. 1.26.
otherwise then which he would certainly have done, had he designed National and
Provincial Churches; he would have said, I design a Church that may top, at
least give check to earthly Kings and Princes; I will turn their heart and make
them mine, both they, and their Subjects: Therefore I will call many wise men
after the Flesh, many mighty and many noble persons, who shall rule, manage,
and defend my Church, which may be in after-ages, but we see it quite contrary
yet. Ver. 27. God has chosen the foolish things of this world, to confound the
wise; and God has chosen the weak things of this world to confound the things
that are mighty, and base things of this world, and things that are despised,
to carry on his spiritual rule. Believe it this matter cannot constitute a
National Church it must be another sort of men. Whatever men therefore may
confidently assert, and however they make a boast, and vaunt themselves of
National Churches, Officers, Members, yea, and National Jurisdiction and
Judicature, exerted in Spiritual Courts, so called, none of which were of
Christ's Appointment and Institution; but were the mere products of Humane
Policies, and mere Antichristian Shams put upon the poor carnal blind world,
whereby that Wicked One endeavors to carry away the eyes and hearts of the
children of men from the true, plain and Spiritual Spouse of Christ; and go a
whoring after Harlots that are agreeable to the fashions of this world, in
Pride, Pomp, Pleasures, Covetousness, etc.

And I say, though such Ecclesiastical Powers, as also Civil, may deal very
hardly upon this account with the true Followers of the Lamb, and Deluding
Pulpiteers may terrify and fright some more weak and less grounded Christians,
with ambiguous words, mis-interpretation and false application of the
Scriptures of Truth; calling light darkness, and darkness light; calling what
they please, Church, Charity, Communion, Uniformity, Schism, Separation,
Rebellion, Disobedience to Laws, Governments, etc. Yet through the mercy of the
most High, there are some that have bought the Truth in these latter days of
light at dear rates of Sufferings, with expense of Estates, Liberties and Lives
under the Antichristian Tyranny, and tasted so much of the sweetness and
excellency of it, that they will not sell it, so as to part with it for worldly
interest, or be affrighted from it, by the open mouths of Roaring Lions, nor
jugaled out of it by the Sham-Divinity of the sly Foxes that spoil the Vines.

We have nothing to say to such men, but as Hannah spoke, 1 Samuel 2.3. Talk no
more so proudly, let not arrogance come out of your mouth, for the Lord is a
God of Knowledge, and by him Actions are weighed. And as for some good old
Ely's who are too much blinded with prejudice, passion and interest, keep a
great sputter against Schism, Separation from the Church, etc. and do not
seldom grieve the hearts of Christ's Members, by their unwarrantable doctrines
and practices in the great concerns of Gods Worship, and but gently rebuke
Hophni and Phineas, we are very well assured, that however they may have laid a
a good foundation in some people, yet their superstructure is but hay and
rubbish, which shall certainly be burnt, and the day shall make it manifest
what it is.

The only Plea that is made for a National Church, that is worth our
Observation, is from the Prophesies of Old, of calling in the Nations,
Sprinkling many Nations, etc. Isa. 5.26. chap. 52.15. chap. 45.1.

This Argument has little in it to prove a Gospel National Church, for these
and such like Prophesies, reser to the calling of the Gentiles; the word (...)
is indifferently rendered Gentiles and Nations, and it intends no more then the
Conversion of the elect Gentiles, scattered up and down in all Nations; and if
it be to be understood of some whole Nations becoming Christian, it argues
nothing of the necessity that the Nation should become one Church Organized;
but that the Gospel-Profession of Christianity, and the Gospel-churches, should
overspread the most of a Nation, or prevail upon the ruling part of it (though
very seldom) to be brought in Subjection to the Crown, Scepter, and Laws of the
Lord Jesus Christ; Erected in visible Churches, planted there.

And its no hinderance, but that christian and religious Magistrates have Scope
enough to Exert that power which Christ has entrusted them withal, as such,
for his Honor and Interest, in making and Executing Laws for Restraint of Sin,
and Encouragement of Virtue, in all matters touching Natural Religion; as
likewise, in taking care for the effectual Propagation, as much as may be, in a
due way and manner, of the Revealed Religion, and by being Nursing Fathers to
the Churches, countenancing and encouraging them in all strict Observation of
the commands of Christ, and Exemplary conversation, both as Churches and
particular Christians, defending them from the the Rage, Malice, and
Persecution of the Professed Enemies of the Lord Jesus Christ.

But know that a christian Magistrate rightly informed in his Duty as Christian
and Magistrate, has a Heart and Opportunity to use both those capacities for
the Honor and Interest of Christ, more then a Heathen Magistrate; yet his
being a Christian, adds not unto his Authority as Magistrate, neither does
Christianity de jure, extend his Legislative Power further then it was before:
And therefore if the Magistrate, as such, has a Legislative Power in matters
of Religion, then all have, and Heathen as well as Christian; and that power
which the Magistrate has Jure divino, we are bound Jure divino to obey. Ergo
required to be of that Religion the Magistrate by Law imposes of one kind or
another. This is an undeniable consequence.

CHAP. IV. Of Parochial Churches.
THere is no such things as a Parochial Church deducible from Rules of the
Gospel, neither can it be showed that the word (...) in the New Testament does
any where import such a meaning from any Application of it there made by the
Spirit of God. What Pleas able and learned men have made for such Churches, you
must give us leave to reject, unless they carry Scripture light and
demonstration along with them, without which our minds and consciences cannot
be bound to Faith and Submission.

A Parochial Church we take in the most common and candid Acceptance (without
binding our selves to the Term Parochial, or Parish, that being but of latter
times) That all Persons cohabiting within such Bounds, Limitations, or
Divisions of Ground, becoming a Parish, Township, Village, or going under any
other Denomination by the Customs or Laws of the Land where they are* I say
such Divisions and Limitations of ground, does not set out the bounds of a
Gospel Church, but that it may extend further then such Landmarks, or be of
lesser Extent, according to the Number or Situation of the Professing Believers
in those parts, for convenience of their assembling together, and Communion for
mutual Edification; neither is it necessary that all co-inhabitants within such
limits should be Members of one and the same Congregation; yea that all should
be reputed fit matter for any, seeing nothing is more evident and every where
experiencd, than that there is the greatest mixture of all sorts of men in such
limits and neighbourhoods; common and natural Justice allowing every one that
habitation that he can claim a civil right and title to, let him be good or
bad; its not Religion that makes men members of this or that Parish, or
Irreligion that excludes them. Now if co-habitation in such a Precinct makes a
man a member of the Church of Christ there, (if there be any) it is either
because it makes him necessarily so, or gives him a due claim: if the first, he
must be one whether he be willing or no, and so long as he dwells in those
limits, they can enforce him to be so; and then the Church must be supposed to
have a compulsive Power, not only internal by moral Persuasions, but a
Spiritual, as to the exercise of Censures toward them that are without, which
is Nonsense and ridiculous; yea an external compulsive power on men's Persons
and Actions to be exerted by themselves, or some by and under them, in order to
make men Church Members; and this is so great a contradiction not only to the
Tenure of the Gospel, yea wholly without any President under the old or new
Testament-constitutions, and to the most common Understanding of the Nature of
Religion, that to assert it is most grossly absurd to any understanding
Christian Ear, and therefore not worth insisting upon. Or it gives him a right
and claim; but co-habitation gives not a man a right and claim; Ergo: For then
he may come and challenge his right, and they cannot hinder him, pleading that
he has what is necessary to Church Membership, viz. Cohabitation. Hence no
Church would have Power to maintain any Purity of Ordinances and defend them
from corrupt communicants, according to the Rules of the Gospel, and therefore
there would be no need of Officers and Discipline to this end. Besides,
Excommunication must be the Removal of men out of the Parish, and nothing else:
for it is the cutting a man off, from the bond of communion. Now if the Parish
limits be the bond of Fellowship, then Excommunication must be the cutting a
man off from it; but Christ never intended that Church Discipline should cut
off any one from civil Rights and Properties* and banish men.

Yea there is nothing makes the Ordinances of Christ so cheap and contemptible
as such Church work as this, when there is no other Qualification required to
adult Church Membership, then cohabitation in the Precinct where such pretended
Church is; and this is so necessary an enforcing reason, that the Inhabitant
cannot avoid it without the hazard of the greatest Penalties from Church and
State; neither can the Church refuse him, making a Profession of christianity
at large, though he be otherwise the greatest known Debauchee in all manner of
Wickedness; nor when he is admitted to communion be rid of him, according to
the true Nature of this Rule, but by removing him out of the Parish. And
therefore I suppose this is the Reason of the Proceeding of such that assert
Parish-churches, that after Excommunication, upon non-return Offenders are
committed to a Goal, a Severity that Christ and his Apostles never thought of,
but in a Spirit of Prophecy, when they foresaw the cruelty and tyranny that
would be exercised under the Antichristian Kingdom. Forcible and imposed
communion is nauseous to all generous minded men, in natural or civil
Societies; no man will be forced to be of a Family by way of Affinity, nor of a
Society by incorporation: Nay there is no such Society, Economy, or Body
corporate, but look upon it much beneath them to prostitute their Rights and
Privileges to every Paultry Townsman or Inhabitant, much less will impose them
upon unwilling Persons, though accounted never so worthy.

Lastly, by this Bond of Church fellowship, viz. Cohabitation, a man is totally
deprived of the use of his own Reason, Judgment and Conscience in Spirituals,
whereas all Laws leaves us to the use of them in temporal and civil affairs;
for if a man is immediately of such a Church, as soon as he has rented a
house, or took Lodgings in such a Parish, the whilst he inhabits there, he
cannot upon any terms but of culpable Separation, join himself to another
Church, where he may be more edifyed, though but a stones cast from him. And if
he was of the other Parish before, where he enjoyed God under an able Godly
Minister, and in the communion of a faithful people; and does upon
family-necessity, or convenience of trade or dwelling, remove but into the next
street over the Parish-bounds, where it may be in the next, is an ignorant,
scandalous, persecuting and railing Minister, and happily a people not unlike
him; (which is no new thing, the Prophets tells us, Like Priests like People)
he is necessitated to be a Professed Member of this Synagogue of Satan, and
cannot remain a Churchmember of the former, by reason of his remove. And that
this is so de facto, see Can. 28. entitled, Strangers not to be admitted to
the Communion; Churchwardens, etc. shall observe, -- Whether any Strangers
come often and commonly from other Parishes to their Church, and shall show
their Ministers of them, least perhaps they be admitted to the Lords Tahle
amongst others, which they shall forbid, and remit such home to their own
Parish-Churches, and Ministers; there to receive the Communion with their rest
of their Neighbors. Just as one Neighbor does with the others Dogs, when they
run into each other houses a munching: Home you Cur you, etc

Here Is no admission of Members of another Parish; therefore our conclusion
holds good, That by this bond of Communion, Christians are cut off from the
free Election of their Minister, and Society in holy things: whereas he is not
enthralled so in worldly matters; he can go out of the Parish to choose his
Physician, Surgeon, Wife, Nurse, Apprentice, Tailor; Trade and deal for any
Commodities where he will, excepting Spiritual, and in those he must take no
better (will he, nill he) then his own Parish-shop affords. Is not this so far
from a Gospel constitution of a Church, that it is a miserable, wretched and
damnable device of the Devil, to destroy the very nature of Gospel-Churches,
and ruin poor Souls to all intents and purposes?

I know what will be still pleaded for a Parish Church, without respect (some
will it may be say) to the bond of Cohabitation; and that is this,

That wherever the Word and Sacraments are Administered, that is a true Church.

To which I answer these things: 1. There is no politic Society but has a
bond of Union, and if that be proved null, void and of no effect, as we have
done, the whole Society or Corporation falls to the ground; 2. That which is
Sauce for a Goose, is for a Gander also; if the Preaching the Word, and
Administering the Sacraments, make a Church without any more; why do the
Assertors of Parish-Churches deny Separate Congregations, where the Word and
Sacraments are Administered, to be such? 3. There may be a Church in a Parish
where the Word is Preached, and Sacraments Administered; but it follows not
thence the Parish is the Church, It Is possible there may be a Church of Christ
in Algiers, but then it follows not that the City of Algiers is a Church; 4.
The 19th. Can. of the Church of England says, There should be a Congregation
of faithful men, and a due Administration, and the Word of God Purely Preached;
Implying, that where the Majority at least, which carries the denomination of
the whole in all body politics, are not visibly faithful men, but otherwise,
there is not a Church of Christ: likewise where the word of God is corruptly
Preached, and the Sacraments unduely administered 5. A Ministers Preaching by a
mere Parish-relation, makes him no more a Pastor, then cohabitation makes the
Parishioners Members; for a Ministers Parish-relation is only a humane
institution, and indeed a matter of Civil Right, (which may be well improved in
Reformed Christian Nations) in order to Spiritual Advantage for the interest of
Christ and his true constituted Churches, by the countenance of good
Magistrates; but that it is a Church-relation settled on Gospel-grounds, it
would be absurdly insolent to pretend. That the establishment of a Ruling
Preaching Officer in the Church of Christ should be, 1. by the Presentation of
a Forreigner, or a Tyrannical Gentleman or Landlord in the Parish, it may be
the most professed Enemy to Christ and his Church; and if of the first sort, by
one that knows not the temper and disposition of the people, nor the Abilities,
Parts and Honesty of him he Presents; never regarding so much those
qualifications whereby he might edify the people, but only some carnal ends and
advantages, or particular regard to the Person of the Parish-Rector, to prefer
him or provide a competency for his Subsistence. This man being presented, is
instituted and inducted, takes to the profits for his life, (unless he forfeit
them by some Puritan or Phanatick faults) performs Parish-duties as the Law of
some people requires, this is his Parish-relation; but not in the least
grounded upon the Gospel. 6. A Minister may Preach a great while in any place,
to any sort of people, before there is a Church; as for Conversion, or for
trial of his Gifts and Parts; but none can be so absurd as to affirm that that
constant Preaching renders the Parish a Church: for we know by woeful
experience, that the word may be powerfully Preached in Parishes for a great
while, and great part, most, or it may be all, be scarcely civilized, but
remain in Professed Atheism, or manifest Profaneness; it may be, open
Persecuting Enmity to Godliness: And if any say it must be constant Preaching
that must denominate the Parish a Church: I would know how long? And what time
is required? If it be said till some are brought home to Christ, and by a
visible Profession to submit to his Gospel-Rules and Government, then the
limits of the Church is no further then the effects of the Gospel, and it
comprehends not those Inhabitants that still remain Professed Rebels against
Christ. So that if the Preaching the Gospel in a Parish, renders it a Church of
Christ, as such, one Sermon will do it as well as a hundred; I say if all the
Parishioners, as such, are to be the Church Members without exception, upon the
Gospel Preached. 7. A Minister is often sent by Christian Magistrates, for
Conversion of People; shall they presently be a Church, whether they receive or
own his Doctrine or no? And it may be none of them, or at least most of the
Parishioners, capable of judging of him or his Doctrine; or a Minister
sometimes is imposed by a Patron or Bishops, etc. upon a capable people, shall
they presently fall into a Church-Relation, whether they approve him and choose
him or no? Such things carry the greatest absurdities with them. 8. As
Preaching may be in a Parish, and no Constituted Church of Christ there, so
there may be the Administration of Sacraments, and no Church of Christ there;
and if there be in the Parish, it makes not the Parish a Church. Suppose a
pretended Minister imposed on a people that evidently enough declares himself
by his life and Doctrine never to have been sent of Christ, and challenges the
Parish by virtue of Humane Laws to be his Church (as they call it) which in
general, own no other Church-Relation, but by Cohabitation; this man goes on to
Preach the Sentiments of his own Brain, abuse Scripture, Reproach Godliness,
rail at, Persecute and devour the Sheep of Christ, if there be any; join in
with the wicked, ignorant, lewd and debaucht part of the Parish, and do all he
can to infect the rest with the Scab or Rot; This man Baptizeth and Administers
the Lords Supper to his Infected Flock, calls the soundest Schismatics and
Separatists: Does this constitute a Church of Christ, or a Synagogue of Satan?
what are all his Admidistrations but an Usurpation? As to the efficacy of the
Act done, its not my Province to determine here; I shall only say as to the
matter of Baptism, I roundly affirm, That I believe it no more effectual, than
if a Cobbler Tinker or Midwife had done it with some competent Solemnity. Hence
it evidently may be concluded, That the Administration of Sacraments
constitutes not a Church of Christ, much less makes a Parish a Church. But in
the forementioned instances, the whole proceeding of Ministers and People are a
mere usurpation of Communion in Church Ordinances, and is no better then
Jeroboams worshipping Dan and Bethel, and Conformity thereto no better then the
Israelites Conformity thereto in obedience to their lawful civil Governors, in
that which is a declared Abomination to the Lord.

Obj. You do hereby Unchurch many an eminent Church, where there has been a
Faithful Parish Minister, and holy good people walking as his Parishioners in
Communion with him.

Ans. We unchurch no true Church of Cbrist by this means, for i^ one thing to
say a thing is Church, and that it is occasional of a Church. I deny not but
many Ministers Parish-Relation, and Peoples cohabitation, have been ocasions of
many Reforming Churches, which Christ has accepted in their degrees of
Reformation; but we affirm they were not Churches of Christ as such, i. e. as
Members of a Parish; but as a faithul people, related by a Spiritual Bond of
Union to Christ, and one to another, in Communion of the Word purely Preached,
and Sacraments duly Administered.

CHAP. V. Of the Catholic Visible Church.
THose that speak of a Catholic Visible Church, speak some at one rate, and
some at another.

If they mean that the Catholic Church is Visible in the largest sense, as
such, we deny it; for it is not visible to us, nor can be, till all the Elect
are called in, and so must be only at the General Assembly and Church of the
Firstborn; for at present the most eminent part of it is triumphant; many true
Believers that are militant, not seen or known to us: And so to say the
Catholic Church is Visible, is to set our words and senses at variance.

By Catholic Visible, some will say they mean not the whole Universal Church,
but so much of it as is visible; but this cannot, for that reason, have the
denomination of Catholic Church, because its but a very small part of it, and
part cannot be called the whole; besides if it be limited to the Visible Saints
militant, I say the universality of them are never visible; either in any
congregation, or in communion of any Ordinance, or under any Visible Pastoral
Jurisdiction; neither are the particular Members of the Church militant visible
at the same time, there being no such time when all true Believers are known by
their visible Profession.

Some understand by the Catholic Visible Church, an Organized Church with a
visible Pastoral Head, and furnished with Officers suiting a Catholic Ruling
Power over all Churches and Saints on Earth; and this is the meaning always of
the Papists when they speak of the Catholic Church, calling themselves
Catholics as Members of it, which Church they say, Rome is, wherein this
universal Pastor and Jurisdiction is placed.

But it is by a cloud of Witnesses asserted that Christ never Ordained any
universal visible Pastor, nor ever promoted Peter above the rest of the
Apostles, neither did ever the greatest contender for the Popes Headship, and
Supremacy over all other Pastors and Churches, ever make seeming fair proof of
it, for though he sent sorth his Apostles as extraordinary Officers, with an
extraordinary presence for working Miracles, and healing, in order to the first
propagating the Gospel, and Plantation of Churches, yet they had but a
coordinate power, neither were they fixed as standing and lasting Officers in
the Church, neither was their Apostolic power conveyed to any Successors, but
dyed with them, leaving only ordinary Officers in the Church. Lastly, can you
read the word (...) any where to import in the New Testament, a Church of this
nature, viz. a Catholic Visible Organized Church. Christ rather pofitively
forbad it, and reproved that spirit of Ambition; that was one thing that our
Savior saw working in them, laboring to be Dignitaries; But he that will be
chief among you, let him be your Servant, Mat. 20.17. and 23.11.10.24, 25.
Which Reprimand the Mother of Zebedee's children received, when she enquired
who should be greatest among her children.

There are six or seven sorts of Churches in the latter days that entitle
themselves the Churches of Christ, which the Gospel makes no mention of, viz.
Catholic Organized Visible, such the Church of Rome, Patriarchal, National,
Provincial, Diocesan, Archdeconary, Parochial. These seem to be the seven women
spoken of, Isa. 4.1. that shall take hold of one man [The Lord Jesus Christ]
Saying we will eat our own bread, and wear our own Apparel, only let us be
called by thy name to take away our reproach. They will have the name of
Christ, that they may not be Reproached as the Churches of Antichrist, and yet
will be at their own provision for Worship and Ordinances by humane inventions.
But for all this, though these whorish women make a shift by a common vogue to
carry the name of the True Gospel Churches throughout the world, his True
Spouse, though small and contemptible as to outward appearance, shall be
glorious, ver. 2. In that day the branch of the Lord shall be beautiful and
glorious, and the fruit of the earth shall be excellent and comely for them
that are escaped of Israel, ver. 3. And it shall come to pass, that he that is
left in Zion [in that great Apostacy] and he that remains in Jerusalem shall
be called holy, even every one that is written among the living in Jerusalem.
See what follows from ver. 4. to the end.

This I take to be the true meaning of that place; for 1. Women in the
Prophetic phrase are Churches, as frequent instances may be given. 2. The
number may be definite for an indefinite. 3. The Prophecy is manifestly of the
latter days, and the Churches state therein, which none will deny.

CHAP. VI. Of the most usual acceptance of the word Church, in the New
Testament.
WE have showed that in one place the word (...) is taken for any common
Assembly, lawful or unlawful, Acts 19.32, 39. and likewise that it is once taken
for a National Church, Acts 7.38.

But in all other places, it is either taken for the Universal Church of Christ,
or for particular Congregations; and for no other sorts of Churches.

The Universal Church of Christ is one Organized Body, Christ being the Head,
and all the Saints Triumphant, and Militant, the Members; united together,
either by a real Bond, visible or invisible, or both.

This Church of Christ either is mentioned in the New Testament in the most
general consideration; or more particularly, referring to it in the mystical
part of it, or to the Visible Externally Organized parts of it, which are the
particular Churches. I shall briefly go through the places of the New
Testament, where it is used, for the Readers satisfaction. It is taken for the
Body of Christ under the most general and comprehensive signification, and so
it is to be understood of a Body consisting of Head and Members, made up of
visible and invisible, real and professing only.

The places carrying it in this sense, are, Mat. 16.18. Upon this Rock will I
build my Church, i. e. my whole Spiritual Fabric shall be built upon that
Person and Doctrine which thou have born witness to in this Profession.

Ephesians. 1.22, 23. Has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be Head
over all things to his Church, which is his Body, the fullness of him that
fills all in all. Col. 1.24. Who now rejoice in my Sufferings for you, and
fill up that which is behind, of the Afflictions of Christ [mystical] in my
Flesh, for his Bodies sake, which is the Church. Note that where the Church is
called the Body of Christ, it is meant of the Universal Church for the most
part.

Ephesians. 3.10. To the intent that now unto Principalities and Powers in Heavenly
Places, might be made known by the Church the manifold Wisdom of God, i. e. by
the whole Church both militant and triumphant, by the eminent Grace and Glory
shinning forth in them, even to the admiration of Angels; even to see, ver. 9.
The Fellowship of the Mystery which from the beginning of the world has been
hid in God, etc. And ver. 21. Unto him be Glory in the Church by Jesus Christ,
throughout all Ages, world without end.

Ephesians. 5.25. He has loved his Church, and given himself for it; ver. 27. to
make it a glorious Church, 29. No man hates his own flesh, but nourishes it
and cherishes it, even as the Lord the Church, i. e. the whole Church; for we
are Members of his body, of his flesh and his bones: ver. 32. This is a great
Mystery, but I speak of Christ and his Church.

Heb. 12.23. To the General Assembly and Church of the first born, which must
be understood of the Universal Church in its purest and most glorious state,
both militant and triumphant; to which every true Believer comes when he is
united by Faith to Christ the Head. (...) there is the only word in the New
Testament can be rendered Catholic Assembly.

2. Church is taken in the New Testament for the visible part of the Catholic
Church, 1 Cor. 12.27, 28. Ye are the Body of Christ, and Members in particular,
and God has set some in the Church first Apostles, then Prophets, etc. In this
and such like places Church is taken primarily for the Universal Church, though
there be many things applied thereto, which more immediately belong to the
visible parts of it in particular simular Congregations, and differing Members,
in respect of Office, Grace, or Gifts. And so i:'s to be understood in the
place last quoted; as also, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. a Parallel Place, and such is,
Romans 12.4, 5, 6, 7.

Lastly, 1 Timothy 3.15. That thou may know how to behave thy self in the house
of God, which is the Church of God, [i. e. in a particular part of the
Universal Church] which is the pillar and ground of truth [i. e. the Universal
Church is the pillar and ground of Truth in the world, to defend and maintain
it, and hold forth the light of it; but every particular Church is a
Candlestick to hold the Candle of the Gospel Light, and Profession, and
Ordinances, among which Christ walks. These are all the places so near as I can
find, which have reference to the Catholic Church, where Ecclesia, or Church,
is mentioned, unless those that speak of Paul's Persecuting the Church, which
may be understood not only actual Persecuting the Particular Church of
Jerusalem, but of the whole Body of Christ, because 1. that Church was all as
yet Planted, and 2. because Christ takes his rage and enmity to be levied and
managed against his mystical Body, Acts 9. Saul, Saul, why Persecutest thou me?
The places are these, 1 Cor. 15.9. Gal. 1.13. Phil. 3.6. Acts 8.3.

CHAP. VII. Of a Particular Church.
I come in the next place to show what the word Church imports in all other
Texts of the New Testament, were it is used, not yet mentioned, which is far
the greater part.

And to make it evident, that no other Church is by them intended then such an
one which is described in the 19th Article of the Church of England, viz. A
Church is a Congregation of Faithful Men, where the pure Word of God is
Preached, and the Sacraments duly Administered, according to Gods holy
Ordinances; which can have no other understanding, then that of a Particular
Church. I need not descant upon it, it carries so much plainness and
correspondency to the genuine sense of a Church in all places of the Gospel,
where a particular Church is intended, that there is no room for exception.

The first Text is, Mat. 18.17. Tell the Church, which is the particular
Congregation of faithful men, etc. Its nonsense to suppose that a National or
Provincial Church is here meant; that upon every offense between brother and
brother, an address must be made to a Council, Synod, Archbishop or Bishop; and
where have we Counsels or Synods, or Pastors called Churches in any place of
the New Testament? If any man pre^end to object that our Savior here ^ntended
the Church of the Jews; and that to tell the Church, was to tell the Sanhedrim:
Let such an one give one instance, that the Sanhedrim is called the Church in
Old or New Testament; I am sure not in the New: neither is it rational to
suppose that our Savior gave here Rules for the Economy of the Jewish Church,
which was so soon after to be dissolved as to its whole constitution, our
Savior never intending the erection of a National Church more.

2. The next Texts are Acts 2.47. Of the Church of Jerusalem:
And the Lord added to the Church daily such as should be saved. This was
without dispute a particular Congregation, for there was as yet but that one,
which was that CXX which Christ left together at his Ascension. This was the
Congregation of the Faithful which was added to; which is the same Church that
was spoken of, Acts 5.11. Fear fell upon all the Church, or Congregation of the
Faithful. The first multiplying of Churches, was occasioned by Saul's
Persecution, after the stoning of Stephen; scattering a great part of this
Congregation, now grown too big for one: Acts 8.1, 3. There was a great
Persecution against the Church which was at Jerusalem; against this Church in
particular, Saul's Persecution was breathed, which he mentions afterward, 1 Cor.
15.9. Gal. 1.13. Phil. 3.6. after which he continues to breath out threatenings
and slaughter, and assay's to pursue them to Damascus, and other places, Acts
9.1. near which place Christ stops his Career.

But notwitstanding this scattering, which God turned to the advantage of the
Gospel, and increase of Churches, by the Preaching of Philip and other
scattered brethren, so that as chap. 8. and 11. ver. 19. and in ver. 21. The
hand of the Lord was with them, and a great number were added to the Lord: So
that in Judea, the Churches of Samaria, and Galilee, were gathered, Acts 9.31.
It appears also the Body of that Jerusalem-Church still remained, and tidings
coming to them of the mavelous success of the Ministry of the scattered
Disciples, they sent forth Barnabas, Acts 11.22: Then tidings of these things
came to the ears of the Church which was in Jerusalem, and they sent forth
Barnabas that he should go as far as Antioch, The Church of Antioch
etc. ver. 25. from thence he departed to Tarsus to seek Saul, ver. 26. And
when he had found him he brought him to Antioch, and it came to pass, that a
whole year they Assembled themselves with the Church, and taught much people,
i. e. besides the Churches, this is the First Gospel Church of the Gentiles we
read of. Now that this was a Congregation of the Faithful, converted first by
the Ministry of the Scattered, it appears in that Barnabas first fell upon
confirming work, v. 23. When he came and had seen the Grace of God, was glad,
and exhorted them all that with purpose ^f heart they would cleave unto the
Lord; and by his further labors the Church was increased, v. 24. and much
people were added unto the Lord; though I will not deny, this expression may
intend his first forming them into a Church, before the coming of Saul, after
which we are assured it was a Formed Church separated from the rest of the
people of Antioch, yea, from many that were frequent hearers of the Word, as
appears verse 26.

After this a second Persecution arises against the Church of Jerusalem, Act.
12.1. Now about that time Herod the King stretched forth his hands to vex
certain of the Church, and killed James, and imprisoned Peter; for whom Prayer
was made without ceasing of the Church unto God for him; verse 5, 12. viz.
Assembled in a private Meeting.

Chap 13.1. We have an Account of Certain Prophets in the Church of Antioch, a
sort of extraordinary Officers in the Primitive Churches, mentioned next after
Apostles, Ephesians. 4.11. These were charged by the Holy Ghost to set apart Barnabas
and Saul to the work whereunto he had called them, which being sent forth, they
went their Progress to Seleucia, Cyprus, Salamis, Paphos, Perga in Pamphilia,
and from thence to Antioch in Pisidia, chap. 13. verse 14. there Paul preached
in the Synagogue with great acceptance of the Proselyte Gentiles, who
assembled to hear the next Sabbath from all parts of the City; but the Jews
contradicting and blaspheming, they declare the rejection of the Jews, and
there turn to the Gentiles, ver. 46, 47. Being Persecuted from this Antioch
they came to Iconium, to the great joy of the Disciples, verse 51, 52. Here
they Preached with success, chap. 14.1. but were opposed by the Unbelieving
Jews, and Persecuted to Lystra and Derbe, verse 20. Cities of Lycaonia: At
Lystra cured the Cripple, and like to be worshipped for Gods; but the Jews from
Antioch and Iconium change the Scene, ver. 19. and Paul was stoned; but
recovered, departed to Derbe, and after Preaching there, returned to Lystra,
Iconium and Antioch of Pisidia, Churches of Lystra, Iconium, Antioch of Pisidia.
confirming the Disciples, verse 22, 23. ordaining Elders in every Church.
These Churches of Lystra, Iconium, and Antioch, were gathered at the Apostles
first coming, and at their return to confirm them, they ordained Elders in
them. These were not National Churches; Antioch was of the Region of Pisidia;
nor was the whole limit of any of these places of the Church, but a few of each
that were wrought upon by, and submitted to their Ministry. From Pisidia, they
came to the Province of Pamphilia, ver. 24. where they Preached at Perga, went
to Attalia, and thence sailed to the first Antioch, where these two Apostles,
so called ver. 14. were Ordained, and from whence they were sent to this
Apostolic work of gathering Churches, and settling Elders in them; here they
give the Church of Antioch an account of what God had done by them, in opening
a door of faith unto the Gentiles, verse 27. and abode there a long time.
During, their abode there, disturbance was raised by some men that came from
Judea, and taught the necessity of circumcision, chap. 15.1, 2, 3. whereupon
the Apostles and certain others were sent to the Apostles and Elders at
Jerusalem about this question, and were brought on their way by the Church,
verse 3. I suppose none can conjecture that here was any Church besides a
Congregation of Faithful; no House-church, that could bring the Apostles on
their way; no National or Provincial Church; it is not to be supposed, that all
the Province or City of Antioch accompanied them, but only those few that were
gathered into a Church; and they not taken all in one Parish or Precinct of the
City, but here and there, as it pleased God by his Grace to work. When they
came, verse 4. to Jerusalem, they were received by the Church, Apostles and
Elders, where the question was determined, verse 22. and return made (with the
resolves of the Apostles and Church of Jerusalem) to Antioch, and staying some
time there, confirmed the Disciples. But some days after Paul and Barnabas
agreeing to depart to revisit the Cities where they Preached, they disagreed
about taking John Mark, and so parted; Paul then took Silas, and went through
Syria and Cilicia, Barnabas took Mark and went to Cyprus; places where they had
been, verse 36, 37. confirming the Churches, v. 41. I shall proceed no further
in these two Apostles travells; this being enough to show what sort of Churches
were first planted by them; and to show where any mention is made of Church,
and that is but in two places more in the Acts, Acts 18.22. After he had Landed
at Cesarea, Church of Caesarea.
and went up and saluted the Church, he went down to Antioch, and chap. 20.17.
from Miletus Miletus.
he sent to Ephesus and called the Elders of the Church, and charged them, v.
28. Take heed therefore to your selves, and to all the Fl^ck, over which the
Holy Ghost has made you Overseers, to feed the Church of God, which he has
purchased with his Blood.

Now what were these but such Congregations that accompanied the Apostles, that
was saluted by them; that they confirmed, and were purchased by Christ's blood;
is it sense to think they were Houses, or whole Nations, or Provinces, or
Cities? no they were those faithful ones, Building of living stones.
who being gathered into particular Congregations by the Ministry first of the
Prophets, ( i. e. the scattered Brethren from Jerusalem) were settled and
confirmed by the Apostles, who Ordained Officers respectively among them.

I proceed in the next place to the Churches to whom the several Epistles were
wrote.

We read not the word Church in any part of the Epistles to the Romans, but in
the 16th chapter, and there referring to other Churches, The Church of the
Romans.
as verse 1. he speaks of Phebe a Deaconess of the Church at Cenchrea, and
verse 4: mentions all the Churches of the Gentiles, verse 5. salutes the Church
in Aquila's house, verse. 16. The Churches of Christ salute you. Though we have
reason enough to believe that there was at this time a constituted Church at
Rome, because first he writes to them as beloved of God, and called to be
Saints, chap. 1. verse 7. Secondly, because he gives Rules to them for walking
toward each other as those in Fellowship, chap. 14. Thirdly, Phebe is
recommended to them from the Church at Cenchrea, which would not have been, had
they not been a Church.

In the Epistle to the Corinthians, we have more mention made of the word
Church then in any Epistle, The Church of Corinth.
importing a Particular Congregation; and we may begin with that description
the Apostle gives of it, 1 Cor. 1.2. Unto the Church of God which is at
Corinth, to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be Saints, etc.
he writes not to all the Inhabitants of Corinth, but to the Church, which he
tells you what they are, sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be Saints; which
words are exegetical of Church; so he directs his second Epistle, 2 Cor. 1.1.
Unto the Church of God which is at Corinth, with all the Saints which are in
all Achaia: Corinth was a City of the Province of Achaia, and he writes
primarily to the Church at Corinth, and likewise to all the Saints which were
in that Province, whether they were actually in Church Fellowship or no. I
shall briefly mention all the other Texts where Church is taken plainly for
such a Particular Congregation as is described in the first Epistle, chap. 1.

1 Cor. 4.17. I have sent unto you Timotheus, -- who shall bring you into
remembrance of my ways which be in Christ, as I teach every where in every
Church; i. e. every particular Congregation.

1 Cor. 6.4. If then you have judgment of things appertaining to this life, set
them to judge who are least esteemed in the Church; i. e. in the Church of the
Corinths, of them its primarily intended, and as a rule for other particular
Churches, where no such thing as Christian civil Magistrates was in those
times. 1 Cor. 7.17. As the Lord has called every one, so let him walk and so
ordain I in all the Churches, i. e. as a Rule for every particular member of
each Church.

1 Cor. 11.16. If any man s^emeth to be contentious, we have no such Custom,
nor the Churches of God.

Verse 18. When you come together in the Church, [i. e. the Assembly, not meant
of the meeting place, as before noted; the same sense as in verse 22.]

Chap. 14.4. He that Prophesies Edifieth the Church, i. e. the Congregation
that hears him.

And verse 5. his reason of prefering Prophesying is given, viz. That the
Church may receive Edifying; therefore says, verse 12. Seek that ye may excel,
that the Church may receive Edifying; and verse 19. In the Church I had rather
speak five words with my Understanding that I might teach others. Verse 23. If
the whole Church be come together in one place.

Verse 28. If there be no Interpreter, let him keep silence in the Church, etc.

Verse 33. God is not the Author of Confusion, but of Peace; as in all the
Churches of the Saints. Verse 34. Let your Women keep silence in the Churches.
Verse 35. For it is a shame for Women to speak in the Church.

Chap. 16.1. Concerning the Collection for the Saints, as I have given Order to
the Churches [such as are in the Province] of Galatia, even so do ye. Where
should Collections be made, but in particular Congregations? Verse 19. The
Churches of Asia, [i. e. of that Region] salute you; Aquila and Prescilla
salute you, and the Church in their House; it may be that frequently assembled
there, or that was for the most part belonging to their Family; there might be
enough for a competent Congregation in such times as those: that Church is
mentioned more times.

2 Cor. 8.1. We do you to wit of the Grace of God bestowed on the Churches of
Macedonia; the word is always used in the plural Number, when its applied to
Nations, Provinces [ Macedonia was a Province] Regions, as of Galatia,
Macedonia, Asia, Judea.

Verse 18, 19. We have sent with him the Brother whose praise is in the Gospel
throughout all the Churches, verse 19. And not that only, but who were also
chosen of the Churches to travel with us; the word is, (...) and might be
rendered ordained, as well as in other places.

Verse 23. They are Messengers of the Churches. Verse 24. Wherefore show to
them and before the Churches the proof of your Love. Chap. 11.8. I robbed other
Churches to serve you.

2 Cor. 11.28. That which comes upon me daily, the care of all the Churches,
viz. as to his Apostolical Office.

2 Cor. 12, 13. What is it wherein you are inferior to other Churches. It
seems there is no superiority of one particlar Church above another, but are all
coordinate.

The word is thrice used in the Epistle to the Gallatians, Chap. 2.1, 2. Paul
an Apostle -- and all the Brethren which are with me, unto the Churches of
Galatia [a Province] Verse 13. You have heard of my Conversation, how that
beyond measure I persecuted the Church of God, and wasted it; i. e. the Church
of Jerusalem, which was only extant when he began his Persecution; and for
ought I know, while it lasted, for that was a principal occasional cause of
scattering the Jerusalem Church, in order to Propagation; but he tells them of
more Churches in the Province of Judea, after his Conversion. Verse 21, 22.
Afterward I came into the Regions of Syria and Cilicia, and was unknown by
face unto the Churches of Judea, which were in Christ.

The Apostle directs the Epistle to the Eph^sians thus, To the Saints which are
at Ephesus, and to the faithful in Christ Jesus; which terms have a synonymous
acceptance most times with a Church, and we have ground enough to believe
there was an Established Church there when Paul wrote, he writing of such high
mysteries concerning Christ and his Church; but we are fully assured of it
afterward, when John wrote, Rev. 2.1. where he directs his Epistle to the
Ephesian Church, as if to the Dutch, or French Church in England, or the
Ephesian Congregation at Ephesus; but in all places where Church is mentioned
in this Epistle, he treats only of the Catholic Church, as has been showed,
being his design mostly to show the Beauty, Glory and Mystery of Christ
Mystical, etc.

He directs his Epistle to Philippi Church of Philippi.
in the same manner, and mentions the word Church but twice; the first is where
he speaks of his Zeal in Persecuting the Church, i. e. of Jerusalem, Philip.
3.6. and 4.15. where he says, No Church communicated with me as to giving and
receiving, but ye only: So that the Saints at Philippi were the Church.

The Epistle to Coloss, is directed to the Saints and faithful Brethren in
Christ who are at Coloss, Church of Coloss.
chap. i, 2. i. e. the Congregation of the faithful there where this Epistle
was to be first read, and then in the Church of Laodicea, chap. 4.16. He
mentions also the Church in the House of Nymphas; every where else the word
relates to the Catholic Church in this Epistle, as has been showed.

The Apostle directs his second Epistle to the Thessalonians, verse 1. To the
Church of the Thessalonians, Church of Thessalonica.
and such a Church as took their pattern from the Churches of God in Judea, 1 Thessalonians. 2.14. and therefore he says 2 Thessalonians. 1.4. We our selves glory in the
Churches of God for their Patience and Faith in all our Persecutions.

The Epistle to Timothy speaks of particular Churches, 1 Timothy 3.5. If a man
know not how to rule his own House, how shall he take care of the Church of
God, i. e. such a one as falls under a Pastoral care in a man's capacity of
Government, as a Family does; and 1 Timothy 5.16. Let not the Church be charged;
that is, the particular Congregation, where Church charges arise, as the
Context shows.

In the Epistle to Philemon he speaks of the Church in his House, i. e. that
did usually assemble there, as indeed all the Church Assemblies were in those
times in private Houses, and this is the third Church in a private Family that
is expressly mentioned by Paul; there was Aquila's, Nymphas's and Philemon's.

The Epistle to the Hebrews has the word Church but twice, the first is, chap.
2.12. I will declare thy Name unto my Brethren in the midst of the Church, I
will sing Praise unto thee; a place taken out of the Psalms, where in the next
and Primary Signification, the Psalmist, so far as he means himself, its to be
understood of a particular Congregation, where God is praised; and so far as
its Prophetically applied to Christ, its meant of the Catholic Church; in the
foregoing verse, saying, He that sanctifies and who they are sanctified, are
all one: for which sake he is not ashamed to call them brethren, saying, etc.

And chap. 12.23. He speaks expressly of the Catholic without dispute.

The Apostle James speaks of the Elders of a particular Church expressly, James
5.14.

So John's third Epistle, verse 6, 9, 10.

John in the Revelations makes mention of the Word in the singular and plural
number, no less then nineteen or twenty times; and always to be understood of
particular Churches. I will only name the Texts that the Reader may inspect at
his Leisure. Revel. 1.4, 11, 20. Chap. 2.1, 7, 8, 12, 17, 18, 23, 29. Chap.
3.1, 6, 7, 13, 14, 22. Chap. 22.16.

I find the word Church used in the New Testament, about 85 times in this
sense, viz. of a particular Congregation, and cannot by any candid Reader be
supposed to have any other meaning, nor with the least show of reason, be
understood of any Meeting House, National, Provincial, Diocesan, or Parochial
constitution, but only of a Congregation of Saints by mutual consent ordinarily
assembling together, for Attendance on Christ in all his Ordinances.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Inferences necessary from the Foregoing Chapter.
IT being discovered in what senses the word Church is taken in the New
Testament; its an idle and vain thing for Christians to trouble and concern
their heads and Consciences about humorsome conceits and imaginations of men's
brains; managed for the most part to serve their carnal Interests, or darken
the Truth. Let men give up themselves and Understandings impartially to the
plain, and genuine Sense and meaning of the Spirit of God, without squeezing or
wresting it to a design or prejudicate Opinion, or favoring any beloved Lust,
and the truth of the Gospel would shine with full Evidence and Demonstration.
And therefore notwithstanding men's great swelling and words of Vanity from
Pulpit and Press, in matters of this nature, we shall make bold to lay down
these following Assertions as undeniable plain Conclusions from what has been
spoken.

1. That the Gospel Church Established by our Lord Jesus Christ in the days of
the New Testament, is or can be no where understood of any other Church then
the Catholic Church, or particular Congregations of faithful men, etc. and
that there is no one place that can have any fair pretense to be understood of
any other constitution of Churches.

2. That wherever the word (...) is used, it always signifies a Congregation
or Assembly of men met together, at least occasionally, upon some civil,
spiritual, or sinful Account; and that we need not be beholding to any Tropical
Senses, or ungrounded supposal of things, and meanings of Words, so remote,
when in the plain and ordinary way of Understanding, things present themselves
to our Reasons and Senses; If we be not blinded with Pride, Passion, Prejudice,
and Estrangement from the true way of Spiritual Understanding, by comparing
Scripture with Scripture, and consonacy of things to the Analogy of Faith.

3. We infer, That a Congregation of faithful men is the generical material
part of a Church, because it comprehends all the matter that is ever found in
any Gospel Church of any kind; all fit matter for such a Congregation, are such
as are really so, or visibly, (in foro mundi) or both. And also, because there
is no Church of Christ spoken of, or mentioned in Old or New Testament, but is
so called under the Notion of being a Congregation to be sometime or other
Assembled all together; the Catholic Church is so under that Notion, as being
all gathered together actually and mystically in Christ, and shall all appear
one day in a glorious Congregation, Heb. 12.22, 23. Where (...) is to be
understood as R. St. renders it, Publicus conventus, a general Public
Assembly: likewise, wherever the Spirit of God speaks of a Church of his own
constituting, its always so.

The Old Testament Church was called so under that notion; though National, yet
was required to be still Congregational; all the Males being required thrice a
year to appear before the Lord in a Visible Congregation at the Tabernacle;
(therefore called the Tabernacle of the Congregation) or at the Temple, where
it was in standing; and it is so often called the Congregation of the children
of Israel; the Reader may turn to these places at leisure, Exodus 16.2.10.
Levit. 4.13. chapter 14.2. and 20.1, 22. Jos. 18.1. chapter 22.12, 16, 18. 2 Chr. 6.3.
Ezra. 2.64. And the whole Congregation together 42360: these more or less made
up one Assembly, these were Preached to by Ezra; and whatever the number of the
Nation was, they were to meet all together in one place. And so we have the
word applied to the Church in the New Testament, that it always signifies a
Congregation that does ordinarily meet together for their edification, if it be
meant of a Particular Church; but if an Universal, such a Church as shortly
shall Assemble, and always sit together in a lasting sinless and uninterrupted
communion. So that a true Church of Christ under whatever Notion you take it,
must be and is a Congregation of Saints, visible, invisible, or both, that do
meet together in one place, for the Worship of God in Christ, and communion in
one body.

4. We infer that we have part of the differencing form in that Description,
viz. where the pure word is Preached, and Sacraments duly Adminstred, etc. for
it distinguishes the true Church, distinguishes the true visible Churches
from false and erroneous, it distinguishes a particular Church from the
Catholic, for there is no Church but a particular Congregation capable of
having the word preached to it, and Sacraments duly administered in one
Congregation, but a particular Church; when the Catholic Church assembles,
there will be neither.

5. We find not the least word in Old or New Testament, of a Representative
Congregation, or Church-Representative; the Congregation of the Jews was to be
by a Personal Appearance of all the Males, the Females were exempted upon Gods
special Dispensation, by reason of their unfitness for Travel, as from
circumcision by reason of incapacity. But we find that every visible Church of
Christ still appeared before the Lord personally, for actual communion in
Church Ordinances, in that way and method that God appointed in his Respective
Dispensations; and we are fully assured there is no Representative Church of
Christ's institution, either Councels, or Synods, or Presbyteries. We read not
of any Presbytery, i. e. Association of Elders called the Church, but the
Church is always spoken of distinctly from them. If there had been any Reason
to have called any Eldership the Church, there had been Reason to have called
that so in the Apostolic Church, which had so many famous Apostles, Prophets,
and Evangelists in in it; but they are named distinctly in that great Council
held at Jerusalem, Act. 15.22. It pleased the Apostles and Elders, with the
whole Church.

6. The Universal Church does comprehend all the particular Congregations in
all Ages and places, (being simular and coordinate parts of it) of the visible
Saints, where (by the Institution of Christ the Head) all the Ordinances are
placed, and by his influence there is a supply of Graces and gifts, for the
Edification of his Body, as likewise all Officers, and Offices, as appears,
Ephesians. 4.11, 12. of which there were Extraordinary and Ordinary.

7. The extraordinary Officers were instituted for an extraordinary Occasion,
viz. the first Plantation of the Gospel-churches: They were Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists; the call of these, the works and Qualifications, was
extraordinary: These continued no longer than the first Age of the Church.

8. The Ordinary remaining Officers are no more than Presbyters, (which some
make a little distinction of) Pastors, Teachers, Ruling Elders,) but there is
no need of multiplication of Titles and Offices, where the work does so much
correspond, and is of the same nature) and Deacons; the first sort to give
themselves principally to Prayer, and the Ministry of the Word, and Government:
the latter to mind the matters of more external concern, called Tables, as the
necessities of the Poor, the providing Elements for Sacraments, conveniences
for Church Assemblies, and whatever is necessary upon such Occasions. These
Officers are no where found with a capacity to exert their Power as such, but
in particular Congregations; though they be members of the Catholic Church, they
are not Catholic Officers; Christ is now the only Catholic Officer, being the
Head of the whole Body.

9. All the Officers of the Gospel Church were placed in the one Catholic
Church, primarily and immediately relating to Christ Mystical, secondarily and
mediately, to the several visible militating parts thereof in particular
Congregations; and their Office-work was either for the planting and gathering
in to them, or for the edification of those gathered: The Extraordinary had an
extraordinary call, furnished with an extraordinary measure of the Spirit, as
with an extraordinary Commission: the Ordinary had not these, but sufficient
both of the Spirit and commission for answering Christ's glorious ends and
designs in building his Church in future Ages, and gathering more.

10. It appears that the true actual members of the visible Church are visible
Saints and Believers, none that were adult were ever counted so in the
Gospel-sence, but under-the Notion of the Profession of Faith and Practice of
Holiness. True Faith makes a man a true Member of the mystical Body of Christ,
but cannot instate a man in foro Ecclesiae, in the rights of visible communion,
till it manifests it self with credibility unto those to whom the Preservation
of these Rights and Privileges are committed, the actual Officers and Members
of a visible Church. The Rule that Christ has given for knowing and judging of
others is by their Fruits, and if the Church be mistaken for want of
Infallibility, (which the Apostles themselves came short in, Simon Magus and
Judas being not known to them but by the Discovery of overt Acts) God charge
them not culpably with it, that being a Prerogative that Christ reserves to
himself, and none ever Pretended to it but the false Prophet, the great
Spiritual Usurper; and it appears that our Savior reserved this Diadem to
himself in the Embrio of the Gospel Church, by his Behavior toward Judas,
admitting him to visible communion, merely upon an outward Profession, though
he knew his Heart; leaving his Practice as an Example to his Ministers and
Churches; carrying himself as a visible Pastor, and dealt with men in the case
of receiving to, or rejecting from communion, according to the visibility of
their Profession: therefore leaving it as a standing Rule to his Church for
future proceeding in this kind; not that he esteemed Hypocrites any part of his
mystical Body, but yet the present Profession giving them by his own Rules a
right to all External Privileges, and a Reputation, nothing inferior to
others; he speaks of them in some Phrases which to minds not thoroughly informed
in the Truth, create much difficulty, as John 17.11. Holy Father, keep through
thy name those whom thou have given me, that they may be one as we are; i. e.
all those that thou have given me to be of my mystical Body, that they may be
united in Participation of the Divine Nature, as we are one; verse. 12. While I
was with them in the World [as a visible Pastor among them] I kept them in thy
Name; of those thou gave me, [that is the charge of, as a visible Pastor, and
that I took upon their visible Profession,] I have lost none but the Son of
Perdition. So John 15.2. Every branch in me [in the Church by a visible
Profession] that bears not fruit, he takes away: verse 6. If a man abide not
in me, he is cast forth as a branch and withered. So 1 John 2.19. They went out
from us, [as a visible Church] but were not of us; as part of the Catholic
Body.

11. Churches of Christ are and may be in Nations, Provinces, Diocesses,
Parishes, though those limits of co-habitation are not so, as such; Jerusalem,
Corinth, Antioch, Ephesus, Smyrna, Coloss, etc. were not Churches as such,
though there was a Church or Churches, in each of those Towns or Cities,
therefore we read of the Church in Corinth, and when he speaks of Provinces or
larger Tracts, he says the Churches of such a place, in the plural number,
viz. Churches of Galatia, Macedonia, Judea, etc. and therefore, the Language of
the Spirit of God now, if he spoke as then, would be to say, The Churches of
England, France, Spain, and not the Church, supposing all the Churches in such
a Province or Nation, to be Organized into one Body, under one visible Pastor,
according to our corrupt Dialect and Understanding.

12. Hence lastly it is manifest that however it came to pass that by the
subtle insinuation of the Mystery of Iniquity, several Antichristian Fabrics
have had the Reputation of the Churches of Christ; yet it appearing that they
are nothing so indeed by Christ's constitution; They are justly separated from
by all truly informed in the mind and will of Christ: And that this Separation
is so far from being any thing of Schism, or culpable Separation, that it is a
high and Eminent Duty, that all they that are growing up to the Stature of the
Fullness of Christ, should be ambitious of; and they need not fear the
Unchurching of them, that Christ never made Churches.

CHAP. IX. Of the Bond of Union in the Church.
1. WE have showed that the Church of Christ is of the Nature of a
Body-corporate, whether considered in its mystical ^r visible State; and
therefore must ^ave a Bond of Union, there being ^o body Physical or Politic,
but ^ath some peculiar Bond that u^ites all the parts, whether simu^r or
dissimular, into one Body; ^e Integrum or whole being made ^p of all parts,
brought into mu^al conjunction and communion ^y the said common Nexus, which
(...) the Principle of the Life, Office, Motion, and Action of each part in its
due Respect to the whole.

2. The Church of Christ coming under this twofold consideration of Catholic
and Visible, in particular Congregations and Polities, we must look upon the
Bond or Nexus to be agreeable to each consideration, the Spirit of God having
so adjusted it.

3. Hence the Spirit of Christ is the real true fundamental and indissoluble
Bond of Union, in this Catholic Body, between Christ and his Church, and every
part and member thereof in Heaven and in Earth, in all Ages and Nations of the
World; so that this, whether visible or invisible, is all but one Body: though
as for the visible part, in all Ages attended with various Manifestations,
Dispensations, and Regiments, according a^ Christ in his infinite Wisdom wa^
pleased to carry on, and reveal the Glory of his Gospel-mysteries in the World.

Three States of the Church for its Economy, has appeared.

First, In Families, as it continued from the beginning of the world, till the
increase of Abraham's Family into a Nation; and then arose by some steps to a
National Typical Church, by Christ's own constitution, furnished with a higher
Degree of Glory then the former State, and inferior to what was to follow.

The third and last, was of all most clear, perfect, and glorious; which was
the Gospel Establishment, freed from Vails, Types, Figures, Shadows, both in
respect of the true Doctrine, leading to Life and Salvation, the Sun of
Righteousness shining forth in his full Brightness, no way overshadowed and in
respect of Worship, and Order of his House, wherein he excelled all that Moses,
or any before him, could do, in right Ordinances and Statutes, for the managing
the Form and Regiment thereof

4. This Bond of Union is purely mystical, and no more visible than the Vital
or rather Animal Spirits, that vivifies the whole man in uniting the Soul and
Body together, whereby every part conjoined is quickened and enabled to Act in
its due place and kind; this we say is the Spirit of Christ, as it will appear
from the express words of the Scripture; 1 Cor. 12.3. I give you to understand,
that no man speaking by the Spirit of God, calls Jesus accursed: and that no
man ca^ say Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost.

Verse 4. Now there be diversit^ of Gifts, but the same Spirit.

Verse 5. And there are difference of Administrations under the O^ and New
Testament, but the same Lord, and Head of the Church; therefore the same Church
Essential.

Verse 6. There are Diversities of Operations; [as in distinct Members, which
operate according to their particular Forms and Measures] but it is the same
God that works all in all, i. e. God by the same Spirit. Verse 7. To another
Faith by the same Spirit [to be understood of Faith of Miracles, or more then
ordinary measures of Saving Faith, exerting it self in an eminent manner, as
Abraham's did, in particular trying cases.] To another the gift of healing by
the same Spirit; [he goes on to enumerate not only the extraordinary, but
ordinary gifts and graces of the Spirit; those given forth in the Primitive
Times, and those that are since continued, and says verse. 11. All these
works that one and the self same Spirit, dividing to every man severally as
he will; and then he goes on to tell us that the Spirit does not only diffuse
it self throughout, and influence all the Members, from the Head with every
Gift and Grace, but that it ties all the Members together, to Christ the Head,
and one to another; verse. 12. For as the Body [i. e the Natural Body] is one,
and has many Members, and all the Members of that one Body, being many, are
one Body, [i. e. Mystical] verse. 13. For by one Spirit are we all baptized into
one Body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles [the Jews before Christ's coming were
baptized spiritually into this Mystical Body] whether we be bond or free; and
have been all made to drink into one Spirit [i. e. all partakers of the
operations and influences of one Spirit, in Regeneration and Justification.]
Now having showed that the Spirit unites the many Members into one Body, and is
the common Nexus, he goes on to show from whence the diversity of parts, in
form, shape, use and office does arise, and the harmony and agreement; yea the
necessity of this variety in kinds and degrees for the good of the whole, verse.
14. For the Body is not one Member but many, etc. and verse. 24. God has
tempered the Body together [viz. with this diversity of Gifts, of Parts, of
Knowledg] For what end? To make a Schism? No, but that the deficient parts
should have the more honor, verse 24. and not be trampled upon, abused and
exposed to shame; and verse 25. That there should be no Schism in the Body, but
that the Members should have the same care one of another, yea a sympathy and
fellow-feeling should be established among all Parts, verse 26. much less any
hatred, detestation and enmity betwixt them.

We argue then, That which works all Gifts and Graces, and knits together all
the Members, diversifyes all the Parts, and brings them into an harmonious
office and agreement for the good of the whole Mystical Body of Christ under
the Old and New Testament, is the Bond of Union of that Body; but it appears
the Spirit of Christ does this; Ergo it is the Catholic Bond. I might mention
many other places, I Will only name two or three more.

Ephesians. 4.1. The Apostle exhorts to walk worthy of their vocation, and mentioning
many Christian Graces; he tells them in the exercise of them, they should keep
the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace [(...): this Unity,
notwithstanding all diversities is the groundwork of all Uniformity among
Christians] There is one Body, one Spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of
your calling, etc. and remarkable is Ephesians. 2. from the 13th verse to the end,
where he tells us, that Christ having abolished in his Flesh all enmity
[between God and us, and between Jews and Gentiles] those that were a far off,
are made nigh; he has made in himself [being the common Head] of twain [i. e.
Jew and Gentile] one new man [i. e. Christ Mystical] so making Peace, etc. see
verse 17. and ver. 18. For through him we both [Jews and Gentiles] have access
by one Spirit unto the Father; and then he goes on to tell them, that they are
no more Strangers, etc. but made a Spiritual Building upon the best Foundation,
fitly framed together, growing up into an holy Temple in the Lord, in whom also
ye are builded together [i. e. the whole Catholic Body] for a habitation of
God through the Spirit, which is the great Cement of this Spiritual Building
that unites all the parts together, and every particular part to the Head.

5. The eminent uniting Graces which are wrought by the Spirit, is Faith and
Love; Faith to our Lord Jesus Christ, and Love to one another. Love indeed is
the most extensive Union-Grace, because it reaches the whole Mystical Body,
both the Church Militant and Triumphant; Faith is an Eminent Grace of
unspeakable use to Saints, but it is only for their Militant State, 1 Cor. 13.
But by Love both Saints Militant and Triumphant dwell in God, and God in them;
1 John 4.7, 16. And hereby we know that we dwell in him, and he in us; because
he has given us of his Spirit, verse 13. But whilst we are here, Faith must be
primum movens, as to our Love; we must see him some way or other that we love;
nay, we must be made nigh, reconciled in our minds, and embrace him; and this
closing, yea, first tasting of Christ, is by Faith; hence the Gospel Ministry
and Ministration, Ephesians. 4.12. is for the building up the Body of Christ further
and further, till all that do belong to him do come, verse 13. (...), to the
one-ness of Faith, or full agreement in the Faith of Jesus, to the knowledge of
the Son of God [the Head] to a perfect man, [i. e. to make up the perfection of
the Mystical Manhood of Christ, as Paul speaks elsewhere of filling up in his
Body the Sufferings of Christ that remain; the calling in the Elect, is the
perfecting the Mystical Body of Christ] that henceforth ye be no more Children,
etc. But speaking the Truth in love; [(...), truthing it away in love, or
walking sincerely in love] does grow up toward him, or upon him in all things,
who is the Head even Christ; verse 16. From whom [i. e. from the indwelling of
whose Spirit] the whole Body is fitly articulated, conjoined and compacted
together [so the words signify] by the supply of every Member [receiving of the
distributions of the Spirit for the particular Shape, Use, Dignity and Office
of each part determined] according to the effectual working, (...), according
to the Energy or in-operation ( viz. of the Spirit) in every part. We have also
here (...), and the same word Philip. 1.19. This shall turn to my Salvation,
(...), by the influence or supply of the Spirit, this influential supply is the
cause of that excellency and beauty that appears in every part for the good of
the whole.

6. Having proved the Spirit of Christ to be the common Nexus or Bond of Union
in the Mystical Body, or Catholic Church; it is not hard to evince a bond of
Union also in every particular Church: As the totum contains all the parts, and
the parts make up the whole; So the Catholic Church contains all particular
Churches, and the same Bond that ties the whole together, ties and limits each
part; but as the Catholic Church is yet Mystical, and not Visible; because its
Bond of Union is such; so when ever any part of this Church becomes visible,
there must be a manifestation and discovery as much (as is possible) of this
Bond of the Spirit, working by Faith and Love.

7. For convenience of edification, Christ has instituted several
Congregations or Apartments in his Church, with a power of choosing their own
Officers, and enjoyment of all Ordinances according to Christ's Will and
Appointment.

These particular Congregations must each of them, as they are parts of the
Catholic, have a manifestation of the Bond of the Spirit uniting them to
Christ and to his Body; which manifestation, is the visible form of a
particular Church, and Church Membership.

8. This manifestation, if it proceed so far as to be a Bond of Union in a
particular Spiritual Body Politic; it must be, first, A probable Profession of
this inward Bond of the Spirit working by Faith and Love, that the person or
persons so professing may rationally, according to the Rules of Charity be
esteemed of the number of the Faithful; which Professing Faithful Ones are the
only matter of a Particular Church of Christ; this is doing as Christians, in
the same manner as Paul did as a Minister, 2 Cor. 4.2. Renouncing the hidden
things of darkness, etc. by manifestation of the Truth commending our selves to
every man's Conscience, in the sight of God; but of this before, viz. That the
true matter of a Particular Visible Church, is visible Saints. 2. There must be
something or other to determine a man a Member of this or that Congregation,
more then another; all men that speak of Churches, say so: As some say Baptism,
some say Cohabitation, and that Baptism only unites him to the Catholic
Church, but Cohabitation determines him to this or that particular. But we say
it must be a voluntary and free submission of a man's self to this or that
Society of Christ's Flock, and the Discipline thereof, that can give him, or be
to him the form of Visible Church Membership; it is not ^ational or natural,
that any man should be a Member, or be capable to claim the privileges of any
Society in the world, of what nature soever it be, without his consent. It Is
therefore a free voluntary consent and agreement, which is the true and proper
external form of a particular Church, or Church Membership. Profession is a
visible qualification of the matter, but it is consent and agreement which is
the Copula or Nexus.

For I challenge any man to give me one instance where Christ or his Apostles
ever attempted to force any man to hear the Word, much less to believe it when
they heard it, or to be of this or that Church. Besides, it is a natural freedom
to every man to choose what Government he will put himself under, as to his
temporal Concerns; though when he has done it, he be bound by the Laws
thereof: much more a Christian Liberty in respect of Spiritual Regiment. 3. God
desires nor accepts of any forced Service, but requires the greatest freedom
and voluntary resignation of themselves in this kind. 4. I shall make it
evident, that all the Primitive Churches were so gathered: For the Apostles had
no external force in any place of the Earth; it was not by power or might, i.
e. humane, but by the Spirit of God; which wrought with the Word Preached,
whereby their hearts were brought with freeness to embrace it, and with
boldness to profess and practice it in the midst of all opposition, and
accordingly with the greatest cheerfulness and alacrity to consent to a
subjection to Christ, and all his Precepts and Institutions in his Church. See
in the first most Apostolical Church, the 120 that Christ left together at his
Ascension, Acts 1.14. And all these continued (...) etc. with one consent,
unanimously in Prayer, etc. Chap. 2.41. And as many as received the Word (...)
cheerfully or gladly, yielded and submitted to the Truth Preached and advised
by Peter, these were baptized and added to the Church by the Apostles Doctrine,
and in Fellowship; which they would not have done, if they had not freely and
upon choice and profession embraced it. The first Church of the Gentiles that
was gathered, was at Antioch. See how they came to be a Church, Acts 11.19, 20.
And they that were scattered upon the Persecution that arose about Steven,
Traveled so far as Phenice, etc. verse 20. And some of them were men of Cyprus
and Cyrene, which when they were come to Antioch, spoke unto the Grecians,
Preaching the Lord Jesus, verse 21. And the hand of the Lord was with them;
[The Spirit and Power of Christ] and a great number believed [i. e. freely
embraced the Truth] and turned unto the Lord. Now when Barnabas was sent from
Jerusalem to aid and encourage this great work, verse 23. When he came and had
seen the Grace of God, he was glad, and exhorted them all, that with purpose of
heart they would cleave unto the Lord; that is, that they would freely,
voluntarily and sincerely, without any hypocrisy, submit themselves to Christ
and his Ordinances, with manifestation of the fullest assent, and freest
consent that might be; now you find, verse. 26. that they were immediately a
Church upon this cleaving to the Lord, with whom Paul and Barnabas assembled,
Preaching unto much people that attended their Ministry besides, which were not
yet of that gathered Church. I need not enlarge on this Point any further, the
assertion being not only most agreeable to the best reason, but it being so
clear, that this was the only way of Gathering Churches, used by the Apostles,
and all their Coadjutors in the times of the Primitive Purity: If any has
practiced otherwise since, we are not obliged to be of their minds, or follow
their examples; Corruptions of the Church proceeding from Antichrist, and not
from Christ.

This is the day wherein the Lord is washing away the Filth of the Daughters of
Zion [The Churches of Christ] and is purging away the Blood [The Antichristian
Pollutions of Worship] of Jerusalem, from the midst of her, by the Spirit of
Judgment, and Spirit of burning, Isa. 4.4.

And all the seven women that have laid hold on the Skirt of Christ, and called
themselves by his name, shall appear to be Harlots; yea, as for thee O
Aholibah, thus says the Lord, Thou have walked in the way of thy Sister,
therefore I will give her Cup into thy hand; thou shall drink of thy Sisters
Cup deep and large, thou shall be laughed to scorn, and had in derision, Ezekiel.
23.31, 32. It contains much.

CHAP. X. Of Church Communion.
1. UNion according to its Nature, Physical or Politic, or Ecumenical,
naturally produces a Communion suitable thereto; that which we are about to
speak of, is of a Spiritual, at least of an Ecclesiastical Nature; we have
shown what is the primary Bond of Union in the Church of Christ, that it is the
Spirit of Christ that animates, knits and ties his whole Body together, and
that this is Mystical: But exerting it self in vital motions and operations in
all the Members, it produces a second Bond, proper and necessary to the
establishment of a particular Visible Church, which is a manifestation of this
Spirit in a credible Profession, and free consent to the Regiment and
Ordinances of Christ, with a resignation of our selves thereto; and this
becomes the Bond of Church Fellowship, and the Foundation of an orderly
Communion.

Communion is participation in one common benefit, or its mutual Participation
or Communication of good things by various subjects.

So Spiritual Communion is first a common participation in one general good or
benefit of a Spiritual Nature; and here where all the Members of Christ's Body
partake of the same Head, the same Spirit, as their Unity consists in respect
of connection of Parts, so their Communion consists in it in respect of
Participation; and this is the Communion of the Holy Ghost, 2 Cor. 13.14. Its
fully expressed as a Mystical Communion, 1 John 1. 3. That which we have seen
and heard, declare we unto you, that you may have Fellowship with us; and truly
our Fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ; This
Communion in the Spirit is set forth unto us at large in that forementioned
place, 1 Cor. 12.4, 5, 6, 7, etc. where he shows, that all the Graces, Gifts,
Members, Operations, Offices in the Body, according to their several
diversifications, flow from the same Spirit, all the streams take indifferently
from the same Fountain.

This Communion in the Holy Ghost runs through the whole Catholic Church in
all Ages and Countries; for where the common Bond of Union is, this Communion
must be.

3. To make Communion in the Body complete, there must not only be this
Participation in a common good by all the Members, but a Communication of all
good to each other mutually, as they are capable, and fellow-feeling with each
other in all Sufferings.

The Spirit of Christ thus influencing all the Members, appears and manifests
it self in Graces and Gifts, variously working toward this mutual fellowship
of Parts, both in good and evil of each other, which are called the Operations
of the Spirit; as for Graces, the Principal wherein the Catholic Communion
does consist, are Faith and Love; and by these they Communicate with Christ the
Head, receiving from him, and making return to him, as it were in a
reciprocation, as also a mutual communication to, and with each other; for
Faith is the leading Grace of Communion for our present state, by it we receive
of the fullness of Christ for Justification and Sanctification, John 1. and by
Faith the Saints have communion one with another; for as it is the foundation
of the love of God in the heart, so it is of our love to our Brethren,
believing them to be Justified in Christ Jesus, and Members of his Body: for
Love founded on the Faith of the good estate of another, is properly Charity;
the credibility of another Profession, gives ground of Faith, that he is what
he professes; and this joined with Love, makes Charity; wherefore the Apostle
takes it in this sense, when he says, Philemon 5. Hearing of thy Love and
Faith which thou have toward our Lord Jesus Christ, and all Saints: Moreover by
Faith the Saints visible have a kind of Communion, with those that went before,
and who are to come after; it being the substance of things [or persons in
futurition] hoped for, and the evidence [or demonstration of the Truth] of
things not seen, [ i. e. removed from sense, by timen parterition, or place in
absence;] so thereby we see the Saints and those Truths attested by them in
Ages past.

4. As for Love, it is not only the most eminent Grace of actual communion
between Christ and his Members, and of them with each other in the state that
we are in here; but it is almost the only remaining when we go hence, 1 Cor.
13.13. John treats much of the transcendent excellency of this Grace throughout
his Epistle, etc. 1 John 4.11. If God so loved us, we ought to love one
another, 12. If we love one another, God dwells in us, and his love is made
perfect in us: by this Grace we have communion with all Saints Militant and
Triumphant, 1 John 5.1. Every one that loves him that is begot, loves him
that is begotten of him.

5. Now by Communion in these two Graces, the Church grows up to its full
perfection; the Apostle saying, Ephesians. 4.12. That the Ministry and Ministration
is for the Building up of the Body of Christ, (...) [agreement in all points of
Faith, and Profession of it] and to the knowledge of the Son of God, [the Head]
to the perfect man, to the measure of the Stature of the fullness of Christ
[Mystical] filling up his Body, and receiving influentially of his Fullness by
Faith, and v. 15. (...), do grow more and more sincere in Love; this Love shows
it self in its fellow-feeling, also that it works in us, whereby we communicate
in each others Sufferings, and supply each others wants, for the good of the
whole; this part of Communion is fully discoursed by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12.13,
14, etc. yea in the most part of the Chapter.

6. Thus far Communion belongs to the Church under its Catholic consideration
in its Mystical State; there must be some external actions and things that are
visible, whereby the Communion of these Graces must be manifest, in Ministry,
Offices, Gifts, Ordinances, but all for and from the Spirit, and these eminent
Graces of Faith and Love.

7. Communion then of particular Congregations must be by Christ's Ordination
visible in those sacred Means and Ordinances appointed by Christ for its
growth, confirmation, and building up in Grace and Truth. God having made his
Church in its visible state, the Nursery of Grace, and the Knowledge of the
Truth, Ephesians. 4.12. For the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the
Ministry, for the edifying the Body of Christ, [i. e. in the militanting
visible part] 13. till we all come in the Unity of the Faith, and the Knowledge
of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ. Verse 14. That we should be henceforth no more Children.

8. The Edification of the Church being appointed by Christ in a way of
Communion; we are to consider, 1. wherein this visible communion does consist;
2. what is the ground and end of it: 3. where, and between whom it is. 1.
Wherein does it consist? It does consist, first in participation of some common
benefit and advantages, which a particular Congregation are capable of, and
have frequent fellowship together in, and these are Church-Gifts and
Church-Ordinances, Acts 2.42. They continued steadfast in the Apostles Doctrine
and Fellowship, in Breaking Bread and in Prayers; and for this end has Christ
furnished his Church with Ministry and Ordinances, Ephesians. 4. Ministry by
erecting extraordinary and ordinary for the planting of his Church; our Savior
thought meet to send them with extraordinary Commission and qualifications
those that were such, were especially Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists, 1
Cor. 12.28. First Apostles, secondarily Prophets, Ephesians. 4.11. These were all to
be Witnesses of the Resurrection and Ascension of our Lord Jesus, and confirm
their Doctrine by Miracles, had their inspiration of the Holy Ghost, special
Presence of God, and power in the Churches wherever they came, especially the
Apostles.

9. The Apostles were XII, which waited upon our Lord during his Ministry on
earth, before his Sufferings; Judas then falling from his Ministry, when our
Lord Ascended he left eleven, to which Matthias was added by Lot, and Election
of the Church, Act. 1. to these two more were added afterward, by special
command of the Holy Ghost to the Prophets in the Church at Antioch, Act. 13.1,
2, 3. compared with chap. 14.14. Which when the Apostles Barnabas and Paul
heard of; and before that Ordination, Barnabas was but a Prophet, sent from the
Church at Jerusalem to assist them that were there before; as appears chap.
11.22, 23. and chap. 13.1.

10. The Prophets, I apprehend to be such, who were furnished with Gifts and
Graces, and extraordinary inspiration; their Call and Commission being such,
for the calling of the Gentiles, and gathering the Churches: And I suppose them
to be those Brethren of the 120 that waited together at Jerusalem, till they
were baptized with the Holy Ghost and fire, being all equally with the Apostles
furnished with the gift of Tongues (though secondary to them in their power)
for the dispensing the Gospel to all Nations, and therefore upon the scattering
the Church of Jerusalem after Stephens Persecution; these Prophets mostly began
the Churches of the Gentiles by their Ministry at first: My Reasons for it are,
1. That its evident all the Brethren as well as the Apostles were
extraordinarily furnished for the Ministry, Act. 2.4. They were all filled with
the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues, etc. Now this was for
special ends, that they were capacitated to speak to all Nations in their own
Languages.

2. We find upon Stevens Persecution, Act. 8.1. that they were all scattered,
except the Apostles; not the whole Church, for we read often of that Church
still, but all the Brethren of the 120 were scattered throughout the Regions of
Judea and Samaria, by whole means Churches of the Jews were gathered, as it
appears, verse 14. and Acts 9.31. After God had taken off that great Informer
Saul, then had all the Churches rest throughout all Judea, Galilee and Samaria.
Likewise we find that the Church of Antioch, the first among the Gentiles that
we read of, was Planted by their Ministry; see Acts 11.19, 20, 22. compare with
chapter 13. 1. More might be said on this point but I must keep to the present
design, only naming the several Offices.

11 The third kind of extraordidary Officers, were Evangelists, such as Steven,
Phillip, Luke, Mark, Timothy, etc. they were men no doubt extraordinarily
qualified, and were called Evangelists, as being Assistants to the Apostles,
and traveled with them, and sometimes alone, as Philip: It may be doubted
whether the seven Deacons were of that 120 Brethren, for they were men full of
the Holy Ghost, chapter 6. 3. and afterward being pitched upon for eminent Service
to the Church, were called now Evangelists; but being not of the number that
were together at our Saviors Ascension and Pentecost, and though their work
might be the same with the Prophets, yet their dignity was inferior to the
Apostles and Prophets, as Ephesians. 4. Some Apostles, some Prophets, some
Evangelists; but we need not lay much stress now upon the differences of those
Offices ceased; those Officers, especially Apostles and Prophets, are
irrecoverably ceased from the very nature of them; for an Apostle, it were
requisite to be one who had seen the Lord, and a Prophet (according to what we
endeavor to prove) one of those that were baptized with the Ghost and Fire at
Pentecost. As for an Evangelist, it is most probable to remain, if any, because
the work still remains necessary to the increase of the Church, viz. Preaching
to Unconverted people, and gathering of Churches; though none can be expected
since the Primitive Times with any more then ordinary qualifications which any
stated Church Officer has, such Evangelists and such Deacons cannot be had:
But to supply those Offices necessary now in the Church, those that are to be
mentioned are sufficient.

12. The Ordinary Officers remaining in the Church now, may be reduced to these
two heads, Elders and Deacons; Elders, for Ministry and Government; Deacons, to
serve Tables, to look after the necessary charges for the Ministry, Ordinances,
Assemblies, Poor, etc. I shall not enlarge here, it being evident to every one
acquainted with Scripture.

13. The Ordinances of Ordinary Communion, are Prayer, Preaching the Word,
Sacraments, Acts 2. Collections. The Lords Supper is still spoken of as the
most eminent Ordinance of Communion, 1 Cor. 10.16.

14. If we enquire for the ground and end of Communion in these Ordinances, it
is, That this is the way appointed by Christ for the edifying his Body, for the
increase of Faith and Love in the Members of Christ; those Ordinances being
designed indeed, as to the Church, for edification; for its not to be supposed
that a Churchmember should be an unconverted person; if a hypocrite creep in,
he has nothing of true end and design of Communion. So that by Communion the
Body of Christ is nourished, strengthened and perfected, toward its fullness
of stature in Christ.

15. If it be enquired where Church Communion is, and between what kind of
persons? I answer, Church Communion in Ornances, can be but in one particular
Congregation, at the same time, where all may meet for edification in one
place, and we read of no other in the Primitive Church; tho some would have
that of Jerusalem to be greater then so, after the addition of 3000; but its
expressly said, that they were all together in Fellowship, and met together
still before the dispersion, Acts 2.42.44. also chap. 5.12. and other places;
but this great Church was scattered afterward by Gods Providence, ordering it
for the great advantage of the Gospel, and propagation of Churches.

16. If it be inquired between whom Church Communion is exercised? The answer
is easy, It Is between particular Members, that ordinarily have fellowship in
the same particular Congregations; as likewise between one particular Church
and another, all Churches comunicating in this, that they are of the same
universal Body, have the same Head, Bond of Union, Graces, Ordinances,
Privileges, as in the one entire Catholic Body; as every individual person in
fellowship is a Member in particular, so every individual Church is a part of
that Integrum compacted by that which every joint supplyeth, Ephesians. 4.16.
according to the effectual working in the measure of every part, etc.

17. Communion we have said, as it stands in copartnership in some common good,
so in communication between Member and Member; what of peculiar good is in any
part, is communicable to the rest, or fellow-feeling of the Sufferings of each
other. As there is a common design carried on by every part for the good of the
whole, so by all parts for each other: The Apostle tells us this at large, 1
Cor. 12. Ephesians. 4.

18. The mutual communication that is visible in order to spiritual advantage,
stands in giving and receiving by the exercise of spiritual gifts and graces in
the Word and Prayer, by mutual advice and counsel, by admonition and
Church Censures, where required; by contributions to the wants and necessities
of each other any way arising, Spiritual or Temporal. This Communion is
practicable between Church and Church also, not only by occasional
participation in the Word and Ordinances with each other, but in the matters
before mentioned of advice and supply of each others wants: In the former case,
we have the example of the Church of Antioch, advising with the Church of
Jerusalem; in the latter, that 1 Cor. 16.5. 2 Cor. 9.3, 4. Gal. 6.6. etc.

CHAP. XI. The Conclusion.
BEing not minded to enlarge this discourse any further at this time, I shall
only lay down a few Corolary Assertions briefly to obviate some objections that
may rise in some men's minds against what has been spoken, which we shall be
ready to defend, if occasion requires.

1. That that only is a true constituted Church of Christ, which is a house of
Gods Building; it is not man's fancy or pretentions, that renders any thing so.

2. That a Christians actual Communion with any one true Visible Church of
Christ, makes him a Member in Communion with all the Churches of Christ; though
he does not at present, nor has occasion to communicate with any Congregated
Body, besides what he is actually and immediately in Communion with.

3. Hence barely Non-Communion as to immediate Participation in Ordinances with
this or that Church, does not Unchurch them, (as some men phrase it) i. e.
condemn their standing, neither is it any part of Schism or culpable Separation.

4. There is a Separation that is absolutely necessary to every True Visible
Church of Christ, there can be none without it, and it is the duty of True
Churches and Members to practice it.

5. This Separation is from the World, Flesh and Devil, and therefore from all
the children of these, and from all false Churches whatsoever.

6. That all Antichristian Churches, as well as absolutely Heathen, are
Idol-temples, and therefore Communion with them is fellowship with Belial and
his Idols, 1 Cor. 6.

7. That Christ has had his true Worshippers and Churches during the whole
time of the Antichristian Reign and Rage, but in a Wilderness, especially as to
Visible Form and Constitution; yea trodden down by the Gentiles for the most
part; preserved notwithstanding by Christ in some times and places in its
essential mystical state, at least without any visible luster in Externals, as
the Church of Old in Egypt and Babylon; in other times and places he has
secured them in some retirements, so far as to have opportunity to erect
Tabernacles of true Gospel constitutions in form and fashion as he primitively
appointed.

8. And thus the true Churches of Christ has stood during the time of the
Woman's militating in the Wilderness, under its several Scatterings,
Deformations and Reformations, under which God has owned them all the days of
their wanderings in the Wilderness.

9. God has had his degrees of Reformation and Purity of his Church,
especially during the last part of the Beasts Reign, and that all such degrees
have been progresses in Separation, as to Purity of Ordinances and Worship,
till at last there shall be a perfect full and clear Redemption of Zion from
all her Captivity in this Spiritual Egypt and Babylon.

10. Schism is a thing talked more of then understood; we only affirm this
concerning it, 1. That Separation from a manifestly false Church is no Schism.
2. Non-communion with a suspected Church, is no Schism, but a duty. 3. That all
Schism spoken of in Scripture, is actually and immediately in some particular
Congregation, being a Visible Politic Body; and those there mentioned are not
all amputations, or rentings asunder; most of them are but divisions in some
matters of judgment and affection, without a destruction of the whole as in the
Church of Corinth, though there may be some tendency thereunto.

11. Manifest Corruptions in Worship persisted in, especially if such as are
taken up again, after they have been abundantly witnessed against, and purged
out by former degrees of Reformation, are to be separated from, and witnessed
against, and such Churches as maintain them: Yea, such Separation is so far
from a just charge of Schism, that it is a necessary Duty of all those whose
Minds and Consciences are informed in the truth of the Gospel.

FINIS.

