March 28. 1683.
ORdered, that the Three Anatomic Lectures read on the 19, 20, and 21 days of
this present Month, in the Theater of His Majesty's Royal College of Physicians
in London, by Dr. Walter Charleton, Fellow of the same College, be forthwith
Printed, and Published.

Tho. Coxe, President.

THREE Anatomic Lectures, CONCERNING 1. The Motion of the Blood through the
Veins and Arteries; 2. The Organic Structure of the Heart; 3. The Efficient
Causes of the Hearts Pulsation:


READ On the 19, 20, and 21 days of March 1682/3

IN THE Anatomic Theater of His Majesty's Royal College of Physicians in London.

BY WALTER CHARLETON, M. D. And Fellow of the same College.

Published by Command of the most Learned President.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Sign of the Bishops-head in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1683.

PRAELOQUIUM.
CVM non ita pridem, Clarissime, Ornatissimeque PRAESES, mandatum tuum, ut ad
Saxum hoc anatomicum hic denuo volvendum me accingerem, ad obsequium paratus
accepissem; mox apud me ultro citroque agitare coepi, quodnam argumenti genus
prae caeteris mihi seligerem, quo and Excellentiae tuae expectationi
aliquatenus satisfacere possem, simul and caeterorum e Doctissimis meis
Collegis (quorum hic florem video tota urbe delibatum) auscultationi prolixius
gratificari. Plurima quidem tunc temporis anxiae ac in diversa distractae sese
offerebant menti, nec ad gratiam vulgi conciliandam fortassis incommoda: Sed
Principum virorum, quos in celeberrimo hocce Theatro placide considentes
venerabundus aspicio, erudita curiositate prorsus indigna judicabam omnia.
Tandem vero animo se meo ingessit summum illud, necdum etiam Medicorum vulgo
satis intellectum Naturae mysterium, Sanguinis, nempe, motus Circularis: quo de
quidem plerique omnes passim gestiunt garrire; paucos tamen reperias, qui de
causis ejusdem, de conditionibus atque circumstantiis, and (quod caput est rei)
de ratione Mechanica cogitarunt unquam; and (quod serio dolendum) adhuc
pauciores existunt, qui male se habentibus consilium daturi, respicere soliti
sint ad fidissimam illam morbis sive acutis, sive chronicis medentium
Cynosuram. His ego igitur adeo pudendam, adeo etiam valetudine adversa
languentibus periculosam nunc demum ut excutiam incuriam; utque aliquod
remedium illorum inscitiae adhibeam: mecum statui, arrepta hac nuper demandatae
mihi provinciae occasion, de veris, hoc est, Mechanicis causis, quibus in
orbem perpetuo sanguis movetur, pro ingenioli mei tenuitate, inquirere.
Affulsit quippe animo spei scintillula quaedam, ex iis, quae is it a de
quaestione apud vos dicenda habeo, lucis nonnihil afferri posse ad eam penitus
explicandam. Quamobrem, ne spem alnisse videar inanem, permissu vestro primum
agam de Sanguinis per venas ad Cor recurrentis motu rapidissimo, itemque de
causis istius tantae velocitatis: deinde Cordis ipsius conformationem Organicam
perscrutabor: and postremo conabor causas cordis Pulsationem efficientes, quae
hactenus omnium elusisse videntur Anatomicorum solertiam, explorare. Haec autem
dum viritim enucleare molior, clarioris doctrinae gratia, demonstrationes
aliquot Mechanicas, ad institutum meum apprime facientes, ex Alphonsi Borelli,
omnium quotquot hoc saeculo nostro floruere, Mathematicorum facile
solertissimi, scriptis mutuabor: omittendo interea caeterorum fere omnium, qui
post Harveum nostrum de Circuitione Sanguinis conscripserunt, opiniones; idque
ne aut tempus frustra conterere, aut memoriae vestrae fidelitati diffidere
censear. Habetis itaque, Auditores Aequissimi, praesentis mei summam consilii,
eorumque quae dicere aggredior, seriem. Quam dum ingenii toto impetu persequi
contendam, nolo existimetis, me mihi veritatis arbitrium arrogare. Semper
equidem verum quaero; quinetiam, Senecae illustri exemplo animatus, quaero sine
inveniendi spe: tantum abest ut credam, esse me aliis docendis parem. Neque
etiam adeo sum mihi Suffenus, ut cujusquam expectem conatibus meis applausum.
Novi enim, quam difficile sit, and diligentiae laudem, simul and gratiam
celeritatis mereri. Caeterum unum illud me solatur, quod ferme rebus sua natura
difficillimis venia sit prolixior apud prudentes viros, quibus non ignotum,
quam sit arduum, novis autoritatem, obscuris lucem, dubiis fidem afferre.

PRAELECTIO I. Of the Circular Motion of the Blood, and the admirable Effects
thereof.
SO plausible and favorable has the Hypothesis of various Ferments, congenial
to and perpetually resident in the various parts, principally in the Viscera of
Sanguineous and more perfect Animals, seemed to many of the Virtuosi of this
our inquisitive age; that they have not doubted to ascribe to them a powerful
energy and necessary influence in all the diverse Motions, all the Mutations,
all the Concoctions, all the Secretions, and other operations instituted by
Nature in such Animals, either for the conservation of them in their single
beings, or for the propagation of their respective Species. Nor is it easy for
us to name any particular function, any action, though really and manifestly
Organical, which the Sectators of this Hypothesis will not presently attribute
to some peculiar Ferment lurking and operating in the part, by which that
action is done, and conferring (forsooth) somewhat of efficacy toward the doing
of it: as if the organical constitution of that part were insufficient to the
function and uses for which it was designed, without the help and cooperation
of a Specific Ferment; or as if the whole Animal Economy depended upon no
other Harmony but that of numerose Fermentations. In a word, they make them
only not Omnipotent. As Heraclitus the Ephesian dreamed [(...)] that all places
are full of Spirits and Demons, Diogen. Laert. in vita Heracliti.
that presided over human actions: So these Gentlemen imagine all the parts of
Animals to be full of I know not what Spiritual Ferments, that by occult
influence regulate and diversifie their functions. And this Comment many have
endeavored to assert by their Writings, with as much confidence, as if the
verity of it were evident, either from cogent reasons, or by Autopsy: when in
truth they are no more able to prove by solid Arguments, or by sensible
demonstration, the existence of many of their imaginary Fermentative liquors or
Spirits in the dissected parts, to which they are pleased to consign them; than
Heraclitus was able to exhibit to men's sight any one of his Demons. I say,
many of their imaginary Ferments; I do not say, any. Because the Acid Phlegm
found in the Stomachs of various Animals, may perhaps so far emulate the nature
of a Ferment, as to deserve the same name. For being endowed with an incisive,
penetrating, and dissolving faculty; it is not improbable but it may conduce to
the dissolution and liquation of solid meats, and together with the drink,
serve, as a fit Menstruum, to extract the laudable and alimentary parts of
them, ad modum tincturae. But this liquation of solid meats in the Stomach,
seems to be effected by motions placid, gentle, and imperceptible in the state
of health; not by those violent commotions and irrequiet agitations that always
proceed from, and accompany Ferments properly so called, during their working
as all men that enjoy good health, feed soberly, and keep a regular course of
diet, may easily observe in themselves. And therefore this Acid Phlegm cannot
properly, and in Philosophical strictness, be referred to the family of
Ferments. The same may with equal reason be said also of the Bile and
Pancreatic juice commixt in the Duodenum. They may perhaps conduce somewhat to
the farther attenuation and exaltation of the Chyle; they may also promote both
the separation of the Nutritive from the Excrementitious parts of the same
Chyle, and the insinuation and permeation of the former through the coats or
membranes of the Guts into the milky veins: all this they may do, and yet not
by way of Fermentation, whereof there is neither necessity, nor sense in statu
sanitatis; and to argue from a preternatural state to a natural, is a
Paralogism. Now if neither of these two so much celebrated Ferments, has any
more right to that denomination, than what is precariously derived from some
remote and slender analogy or semblance imagined to be betwixt their nature,
qualities, and effects, and those observed in genuine and true Ferments; as
certainly neither of them yet appears to have: What ought we to think of all
the rest of invisible Ferments supposed to reside in places, where hitherto
they have never been found? Why may we not, till they shall be by Anatomical
and other convincing experiments shown to us, believe that they have existence
no where, but in the brains of fancyful men? For my part, I blush not, even in
this venerable Assembly of most Learned men, where I have as many Judges as
Auditors, openly to profess my self to be of this belief: because de non
apparentibus, and de non existentibus eadem ratio est; and because I have heard
an eminent Member of this first and more ancient Royal Society, a man renowned
over all Europe for his Philosophical and Anatomical Writings, deliver this
judgment of the multiplicity of Natural Ferments fancyed to be in the body of
an Animal, that they were a newfound asylum ignorantiae. I say, of Natural
Ferments; lest what I have said should be detorted to the exclusion of
Praeternatural Fermentations, which I do not deny to be incident sometimes to
the blood and other humors of the body, more signally in Fevers, and some
other acute diseases: though perhaps not so often as vulgar Physicians imagine.

What I have hitherto said, may perchance seem to some of my Auditors to be a
digression; and they may be apt to think, that I have made my first step in a
wrong path. I am therefore obliged, in my own defense, to advertise them, that
having proposed to my self to enquire strictly into the natural necessity or
Mechanical reasons of the Motions of the Blood; and finding the aforesaid
Comment of Ferments lying, like a block, in my way: I thought it concerned me
rather to remove than to leap over it, and leave it for others to stumble at.
For, some there are, and those too, men whose names are deservedly celebrated
for their profound knowledge both in Anatomy and the Mathematics, Joan.
Alphons* Borellus de Motu Animal. part. 2. page 76. Willisius, de Ferme^t.
who in their books have professedly taught, that even the blood it self, the
seat of life, also undergoes a certain natural Fermentation in the heart,
lungs, and greater arteries, as necessary to its perfection and vitality. A
doctrine, which to me (I profess) seems very improbable, and inconsistent with
the wisdom of Nature.

Improbable; First, Because of all the various liquors found in the body of an
Animal, in statu Naturae, the blood seems of it self least prone to
Fermentation; which is incident chiefly, if not solely, to new and musty
liquors: whereas the greatest part by much of the blood is old, and by repeated
Circulations well defaecated in its proper Emunctories, and by insensible
transpiration; and by consequence needs no Fermentation. True it is indeed,
that new Chyle is ever now and then brought into the rivulet of the blood, out
of the common cistern thereof, by the ductus thoracicus and the Subclavian
vein, for a recruit: but in a quantity so small (a few drops perhaps at once;
for more will not be found to bear a just proportion, either to the capacity of
the common Receptacle of the Chyle, which is but little, or to the narrowness
of the Pipe leading from thence to the Subclavian vein) as cannot in reason be
thought sufficient to perturb and excite a fermentation in the blood, with
which it is mixed. If a greater quantity of Chyle were mixed with the blood at
one time; certainly the blood would soon lose its native purple, and put on the
white livery of the Chyle, especially in the descending part of the Vena cava,
where the commixture is first made: which yet no Anatomist (for ought I know)
has ever observed. Secondly, When Ferments are commixt with liquors consisting
of heterogeneous particles, they are generally slow in exerting their power,
and by degrees insinuate and diffuse their active particles through the whole
mass, before they can so far prevail, as to raise an universal commotion and
tumult in them; as common experience testifies: but the newly commixt Chyle and
blood are in a moment, at most in the space of a few pulses of the heart, rapt
out of the Vena cava, first into the right Ear, and then into the right
Ventricle of the heart; so that here is no morula, no competent space of time
given, to excite an actual fermentation. Thirdly, Here is wanting also
convenient place. To all Fermentations is required fit room, wherein the
liquors may have liberty to undergo an impetuose commotion and agitation of all
their dissimilar and contrasting particles; nor will the Must of Wine it self
ever ferment, if it be kept in close and strong casks, as appears from the
making of Stum: but the Vena cava, the Heart, and Arteries are filled with
blood even to distention, till by their Systole they squirt it forth, and then
in the next moment they are replenished. What room then is left for the blood
to ferment in? Seeing therefore that the blood is by its own constitution unapt
to ferment, as bearing a greater analogy to the nature of Milk, than to that of
Wine, whatever the Willisians have said to the contrary; and seeing that
neither the small supplies of Chyle which it daily receives, are sufficient to
induce, nor the shortness of the time in which it passes through the
praecordia, nor the want of convenient room, permit a fermentation: what reason
have we to assent to their opinion, who teach, that a fermentation of the blood
is necessary to its perfection and vitality? especially if we farther consider,
that the same opinion is also

Inconsistent with the Wisdom of Nature. Whose custom always is, to institute
the most direct and compendious methods, for the attainment of her ends; nor
ever to use many instruments, where one may suffice, to effect what she has
designed: abhorring to multiply things, without inevitable necessity. To this
her admirable Wisdom then it is injurious, to imagine, that when she had
ordained in the blood a certain placid, regular, and benign motion, by which
all the heterogeneous ingredients or constituent parts of it, should be so
agitated among themselves, as by their mutual conflict to produce an alternate
expansion and contraction, from whence a vital heat results, and upon which
original life continually depends: she should notwithstanding institute a
second intestine motion, to be at the same time, in the same subject performed,
viz. a Fermentation; which seems unnecessary at best, and which probably might
not only hinder, and impugn, but also destroy the former. A Fermentation would
indeed raise a tumultuous agitation of the same dissimilar elements of the
blood: but such as would be violent, irregular, and of a far different manner
from the Vital Mication. But not to insist now upon the manifest disparity of
these Two Motions, which may more opportunely be collected from what I shall
soon say of the genuine and true one; let it be supposed at present, that both
may operate in the same manner, and produce the same effects in the blood, as
to the attenuation and comminution of the grosser, viscid, and unagile parts;
and the facilitation of the expansive efforts of the Spiritual, volatile or
elastic: yet still it will remain to be inquired, why Nature should institute
Two Motions, where either of the two might singly do her work as well, if not
better. If therefore any defendent of this opinion, which I have here, en
passant, impugned, shall vouchsafe so far to illuminate my gloomy
understanding, as to solve this Problem: I shall acknowledge the favor, and
recant my opposition of it. Mean while, I will suspend the farther
consideration thereof, and now address my self to the more important part of my
present province, the true and undoubted Motions of the Blood, viz. the
Mication, and the Circulation: by both which, though diverse in their origines
and kinds, yet mutually helping each other, and conducing the one to the
accension as it were of original life, the other to the distribution of
influent life, the blood is perpetually moved in the vessels that contain it.

By the FORMER of these, the vital spirits, or if you please the elastick
particles of the blood, now passing through the Ventricles of the heart, from
their own natural force or expansive energy, endeavor to expand or unbend
themselves; while the grosser and viscid parts resist that endeavor to
expansion* by compressing them. Hence instantly, and by natural necessity,
arises a certain Colluctation or mutual striving betwixt the expansive motion
or endeavor of the Vital Spirits, on one part, and the renitency of the
grosser parts of the blood, on the other. And from this Colluctation, an actual
heat is quickly excited or kindled in the blood: actual heat being nothing else
but an expansive luctation of the particles of the body or subject in which it
is, as I professedly labored to evince from various instances, and a strong
chain of propositions, when I first had the honor to sit in this Chair.
Moreover, because this expansive luctation is not violent, nor unequal, nor
irregular, nor consequently noxious or hostile to the nature of the blood; but
on the contrary always ( in statu Naturae) moderate, equal, regular, amicable,
and tending not only to the conservation of the blood, but also to the
exaltation of all its faculties and operations: and because it proceeds from an
internal principle, from the energy of the vital spirit contained in and ruling
the blood, or (if this be more intelligible) from the Elasticity of the aereal
particles commixt with the blood: therefore the brisk motion or heat thence
resulting, is also vital. For in that very expansive motion of the blood, does
the formal reason of life originally consist: which Theorem also I have
formerly, in this place, endeavored to explicate and establish. This admirable
motion, from the various notions or conceptions which Learned men have formed
of it in their minds, has acquired various names. By some it is called motus
sanguinis intestinus sive spontaneus, because it arises from an internal
principle, the expansive endeavor of the spirituose, or elastic parts of the
blood, and to ^^^tinguish it from the circular motion, which is impressed by an
external Movent, viz. the Heart. By others, Motus fermentationis vitalis, from
the similitude they fancyed between it and common fermentations: but
improperly, for the reasons by me just now alleged. By others again Alphons.
Berellus de mot. animal.
, motus oscillatorius, from the resemblance it has of the Oscillation or
swinging of a Pendulum, whose motion describes a Cycloid Christianus Hugenius,
de Motu horologii oscillatorii, part. 1.
, and by others Glisson. lib. de ventriculo and intestin. and Charleton,
Oeconomiae Animalis exercitat. 6.
, Micatio sanguinis, the panting, or reciprocal expansion and compression of
the parts of the blood. Of these denominations, the two last seem to me more
fully and emphatically than the rest to signify the nature and manner of the
thing denominated; as equally comprehending the double motion in a single
appellation. Wherefore I intend hereafter to use these promiscuously, when
there shall occur to me any occasion of mentioning the same motion. Mean while,
I proceed to

The LATER motion, the CIRCULATION of the Blood; the most noble and most useful
of all modern inventions, first obscurely hinted (as some think) by Cesalpinus,
but afterward with prodigious sagacity, In Exercitat. Peripatet.
most exact judgment, and happy diligence investigated, and with such
convincing evidence demonstrated by our immortal Dr. Harvey, that now the
verity thereof is no longer doubted of in the world. I wish the same were as
well understood, as it is generally acknowledged: and lest I be thought only to
wish this excellent knowledge, and of so great importance to Physicians, I will
now again do my best devoir to explain so much of the mystery, as I my self
have formerly left not sufficiently explicated: omitting to reoire what is
vulgarly taught in the Schools and Books of Anatomists, and touching only those
things, which have been either pretermitted, or not rightly explicated by
others, concerning the Causes, Mechanical modes, and circumstances of this
life-conserving motion.

There intervenes (ye know) a double pause or respite, which by Anatomists is
called perisystole cordis, between the two contrary motions of the heart; one
betwixt the diastole and the systole, another betwixt the systole and the
diastole: and this of absolute necessity, because it is impossible, that the
same body should perform two contrary motions, without a morula or space of
time, how short soever, be interposed betwixt them. Ye know also, that the
force impelling the blood, which is the Compression of the heart, does not act
continually, but interruptedly or per vices, short and almost isochronic or
equal quiets interposed: So that the blood expressed by the heart, does not
flow thence in a continued course, as rivers and fountains do, that are without
intermission carried on by the weight of their waters; but gush forth and stop
alternately, though this vicissitude be exactly regular, and proceeds in a
constant order. Now these things considered, it may seem consentaneous to
conclude, that the motion of the blood cannot be continuus, since two pauses or
quiets are interposed betwixt every two pulsations or Systoles of the heart,
during each of which the motion ceases: but on the contrary ought to be
esteemed and called an interrupted and mixed motion. And yet notwithstanding the
verisimilitude of this conclusion, I doubt not to lay down and expose to your
examination this

First PROPOSITION, That the blood is carried in a round through the body of an
Animal, in a truly continued, and never interrupted motion*
This perhaps may sound like a Paradox: but that shall not a-whit discourage me
from asserting it, while I remember that remarkable sentence of Minutius Felix
(in Octavio) Inest and in incredibili verum, and in verisimili mendacium.

Though it be true and evident, that the heart does not, in the time of its
pauses, express any Blood into the Arteries, yet it is not true, that the blood
contained in the Arteries, in the Viscera, in the habit of the body, and in the
Veins, does at the same time stagnate, and stop its course; but on the contrary
is always carried on in its journey, though with unequal velocity. First, the
Verity of this appears in the Arteries. For the afflux of blood from the heart
being wholly intercepted, either by a Ligature applied to the aorta at its
original, or by cutting out the heart it self, as is commonly done in Frogs and
Vipers; we see, that nevertheless the blood wherewith the Arteries were filled,
is by degrees squeezed out, so that they are soon after left altogether empty.
And doubtless this exinanition of the Arteries happens, because they by their
own spontaneous motion constringe themselves, and contracting their Circular
Fibers, express the blood into the habit of the parts: and are at the same time
compressed also by the contraction and tension, or the peristaltick motion of
all the Muscles of the Body. From the observation of this vulgar Phenomenon,
viz. the emptiness of the Arteries in dead bodies; the Ancients perhaps took
occasion to believe and teach, that not blood, but only Vital Spirits are
contained in the Arteries. Secondly, this appears also in the Veins. For, that
the blood does continually flow on in them likewise, not only when it is urged
forward by the Arterial Blood pursuing it, but even in the time of the hearts
pauses; is evinced from this, that then the blood runs on through the trunk of
the Vena cava to replenish the right Ventricle of the heart. But why do I
mis-spend time in alleging reasons to prove a truth that is manifest to sense
in Phlebotomy? no sooner is a Vein opened, than the Blood flows forth with a
swift stream, and while the wound is open, continues to flow without pauses or
interruption, which is a demonstration of the thing proposed, viz. of the
continual motion of the Blood in the Veins.

Being thus assured of the effect, let us proceed to investigate the Causes;
which are not equally evident, nor can we hope certainly to solve this Problem,
without enquiring the Mechanical reason of the continual motion of the Blood
through the Veins. This therefore I will now attempt to do. That Nature has
instituted no immediate Communication betwixt the Capillary Arteries and the
Capillary Veins, per anastomosin, is manifest to sense, and now acknowledged by
all Learned Anatomists: and therefore it cannot stand with reason to imagine
that the Blood in its Circular course is emitted immediately out of the
Arteries into the Veins, these vessels being separate. And though we opine,
that there is some secret communication betwixt the extreme Orifices of the
Arteries and those of the Capillary veins, by the intermediate Spongy substance
of the flesh, Viscera, and glandules, or by the Cribrose substance of the
Bones, as by the Pores of a Pumice stone: yet we are still to seek, by what
motive force the blood may be carried on from those intermediate Porosities,
and insinuated into the veins. First, because it is consentaneous, that the
impulsive force, whereby the Systole of the heart squirts the Blood into the
Arteries, is by degrees weakened, and at length languid in those streights of
the extreme vessels, and of the intermediate Porosities. Secondly, Because the
Orifices of the Capillary veins cannot continue always open and dilated; their
consistence being not hard and bony, but membranose, soft and slippery; so that
they are apt to be closed by conniving, and consequently to hinder the ingress
of the blood newly arrived. Thirdly, Because here we can have no recourse to
the compression of the Viscera, and the Muscles, whereby the blood should be
squeezed into the Orifices of the Capillary veins; for we see, that the blood
is sucked up by the Capillary veins, not only when the Muscles are invigorated
and upon the stretch, but also when they are quiet and relaxed, and do not
exercise their compressive power; as is most evident in sleep, when the
Circulation proceeds without intermission. This is confirmed from hence, that
in the Brain, in the Medullary substance of the bones, where no compression can
be admitted, the Capillary veins receive the blood as freely as in the softer
flesh it self. Seeing then that the effect cannot be denied, viz. that all the
blood effused out of the Arteries is after absorpt and carried off by the
Veins, to be brought back again into the heart; and seeing also that this is
not effected by way of Attraction, there being no such thing as attraction in
Nature, as I have more than once elsewhere proved: we are compelled to assert,
that the Blood is imbibed by the Capillary Veins for the same reason, and by
the same Mechanic action, by which Siphons, Sponges, Filtres, Chords, and all
Porose bodies are penetrated by water with which they are moistened: which power
is no other than the gravity of the fluid it self, which is augmented by the
impetus of its proper motion, and by the impulse communicated to it from
external force. So the motive force of Gravity, which the blood can want no
more than water can, when it finds the small channels of the Capillary veins
open (for they can never be so closely constringed by the flagging and
connivency of their thin membranes, as to leave no entrance for a fluid; as
appears in the Pores of Ropes how hard soever twisted) must of necessity
overcome the weak resistance of the streights in all Filtres and Porose bodies:
and consequently the blood may be insinuated into the Capillary veins by a
Mechanic action like that of Filtration. If this proposition be true, the
greatest difficulty occurring in the whole mystery of the Circulation of the
blood, is now at length solved.

The blood having in this manner passed the aforesaid streights, and entered
into the Canales of the small veins, by the same motive force, whereby it was
insinuated (for such an ingress is not possible without motion) may be advanced
a little farther in its way by its proper force, and by external force, and
also by the impulse of the new blood following behind; as we see water sucked up
by a Filtre, to be carried on to the end of the list. Afterward, because many
small veins meeting together, make one wider ductus or pipe; and because in
this larger pipe the former impulsive force of necessity grows more and more
languid and faint by degrees, and by consequence the motion of the blood is
retarded: therefore it stands in need of some auxiliary forces, to be carried
on the rest of its journey. These are, First, the force by which the Circular
Fibers of the Veins, that naturally have a peristaltic virtue, contract
themselves always after they have been stretched, as all Nervose and other
tensile bodies are observed to do: Secondly, The Compression of the Veins by
the weight of the Circumambient air or Atmosphear, and the Elastic virtue of
the air inspired: Thirdly, The Tonic motion of the Muscles, when they act;
together with the various motions of the Viscera, and of humors discurrent
through the body; all which more or less compress the veins. Now, that the
manner how this compression promotes the continual decurse of the blood in the
Veins, may be the more fully and clearly understood; I will take liberty to lay
down this

Second PROPOSITION. That by the artifice of the Valves, the Compressions of
the Veins protrude the Blood toward the heart with a motion doubly swifter; not
indeed in a continual flux, but with little pauses interposed, and with unequal
velocities.
We here behold in the Crural vein slit open from end to end, Figure I.
certain Valves placed at unequal distances in the inside of the Vein: which
for demonstration sake are accurately represented in this Figure exposed to
sight. Figure II.
These Valves (ye see) are nothing but half pockets of a membranose substance,
or little bladders affixt to the sides or walls of the Vein, and resembled by
AONMP. and BONQR. They are found sometimes single, sometimes in pairs placed
one opposite to the other, and laterally touching each other; as at NO. the
unequal tops of which pair respect the Capillary beginnings of the Veins beyond
HL; but the Orifices of their cavities PO, TO, open toward the heart, have
respect to the parts IK. Now I am to demonstrate, that from this structure and
situation of the Valves, it is necessary that the Blood be protruded toward the
heart. Imagine then, that the same portion of the Vein HMQL is replete with
blood; and because by the circular Fibers of the Vein itself, and by the
ambient Muscles, and perhaps also by the gravity of the Atmosphear, one part of
the Vein is constringed after another all along; it must be, that the lateral
walls ST come nearer to each other toward V: and then the Vein so girded will
lose its Cylindrical form, and be turned into two little funnels, HVL, MVQ;
which are less capacious than the former Cylinder, and therefore the blood
which was contained in the spaces VHS, and VLT, will be expelled out of the
Orifice HL; but the remaining quantity of blood contained in the spaces VSM,
and VQT, will be squeezed without the Orifice MQ, toward IK. It appears then,
that from the abovementioned compression of the sides or walls of the Vein,
the blood is expressed in equal quantity to the opposite parts; and this would
certainly happen, if the Valves were removed. But because to the walls of the
Vein within, MP, QR, are fastened two Valves; it is necessary, that the blood
impuls'd by a compression made in ST, be forced through the narrow chink NO;
because the yielding fluid contained in the cavities of the Valves, and urged
by the advenient blood, is constringed, and thrust out of them; and then
instantly the sides of the Valves, that before touched each other, NO, receding
one from another, leave an open way, by which the flux of blood coming on from
MSTQ, may be insinuated, and pass forward beyond AB. Again, after the blood
has passed the confines of the Valves PO, TO, there necessarily follows a
restriction of the little chink NO. For, the blood it self must, by reason of
its heavy bulk, and fluidity, fill the little baggs of the Valves, and so their
soft and pliable sides being dilated till they mutually touch, ought closely to
shut the rimula NO.

Moreover, because the Vein is not constringed in all its parts at the same
time, but part after part successively; therefore after the blood is
transferred beyond the Valves within the little funnel ABCD, there follows a
constriction of the walls AD, BC, in the same time, in which ST is not
constringed. And because by reason of the close shutting of the rimula NO, half
the blood, that was contained in the spaces EAG, FBG, cannot flow back toward
AB, finding the obstacle AOB filled with blood, and retained by the Valves; it
is compelled with a reflex motion, like that of a Tennis-ball rebounding from
the wall, to flow toward DC: and since by the same compression, the Blood that
was contained in the spaces EDG, FCG, is protruded beyond DC: therefore a
double quantity of blood is in the same time, in which the compression is made,
expelled through that same aperture DC: but when a double quantity of a fluid
is in the same time emitted at the same Orifice, it must run out with a double
Velocity. Thus is our Proposition verified. And as to single Valves; from what
has been said of the use of double, it may easily and genuinely be inferred,
that they also help to promote the course of the blood, though but half so much
as the double. Wherefore Natures wisdom is admirable in placing single Valves
both at less distance one above another, and for the most part where the Cavity
of the Vein is a little narrower, or where a less Vein laterally exonerates it
self into a greater: in both which cases the necessity of this demonstrated
acceleration of the motion of the Blood, seems to be less. In the trunk of the
Vena cava no valves are found; as well because of its ample Cavity, as because
of its contiguity to the trunk of the great Artery, by whose pulsations it
cannot but be somewhat compressed, and consequently the Blood flowing through
it, proportionately promoted. In the Iugular veins also none have yet been
observed; probably because in them the blood descends swiftly enough, from its
own weight and fluidity. In small veins they are not placed; unless in the
Coronary veins of the heart, just at the place where they empty themselves into
the right Ventricle of the heart: and of these too the use is, not to promote
the course of blood, of which there is no need in so small a circuit; but only
to prevent the reflux of it out of that Ventricle, in the systole of the heart,
as appears from their situation, and from their conformation. Nor are any found
in the Arteries, in which the blood, with mighty force impulst by the
constriction of the heart, and of the Arteries, needs no additional machine to
accelerate its motion: except those that are placed in the inlet and outlet of
the left Ventricle, to obviate the regurgitation of the blood into the arteria
venosa, and out of the aorta into the left Ventricle; and the two very little
Valves sited in the two Coronary Arteries, at their origin from the aorta, to
prohibit the regress of the blood into the aorta.

If this Artifice of the Valves affixt within the veins be so necessary to
promote the reflux of the blood toward the heart; certainly he that first
discovered them, deserves to be remembered with honor. But who was that
fortunate man?

Tractatu 4. de venar. Ostiolis.
Fabricius ab Aquapendente put in his claim to the glory of the invention, as
wholly due to himself; in these very words. De his itaque [ostiolis nempe
venarum] locuturus, subit primum mirari, quomodo ostiola haec, ad hanc usque
aetatem, tam priscos, quam recentiores Anatomicos adeo latuerint; ut non solum
nulla mentio de ipsis facta sit, sed neque aliquis prius haec viderit, quam
Anno Domini Septuagesimo quarto supra millesimum and quingentesimum, quo a me
summa cum laetitia inter dissecandum observata fuere.

But Padre Fulgentio professly ascribes the invention to that prodigy of
Wisdom, Learning, and Virtue, Padre Paolo the Venetian: at the same time openly
accusing Aquapendens of disingenuous arrogance and theft, for challenging to
himself the honor of having first discovered the Valves, to which he had no
right; and for stealing the glory due only to Father Paul. In vita Patris Pauli.
The sense of his impeachment is this. The whole Tractate concerning the Eye,
which passes under the name of Aquapendens, or at least so much of it as
contains new and rare Speculations and Experiments, is the work of Padre Paolo;
whereof I have had speech with some, that were eyewitnesses, and knew that a
due part of the praise was not attributed to him that deserved it all. But much
more in another matter of more moment, which was the finding out of those
Valvulae, those inward shuts or folds that are within the Veins. Of which
argument I do not find, that any, either ancient or Modern, has made mention;
because it was a thing unthought of till these times, when Aquapendens moved
the question in a public Anatomy. But there are still living many eminent and
Learned Physicians, among whom are Santorio, and Pietro Asselineo a Frenchman,
who certainly know, that it was no Speculation, nor invention of Aquapendens,
but of Padre Paolo. Who considering the weight of the blood, grew into an
opinion, that it could not stay in the Veins, except there were some bunch to
hold it in, some folds or shuttings, at the opening and closing of which there
was given a passage and necessary Aequilibrium to life. And upon his own
natural judgment he set himself to cutting with more accurate observation, and
so found out those Valves, etc.

Having thus faithfully recited the Pleas of these two great men, I leave it to
you to decide the controversy, and to fix the Laurel on the head of which of
the Competitors you please. For my part, if my judgment were considerable, I
should declare my self on Padre Paolo's side, as to the invention; and allow to
Aquapendens the honor of being the first that by writing made the thing known
to the world. Understand me, I beseech you, only of the Valves themselves, not
of the true use of them, which neither Aquapendens, nor the Father had the
happiness to discover.

Not Aquapendens; because of the two uses by him assigned to these Valves
(which he most improperly named Ostiola) namely the corroboration of the Veins,
which might otherwise be by the blood every where distended and broken into
varices; and the retardation of the blood in the Veins, that so all parts of
the body might have time to take in their due shares of blood, for their
nourishment, and not have their meat (forsooth) snatched away before they have
filled their bellies: of these two mighty uses, I say, neither is true, and
both are raised upon this Supposition, that the course of the blood is out of
the greater and superior Veins into the smaller and inferior; which is most
evidently false even by the testimony of the sight. But lest I be thought,
either not well to understand, or to misrepresent his meaning; I am obliged to
recite his own words. Aquapend. Tract. 4. de Venar. Ostiolis.
Nam cum in varicibus, in quibus aut laxari, aut rumpi Ostiola par est, plus
minusve dilatatas semper venas conspiciamus; dicere proculdubio tuto possumus,
ad prohibendam quoque venarum distensionem fuisse Ostiola a Summo Opifice
fabrefacta, etc. Thus far then I have done him no wrong. He proceeds. Erat
profecto necessaria Ostiolorum constructio in artuum venis, quae non exiguae,
sed vel magnae, vel moderatae sunt magnitudinis; ut scilicet sanguis ubique
eatenus retardetur, quatenus cuique particulae alimento fruendi congruum tempus
detur, quod alioqui propter artuum declivem situm confertim ac rapidi fluminis
instar in artuum extremitates universus conflueret, ac colligeretur, idque tum
harum partium tumore, tum super positarum marcore. Here also I have faithfully
interpreted his words, and ye see that he thought the contrivement of the
Valves necessary to retard the motion of the blood, because he took it for
granted, that the blood descended through the greater Veins into the less:
grossly erring in both opinions. For, that the former is false, we have seen
demonstrated from the construction and situation of the Valves themselves: and
that the latter also is false and absurd, is known to all who understand any
thing of the Circulation of the Blood. To these errors he has in the same Page
added a third much more extravagant; which is, that the blood is by a flux and
reflux perpetually carried forward and backward in the Arteries. For,
attempting to give the reason, why Nature has framed no Valves in the Cavities
of the Arteries, he says; Arteriis autem ostiola non fuere necessaria, neque
ad distensionem prohibendam, propter tunicae crassitiem, ac robur; neque ad
sanguinem remorandum, quod sanguinis fluxus refluxusque in Arteriis perpetuo
fiat. It appears then, that this famous Anatomist, who in many other things
deserved well of the Commonwealth of Physicians, had no just title to the
honor of having first invented the true and genuine use of the Valves: nay,
that he understood no more the Mechanic reason of their conformation, than if
he had never heard of or seen them.

Nor in truth did Father Paul (whom yet I never can mention without secret
veneration) if the aforerecited account, and what follows immediately after,
given by his most intimate friend during his life, and after his Historian,
Fulgentio, be true and full. For in Fulgentio's narration of the manner how the
Father came first to find out the Valves, there is this passage. And upon his
own natural judgment he set himself to cutting with more exquisite observation,
whereupon he found out those Valvulae, and the right use of them; which do not
only stop and hinder the blood from dilating it self by its weight into the
Veins (as we observe in some crooked and swelled knots) but also that blood
running up and down with so much liberty, and in so great quantity, it might
easily suffocate the natural heat of those parts, which ought to receive their
nourishment from it. Whence it is plainly apparent, that the Father also
attributed a double use to the Valves: one, the very same with the former
dreamt of by Aquapendens, who probably borrowed it of the Father; viz. to
prevent the dilatation of the blood into Varices, by stopping its impetuous
motion up and down in the Veins: the other, quite contrary to Aquapendens's
second use, viz. to prevent a surfeit of the parts upon too much blood, and an
extinction or suffocation of their natural heat by that excess; whereas
Aquapendens feared they would be famisht, if the Valves did not detain their
food, as Tantalus is feigned to be. Now if these were truly the Father's
Sentiments concerning the Valves, certainly he had no right conception of
Natures design in making them; as may be collected from the precedent
demonstration of their true use.

To come then to a conclusion, and draw all the lines of this scrutiny to a
point; since it is evident, that neither Father Paul himself, nor his disciple
Aquapendens had a right notion of the proper use of the Valves; and that both
believed the blood to flow out of the greater Veins into the less, which the
Fabric and situation of the Valves plainly contradict: it necessarily follows,
that neither of them could be Author of that much more noble and more difficult
invention of the CIRCULATION or the blood, which it was morally impossible for
any man to deduce from their absurd opinions concerning the use of the Valves,
and the glory of which is wholly due to that incomparable man Dr. HARVY. Who by
admirable Sagacity of Spirit, by numerose Experiments and Observations
Anatomical, and by assiduous Meditation, perhaps also by the secret Manuduction
of Fate, that had reserved the secret for his knowledge, attained at length to
the invidiose felicity of finding it out, and revealing it to the world. I
wonder therefore that some men of not obscure names in the Catalogue of
Anatomists, have shown themselves so ungrateful and envious toward this
immortal man, as to ascribe this divine invention to Padre Paolo: I mean, Joh.
Walaeus epist. 1. de motu Chyli and Sanguinis.
Ioh. Walaeus and Tho. Bartholinus. The former of whom doubted not to write
thus. Vir incomparabilis Paulus Servita Venetus Valvularum in venis fabricam
observavit accuratius, quam magnus Anatomicus Fabricius ab Aquapendente postea
edidit, and ex ea Valvularum constitutione aliisque experimentis hunc sanguinis
motum [puta Circularem] deduxit, egregioque scripto asseruit, quod etiamnum
intelligo apud Venetos asservari. Ab hoc Servita edoctus vir doctissimus
Gulielmus Harveius sanguinis hunc motum accuratius indagavit, inventis auxit,
probavit firmius, and suo divulgavit nomine. The other had the confidence to
affirm, Thom. Bartholin, epist. Medicinal. ^entur. 1 epist. 26.
that Veslingius had communicated to him, as a secret never to be revealed
(forsooth) to any third person, that the Circulation of the blood was the
invention of Father Paul the Servite, who had written a book of it, which was
in the custody of Fulgentio at Venice. To refute this palpable fiction, to what
I have already said of Father Paul's ignorance of the right use of the Valves,
I need add only this, that if Fulgentio had had in his hands any such
Manuscript of the Fathers, as these Detractors have imagined; it is wonderful
strange he should never so much as mention either that or the Circulation in
his whole History of the Father's life; when of all the subtle Speculations and
discoveries of natural secrets by him attributed to the Father, nothing would
have so much conduced to the propagation of his glory, as that. Here therefore
I put an end to this long digression, to which the necessary contemplation of
the Valves gave an inviting occasion, and which, being intended only to do
right to the venerable memory of Dr. Harvy, all lovers of truth, as well as all
Members of this Noble Society will (I presume) easily pardon.

Having inquired into the velocity of the motion of the blood in the Veins, and
the mechanic causes thereof; let us next consider the velocity of the motion of
the same blood in the Arteries. For the clearer understanding of which I lay
down this Third Proposition,

PROPOSITION III. That the Arteries of an Animal, their constriction or
pulsation being complete, do not remain wholly empty of Blood.
Evident it is even to sense, that all the veins of a Sanguineous Animal taken
together, are larger or more capacious, perhaps in a quadruple proportion, than
all the Arteries put together: and the whole mass of blood runs through all
both Veins and Arteries, which mass in full-grown men commonly exceeds not 18,
or 20 pints: and though the Veins, by reason of their transparent coats, always
appear full of blood, yet a man may doubt, whether the Arteries also be always
full; that is, whether they only give passage to the blood in the time of the
pulsation, and then in the time of their quiet remain wholly empty, or not. To
resolve this doubt therefore, I say, that the Arteries, if they were wholly
empty in the intervals of their pulsations, then being laid naked to the sight,
they would appear constringed and lank, like chords extended: but our eyes
assure us, that on the contrary they retain their round and plump figure, and
being pressed by the finger resist the pressure; neither of which can possibly
consist with a total exinanition. Again, the Veins being laid naked, if, after
the pulsation of the heart, the Arteries remained empty; then certainly would
the pipes of the Veins by the quantity of 5 pints of blood crowded into them
more than what they are proportioned to contain, be distended at least a third
part more than they ought: but this is sensibly false, for their coats are not
distended beyond their usual rate. Ergo, the Arteries are at no time wholly
empty.

Moreover, in Animals whose Arteries are transparent, as in Snakes, Vipers,
Eels, Froggs, etc. we may from their Purple or bluish color perceive the
Arteries to be full of blood. Which is alone sufficient to evince, that the
Arteries do not remain empty after the pulsation of the heart, but contain at
least a 4 th part of the whole mass of blood, which in a man is about 5 pints.

Yet farther, the Arteries, in the moment of their pulsation, are highly
turgid, when yet not above 3 ounces. of blood is emitted into them by the
Systole of the heart. Therefore, if before the Systole the Arteries were wholly
empty, a space 20 times greater than their bulk is, would inevitably be filled
by the 3 ounces of blood emitted by the heart: but this certainly is impossible
without such a rarefaction of the blood, which no man of common sense will
admit. Therefore to replenish so great a vacuity in the Arteries, there must
come into them five pints of blood, either from the heart, or back, out of the
Veins: but neither of these is possible in nature.

Let us add, that 3 ounces of blood emitted by the Systole of the heart, cannot
fill a space greater than half a foot of the next Arteries to the heart.
Therefore, if the Arteries were empty before the Systole; truly all the rest of
the Arteries would remain empty also in the following Systole; and consequently
could not beat at the same time with the heart, and the Circulation of the
blood through them would be interrupted or discontinued, contrary to the
mechanic necessity thereof.

In fine, we are convinced by common experience, when an Artery, whether it be
great or small, is cut, the blood is in every pulsation squirted out with
mighty violence. Now it is impossible this should happen, unless all the
Arteries were full of blood all along from their beginning to their end;
because the violence of the stream of blood gushing from the incision, has no
other efficient cause, but the protrusion of the blood coming on behind and
urging the antecedent. But in the following pulsation there is an accession of
no more than 3 ounces of blood; which cannot by its quantity replenish half the
capacity of the Arteries. Therefore unless there remain, after every pulsation,
5 pints of blood in the Arteries, they cannot be made turgid again in the
following pulsation. So that nothing is more certain or more evident than this,
that in a living Animal the Arteries are never empty. Quod erat ostendendum.

From the praecedent Theorem naturally arises this Consectary:

That after the pulsation of the heart, there remains in the Arteries the 4 th
part of the whole mass of blood contained in the body of an Animal; and in a
man commonly about 5 pints: and that the proportion of blood expressed by the
Systole of the heart into the Arteries, is about one twentieth part of the
blood contained in them. As also that 3 ounces of blood ejected out of the
heart into the Arteries, fill a space in the Arteries next to the heart no
greater than half a foot, namely so much as is triple, or quadruple to the
latitude of the Ventricles of the heart.

PROPOSITION. That the motion of the Blood in the Arteries, is threefold
swifter than the motion of the Heart, that impells the Blood;
Because in the same time are absolved all these motions, viz. the dilatation
of the Pores of the heart, the restriction of its Cavities by the swelling
inward of the walls of the Ventricles, the expulsion of the blood. contained in
the Ventricles, the motion of the expulsed blood in the Arteries, and the
promotion of the mass of blood praeexistent in them, caused by the urgency of
the new blood coming on out of the heart: all these actions, I say, are
performed in the same time.

And it appears, that the three former operations are performed with the same
velocity in the heart, because the Fibers of the heart, by reason of their
abbreviation, are with the same motion moved through the same space of the
amplitude of the Ventricles, through which they are moved by restringing the
same Ventricles, and squirting out the blood that was contained in them. And
the two last operations likewise are performed with the same velocity. For look
how much space the blood expelled out of the heart runs through in the
Arteries, just so much space must the mass of blood praeexistent in them be
driven through, in the same time; because one part of the blood must give way
to another urging it forward, as fast as that comes on behind.

But if the motion of the constriction of the heart be compared with the
progressive motion of the blood in the Arteries; then doubtless they will not
be found to be of equal velocity: because the former motion, viz. of the
constriction of the heart, is made through a space equal to the latitude of the
Ventricles of the heart, which at most excedes not 3 inches breadth: but the
space through which the 3 ounces of blood expressed out of the heart, run in
the Arteries, is equal to the length of half a foot. Therefore the space will
be triple at least to the space of the former motion: and yet both these
motions are performed in the same time. Ergo, the motion of the blood in the
Arteries is threefold swifter than the motion of the heart, that causes it.
Quod erat propositum.

I add this remark, that the motion of the blood in the Arteries is always the
same, whether the three ounces of blood emitted into them out of the heart,
exactly fill the space dilated in them; or whether any portion of it be after
their repletion expelled out of them. For in both cases, the blood praeexistent
in the Arteries, is just so much promoved in its course, as 3 ounces newly
emitted take up of space, which run through more of length than half a foot.

Here I cannot fairly decline to encounter a vulgar error, that stands in my
way. Which is, That the blood is expelled out of the Orifices of the Arteries
into the substance of the Parts, by no other cause but the constriction of the
Heart. To refute which I will assert this

PROPOSITION, That the cause expelling the Blood out of the Arteries, is not
the Systole of the Heart alone, but the constrictive or peristaltic motion of
the Arteries themselves naturally and necessarily succeeding their expansion.
To the pulsation of the heart two effects are subsequent, viz. the repletion
of the Arteries by the blood emitted into them, and the expulsion of the same
blood out of them into the habit of the parts. Now certainly these two
operations cannot be performed together or at the same time; because the former
is done by dilatation, and the other by constriction of the same Arteries,
which two contrary motions cannot be coincident. Wherefore it is of absolute
necessity, that the repletion of the Arteries be precedent, and the evacuation
be subsequent.

But the repletion cannot be made without a violent distention of the
transverse or circular Fibers of the Arteries, and we all know, that all the
Fibers of vessels, no less than those of the Muscles, of the Guts, Stomach,
Tendons, Membranes, and the like Fibrose parts, naturally resist distraction,
and have a power of contracting themselves after extension. Yea more, we see
that all Fibers even in their natural posture are somewhat upon the stretch:
for when they are cut, they instantly shorten themselves toward both ends:
which would not happen, if they had been constituted in a middle state betwixt
laxity and extension, as a Bow unbent is quiet, suffering neither contraction
nor distraction of its parts.

Now if all Fibers even in their natural state suffer some degree of
stretching; certainly when the Arteries are replenisht with blood, their cavity
must be dilated; and in the dilatation of their cavity, their transverse or
circular Fibers must suffer much more stretching, than they did before. And
because to this dilatation of the Arteries a constriction immediately succeeds,
which is not possible to be effected without an abbreviation of the circular
Fibers of the Arteries; and because that abbreviation or contraction is
connatural to the Fibers themselves: therefore it is impossible, that the
Arteries, after that violent stretching caused by their repletion and turgency,
should not exercise, by natural necessity, that mechanic power they have of
contracting themselves, by virtue of their circular Fibers girding them inward:
and equally impossible, that the Arteries should so contract themselves,
without expelling at the same time out of their Orifices, the blood that
dilated them. Whence it appears beyond dispute, that the spontaneous
constriction of the distended Arteries is the cause of the expulsion of the
blood out of them into the substance of the parts; contrary to their opinion,
who ascribe this expulsion only to the Systole of the heart.

The natural method of acquiring Science, ye know, is to begin from things more
known, and then to advance to things less known; to proceed from effects to
their causes. Seeing therefore that we are now certain that the blood in
Animals is carried by a perpetual circular motion through all parts of the
body; our next business is to enquire, what are the Causes of this admirable
motion, as well the final as the efficient.

I begin from the final; it being a question worthy our consideration, why or
to what end Nature, all whose counsels and actions are ordained by an infinite
wisdom, has instituted this rapid Circulation of the blood.

Constant it is even from common experience, that whenever the blood is quiet
or ceases from motion, whether within or without the body of an Animal, the red
and grumose part of it soon curdles, and is separated from the serose or
albumen: and so the constitution or contexture of it is dissolved and
corrupted: whereas on the contrary, while the blood continues in perpetual
motion within its vessels in the body of a living Animal, so long the ordinate
mixture of its elements, due temper, and vital constitution of it is conserved;
for mechanical reasons in our ensuing discourse to be explained.

It seems then, that such a mixture of the constituent parts of the blood, upon
which the vitality of it does necessarily depend, cannot be otherwise
conserved, than by a continual agitation and concussion made in the vessels,
first by the heart, with strong force impelling the blood through the Arteries;
then, that impulsive force languishing by filtration in the spaces intermediate
betwixt the Arteries and Veins; next in the Veins, by the constriction of their
circular Fibers, by the compression of the Muscles, and the Viscera, and the
inspired air. All which compressions would not suffice, were not Valves placed
commodiously within the Veins, by which the motion of the blood is accelerated,
and a farther conquassation of it made.

And here we meet with a fair occasion to reflect upon the mutual Anastomoses
of the Capillary Veins, and the infrequent distribution of Valves in one and
the same Vein: for both these contribute also their proportions toward the end
now under our disquisition. For, the texture of the Veins being indeed lax and
soft, yet such as may by virtue of their circular Fibers be constringed and
contracted: hence it is, that by the blood regurgitating in those tracts of the
Veins, that have no Valves, by the great quantity and force of its
regurgitation or recoiling, the lowest part of the Vein is much dilated; and on
the contrary the highest part is contracted: So that the blood being by this
reflux, though inobservable, agitated and conquassated, may revive its due
commistion, and conserve its vital constitution. It appears then, the defect of
Valves also has its use. Within the cavities of the Arteries (as I said
before) no Valves are placed, because the grand force, by which the blood is
impelled through them, is more than sufficient to conquassate and commix it, by
wedging in as it were the more fluid albugineous particles among the red
grumose particles, that from both sorts comixt per minimas moleculas (as they
say) and yet mutually reluctant, the Vital Mication, or Oscillatory intestine
motion of the blood may be continued. So then here is neither need of, nor
place for a Fermentation. Now from the consideration of these things premised,
I conclude, that the Circulation of the Blood was instituted for the
conservation of its requisite temper and vital constitution: Which was to be
inquired, and which leads us to

The admirable effects and benefits arising to the Animal Economy from the
same Velocity of the Circulation of the Blood;
Which being certainly so great, that the whole mass of blood runs its circular
race in the twentieth part of an hour, or thereabouts, even in a sedentary and
sedate man; as has by many been demonstrated from the quantity of blood
commonly contained in the body, from the number of Pulses made in an hour, and
from the quantity of blood expressed by every pulse of the heart: and we having
already seen what advantage redounds to the blood it self from this velocity:
our curiosity spurs us on to enquire also, what other scopes or ends Nature may
probably be conceived to have proposed to herself, when she instituted this so
rapid motion; or what emoluments and benefits from thence redound to the
Economy of the whole body.

Of these the first seems to be this, that in every pulsation of the heart, a
great quantity of blood is effused and protruded out of the Capillary Arteries
into the habit of the parts, for their refocillation by influent life (of which
I have formerly discoursed copiosely in this place.) For, by how much swifter
the motion of any liquor or other fluid through a pipe or canale is, so much a
greater quantity of it is, in equal time, effused at the Orifice thereof; as
has been ingeniously demonstrated by B. Castellus: Lib. de aquae fluxu.
and therefore the blood is, like a full and rapid torrent, impelled into the
Pores of the flesh and Viscera.

The second is the energy of the stroke, with which the blood projected by the
heart, dashes against the same extreme parts: which energy is composed of the
degree of velocity, and of the quantity of blood impulsed, Tract. de vi
percussion. Cord. prop. 28.
as that excellent Mathematician Io. Alphonsus Borellus has fully
demonstrated. By this stroke it is, that the newly emptied and conniving
porosities of the Muscles and Viscera are forced open and replenished with the
impulsed blood, that communicates to them vital heat and fresh vigor: and that
the torpid, useless, and excrementitious particles there remaining, are
protruded and expelled, partly through the pores of the skin, partly through
vessels destined to their transportation and expulsion. So that by this rapid
rushing in of the blood, nature attains to not only a reviving of the solid
parts of the body, but also to the expurgation of the blood it self from its
unprofitable and excrementitious parts, in the Emunctories ordained for that
office.

A third advantage is, that by the same rapid velocity of the blood, and its
vehement intrusion into the narrow meatus of the parts; the current thereof
dislodges, rinses away, and carries with it many other amoveable particles of
various kinds, Saline, Sulphurous, etc. principally the relics of the
nutritive and nervose juices brought thither from the brain; which though
unprofitable now to the refection and invigoration of the parts in which they
were left, may yet be of some use to recruit and conserve the Crasis of the
blood, and to expedite the secretion of its excrements. This artifice of nature
we may more easily comprehend, by observing, that the foreign particles now
mentioned are extricated and rinsed away by the blood, not in ample vessels,
but after the egress of the blood out of the Capillary Arteries, in the
intermediate spaces betwixt them and the Capillary Veins, where end innumerable
small Canales, some of which bring in the nutritive and nervose liquors, others
export the superfluous and less profitable particles of them; which small pipes
are, like the Capillary roots of plants, almost every where disseminated into
the fleshy parts, into the Viscera, and (most frequently) into the glandules.
And this seems to be done, to the end that so many particles of these spiritual
and noble juices, being rinsed away by and commixt with the the blood, may
advance and conserve the due consistence and constitution of it.

Now of these three considerable benefits, no one seems to me possible to be
attained otherwise than by the perpetual and rapid motion of the blood.
Wherefore I am not destitute of a rational ground to support my conjecture,
that for these ends Nature thought fit to institute the swift motion of the
blood in its Circulation.

But what may we conceive to be the reason that induced Her to institute also
so multiplied a repetition of this course of the blood through the same ways?
A River, we know, though the water be in a continual flux, is yet still the
same river, because the elapsed parts are continually succeeded by new waters
coming on with the same degree of speed to supply it. But to maintain this
perpetual succession and supply, upon which the identity of the river
necessarily depends, there is required, either an immense quantity of waters
from a spring to feed the current, or the same elapsed water must be brought
back again to the fountain whence it flowed, that so by perpetually reiterated
circuitions the course of the river may be conserved, which otherwise would
soon fail and cease.

We are then no longer to admire that Nature, having designed to bring the
river of blood with a most rapid course through the whole body of an Animal,
for the various ends above explained; and resolved to make that course
perpetual, during the life of the Animal: made use of the same expedient, viz.
to repete the circuition of the same blood without intermission. For the whole
mass of blood commonly found in the body of a man, not exceeding 20 pints; and
that quantity not sufficing to maintain the course above 5 or 6 first minutes
of an hour: lest the current might cease, and so life also fail, it was
necessary that the circulation of the same mass of blood should be continually
reiterated, for the conservation of life.

Besides this necessity, there are many admirable uses and advantages which
Nature brings to an Animal, by often repeating the period of the circuition of
the blood through the same ways. For if the Circulation were not in this manner
reiterated, the blood could not be defaecated from its biliose excrement in the
Liver, nor (according to the vulgar opinion) from the matter of Urine in the
Kidneys; nor could either the Chyle be commixt with the blood in the heart, or
the Lympha be brought to temper and dilute it in the Veins: nor could various
other operations necessary to the Animal economy be performed. All which it
were not difficult for me to deduce from this repeted circuition of the Blood,
if the shortness of the time appointed to me for the administration of my
present province, did not oblige me to pass by all collateral disquisitions,
and to peruse my principal Theme, the Motion of the Blood. From the final
causes of which I will therefore in a direct order proceed to the Efficient.

PRAELECTIO II. Of the Heart, and its Pulsation.
TO measure the Divine Wisdom elucent in every Organ of an Animal, by the short
line of human Reason, is indeed extreme folly: and yet I doubt not to applaud
and follow the counsel of Erasistratus, who (as Galen relates) advised
Physicians to solve all the actions naturally done in the body of an Animal, by
Mechanic Principles; so far at least, as the dim light of my limited
understanding may serve to guide me in my researches. For not to depend upon
the authority of Plato, who said, (...), that God always works by Geometry; or
of his greatest disciple Aristotle, who from thence called God, (...), the
Mechanic of the world: we have the greater authority of the Sacred Scripture
itself, that God has framed all things in number, weight, and measure. Whoever
therefore intends with due care to study any part of his works, must therein
chiefly consider number, weight, and measure, i. e. the Mechanism of it:
otherwise, in the end he will find his mind rather swelled with opinion, than
filled with knowledge. Why then may not we, who are Christians as well as
Natural Philosophers, take those parts of an Animal to be Machines or Engines,
which evident reason, and chiefly sense show to be such? or who has prohibited
us to investigate the formal reason and manner of their operations? It is not
more certain, that no mortal can know enough of Gods works; than it is, that
the more we are able to discover of his wisdom, power, and goodness discernible
in the mirror of his Creatures, the more we shall find our selves obliged to
admire, love, and adore him. Equally certain it is also, that no kind of
devotion is more acceptable to him, than that which procedes from knowledge of
his infinite Perfections: and that the Sacrifice of Praises offered up to
Heaven from the mouth of one, who has well studied what he commends, are more
suitable to the Divine Nature, than the blind applauses of the ignorant.
Wherefore, since we are now come to the Efficient cause of the before described
motion of the blood, which our senses plainly show, and all learned Anatomists
acknowledge to be the Pulsation of the heart; and since it is equally manifest,
that this Pulsation is an action entirely Mechanic: let us attentively
contemplate and consider the Mechanism of the heart, from whence that action
necessarily proceeds. For the true reason and manner of the Pulsation being
known; our disquisition of the motion of the Blood will be complete, and we
shall so much the more admire and laud the skill of the Divine Engineer, who
contrived and made the Machine of the heart of so small a bulk, and yet of so
stupendous power and force. Nor ought we to despair of finding what we search
for: because though the Heart of man be to us inscrutable, as to its (...)
thoughts and reserves; it seems not to be inscru^^^^e, as to its Fabric and
Conformation. I will therefore endeavor to explain the structure of it.

That the Heart is a Muscle of the same nature with the Muscles of the Limbs,
is apparent to the sight, and will be more apparent, if the Carnose Fibers of
it be plumpt up by boiling. For then we may plainly perceive, that it is
composed of robust fleshy Fibers of the same Prismatical Figure, of the same
color, and consistence, and tenacity, as the Fibers of other Muscles have: and
therefore the Fibers of it are in like manner inelongable, and resist
distraction; they, as those of other Muscles, spontaneously contract themselves
after extention, may be swelled, and acquire hardness, when they act in the
Pulsation of the heart. So far the resemblance holds.

But yet the Fibrose constitution of the heart differs from that of all other
Muscles, in this, that the flesh of the heart is firm, hard, uniform, of a deep
ruddy color; nor are the prismatic columns separated from the little membranes
and innumerable Tendinose Fibers, as the Fibers of the other Muscles are.
Besides, the disposition and configuration of the Fibers of the heart is
extremely diverse from that observed in all others. For here the Fibers are
neither direct, nor parallel among themselves; but curve and spiral, and in
wonderful manner variously interwoven and implicated, not by a Texture like
that by which Wicker Baskets are made, as Vesalius imagined them to be, but
disposed with a more admirable artifice. For, immediately under the outward
membrane investing the heart, from the Basis of the heart, and from the
Circular Tendinose Orifices of it, in which the Vena Cava and the Vena
Arteriosa are terminated; as also from the beginnings of the aorta and arteria
venosa, is propagated a stratum or Layer of Carnose Fibers, which are almost
aequidistant among themselves, and tending directly from the Basis toward the
Cone of the heart; where variously inflected and contexed, they are reflected
toward the Cavities or Ventricles within the ^^ volutions and mutual
intersections, seem to give to the heart its circular and Conical Figure, in
which it is not resembled by any other Muscle whatsoever; are disseminated in
great multitude spriggs of Nerves, derived from the interior branch of the
Eighth pair, properly named par vagum: all which passing betwixt the arteria
pulmonaris and the aorta, first bestow many smaller surcles upon the Auriculae
on each side, and then implant themselves into the Fibrose substance of the
heart in diverse places. The manner of which their implantation is plainly
visible in the heart of a Calf, Lamb, or other new born Animal, while it is yet
warm.

But because in things Anatomic, the Eye is a better instructor than the Ear; I
have caused to be accurately represented in this Figure, the whole System of
Nerves pertaining to the Heart and its Ears; to help both the understanding and
memory of younger Students, for whose sake chiefly Lectures were at first
instituted in this College.

FIGURE III.
In this Figure, AA, AA, represent the Nerves of the Eighth pair cut off: which
though derived from the same origin, are yet, in a man after they have passed
out of the Skull, divided into two Trunks; of which the exterior, denoted by
BB, is called the Intercostal branch, because in its descent toward the parts
of the lower belly, it receives many Spriggs of other Nerves shooting forth
between the ribs from the Spinal marrow, as auxiliaries; and the interior,
named par vagum, from its various windings and turnings, first distributes
diverse surcles in its passage downwards to the heart; then subdividing itself
into more threads, is disseminated into the Viscera contained in the abdomen.

DD, The plexus of the former or intercostal branch, called ramus Cervicalis,
because in man it is sited on each side in the middle of the neck.

EE, The plexus of the Nerves of the later branch or par vagum.

F, The Cardiac plexus, in which are terminated smaller Nervose tendrels, GGG,
arising on each side from the plexus cervicalis of the intercostal nerve.

HH, Surcles of a conspicuous nerve shooting forth from the plexus of the par
vagum, and terminating itself in the plexus Cardiacus.

II, Many nervose productions from the plexus of the par vagum, distributed to
the Pericardium, to the vessels conjoined to the heart, and to the ears of it.

K, Remarkable surcles of nerves from the plexus Cardiacus, which passing
betwixt the arteria pulmonaria, M, and the aorta N, are terminated in the
substance of the heart.

LL, Two considerable Nerves sent from the par vagum to the heart; which are
variously combined, as it were by mutual inosculation, both among themselves,
and with Nervose branches issuing from the plexus Cardiacus; to the end,
doubtless, that both might be strengthened by that union. These seem to be the
principal of all Nerves pertaining to the heart, and most likely to convey
influence from the brain to the heart (whatever that influence be) to
invigorate it, and maintain it in perpetual motion; probably by supplying the
heart with succus nutritious in great plenty.

OOOO, The Musculose substance of the heart, into which the said Nerves are
inserted.

In this manner has Nature furnished the heart of man with store of Nerves;
thereby providing for its strength and continual motion. Nor has she much
diversified her work in the hearts of Brutes. For all the difference that
hitherto has been observed in them, as to the Nerves, is only this; that
beside the productions that come from the Nerves of the Eighth pair, in a place
somewhat higher, and are distributed to the heart; in most Brute Animals there
are moreover very many spriggs shooting from the same Nerves, where they pass
above the heart, and receive as auxiliary supplies, nervose surcles passing
betwixt the ribs from the Spinal marrow; which are sent down directly into the
substance of the heart, as if the more easily to convey some influence into it.
No great difference this: and yet the cause that induced Nature to make it, may
be great. What it is, is difficult to find out. It may probably have some
respect to the prone posture of Brutes, which being horizontal, must cause the
ponderose machine of the heart to swagg, and the cone to point, not toward the
midrif as in erect man, but toward the Sternum: and therefore in them there
might be need of more auxiliary Nerves to assist the hearts motion in that
position. But whatever may be the true reason, I do not assent to their
conjecture, Lowerus de Cord page 14. noviss. edition. and Willis de Cerebro,
in Neurologia.
who say, that because the heads of beasts look downward, therefore the
providence of Nature has furnished their hearts with more Nerves, lest Animal
Spirits should not in sufficient swarms be sent every moment from the prone
head into the heart of a Brute, that position of the brain (forsooth) rendering
the transmission of these Spirits more difficult and slow. And the reason why I
do not assent to this witty conjecture, is because neither the Authors of it,
nor any other man whose writings I have read, have sufficiently proved, that
there are such things as Animal Spirits in rerum natura. In some books indeed
whole Commonwealths of them are found, so that ye can hardly pass along without
meeting crowds of them. But till I see their Existence otherwise than
precariously asserted; I am justly excusable if I doubt thereof.

The Heart being thus composed of many myriads of strong Fibers of various
orders, by most dense contexture compact; and of various Nerves intersperst: it
required to be continually cherished with due heat as well without as within.
Wherefore the Heart having no heat but what it receives from the blood, in
which only the true Calidum innatum, the lar familiaris resides; Nature has
furnished it with two Arteries, for its own peculiar use, divided almost from
their origin into two trunks; the Orifices of which open themselves near to
the beginning of the aorta, immediately without the Valvulae Semilunares. They
are fitly called Coronary Arteries, because their trunks do not presently enter
into the parenchyma or substance of the heart, but first make their tour or
circuit, the more commodiously to disperse their branches, round the basis of
it, in manner of a crown, or rather a Diadem: and though from their very
original they divide, and recede the one from the other to the opposite regions
of the heart; yet they meet again in their extreme branches, and by mutual
Anastomoses or inosculations communicate betwixt themselves, so that if any
liquor be injected into either of them, it will in a moment appear to diffuse
it self also through the other. And this mutual Communication seems to be
designed to a good end. For since the necessity of influent heat or life is
equal in all parts of the heart, that necessity could not be more commodiously
satisfied any way, than by this Artifice of mutual inosculation betwixt the
extremities of these two Arteries.

No sooner has the blood thus imported, communicated its vital heat to the
substance of the heart, than it is thence exported by the two Coronary Veins,
which in like manner encompassing the heart, and by their numerose emissary
surcles imbibing the blood effused out of the Arteries, reduce it into the
right Ventricle, thence to be brought through the Lungs back again into the
left. So that here is a private circulation in a small circuit, instituted for
the peculiar benefit of the Heart. As the extreme surcles of the Coronary
Arteries are mutually inosculated, so also are those of the Coronary Veins, as
is apparent from ocular inspection. For, if you take the heart of a Calf or any
other very young Animal (for in such these vessels are most easily discernable)
and with the back of a penknife gently impel the blood from one side of the
heart toward the other, you shall see it flow out of the Vein of one side into
that of the other, and vice versa. Nor is it to be doubted, but that in all
other parts of the body there is the like mutual communication per anastomosin
betwixt Capillary vessels of the same kind.

Besides the proper vessels of the heart now described, there are annexed to its
basis also two Subsidiary Muscles, hollow and round, from thence called
Auriculae cordis, framed with no less art than the Heart it self, though of
less bulk. For they are composed of robust Fibers too, and disposed in the same
order; and as their motion precedes that of the Heart, so have they Nerves from
surcles of the Eighth pair before they reach to the heart it self. Besides,
their intermediate fleshy Fibers, which form little musculose columns, are
elonged to opposite Tendons. For the Tendon at the basis of the Heart is common
also to the ears of it, and serves them for a fulcrum or prop; and on the other
part of the right Ear, where it respects the Vena Cava, it is firmed by a
harder and Tendinose circle: betwixt which two Tendons the Fibers tending to
each are terminated; as appears in the right Ear of a human heart inverted. Of
these Ears, the right is always greater than the left. Perhaps because the flux
of the blood being less rapid out of the Vena Cava into the right Ventricle of
the heart, than out of the Arteria Venosa into the left, whither it is impelled
by the compression of the Lungs, and by the coincident elasticity of the
inspired air: it was therefore requisite, the capacity of the right Ear should
be proportionately larger, to receive and transfund into the right Ventricle a
quantity of blood sufficient to fill it. For evident it is, that the office of
these Ears is, like that of funnels, to transmit the blood into the Ventricles
of the heart.

For the same reason, the trunk of the Vena Cava, when it approaches to the
heart, participates somewhat of the nature of a Muscle. For there it is
furnished with fleshy circular Fibers, by which it is constringed, and
consequently the blood running through the canale thereof is urged the faster
into the right Ear: in the same manner as when a gut or bladder is outwardly
constringed by the hand, the liquor therein contained is expressed, and its
regress hindered.

We have now surveyed the Structure of this admirable Machine the Heart, at
least so much thereof as may serve to render more plain and intelligible what I
am about to say concerning the Action thereof. To which I now pass.

Evident it is both to the sight and to the touch, that in the act of
Pulsation, the whole fleshy substance of the heart is stretched, and hardened
with very great force, as all other Muscles are, when they act: and certainly
this tension and induration arises from the very Structure of the heart. For
the Fibers of the columns of it, and their cylindrical fasciculi or
combinations, have not their ends fastened to Bony or Tendinose props, as most
other Muscles have; but relying only upon, and having both their beginning and
end in the pendulous heart itself, are retained by an instable foundation or
hypomochlium, yet with tenacious firmness. Hence it comes, that the turgency of
the Fibers of the heart seems not to have been ordained by Nature for the
traction and approximation of their extreme terms; but on the contrary, that
there might be made a decurtation or shortning of the Fibers, that by their
swelling they might restringe and lessen the hollow perimeter, and so, like a
Press, squeez out the blood therein contained, just as boys Spirt the stones of
plums by compressing them strongly betwixt their thumb and forefinger. This is
evinced from hence, that in every Pulsation or Tension of the heart, the blood
contained in the Ventricles is with very great violence Squirted out into the
Arteries, as water is Squirted to great distance out of a Syringe by the
embolus or rammer. But more evidently by putting your finger into a hole made
by incision in the heart of a living Animal. For in every Systole of the heart,
you shall feel your finger pinched all round about, as by a pair of pincers, by
the swollen and indurated flesh of the Heart. Though therefore the external
superficies of the heart be not in the Pulsation augmented; yet certainly the
whole fleshy substance of it is at that time truly swelled up, and increased,
and indurated.

Here I have affirmed two things difficult to be conceived, more difficult to
be proved. The one is, that the decurtation of the Fibers of the heart, which
always is effected in its act of Pulsation, does by lessening the cavities of
its Ventricles, express the blood contained in them. The other is, that though
in the same Pulsation, the outward superfice of the heart be not augmented, yet
the whole fleshy substance of it is so enlarged, as to fill a greater space
than before. Wherefore, since this action of the heart cannot be clearly
understood, unless the Mechanic reasons of both these Propositions be first
explained; and since that work has been done to our hands, with great labor
of mind and profound judgment, by that excellent Mathematician Io. Alphonsus
Borellus, in his second Volumn de motu Animalium; not long since published: I
choose rather, in so obscure a way, to lead my Auditors of the Younger sort by
his brighter Torch, than by the Glowworm light of my own understanding.
Omitting then the Lemmata or introductory propositions by him premised to his
demonstrations of the Mechanic reason of the Action of the Heart: I will
venture to make my self an Interpreter of so much of his Theory concerning that
abstruse subject, as seems to me requisite to the explication thereof:
referring those, who shall not be satisfied with my Epitome, to the book it
self, in which the argument is treated at large, and more Mathematico. I begin
from his 47 th Proposition.

Let us represent to our imagination a glome or bottom of small twine or thread,
ABR hollow within, composed not of one thread, but many, and those too tied to a
ring, or the semidiameter of the glome AETR, fixed, and to the superfice of the
cavity; and wound about Concentrically, or Spirally. Now if the cavity be
filled by swelling of the threads by their humectation, the internal threads MOQ,
must be corrugated or shrivelled up unequally, always the more increasing their
wrinkles or folds, by how much the nearer they come to the Center; and the
external Figure of the glome will remain unaltered.



Because in a Rope of Hemp, whether the Rope be made of a single twine, or
composed of many twines twisted together Spirally, the external Spires do in
the same order strictly embrace and bind down the internal Spires, so that they
cannot be removed out of their places; we see that ropes are equally by
humectation swelled, contracted, and suspend equal weights. Therefore in like
manner glomes of thread, composed of one or more threads, ABR, ought in the same
manner to be swelled, and their cavities MOQ, to be filled by that swelling.
For the beginnings and ends of their Spires are with equal firmness retained in
the same places, whether they be mutually knit by continuation, or whether they
be tied or fastened to the rings or other firm places of the glome, as in the 4
th Figure. For, in both cases the threads are the same, of the same form,
disposition and thickness; and the external threads by their Tension spirally
gird in and embrace the internal; therefore they must become, in the same
manner, thicker by a few drops of water, and consequently in the same
proportion corrugated; always so much the more shrinking into little wrinkles,
by how much the nearer they approach to the Center; and their external Figures
will remain of the same bulk and magnitude.

To accommodate this to our present Theme; I say, that when the Porosities of
the Fibers of the Muscle of the Heart are by internal humectation dilated, the
cavities of it ought of necessity to be filled by the fleshy substance of it,
without variation of the external Figure thereof. For, because the Heart is a
glome hollow within, composed of innumerable Fibers, Spongy, very strong, and
not extendible in length; which Fibers are fastened to the Tendinose rings of
the four orifices of the heart, and spirally involved and contexed: and because
all these Fibers are by internal humectation swelled no otherwise than the
twines of a rope, and the threads of a glome are made to swell, and become
turgid by a few drops of water insinuated into their pores: Therefore by the
same necessity, by which a glome contexed of threads is transformed inwardly,
must the cavities of the heart be filled, the internal Fibers of it being
corrugated, and shortened unequally, always augmenting their swol'n wrinkles, by
how much nearer they approach to the Center of the heart; the external Figure
of the heart being the while neither augmented, nor diminished. And thus is the
difficulty of the latter of our two Propositions solved.

Let us therefore in the next place resume the consideration of the former,
viz. That the constriction of the Ventricles of the Heart cannot be made by the
force of the contraction of its Fibers.

If, according to the common doctrine of Anatomists, the proper action of all
Muscles be a Contraction of their Fibers; then it may seem consentaneous, that
the proper action of the Muscle of the heart should also be a contraction of
its Fibers: and because the heart is not tied or bound to any joints, as most
other Muscles are, for the bending of them, but ought only to constringe its
own Ventricles; let us see, whether the Ventricles of it may be constringed by
a simple contraction of its Fibers, or not. And First, if the Heart be like to
a glome composed of threads spirally involute; it is manifest from what has
been said, that Fibers, when they act, cannot possibly exercise their force by
their contraction, and by drawing their extreme terms toward the middle;
because by a corrugation or shrinking up into wrinkles of their length, they
must rather be relaxed. Therefore as a weight hung on to a lax cord cannot be
raised thereby, while the cord continues lax: So by Fibers lax and corrugate
cannot the opposite walls of the Ventricles of the heart be violently drawn
together, and conjoined.

Secondly, but if we suppose, that the Fibrose Spires of the heart are not
wound about tortuose, with turnings and windings quite home to the Ventricles,
but extended in a direct course into the Ventricles, and there bound together
into those fasciculi or sheafs, which compose many little Cylinders or cords:
then indeed a man may think, that by simple contraction of the Fibers those
little Cylinders may be totally shortened, and so the opposite walls of the
heart be brought to meet together. But this is evidently impossible; because in
such a position there must necessarily be admitted a corrugation of the whole
concave superficies of the heart intercepted betwixt the bases of those little
columns or cords; and therefore innumerable Fibers there contexed must be
crowded up together, and in like manner corrugated, i. e. relaxed; and by
consequence could not act by their tense contraction; which is repugnant to the
supposition.

Besides, in the right Ventricle of the heart are found but very few of those
little Cylinders or columns: and therefore this subterfuge can have no place
there.

Yet farther, a total decurtation of those same columns or cords could not be
made, unless the lengths of the Spires ending in the columns themselves, ran
out betwixt other Fibers, as into sheaths, or about pullies; neither of which
contrivances is to be found in the heart. For the Fibers of the heart are with
decussated directions contexed, and so closely and firmly bound among
themselves; that they cannot by various and contrary motions start out of their
places, and run out among other Fibers embracing them.

In fine, that the Tension of the heart cannot be solved by a simple
contraction of its Fibers, as heretofore has been commonly imagined, may be
sufficiently evinced even from this, that the bulk of the Muscles of the Limbs,
which when they act, are truly contracted, is sensibly diminished rather than
augmented; but the bulk of the heart, while it acts, is augmented, since the
Cavities or Ventricles of it are filled up by the fleshy substance, the outward
figure of the whole heart being at the same time unchanged and undiminished.
Wherefore the proper action of the heart is not performed by contraction of its
Fibers. Quod erat probandum.

Hence arises this Corollary; That the cavities of the Heart are constringed,
not because the lengths of the Ventricles are shortened, but because their
side-walls are brought nearer each to the other, so as almost to touch.

This appears from the very position and configuration of the Ventricles of the
Heart, and from its operation. For, the left Ventricle, dissected from the
bottom to the top, is (ye see) extended through the whole length of the heart,
from the Basis down to the Cone, which ends into a sharp pointed and slender
wall: and since the external figure of the heart, while it beats, is not
shortened; therefore neither is the length of this cavity diminished, that is to
say, the Basis of the Cavity is not brought nearer to the Cone of it. Besides,
the Base and Cone of the heart cannot at all be inflated and incrassated;
because the Base wants Fibers, and is entirely destitute of flesh, as being
wholly occupied by the four ample Orifices of the Veins and Arteries: and the
wall of the Cone is very thin and slender. Therefore the Cavity cannot be
filled by inflation of the Fibers of the Basis and Cone of the heart. It
remains then of absolute necessity, that the Cavity be filled by inflation of
the side-walls of the heart, which are very thick, full of Fibers, and
therefore easily capable of inflation. Lastly, as was said before, if a man put
his finger into a hole made by incision in either of the Ventricles of the
heart of any Animal yet living, he shall perceive a strong constriction of the
side-walls, but none of the Basis and Cone tending to their approximation one
toward the other. By this Consectary thus verified, we are led to understand.

The Mechanic reason of this Operation.
That by Mechanic necessity the Cavity of the heart cannot be shortened, may be
farther proved thus. Because a Contraction of the heart cannot be made, but by
a Contraction of its Fibers; therefore those parts of it, that want Fibers,
will not be capable of Contraction: but of that immense multitude of Fibers
descending from the Basis of the heart, not so much as the thousandth part
attains to the Cone (because if they should be there connected, they would,
being accumulated stratum super strato, make the acuminate and thin wall of
huge depth or thickness: whereas now that wall is very slender, in such a
situation) and all the rest of the Fibers, that are spiral, are woven together,
and reflected into the heart with a transversal Circuit before they reach to
the Cone. Ergo they will not be able to draw up the Cone of the heart toward
the Basis; and by consequence, the length of the cavity of the heart will not
be shortened.

But the Cause by which the side-walls of the Ventricles are brought to meet,
is this. Because almost all the innumerable Fibers of the heart are wound
obliquely and transversly about the sides of it, and of them are composed very
many Layers one above another, like Membranes. But when the Fibers of any Layer
are inflated or huffed up, they, touching each the other laterally, and lying
in one Superfice, will of necessity crowd and press each the other laterally;
and so thrust each the other out of their places, and urge them farther, viz.
sideways toward the Basis, and toward the Cone. Wherefore the interval betwixt
the Basis and the Cone ought to be rather augmented. But because the other
external Fibers obliquely encompassing and closely girding the transverse, and
intersecting them decussatim, hinder their elongation and protuberance; it
comes to pass, that of necessity the inflation of the Fibers ought to cause
them to swell inwardly toward the cavities; and so the insides of the walls
being puffed up, must be brought nearer together.

Moreover, the septum cordis, or partition wall of the Ventricles, consisting
for the most part of transverse Fibers, will not be shortened by their
inflation, but the thickness of it is much augmented: and the outward walls
ought likewise to be inflated inwards toward the internal cavities; therefore
the insides of the opposite walls ought to meet, the Basis remaining always at
the same distance from the Cone. Quod erat ostendendum.

Hence we may deduce this genuine Consectary, That the meeting of the opposite
insides of the walls of the Ventricles of the heart, is the sole and immediate
cause of the expression of the blood, that was contained in them, into the
Arteries. For, the swelling or incrassation of these opposite walls being all
inward toward the Center of the heart, and withal so great, as to fill up the
cavities of the Ventricles; it is necessary that the blood contained in the
cavities, being on all sides vehemently compressed, give way and flow forth
through the apertures or Orifices by Nature provided for its efflux: the
resistance of the fluid blood holding very little proportion to the mighty
force of the solid compressing it.

But so grand an intumescence of the fleshy substance of the heart could not
otherwise be made, than by a great swelling and turgency of its Fibers: and
therefore we may infer, that the thickness of the Fibers of the heart is, in
the act of Pulsation, doubly greater than in the diastole. This being granted,
I consider, that the external Fibers of the heart exercise very great force,
not by shortning themselves, but by resisting distraction; (as the iron hoops
of a hogshead) that the perimeter of the heart be not augmented; and at the
same time they are inflated in their Concave part or under side, as we have
said, the threads of a glome are: and in like manner the internal Fibers, when
they are swelled and incrassated, exercise very great force by making folds and
turgid wrinkles, so tense and rigid, that they do the office of wedges, by
which not only the cavity of the heart is filled up, but the blood therein
contained is by vehement compression squirted out, by a motion very much
resembling that, by which we spirt Plum-stones, with our Thumb and forefinger
compressing them behind.

But the slender fleshy Columns holding in the opposite walls of the Ventricles
of the heart, are at the same time also incrassated, and withal shortened (their
Fibers being swelled and corrugated) to help fill up the cavity. Yet they
exercise greatest force, to perform the office of wedges. They exercise none
toward the drawing together the opposite walls of the Ventricles, because
themselves are lax, by reason of the corrugation and shrinking of the length of
their Fibers: and besides this, they could never exactly conjoyn the opposite
walls, because being of a musculose constitution, they cannot be totally
shortened, the nature of the Muscles being such, as suffers not contraction
greater than the third part of their length. Yet it cannot be denied, but these
musculose Columns serve, as cords, to retain and conserve the due disposition
of the internal parts of the heart, and to prevent the immoderate distension
and distraction of the Ventricles, which too great a quantity of blood rushing
into them out of the Veins, might otherwise cause.

Finally, the Papillae, or little fleshy teats standing up within the
Ventricles, and to which the membranose filaments of the triangular valves of
the heart are fastened, do also act their part in this Scene: not only by
admitting the like inflation of their Fibers, but also by firmly erecting
themselves, ad instar penis.

All these things are verified in the left Ventricle, and in the Ears of the
heart; but in the right Ventricle, where is not found an equal number of
Columns, the constriction is made by incrassation of the external wall, namely
by inflation and decurtation of the Fibers thereof, so that the hollow
crookedness of it, by swelling inward, comes near to a Plane, and the Arch
within becomes straight. Also the inflation and swelling of the Septum cordis,
or middle wall of the heart, of great thickness naturally, contributes not a
little to the repletion of the right Ventricle. For hence it is, that the
Unequal superfice thereof does become more prominent and stretched out, whence
that space resembling the figure of a concave Lens, is filled up, and the walls
mutually touch, the circuit of the Lenticular cavity remaining still the same.

Now this whole operation is exactly conform to the institute of Nature, which
primarily fills and amplifies the Pores of the Spongy Fibers by the humectation
above explained; from which she attains to a double effect. For, in the Muscles
of the Limbs that swelling of the Pores of the Fibers, produces a secundary
effect, which is the decurtation of the Muscle, and the strong traction of the
joint: but in the heart, from the very inflation of the Fibers, and consequent
incrassation of the walls, she effects the repletion of the Ventricles. But the
Machine is the same in both, namely, the force of a wedge dilating the Pores of
the Fibers.

But that this expression of the Blood out of the heart is not made by a Spiral
contorsion or twisting of the heart, such as that by which water is commonly
squeezed out of a wet napkin, as some late Writers Lower de. Cord.
have thought, is easily to be proved. I acknowledge it to be most true, that
the expression of the blood out of the heart, no less than the wringing of
water out of a wet cloth, is made by constriction of the Cavities and Pores,
which were filled by the fluid: but at the same time I deny, that such a
constriction is made in the heart, and such an expression of the blood thence,
by the same cause, the same Organs, and the same Mechanic action, by which
water is squeezed out of wreathed Linen. For, in a Linen cloth, before its
Contorsion, the threads were all lax, and therefore they admitted many
Interstices, that might be filled with little drops of water. Afterward, the
cloth being strongly twisted, the threads are forced to make many circuits about
the twist, of almost the same altitude, and so they must not only be much
elonged in those prolix Gyres, but also extenuated and stretched; and
consequently their sides being made smooth by extension of their folds and
wrinkles, will mutually touch, and their interstices vanish, whence the little
drops of water that were in them before, will presently be squeezed out. But in
the heart, the repletion of the Ventricles is performed in a manner far
different from this. For, in the act of Pulsation, the bulk of the heart is not
extenuated or diminished, but rather augmented in a double proportion, nor are
the Fibers of the heart elonged, but rather contracted as the nature of all
Muscles requires. The same Fibers do not mutually touch, nor are their
interstices filled up by reason of violent traction and extension, but of their
inflation.

Notwithstanding this, we are not to think, that the Spiral disposition of the
Fibers of the heart is of no use. For, they serve to the firm binding or
hooping as it were of the walls thereof, that the face and configuration of the
heart may continue still the same: which Nature has provided for also by
Girths of other Fibers wound round about from the external Tendinose Orifices
of the Vessels of the heart, to the Columns within, and with admirable Artifice
decussated and woven together. And thus we have made good our Proposition. That
the proper Action of the heart is the Constriction of its Ventricles, and the
consequent compression and expression of the blood contained in them; not by a
Contorsion of its Spiral Fibers, but by an inflation and corrugation of them.

Here some perhaps may be willing to propose to me this question. If it be
true, that in the Systole or act of Pulsation, neither the exterior Superfice
of the heart is augmented, nor the Cone of it drawn up toward the Basis; both
which we have asserted: how then comes it, that in every Systole, the Cone of
the heart knocks against the left side of the breast?

Which may be thus Answered. Because the heart is hung in the middle of the
Breast by strong Ligaments, and yet in every Systole is brought to touch and
strike the inside of the Breast; therefore it is necessary that this be done,
either by a dilatation of the heart, or by local motion and translation of it,
or by erection of the whole, or by flexion and incurvation of the Cone thereof.
And as our observation and experience rejects the three former causes of this
Phenomenon, so it obliges us to embrace and acquiesce in the last. Wherefore
it remains only that we investigate the Mechanic reason of this effect. Which
seems to depend first upon the disposition of the Fibers of the heart. For, we
see that a crooked gut tied about with a thread, and not wholly filled with
water, is by the weight of the water extended directly or in a strait line: but
if the water be impelled toward either end by compression, then the gut becomes
crooked again, as the nature of it exacts, and the other pendulous extremity
will be erected, and strike against your hand held a little over it. This
plainly follows from the curve figure of the membrane of the gut, which is
longer in the unequal part, and shorter in the concave. So in the left part of
the Ventricle of the heart, the left wall is shorter, less fleshy, and less
crooked, than the two walls that make the right Ventricle. Wherefore in the
Systole of the heart, the Cone of it ought to be erected toward the left side
of the breast, and to strike against it, more or less strongly, according to
the degree of violence with which it is erected. This may be somewhat helped
also partly by the erection of the heart lying obliquely, partly by the
situation and disposition of the Fibers, which are wound about obliquely and
spirally from the right side of the Basis of the heart toward the left side of
the Cone; whence in the act of Pulsation, when the Fibers are shortened, the
Cone may be a little distorted and erected by the fasciculus or combination of
Fibers, forwards toward the left side, and so the Percussion may be made.

Seneca (as ye may remember) in epist. 57. most elegantly describes, first the
inevitable horror that invaded him while he was passing through the dust and
darkness (a darkness so thick, as even to be seen) of the Crypta Neapolitana,
now named the Grot of Pausilype, in the way between Naples and Putzole: and
then the cheerfulness (he calls it alacritatem incogitatam and injussam) that
returned to his mind upon the first sight of the restored light. The same
surprising alacrity, methink, I now feel within my self, after my passage
through the no less darkness, in which Nature had, through a long Series of
ages, involved her great secret of the Motion of the Heart, made more obscure
by the dust of men's various opinions; and my arriving at the light of
knowledge, both what is the proper Action of the Heart, and by what Mechanic
necessity that Action is performed.

In the ardor of this alacrity, I proceed to the use, and action of the Ears of
the Heart, and of its Valves.

The end of the Vena Cava, which is conjoined to the heart, is (as has been
said before) in greater Animals, Musculose round about, that the trunk of it
may be constringed as Sphincters are closed by virtue of their circular Fibers.
But the end of the Vena Pulmonaris wants the like fulciment, and therefore
cannot constringe itself. Then both these Veins end into the Musculose Ears,
which are hollow, like little bags affixed to the sides of the heart; and whose
structure much resembles that by which the left Ventricle of the heart is
contexed in the hollow part of it. For the Ears also consist of fleshy Fibers
intersecting each other like a St. Andrews Cross, which within are bound
together into many little Cylindrical Columns, and trenches connecting the
sides of the bags. To these Ears succeed three membranes in the right
Ventricle, and two in the left; which are of a very strong contexture, of a
triangular figure; the bases of which are closely affixed to the whole Circuit
of the Tendon of the Orifice of the heart. Then the areae or middle spaces of
these little membranes are branched within the Ventricles of the heart into
many little Tendinose Strings or cords, which are fastened to the tops of the
papillae or teats that stand pointing upwards, placed on the opposite side. Now
this admirable structure being known, let us enquire the design or use of it.

First the extreme part of the Vena Cava seems not to be made Musculose for
strength, lest it should be broken by the current of the blood rushing in; but
rather by its constriction to protrude the blood into the oblique Sinus of the
right Ear, and to render the same turgid. Which action is helped by the
peristaltic constriction of the whole trunk of the Vena Cava, and by the
compression of the Muscles and Viscera of the whole body, as was yesterday
demonstrated, when we considered the motion of the Blood. Hence it comes, that
the blood impelled through the open aperture of the Ear, fills the cavity of
it, and then runs into the right Ventricle: and by the like necessity the blood
flows out of the Vena pulmonaris into the left Ear, and thence into the left
Ventricle of the Heart.

No sooner are the Ears filled and distended with blood, but they both at the
same time constringe themselves, by a contractive and compressive action common
to all Muscles, resembling that of a Press; in this order, that first by
shutting their apertures they hinder the regress of the blood into the same
Veins out of which it came in: then by the great force of compression they
squeez it into the Ventricles of the heart, until they be filled and made
turgid. To this action of the Ears immediately succedes the compression of the
press of the Heart itself, by which the blood itself, by reason of its
abundance, inflating and distending the triangular and mitral valves, exactly
shuts the Orifices or mouths of the Veins, and so prevents its own recoiling
into them. Whence it is of absolute necessity, that the same blood be expressed
into the Pulmonary Artery or Vena Arterialis, and into the aorta. These are the
Actions and Uses of the Ears and Valves of the heart, first discovered by our
immortal Dr. Harvey, and since confirmed by various experiments of other
excellent Anatomists. Being then certain of the Phenomenon, it remains only
that we endeavor to explore the Mechanic causes of them.

In the first place, because the Ears of the heart are Muscles, round, hollow,
and composed of fleshy Fibers wound about Spirally, and intersecting each the
other decussatim; and because they end into little columns and trenches, in the
same manner as the left Ventricle is framed: therefore must they operate by the
same Mechanic necessity, and Artifice, by which the heart operates, viz. by the
force of a Press, and by wedges insinuated into the Pores of their Fibers, they
must be swelled, and so constringed, and consequently express the blood
contained in them.

Secondly, That the constriction of these Ears, ought to precede the
contraction of the Ventricles of the heart, though both motions seem to be
performed at one time; may be thus demonstrated. For, if this be not true, then
either the Ears, and Ventricles of the heart are constringed in one and the
same moment of time, or the heart is first constringed and then the Ears. If
the first, because the triangular valves have no use before the heart is
constringed, nor after the constriction of it is complete, because the shutting
of the Valves would be in vain, when the blood cannot flow back; and slow back
it cannot before the heart is constringed, because then the blood is not yet in
the Ventricles, and so cannot be impelled by the Systole of the heart; and
after the constriction of the heart, the expulsate blood can much less flow
back: therefore it is necessary, that at what time the Ventricles are
constringed, at the same time the Venose orifices ought to be exactly shut by
the Triangular Valves, that the blood may be impelled, not backwards but
forwards into the Arteries. But if at that same time the Ears were constringed,
they would inevitably vomit out the blood contained in them into the
Ventricles, and so open the clausure made by the triangular Valves, because
they are so disposed, as to be opened and dilated by the very coming of the
blood. Wherefore at the same time the blood would be impelled by the Ear into
the heart, and repelled by the heart: and so these two contrary motions would
mutually destroy each the other, and both be in vain. Besides, when two outlets
are at the same time open in one Ventricle of the heart, the whole compressive
force of the heart is divided into two equal parts, which impell the two halfs
of the blood, one backward, the other forward into the Arteries: and therefore
Nature would foolishly by a double endeavor attain but half her end. We may
add, that the triangular Valves would be wholly useless, since they would then
( urgente necessitate) be open, when they ought to be shut: Wherefore it seems
impossible, that the Ears of the heart, and its Ventricles should be
constringed at the same time.

But if we suppose the natural order to be inverted, i. e. that first the
Ventricles of the heart are constringed, and then the Ears compressed; this
would be much more absurd: for half of the blood contained in the Ventricle
would flow back into the Ear on both sides open, and thence into the Vein.

It must therefore be confessed, that the constriction of the Ear ought to
precede, and then immediately ought the constriction of the Ventricle to
succeed; and then all the operations proceed regularly and compendiously. For
the Ear being comprest, first the regress of the blood into the Vein is
hindered, next the blood is expressed out of the Ear into the cavity of the
heart; Thirdly, the Orifice of the heart is shut by the constringed Ear;
Fourthly, the Ventricle of the heart being filled with blood, and distended,
the Membranes of the triangular Valves are expanded. These actions being in
this order of succession done, then in the fifth place follows the swelling of
the heart, by which all the blood in the Ventricles, which cannot, by reason of
the double clausure, slow back, is forced to run forth by the open door of the
Artery.

Thirdly, it is observable, that the action of the right Ear differs from that
of the left; because the blood ought to flow out of the Arteria Venosa or (as
some call it) the Vena Pulmonaria, which is very ample, into the left Ventricle
of the heart, with a swift current, by reason of its gravity, and of the
compression of the Lungs. For this reason, a little Ear is sufficient to
transmit the blood so swiftly running into the left Ventricle: and, with the
help of the mitral Valves, also exactly to shut the aperture of the heart.

On the contrary, in the right Ear, the slowness of the bloods influx ought to
be compensated by the amplitude of the Canale. And moreover, because the right
Ear ought not only to close the Orifice of the heart, but also to impel rapidly
the slow paced blood into the right Ventricle: therefore Nature has made the
Muscle and cavity of the right Ear stronger and larger, than that of the left.

Fourthly, We may farther gratify our curiosity, by considering the manner how
the triangular Valves exactly shut the Orifices of the heart; which seems to be
this. Because these Membranose Valves have their bases fastened to one part of
the circular Tendon of the Orifice of the heart, as flags are fastened to their
staves; and their other sides are by many Tendinose Filaments or strings
fastened to the fleshy teats in the opposite part of the cavity of the
Ventricle, as Webs of Linen exposed to the Sun are kept upon the stretch by
many small cords tied on each side: Hence it comes, that by the stream of blood
rushing in, the cavities of the Ventricles are dilated; and so these Membranose
Valves, which before were lax, and flagged, are drawn and expanded transversly,
so as to spread themselves through the whole space of the Orifice. Necessary it
is therefore, that the points and sides of these Triangular Valves, thus drawn
by the little cords decussated, should be conjoined, and being conjoined make
one Conical superfice, greater than the plane of the Orifice, or of the circle
of the basis of the same Cone. After this, follows the Systole of the heart,
when the insides of the Walls of the Ventricles are united, and therefore those
little cords of the Valves are at the same time relaxed, and united also: and
so the faces of the Triangular Valves themselves must be united, and acquire a
Sinuose or embowed figure, their Superfice not diminished, because their
membranes are not contracted. Whence it comes, that the blood filling the
Ventricle, does by repelling the membranes, and inflating them, bow them, as
the Sails of Ships swelled by the wind, are bowed into a hollowness. Again,
since those membranes thus embowed are transferred toward the Tendinose Orifices
of the heart, the round area of which they far exceed: therefore it is
necessary, they should exactly shut those Orifices, before the Systole of the
heart is complete. Wherefore it is also necessary, that the blood contained in
the cavities of the Ventricles, should by the process and continuation of the
constriction of the heart, until a total union of their walls be effected, be
all expressed thence through the Arteriose Orifices, which are then open to
give it free egress.

Fifthly, If the clausure of the Ears did not precede, those little and thin
Valves would not be able to resist that mighty violence, with which the blood
comprest by the heart invades them, and otherwise would certainly break them:
therefore to secure them, provident Nature has put a fleshy fornix or Vault,
viz. the constringed Ear; that she might with a double door shut the ample
Orifice of the heart.

Hence naturally arises this remarkable Corollary; that the action of the Ear
is longer in time, than the Systole of the heart. For, the constriction of the
Ear begins, while the heart does not act; and ends in the same moment, in which
the Systole of the heart is completed.

Finally, It is worthy observation, that in the Arterial Orifices or outlets of
the heart, there is no need of the like apparatus, to prevent the regress of
the expulsed blood into the Ventricles. For after the exit of the blood, and
after the greatest part of it is expulsed without the Capillary Arteries, it
cannot be impelled back again; as well because it is not urged by the force of
an Antagonist Muscle of equal strength with the heart, as because it is already
expelled out of the extreme Arteries. Wherefore Valves of little strength are
sufficient here, such as is proportionate to the force, which the not-intire
fullness of the Arteries can make, which is very inconsiderable. And therefore
the Semilunar Valves are far weaker, than those Triangular; but yet strong
enough to hinder the regurgitation of the blood expulsed by the heart.

Thus have we run through all the proper actions and offices or uses of all the
parts of this incomparable Machine of the Heart, in their natural order; and
found them all to be plainly Mechanic, i. e. necessarily consequent from the
structure, conformation, situation, disposition, and motions of the parts, by
which they are respectively performed.

If the Mechanism has been by us rightly explicated (as I am persuaded it
has) in the precedent discourse, no man has reason longer to believe, that the
manner of the motion of the heart is a thing to human wit wholly
impervestigable. Probable it is therefore, that when that excellent Anatomist,
and our worthily honored Colleague Dr. Lower said, Lib. de Cord cap. 2.
Cum nimis arduum sit de ratione, qua Cordis motus perficiatur, quicquam rite
concipere; atque Dei solius, qui secreta ejus rimatur, motum quoque cognoscere,
praerogativa sit; in eo ulterius perscrutando operam non perdam: he was out of
modesty willing to limit his own curiosity in that particular, but not to set
bounds to the future disquisitions of other men.

PRAELECTIO III. Of the Efficient Causes of the Pulsation of the Heart.
DElighted with the Contemplation of the Structure of this Masterpiece of
Nature the Heart, I have sometimes revolved the Books of the most Celebrated
Authors, who have professedly written of Architecture, and of Hydraulic
Engines; in search of some example of a Machine, that might be, at least in a
few respects, compared with it. Of many that occurred, that which seemed to me
to come nearest in similitude to this inimitable Prototype of Nature, was the
Hydraulic Mint at Segovia, mentioned rather than described by that every way
Noble Gent. Sir Kenelme Digby, in these words. This Engine, or rather multitude
of several Engines, Treatise of Bodies, chap. 23.
to perform different Operations, all conducing to one work, is so artificially
made, that one part of it distendeth an Ingot of Silver or Gold into that
breadth and thickness, as is requisite to make Coin of: which being done, it
delivers the Plate it has wrought, unto another, that prints the Figure of
the Coin upon it, and from thence it is turned over to another, that cuts it
according to the print, into due shape and weight. And lastly, the several
pieces fall into a reserve, in another room, where the Officer, whose charge it
is, finds treasure ready Coined, etc.

For betwixt this Engine and the Heart, I fancied something of Similitude, at
least in the few particulars following.

First, As the design or end of the former, was to Coin money, which is the
blood of all States, as well Monarchies as Republics, for the support of the
Government: so the office and work of the latter is to stamp the character of
Vitality upon the mass of blood, for the maintenance of life in all parts of
the body, and regulation of the whole Animal economy.

Secondly, As the one is moved by a stream of Water, so is the other by a
current of blood, as to its diastole at least.

Thirdly, As the Artificial Engine was composed of many less Machines, each of
which performed its proper office by a distinct operation; yet all conspired to
one common end: So the Natural, being also complex, consists of various
smaller Machines, viz. the Ears, Valves, Ventricles, Musculose flesh, Fibers of
different orders, Chords, Columns, Papillae, etc. all which have their peculiar
functions and motions; yet so combined, that they all cooperate to the Vital
motion or heat of the blood, and diffusion of the same.

Fourthly, By the Segovian Engine Ingots of Silver were distended to a breadth
and thinness requisite to make money: by the heart and its Ears vehemently
constringing themselves, and repeting their strokes, the Silver Chyle, or
public revenue of the Animal, is attenuated, its viscid and grumose parts
dissolved, the cruder parts concocted, and all by conquassation and compression
so perfectly commixt with the blood, as to be fit to make good and current
blood.

Fifthly, From the Mint-engine the new stamped Coin was quickly transferred into
a receptacle in another room, thence to be distributed, by orders of the
Mint-master: From the Heart is the new Coined blood instantly transmitted into
the Arteries, to be distributed, according to the ordinance of Nature.

Sixthly, As the various parts of the greater Engine were so situate, disposed,
and connected, as that if any one of them were by chance displaced, broken, or
hindered in its motion and action, presently all the rest must fail to proceed
in their respective operations, and the work of making Coin cease: So in the
much more subtle and mysterious Machine of the heart, if any the least part,
though but the chord of a Valve, be broken, or arrested in its motions, all the
rest will soon be at a stand, and the grand work of making the blood vital be
at an end.

Thus far, methought, the Parallel held fairly enough, and I was not ill
pleased with the ramble of my imagination: but when I had attempted to carry on
the resemblance a little farther, I soon discovered the disparities to be so
many, and so great, that it was impossible to reconcile them into a just
Analogy. Whereupon, condemning the extravagance of my fancy, I soberly
concluded, that the Heart of an Animal is an Engine never to be imitated by
human art: and I found my self more inclined to applaud the judgment of that
prodigy of Mathematical knowledge, Archimedes of Syracuse, for never attempting
to counterfeit the motions of the heart, than to admire his wit shown in making
a Sphere of Glass ( Athan. De Magn^te lib. 1.
Kircher denies that any part of it was Glass, but only the outside, that men
might discern the wheels and motions within) which represented the perfect
order and motions of the Celestial Bodies; and which Claudian describes in one
of his Epigrams.

Now if we desire clearly to understand this inimitable Excellency of the
Machine of the Heart, and in what Proprieties of it the same does chiefly
consist; we shall be obliged well to consider two things, neither of which has
yet been explicated by us, and without a due explication of both which, all
that we have hitherto said concerning the motion of the Heart, will be maimed
and unsatisfactory. These are, the Mighty and incredible Motive force of the
Heart, by which it expresses the blood out of the Ventricles: and the
Efficient Causes of its Motion. Things so worthy to be known, that I need not
deprecate your impatience, most Candid and accomplished Auditors, if I detain
you a few minutes longer, while I enquire into them.

As to the FIRST therefore, viz.

The admirable Motive force of the Heart.
Since the round and Conical Figure of the Heart does not permit us to attempt
the measuring of its Motive power by the same way, by which the most Learned
Alphonsus Borellus has with singular sagacity measured the forces of very many
other Muscles of Man's body, namely by weights suspended by them; and since
therefore in this disquisition, we cannot from the effect proceed to the
knowledge of the cause: we are compelled, from some other Sign to raise a
probable conjecture, whence we may investigate the greatness of the effect. And
this Sign shall be the Similitude and Analogy, which the Muscule of the heart
seems to hold to other Muscles of the same Animal. Let us then with the same
excellent Mathematician Borellus (in whose footsteps I now again tread)
suppose, that all, even the least Fibers, or little Machines of the same, or
diverse Muscules, in the same Animal, are equally strong, and exercise an equal
motive force, in the same time, in the state of health. And because equal bulks
of two Muscles contein equal multitudes of the least Fibers, it follows, that
if we have foreknown the total motive power of one of the two equal Muscles, we
shall be able thence to conjecture, what is the total power motive also of the
other. Therefore the fleshy bulk of the heart being of almost equal magnitude
to the bulks of one of the Temporal muscles, and of one of the Masseters; and
Borellus having demonstrated to us the total motive force of those two muscles:
we may probably infer, that the motive force of the heart is equal to that,
which those two muscles shutting the mandible exercise.

Now because no entire Fiber of these two muscles, is less than two inches long
(taking all the Fibers one with another, that the excesses of the longer may
compensate the defects of the shorter) and because in an inches space of every
single Fiber, we may imagine more than twenty little Machines, or Rhomboid
Pores contained, like the links of a chain in a Watch, or the Meshes of a Net
in a row one above another; let us notwithstanding suppose no more than ten
smallest Fibers to be contained in that space: therefore in the length of every
one of the Fibers that compose the said two Muscles, there will be contained
more than twenty of those most minute Machines. And since the weight of 150
pounds may be suspended by one single Stratum or Layer of these small Machines
of the same Muscles: therefore, that we may have the whole force that Nature
exercises in those Muscles, the force of that one Layer, viz. that which is
able to sustain 150 pounds, ought to be twenty times multiplied. Wherefore the
whole force that Nature exercises, to dilate all the Rhomboid meshes or pores
of the said two Muscles, when they act, is greater than the force of 3000 pound
weight, and would, if applied to the opposite end of the beam of a balance,
preponderate.

If then every most minute Fiber of the Heart exercises, in the Systole of it,
a force equal to that, which every Rhomboidal Machine of the Temporal, or
Masseter muscle makes, when they act, as most certainly it does, the motive
power of all Fibers of the Muscles, in the same Animal, in the state of health,
being equal; and if the multitude of least Fibers contained in those two
Muscles, be equal to the multitude of most minute Fibers contained in the
Muscle of the Heart, as the visible equality of their magnitudes warrants us to
suppose it to be: we may thence deduce this conclusion, that the force, which
all the most minute Fibers of the heart, when they are swelled, exercise to
constringe the Ventricles, i. e. when they act all together, exceeds the force
of 3000 pound weight, and would preponderate, if it were applied to the
contrary end of the beam of a just balance. Quod erat demonstrandum. And thus
have I given you a summary of what Borellus has from a long chain of most
ingeniose Propositions and Theorems in fine inferred. I come therefore to the.

SECOND and last considerable proposed to be inquired, viz. the Efficient
Causes of this so wonderful Motive force of the Heart. These seem to be no more
than two: of which one is immediate, the other mediate.

As to the the former, viz. the immediate cause of the hearts Motive Power; we
are not to expect to learn, either what it is, or whence it procedes, from the
doctrine of the Ancients. For, they having observed, that the heart was not, as
all the other Muscles of the body are, moved ad arbitrium voluntatis, at the
command of the Will; not only named the motion of those Voluntary, and the
motion of this Natural, as they had good reason to do; but also conceived and
taught, the cause of the motion of the heart to be diverse from the cause of the
motion of the rest of the Muscles, and accordingly constituted and assigned to
the heart a certain blind and unintelligible Pulsifick Faculty, whereto alone
they ascribed as well the diastole, as the Systole thereof; which they had no
just reason to do. To evince this their palpable error, I will assert this

PROPOSITION, That the immediate Motive cause of the heart, is the very same
with that, by which the Muscles of the Limbs are moved Voluntarily.
First, it is most evident to sense, that the Muscle of the heart is composed
of the same constituent parts with all other Muscles, viz. of bundles of
carnose Fibers of the same Tendinose and Contrahible substance, of the same
prismatic Figure, in the same manner disposed, Layer upon Layer, bound down by
mutual contexture, in the same manner interspersed with branches of Nerves,
fastened to Tendons, and enlivened by blood irrigating them out of the Arteries.
In a word, there is no sensible difference or disparity, the Figure of the
whole heart excepted; which yet does not diversifie the Organic nature of it,
no more than the diversity of Figures among other Muscles, does make them of a
different nature. Then if we consider the action of both the Heart and all
other Muscles, we shall find, that as well the Fibers of the heart, as those of
all other Muscles act by contraction of themselves. If we descend to the
immediate motive cause, and the Mechanic mode of their operating; from what we
have already said, it is manifest, that it is as impossible for the heart to be
inflated and moved by an incorporeal Faculty, or by Spirits, or by the blood
alone however violently rushing into it, or by the same blood to what degree
soever rarefied in its Ventricles, or by a Fermentation, conflict, and
displosion of Acid and Saline juices met together in the heart: as it is for
the Muscles of the Limbs to be regularly moved by the same causes. It remains
therefore, that as all other Muscles are moved by contraction of their Fibers,
the Pores of them being filled and distended; so also it is most probable, that
the proxime or immediate cause of the motion (I mean only the Constriction) of
the Heart, is the dilatation or distension of the Pores of its Fibers, which
causes their abbreviation or contraction, i. e. the Systole of the heart. But
what the Mediate Cause is, by which the Pores of the Fibers are dilated to the
abbreviation of the Fibers themselves, we shall after a few minutes enquire. In
the mean time, I will lay down this other

PROPOSITION, That the Mediate Cause of the Hearts Motion seems to differ from
that, by which the Muscles of the Limbs are incited to Voluntary Motion.
Since it is a truth known to all men, that we can move what Muscles we please
of any Limb, and continue their Motion as long as we please, and stop it when
we please: but the Motion of the Heart is not subject to the Empire of our
Will, but, like that of a Mill, perpetual, whether we sleep or wake: and since
even without our knowledge or perception, the heart, as agitated by a certain
natural necessity, makes most vehement and almost momentany strokes or jerks
alternately, short and Isochronical or equally temporaneous pauses interposed
betwixt them; nor ever either much varies that constant Rhythm of its pulse,
while we are in the state of health, or intermits the same during life:
therefore certainly there must be somewhat of difference between the mediate
cause of the hearts natural motion, on one part; and the mediate cause of the
voluntary motion of all other Muscles, on the other. Besides, in an Egg, from
the first days incubation of the hen, the punctum Saliens, and then the
Vesicula pulsans exhibit to our sight this dance of life already begun, when
we cannot conceive it to be possible, that there should be in that first
rudiment of the foetus any sensation of good or evil, any will to pursue the
good or avoid the evil; and when nothing of the brain is yet formed. Nay more,
in the heart of a Viper taken out of the body, and put into warm water, the
Pulsation is observed to continue many hours, when by reason of the abscission
of the Nerves, all commerce betwixt the Brain and the Heart being extinct, no
sensation, or election can be imagined to ordain and command that motion.
Wherefore we are obliged to confess, that the first and mediate cause of the
hearts Pulsation is in some respect or other, diverse from that whereby the
other Muscles are incited to motion, at the command of the Will.

But to explore wherein this nice difference may most probably consist, is a
work of so great difficulty, that I wish it were possible for me to revoke the
temerarious promise I made to attempt it: nor should I have courage enough to
carry me so much as one step farther, if I did not derive it wholly from the
well known Candor and benignity of my most Learned Auditors. For, the remaining
part of my way, though short, is yet dark, and rocky, with Precipices on both
sides: and all the light I can expect, must be from a few Sparks stricken out
of my Flinty subject by the force of conjecture. If therefore I chance to
stumble, or err; humanity will oblige you, rather to put forth your hands to
support, or guide me, than to deride my blindness. In hope of this favor I
will venture to proceed.

Certain it is, that the first and mediate Cause of the Motion of the Heart, as
well as that of the motion of the other Muscles, whatsoever it shall at length
be found to be, is derived to it by the Nerves from the Brain. For, as if the
Nerve inserted into any Muscle be strictly compressed by a Ligature, or cut
off, the power of motion in that Muscle is presently intercepted, or totally
destroyed; as common experience witnesses: So if the Nerves of the Eighth
conjugation be either strictly compressed by a Ligature round about, or cut
off, in the neck of any Animal; there suddenly will ensue a visible change in
the Motion of his Heart; witness the memorable experiment made by Dr. Lower,
and recorded in his excellent Book de Cord, Cap. 2.
where he affirms, that the heart, which before reciprocated its Motions
moderately and Rhythmically, presently after the Ligature had been made upon
the said Nerves, began to palpitate and tremble, and by degrees grew more and
more languid, till the poor creature died, which was within two days. Other
experiments confirming the same thing, I might allege, if it were not
universally acknowledged by Anatomists, that the Motive force of the heart
depends upon some influence from the Brain. And among these, one of the most
accurate affirms, that Nature made the Cerebellum as a Storehouse of Animal
Spirits chiefly for the use of the Heart, that the Motion of it might be
perpetually maintained: saying, Pro motu Cordis praestando tam sedula and
sollicita fuit naetura, ut, Lowerus de Cord, cap. 2.
praeter Nervorum propagines ubique in illud dense distributas, pro continuo
spirituum animalium influxu, Cerebellum insuper, quasi perenne little
promptuarium, ei accommodaverit. A cujus benigna and constante influentia adeo
dependet, ut fi spirituum influxus vel minimo temporis momento impediatur,
motus ejus illico deficiat. But why have I recourse to the authority of men,
when Nature herself, in her constant process of forming the parts of an
Embryon, seems to teach us, that some influence (whatever it be) derived from
the Brain to the Heart, is absolutely necessary to the incitement and
perpetuation of the Motion of the Heart. For, the Brain is, in a great part,
perfected before the heart; though those two Members, ob communem officii
necessitudinem, be almost congenite. And I have good cause to believe, that the
exordium of the Brain, is that Colliquamentum, which is first seen in an Egg
after the first days Incubation of the Hen; and which, by the same warmth
continued, does in a short time concrete, and is condensed into a thicker
substance, that is soon invested (as every viscid humor is wont to be) with a
thin film or membrane, and shoots forth from itself little Nerves, as branches,
every way. From the observation of which that incomparable man Sir George Ent
doubted not publicly to declare himself to be of this opinion, Antidiatribae,
page 7.
that not the Heart, but the Brain, is the fountain of life. His words are
these, Cor enim* (uti arbitror) non est fons vitae (qui cerebro peculiaris est)
sed rivulus dunta^at accessorius. Which yet is no new opinion, but ascribed by
Galen to Erasistratus, Galen de Hippocr. and Platon. decret. lib. 7. cap. 3.
who said: Omnium, quae in corpore sunt, principium esse Cerebrum, apparet: and
asserted by Hippon, whom Censorinus introduces rightly teaching, Caput primo
fieri. Now what can we with equal probability conceive to be the reason why
Nature finishes the Brain before the Heart, as this I have here given, viz.
because the Heart, even from the beginning, has need of some influence to be
transmitted from the Brain to it, for the incitement and continuation of its
motion, as well as for the Nutrition of its substance? the latter of which
benefits is common to the heart with all other parts of the body.

Secondly, It is highly probable, that the Brain is, not only the Laboratory,
but also the common Promptuary of the true Succus nutritious; and that the
Nerves are the Canes, or Filtres through whose long and narrow Pores the same
roscid Nutritive liquor is gently distributed to all parts, for their
nourishment; both which Propositions have been formerly with many considerable
arguments drawn as well from experiments Anatomical, as from reason, asserted
by Sir George Ent, Dr. Glisson, and (if it be lawful for me to put my self into
the same period with such excellent men) my self. This therefore being
supposed, it is not unreasonable to think, that this roscid, balsamic and
spirituose liquor, by many called Succus Nervosus, being for the most part in
sufficient plenty in the Brain, does at all times touch, and soak into the open
Pores of all the Nerves thence elonged; but more copiously into the Nerves that
extend themselves into the Fibrose substance of the Heart; because the Heart is
furnished with many more and larger Nerves than any other Muscle of the whole
body. And because the extremely narrow cavities of the Nerves are full of a
spongy medullary substance, and continually wet with the same roscid liquor
creeping through them: therefore the liquor cannot flow out of the lower ends
of them, into the Fibers of the heart, otherwise than guttatim, drop after
drop; as all liquors, chiefly such as have any thing of viscidity, slowly creep
along the threads of Filtres, and when they at length arrive at the end, fall
down in equal drops, with equal pauses betwixt the precedent and the succeding
drops. Farther, because the distillation of each drop is almost momentaneous,
not persevering; thence it seems to come, that the constriction of the heart is
performed and finished in a moment, and a pause succedes in the next moment,
till a second drop comes to cause a second constriction, and so forward. And
since in the Brain, or fountain of this roscid liquor, there is always plenty to
maintain a perpetual succession of drops; and the liquor it self is (in the
state of health) always of the same temper and consistence, and the narrow
Canales in the Nerves always equally retard its descent and efflux: therefore
it seems necessary, that the times of quiet, or the pauses intervenient betwixt
the drops, should be equal, so long as the liquor retains the same degree of
fluxility, or is not hindered by greater violence.

But if it happens, that the liquor is become either more thin and fluxible
than is fit (as commonly it does upon debauches with Wine or other strong
drinks) or Saline, Acrimonious, Acid, or of any other vicious and irritating
quality (as often it is vitiated in many maladies, chiefly in Scorbuto
inveterato) or fall into a Fermentation (which I have reason to conjecture it
always does in Fevers, and more eminently in the Small Pox, the matter of which
seems to be, not the blood, but the Succus nutritious in a peculiar manner
corrupted, and critically transmitted from the Brain through the Nerves into
the habit of the body) or be agitated by any swift motion (as in the more
violent passions of the mind, and chiefly in anger, it is) in all these cases
the motion and distilling of it into the Fibers of the heart must be
accelerated proportionately, and consequently the Systoles of the heart will be
more frequently repeted, and the pauses intercedent betwixt them will be, as
those intervenient betwixt the drops, shorter. And here a fair occasion offers
itself to me of expatiating into the various and numerose differences of Pulses
of the heart, and endeavoring to solve them rationally by this Hypothesis,
which alone is capable to do it: but the shortness of the time appointed for my
sitting in this place, forbids me to make use of the occasion.

Of this Stillicidium or guttulation of the Succus Nervosus out of the ends of
the Cardiac nerves, we have various familiar examples. We see, that Sponges,
Filtres, and even Glass tubes of very small bores, though they be continually
replete with water or any other liquor; yet the liquor does not flow out of
their lower ends or orifices, in a continued course, as water gushes out of a
fountain, or out of the cock of a Cistern; but by drops, with aequitemporaneous
stops or pauses betwixt the drops. The true cause of which effect seems to be
this; the great narrowness of the Canales, which impedes the free permeation of
the liquor, the little particles, or moleculae of the liquor being not exactly
smooth, but villose and viscose: and therefore they are forced to creep along
with a slow pace through the cavities of the tubes, whose superfices within are
equally full of little asperities too; so that they must, as they pass along,
be put into a vertiginose motion, and interrupt their course, and consequently
fall out of the lower end of the Sponge, Filtre, or Tube guttatim. Now since
the Nerves are, like Indian Canes, composed of Filaments running their whole
length in direct lines, a medullary and spongy substance, and many little
interstices interjacent betwixt the Filaments, with a thin coat investing them;
and since the superfices of their little Canales within, must therefore be full
of small asperities: it is necessary, that the Succus Nervosus, whose
consistence is not much thinner than the white of an Egg well beaten, should
pass through them with a slow and interrupted course, and at length fall out of
their lower ends in drops, with equal pauses between the drops. Where we find a
parility of Causes, we may rightly expect a similitude of effects.

Here I see two formidable Difficulties standing, like Romantic Giants, in my
way, to deterr me from proceeding: and I cannot, without shame and infamy,
decline to encounter them.

One is, That after the Cardiac Nerves are cut off, and the heart itself taken
out of the body, the Pulsation of it continues for some time. To remove this
therefore, I say, that the cavities of the Nerves annexed to the heart may
remain still full of, and turgid with the roscid Succus Nervosus, which being
hindered from regress by their spontaneous contraction toward the heart, and
kept in a state of fluxility by the yet lasting warmth of the heart, may for
some time be instilled into the Fibers of it, and by swelling of them cause
them to constringe the Ventricles, as before. Then the heart being irritated by
the prick of a needle, or some sharp and pungent liquor, may be able, by its
peristaltic constriction to squeez out the few remaining drops of the roscid
liquor. Which being done, the Pulsation cease for ever. To the blood, this
effect ought not to be ascribed; for after all relics of it have been, with
warm water and a Syringe, washed out of the Ventricles, and squeezed out of the
Vessels; the Pulsation notwithstanding will continue for sometime: Nor can it
be with more reason ascribed to Convulsions of the heart; because all
convulsions are disorderly, and unequal both in the times of their girds, and
in those of their intermissions: whereas in this case the Pulsations are
regular, and isochronical, with equal pauses. Nor to the Heat communicated by
the blood to the heart before it was exsected, and not yet quite extinct;
because that borrowed heat soon vanishes, and no external heat will revive the
languishing Pulsation, after all the roscid juice has been expressed out of the
ends of the Nerves left in the heart. Nothing then remains to solve this
Phenomenon, but the instillation of a few drops of our roscid liquor into the
Fibers of the heart, to swell them, and so urge them to constriction of the
Ventricles.

The other Difficulty is this. Why is there not a Pulsation after the same
manner also in all the Muscles of the Limbs; since their Fibers are of the same
nature in all things, their disposition and direction only excepted; since the
Orifices of the Nerves perteining to them, are in the Brain as open to admit
and imbibe the Succus Nervosus there elaborate and provided for them; and since
the same Nerves are equally spongy and permeable in their constitution, and so
apt to transfer that liquor, as the Orifices of the Cardiac Nerves are to
receive, or their Canales to transfer it? If the whole apparatus be the same on
both parts, whence comes it, that the same effect is not produced in both?

At this Goliath I have in my Scrip three Pebbles to throw; and though my arm be
weak, I will not despair of hitting him in the forehead. First therefore I say,
that it is not yet certainly known to any mortal man, by what mediate cause the
Muscles of the Limbs are moved at the command of the Will; whether by simple
contraction of the Originals of the Nerves inserted into them, or by the
immission of the Succus Nervosus more copiosely and swiftly at the time of
their being put into action: though the Mechanism of their Fibers make it more
probable, that they are moved by immission of some liquor from the Brain, by
which the rhomboid meshes or pores of their Fibers being all at the same time
swelled and dilated, a contraction of the whole Muscle must in the same moment
be effected; and therefore I prefer this opinion to the former, and have
followed it in many places of this rude Discourse. But yet this opinion has
not led me to a discovery of the Cause of the difference, this present
difficulty compells me to hunt after. Should I imagine Valves affixt by Nature
to the Orifices of the Nerves of the Muscles, as Mons* Des Carts did in the
bodies of them; though such an artifice be not impossible, yet, beside that no
such Valves have hitherto been found in the Brain, I should still be to seek
for a Cause to open and shut them ad arbitrium voluntatis, and so should be put
to a stand in my disquisition. Which to avoid, some other Organical
contrivement, such as may be not only possible, but probable also, and facile,
and fit to untie this Gordian knot, must be excogitated. Let it then be
supposed, that in the Brain the Orifices of the Nerves thence elonged to the
Muscles of the Limbs, and their Canales are in such a peculiar manner formed,
as at no time to take in and convey into the Muscles, more of the roscid liquor
than what is sufficient to nourish them, and recruit their vigor; unless when,
at the command of the Will, under whose jurisdiction they properly are, the
Nerves being twitched up or convelled at their Originals, both their Orifices
are dilated to receive, and their Canales rendered more pervious to transmit, in
a moment, into the Fibers of the Muscles to be used, a greater portion of the
same invigorating liquor, viz. so much as is requisite to swell them up, by
replenishing their pores, and force them to contraction, which is the common
action of all Muscles. On the other part, let it be supposed, that in the Brain
Nature has framed the Originals of the Cardiac Nerves by a different Artifice,
namely such, as that not only their Orifices may always be open to imbibe, but
also their Canales so easily pervious to transmit the roscid liquor, as that
without any Vellication, without any Convulsive motion, the same liquor may,
merely by the plenitude of the Canales themselves, be effused guttulatim into
the Fibers of the heart, to cause the alternate constriction or Pulsation of
it. And it is the more lawful for me to suppose this difference of structure in
Nerves ordained for different uses; because it is above all doubt, that the
Optic Nerves have a peculiar fabric and contexture, wherein they differ from
the Auditory, and all other Nerves inservient to the rest of the external
senses; and that the Organ of every sense has its nerve of a peculiar
constitution, accommodate to the nature of its proper object: though those
differences consist in such minute and subtle artifices, as have hitherto
eluded our most curiose researches, though assisted by the best sort of
Microscopes. Why then may it not be thought, that Nature has given to the
Cardiac Nerves also a constitution diverse from that of all other nerves:
especially when their Function and office is different from that of all other
nerves, and no less than the Pulsation of the heart, i. e. the conservation of
life itself depends upon that difference? I am not, I confess, so happy, as
certainly to know in what singular Artifice the difference does consist: but am
notwithstanding fully convinced, there is some difference. And if so, why may
not the difference consist in such an Artifice, as that which I have here
supposed and described; since the same is not only possible, but facile also,
and sufficient to produce the effect required, viz. the perpetual instillation
of the roscid liquor drop after drop into the Fibers of the heart? If this be
granted, the mighty Difficulty is solved. If not, I say

Secondly, That the multitude of Nerves elonged from the Brain to the Heart
ought to be considered. What reason can we imagine Nature to have had, when she
furnished the Heart with so many nerves more than are inserted into any two,
nay three Muscles even of the first rate? Certainly she did it, either for the
more exquisite Sense, or for the more copious nourishment, or for the stronger
motion of the heart; for no fourth cause can be found. The first is improbable;
because it does not appear, that the Heart excells any other Muscle in the
sense of touching or feeling: and because there seems to be no necessity of its
being endowed with much of sense, whether we respect the action of it, which is
not perception, but Pulsation, and that too with incredible violence, such as
is inconsistent with delicate and exquisite sense; or whether we reflect upon
the secure Situation of it, which is in the Center of the cavity of the Thorax,
where it hangs free and defended on all sides from harm and offense, either
from within, or from without. The Second also is improbable; because the bulk
of the heart holds no just proportion to the multitude of nerves inserted into
it; and there are many Muscles of far greater magnitude, which yet are
plentifully supplied with nourishment by much fewer nerves. The third therefore
is true: and by consequence serves to disintangle our Hypothesis from the
chords of the Difficulty proposed. For, so great a number of nerves importing
into the Heart much more of the nutritive liquor, than can be thought necessary
for its nourishment; of what use can the overplus be, unless to maintain the
perpetual motion of it? And in this also there is a manifest difference betwixt
the Heart and all other Muscles; and such a difference, as may be brought for
one reason, why no other Muscle but the Heart has a Pulsation.

Thirdly, I say, that the aptitude of the Heart to Pulsation does consist in
its proper Fabric and conformation, in its Conical Figure, in its cavities
within, in the disposition and configuration of its Fibers, in a word, in its
whole Mechanism, which I have formerly described, and which is far different
from the Mechanism of any other Muscle whatsoever. So that if there were no
singular Artifice or knack in the structure of the Cardiac Nerves, or if these
nerves were fewer in number: yet might the heart be apt for Pulsation, of which
all other muscles are incapable, as wanting the like Mechanic conformation. No
wonder then, if Pulsation be proper to the heart only, though the Fibers of all
other Muscles be of the same nature with the Fibers of the Heart; though the
Efficient Causes of the Motion of all other Muscles be the same with those of
the Motion of the Heart; and though they, as well as the heart, act by the
contraction of their Fibers. Now if no one of the three Reasons here by me
alleged, why the motion of Pulsation is not common to all the rest of the
Muscles taken single, be thought sufficient: yet if ye please to conjoyn and
twist them all together into a triple chord, ye may then perhaps find them
strong enough to pluck up the proposed Difficulty by the roots.

But hold, a minute or two. Have I not, through have, or want of due
circumspection, run my self into the Briars of a contradiction? Did I not, in
my last Proposition, affirm, that the Mediate Cause of the natural Motion of
the Heart differs, in some respect, from that by which all the rest of the
Muscles are incited and invigorated to voluntary motion? and have I not, in the
Paragraph immediately preceding this, said, that the Mediate cause both of the
Motion of the Heart, and of the Motion of all other Muscles, is one and the
same, viz. the Succus Nervosus derived from the Brain? Where then is the
difference presumed? I answer therefore; that the difference lies not in any
change or alteration of the nature and qualities of the Succus Nervosus itself,
which I grant to be the same utrobique, on both parts: but only in the diverse
Modes of its effusion from the Brain. Into the heart, I suppose it to descend
through the Cardiac nerves, gently, slowly, and by way of instillation, drop
after drop: but into the rest of the Muscles, I suppose the same to be immitted
with great force and velocity, swift as Lightning, at the command of the Will.
And this seems to be sufficient, to constitute a difference, where the same
cause, used by Nature diversimode, and in Organs of different conformation,
produces so different effects: and consequently to extricate me from the
Briars.

From which as well as from the former impediments, being now at length free; I
come in the next place, to establish the grand Pillar, upon which the whole
weight of this my rude structure relies: that is, to make it appear to be not
only possible, but also probable, that a few little drops of liquor instilled
into the Fibers of the heart, should only by causing them to swell, or by
dilating their Pores, abbreviate them with a force great enough to make a
constriction of the heart. This if I shall be able to do, I shall not despair
of finishing my Building as I at first designed: for the remaining part of my
work will be little and easy.

As for the Possibility of so great an effect from a cause that seems to be so
weak and inconsiderable; that may be without much difficulty proved from the
just Analogy or similitude of this effect to many other as great, if not
greater effects commonly observed to arise from the like Causes: For, Mechanic
Examples of this kind are every where so obvious to sense, and so numerose,
that only to enumerate them would be a task hard and tediose. Out of so vast a
multitude therefore, I will, for brevitie's sake, select only two, such as are
not only pertinent and adaequate to my subject, but also in themselves
eminently remarkable.

The First is of a new Cable, which upon wetting will very much swell or become
thicker, shrink, and shorten itself, beyond the belief of any but a Mariner.
And Galilaeus has well observed this swelling, and the consequent abbreviation
of a Cable, to be of so great efficacy, that the violence of a Tempest, the
weight and jerks of a laden ship of 1000 Tuns burden, and the current of the
Sea, cannot by their united forces extend the Cable to its former length. This
ye will confess to be admirable, that a little water insinuating itself into
the Pores of the threads, of which the Cable is composed, should dilate those
little and indiscernible Pores with such prodigious force, as not only to swell
the close and hard twisted Cable, but to countervail, nay exceed the aggregate
of the forces of a furious wind, a strong current of the Sea, and the weight of
so great a Ship with its whole Freight. Yet common experience testifies this to
be true.

The Second Example will perhaps raise your admiration to a higher degree,
being of all of this kind that hitherto I have ever read or heard of, the most
memorable. It is this: In Rome there stands at this day an Obelisk of one solid
stone, a kind of Ophite or spotted Marble, anciently consecrated to the honor
of the great Julius Caesar, and erected in the Cirque of Nero: but in the Year
of Our Lord 1586. removed into a more eminent place, at the vast charge of Pope
Sixtus Quintus, and by the admirable skill of Dominicus Fontanus, an excellent
Architect and Engineer. This stone is in height 170 feet, above the base; in
breadth, at the bottom, 12 feet, and at the top 8, in weight 9586148 pounds:
and the weight of the Cables, Chords, Pullies, and other moveable instruments
used in raising it, amounted to 1042824 pounds, according to the computation of
Georgius Draudius. Adnotation. ad. Solini memorabilia, part. 1. fol. 131.
The removing and erection of this Obelisk was thought to be so rare a work of
Art, that the Engineer, beside the great mass of treasure he received for a
reward from his Holiness, thereby acquired to himself immortal renown; no less
than 56 Learned men having since profestly written, to describe his Machines
then used, and to celebrate his praises; as Monantholius relates. Comment. in
Aristot. Mechanic. cap. 19.
But all their praises notwithstanding, he owed no small part of his honor to
Fortune, or rather to a Carter, that stood by, an idle Spectator. For the
Engineer, a little mistaken in his forecast of the stretching of the Cables and
Ropes, found, when he came to set the erected Obelisk upon the Pedestal, that
he had not raised it high enough by 2 or 3 inches, and to raise it higher with
those Machines so stretched, was impossible. Confounded with shame and despair
by this unforeseen faileur, he begun to meditate flight, to save his life,
which he had pawned to the Pope to be forfeited, if he did not accomplish the
difficult work he had undertaken: when, as good luck would have it, out of the
crowd of vulgar gazers comes a Carter, and advises him to cause all his Cables
and Ropes to be wet with water. Which done, the Ropes quickly swelled and
shortened themselves so, that they lifted up the Column to a due height: and
then the overjoyed Fontanus with ease placed it upon the Pedestal. Now if ye
shall be pleased to reflect upon this Example, and to consider, that a little
water, only by dilating the Pores of the threads of the Cables and Ropes,
swelled and shortened them with force great enough to overcome the immense
gravity both of the Obelisk, and of themselves, with the rest of the Mechanic
apparatus then used; which gravity has been computed to your hands: I am
confident, you will no longer think it impossible for a few little drops of
liquor diffused through the Fibers of the Heart, and like wedges dilating their
little Meshes or Pores, so to swell and abbreviate them, as to cause a
constriction of the Ventricles, and that too with a force (if Borellus his
estimate be right) exceeding the force of 3000 pounds weight.

And as for the Probability of this proposition; that cannot be obscure to any
man of common sense, who shall consider, first, the near similitude that is
between the threads of a chord, and the Fibers of the heart, in Figure, in
tenacity and strength, in aptness to swell, and consequently to shorten
themselves upon humectation, and in the faculty of restoring themselves to
their natural tone after extension: and then the little or no difference
betwixt water and the Suc^us Nervosus, as to the power of insinuating into, and
dilating the Pores of bodies naturally apt to swell and shrink. For, since the
two Agents, viz. water and the Succus Nervosus, are so alike in their efficacy,
as to the dilatation of the Pores of Tensile bodies; and since the two Patients
also, viz. the threads of a chord, and the Fibers of the heart, have so full a
resemblance in their nature: it is highly probable, if not necessary, that like
effects should be produced by them. And this probability is the greater,
because of all other Efficient Causes hitherto excogitated by Learned men, to
solve the grand Phenomenon of the Pulsation of the Heart, none can be given,
which is either so intelligible, or so congruous to the whole Mechanism of the
Heart, as this which I have in this Lecture endeavored to assert.

But this Chair does not make me a Judge. To hear and determine, Most Excellent
President, and my most Learned Colleagues, is your right; which I ought not to
usurp. I will therefore first (to ease your memory) reduce into few words the
heads of what I have delivered, concerning the Efficient Causes of the Motion
of the Heart; and then humbly, and without reserve, submit all parts of my
Disquisition (for I pretend not to know, but only to inquire truth) to your
examen and judgment.

The sum of the Precedent Hypothesis is this* I suppose ( First) That the
immediate Efficient of the Pulsation or Constriction of the Heart, is the
abbreviation of the Fibers of it, arising from the dilatation or expansion of
their Pores or little meshes. ( Secondly,) That the Mediate Efficient, is the
Succus Nervosus, derived from the Brain, through the Cardiac Nerves; which
being instilled into, and diffused through the Fibers of the heart, fills and
dilates their Pores, and by necessary consequence abbreviates them, with force
sufficient to make the Systole or constriction of the Ventricles, and to
express the blood contained in them. ( Thirdly,) That the short quiets or
pauses interceding betwixt the Systoles of the heart, arise from equal pauses
or intermissions betwixt the drops of the Succus Nervosus instilled into, and
swelling the Fibers of the Heart: and that as the times of the droppings are
equal among themselves, so are also the Systoles of the Heart isochronic or
aequitemporaneous. ( Fourthly,) That the motion and guttulation of the Succus
Nervosus into the Fibers of the Heart, being accelerated or retarded, by
whatsoever causes; the Systoles of the Heart must be more or less frequent
proportionately thereto.

Which things, if ye now at length shall judge to be consentaneous to right
reason, agreeable to the Animal Economy, congruous to the Organical structure
of the Heart (to all which I have been careful to adjust them) and in fine
consistent among themselves: then I shall with assurance conclude, that the
Heart is, as all Automata are, moved by Mechanic necessity. Which is, what I
proposed to demonstrate, even without that incredible displosion of Saline and
Acid spirits in the Heart, first imagined by Doctor Willis, and since asserted
by a man of much greater Erudition, and more solid judgment, namely Alphonsus
Borellus; as necessary to be supposed, in order to the Solution of this great
Problem of the Pulsation of the Heart, and that of the motion of the rest of
the Muscles. Which pretty conceit, I will first revive in your memory, by
reciting a few of Borellus's own words faithfully; and then offer to your
consideration the reasons that have induced me to reject it. Restat igitur,
says he, quod sicut omnes musculi contrahuntur, inflatis vesiculis eorum
pororum; sic quoque immediata causa tensionis Cordis, erit inflatio vesicularum
pororum ejus, facta a fermentativa ebullitione tartarearum partium sanguinis a
succo spirituoso ex orificiis nervorum instillato, etc.

The Reasons that dissuade me from assenting to so great a man, in this matter,
are these:

First, We have the testimony even of our sight (the most certain of all our
senses) that in an Egg, after a day or two's incubation of the Hen, the Punctum
saliens first, and then the Vesicula pulsans are agitated by a manifest
Pulsation, in the Center of the Colliquamentum or genital humor, which is a
pure and homogeneous liquor; even before any the least sign of blood can be
discerned. Here therefore the supposed immediate cause of the Hearts motion,
viz. an inflation from a Fermentative ebullition of the Tartarous parts of the
blood, meeting and conflicting with the spirituose juice instilled out of the
Nerves into the Heart, certainly can have no place. For at that time, in the
Egg, neither Heart, nor Brain, nor Nerves are yet formed, nor is any part of
the Colliquamentum converted into blood: and causarum in rerum natura nondum
existentium, nulli dantur effectus. Beside, the same Vesicula pulsans is from
the beginning of the change of the genital liquor into blood, not only the
Conceptacle of it, but also the Engine that gives it motion; and therefore the
new made blood can contribute nothing toward the Pulsation thereof.

Secondly, If not only the natural motion of the Heart, but also the Voluntary
motion of the rest of the Muscles, proceed from an explosion of mutually
hostile spirits concurring and combating in them, as Borellus affirms: why have
not all other Muscles, as well as the heart, a perpetual Pulsation in them;
when the same blood, and the same Succus Spirituosus perpetually concur in
them, no less than in the heart? And what dominion could the Soul have over the
Muscles of the Limbs, to exercise which of them she pleases, and as long as she
pleases, and give them rest when she pleases; if they were agitated every
moment by Squibbs or Crackers breaking within them? certainly she could never
moderate such violent and tumultuose explosions. Besides, it is wonderful
strange, if those explosions be made in a Muscle, when it acts, that we should
never perceive it to be distended or heaved up outwardly; but that on the
contrary, we should plainly perceive, the Muscles, in all voluntary motion, to
be strongly constringed inwardly, to be minorated, and become harder; which is
a certain indicium, that they are moved in a manner quite contrary to inflation.

Thirdly, Such an explosion made in the heart, might indeed cause the Diastole
of it, by inflating and distending the Ventricles: but would hinder the Systole
or constriction of them inwardly, which is requisite to the expression of the
blood. For, the supposed explosion consisting, like that of aurum fulminans, or
Gunpowder, in a motion expansive; would of necessity dilate the cavities of
the heart.

Fourthly, If an explosion of Acid and Saline liquors meeting, commixt, and
warring in the heart, be the immediate efficient of its motion; it is
consentaneous to infer, that where the ingredients of this explosive mixture
are more copiose, there the explosions ought to be more frequent; and e contra.
But in sucking infants, who being nourished only with milk, cannot reasonably
be thought to have much, if any thing of Acidity in the nutritive juice, or of
saltness in their blood, the Pulse of the heart is notwithstanding, even in the
state of health, at least doubly quicker or more frequent, than in full grown
men, nay such who delight to feed on salt meats, and drink plentifully French
and other subacid Wines. Ergo, it is highly improbable, that the Pulse of the
heart should be the effect of such explosion.

These are the reasons that moved me, when I came to this instable bogg, to
withdraw my judgment from the conduct of Borellus, whom before I had so closely
followed; and to divert into a private way, which seemed to promise me smoother
and firmer sooting; and which notwithstanding I will not commend to others,
unless your approbation shall encourage me to pave it. Meanwhile, the
hourglass admonishing me to reserve, till I meet with some other opportunity,
what may be farther alleged to confirm the precedent explication of the
Efficient Causes of the Systole of the Heart; I will now add no more than three
short Advertisements, and resign you up to the more profitable, and more
pleasant entertainment of your own better thoughts.

The First is, that is probable, that in every Diastole of the heart, the few
and little drops of the Succus Nervosus, which by wedging themselves into the
small Rhomboid Pores or meshes of the Fibers of the Heart, and so dilating
them, caused the immediately precedent Systole; are by the restitutive motion
of the same Fibers, squeezed out of those Pores into the Parenchyma of the
Heart, whence they are absorbed and carried off with the blood by the Veins;
and so make room for the next succeeding drops, to cause the next Systole, and
so the Systoles and Diastoles of the heart come to be alternately repeted, and
the Circulation of the blood to be perpetuated. This, I say, is probable;
because Nature has instituted the like absorption of the redundant Succus
Nervosus by Veins in many other parts of the body; more eminently in the upper
part of the neck, where the Iugular Veins imbibe whatever humor distills from
the bottom of the Brain, Lib. de Cord cap. 6. ubi de Catarrhis agit.
as Doctor Lower expressly affirms, and with good reason; in these words, Humor
omnis e cerebro proveniens in venas jugulares resorbetur. I had heretofore, I
confess, a thought, that the humor contained in the Pericardium might have no
other fountain but the relics of the Succus Nervosus expressed out of the
Fibers of the Heart in the Diastoles, when after violent Tension they exercise
their natural faculty of restitution: But when I had seen, that the liquor
found in the Pericardium is easily capable of coagulation either by heat or
cold, so as to become like gelly of hartshorn, or the white of an Egg hardened
by boiling, as the Serum of the blood will do; and observed the various little
Glands seated about the Basis of the Heart, for which I could find no other
equally probable use, as to instill the Serum into the Pericardium, to
facilitate the motion of the heart, which most certainly that liquor does; as
the humor instilled out of the glandulae lacrymales upon the outsides of the
eyes, serves to moisten and make them more easily moveable every way: when I
had, I say, observed and considered these things, I rejected that thought, and
embraced this, of the absorption of the relics of the Succus Nervosus by the
Veins of the heart.

The Second is, that the Diastole of the Heart, is caused partly by the
Relaxation of the Fibers of it spontaneously restoring themselves to their
natural posture and length, as all other Tensile bodies are wont to do, after
they have been distended: partly by the force of the blood rushing out of the
Ears into the Ventricles of the Heart, and replenishing them. Wherefore the
Wisdom of Nature is admirable also in this, that she ordained these Two Causes
of the diastole, viz. the relaxation of the Fibers, and the influx of the blood
into the Ventricles, to be exactly coincident, that with united forces they
might cooperate more efficaciously. Whence it appears, that in the diastole,
the Heart is not wholly Passive, as all Anatomists hitherto have believed it to
be. For, unless the Fibers did restore themselves to their former longitude,
which is a natural action, at the same time the influx of the blood happens;
certainly there could be no room to receive the blood, because the insides of
the Ventricles would continue to touch each the other, and so there could be no
diastole.

The Third and last is, that it appears from the whole Series of this
discourse, that the Pulsation or Constriction of the Heart has its force from
that Mechanic power, which is called the Wedge: and that the blood is expressed
out of the Heart by virtue of another Mechanic power, which is named the
Praelum or Press: and consequently that the Heart itself is, as all Automata
are, moved, not by Spirits, nor by a Pulsifick faculty, nor by rarefaction of
the blood, nor Ebullition or Fermentation of the blood, nor by explosion of
Saline and Acid spirituose liquors, but by Mechanic necessity. Which from the
beginning I hoped I should be able fairly to prove.

If the success of my endeavors has not been answerable to that hope; I will
not go about to extenuate the blame of my faileur, by citing examples of much
greater Wits, which have before me in vain attempted to reveal the same secret
of Nature: but consolate my self with this, that my Judges are men no less
beloved for their exemplary candor and humanity, than honored for their
excellency in all kind of Learning; and who need not be put in mind, That Truth
is a tree, whose root is in Heaven, and of which even the wisest of us
dim-sighted Mortals here upon earth see nothing but the shadow of its branches.
I will therefore conclude this inelaborate Disquisition with that memorable
saying of the Prince of Roman Orators; Cicero in Consolatione.
De his statuat unusquisque ut libet. Quid autem verius sit, Deus ipse viderit:
hominem quidem scire arbitror neminem.

MY Lectures, such as they are, much Honored Auditors, Ye have with obliging
patience heard. Be pleased, I beseech ye, to hear also, before ye rise, a word
which I have to speak in my own defense. Were it not indecent to compare small
things with great, I should venture perhaps to advertise you, that the reasons
which induced me to attempt a reformation of the Borellian Hypothesis of the
Motion of the Heart, which Doctor Harvey himself called the Sun of the
Microcosm; In epist. dedicat. lib. de mo^u sanguin.
seem to have some kind of Analogy to those, which moved the Prince of
Astronomers, Tycho Brahe, to dislike the Ptolemaic System of the Macrocosm or
greater World, and to excogitate a new one of more probability and neatness.
For, as Tycho animadverting, that the Celestial Orbs had been by Ptolemy
distributed unhansomly; that so many, and so great Epicycles were in vain
imagined, to explicate the retrogradations of the Planets, and their various
respects to the Sun; and that the equality of the Circular motion was measured,
not from the Center of its proper Circle (as it ought) but from the Center of
another Eccentric Circle, against the first principles of Nature and Art:
invented a new System exempt from all these incommodities, which is in truth
the Copernican inverted. So I conceiving, that in the Borellian Hypothesis, and
Explosion of I know not what Saline and Acid materials in the Heart, was not
only in itself extremely improbable, and incongruous to the Wisdom of Nature
(which always constitutes certain and regular Causes to produce certain and
regular Effects) but also unnecessarily supposed to solve the Phenomenon of
the Hearts Pulsation: set my dull Brain on work to reform it, and soon invented
another, that seems both free from those inconveniences, and more agreeable to
the Organical Structure of the Heart, to which above all things it was
requisite I should endeavor to adjust it. This I thought my self obliged to
signify, lest any here should believe, either that I have usurped to my self
this whole System of the Motion of the Heart, from that most excellent
Mathematician Alphonsus Borellus, whose Memory I highly honor; or that I lay
claim to more than a Candid attempt to reform it.





EPILOGUS.
PRAELECTIONVM quidem vela jam tandem contraxi; nondum tamen dissolutam video
concionem. Resistamus igitur hic parumper, Auditores Ornatissim^, si vobis ita
videatur; and ad stupendam illam, cujus rationem Mechanicam hactenus tam anxie
inquisivimus, Cordis fabricam serio respiciamus. Inde enim, etiamsi alia omnia
in universitate rerum deessent Divinae Architecturae documenta, cuivis hominum
pronum est infer, and quam sit immensa illius, caeterorumque omnium in hoc
Mundo adspect abilium CONDITORIS solertia; quamque parum ab immedicabili cum
animi tum mentis stupiditate olim abfuerit Epicurus. Qui Animalia casu quodam,
in prima rerum procreatione, genita fuisse vecorditer censuit: and opinatus est
consequenter, totam in iis membrorum varietatem dearticulationemque non
aliunde, quam ex Atomorum forte fortuna, post infinitos inter se in spatio
infinito vortices, ita concurrentium, atque commistarum dispositione extitisse.
Quamobrem neque ullam fuisse intelligentis Naturae prudentiam, quae ossa,
cerebrum, cor, nervos, venas; quae oculos, manus, pedes, viscera; quae caetera
omnia conformans, ad fines certos, seu functiones partibus congruas respexerit:
sed singulas parts ita delineatas, co-adunatasque fuisse quadam materiae
necessitate (talibus nempe, ac tali modo concurrentibus Atomis) ut si nullius
deinde usus futurae participes fuissent. O ridiculum subtilissimi caeteroquin
Philosophi stuporem!

Pudendum profecto, si contemplans palatium, quod sit fundamento securum, tecto
concinnum, parietum symmetria congruum, exteriore forma decorum, interiore
commodum, fenestrarum constitutione salubre simul, and illustre; cunctis
denique partibus absolutum, and elegans; dicere non a^des, Epicure, fortuna
exstructum, sed art, and consilio: intuens vero Hominis corpus, in quo omnia
neque exquisitius formari, neque congruentius collocari, neque utilius
destinari, neque speciosius exornari quacunque tandem art potuissent; causam
illius coecam reputas, expertemque consilii? An non, cum oporteat de causa
ratiocinari ex effectu, ejusque conditionibus; colligamus necesse est, ex
scitissimo opificio scientissimum Opificem; and ex usibus partium tam
appositis, causam ad illos destinantem intelligentissimam inferamus? Ac sunto
fortunae suae interdum vices; non tamen, si pictoris spongia in tabulam temere
impacta, equi spumam semel expressit, ideo quotquot vides pictas tabulas,
consimili casu sunt elaboratae. Et nisi id sit, qua front id dicis de Naturae
operibus, quae tam perfect, tam constanter, non pinguntur, sed animantur?
Nempe Zeuxis, aut Polycletus habetur tibi valde peritus, cum aliquod Naturae
opus imitatus adumbratione, superficieque tenus fuerit: and DEVM, Parentemve
Naturam, seu quocunque nomine dicas Architectricem illam causam, ignorasse
putas quidnam ageret, cum internam, vivam, veramque ac inimitabilem molita
fuerit constructionem? Obstupescis Myrmecidas opusculorum fabricatores, nec
potes illum satis mirari, qui pulicis corpusculum site repraesentaverit: and
te tamen in admirationem non rapit ea causa, quae animalculum tantulum tanta
energia donarit; quae innumera organa in tam exigua materia tam distinct
expresserit; quae crus ipsius tantulum articulis distinxerit, pilisque and
crustula convestierit; quae os proboscide armarit, and intus ventrem, ac
intestina, principesque parts disposuerit; quae venas, arterias, nervos,
musculos, spiritus, and caetera tam multa ad nutritionem, vitam, sensionem,
imaginationem, appetitum, motum necessaria sic concluserit, ut tamen
unumquodque horum suam regionem, munusque suum, citra cujusquam alterius
interturbationem obtineat? Denique laudas Daedalos, Architas, Heronas, ob
solertiam, qua pauca quaedam machinamenta excogitant, parant, componunt, suis
includunt automatis: and non commendas Summum Artificem, qui quot Animalia, tot
fabricatur automata, non mortua illa, non brevi a motu impresso cessantia; sed
omnia viva, atque durabilia; sed suos ex se motus obeuntia, sed innumeris (non
unis, pauc^sve) Machinis sic dispositis, ut incomprehensibile sit, quantam in
singulis seorsim, quantam in omnibus conjunctim, solertiam, sapientiam
adhibuerit? O animum ex atomis vere concretum, and ignorantiae tenebris
oppletum; cujus vecordiae mederi, ne Asclepiadi quidem concessum existimo! Quis
enim, nisi Margite Quo prodigiosae vecordiae vocabulo Alexandrum magnum
appellitavit Demosthenes. Quam vocem insolentem exponens Suidas, deducit a
Margite quodam insigni fatuo, qui ultra quinque numerare non posset; and quum
Virginem duceret, eam non ausus est attingere, ne illa matri rem indicaret.
Videsis Erasmum in Adag. in Margite.
stultior, inspecta semel cujuslibet Animalis, maxim vero Hominis fabrica per
anatomiam patefacta, extemplo admiratione raptus, non exclamaret cum Cicerone
De not. Deor. l. secundo.
, In universo animalis corpore quid est, in quo non Naturae ratio intelligentis
appareat? Omnia enim, quae quidem aut extra cernuntur, aut intus inclusa sunt,
ita nata, atque ita locata sunt, ut nihil eorum supervacaneum sit, nihil ad
vitam retinendam non necessarium; and quantum ad hominem spectat, ex ejus
natura debet intelligi, nec figuram situmque membrorum, nec ingenii mentisque
vim talem effici potuisse fortuna: aut cum Seneca non diceret, De Benef. l. 6.
Scio equidem, scio, non esse hominem tumultuarium and incogitatum opus? Id
autem si mero naturae lumine fuit olim Ethnicis cognitum atque perspectum; Hac
de re videri meretur Galenus, praesertim qua part oculi and manus usum
examinat.
nos profecto, quibus ex Mosaica creationis historia clarior lux affulsit,
impii, nedum ingrati Summum erga Numen essemus, nisi summa cum animorum
veneratione immens^m ipsius Sapientiam, Benignitatem, Potentiam perpetuo
agnosceremus. DEO igitur ter Opt. Max. Creatori nostro sit laus, honor, and
gloria, qui tam mirabili nos structura formavit.

FINIS.
GVALTERI CHARLETONI Scripta jam in Lucem emissa
Latin.
1. DE Lithiasi Diatriba, Lugduni Batavorum, A. D. 1650. in Octav. 2. Oeconomia
Animalis, novis in medicina Hypothesibus superstructa, and Mechanice explicata:
cui accessere Dissertatio epistolica de Ortu Animae humanae, and Consilium
Hygiasticum: Londini, A.D. 1658. in Oct. 3. Exercitationes Pathologicae, in
quibus Morborum pene omnium natura, generatio, and causae ex novis Anatomicorum
inventis sedulo investigantur: Londini, 1661. in Quarto. 4. Inquisitiones II.
Anatomico-physicae: prior de Fulmine, altera de Proprietatibus Cerebri humani:
Londini, 1665. in Octav. 5. De Scorbuto, liber singularis: Londini, 1672. in
Oct. 6. Exercitationes de differentiis and nominibus Animalium. Quibus accedunt
quaedam de variis Fossilium generibus; deque differentiis and nominibus
Colorum; cum Mantissa Anatomica: Oxon. 1677. in Fol. 7. Oration Anniversaria,
habita in Theatro Anatomico Regalis Collegii Medicorum Londinensium 5 to die
Augusti, 1680. in Quarto. 8. Guilielmi Ducis Novocastrensis vita: Londini,
1678. in Folio.
Anglice.
9. The darkness of Atheism dispelled by the light of Nature, or a Natural
Theology, Land. 1652. in Quar. 10. Physiologia Epicuro-Gassendo-Charletoniana,
or, A fabric of Natural Science upon the Hypothesis of Atoms: Land. 1654. in
Folio. 11. Epicurus's Morals: Land. 1656. in Quarto. 12. The Immortality of the
human Soul demonstrated: Land. 1657. in Quarto. 13. The Ephesian and Cimmerian
Matrons; two remarkable examples of the power of Love and Wit. Land. 1658. in
Octavo. 14. Character of King Charles II. Land. 1660. in Quar. 15. Chorea
Gigantum, or Stoneheng restored to the Danes: Land. 1663. in Quart. 16. Two
Philosophical discourses: 1. of the different Wits of men; 2. of the Mystery of
Vintners: Land. 1672. in Octavo. 17. A Natural History of the Passions: Land.
1674. Oct. 18. Socrates Triumphans, or Plato's Apology for Socrates; and his
Phaedo or Dialogue of the Immortality of man's Soul; with useful Reflections:
Land. 1675. in Octavo. 19. Inquiries into Human Nature, in VI Anatomical
Praelections in the new Theater of the Royal College of Physicians in London:
Land. 1680. in Quart. 20. The Harmony of Natural and Positive Divine Laws:
Land. 1682. in Octavo. 21. Three Anatomic Lectures read in the Theater of the
Royal College of Physicians: Land. 1683. in Quarto.
FINIS.

