ECCLESIASTICVM: OR A PLAIN and FAMILIAR Christian Conference, CONCERNING
Gospel Churches, and Order.

For the Information and Benefit of those, who shall seek the Lord their God,
and ask the way to Zion, with their faces thitherward; SAYING,

Come and let us join our selves unto the Lord in a perpetual Covenant that
shall not be forgotten.

My People have been lost Cheep: their Shepherds have caused them to go astray,
they have turned them away in the Mountains, they have gone from Mountain to
Hill, they have forgotten their resting place, Jer. 50.5, 6.

Show me thy ways, O Lord teach me thy Paths, Psalm. 25.3, 4. and 27.11. and
119.12, 33.

How goodly are thy Tents, O Jacob, and thy Tabernacles, O Israel! Numb. 24.6,
7.

Tell me, O thou whom my Soul loves, where thou feedest, where thou make thy
flocks to lie down at noon; for why should I be as one that turns aside to the
flocks of thy Companions? Cant. 1.7.

LONDON, Printed by T. S. for the Publisher, and are to be Sold by W. Marshall
at the Bible in Newgate-street, 1690.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
HOW small soever the stone cut out without hands, now seems to be, and has
been for many Ages, viz. A poor afflicted People trusting in the Name of the
Lord, Zion whom no man regards, a Remnant, a Cottage, a persecuted Woman in
the Wilderness; Yet it is great in the Eyes of the Lord, and in the Eyes of
every one that fears his Name, even exalted above all Mountains and Hills, in
regard of it is spiritual beauty and preciousness, and shall e're long in
respect of Visible splendour and Prevalency be set on the top of every Mountain,
to fulfill those Prophecies, Isa. 2.2, 3. Mic. 4.1, 2. Zech. 8.20, 21, 22. When
many People shall say, Come let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord, to the
house of the God of Jacob, etc. Which intends the mighty and cheerful gathering
and assembling that should be in the last days, unto a Visible Church state and
Communion in the Faith and Order of the Gospel; then will the Lord assemble her
that halteth, and gather her that is driven out, and her that he has
afflicted, and then he says, he will make her that halteth [those who are not
rightly instructed in the Order of the Gospel] a Remnant [i. e. of living
Stones to be built up on the Corner stone in the building of Zion] and her that
was cast far off [by Antichristian corruptions] a strong Nation, and the Lord
shall reign over them in Mount Zion from henceforth and for ever. In this Glory
shall the Lord appear when he builds up Zion, Psalm. 102.16. And by Gods
present Providence, seemingly unfolding ancient Prophecies, he is now arising
to have Mercy on Zion, the time [of the end of one thousand two hundred and
sixty days of her Desolation, and therefore] to favor her being come, yea the
set time, ver. 13. and no less seeming to be coming out of his place to punish
the inhabitants of the Earth, Isa. 26.21. For all their cruel Persecution, and
hellish Idolatry, to destroy Babylon that has wasted her, and the Children of
Edom [Protestant Persecutors of the Egyptian race] that have so long been
crying aloud to Babylon, and the Antichristian Fowers against the inward court
worshippers, Race it, race it even to the Foundation, Psalm. 137. The building
of this Zion will be gradual [ for a Nation cannot be born in one day, this
Royal Nation] by the accomplishment of the great Prophecies, by wonderful and
great Providence, and those of two sorts, in breaking, scattering, and
overthrowing the Antichristian Powers, the Feet and Toes of Iron and Clay, and
in setting up a Kingdom of Saints which shall not be left to another People.
The Inchoation of which has been already by Preaching the Everlasting Gospel,
the auspicious augmentation and growth, will be in gathering the Saints into a
Visible Church State; Churches shall be multiplied and mightily increased, as
of old, Act. 2. and 9.21. To hasten this great and expected Glory, what can we
do less than contribute by our Prayers and faithful endeavors, to the
appearance thereof? and who that loves the Lord Jesus and his glorious
appearance can do less than to come to our great Cornerstone, as living stones
that they may be built up an Holy Temple in the Lord, and thereto be edified in
all holiness, serving him therein Day and Night? And that this may appear to be
the duty of every one professing Faith, viz. to join himself in fellowship with
a particular Church Visible is all that I intend to do at this time, as a brief
Preface to this short Treatise.

1. It was the practice of Believers in the Primitive times, Act. 2.41. They
that were converted to the Faith of the Lord Jesus Christ, by gladly receiving
the Word of Promise, ver. 38.39. were added unto the Church to the number of
three thousand Souls. And it is most evident that their believing, of it self
made them not Members of the Church, for the Text is express in it, that they
first believed, and then by another Act of their own and the Churches,
receiving them, they were added to them that were before in fellowship, [the
hundred and twenty,] and became Church Members, as it follows, ver. 47. And the
Lord added to the Church daily such as should be saved. i. e. Such as were in a
State of Salvation by believing. The Lord is said to add them by his Grace,
that wrought effectually upon their Hearts to believe, and believing inclined
them also to join themselves unto the Lord in Church fellowship. On the
judicial proceeding of Christ by the Mouth of Peter against two Hypocrites that
had joined themselves and were discovered, Act. 5.13. That of the Rest [i. e.
of the same sort] durst none to join himself; (Ananias and Sapphira having been
made so eminent Examples) but the people magnified them, i. e. the Church and
the Apostles, ver. 14. And Believers [i. e. sincere-hearted] were the more
added unto the Lord, Multitudes both of Men and Women. So that as soon as they
believed they looked upon it, as their next duty to join themselves to a Gospel
Church. Likewise see the same Practice by the Apostle Paul as soon as he was
converted, Act. 9.26, 27, 28. There is also another eminent instance at
Antioch, where the Disciples were first called Christians, they that were
converted by the scattered Disciples at Saul's Persecution, were exhorted by
Barnabas, Act. 11.23. To join together in Church fellowship, for it is said,
when he came, [being sent for that end by the Church at Jerusalem] and had seen
the Grace of God in these converted ones, he was glad, and exhorted them all
that with purpose or readiness of Heart, they would join unto the Lord. i. e.
In Church fellowship, for these phrases of joining and adding unto the Lord, do
express adding or joining to the Church, because the Church is the Lords, and
joined unto him by a visible Covenant; and every one that joins to the Church
does primarily and professedly join themselves to the Lord in Church Communion.
And the immediate declared event of this Exhortation of Barnabas was, that they
joined to the Lord in Church fellowship, and became a Church, ver. 26. See also
Act. 16.5.

2. It appears to be the duty of every Believer to join himself to a particular
Church, from the Nature of Conversion; it is the turning the whole man unto
God, in all the ways and appointments of Christ wherein he is to be found; but
Church fellowship is a Divine Institution where God is to be found, joined
with, and submitted unto, as is abundantly manifest from the current of the Old
and New Testament. This seems to be the meaning of the Apostle when he does
beseech the Romans, chapter 12.1. by the Mercies of God to present their Bodies,
[i. e. their Persons] to give up their Persons by presenting them to, or before
the Lord [ viz. in Church Communion] a living Sacrifice [of thanksgiving] Holy
and Acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable worship, [(...)] it should be
rendered, your word service, or worship; the word is used for the Word of God, 1
Pet. 2. Or a service of Words, As new born babes desire, (...), the sincere
Word, the Milk, or Milk of Word. So that the Exhortation of the Apostle seems
to be made to Believers to devote and dedicate themselves unto the Lord in
Church fellowship by a Covenant or Obligation of Words, being called their
service of Words, viz. their explicate word, the Presentment or Devotement of
themselves unto the Lord, according to Hos. 14.2. This Dedication or Devotement
is lively signified in Baptism, wherein every Believer does federally oblige
himself, to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and thereby does both bind himself to
join unto the Lord in professed Subjection to all his Ordinances, and does show
it, Sign and Seal it before the Lord. And every adult one that professes
himself baptized, and does not actually join himself unto the Lord in Church
fellowship, does practically deny his Baptismal Dedication, wherein he is
devoted to be a living, i. e. visible lively Sacrifice of thanksgiving in his
Person, and all his performances unto the Lord.

3. That Believer that joins not himself in Church Society falls short of many
great ends of his professed high, and holy Vocation; for we are called
according to Gods purpose of Grace to be a choice Generation, a Royal
Priesthood, a People, (...), i. e. for a peculiarity, i. e. unto God for his
special visible service, to offer up Spiritual Sacrifices, of a true Gospel
Nature, acceptable unto God through Jesus Christ, ver. 5. Wherein the Virtues
of Christ are showed forth or declared, ver. 9. Not only perceived in our
selves, but showed forth in Practice and Profession, and this is, or can be no
way so much as in Gospel instituted worship, wherein a Believer comes unto, and
is built up in the Lord Jesus Christ as a living Stone. The great reason of
squaring a stone is, to be laid in the building, as the end of squaring the
Stones in Mount Lebanon was to lay them in Solomon's Temple, a Type of a Visible
Gospel Church, Such I doubt not but the Holy Ghost means by the Apostle Peter,
saying, Ye as lively Stones are built a spiritual House, ver. 5. and so the
Apostle Paul, Ephesians. 2.20, 21.

Again the Lord Jesus does declaredly design that Believers should be visibly
separated from the World, to come out in the way of Gospel Communion from all
unclean things and Persons, 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16, 17. From all Heathenish,
Antichristian, or false unwarranted worship, and from Communion with professed
Unbelievers, and enter into a solemn explicit Covenant with the Lord; without
doing of which they answer not the end of their calling in Christ. Lastly our
Calling is not only to be the Lords singly, but conjunctly with the Saints and
redeemed ones, to a mystical Relation to Christ, in a Community of the Elect
and called ones, which is answered by us, as in our inward and spiritual, so by
our external and visible joining our selves to the Society of the faithful, to
serve the Lord in one Body with them; for we are called to the Peace of God
that rules in our Hearts, in one body, Col. 3.15. i. e. with other Saints and
Believers, and therefore are to walk worthy, as it becomes this vocation, not
only as to Moral Duties but instituted worship, Ephesians. 4.1. etc. Phil. 1.26. Let
your Conversation be as it becomes the Gospel of Christ; and this in our Order
and stedfastness of our Faith in Christ, Col. 2.5.

4. There are Duties to be performed by every Believer, by Virtue of his
Relation to Christ as such, which cannot be done but in a way of Church
Communion; for he is obliged to observe what ever Christ has commanded, Mat.
28.20. And how great things has Christ required to be observed in a way of
Church Communion? as the exercise of Brotherly love, Heb. 13.1.1 Joh. 3.11. And
he there refers to our Saviors express command, Joh. 13.34. The Obedience to
which lies in the sensible Expression thereof, as it appears by what follows,
Hereby shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have love one for
another, i. e. In outward visible acts. And the Apostle speaks of the ^ommunion
of Love, fellowship of the Spirit, Bowels of Mercy, sameness of Mind, etc.
Phil. 2.1, 2, 3. Love is a Grace that gives Life to all acts of Communion, it
flou^isheth and branches it self in the most lively manner in a Society, and
Societies are for the sake of it. Destroy love, and not only the ends, but the
very bond and Life of a Society comes to nothing. There are great commands of
Christ that we are not capable of obeying him in but in Church Communion: As
frequent assembling together, provoking one another to love and good works,
Heb. 10.24. The remembrance of the Lords Death frequently in the Lords Supper.
And this is to be observed in a Body or Society of Believers. See 1 Cor. 10.16,
17. I might instance also in all Duties that concern brotherly watch, Pastoral
watch, each Officers duties by their respective places, and Members to them;
all Discipline actively or passively considered, Christ's Church Institution,
Ordinances and Statutes are those which are principally intended by David,
Psalm. 119. And such were those that Zechary and Elizabeth walked in, blameless,
Luke 1.6.

5. Every one that supposes himself in a state of Grace should use all
endeavors required by Christ, and means instituted by him for growth in Grace.
Now that Church fellowship and Ordinances are instituted by Christ for growth
in Grace, I think no sound Christian will go about to deny. Believers are
exhorted, or commanded to grow in Grace, 2 Pet. 3.18. And that Churches, and
their Officers and Ordinances are appointed for that end, which we are to abide
steadfast in the use of, is manifest, from Ephesians. 4.14, 15. compared with the
Primitive practice, Act. 2.42. chapter 9.5. See also Ephesians. 2.19.

6. All that profess themselves to be translated into the Kingdom of our Lord
Jesus Christ should walk as professed Subjects thereof; and this they cannot do
but in Communion with a visible Church, for particular Churches are the visible
parts of Christ's Kingdom. Here Christ rules as King, Lawgiver, and appears as
High priest and Prophet, giving forth himself to the Faith of his People with
all his fullness of Grace in Gospel Ordinances and Dispensations. Here then it
is that a Believer does exalt the Lord Jesus Christ most eminently as to
visibility, in his regal Power; and therefore so long as a Believer joins not
himself to a particular Church, he stays in the Verge of Satan's Kingdom,
exposes himself at no small rate, to his Temptations, Rage and Tyranny; and
salls short of one great end of his Faith in the Salvation of his Soul, which
is to be a professed Subject of Christ's Kingdom, deals disloyally with Christ,
instead of promoting, prejudiceth the Interest of Christ both in respect of
himself and others in the World, he may be a Nicodemus like Friend of Christ;
but why does he not professedly and openly practice Obedience to all the Laws
and Ordinances of his House, and bear witness thereto? Is it not a tacit and
implicit denying of Christ? and will not Christ take it so? and men's talking
of Christ's Kingdom is but a vain show, unless they do him this particular
personal service, as to join themselves actually and visibly to a Church of
Christ; therein espousing his Interest in giving up their Names unto him, and
walking in his Name, as Micah 4.5. All people will walk every one in the Name
of his God, and we will walk in the Name of the Lord our God for ever and ever.

Objections that are made against this practice are very inconsiderable, and
should bear little weight in a Mind truly enlightened; some of which are
answered in the ensuing discourse, others I should here remove, if there were
room for it. I think the Naming them is the shaming of them, to all men that
have learned Christ, and tasted that the Lord is Gracious. 1. The scorn and
reproach men shall fall under from the profane World. I think no wise man will
be laugh't out of his Estate, how much less out of his Religion and Souls
Salvation? 2. A Suspicion lest they should come under too strict ties and bonds
to Holy and Religious Conversation. Read 1 Pet. 1.14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. 3.
Others are kept off, by prejudices arisen by reason of the sins and failings of
Churches and Church Members. But will wise men refuse a good Calling or Estate
because there are so many abuse them? And name a Church or Christian without
failings, and considerable ones. It is your duty to choose the purest Society,
and you are at your Liberty to do it where you may have most Comfort and
Edification. Lastly, Many are hindered from their ignorance, or misled
apprehensions concerning the Nature of a Gospel Church. For their Information
and Rectification, especially, I have published this Christian Conference, that
was in my hands, and that it may obtain the desired end, is the sincere wish
and prayer of an unworthy Servant of Christ,

Isa. Chauncy.

This Conference is managed by Mr. Cornelius Philomathes a Country Gentleman,
and Mr. Peter Christophilus a Minister, Neighbor to him.

The Introduction.
Christophilus. Mr. Philomathes, I am heartily glad to see you; methinks you
are mightily enjoying your self in your pleasant and retired walks; will not my
company disturb your meditations?


Philomathes. I take it kindly, Sir, you are pleased to give me a Visit, for
indeed, I live somewhat lonely, I am glad of good company, especially sometimes
for divertisement, but there is no friend more welcome than your self to me,
because your cheerfulness revives me, and your discourse profits me.


Christoph. Dear Sir, I deserve not so great a character and commendation, it
is your generous disposition that leads you to speak these things, for you know
we use to differ pretty much in many things, especially in matters of Religion,
and in discourse seemingly hot opponents of each other, but I think never the
worse Friends.


Phil. Sir, I have, so near as I know my own heart, a most cordial love to
every one that fears God, though he be not in every thing of my mind; but for
you, Sir, I have more than an ordinary respect and esteem, as having been my
old acquaintance, and intimate friend and neighbor in all the late Changes in
Church and state, for above these forty years we never had any lasting
difference, but for the most part a very friendly correspondence.


Christ. And to your great honor, with a grateful remembrance, may I often
rehearse to the praise and glory of God, the marvelous Christian kindness and
commiseration that you showed to me, and my wife and family in our late
Persecutions, that you often sheltered me from the rage of my enemies; and when
they haled me to Prison, and plundered all my goods, that my Wife and Children
had not Beds to lie on, Victuals to eat, nor Vessels to dress any thing in
left, you were pleased to take them into your house, and provide plentifully
for them; and this you did when you were in a capacity to have done us more
hurt than they who did it, and ran no small hazard from time to time in not
doing it.


Phil. No, no, I hope God will keep me from a persecuting spirit; I bless his
name he has kept me from it hitherto, and it is a change in our Nation much to
be admired, that we have such a day of Liberty as we have, that all good men
may live quietly and peaceably one by another, and serve God according to their
Consciences.


Christ. Ay Sir, especially if we consider the stupendous circumstances of
Providence these few last years past, that has wrought about matters to effect
that which we so long prayed and waited for.


Phil. But my friend, I must whisper a word in your ear, things are not right
yet.


Christ. No, no, nor will not be yet, as they shall be, but blessed be God they
are so well as they are, and that God is going on so fast in the way of his
Providence toward finishing his Mystery.


Phil. I see you are on your Prophetic hints still, I must confess my self
here Asinus ad lyram, for the darkness of Prophecies, and the disagreement of
Interpreters, and Events refuting so many that have been very confident, has
quite discouraged me, that as I look not into them my self, so I give little
heed to what others say, for all men will abound in their own sense; and a man
may be saved whether he be right or wrong in those things.


Christ. Well Sir, then we'll let those things alone, I would not introduce any
ungrateful discourse, but would rather enter upon something more suitable to
your genius.


Phil. Say you so? I will be so bold with you then, as to start some matter for
our discourse, which may be of use to me, and it is that which I have been just
now meditating on, when walking by my self, and I cannot tell what is the matter
with me (there may be something of God in it) my mind for some months since
has been much running on such things: My Friend, I am thinking about a Church
of Christ, whether or no Christ instituted any? or whether there be any Visible
Church but what is established by the Laws of Men? our Parson stands very
stiffly on this latter Opinion, and truly to give him his due (though a while
ago he seemed a little of a Persecuting spirit, which I always chid him for) he
is a learned man, a good Divine, an eloquent Preacher, and indeed an
indifferent good liver, unless now and then in some company he may drink a
glass of Wine too much, which a good man may do. Indeed he was upon this Point
Sunday last, and I am thinking he did not give sufficient Scripture ground to
prove what he said.


Christ. Sir, I am not a little startled at this humor of yours; you know how
often you have been moved to great passion upon my starting Disputes upon that
Point, and that you looked upon things of this nature (how clearly soever
proved from Scripture) to have as little certainty in them as you do the
Interpretation of Prophecies now.


Phil. It Is too true indeed what you say of me, and I thank you for it, but
Nemo mortalium omnibus horis sapit; it may be God is fixing my heart to a more
serious and impartial consideration of these things, from which two things
hindered me. 1. A rooted prejudice took in from the University, and daily
company, especially with them of the Gown of both sorts against these things.
2. Worldly Interest; I did not dare to suffer my mind and conscience to be
overcome by the light of some Truths, lest they should so far prevail as to
prejudice my Estate and Reputation among the leading men of the times; I shall
speak two words, which shall introduce you with cheerfulness into this
discourse. 1. In our former converses about these things, although I usually
(as you know the manner is for discourse sake) gave you much opposition, yet
there were many Arguments which you used pinched me very hard, and although I
seemed to blow them off with little regard, yet they stuck in my mind
afterward, and now recur with no small evidence and demonstration, especially
such as flowed so clearly from Scripture, as I know there were many: though I
made as if I would not see it. And I have had a great veneration for Scripture,
and I have often thought that it must be the standard for our Religion,
whatever men say, else we must turn Papists or Mahometans. And there was one
place among the rest which you pressed upon me for strictness of walking
according to Gospel Rules in the service of Christ, Joh. 15.14. Ye are my
friends if ye do whatever I command you. From this place I have had many checks
of conscience in reading over the Books of the New Testament (in the course I
observe in my family) seeing so many things commanded by Christ, which I take
no regard to, especially in Gospel Instituted Worship, and I have thought that
sure Christ commands Believers much more than mere Morality, which made me to
question my true friendship to Christ, and that I was not carried forth in the
practice of that little Religion which I pretend to, from a right principle,
but from carnal, and did but what a mere prudential moral man might do; viz. to
attain to a little seeming negative Holiness; and seeing upon examination I
find the fruit no better, I question the goodness of the Tree. Indeed I pleased
my self that I was not of a persecuting spirit, and now I find this came from
the natural constitution God has given me; I was always of a compassionate
nature, hating cruelty. Likewise I took up from the Gospel a Moral Rule, to do
as I would be done by; now in all this I find there was nothing but nature, and
mere morality, not any thing of grace; here now I finding my self merely
natural, I see the reason why all the mysteries of faith and order (the
commands of God in the Gospel) were mere foolishness to me. And I manifested a
love to you and others of your persuasion, because you were always the fairest
and honestest sort of men to deal with, except here and there an Hypocritical
knave. Such will be found among the strictest Professors in this world: though
I often had my mouth stopped when your inveterate Enemies condemned all, and
your very Religion it self for your sakes. Besides, I did love you, because I
saw you good Commonwealths men, and for the most part asserted our Civil
Liberties, as well as Spiritual. And lastly, as I may tell you, I had no little
condemnation in my conscience by observing the conversation of some of you, and
looked upon it as some kind of expiation for my extravagancies and compliances,
and so a palliate cure of my stinging conscience to show as much countenance to
you as could well stand with my circumstances. And I was willing to have a
general reputation among all Parties for a good honest prudent Gentleman of a
religious inclination, though differing in some smaller matters, and sometimes
carried away by a sort of men to those practices I approved not of, but could
not well avoid; and you know I was never no swearer, nor did ever care for
healths, and seldom out of the way by a glass of Wine more than ordinary.


Christ. Sir, I am sure now you speak like a very honest Gentleman indeed; I
have often heard your discourse with delight, but never with so much
complacency as now, you have by this got my very heart, for I hope you are
through grace raised to a better savor and truer relish of spiritual things
than ever I perceived in you.


Phil. I wish that be true, God grant that through his rich grace it may be so.
I will add a word more concerning my state in grace by and by, but let me first
mention the other thing to induce you to proceed in answering my desire, and it
is this; I am now willing heartily to enquire into your way of Worship, that
which you call Gospel Order, and to lay aside all wrangling disputes and
prejudices, and take things calmly, and with a sincere impartial attention,
that so I may have the clearest information that may be of the true mind and
will of Christ; for now I see it is to no purpose to serve Christ in a way that
he never revealed or appointed; such services I am convinced are neither
acceptable to him, nor profitable to us: therefore our gracious and wise Lord
tells the corrupt worshippers of his day, In vain do ye worship me, teaching
for Doctrine the commandments of men. I was much startled at that Text once by
an able Preacher (slipping in a strange place into a Conventicle where no body
knew me) who did open and apply that place notably; I wished in my mind some of
my acquaintance had heard him, but that was not a day for such as I and them to
be seen at a Conventicle.


Christ. Sir, I shall now most gladly comply with you in the command you lay
upon me, but I pray Sir, how came you so in love with the Lord Jesus Christ?
you may remember how in your familiar discourses with me at your Table, you
would take occasion a little merrily to descant upon my name, and say, it was a
marvelous Puritanick name, sure thy Father was a great Puritan, Brownist, or
Anabaptist.


Phil. Sir, I remember it very well, and I am convinced I did very ill in it to
jest with spiritual things, for I find now I had as good have joked on the name
Christian, for indeed he is not worthy of that name who is not a friend of
Christ, and such I desire to be, and hope through the free grace of God I shall
be for ever hereafter; and oh that through the Word of God, and the effectual
operation of his Spirit, I may be made wise unto salvation, and then my name
will not only be Philomathes, but Polumathes!


Christ. Amen; It is my hearty desire and prayer to God for you that you may be
saved, and always has been since I knew you; but I pray how came you all of a
sudden to be so great a friend unto Christ, as I hear you now profess, to my
unspeakable rejoicing?


Phil. On a sudden! no, no, man, it is not on a sudden; God has been longer
dealing with my heart than you, or any one has known of, though you hear of it
but now. It would be too long to acquaint you with the dealings of God with me,
the many convictions of conscience that I have wrestled with, and at last
through the prevailing power of Sin and Satan, palliated with some Religion, or
stifled with merry companions, or by resolutely casting off convictions: from
reading the Word, from hearing it, from the good Education my good Parents gave
me (for indeed to tell you the truth, they were Puritans, and I* the Lord
forgive me, an Apostate wretch from the Principles I was instructed in: however
all was palliated under the name and carriage of a prudential man) convictions
from the conversation of good men, from the sins of profane ones, that I was
often an eye and ear-witness: of convictions, from the preaching of our Parson
that preached against some sins that he was too too much guilty of. I was
convinced it was my duty to do as he said, not as he did; but all this while I
was in the gall of bitterness, and the bond of iniquity, whatever I or others
thought of me, for I knew not Christ, and tasted no true savor of him: I had
something of a form of godliness, but no power; my Religion, such as it was,
was a mere slavery to me; the world, and the lusts of my own heart kept me a
slave to the Devil.


Christ. When do you think those bonds began first to be broken, and how?


Phil. Truly it was by the Word of God; for when I considered some places of
Scripture, such as Romans 10.17. faith comes by hearing, etc. and Jam. 1.18. Of
his own will begat he us with the word of truth; it wrought upon me to look out
a little (in my prudential way) after good Preaching, that I might find the
gates of Wisdom. And I would hear some of the ablest men of our Church,
especially when I went to London, and truly I heard many notable discourses for
Eloquence and Learning, and they seemed for to make a great jingle in my
imagination for the present, but no impression on my heart, that remained very
lean still. And the main substance of their discourses was usually to cry up
our Church for the purest in the world, and natural Religion, and the power of
the natural man's free will to the embracing the things of God, the Doctrine of
Non-Resistance, and Passive Obedience; and in the hearing of those Doctrines, I
was so far from profiting, that my heart told me still while I heard, that I
sufficiently knew by mine own experience that they preached Lies, and that they
caused the people to err, such as are spoken of, Jer. 14.14. and 23.25, 26, 32.
Ezekiel. 13.8, 9. and 16.29. and 22.28. I pitied the poor Souls that sat
constantly under such teaching, and resolved to give them off, and betake my
self to Conventicles; but my covetous heart, in love still with the world, was
too hard for me, for there was danger yet in it; whereupon I talked with some
Whigs that were not so strait-lac'd, but that they would hear good Preaching in
the Church, and Common Prayer too, if need were, but would shake their heads,
and make great complaint of the Public Ministry. In brief, I find they were
sick of my disease, though I liked them the better for it then; they told me of
a man or two which the Whigs that had been affrighted from Conventicles had
smelt out, and went to hear, but they are (say some) reckoned but Phanaticks in
a Mask; the true Sons of the Church hate them with a perfect hatred; quoth I,
it is no matter for that, I will hear them what they say, if it please God:
Indeed I was so dissatisfied in the preaching of some of their London Dons,
that I had rather hear our Country Doctor, which I look upon as more orthodox,
and was just resolving to leave the Church, and venture it at the Conventicles:
No, say my honest Latitudinarian Whigs (as true Blues for the Peoples Civil
Rights as any in the world, but since I find them mere bogglers at the Interest
of Christ; and there are some N. C. Divines that give large measures to their
consciences too, but no more of that) don't do any thing rashly; consider, you
have a plentiful Estate, God be thanked, and you have a Wife and many Children,
it becomes you to mind the main chance; these are but Punctilio's of difference
between the Church of England, and the Dissenters, the great danger is of
Popery, let us all combine against that, and not let Protestants break one
another by these small Indifferences. We confess we are troubled at this Devil
of Persecution that is broke out in the Church, but we think too they are a
sort of imprudent rash People, that will be cast into Prisons, and ruin their
Estates and Family's for noncompliance in indifferent things, in which cause
we believe they could not justify themselves to die. There are many things
indeed should be rectified in our Church; but you know our Articles are very
sound, and as for the Prayers and Ceremony's, they are as our first Reformers
and Martyrs left them. These things being spoken at a noted Coffee-house for
Whiggs, took much impression upon me, and fixed me with more Resolution to
adhere to the Church; for I knew they were old Professors, and as cunning
Shifters, as I was, or I could be in matters of Religion. I thought my self now
but a fool to them, seeing they had studied and practiced this Point so
thoroughly; and condemned a narrow throated Conscience for one of the worst
things in the World for a Wise man, it was fit only for Religious fools. But I
told them if I did keep my Church, I would hear some or other that preached
Salvation by Jesus Christ, and if I found such an one I would go near to move
my Family, and come up to London, so I took my leave and went away, paying my
Dish.


Christ. And did you go to hear the man or men they directed you to?


Phil. Yea, I Will warrant you, and with a greedy appetite; and there was a great
crowd of Whiggs, many of which I knew when they would not have gone to Church
for a great deal, sed tempora mutantur and nos, etc.


Christ. And what was the Subject he was upon?


Phil. Ephesians. 2.1. And you has he quickened who were dead in Trespasses and Sins,
etc. He insisted on the dead state of the Natural man, showed how all the
Imagination of his Heart was evil; he could not of himself do any good, Romans
3.12. and backed his Doctrine with so many full and plain places of Scripture,
that my mouth was fully stopped and my Heart became guilty before God. I said
with my self, Blessed be God, I hope some men in the Church have got the cue of
the Gospel. I hope all have not abdicated the thirty nine Articles from their
Pulpits. I went in the Afternoon to hear a man much commended too, and he was
on that Text, Mat. 16.26. What will it profit a man, etc. And he described the
excellency and worth of a man's Soul so well, showing nothing could be a
valuable ransom for it but Christ; and decried the world at such a rate,
especially when it comes in competition with the Eternal welfare of the Soul;
that my two great bulwarks were battered down in a manner in one day, and
Christ even ready to take possession. I saw now I was but a poor undone,
wretched, wicked, condemned creature, and that I had hitherto sold my Soul to
preserve my Estate. Whereupon I retired my self to my Lodging, and spent much
time in Prayers and Tears, and resolved now if God would give me strength, I
would slip into a Conventicle, which accordingly I did next Sunday, where I
heard a very awakening discourse upon, Gal. 3.10. As many as are of the Works
of the Law, are under the Curse. Whereby I understood the desperate Condition I
was in, in Relation to the Law, which he opened exceeding well, Whereby the Law
came, Sin revived, and I died, Romans 7. After this I made a shift to get into a
place where I heard a worthy man preach very lively and clearly on Act. 16 31.
whence he opened the Nature of Faith, and showed how it saved, viz.
Instrumentally by closing with, and laying hold upon the Lord Jesus Christ for
Justification and Sanctification, and how Christ was made Sin for us, and bare
the Curse: After this I began to savor the preaching of Jesus Christ, and
found my Soul more refreshed with one of these Sermons, than with an hundred
others. I heard also from Acts 4.12. There is no other Name under Heaven given,
whereby we can be saved, and from Heb. 7.25. He is able to save to the
uttermost all them that come, etc. from Joh. 14.6. I am the Way, the Truth,
etc. It would be endless to acquaint you with the precious discourses, that I
have since heard in London when I came up, especially from the time of Liberty;
and what warmth of Love was wrought in me to the Lord Jesus Christ, with some
measure I trust of a true and lively Faith, that through the strength of
Freegrace I hope I shall be a Christophilus now all my days, but I must tell
you one thing, that the Devil is a Conventicler too, as well as a Son of the
Church, for I see many very loose persons there for hearers, and not a little
false Doctrine delivered in many of them.


Christ. These things always have and will be; as for profane hearers, I
dislike not that, for there is then the more matter for a converting Ministry
to work upon; and as for false teachers, they were many in the Apostles time,
as Paul and Peter tell us in their Epistles. This should not discourage you;
But be faithful to the Death, and you shall have a Crown of Life, Rev. 2.10.


Phil. I hope by the help of God I shall, but I will tell you there is one
difficulty, I cannot get over yet, and that is this; I have heard you say, it is
the Duty of a Believer, to follow Christ fully, to deny himself and take up his
Cross, and to add or join himself to some Church; which I have not done any
otherwise than to partake sometimes with the Church of England, and sometimes
at a Meeting; which I am much dissatisfied in, for many weighty reasons not to
be now insisted on. That which keeps me at this day is my great Ignorance of,
and Estrangedness to the order of the Gospel, I being not fully satisfied
whether Christ has instituted any Stated Gospel Church, and if he has, where
among all your different persuasions in matters of worship it is to be found. I
wish you would be pleased to give me the clearest account you are able in brief
of your persuasion and practice in these matters.


Christ. Sir, I shall cheerfully endeavor it, but that things may be more
clear and plain to your understanding, I pray make your enquiries of the points
you would be resolved in, and your objections as they occur.


Chap. I. Of the Church Catholic.
CASE II.
Phil. I Pray Sir, what does the word Church import?


Christ. Church or Kirk is but an abreviation of (...); according to the proper
idioms of Languages English and Scotch, it signifies the House of God; and
hence our places of public assembling are called Churches in Conformity to the
Jews of old, who called the Temple, the House of God, according to which Christ
speaks, Mat. 21.13. there being a Levitical Holiness ascribed to it, which
Holiness of places has ceased with it, and the Gospel Church is made only of
living stones, Heb. 3.8. 1 Pet. 2.4. though when we in England speak of a place
for public assembly, we call it a Church, not that any wise Protestants do
take it so, in a proper sense, but Metonymically only; as for others they think
and speak after the Papists.


Phil. What do the Greek and Hebrew words import?


Christ. They always signify an Assembly or Congregation, there was two words
used for it in the old Testament (...) and (...) both signify Coetus or
Congregatio, (...) is from (...) condixit, so that it is taken for the solemn
assembly gathered together at Gods appointed time, or for the assembly at the
appointed place, viz. the Tabernacle, and therefore the Tabernacle of the
Congregation, which Congregation was the Church of old, Act. 7.38. Ecclesia in
the New Testament is taken for any assembly, though rude and riotous, Act.
19.32. [(...) is not used, v. 37. where our Interpreters use our English word,
(...) ought to be rendered robbers of Temples,] Heathenish and Jewish, but it is
mostly used for, and appropriated to a sacred assembly, as Mat 18.17. Act.
2.47. Chapter 8.1. Chapter 11.26. 1 Cor. 1.2. etc.


Phil. What do you say then is a Church of Christ in the most comprehensive
sense?


Christ. A Church of Christ is a Congregation of Saints associated in Christ
Jesus our Lord, Ephesians. 3.21. In the Church in Christ Jesus.


Phil. Why do you say associated?


Christ. Because a Church is not a transient and occasional Congregation but
fixed, and a joined Society by Union and Communion with Christ and one another,
1 John 1.3. and because the Saints are the members of Christ, and he is the
Head, they are said to be gathered together always in Christ Jesus really, or
professedly, they are gathered unto him by way of insertion, mystically, or
Politically, they are gathered together in his Name or Authority.


Phil. Then a Church comes under various considerations?


Christ. Yes, Sir, it does, but the Church of Christ is properly but one, as he
is the one Head and only so, the Body is but one, 1 Cor. 12.12. For as the Body
is one, and has many members, and all the members of the one Body, being many,
are one body, so also is Christ, i. e. Mystical.


Phil. I pray be as distinct as you can upon the several considerations of this
one Church of Christ?


Christ. I will, you know the most comprehensive consideration of the Church of
Christ is under the name of Catholic, and there are two Articles in the Creed
called the Apostles, that express our Faith therein; 1. I believe the Holy
Catholic Church; 2. I believe the Communion of. Saints, which two words Holy
and Saints denote the Matter and Form of this Church, that it is Saints in
Christ Jesus, it is a Holy Church made up of Saints; and then that it is
comprehensive of all Saints. And lastly, That the formal nature of this Church
consists in a certain Union and Communion, for the latter always implys the
former.


Phil. But is there not particular Churches? do you not call every single
Congregation a Church?


Christ. Yes, we do so; but that you may have the right and distinct notion of
it, we must duly weigh the Catholic Church as to its Relation, to Christ its
Head. The Catholic Church is to be considered as to its mystical, and
political standing in Christ. In respect of its mystical standing these things
belong unto it; 1. That it is the general assembly or collection of real
Saints, Heb. 12.23. ye are come, (...) to the Catholic assembly and Church or
Congregation of first born, whose names are written in Heaven. This is the
Heavenly Church to which he says Believers in the Gospel days are come, to
which Church, Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant is the Head of influence,
and to which all Saints as such are spiritually knit, and with whom they have
Communion, and in him one with another. 2. The Church in this sense is it,
which Christ has purchased, and are effectually partakers of all his benefits,
Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27. to it belongs, Election, Redemption, Effectual Vocation,
Justification, Adoption, Sanctification, and Glorification, John 17.9, 10, 11.
Romans 8.29, 30. 3. Here in this respect the Church is said to be Catholic in
relation to individual Saints only, it is not Catholic as a genus comprehending
many species of Churches, but as a totum integrale comprizing many parts, and
all have a coordinate standing in subordination only to Christ their Head; yea
they all conduce to the making up of Christ Mystical one body, being members in
particular. 4. This Mystical Body is to be considered according to its manner
of existing (secundum modum existendi) and that two ways. 1. In its Militant
State or Standing, or in its Triumphant, in Via or in Patria. In its Militant
State it comprehends all the true believers in the world existing at the same
time, whether they are visible by professing or not, the complement whereof are
all the Saints actually glorified, or the Spirits of just men made perfect. And
this distinction is only of the Church, in respect of the different state in
the enjoyment of Christ in the way of Communion, in Grace and Glory; the
difference is only gradual, and no more, the Union is the same. 2. It is to be
considered in its Invisible and Visible standing. The Church's Invisible
standing is wholly in respect of that inward spiritual Relation, which the
Saints have to Christ, and one another. Its Visible standing is in professing
Saints that are real members of Jesus Christ.


Phil. I Pray Sir, give a right understanding of the Church in its relation to
Christ as a Political Head.


Christ. Thus Christ is to be considered as King and Lawgiver to his Church
and People, and he governs his Church either immediately by his ruling Spirit
in the heart of every Member of his Body, whereby they are influenced, Ephesians.
4.4. There is one Spirit, one Body, one Lord, etc. Or he governs mediately as a
Politic Head, and that is only so far as the Church is visible and professing,
and as such he has given Immunities, Laws, Officers, Ordinances, for
establishment of Visible Polities, Societies, or spiritual Corporations. And
here we are to observe diligently these things; 1. That under this
consideration the Catholic Church is most large and extensive, for it
comprehends all credible Professors, though not real, and all actual
Church Members, though secret Hypocrites, Ephesians. 3.15. Of him the whole family
is named in Heaven and in Earth, i.e. real and professing. 2. That the Church,
so far as it is capable of Visible Communion and Fellowship, is the subject of
Christ's mediate Political Rule and Government, and that is only in particular
Congregations, to them he has given his Word, Ordinances and Officers, and to
no other, for he suited them to particular Societies, neither has he
substituted any Officers or Ordinances to the mere mystical standing of the
Church. 3. All the Instituted External Worship, though it be given to the
Church in its visible standing, which it has in particular Churches, yet it is
for the sake of the Mystical Body, for the edifying and building it up by the
Means of Grace, Ephesians. 4.12, 13 and for the multiplying it by calling in the
Elect. 4. In this sense and acceptance as the Catholic Church being a
Political Body of all Saints mystically and immediately under Christ their
Head; so this Political Body shows it self, and becomes visible in some
particular parts there-only, which are called Visible Churches, and are under a
mediate Rule and Government of Christ, and in this respect the Catholic Church
comprehends particular Churches as some distinct parts and parcels thereof.


Phil. Then I suppose your apprehensions are, that there is a Catholic Visible
Church, which is the next and immediate subject of all Officers and Ordinances.


Christ. Mistake me not, I have not said so as yet; I say the Catholic Church
becomes in part visible in particular Congregation^s and they are the immediate
subjects of visible Ordinances and Officers, which are instituted and placed
therein for the edification of the Mystical Body of Christ.


Phil. But is not the universality of Saints Militant the Catholic Visible
Church of Christ on Earth?


Christ. The universality of Saints on Earth does not constitute a Church in a
visible standing; for many are Believers that as yet make not themselves
visible by profession. 2. They are not, nor can be bound together in visible
Union and Communion. That which makes a Catholic Church is a Catholic Bond of
Union and Catholic Communion, which is only mystical and invisible; but there
is not, nor cannot be a Catholic visible Bond; for as they cannot appear in
one visible Congregation, so they cannot be bound to walk together in
Fellowship, nor can have visible Communion as one Church in the same individual
Administration, if they profess the same Faith, preach the same Word, pray
alike, etc. yet this makes not one particular Church. 3. If there be a
Catholic Visible Church, then it must have Catholic Visible Officers, every
Officer must relate to the whole Church; every ordinary Officer must be Officer
to the whole Catholic Visible Church, and there had need be a Visible Pastor
Pastorum over them all. 4. All Visible Members of the Catholic Church are not
therefore Members of any Visible Church with Ordinances; for they must be
supposed to be Members of the Catholic Church, before they can be made Members
of a Visible Church with Ordinances. 5. A Visible Church is Organized with
Officers to the whole Church, and not to a part of it: A Pastor, Elder, Deacon,
are Officers to the whole; and who will say a Deacon has as much power in all
the Churches on Earth, as in the Church to which he is constituted? he may as
well say so, as say a Pastor has. 6. If Christ instituted a Catholic Visible
Church, it was under the Old Testament, or under the New, but he did neither,
for there was but one Particular Congregation under the Old, and Christ left
but one when he ascended.


Chap. II. Of a Particular Church.
Phil. I Pray Sir come now to the main thing I aim at, viz. to the true nature
and constitution of a Gospel Particular Church.


Christ. You mean such a Congregation as is the immediate subject of all the
Ordinances and Offices of Christ's Institution, where every Believer is bound
to wait upon God in Gospel Faith and Order, for the glory of Christ, and his
own edification.


Phil. Such a Church I mean; may not a National Church be it?


Christ. By no means; it is no Church but such whose Members may all meet
together in one place for Communion in all Ordinances, for so the first Church
at Jerusalem did, the greatest for ought I know that ever was since, and all
other that we read of in Scripture since. If any comprised all the Saints in
the Nation, Province or Territory, they all assembled for frequent Communion in
one place under the same Officers. We read of no Particular Church in Scripture
but what was Congregational; for the National Church of the Jews, which was the
only one of that kind which ever was in the World of God's Institution, was
Congregational; for all the Males came to the Temple, and before, to the
Tabernacle three times a year, to appear before God to worship in acts of
Communion, therefore it was called the Tabernacle of the Congregation.


Phil. I am pretty well satisfied now from the weighty arguments I formerly
heard from you, though my thoughts through prejudice passed lightly over them
then, that all National, Diocesan and Parochial constitution of Churches was
merely from Man, if not from the Man of Sin, which latter I see cause enough to
suspect. But I pray, give me a plain description of a particular Gospel Church.


Christ. With all my heart Sir, a Particular Gospel Church is a separate
company of Visible Believers with their Seed (or Saints) associated together in
special bond of Union for the enjoyment of Communion with Christ and one
another in all the Ordinances of Christ's appointment for their edification.


Phil. You say the allowed matter of this Church is Visible Believers; what
understand you by a visible Believer?


Christ. I mean one that makes a credible profession, such an one as I am bound
by all the rules of Charity to believe he is a true believer on the name of the
Lord Jesus Christ; and I do not say, 1. That it is necessary that therefore he
be no Hypocrite for so he may be and I not know it. 2. Neither do I say that
his mere professing makes him a Church member, for they in Act. 2. believed
before they were Church Members and professed their Faith, which gave them
right of claim. Yea there are many have right of claim, and do profess, but do
not seek to join to a particular Church, and it cannot be without a voluntary
offer, and subjection to the Order of the Gospel.


Phil. What is required to a credible profession for the due satisfaction of a
particular Church of Christ?


Christ. The Tree cannot be known to me but by the Fruits, see Mat. 7.17, 18,
19. chap. 12.33. Luke 6.44. the credible fruits are therefore, Holiness of
life, and profession of Faith. It Is required there be visible holiness of life,
Phil. 1.27. Let your conversation be as becomes the Gospel, i. e. both the
Doctrine and Order of it: And this lies in negative and positive holiness
appearing in the conversation. 1. Negative that it be without blame, Ephesians. 1.4.
Phil. 2.15. 1 Th. 5.23. 2. A mere negative religion in respect of grosser and
more observable sins is no more than what many a Carnal man may attain unto;
there must be the practice of positive duties required, and not merely moral in
justice and mercy, but such by which a Christian is more peculiarly
distinguished from Moral Heathens, such as family duties of reading the word,
and daily prayer: those of a more public nature, as constant attendance on the
word Preached, sanctifying the Lords day, free distribution to the necessities
of the Saints, and a manifest readiness on all occasions, to follow Christ as
his disciple in all things, Tit. 3.8. chapter 2.11, 12. yea in suffering.


Phil. But what more profession is needful besides this visible practical
walking? is not this enough of it self?


Christ. It is as the Church shall judge of it, for they may be so well
acquainted with the Faith, as well as the visible holiness of some, that there
may not be the least doubt that the person offering himself, is fit matter for
the Spiritual building, but the Church will it may be for the edification of
others desire to hear the dealings of God with such an one, rather than for
satisfaction concerning his Spiritual state, which they doubt not of.


Phil. But I pray Sir, what is the nature of this verbal profession which you
expect?


Christ. There are two things besides what has been said requisite in an adult
Church Member. 1. That he have a competent knowledge of God and Christ, Prove.
19.2. He that has not the knowledge of Christ cannot believe, Romans 10.14. chapter
3.11. Pro. 9.10. Hos. 4.6. 2 Pet. 1.3. 1 Timothy 2.4. therefore it is requisite
that such as are admited Church Members, do show that they have a knowledge of
God in his essence and subsistences, the person, natures and offices of Christ,
the state of man by reason of the fall, the nature of Christ's Mediatory Office
in his Humiliation and Exaltation, and the great effects thereof in
Justification, Sanctification and Glorification.


Phil. I think indeed it is very requisite, that Church Members should have
knowledge of Divine Mysteries, so far as is necessary to Salvation, or else
they will but profane holy things, and turn them into mere superstition or
Idolatry, as the Papists have done, who hugg Ignorance as the Mother of
Devotion, but many a man that has had good Christian education may give a
great account in these matters and not have a Grain of Grace in his Heart.


Christ. So he may, nay many ^n one that can discourse with much knowledge in
all points of Divinity may be a very loose and wicked man in his life, Romans
2.17, 18, 19, 20, etc. nay, he may do all externals in Religion, and have no
power of Godliness. Wherefore, 2. We go as far as we can to be satisfied, and
therefore inquire a reason of his Faith and Hope, which when he has satisfied
us in, we can go no further, but own him fit to become a visible Member of the
Church. And these qualifications are expressly laid before us, Romans 10.10. The
reason of the Faith that is in us is to be given when required, 1 Pet. 3.15. be
ready to give a reason of the hope that is in you, It is therefore of the
greatest weight to give this reason to a Church, for their satisfaction when
asked by it, and we find that they that were added to the Church, Act. 2. gave
good evidence of their Repentance and Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, as the
effects of Peter's Sermon.


Phil. But they were presently added to the Church, they allotted no time to
make further inspection into their lives and conversations.


Christ. There may be great reason for it, for, 1. It Is most probable these
were all known to be very devout in the Jewish Religion, such it may be for
conversation, as Zechary and Elizabeth, and as Cornelius a Proselyte, for they
were Jews that lived at a distance, in remoter Regions, that came up constantly
to Worship at the Feasts, and now came to the Feast of (...). 2. Peter and the
rest of the twelve, all presided in the Church, who were extraordinarily
inspired, and therefore had a more infallible judgment, or more infallible
dictates of the Spirit to direct them in Church administrations, than ordinary
Church Officers since have, as appears by many instances in the matter of Simon
Magus, Ananias and Sapphira, etc. but we are acquainted by the Spirit of God
how true steps they made in receiving of Members, that they were still such as
should be saved; we read not of any false-hearted of all that 3000, unless
Ananias and Sapphira were of that number.


Phil. But is it absolutely necessary, that every adult person be admitted into
Church Communion, and give credible evidence that he is a Member of Christ.


Christ. Yes, for 1. Visible Membership of the Catholic Church, gives right of
claim to Communion with a particular Visible Church, a supposal of a persons
mystical union to Christ, is the true ground of claim of Communion with Christ
and his People, in instituted Ordinances. 2. We have no other sort of Members
but visible Saints spoken of, as admitted, in the primitive Apostolic state of
the Churches, Romans 1.7. 1 Cor. 1.2. Phil. 1.1. Ephesians. 1.1. Co^ 1.2. Saints and
faithful Brethren in (...) These. 1.1. Ephesians. 2.1, 2. those of the Church of
Thessalonica were in God the Father and in Christ Jesus. In Solomon's Temple,
all the Stones were to be squared and fitted, before laid, a Type of Christ
Mystical and Politic in visible Church State; the Apostle Peter alludes to it,
1 Pet. 2.2.3, 5. he shows the first effects of the Word of God's grace on
Converts, and then they come to Christ the cornerstone, as living stones to be
built a spiritual house in visible Communion of the Saints. 2. That a
Churchmember who ought to be cast out when in, is not to be received in; but
if any surreptitiously crope in, and be made manifest not to have the fear of
God before his eyes, he is to be cast out; therefore, he that does not appear
to have the fear of God, is not to be admitted a Churchmember. See 1 Cor.
5.11, 12.


Phil. Your strictness in this kind keeps off many that would otherwise join
themselves.


Christ. And does not the holiness of Gospel Truths as much or more keep off
carnal and wicked men from embracing them, as they will say? but the true
reason is their rebellious hearts bigoted to their beloved sins. Besides, it is
very necessary there should be a bar to keep off unworthy persons from sacred
things; It is not meet to give holy things ( i. e. such as are peculiar to
God's Children) unto Dogs, and such are Church Priviledges. 3. We would not
willingly debar one, even the least Babe in Christ, from the appointed ways and
means of Communion with Christ, and therefore do willingly condescend to the
modesty and weakness of any Age or Sex manifesting a spiritual hunger and
thirst after the Lord Jesus Christ; if there be a ground to judge there is
truth of grace in the heart, it is accepted, and this is ordinarily perceived
by them that are spiritual.


Phil. But you will ask hard Questions in the points of Knowledge.


Christ. No harder than are asked in our ordinary Catechisms which we teach our
Children, trying only whether a grown Person understands in any competent
measure what he says, according as Philip dealt with the Eunuch.


Phil. But this giving a reason of the hope that is in us, is that which most
are against, and are loath to comply with.


Christ. They that have it not cannot do it, unless some glozing Hypocrite,
that by his Education and Parts has got much brainknowledge, and can
counterfeit any external part of Religion. But where this hope is you usually
see how ready men are to speak of the Grace of God to Friend and Neighbor, why
not to a Church or its Officers, that may bring their Relation to the Church?
You see how naturally in our discourse, but now, you fell into this; when I
took but occasion to ask how you came so suddenly in love with the Lord Jesus
Christ, you gave me a very full account of the Grace of God toward your Soul.


Phil. Why is it no more than such a poor account as I gave you but now? alas I
could have said a great deal more concerning Gods wonderful gracious dealings
with me, but that I hasted to this discourse with you about Gospel Church and
Order, which I have long wished for. I had thought your members must have
prepared some set speech in such exact form and manner as some men can do. But
alas how many good honest Christians cannot express themselves? but they can
tell you in their plain way of speaking, what they were, Drunkards, Liars,
Scoffers, Debauched Adulterers, Blasphemers, etc. And one will say, God cast me
down under the sense of sin, by awakening my Conscience, by such a Word or such
a Providence, and I began to think how I was in hastening to eternal
destruction, he will tell of the great struglings he had with Satan, the World,
and his Company, to hold him fast in his sinful ways, he will tell you what
good tidings to him the Revelation of the Free Grace and Love of God to Sinners
was. And how thereby his Heart was drawn forth to Faith in his blood and
obedience to all his commands, he will tell you the Sermon, and places of
Scripture, some at least of the most remarkable, which were made most effectual
for his Souls benefit and advantage. If this be all you stand upon, I think
none that has tasted that the Lord is gracious, will make any scruple of it.
As for my own part I could be willing to make it my frequent discourse to any
faithful Friend in Christ, to declare to him, what God has done for my Soul,
and should look upon it as the best entertainment he could give me to hear the
like from him. And I know not why any one should question the doing it to a
Church of Christ, where so many faithful ones labor under the sense of their
own sins and weaknesses, as well as a man's self.


Christ. I find bashfulness is a great hindrance to many, in some, especially
Women, it is from their Sex, and the natural temper of many of both Sex; there
is no remedy for them but to pray against it: and for Church Officers to deal
with them in all Tenderness and Condescension, supposing still that there is
much of the Grace of God, and sense of Sin in them, which is not expressed by
what shows it self. Again, others are ashamed, some upon this account, viz. to
tell the World how wicked and vile they have been, others afraid they shall be
rejected, and that would be a great disgrace to them. As to the first sort, I
say, Churches do not stand upon this, that every one should particularize the
individual Sin, that he has committed, it may be some of an heinous and
enormous nature; it is enough that he specifies the sense of the greatness of
the sins he lived in, in General, unless he finds it for the honor of God, and
the good of others, to declare what a wicked wretch in this or that kind he
has been, which the world and his acquaintance knows as well as he; and in
that respect it is necessary for the honor of God, and Paul did so, that great
Apostle, I was a Persecutor, etc. And how often does he aggravate his sin, and
magnify the rich Grace of God that called and saved him? That great notorious
sin of his known to all, he declares often to the Churches and others. Then as
to the declaring our Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, and in his great and
precious Promises, there is no reason any should be ashamed of it, unless a man
be ashamed the World should know he is willing to be saved, and not eternally
perish. Romans 10.10, 11. The Apostle anticipates this Objection, when he says
with the Heart man Believes, and with the Tongue Confession, ( i. e. of that
Faith) is made unto Salvation, it immediately follows, for the Scripture says,
He that believes on him shall not be ashamed, i. e. To confess with his Mouth
what he believes in his Heart. As for Confession of particular secret sins, it
is not expected by the Churches, they have no such custom to require it, but
leave it to the wicked practice of the Romish Priests in Auricular Confession.


Phil. You have given very good satisfaction in this point, for I have heard
many that are not acquainted with the way of your Churches object this very
strenuously; as if your Ministers took upon them the practice of those Wicked
Varlots, who make Confession a stratagem to creep into acquaintance with men's
secrets, for their own advantage. But I would have you answer the other
objection that many are afraid they shall be rejected, and I will tell you too
many are loath to bewray their own ignorance and unacquaintedness with the
things of God.


Christ. As for such, who fear they shall be rejected, they are of two sorts.
1. Such as are lifted up in themselves, and put on Religion more for the
applause of it than for the love of it; these have not learned Christ, for they
know not how to deny themselves; and therefore it is better they stay off than
offer themselves, till their Hearts be inclined to love Christ, and his
commands more than the applause of men. And these have usually one of these
reasons for their fears; first, Either that they have lived in some known
scandalous sins, that they cannot give any sufficient grounds to others, to
believe, they have thoroughly repented of by a manifest Reformation, and such had
better forbear offering themselves, till their Friends and Acquaintance observe
some evident change in them. Or it is by reason they fear, as you say, they
shall bewray their Ignorance in the things of God; if that be the reason, it is
much better for them to discover their Ignorance than to remain in it, being
the enquiries upon this account into men's Knowledge, it is only in the great
and weighty points of the Gospel, without acquaintance with which a man cannot
believe unto Salvation by Jesus Christ. Besides what danger is there of public
disgrace? If the way of the Churches be known, no unprejudiced Christian can
think there is any, for if a man offer himself to join to a particular
Congregation, he goes to the Pastor or Elder, and acquaints him with his
desire, who will, if he think there be reason, first enquire of his knowledge
in some great fundamental points, wherein finding him grossly defective, he
gives him Information, and desires him frequently to repair to him for the more
cherishing all good desires and affections in him, till he arrive at a
competency of knowledge; but all this while does not make him known to the
Church, so that his infirmities are not blazoned abroad in the World in the
least by this way of proceeding.


Phil. My Friend, I pray inform me what you intend by a separate Society; and
can you justify separation? you know how it is cried out against by most
learned Divines.


Chapter Therefore I put in that word, because I am sure Separation is a necessary
adjunct that does belong to every true Constituted Church of Christ, nay is
there any that does pretend to be a Church of Christ, that does not separate
more or less? does not the pretended Church of Rome separate from Turks and
mere Pagans? does not our Church of England separate from Rome? and why? Either
because some say it is no true Church; others because it is corrupted in Doctrine
and Worship, though a true Church, and thereby justify their separation from
it. And may not other Churches upon the same ground separate from the Church of
England, either because, as some will say, it is not a true constituted Gospel
Church, but Antichristian. or because, as others will say, they allow it to be
a Church of Christ, but polluted in Doctrine, Worship, Manners, both as to the
Ministry and People, and therefore to be separated from, for the enjoyment of a
purer Church State and Communion? Again, the Church of England in her Catechism
teaches separation, and solemnly vows it, Infants in Baptism, Promise by the
Sureties or Vangers, to forsake the World, the Flesh, and the Devil. What is
this but separation? And if this were practiced as it is promised, the members
of the Church of England would be a separate people. Lastly there is nothing
clearer than that a visible Church of Christ ought to be separate, 1 Pet. 2.9.
What is a choice peculiar people, a holy Nation, to show forth the praises of
him that has called us out of darkness into his mavelous light, but a
separate people? a Holy Nation in a world lying in wickedness? a people called
out of a dark world into mavelous light, as the Church of old in Goshen had
mavelous light while Egypt was in darkness, and the praises of Christ thus
separating themselves, they show forth in the Churches. And what can be opposed
with any evidence against that plain and full place to this purpose? 2 Cor.
6.14. be not unequally-yoaked together with unbelievers, ver. 15. what part
has he that believes with an unbeliever? i. e. a visible unbeliever; it ought
not to be rendered an Infidel, as if one sort of unbeliever only was meant, for
it is the same Word every where else, and v. 14. rendered unbeliever; but our
English Divines render the word Infidel, insinuating that none but Turks and
Pagans were to be understood by this Text, that we are required to separate
from. But the Text is most express that it is from all visible Unbelievers. The
Temple of God is the Gospel Church, the fellowship is Church fellowship,
therefore he bids us come out from among Unbelievers, and from all false
worship, and be separate, v. 17. and then God Promises to be their God, to
dwell with them, etc. I shall add no more at present on this point though much
more might be said.


Phil. You have fully confirmed me in this point, I pray tell me whether there
be any that are not actual believers that are Church Members.


Christ. All Church members come in upon the right of a Visible Profession, but
it follows not thence that all Church Members are actual believers; for many
Hypocrites come in upon the right of Profession, but are not actual believers.
Again, Infants and Children of believing Parents come into Churches, and are
justly made and called members upon the right of Profession; but it is of their
Parents, not of their own Personal Profession, neither are they actual
Believers; their Profession is in the Parents, their Covenant Obligation is in
the Parents, the Privileges they are capable of is belonging to them by virtue
of a Promise, wherein they are concerned with their Parents, and primarily for
the Confirmation of the Parents Faith, and secondarily in order to the
Salvation of their Children. But a little more of this when I come to Baptism.


Phil. I pray Sir, proceed then to speak to the Visible bond whereby this
Church Society is bound together.


Christ. I hinted before that Churches are denominated from their bond of
Union, as from their Communion; from Mystical Union and Communion, the Church
is called Invisible, from Visible Union and Communion it is that Churches are
called Visible. It Is thus in any civil Corporation and Society, every man does
not come and partake of the Privileges of it at his pleasure, and leave it
when he please, no not every one of such a Profession qualified according to
the Laws of the Society, none but such as being qualified comes and lays claim
to his admission on his qualifications wherein to be approved he puts himself
upon the Test, being approved he immediately enters into a mutual bond or
obligation, he promises by Oath or otherwise to submit to the Laws of the
Society, they admit him a member to partake of all the Privileges. So it is in
Visible Churches which are so many particular Societies that have given up
themselves to Christ, and bound themselves to walk together in a visible
submissionto, and constant waiting upon Jesus Christ in all his Gospel
Institutions and Appointments, and it is requisite this obligation be explicit;
because, first, The Church Society is visible and explicit, such therefore
must the bond be. 2. The Profession of his Faith is explicit, such therefore
should his obligation be to future walking. 3. As no man can be a member of any
Society constituted by voluntary consent, without he voluntarily offer himself,
so none is governable there by the Laws of it, without such an obligation, and
otherwise the Government of it would be wholly precarious; for a man cannot be
a subject duly (unless a man be a slave and under compulsion) to any society
but by natural (as a Child to a Family) or voluntary submission and obligation,
as here. 1. All societies of this nature do justly expect and demand that a Man
be true to them, and submit to their Laws, if he will have protection, and
partake of their Privileges.


Phil. But they say you have no Scripture grounds for this Bond or Church
Covenant as some call it.


Christ. It might be enough to say, that a society must be increased the same
way, as it is made at first, and that after Members must be joined upon the
same terms, on which the first embodied and associated together, but there is
no incorporate society but join together at first by mutual agreements, under
some Charter, for enjoyment of some privileges, and submit to the prescribed
Laws thereof, and on these terms are Members, and capable of being judged by
it; so it is here, Christians meet and agree together, to walk in Church
fellowship, and what do they promise solemnly to God and one another, to give
up themselves to the Lord and one another, to walk in all the ways, ordinances
and appointments of Christ. Now I find this is that which is called adding to
the Lord, when a people first join themselves to Christ in Church fellowship;
and so the first gathering the Church at Antioch is expressed, for Act. 11.19.
some scattered upon the persecution by Saul, men of Cyprus and Cyrene, I doubt
not but Prophets inspired at Pentecost, Preached to the Grecian Jews the Lord
Jesus Christ, v. 20. and the hand of the Lord was with them, and a great number
turned unto the Lord, v. 21. Upon the tidings of this success Barnabas was sent
from Jerusalem, who was a good man and full of the Holy Ghost, and of Faith.
And much People were added to the Lord, i.e. they by mutual consent, gave up
themselves unto the Lord Jesus Christ, they turned to the the Lord by
Repentance, by the Preaching of these first comers. But now the Spirit tells us
the success of Barnabas his coming, and it was upon his exhortation of them
thereto, v. 23. and when he was come and saw the Grace of God, (which had
prevailed unto conversion) he rejoiced, and exhorts them all with full purpose
of Heart [i. e. with sincerity and resolution] (...), to join themselves for
constancy unto the Lord, in Church fellowship, afterward when Paul comes, v.
26. he finds them a Church, and as such abides among them for an whole year,
for it is said Paul and Barnabas assembled themselves with the Church, (...)
Preaching to a great multitude, many of which were not yet of the Church, and
that this adding or joining to the Lord is entering into the Church obligation,
is manifest also from Act. 5. where it appears upon the signal Judgments, that
Ananias and Sapphira fell under, v. 13. of the rest such Hypocrites as they,
none durst join themselves; the word is (...) signifying to cement and unite
into a Body, it is used for joining to the Church of Jerusalem, Act. 9.26. and 1
Cor. 6.17. in the same sense. And it is said here, v. 14. Believers were the
more added to the Lord, which must be by some visible overt act, whereby they
became Members of the Church after believing, for it cannot be meant of their
mystical joining to Christ by believing; for then the Antithesis would not hold
between them that durst not and them that did. In the same sense is the adding
a Member to a Church, which is joined to the Lord, Act. 2.41, 47. there they
were first visible Believers, then added to a society by some overt solemn act,
and therefore said to be added to the Church. It would be too long in this way
of conference between you and me, to evince this Truth particularly from the
method that God used, in the constituting and maintaining a visible Church,
from the beginning: to look back but as far as Abraham, how he, and his family,
and his seed became a Visible Church, it was by explicit obligations, and
overt acts in binding them by Sacrifice. I might mention the several express
obligations that Church came under from time to time, in Moses time at Horeb,
Joshua's, the Judges, Samuel's, especially, David's, and the rest of the
Reforming Kings, remarkably by Josiah, and after the Captivity in Ezra's and
Nehemiah's days. And that this was not a dispensation peculiar only to the Old
Testament State, and standing of the Church is manifest from Isa. 56.3, 4, 5,
6. for there God speaks of the privileges of the Gospel Salvation, which was
near, meaning the Gentile, by the Son of the stranger, and by the Eunuch, any
other excluded from the privileges of the Church of the Jews, and
incapacitated by Levitical uncleanness; these, says the Lord, being Believers,
and joining themselves to the Lord (the words used in the acts) and taking hold
of his Covenant, shall have a place and a name in my house, i. e. to be Church
Members, and have right to all Church Privileges. And this is that bond of the
Covenant which the Prophet Ezekiel foretells, that the Great and Gospel
restoration of the Jews should bring them under, Ezekiel. 20.37. of which the
Prophet Jeremiah, chap. 50.4, 5, 6. and Zech. 2.10, 11. I refer you in this
matter to that clear discourse that the Learned Mr. J. Cotton, has upon this
subject in his way of the Churches of N.E. Page 59, 60, 61, etc. where you may
receive full satisfaction in this point, if what I have briefly spoken be not
enough. You may read also Mr. J. Davenport's power of Congregational Churches
his answer to Mr. J. Paget, where he shows page 27. that this Covenant
obligation, is the formal cause of a Church, and shows the nature, and
evinceth the necessity of it to a Churches being; as likewise Mr. Hookers
survey, chap. 4. page 45.


Phil. Sir, I thank you for discovering these authors to me; I have heard of
them that they were Reverend, Pious and Learned Men, who suffered much for the
Testimony they bore against our corruptions, prejudice for a long time has
kept me off from reading the works of such men; but I pray Sir, give the heads
of the Arguments they insist on for it.


Chr. 1. Believers are under Church power this way, or quatenus Believers; If
quatenus professing Believers, then where ever they come, the Church and
Officers there, may challenge power over them as Members; this will be denied
by most till they voluntarily submit themselves, it may be some will come for
Church privileges, but will not admit of any Church power for their
Reformation to be administered toward them. 2. They argue from all Civil
Societies of that nature, and Marriage it self cannot have a formal being
without mutual compact and agreement; so there is a mutual relation that all
Church Members stand in one to another, and all of them to their Officers, and
their Officers to them, and reciprocal duties to be performed; these cannot be
performed, or will not without mutual consent and obligation. 3. They argue
from all the Metaphors whereby a Church is described a House and Temple, is
bound and pined together, a natural body has all the Members knit together by
joints and bands, it is represented as a City compact, Rev. 11.2. Ephesians. 2.19. and
what City can become enfranchised, but this way and manner. 4. It Is no reason
any should challenge privileges of a Society without they be subject to the
orders and rules of walking. 5. If this be not, but Members may come in and out
as they please, without obligation, Churches have no power to keep themselves
pure by Admission or Excommunication, for as a Member can come at pleasure, so
he may depart. 6. Lastly the practice of the Primitive Churches seems very
clear, as has been touched, but suppose it had not been so clearly expressed I
know not out if God institutes a Society or other thing, what ever is
necessarily required to the very nature and essence of the thing without which
it would inevitably be destroyed, ought to be done, the general rule in
such-cases ought to lead us to the practice of duty in all those particulars,
that must necessarily attend obedience thereunto.


Phil. But if this bond of visible obligation be the formal Cause of a Church,
then there is no true Churches but such where it is; which seems to be hard.


Christ. How far the Lord Jesus Christ will own a people professing themselves
a Church, and how far he will dispense with their failures and defects in
matter of order, especially while it has been in the Antichristian Wilderness,
he himself only knows. Much has been done by Christ undoubtedly in the latter
times of that great Apostasy in the days of Reformation, and that he has had
his true Churches all along, it is not to be questioned, but that for the most
part was in a mystical, not a visible organical standing; and in many
congregations, where the Word and Sacraments have in some measure of purity
been administered, in respect of the matter of the Congregation, visible Saints,
and the manner of administration freed from Romish Pollutions and humane
Inventions, we will not deny but there may have been a true, though not right
regulated Church of Christ, without this express and solemn obligation, it is
implicit, and such as is to be supposed as intended by their practice, in
attending, and constant waiting upon God in all the Ordinances of his
appointment, in one assembly or congregation, especially in that great
Ordinance of Communion in the Lords Supper, wherein they seal their union in
one body. 1 Cor. 10 17. And undoubtedly a people that is congregated having
explicitly chosen their Pastor, or implicitly subjected to him, and received
this Sacred Ordinance from his hands, are bound to abide, as a society mutually
related one to another, in constant and frequent Communion by the nature of the
Ordinance it self. But the coming of a Church thus together, 1. Is far short of
the order of the Gospel. 2. The generality of communicants of this sort, do not
apprehend themselves hereby bound to one Congregation more than another, and
their Ministers look not upon themselves bound to one People more than another:
any more than for external emolument, taking themselves to be Ministers to the
Catholic Church, and so may administer the Sacrament to as many people as they
Preach to, here or there, without designing a peculiar flock to take charge of.
So that their Churches are occasional most times, and but for a while, during
their pleasure to administer to them. 3. Such a Congregation is not at all
governable, though as to privileges, so called, they take and leave as they
please; yet for their disorders, miscarriages and sins, they think themselves
not accountable to any. And so liable to no censure, and therefore though we
would go as far as possible in allowing the Right Hand of fellowship, to
professing Protestant Congregations; yet we cannot do to all promiscuously, but
may undoubtedly use the judgment of discretion therein, so as we be careful we
do not by our practices in this and other cases, nullify the appointed order of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and pollute our Communions.


Phil. I pray what is the manner of a Peoples first entering into a Church State?


Christ. I will tell you the usual manner of them in N. E. and other places,
who have chosen to practice most agreeably to Gospel order, when a competent
number of professing Believers living within a vicinity, desire to join
together in a Church State, having good knowledge one of another, and having
solemnly sought God together for help and direction in this weighty matter,
they appoint a day for it, and acquaint Churches with it, that their Pastors or
Messengers, or as many of other Churches as please may be present at the time.
After spending some part of the day in such solemn duties, as concern the
matter in Hand, they do declare the dealings of God with their Souls one after
another, then or before, one being chosen by the consent of all to preside for
order sake this day, it may be some Brother upon whom they have their Eye for a
Pastor, he then declares in the name of all there now intending to associate,
naming each of them, (at which they are standing) the speaker addressing
himself to the Pastors and Messengers of other Churches present, after this or
the like manner. Brethren, you are Witnesses of that great and solemn
obligation that we are entering into; that we may have a name and a place within
the Walls of the House of God together with you, and may have but the Honor to
be reckoned one of the least of the Tribes of Israel. We therefore here upon
mature consideration, and cheerfully, do give up our selves (with Children) to
the Lord Jesus and one another, promising in the strength of the Lord, to
subject our selves to all the Commands and Institutions of Christ in the
Gospel, and continue steadfastly in fellowship one with another, to the Glory of
him that has called us, and our mutual comfort and edification, and do
accordingly receive each other in the Lord, and cleave to each other in
Brotherly love and mutual subjection according to God. These words, whether
more or less to the same purpose, may be used only to declare their professed
subjection to the Gospel of Christ in Faith and Order. Accordingly one of the
Pastors or Brethren of other Churches, stands up in the name of the rest of the
Brethren of other Churches there present, and declares their joyfulness and
gladness of Heart to see their Faith and Order, and accordingly does reach out
unto them the Right Hand of Fellowship, with holy wishes and desires that as
their Foundation is laid in Christ Jesus, so they may be Edified in him,
walking in the fear of the Lord, and in the comforts of the Holy Ghost, and be
multiplied. See Cotton's way to the same purpose.


Phil. Sure this practice looks very much as becomes the Gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ. But what is the next thing to be done?


Christ. Now the next thing is to Organize this Body with Officers, in order to
due administration of Ordinances.


Chap. III. Of Church Officers.
Phil. HAVE they power within themselves to choose their Officers?


Christ. They must undoubtedly have, the nature of the society is such that
they must have it, for they associate not themselves by the Command or Power of
Man, but of the Lord Jesus. If none has power over them but the Lord Jesus
alone, none but himself by their own free act, can constitute a Pastor over
them. 2. The power of choosing their Officers, is one of the subordinate ends
for which they do associate, because they will not be imposed upon in this
kind. 3. This power naturally grows up with, and is inseparable from all free
societies gathered by mutual consent, unless they be limited by their Charter
in this kind, or be so false to themselves and successors, to give away their
Privileges, as many have done to Antichristian and Usurping Powers. 4. Thus
you see Officers were chosen by common suffrage Act. 1.23. chapter 6. Act. 14.23.
it should be read, that when they had constituted Elders by common suffrage, or
lifting up of Hands in every Church, so that it was the usual way. The Apostles
or their substitutes one or more might be present to encourage or direct, but
the People ordained by choice.


Phil. Does their Power reach to call whom they will into Office?


Christ. 1. So as he be qualified for them, and the Office they call him to, as
the Holy Ghost requires, they are to be very observant of the rule of the
Gospel, for that is their Charter, by which they associate, and by which they
do act. 2. They are hereby limited to choose men out from among themselves, Act.
6.


Phil. But what if as yet they have none duly qualified among themselves.


Christ. They may then invite qualified men, that can be spared from other
Churches, with the leave of the Church or Churches, from whence they invite or
call them.


Phil. Does such an invitation or call of one that is a Member of another
Church, or Non-Member to any Church make an Officer?


Christ. No, it is but in order to the making such an one an Officer, for he
must be incorporated as a Member before he can be chosen and constituted an
Officer. It is so in all civil societies of the like nature, an Office is Power
and Privilege which none can enjoy in any society but the Members thereof,
unless he come to it by force or usurpation.


Phil. How many may be a sufficient number to begin a Church Society? some say
two or three agreeing in this kind is a sufficient number, from Mat. 18.19, 20.


Christ. They misunderstand the place who say so, for the two or three there
may be understood of Women as well as Men, and are capable of performing the
Duties which our Savior there intends. But the Holy Ghost allows them no
Office, unless of Deaconesses, no ruling Office or Power of suffrage in
Election; and therefore if all of them be such, or but two or one, they cannot
constitute a Church for the ends Christ has appointed it. It Is plain the words
of our Savior they are only to encourage a Church Duty, and the regular
gradual proceeding therein, in case of private offenses arising between Brother
and Brother. And promises his Presence with. And Blessing upon, the smallest
number that are found, to exercise themselves in agreement to perform any duty
required of them in their capacities for the Honor of Christ, and in this case
for the Restoration of a fallen Brother. See Cottons Way. As for the exact
number that may begin a particular Church, the Holy. Ghost has left it
indefinite, only it is easily to be supposed that spiritual reason, and
Christian discretion must be our guide, that there be such a number as is
consistent with the Nature of the thing, the greater, the better. And that we
begin not a Church with so small a number as may render the institution of
Christ absurd, and his Obedience unto his commands therein impracticable.


Phil. I perceive then you allow not women any power in the Church, they are
members and incorporated in the same body by mutual obligation to Communion
with the Brethren, why have they not equal power with them?


Christ. Women are members, and very useful and profitable many ways, in their
Graces and Gifts; and capable of performing any admonition between one another
according to Mat. 18. for it belongs to mutual watch required of all members
indefinitely. But our Lord Jesus Christ has excluded them from all acts that
are not suitable to their Sex in respect of Modesty, and the state of
Subjection that they placed in to the man. 1. They are not Ministerially to
teach nor speak authoritatively, 1 Cor. 14.34. Let your Women keep silence, for
its not permitted to them to speak, but to be under obedience. Not but there
may be occasion for a Woman to speak in way of obedience, as to speak in answer
to Questions asked her, as at admission to answer in giving a reason of her
Faith when asked, in case of offense to answer for her self, if accused, or to
witness for or against another. But to do any ministerial act in teaching, or
to speak in the management of any act of power or judicial proceeding, it
belongs to the men, and not the women. 2. They may not exert any power of the
keys, so much as by public giving their suffrage or vote, for this reason, 1 Timothy 2.12. I suffer not a Woman to teach, or usurp authority over the man, but
to be in silence, viz. In the Church, it is plain by the Text and Context, that
the Apostle treats of the Woman's carriage in the Church, and that it ought
always to be in a way of Submission and Subjection, not with Rule and Power,
for such a carriage is Usurpation of that which belongs not to her, the Words
(...), is no where else used in the New Testament, and seldom in other authors;
a thing is said to be authentic when it is legal, true, and right, it is used of
writings when approved, and so of witnesses and authority, that there is no
ground to contradict the one, or question the legality and just right of the
other; therefore this kind of Power is denied to the Woman, the Translators
render it well by usurping Authority, where any assume Power or Authority to
themselves that belongs not to them, there they usurp it, the Apostle says
they have no authentic Power, i. e. Just and belonging to them, neither shall
exercise any regularly in the Church of Christ.


Phil. I am satisfied that God never intended any ruling Power to Women in any
Societies, but in Families over Children and Servants, and there not over their
Husbands, therefore not a decisive supreme Power, unless Providence remove
their Husbands. But if they should have an equal suffrage with men in civil or
ecclesiastic Societies, they must certainly then have exercise of Power over
the men so far as they carry their share in the Majority. But I confess it
seems odd that members of the same Body each challenging an equal membership,
should not have all the same power?


Christ. There is nothing absurd in it at all, because Christ has so
appointed, and if we look but into natural Bodies, to which the Church is
compared, for there are some members that are ruling as the Head, so the
faculties of the Brain and Soul, and others are ruled, as Tongue, Hands, Feet,
and the whole Body consents to it, and each of them consents that the ruling
Power be in the Head; so it is in Bodies Politic.


Phil. I pray Sir where do you place Church Power?


Christ. The Power that is in a Church is Christ's, but it is acted in and by
the Church, in ecclesia, and mediante ecclesia. The Church is entrusted with
it, as an associated or embodied company of Believers, for the Key of
Government was given to Peter and the rest, primarily, as believing Disciples,
and associated followers of Jesus Christ. Secondarily as Ministers, and lastly,
as Apostles extraordinary Ministers. And that the Power of binding or loosing
is primarily in the Society, as such without the consideration of Officers
appears; 1. Because the Church has the essence, that is the matter and form of
a Church without Officers, and therefore the power of it; for it admits the
definition of a Church, and can act as a Church. 2. That body which by mutual
agreement of it is members gives it self a being, will not deny it self that
power and privilege which conduce to it is well being, or integral perfection,
such is a Body Politic, especially a Church of Christ. 3. A Church considered
only in it is membership is the first subject of Christ's power for the exercise
of it; because they can immediately after they are associated, (before they
have chosen an Officer) admit more members, they can also admonish and
excommunicate a corrupt member out of their body, for all such societies have
an innate power of increasing themselves, and of purging themselves. 4. An
associated or incorporate Body not yet organized, has power to consult it is
been esse and make it self an integrum Organizatum, a Body furnished with
Officers as well as Members, and therefore can confer Office Power, where there
was none before; now there is Power in that body whatever it is that does
confer Office, Power. 5. If there were not a Power in the Church as a Body
Politic, it would be wholly divested of it, whenever it were deprived of it is
Officers by Death as it often is, but it is not because it can proceed to
another choice.


Phil. I pray Sir, what kind of Power is this? is it legislative or executive,
and where does it lie, that I may know what you understand by the Keys?


Christ. Christ is the only Legislator, and in that respect his revealed Will
is the Key of David, who opens and no man shuts, and shuts and no man opens.
And in this respect he does not communicate his power, but in respect of
execution he does deligate his Power to Churches and Officers to act in his
Name. And this is no other than a decisive Power exerted in the Church,
according to the rule that Christ has given. This decisive power passes
always upon matter of fact committed by a particular member, or to be done by
the Church in admission or rejection of members, or in choosing of Officers.
This decisive power consists in opening and shutting the doors of this
spiritual house; and I call it the key of Government, for such is the nature of
a Key to open and shut a door; now this key of decisive power is the unanimous
suffrage of the brotherhood, or where that cannot be had, it must be the
Majority, or else there could be no end of some differences in such Societies.


Phil. Then the keys being this decisive power, and lying in the fraternity,
there needs no Officers at all.


Christ. It is one thing to be a key, and another to have the management of a
Key. Christ gave Peter the key, but did not make him the key as a Church
Officer, any otherwise than as an Apostle, and as other Apostles were, who had
all decisive Churchpower in themselves, to exert as occasion required, but for
the most part they acted by the management of the Church Key; as Peter in the
choice of Matthias, Act. 1. and of Deacons, Act. 6. and Paul in casting out of
the incestuous Person.


Phil. A key is a dead thing, and cannot open or shut without a hand to manage
it.


Christ. In a Politic body where the members are intelligent Agents, it is not
a dead thing, the Subjects of it being rational creatures, voluntary free
agents, and living stones, and the indispensible Law of self preservation is a
justifiable reason of acting in this kind, though they do not act in so orderly
a manner as they desire, being as yet incapable for it. But Christ having
instituted Officers in his Church for the more orderly and comely management of
the keys, they are upon the Terms of congregating bound also to choose them
Officers of his appointment, to whose prudent care and watch, the management of
the decisive power is committed by Jesus Christ, [through the hands of the
people,] and to them Parents, Officers, the Church does subject themselves in
the Lord.


Phil. That is, they now give up their power to the Pastor they choose, and the
decisive power remains no longer in them; but they are divested of it.


Christ. It is one thing what a people do de facto, and another what they may
do de jure. It is too true that through Ignorance or being imposed upon by men
of name, many Churches do give away their Power, or suffer it to be wrested
from them by usurping Officers, such as Diotrephes, who will be the Keys as
well as have the management of them; but this is not to be de jure; for. 1. The
decisive power being the Key, and this the suffrage of the majority, they break
the key, or change it by putting the decisive power into the breast of the
minority, which is a single persons or a few at most. 2. They cannot divest
themselves without destroying the very formal nature of the Society; for as
their first being arises by common consent, so their continued acting must be.
3. If they give up this power, they part with their freedom, and are at the
mercy of one man, and they set up an Arbitrary Government. 4. They cannot
exercise that power which they have given up; and then in case of
Maladministration, who shall say to Archippus take heed to thy Ministry that
thou fulfill it, etc. for it may so fall out that a Church may see reason to
deal with an Officer, and to excommunicate him from his Office Relation and
Membership too. 5. What a condition is such a Church in that does so? For if a
Pastor or ruling Elder will be corrupt, how many ill members, at least such as
are offensive to the Church may he take in, and how many good may he cast out,
as Diotrephes did? 3 John 9. 6. What Christ has j^^ned together none should
separate; but Christ has conjoined Office Power and the Church Power. The
Officers are for the due, orderly, honorable and solemn management of the
Church Power, not for the taking of it away. Officers are no addition of Power,
to a Church, but for the better administration to edification and advantage,
and in obedience unto the Lord Jesus Christ, and subordination unto him. And so
far as they are entrusted and authorized by the Lord Jesus Christ, the Members
are to obey and submit themselves unto them, Heb. 13.17.


Phil. You seem to give away all the power from the Officers to the People, and
make the Officers insignificant.


Christ. I say the power is wholly in the People before there is Officers, and
when there is Officers they have not given away their power, but retain it in
conjunction with their Officers, I mean as to the decisive power, or key for
letting in and out, it is the Officers and Brethren. Though the authoritative
management of Church rule, as to declaration of the mind of Christ, the
prudential ordering matters, and presiding in all cases belongs to Officers.
The management of our civil rights in England, is a great illustration in this
case. We choose to be judged by our Peers in matters of Life and Estate, and as
to matter of fact the Jury adjudges, the decisive power is committed to them,
and the Judge does but preside in the Court, and see that all things be legally
and orderly managed, declares the mind of the Law unto the Jury, and then
delivers the Sentence of the Law as the Jury finds the fact. So it is in
Churches, the Officers for rule have as much power in a Church according to the
nature of that Constitution, as a Judge or a Mayor has that sits on the Bench
to hear and determine civil concerns.


Phil. You have greatly satisfied me now, that as our Constitution is the best
in the World (were it not abused) for judging civil concerns, so I believe such
a Constitution of a Church, must needs be the freest from exception. For 1. A
people cannot be offended at such a judgment as is passed by themselves, for
who would a Member of any Society be freer to be tried by, than his Peers? And
the Apostle blames the Corinthians for seeking a decision in doubtful cases of
civil matters, out of the Church, 1 Cor. 6.2. 2. And as for Church Officers, I
think the most judicious would not desire an absolute power in themselves, to
lie liable to the many censures of men, and the odium that would be cast by
reproachful Tongues upon their most righteous and upright proceedings.


Christ. If the matters of the greatest concern in civil affairs, as to Life
and Estate be tried by twelve honest neighbors of ordinary Morality, scarce so
much many times, and all men usually acquiesce in it; how much more ought we to
be satisfied, that all Ecclesiastical debates should come to decision, as to
matter of Fact, by the judgment of so choice a community, as a Church of Christ
is, or should be?


Phil. But ordinary Christians are to seek in many great and weighty matters of
Faith and Order, and cannot determine where the Truth lies, it is fitter for
Divines to judge.


Christ. I distinguish between matter of Fact, and matter of Law, The Churches
decision is of matter of Fact, as to matter of the Law, or the mind and will of
Christ, it is the Pastor, or Elders place to inform them, and if they are not
satisfied therewith, it may be carried as a case to advise upon with other
Churches or Elders.


Phil. I have little farther to object against the principles of Order which
you have laid down; only one thing, which is, I confess, of no great weight to
me. I have heard some Church Members say, they join to this or that Church
only, because of the present Pastor, yea, that they joined to the Pastor only,
not to the Church and when the Pastor dies, they are at liberty to go whither
they please.


Christ. This proceeds from the Ignorance and Corruption of many Members, who
are not, or will not be rightly informed in the Principles which they would
seem to profess. This is so absurd a thing that the asserters thereof would be
ashamed of it in civil Societies of such a Nature. Does any Man join himself to
the Master or Wardens of the Company only, or to the Company it self, when he
is made a Member? Officers are changeable, either by the fundamental
Constitution of the Society, or by Death; and if this were so, then all
Churches were dissolved upon the Death of their Pastor. Besides, the terms of
admission into Congregational Societies, speaks plainly otherwise, that they
give up themselves to Christ, and the Congregation: put themselves under the
Office watch, and the watch of each Member, are admitted by the common suffrage
of the Church, therefore such things as these are but some of the Wiles and
Subterfuges of Satan, which loose-spirited and Principled Members make use of,
for the shaking off the Yoke of Christ.


Phil. But when a case falls out to be determined by the decisive power of the
Church after due debate, as supposing the choosing of an Officer, or in the Key
of rule, in admission or exclusion of a Member; and the Fraternity, or the
Elders and Fraternity divide into a Major and Minor part, what should the Minor
do?


Christ. It is by the known Laws of the Society to acquiesce in what is done by
the major part, as that which is the Churches act, or else it is not possible to
maintain any Societies of that Nature, yea they must fall. Butif a particular
Member or more will not acquiesce in the Churches Act, as he is not fit to
continue for the Peace and Order of the Church, so he may peaceably depart at
the same door he came in at, to another Church by an express dismission.


Phil. What if he will not ask such a dismission, but withdraw from Communion,
and reject it in a kind of defiance, and continue incorrigible therein?


Christ. Such an one ought to be dealt with in form and manner as in some
scandalous sin of another nature, for such an one is herein scandalous.
Besides, he is incorrigible, whereupon the Church is to proceed against him as
such an one, he appearing to others but a man of Belial which is an
ungovernable person, for so the Spirit speaks, 2 Cor. 6.15. What fellowship
has Christ with Belial? viz. a lawless person that is not fit for any Society,
especially of the Church, he will not bear the yoke of Christ's Government.


Chap. IV. Of Officers extraordinary.
Phil. I Desire you will now acquaint me what are the Offices and Ordinances
which Christ has Instituted in his Church.


Christ. The Officers Instituted by Christ are Pastoral and Diaconal; viz.
Bishops and Deacons, Phil. 1.1.


Phil. Are not Presbyters and Bishops distinct Orders? Our Church makes them so.


Christ. Nay, the Scripture make Presbyters and Bishops the same; there is no
difference between them. For a Bishop is but an Overseer of the Church, so is
every Presbyter or Elder; see Acts 20.28. and there he is no more than an Elder
to a Particular Congregation.


Phil. How comes it to pass that our Bishops are exalted so far above
Presbyters in Office and Benefice?


Christ. From the corruptions of the pretended Church and Ministry; viz.
through Ambition, Covetousness, and Human Inventions, whereby also all
Antichristian Abominations overspread the whole face of the Christian World.


Phil. But did not Christ give other Ministerial Officers to his Church?


Christ. The Officers which Christ placed in his Church for Edification were
Extraordinary or Ordinary, but both Pastoral; for they that are called Elders,
and set for Doctrine and Administration in seals and Government, I call justly
Pastoral; for feeding the Flock comprehends both in the true sense of the
Spirit of God.


Phil. Who were the Extraordinary Officers?


Christ. They were Apostolic, and such who were not succeeded after the first
Churches were planted, but by ordinary Pastoral Officers, and these were
Apostles, and Apostolic helps in the performance of their Office-charge, Ephesians.
4.11.
and were Prophets and Evangelists, and were extraordinarily furnished with the
gifts of the Holy Ghost, and Power, for the propagation of the Gospel, and
plantation of Churches, but at the disposition and direction, for the most
part, of the Apostles, as all other Church Officers, as well as Churches were
during their lives.


Phil. And our Bishops say they succeed the Apostles, and all other Ministers
are subordinate and subject to them.


Christ. They may as well say, the Pope succeeds Peter; for it is plain, they
were extraordinarily sent and inspired, and therefore could not be succeeded
but by such as were extraordinarily assisted, as they were, which has been
none: or ordinarily, and such are Presbyters, and no others.

The Charasteristick Notes of the Apostles were, 1. That they were to be such
who were ear and eyewitnesses of Christ, from the Baptism of John, to the time
of his taking up, Acts 1.22. viz. of his Ministry, Miracles, Resurrection and
Ascension. 2. That they should be extraordinarily inspired by the Holy Ghost
for the revelation of the mind and will of Christ, since which none ever were.
3. To have the gifts of Tongues, and working Miracles. 4. That they should have
the charge of the Churches for the plantation, direction and government of
them, every Apostle having the charge of all Churches, and in every Church,
whatever power was afterward ordinarily in each Church. And though a Bishop now
in an Apish imitation by a pretended plea of Succession would lay claim to
power over many particular Congregations, yet each Bishop is not allowed power
in another man's Diocese. And as to the former characters where is the Bishop can
with a show of any just pretense lay claim unto them.


Phil. What were the Prophets that accompanied and assisted the Apostles in
their Ministry?


Christ. Of this sort it is said, Acts 13.1. there were certain Prophets and
Teachers, I suppose not much differing one from another in respect of the
extraordinary Mission and Qualification, being Church Members of the Church of
Jerusalem, on which the Holy Ghost fell in the appearance of fiery Tongues,
whereby they were furnished with Preaching, Gifts, and those of Tongues, in
order to the propagation of the Gospel in all Nations, and to whatsoever People
they came, Jew or Gentile, and went forth for this end, in subordination to,
and by direction of the Apostles. And the first time we read of the Travels, is
Acts 11.19. occasioned by Readiness persecution; some of them men of Cyprus and
Cyrene, who when they had passed through other places Preaching, came at last
unto Antioch, and spoke unto the Grecian Jews, Preaching the Lord Jesus Christ,
the effect of which was the believing and turning of many unto the Lord. These,
by the command of the Holy Ghost laid hands on Paul and Barnabas, but we read
not that they baptized, or did perform any other Ministerial Act, if that were
one. Probably they might convey the Gifts of the Holy Ghost on others by
imposition of hands too.


Phil. What were the Evangelists?


Christ. They were extraordinarily called to assist the Apostles also in
Preaching the Lord Jesus, Baptism, and planting Churches, with Ordination of
Officers in them. Philip Preached and Baptized, and wrought Miracles, Acts 8.5,
12, 39. But did not convey the extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost; they were
bestowed by the prayers of Peter and John, as the laying on of hands, verse 15,
16. and Philip is called an Evangelist, Acts 21.8. Timothy was an Evangelist, 1 Timothy 4.5. and Assistant to Paul in his Apostolic Function, and he did lay on
hands. Now as to this, that Philip did not, and Timothy did, I judge these
secondary Apostolic men acted not as the Apostles, by a general Commission,
but by the immediate particular dictates of the Holy Ghost: or by the mediate
Commands from time to time given to them by the Apostles to whom they were
assistant and subordinate in their Actings; there were some which we call
Evangelists, from their writing the History of the Gospel, two of which were
primarily Apostles; viz. Matthew and John. Mark and Luke might be Evangelists
in the other sense.


Phil. Who were left the Pastoral Officers in the Church at Jerusalem upon
Christ's Ascension?


Christ. The whole Ministerial Office in that Church was left and placed at
first in the Apostles, both Pastoral and Diaconal, and either of the Apostles
might have presided, but that by consent (it may be) grounded on the words of
our Savior, Mat. 16.19. Peter took the Chair, viz. the orderly management of
the Keys. That the diaconal Office was in the said Apostles at first, is
manifest from the account we have, Act. 2.4, 5. of the Members bringing their
possessions, and laying them at their feet to dispose of, as a Church stock,
and from the reason given by the twelve to the multitude, for the choice of
Deacons they finding the serving tables to be to great a Burden to them upon
such increase of the Church Afterward also, as the necessity and state of the
Church required, there were Elders or Presbyters chosen distinct from the
Apostles, which appears from Act. 15.23. And it is most plain the increasing and
multiplying Officers, in the Church was according as the necessary reasons
thereof did arise from the increase or otherwise, which necessities by the Holy
Ghost breathing through the Apostles were provided for and supplied.


Chap. V. Of ordinary Officers.
Phil. WHat Officers do completely Organize a particular Congregation?


Christ. Pastoral and Diaconal, so that Pastor and Deacon do make a Church
completely Organized, but through multiplication of a Church, or for other
reasons there may be good ground to choose coadjutors in each Office aforesaid,
for the increasing the Officers of one kind or another, that the Church may be
edified.


Phil. What is the Pastors Office?


Christ. The Pastors Office is to feed the Church as the flock of Christ, over
which the Holy Ghost has made him an overseer or Bishop. Which Pastoral
feeding consists in Gospel Preaching, administration of Sacraments, and
Government. In the last respect more especially he is called a Bishop or
Overseer, Act. 20.


Phil. What do you mean by Gospel Preaching?


Christ. I mean a right dividing of the Word of God, according to the revealed
Will of God, and it stands in Doctrine, exhortation, and reproof, etc. to bring
home the Scripture for the instruction of the Hearts and Minds of Men, by
exposition, application, catechism, and defending the Truth against gainsayers.


Phil. You give the whole Preaching Office unto the Pastor.


Christ. It is in him, and may ordinarily be performed by him, providing his
strength and ability can reach to it, and other parts of his Office, lie not
too hard upon him, or can be performed to the Churches full edification.


Phil. But what if it cannot be performed to the Church's full edification?


Christ. Then it is requisite that a Coadjutor, or assistant to him, be chosen
in this part of his Office, to wit a Teacher or Teaching Elder, who is to wait
mostly on doctrinal, expository, and catechumenal teaching.


Phil. But this seems not a distinct Officer.


Christ. Though he come into part of the Pastoral or Episcopal Office, yet he
becomes a distinct Officer, for he comes in as a governing, feeding Officer,
attending more particularly on the part of the Office, to which he is appointed
and chosen, for he is to feed the Flock so far as the Holy Ghost has made him
overseer, by the call of the Church for their necessary supply. Neither does
his Office power curtalize at all the power of the Pastor, only acting in
conjunction with his Office is an (...), opitulatio, a help, or assistance,
taking off part of the burden from him; and such Teachers were set in the
Church, 1 Cor. 12.28. and such an one is to wait on his teaching, Romans 12.7.
Where teaching seems plainly to be specified as a distinct office-work in one
called thereto; as exhorting in him that is more especially called to
exhortation. And Teachers are plainly enough named in distinction from Pastors,
as Officers set by Christ in his Churches, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. For the perfecting of
the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, i. e. Officers for the filling up the
ministerial office, and edifying the body of Christ. Therefore when this
Officer is necessary for full edification of the Church in the work of the
Ministry then he is to be added.


Phil. Is there no Officer appointed to take up, as a help to the Pastor in
ruling and governing the Church? For where a Church is large, the oversight of
the flock in way of rule, according to the order of the Gospel will require
much labor, diligence, and wisdom.


Christ. There are ruling Elders, or Presbyters, called to attend and wait upon
that part of the Pastoral Office, to take up with him, and be helps in
Governments, I conceive they are to be understood by (...), 1 Cor. 12.28. which
should not be rendered miracles, but ruling Officers, or Powers, as the same
word is rendered, Romans 8.38. Persons in Power, the abstract put for the
concrete, and the gifts for the edifying of the Church, first and last are
specified under the name of (...), Gifts graciously bestowed, among which are
(...), gubernationes, governing or ruling Gifts.


Phil. You make then a Ruling Elder a distinct Officer of the Church?


Christ. I do not say that the Pastor or Teacher are not ruling Elders, but
that when one or both are not able to manage the ruling part for the sufficient
edification of the Church: there ought one or more to be called into that part
of the Ministry, and to attend thereto with Diligence. And accordingly the
Apostle, Romans 12.7, 8, 9. calls the whole Ministry of the Church Episcopal and
Diaconal by the Name of (...), or Ministry, and gives us an account of the
several Offices to be attended to, the Teacher that attends on Teaching, the
Exhorter that attends on Exhortation, the Deacon that distributes with
simplicity, the ruling Elder, (...), he that presides in governing, let him do
it with Industry or Diligence.


Phil. But is there any Presbyter or Elder that is not teaching? You seem to be
for Lay Elders.


Christ. The distinction between Clergy and Laity comes from Rome, we own it
not in the sense it is used by no means, for the people are the Clergy in the
sense of the Spirit of God. The Apostle Peter showing the Duty of Presbyters, 1
Pet. 5.3. he says, (...), not Lording it, as Lord-Bishops over Gods heritage.
2. They are no more Laymen than the Pastor and Teacher, yea I may affirm if
they that are ordained Officers of Christ in the Church are made thereby the
Clergy, then all the Ministers, even Deacons as well as Pastors, for there is
but one kind of Ordination to all the Officers, Presbyters and Deacons. 3. We
deny not Pastors and Teachers to be ruling Elders, neither do we deny that a
ruling Elder may speak and teach, as occasion requires to the edification of
the Church, especially in matters that concern his Office in Public or
Private. And therefore it is one qualification requisite to all Presbyters or
ruling Elders preaching or not, that they be apt to teach, 1 Timothy 3.2. and 2 Timothy 2.24. The Elder must be (...), for a Bishop ( i. e. a ruling Elder or
Presbyter) must be apt to teach, i. e. so far at least as to be able to give a
Word of Exhortation, as he is called thereto. 4. But the Apostle does speak
very clearly in distributing the Elders into them whose ordinary and chief work
is to labor in the Word and Doctrine. And such whose more peculiar work is to
attend Government, though there never wants those that will endeavor to darken
and baffle the expressions of Scripture that are clearest to common sense, 1 Timothy 5.17. The Presbyters that rule well [for (...) are Presiders or Presidents
in rule and Government, as all the Presbyters or Bishops are in the Church]
shall be worthy, or let them be counted worthy of double honor; [i. e. by
virtue of their Office and well management thereof. Let such have greater
honor than any aged person that is but an ordinary Brother, for he had spoken
before of our carriage to aged Brethren and Sisters: But such as these we
should esteem them for their work sake] but especially they that labor in the
Word and Doctrine, the Preaching Presbyters, let them in an especial manner be
honored or esteemed.


Phil. How many ruling Elders ought there to be?


Christ. Christ has not limited Churches here, but left them to walk by the
rule of edification. The Church may be such as that it may be fully edified by
a Pastor or Teacher as the sole Presbyter. And there may be little or no use of
a distinct ruling Elder, till the Church increase to a greater bigness, and
when it is increased the Church may choose one or more according as is judged
necessary to it is edification.


Phil. What if the Church have not a man or men duly qualified for that Office?


Christ. They may pitch upon a Brother (not in Office) of another Congregation,
and call him to it. And why not as well as to call one to be a preaching Elder,
that is a Brother of another Congregation? for all Church Officers should be
taken out of Churches, and first made Members of that Church, wherein they are
to serve Christ in Office before they are solemnly set apart thereto.


Phil. What reasons may a Church be moved by, to choose a ruling Elder or more?


Christ. If there be a Brother aptly qualified, and can attend it, there need
be no dispute about it, though the Church be but small, it may be much Comfort
and help to the Pastor and tend to much Edification of the Church. 2. The
Church may see reason to choose ruling Elders, from the great increase and
largeness of the Church, that the management of this part of the Pastoral
Office lie not too heavily upon their Pastor. 3. The Church may see reason for
it, because their Pastor qualified it may be with much of Grace, Preaching
Gifts and Learning, may not be qualified with a Spirit of Government; and it is
very seldom that men of retired studious lives have so great an insight into
the right ordering of Politic Affairs. A man may be a great Mathematician, but
yet an ill Seaman, not know how to work or stear a Ship so well as a Masters
Mate or a Boatswain. There is in spirituals, as well as temporals, a skill in
practice to have the senses exercised by reason of use, as well as a Knowledge
and Understanding of the rule.


Phil. What is the Office-work of a ruling Elder?


Christ. To have a special regard to admissions, to make good enquiry after the
Faith, and Holy Conversations of such, who offer themselves to Church
Communion, to propound them, and bring them to the Church. 2. To make
inspection into the lives and conversations of actual members, frequently to
visit them, to rebuke any seemingly walking as not becoming the Gospel, to
enquire after the reason of members absentments from Communion, to exhort them
to frequent assembling together for mutual edification, to comfort the
afflicted, to support the weak, to visit the sick, to inform the ignorant, etc.
3. In all matters of admonition and censure to hear and prepare matters for the
Church before hand, that there be nothing done in Confusion, and in
Disquietment of Mind in the Church, but with all meekness, unanimity and
authority in the Name of the Lord Jesus.


Phil. You have showed that the Ministerial Offices of the Church are Pastoral,
or Diaconal, and have showed that the Pastoral or such as belong to the
Pastoral care are Exhortation, Teaching, Administration of the Seals, Rule and
Government; according to all which parts of a Pastors Office, the Holy Ghost
has provided affisting Officers and helps, such as Teachers and ruling Elders
to the full edification of the Church; I pray speak now something of the
Deacons Office.


Christ. The English word Deacon is derived from the Greek (...), which
signifies a Minister or one that serves Christ and his Church in Office, it is
used for any Minister at large, (...), or Deaconship is applied to the
Apostleship it self, Act. 1.17, 25. or to a part of their Ministry as it was at
first, Act. 6.4. It is applied to any particular service of the Church, Act.
11.29. chapter 12.25. And Paul applies it to his whole Ministry as an Apostle,
Act. 20.24. Romans 11.13. chapter 15.31. 2. Cor. 6.3.

But it has it is peculiar application to that Ministry which tends to the
supply of the Churches and Saints necessities, by way of distribution of
Collections made to this end and purpose, to whosesoever care it is committed;
and such a service Paul says he undertook on the behalf of other Churches, 2
Cor. 8.4. which is called the Deaconship of this Liturgy, 2 Cor. 9.12. rendered
the administration of this service. Now we find as Office titles of large
significancy, are brought down by the Holy Ghost to denote a single particular
Office in the Church as Apostle, Pastor, Bishop, Presbyter, etc. So here the
word Deacon is often used for all sacred Ministry, Liturgy or Service, is a
Title put by the Spirit of God upon this Officer in the Church, who is called
and set apart to the Liturgy (or service) of the Church in this way of
Administration, by distribution.


Phil. When was the first Institution of Deacons?


Christ. It was Act. 6. an Apostolic ( i. e. as much as to say) a Divine
Institution, and it is not amiss to observe the reason and ground of it, it was
to ease the Apostles in that great burden that lay upon them; when those that
were converted sold their possessions, and brought the Money and laid it down at
their feet; and it was to be given forth again for an equal and necessary
support to every one, as need required. This was too great a charge, and
burden to the Apostles, and likely afterward to be unto ordinary Pastors; and
hence they institute this Office of Deaconship, and therefore is also a more
remote Office of Assistance unto the ruling Episcopacy, but being very distinct
in nature and kind from that sort of Ministry; wherefore the Apostles speak
after that manner. Act. 6.1, 4. That the Church should choose them fit men for
this daily care and trust, and they would betake themselves to the Ministry of
the Word and Prayer.


Phil. What ground have you for this Officer in the Church?


Christ. The very nature of such a Society, as a Church requires it, and I
take it to be a very good ground for an Office, when it is founded upon the well
being of a Society, and it is ordinary necessities do require it. But the Holy
Ghost is most express upon this account, that the Church of Jerusalem by the
appointment of the Apostles, chose such Officers for the necessary service of
the Church. And that they were afterward stated Officers in other Churches
appears from Phil. 1.1. And the Apostle Paul does expressly call their Ministry,
an Office. 1 Timothy 3.10, 13. As the Word is rendered and ought to be by our
Interpreters. Their Qualifications and Encouragements are also very particular,
v. 8.9, 10, 13. See Romans 12.8. He it to be grave, sober, exemplary in Faith and
Holiness, etc.


Phil. What is the Office of a Deacon?


Christ. The Holy Ghost calls it serving of Tables, the Lords Table and the
Tables of the Saints, in a faithful collection and distribution of the stock of
the Church which is given for the maintenance of Ordinances, Ministry, and
relief of the Poor, which ought to be done with Simplicity, Prudence and
Chearfu^^ness. And of which they are accountable to the Lord Jesus Christ, and
the Church, let that word Cheerfulness be observed, because many are apt to
murmur at this Office as a burden to them.


Phil. How many Deacons are there to be?


Christ. There were seven in the first Church of the Gospel, but there have
seldom Churches arrived to the bigness of that since, neither does the Spirit
seem to limit to a certain number. The Church is to Judge how many are
requisite to perform the duties required in that Office, according to their
present stare and standing, yea they may increase their number if they see need
requires.


Phil. Is there any help in this Ministration speciffied by the Holy Ghost?


Christ. Yes, and it seems to be pretty plain, that there were Widows, or
Deaconesses, or Matrons, who were to do that part of the Office, which was not
so convenient for men, such as to visit the Sick, especially Sisters, and
enquire into their necessities, and bring an account to the Deacons, if any be
without necessary supply for food, raiment, physic, attendance and the like;
see 1 Timothy 5.5, 9, 10. And Phabe seems to have been a Deaconess to the Church
of Cenchrea, Romans 16.1.


Phil. You have spoken to all the fixed Officers in a particular Congregation,
and although there are some who would deny some of these to be distinct
Officers; yet seeing here is in every Church, these Office services to be
performed, and the Holy Ghost speaks of them distinctly under these two Heads,
Bishops and Deacons, and that the Pastor, Teacher, and ruling Elder all concur
to the fulfilling the Pastoral or Episcopal Office for the Churches
Edification; and Men, and Women Deacons make up the Liturgical or Diaconal
Office. I have received much satisfaction upon this account, but methinks I am
much to seek about one great concern of Christ and his Kingdom, viz. The
propagation of the Gospel to the unconverted, for which work and service I
cannot see how Christ has provided since the Apostles times, for all the
Officers you have mentioned are Officers only in and to the Church, and so far
as men are capable of hearing the Word preached in the Churches, they have a
converting Ministry, but they that are remote must be without a Ministry,
because there is no Churches.


Christ. Christ has constituted no stated Officers, but in and to a particular
Congregation. He has not called and sent any to the work of the Ministry for
Conversion in the purest state and standing of the first Churches, but from the
Churches the first Apostles themselves went out from the Church of Jerusalem,
Paul and Barnabas from the Church at Antioch, so that it is according to the
prophecy of the latter days. The Law shall go out from Zion, and the Word of
the Lord from Jerusalem. And Christ has provided a way to send the Gospel to
Infidels and unconverted ones, for Romans 10.14, 15. How shall they preach except
they be sent. And though I doubt not but God has had his way in a providential
manner of sending the Gospel into the blind parts of the Earth, when visible
Churches were hardly to be found, through Antichristian Darkness that
overspread the Earth, yet Christ has an instituted way of sending the Gospel
to the unconverted world. For men may have a Call and Dedication to some
peculiar work and service to be done for Christ out of the Church, viz. To be
an Ambassador for Christ to beseech men to be reconciled unto God. The Word of
the Lord has providentially been sent to many places, as the scattering the
Church by Persecution was the occasion, Act. 11.19. Of preaching the Gospel at
Phoenice, Cyprus, and Antioch, etc. and when tidings of these things that were
done came to the Church at Jerusalem, they sent forth Barnabas that he should
go as far as Antioch, and afterward he was sent forth again from the Church at
Antioch.

I shall not enlarge now on this point, I may meet with it again elsewhere; the
due and orderly way of going forth to the exercise of the Ministry is by the
mission of a particular Congregation by the suffrage and Prayers thereof, and
he may be called a Teacher, such as were in the Church of Antioch; and so I
distinguish of Teachers: 1. Such as are stated Teachers to the Church wherein
they are. 2. Such that are sent forth to open blind eyes, etc. To preach to the
World, men lying in their infidelity.


Phil. You having given me a distinct account of the several Officers of a
Gospel Church, I desire to understand how they are made and constituted in an
orderly regular manner.


Christ. It can be but by Ordination.


Phil. What, all of them by Ordination, Elders and Deacons, the Lay-Officers?


Christ. I told you before we own no such Officers, but them that are
Ecclesiastically so, and therefore not Lay-Officers; the way of Ordination of
ruling Elders and Deacons is the same with that of Pastor and Teacher.


Phil What by laying on of the hands of the Presbytery, it seems to be a mighty
profanation of that Sacred ordinance to apply it to men that are illiterate,
and have not been at the University.


Christ. Christ did not limit any Ordinances to Literate men, and to University
men, his practice was quite contrary, but I pray Sir, tell me. 1. Where
imposition of hands is called Ordination? 2. Whether the Deacons had not
imposition of hands, Act. 6.3. Where any other ordinary Church Officers had
imposition of hands? And therefore if there had not been some more reason of
the Holy Ghost than ordinary for applying it to Deacons, whether they should
have had it? If it was in an ordinary way of Administration, and therefore all
Church Officers to have it, then they have eminent right to it still. And then
what profanation is it to apply an Ordinance according to it is first
institution?


Phil. You suggest strange notions about Ordination, I must get you to clear
them up to me.


Christ. Sir, you shall excuse me for the present, I shall do it another time;
I only tell you now, that all Church Officers are made by Ordination, and
ordained alike, and that imposition of hands is not Ordination; and if the most
be made of it, it is but a Ceremony annexed which now is obsolete. And that all
Ordination belongs to the Church of whom the Person ordained is a member, yea
if imposition of hands be a necessary Ceremony therein, it is not to be
performed by the Elders of other Churches; but by the Presbytery or delegated
Brethren of the said same Church. These things shall be demonstrated to you
according to that measure of light which Christ has given.


Phil. These things look not only Heterodox in respect of the common sentiments
of ordinary Professors of the reformed Religion, but contrary to what many, yea
most of our Learned Divines have wrote and practiced, but I shall wait till you
give me further light into them, and demonstration for the assertions you have
laid down. In the mean time give a brief account of Gospel ordinances
instituted by Christ for a Churches Edification.


Chap. VI. Of Church Ordinances of Christ's Institution.
Christ. THe instituted Ordinances of the Lord Jesus Christ, are, 1. Preaching
the Word. 2. Prayer and Praises. 3. The Seals of the New Testament. 4. The
Keys, which are the Churches exercise of it is power. 1. In Election of
Officers. 2. Admission of Members. 3. Translating Members to other Churches,
Admonition, and Censures. 5. Contribution for the support of Ordinances,
Ministry, and necessity of the Saints. 6. I may add unto this, Holy Conference
for mutual Edification. These are given either as peculiar Privileges to the
Churches, such as the Seals and Keys of Discipline, or primarily (though for
the Conversion and in order to the Salvation of others) but for the sake of the
Churches, for their Multiplication, growth and Confirmation in Grace.


Phil. Speak to these Gospel Ordinances particularly, as to the distinct
Nature, End and Use of them.


Christ. 1. The Preaching of the Word comprehends, 1. The reading of it
frequently in the Church. 2. The opening and expounding of it. 3. The applying
it unto the Consciences of Saints and unbelieving Sinners, according to the
true intent thereof, by Instruction, Reprehension, Exhortation, Direction,
Consolation, in the evidence and demonstration of the Spirit. 4. By the
instilling, and promoting the knowledge of God in the Mysteries of the Gospel,
by Catechizing Children and Youth, in such a way and manner as may conduce most
to the enlightening their understandings in, and bringing over their affections
to, the things of God in their tender years.


Phil. Sir, I doubt in the last thing mentioned, many if not most of your
Churches have been too defective.


Christ. I grant it, and fear the next Generation will have great cause to
complain of us, for the Children of Church Members do manifestly grow up in
Ignorance, carnality, and looseness, little care is taken of most religious
Parents, and less by the Churches, to educate them in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord, all, or the chief of Parents care, is how to provide
well for them in the World. Besides, every way of Catechizing will not answer
the end, to learn a Catechism merely by rote, and a preaching upon it, will
make no more impression on their Ages, than other preaching, there must be care
to instill in to their understandings by little and little, in a plain and
familiar way of discourse with them, as they are able to receive: if a great
deal of Water be flusht on upon a narrow-mouthed Bottle very little or none
will go in, but you may by a small stream, and gradually, fill it. Ignorance in
Religion, is destruction of Religion, it has been the mother of all false
Worship and Error in Doctrine, and it is evident it is the cause for the most
part of the disorders in, and among Churches.


Phil. To what Officers does the ministration of the word in Churches belong?


Christ. To the Pastor, and Teacher, if there be any, they being the Preaching
Elders that labor in the Word and Doctrine. The Pastors work in Preaching
seems to lie most in dealing with the Consciences and Affections of the
hearers, whether for Conversion or Edification. The Teacher insists most on the
enlightening the understanding by doctrinal Truths, Catechizing, Argumentation
and Conviction of gainsayers. Romans 12.7, 8. If one Officer according to the
present circumstances, can perform his Office to the full edification of the
Church in all these things, it is well: if not then both are requisite, as has
been spoken. And the word is to be so preached as has been said, 2 Timothy 4.2,
3. Ephesians. 4.12. Act. 2.42. the Apostles doctrine is the word that is to be
Preached, and to be attended on by us.


Phil. I look upon prayer and praises ab- be great Church Ordinances, as well
as duties of a Universal nature to all and individual persons in private and
secret.


Christ. It is a solemn Church Ordinance, expressed either way in public
prayers or in praises, not only in the Prayers of a single person, the mouth of
the Congregation: but in Psalms and Hymns. That prayer is a Church ordinance,
and a duty to be performed frequently in the Church service, see Act. 1.14.
These continued with one accord in Prayer and Supplication, so Act. 2.42. no
other Ordinance can be duly administered without it.


Phil. I think there is no Christians but hold that Prayer is a Church
Ordinance: but I have heard some except against singing of Psalm in Meter as we
do.


Christ. That singing Psalms is an Ordinance of the Church, I think is plain.
1. That singing Praises to God, with an audible voice, was practiced in the
Apostles times by the Apostles, Act. 16.25. 2. That they are to be sung in the
Church, at the most solemn Ordinance of the Lords Supper is without dispute,
Mat. 26.30. Mark 14.26. 3. That singing with words of Psalms and Hymns, at the
same time making melody in the Heart is recommended to us, Ephesians. 5.19. so Col.
3.16. teaching and admonishing your selves [so (...) should be rendered, and not
one another, for thus Interpreters have rendered the same word your selves, Ephesians.
5.19.] in Psalms and Hymns and Spiritual Odes in Grace, singing in your Heart
to the Lord. From both which places singing Spiritual Psalms and Hymns, for
instructing and quickening a gracious Heart sweetly and affectionately carried
forth in them, is highly recommended to us by the Spirit of God. And that it is
a duty to sing in conjunction with others, appears by what was practiced by our
Savior and his Disciples at the institution of the Lords Supper, that they
Sang an Hymn. And by Paul and Silas in Prison, but what the Holy Ghost says
expressly he expects of us, Romans 15.6. that you may with one Mind and one Mouth,
i.e. with sameness of Words and Heart glorify God.


Phil. Some may say this is to use forms.


Christ. A. 1. Though it be to use a form in Singing, it is not an imposed form,
but freely taken and chosen, no more than the Ministers Text is imposed. 2. A
form allowed or enjoined by the Spirit of God may and ought to be used as the
words of institution in administration of the Seal of Baptism, or of the
Elements in the Lords Supper. 3. The nature of the thing requires that it be
premeditated that the Singing be melodious, i. e. orderly, not with confusion,
and not in absurd dissonies.


Phil. But some are against singing in mixed Congregations.


Chr. They may as well be against public Praying in mixed Congregations. Does
not he that Prays endeavor to use such expressions, as most may join with
him in? So he that propounds a Psalm or Hymn, endeavors to suit it to the
Congregation, where, and the time and occasion when, it is to be sung. It Is due
to God from all his creatures to praise him; it is his Saints only bless him,
but it is not in our power to judge the heart of him that joins in a public
duty, and if it be to be performed publicly, as Praying and Preaching, we are
not to hinder any that will join with us; if they are not upright in one, or
profited by the other, the sin lies on themselves to answer for it.


Phil. Which be the Seals of the New Testament, and why called so?


Christ. They are Baptism and the Lords Supper. And they are called Sacraments
because sacred and solemn ratifications of Gods Promise to us, and ours to him,
they are signs, being significant of Invisible Grace and Blessing. They are
called Seals, as Circumcision and the Passover were, being for confirmation of
the Covenant relation between God and Us.


Phil. I pray speak of Baptism; it has been much controverted upon many
accounts.


Christ. I shall not detain you upon the most controverted points of it, but
tell you now briefly what we believe and practice about it. 1. That it is an
instituted ordinance by the Lord Jesus Christ, to remain in the Gospel Churches
to the end of the world, as appears by Mat. 28.19. 2. That the Element or
significant sign is Water. 3. That it being blessed by Prayer is to be applied
in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. 4. That the thing signified is
the washing in regeneration and renewing of the Holy Ghost, wherein the Lord
Jesus Christ his precious Blood is applied for Justification and
Sanctification, and the person Baptized dedicated unto the Lord, remission of
Sin is eminently signified thereby, Act. 2.38. chap. 10.43.


Phil. Then you think a person to be regenerated in Baptism.


Christ. It is but a sign of that which is, or should be, in adult persons it is
requisite there be credible signs or grounds to think they are regenerated, but
many such who are Baptized are not; and therefore it is evident none are
regenerated merely by partaking of that Ordinance, unless we allow falling away
from effectual grace, and when it is administered to the Infant Seed of a
Believer, it is a sign of what is or may be, and is both desired and prayed for.


Phil. I see you are for the Baptism of Infants.


Christ. We are for it, and do practice it. We doubt not of it, and upon good
grounds, for we look upon Baptism to be the right of every Child of a Church
Member. 1. As the Infant is a Church Member in the Parents right, the Parent
having given himself and Children to be the Lords in Church Relation. 2. That
it is a Privilege the Parents challenge by virtue of the Promise which the
Spirit of God says, Act. 2. belongs to them and to their Children; the Promise
made to Abraham, is transferred to all the Faithful, who are said, Gal. 4.28.
chap. 3.29. to be the Children of the Promise, as Isaac was, and therefore have
the Covenant and Seal of the Covenant belonging to them for themselves and
Children, as Isaac had. And in the administration it is of use to the Parents.
1. For confirmation of their Faith in that extensive Promise. 2. For a Solemn
dedication of the Child unto the Lord. 3. For an obligation to bring it up in
the nurture and admonition of the Lord.


Phil. May not a professed Believers Child be Baptized that is not actually a
Member of any Church?


Christ. He that is a Believer ought to claim his right to all Church
Privileges, and therefore to join himself to some particular Congregation,
where he may enjoy all Ordinances according to the rule of the Gospel. And
whilst he does not, he evidently lives in a Sin of great Omission, if
Providence has given him opportunity so to do. And I know not but a credible
Believer, may as well desire the Lords Supper without adding himself to a
particular Congregation, as to desire the Baptism of his Child without it: and
therefore it renders his profession very hardly credible, whilst he lives in
this great Sin of Omission.


Phil. Is there any just ground to believe that an Infant Baptized and Dying in
his Infancy, is certainly Saved.


Christ. By no means, if you understand all Infants of good and bad, as they
are usually now promiscuously Baptized, for the Salvation of Infants is a
Divine Secret.


Phil. But what comfort has a Believing Parent in this case, any more than a
professed Unbeliever or Infidel? Is there no promise that he can take comfort
from, upon this account? If not, then it is possible such an affliction may
befall a Child of God for which he has no promise from the Word of God to
support him in, for without a promise Faith can take no hold of God, for
Comfort.


Christ. In case a Believers Child dies in Infancy, and his trouble be about
the Eternal state of his Child: I know no Promise in the Word of God will reach
forth Comfort to him, but this, I will be thy God, and the God of thy Seed.
Seeing his Child lived not to make a personal and professed Rejection of his
Covenant Relation in adult years as Ishmael and Esau did. And thus a Believer
by Faith in that Promise can take such Comfort to himself in that Condition
which no Unbeliever can. For there is not one Word in Scripture that speaks of
the Salvation of an Unbelievers Child dying in Nonage. What God has reserved
in his secret Counsel is not for us to determine.


Phil. Is not Baptism a converting Ordinance?


Christ. If it be true as your Church says, that he that is Baptized is
certainly saved, it must needs be so most times. But although it is a sign that
referrs to Regeneration and Initiation thereby in the Covenant, yet it is a
confirming Sacrament as the other is, it is always for Confirmation of Faith in
the Promise, both in Parents and Children, neither is it improved by the
baptized till he believe.


Phil. Now I pray speak something of that other great Seal the Lords Supper.


Christ. It is called, breaking of bread by a Synech. Act. 2.42. ch 20.7, 11.
It is the Supper, John 13.2. chapter 21.20. The Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11.20. Because
of peculiar Relation to the Remembrance of our Lords death, as the observation
of the first day of the Week has to his Resurrection, therefore called the
Lords day. Christ instituted this Ordinance for a solemn remembrance of his
Death in the Churches till he come the second time. And he did it the Night he
was betrayed, after he had eat the Passover with his Disciples, Mat. 26.26. The
Elements Bread and Wine, the Sacramental Actions are Blessing the Elements
distinctly. 2. Breaking the Bread and pouring out the Wine. 3. The delivery of
each to the people with the words of Command appropriated by the appointment of
Christ. 4. The Order. 1. The Bread blessed, then broken, then distributed. 2.
The Wine poured out, blessed, delivered forth; after this a Psalm or Hymn is
Sung, as our Lord Jesus Christ did, and that Ordinance is ended. Though most
Churches conclude with a short Prayer, wherein Gods name is further blessed,
and particular Cases of the Assembly spread before the Lord, before which
Prayer is usual a liberal Collection for the Poor, and support of Ordinances.


Phil. What is the great Use and Improvement a Communicant may and should make
of his participation of this Ordinance?


Christ. 1. That as the Bread broken and Wine poured out signify the Body and
Soul sufferings of the Lord Christ: they are exhibited in this Ordinance in a
lively manner, to our thankful remembrance of Gods and Christ's love to us;
therefore by the ancients called the Eucharist. 2. Hereby our acts of Faith are
renewed, and our Faith greatly strengthened in the love of God to us, in the
Redemption wrought by Jesus Christ for us in his Death and Suffering, for our
present Justification and Sanctification, and Future Glory. 3. It is a sign and
Seal of our Union to, and Communion with the Lord Jesus Christ, and to one
another; our Communion together by a common participation of Christ our Head in
his personal Excellencies and mystical Communications; as also our Communion in
him one with another as a mystical and visible Politic Body. 4. It is a
visible Testimony and Profession of our mutual love, and Obligations therein as
members one of another. 5. There is a sweet Communion in each others Gifts and
Graces, in order to edification and growth in Grace.


Phil. To what Church Officer does the administration of this Ordinance
appertain?


Christ. It appertains to the Pastoral teaching Office, for the Seals are
teaching Ceremonies, by way of Instruction unto us, for increase in Faith and
Love, and by way of Consolation and Confirmation in our right to Covenant
Benefits and Privileges. And hence it belongs primarily to the Pastor that is
principally called to the whole Office of feeding the flock, for Christ the
great Pastor first administered it. And secondarily to the Teacher who is called
to bear a share with him in his Teaching work, which is feeding the flock with
wholesome Doctrine, and administering such instituted signs and seals as tends
to the Confirmation thereof unto their Souls and Consciences, and therefore
where there is actually Pastor and Teacher, it may for the ease of the Pastor
[that part of this Labor may be born by the Teacher] as well as that of
teaching. And in case of the Death of the Pastor the whole pastoral charge as
to Teaching and Administering falls upon the Teacher, unless the Church think
meet to choose another Pastor.


Phil. But I pray what do you think of the practice of our Minister, and if I
mistake not some Non-conformists use it still, viz. for the Administrator or
Administrators (for I have known several at the same time in one Congregation)
to go about from Person to Person, and deliver the Bread and Wine into the hand
of each, repeating as often the Words of institution, Take, eat, etc. Take,
drink, etc.


Christ. I take it to be an unscriptural usage, for Luke 22.17. Christ said,
Take this and divide it among your selves. And if it be said that is spoken of
the Passover Cup, it makes not against us, for in the same manner as that Cup
went about, did also the Bread and Wine that followed. And we have no ground to
suppose that he delivered the Bread with the Words, This is my Body, take eat,
nor the Wine, etc. any more than once. Again it is plain, that this practice
came from Rome, from that blasphemous Heresy of theirs, that the Bread is the
very Body of Christ after Consecration of the Priest; and therefore not to be
touched by the Communicant, but put into his Mouth by the supposed sacred Hands
of the Priest. Therefore it has the same Idolatrous Original as Kneeling in
receiving has, nourishes much vain Superstition in the people, makes the
Ordinance most tedious and troublesome, if not too Comical.


Phil. You mention Kneeling; methinks that seems to be a comely gesture enough
in so solemn and sacred an Ordinance, though I confess I am not for imposing of
it.


Christ. I need not tell you the reason and ground of that Innovation, viz.
From the Idolatrous worshipping the Bread. And I need not tell you that the
posture in receiving was not so from the beginning, but after the eastern
manner of sitting at a Feast. It is not proper or comely to kneel at a Feast
which is for a sociable rejoicing. Kneeling is a posture of prostration in
Prayer, but this is a distinct Ordinance from Prayer, though it be blessed by
Prayer. The Prayer is over when the Element is distributed and then our
business is not to pray, but to feed in a Feasting Sacramental and Spiritual
manner. Neither is the practice of some Communicants to be commended, who after
the Element is blessed by the Prayers of the Congregation betake themselves to
their particular private prayers before they eat or drink; it is a new
Consecration, as if the Element were not sufficiently consecrated. Or as if
they were to receive in an act of Prayer. Whereas now they are to receive their
spiritual food to the satisfaction of their hungring and thirsting Souls, with
rejoicing and gladness of Heart, making it the Bread of Consolation and cup of
Salvation; praising the Name of the Lord. The Nature of receiving clearly
appears from this, that it is a Feast of Remembrance, and therein for spiritual
Repast, Nourishment and Consolation, and it appears in that the distribution of
the last Element ends with a Psalm or Hymn of praise before we arise from the
Table, and therefore to be performed in the same posture we were in, when we
received the Cup, and we use not a kneeling posture in singing.


Phil. I have read many considerable Arguments indeed against this posture in
receiving, which gives ground to suspect there is too much of Superstition in
it; and that it was derived from Rome, but I have not before considered what
you say of its great disagreement to the very Nature of the Ordinance, the Act
of receiving being a distinct duty from praying, and therefore I believe many
that profess to more Knowledge in these things than I do, do they know not
what, in betaking themselves to private Prayers, when they should be exercised
after another manner, and so do unduly mix one Ordinance with another, or
thrust out one spiritual duty by another. I am glad you mention it to me. I
hope it will be matter of good instruction to me in my practice for the future.


Christ. I am glad to find your Heart so molded, by the Grace of God that you
are ready to receive the impression of Truth. It was otherwise not long ago.


Phil. I think the next Head of Church Ordinances, which you mentioned, were
the Keys; I pray speak to them.


Christ. By Keys I mean Church power of opening and shutting. It is a Scripture
Word, but Metaphorical. A Key is used in respect of spiritual Knowledge, or in
respect of Power. In respect of Knowledge, Luke 11.52. In this respect Peter
had the Key of the Kingdom of Heaven committed to him as an Apostle, as is
spoken by our Savior, Mat. 16.19. Being the first Apostle instructed by God to
open the door for preaching the Gospel unto the Gentiles, Act. 10. But this
Key, though first turned in exercise by Peter, was given to the rest of the
Apostles at the same time, and with them to all faithful Ministers. There is
another Key of the Kingdom of Heaven, which is in the Church of the Gospel,
viz. The Key of Power, which is either of Supreme Church Power, and is the
Power of the Lord Jesus Christ which is Sovereign, Absolute, Legislative, and
therefore called the Key of David, which he alone has, Rev. 3.7. And there is
the Key of subordinate Power which is delegated by Christ unto his Church, and
therefore given by Christ unto Peter, and the rest of the Disciples, as his
associated Church on Earth; to which he himself was Pastor, and to which he
administered as such the Lords Supper. The twelve Apostles had this Key given
them as such, in that for their time they had all Church Power committed unto
to them, did exercise it as occasion required, as to Constitution of Officers,
receiving, dismissing or excommunicating members. But there being none in
Succession unto them, this Key of Power can be found no where lodged but in a
particular Congregation built on the Faith which Peter in the Name of the rest
professed, Mat. 16.19.


Phil. But the great Question is where the Power of the Keys lies in a
particular Congregation, whether in the Fraternity, or in the Eldership.


Christ. I call the decisive Church Power the Key, and say it lies in the
Majority, as in all Societies that arise by mutual Consent or Agreement. But I
distinguish between the Keys and the management of them, for a Key is dead, and
opens no door if there be not a hand to make use of it. So that in an Organized
Church, the orderly managing and making use of the Churches Power lies in the
Elders. But if the Church be not Organized, they are guided by a common rule of
self-preservation, and using all means to procure their well being, they act by
common consent, as they came together in the Name of Christ, till they be duly
Organized with Officers. And therefore they admit members or excommunicate, if
necessity require, as they may before they have Officers. But having chosen
Officers the orderly way of proceeding is, by the authoritative Power of the
Officers in management of this Key, which is the decisive Power. Hence I
distinguish between a Churches acting pro necessitate, and pro regula ordinis.


Phil. What part have the ruling Elders, viz. the Pastor if there be no more,
or if there be, the ruling Presbyters that take part with him, as assistants in
admitting of a Member.


Christ. The Elder or Elders work is, 1. To speak with the party that desires
admission, propound him to the Church, and upon mature deliberation cause the
decisive Vote of the Church to pass upon him. Whereby he is received or
rejected. If received, the Elder declares the sense of the Church, and does
solemnly in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Church, enter into a
mutual obligation with the said Member, saying; You are here now to give up
your self, and Children, (if he has any,) to the Lord, and this Congregation,
promising (as Christ shall help you) to walk and abide in, and with this Church
in all Gospel Conversation, according to the rules of Faith and order of the
Gospel, submitting your self to the watch of the same, and promise to bring
your Children to the Ordinances of the Church, educating them in the nurture
and admonition of the Lord. Likewise adds, I do in the Name of Christ and this
Congregation, give you the right hand of fellowship, and receive you in the
Lord, promising to perform all the duties toward you that are required of us in
order to your Edification, as Christ shall enable us.


Phil. Has an Elder no more part in the decisive Power by Vote than an
ordinary Brother?


Christ. Though the Elders Judgment is usually hearkened to, and sways many
times much with the Congregation, giving light unto them from the Word, yet
when a matter comes by Vote to be determined, his Vote is but single as another
Brothers, and therefore we say this Key of decisive power is in the Fraternity,
though the orderly management thereof, and authoritative declaration thereof in
the Name of Christ belongs to the Elder.


Phil. In what other Cases is this Key made use of?


Christ. In letting, shutting out, and turning out of Members. 1. In Letting
out, or translating Members from one Church to another, when upon good reasons
a Church Member desires to change his or her Communion, and asks a
Dismission, it is granted by the suffrage of the Church approving his reasons
for it.


Phil. Is there any Scripture ground for a Dismission? may not a Church Member
not chargeable with any scandalous Sin go away to another Church without a
Dismission?


Christ. No! For it will cause Confusion in the Churches, and God is the God of
Order, and not Confusion, as in all the Churches of the Saints. Besides, it is
contrary to the Nature of such Societies, and the obligation by which the
Members stand mutually bound together in one Body. And Christ has provided as
well the orderly departure as stay of Church Members. The word (...) used, Romans
16.1. should be rendered statuo, constituo in coetu vobiscum, I dismiss to you,
for though our translators render it, I recommend, yet it should more rightly be
rendered, I dismiss or place in Church fellowship with you; and so all the
Apostle speaks afterward, are terms of a dismission. These Paul needs not he
being an Apostle, and having had a Seal of his Apostleship among them, (...),
are commendatory Letters with Dismission, 2 Cor. 3.2.


Phil. What then are your Letters of Recommendation?


Christ. A Letter of Recommendation is but a Certificate under the hand of an
Officer, that this or that Brother or Sister is a Member of such a
Congregation, walking blamelesly, and as becomes the Gospel, that when any
Brother or Sister comes to other Churches in their travels, they may make no
scruple to receive them to occasional or transient Communion, but transfers not
any as Members to another Congregation.


Phil. How is the Key used for Exclusion of a Member?


Christ. A Church Member is excluded or put out of Communion by Himself or by
the Church, and either amounts to Excommunication, for Excommunication is the
putting one out of the Communion of a particular Congregation; which is done
when a Member does disorderly withdraw and divide himself from the Church
Communion, obstinately refusing to be reduced to his place and duty in the said
Church. This is an usurpation of the Key of Power, and separating of himself;
and I call it Indirect Excommunication, because he divides himself violently
and schismatically; upon which the Church is to reassume the Key and shut the
door of Communion upon him, either by a direct Excommunication which is the
regular way, and may be justified from express places of Scripture, such as
Romans 16.17, 18. Or else if this way of Discipline will not be born, Judicially
to remark by the decisive Power of the Church, and declare that such an one
has sinfully or disorderly withdrawn and divided himself from the Communion of
the Church, whereby he must immediately be looked upon as Ecclesiastically felo
de se, and one cut off from the Communion of the Churches of Christ; being
separated from that Congregation to which he did belong. For he that
challenges Communion with other Churches, can do it but as a Member of one
particular Church, from which being divided by his act, having disclaimed it,
and secluded, thereupon by the act of the Church, he is doubly excommunicate,
and has no ground to claim right of Communion any where: but is as a dead
branch cut off, a Tree twice dead (in respect of his visible Church-standing)
and plucked up by the roots.


Phil. I am glad to understand that in the way of Church discipline you do
profess to, there is a regular way of proceeding to curb such kind of
disturbers of Churches, for it is easier to correct those who are chargeable
with scandal. For such make parties, divide Churches, and depart from their
Communion bidding defiance to all Rule and Government, and that out of a
pretense of Conscience. Now the way you speak of, would tend much to the
humbling such proud and prejudiced professors, who under pretense of serving
Christ, serve not the Lord Jesus, but their own Lusts, which to gratify, they
regard not the defaming and breaking the best Churches on Earth. But other
Churches and Elders will countenance, abett and receive them, as I have known
some do.


Christ. I must acknowledge it, to our great sorrow and shame, that is, of some
Elders and Churches, that will be still taking part with the offenders, and
censured Members of other Churches, and have no Conscience of the violation of
the Communion of Churches, but there is not many of them. It cannot be
expected, but as among a great many Churches some will be disorderly and
unruly; so among many Churches some will be of that nature, and become
Commonshores for Mammon sake, to all lawless ungovernable Members of other
Congregations. But a little more of this when we come to speak of the Communion
of Churches.


Phil. What is that which you call direct Excommunication?


Christ. It is when the Church by its decisive power adjudgeth a person an
impenitent obstinate offender, or grossly scandalous, lays him under a
sentence of Excommunication.


Phil. What Rules are there to proceed by, in that case?


Christ. There are two sorts of Offenses to be proceeded upon, and accordingly
are the Rules of proceeding. 1. Cases of less heinous nature, and privately
committed, as one Brother's sinning against another in lying, defrauding,
purloining, etc. and so sins not publicly known, not being so criminal and
heinous. In this kind of offenses Christ has laid us down the degrees of
proceeding, and if at last he is not convinced of his sin, when the Church
adjudgeth there is abundant ground of conviction laid before him, it is to
proceed to censure, and he is to be looked upon as a Heathen or Publican, that
has no right to Church Priviledges. 2. There are some sins heinous, more
criminal, publicly committed and known to the World, such as Blasphemy,
Drunkenness, Whoredom, Perjury, etc. These sins are not to be dallied with in a
gradual way of proceeding, for they go before the sinner to Judgment, and such
are immediately to be proceeded against to Excommunication. 1. Because it was
so practiced in the case of the incestuous person by the command of the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 5.2. It is requisite it should be so for the vindication of the
honor of Christ and his Church before the World. 3. That whatever pretenses
there are of present remorse, it is not meet such a person should be permitted
to abide an actual Church Member under the reproach of such a Sin, without
suffering the utmost censure, so long time as is requisite to satisfy the
Church of the dueness of his remorse and truth of his repentance. The dealing
with the incestuous person after Excommunication, is a rule to Churches to walk
by in the like cases.


Phil. The receiving in, of an Excommunicated person upon due Repentance, is
also by the decisive power of the Church.


Christ. It is so, for it is the same Key that opens to cast out and shut the
Door, and therefore must open it again, to let in the Penitent Sinner upon his
Repentance.


Phil. For what Sins is a person to be Excommunicated? Some of your persuasion
say not for any but heinous crimes, such as the light of Nature condemns, as
Murder, Adultery, Theft, Blasphemy. And the Acts of those sins must be clearly
proved too, any scandalous actions leading to these sins, will not bear the
dreadful sentence of Excommunication: As for example, words of threatening and
revenge, and actions manifestly such, lascivious carriages, keeping ill and
wicked company, purloyning, overreaching, cheating, equivocating, lying; these
are not sins with them to be excommunicated for, nor any sins of omission. As
for example, never to pray in a family, or read the Word, etc. nor for great
errors.


Christ. I must confess I have much wondered upon what grounds some men speak
and write in this case. But I find it mostly was those that prudentially made
this plea an evasion to excuse themselves from the exercising of any censure
upon any Churchmember, especially from questioning and dealing with any rich
and honorable for any sin. For Pastors are hereby pretty well secured upon
this account from this trouble, so long as there is none to be excommunicated,
but such as are burnt in the Hand at the Old Baily, or whipped at the Carts Tail,
or condemned to be Hanged at Tiburn. But we have not this limitation from the
Spirit of God, but from corrupt man, for there is no sin specified, Mat. 18.
yea any manifest sin is supposed by that text to be cause enough of
Excommunication, if a manifest impenitency be found in the offender, and he be
not by any due means to be reduced and brought to a sight and sense of the sin
he is charged with, and there is sufficient proof of it. As for sins of
ordinary infirmity they are watched against to be corrected by the brotherly
admonitions of others and frequently bewailed by our selves, but not made the
causes of Church censures.


Phil. In case one come under the censure of Excommunication, in what form and
manner is it usually denounced in your Churches?


Christ. In the very Words, which the Apostle Paul commanded the Corinthians to
Excommunicate the Incestuous Person, 1 Cor. 5.


Phil. Is not that a dreadful curse to deliver one to Satan for the Destruction
of the flesh, etc. I pray what does these words import?


Christ. The Sentence is very terrible and awful, but it is for a good and
desirable end, viz. The recovery of a Sinner from Sin, and saving his Soul, the
words which you mention are of mavelous spiritual signification. To deliver
over to Satan is as much as our Savior (by whose Spirit the Apostle enjoins
the use of this word) expresses, Mat. 18. that such an one should be accounted
as an excommunicate Person was by the Church of the Jews, or as one out of that
Churches Communion, viz. An Heathen, or Publican, for such the Jews would not
eat with, and condemned our Savior for so doing. There are but two Kingdoms in
the World; Christ's, and Satan's, who is called the Prince of the World, that
rules in the Children of disobedience, i. e. the Sons of Belial, men that will
not come under the yoke of Christ's Government; and with such Christ can have no
concord in his Church, 2 Cor. 6.15. And therefore to be put out of the Visible
Church as a Child of Disobedience, an incorrigible person, hardened in sin, and
to be returned into the World as one that has no right to the Childrens Bread:
And this is to be a means to humble him, and bring him to shame and godly
sorrow, so that his flesh (a Gospel expression for sin, which is corrupt
affections and lusts) may be destroyed, and that his Soul may be saved in the
day of Christ. And the consequent behavior required toward such an one
abundantly shows it, that intimacy of familiarity is not to be kept with him, 1
Cor. 5.11. And that such a Person is to be put away from Communion in this
manner, as to all sacred things peculiar to the Church, ver. 13. And what does
the Apostle intend, 2 These. 3.14. but the Excommunication of one that is
unruly, that he may be ashamed; for it is setting a mark upon him that others
may withdraw from him to his great shame, but yet ver. 15. to take all
opportunities to admonish him in order to his recovery.


Phil. What rules are to be observed in the Denunciation of this solemn
Sentence?


Christ. All the rules of Christ according to the Nature of the offense being
private, or public, ought to be observed, that all due deliberation be used,
and tenderness toward the offending Brother, before the case be put to the
suffrage of the Church. That being passed, and the Offender convict as guilty,
and ripe for censure, the sin is to be laid open with all the aggravations
thereof. Then the nature of the Sentence, and the true end and intent thereof
showed. Solemn Prayer is to be made by way of Humiliation to the Church, and
Supplication, for the Conviction, Repentance, and Humiliation of the Sinner,
that the Ordinance may obtain it is true and best effect upon him. Lastly, The
Sentence is to be denounced solemnly in the Name of Christ, by a ruling Elder,
if any, if none, by the Pastor; and then the Ordinance is to be concluded with
Prayer of Gods blessing of it unto the Sinner, for his return, and for the
Church, that God would preserve it from Impurities, Apostacies and Decays in
Grace, and that the fall of this Brother may be a warning Example, that He that
stands do take heed lest he fall.


Phil. Is there not a lesser Excommunication, which an offending Brother may be
tried with before you proceed to this great and tremendous one?


Christ. There is with some, that which they call Suspension, but I know no
ground for it from the word, for a man that is an adult Member has right to
all Ordinances, or not, and right he has still, till he be duly convict, and
sentence passed upon him. And I know no Power that any Church or Officer has
to debar him from any Ordinance of Church Communion, till he be excluded
judicially in the Name of Christ.


Phil. You are ready to receive an Excommunicate Person again upon credible
manifestation of his Repentance.


Christ. There ought to be great readiness to receive a repenting and returning
Sinner with all Tenderness, Compassion, and Commiseration, but with a due
regard to the Honor of Christ, his Church and Ordinance, to endeavor to get
as much satisfaction as may be, concerning the Truth and Sincerity of his
professed Repentance, not only by manifested remorse, but in some Cases by
experienced Reformation.


Phil. You were saying that one that is an unjust divider from the Communion of
the Church, ought to be excommunicated by a direct Excommunication.


Christ. I do verily believe it is the mind and will of Christ, and though our
Churches, that are now but in a declining state as to matters of Order, will
not receive it, yet Churches have practiced it; and whenever the Churches
flourish they will practice it. My Reasons are briefly, 1. That it is Schism of
the highest nature, being the actual dividing of a particular Congregation; and
there is no other Schism spoken of in Scripture; that in the Church of Corinth
was but Factions tending to this Division, else the Apostle would have given
command to excommunicate the causers thereof, as well as the incestuous Person.
For the contentions and factions that had a tendency thereto they were highly
rebuked, 1 Cor. 1.11, 12. chapter 3.3. 1 Cor. 11.18. 2. What way is for marking and
withdrawing from a Person, but the Sentence of Excommunication? Romans 16.17. 1
These. 5.14. 2 These. 3.14. 3. It Is a most scandalous Sin to Jew, Gentile, and
Church of Christ; nothing stains the Honor of Christ more in the Congregation.
4. It Is a root of bitterness that infects many, and ought to be plucked up by
censure, if it cannot be cured, Heb. 12.15. 5. To excommunicate such a person
is no wrong, because he has excommunicated himself, he has but what he sought
after, and has done. 6. It Is fit such an one should be excommunicated
judicially, because he has by usurpation excommunicated himself and the
Church. 7. It Is plain it is a sin and such an one wherein he hears not the
Church, and therefore to be made as an Heathen and Publican. 8. It Is a gross
breach of his Covenant at entrance into Church Communion.


Phil. Speak something now of the fifth Head of Ordinances, which is
Contribution to the support of Ordinances, Ministry, and the necessity of the
Saints.


Christ. Contribution on these accounts are manifestly the Office charge of the
Deacons, to call the Church to it is Duty in this kind, and to take care for the
faithful distribution of all Collections of this Nature, and to give account
thereof to the Church. They are herein the Churches Stewards, it is fully
manifest from the first institution of that Office, Acts 6. and by their
necessary qualifications spoken of, 1 Timothy 3.8. Now the reason of this Office
and Ordinance, is not only the Gospel Institution, which from the places
forementioned are without dispute, but from the Nature of the Church Society it
self No Societies, if but civil, can be supported according to their Nature
without charge, and there are many charges necessarily required to support a
Church Society, for a Ministry must be maintained, 1 Cor. 9.9, 10, 11, 12. 1 Timothy 5.17, 18. Gal. 6.6. Luke 10.4. Likewise there is charges as to places for
the Church to assemble and meet in. The Primitive Churches assembled in upper
rooms of ordinary Houses, Act. 1.13. (...), they went up into an upper room.
And Paul preached in his own hired house, Act. 28.30, 31. The Churches were at
the charge of hiring places to meet in, and so have been ever since the
Profession of Christian Religion, they are built, or hired. There are Elements
for the Lords Table, which are matter of charge. There are the Poor to be
supported and relieved. And that it was the practice of the Churches to have
frequent Collections, for these ends and purposes is beyond all dispute, 2 Cor.
9.1. 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. The time and manner for making these Collections seems to
be left to the prudent Consideration of each Church, as may be most agreeable
to it is circumstances, though Paul seems to intimate to the Corinthians that
the first day of the week, when the Church assembleth, is a suitable and meet
time for it. As for the administration of other Ordinances of Christ, and the
proportion that every one is bound in Conscience to give to all such occasions
of Contribution, is from time to time, as God has prospered him, and the
manner specified: He that gives, with simplicity, he that shows Mercy with
cheerfulness, Romans 12.8.


Phil. You seem to add one thing more to be observed and practiced in Churches,
as an Ordinance of Christ for Edification, the frequent assembling of the
Church for Prayer, and Conference.


Christ. Whatever may have a manifest tendency to Edification is undoubtedly
required, and is to be practiced in a Church of Christ. This assembling of the
Church all together, or in parts, or neighbourhoods does undoubtedly do so; and
if there were no other place of Scripture to be pleaded for it, that is enough
to encourage it, Mal. 3.16, 17. But the Apostle seems, Heb. 10.24, 25. to lay
frequent assemblings in this kind, as a great charge upon the Churches of
Christ. And we find that there was a practice of this nature frequent in the
Primitive Churches, when Brethren spoke by way of Exhortation in Conference one
with another, and it was called prophesying, 1 Cor. 14.3, 4, 5. And it is plain
that it was but speaking and praying in this manner of the Brethren, for the
edifying of the Church; and to this practice does the Apostles discourse, 1
Cor. 11.2, 3, 4, etc. seem plainly to look.


Phil. How were those meetings for Conference or mutual Edification managed?


Christ. It was by Brethrens speaking one after another (not several talking of
spiritual matters in the same roomin diverse Companies, as it was before that
the Apostle corrected that disorder, 1 Cor. 14.29.) But the regular way of
carrying it on is that one speak at once, and the rest judge, viz. That a
practical question be propounded, and two or three or more speak briefly in
answer thereto one after another; and if that an Officer should be there, or
one appointed in chief to Judge, and to review the Consonancy to Truth of what
is spoken then. Let others submit thereto according to the light brought, 1
Cor. 14.30.


CHAP. VII. Of Communion of Churches.
Phil. IS the Supreme Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical in every particular
Congregation? Is there none Superior to appeal to, Episcopal or Classical?


Christ. None but Christ himself. For all Churches are coordinate in Power one
with another, nextly and immediately under Christ; neither has Christ
constituted any Officers with Apostolic Power over many Churches.


Phil. But what if matter of difficulty arise; ought not Elders of neighboring
Churches to assemble and decide it?


Christ. There are two sorts of things wherein matters of Controversy do
usually lie, 1. There may be a case in Thesi, which to understand the Mind of
God clearly in, is of great concernment to the Church; and if the Pastor and
other Officers cannot sufficiently satisfy the Mind of the Brethren, then it is
requisite to consult other Churches and Elders; who when they give their
Judgment in the Case, it is no further binding, than it carries the light of
Truth with it; for no Elders can impose any rule of practice upon the Churches:
and their Judgment has no more force than Ministerial; so far as carrying the
Authority of Christ in his declared Mind and Will. Here then it is very
necessary and requisite, that in matters of greater and weightier concern other
Churches should be acquainted and consulted. Other things are referrible all to
matter of fact in elections, admissions, translations, and exclusions And here
the Church is the supreme Judge, and none to be appealed to. Why should not a
Church of Christ be as able to judge in any case of this Nature, as well as a
Jury in Civil Affairs to whose Judgment, as to matter of fact our Lives and
Estates are left daily. Therefore if we hold the distinction de jure and de
facto, this matter of the Jurisdiction of Churches will be clear. In cases de
jure, a Church can be led only by the best light they can have; and the more
the better, and knowing this they have a foundation to proceed upon in matter
of fact, whereupon the binding and loosing lies in themselves.


Phil. What if a Member or Minor part of a Church think themselves wronged upon
the supposed irregular proceedings of the Majority?


Christ. He or they may complain to another Church. That Church is to hear what
the Sister Church says in vindication. If it satisfy not, nor is convinced of
it is error, then another Church ( i. e. the Elders with Messengers thereof) to
deal with the offending Church. And if it hear not, then the case is to be
brought before the vicinity of Churches. All which finding this Church justly
chargeable with sin, and incorrigible therein, agree to declare Non-communion
with it, which is virtually an Excommunication, for the rule of Churches
dealing with each others is of the same nature, as that, Mat. 18. where a rule
is laid down by our Savior for the orderly proceeding of one Church Member
with another.


Phil. What if an Elder fall under offense in a Church; is it in the power of
that Church to deal with him, as with an ordinary Brother?


Christ. There is no doubt of it, the Jurisdiction is in the Church as to
Officers, who are Brethren, as well as to others, and the manner of proceeding
is the same; but an accusation against an Elder is not presently to be
received, it must be clearly evidenced by two or three Witnesses. Again, in
such cases it is good for the Church to proceed with the advice and approbation
(if possible) of other Neighboring Churches and Elders.


Phil. Wherein consists the practical part of Communion of Churches?


Christ. 1. A concurrence in principles of Faith and Order. 2. In giving each
other the Right Hand of Fellowship. As, 1. In receiving each others Members
unto transient Communion, as due occasion requires. 2. In dismissing Members to
each others, or receiving Members orderly dismissed. 3. In refusal to admit
such to Communion, which are under the censure of another Church or disorderly
withdrawn from it, signification being made thereof. 3. There is Communion of
Churches in mutual advice and counsel, which should be maintained by Elders
frequent assembling and meeting together for this end and purpose. 4. By
sympathizing with each others Poverty and Afflictions, by relieving and
supporting as much as possible such as labor in this kind. And this is a
Communion in giving and receiving, as the Apostle calls it.


Phil. Is there not a Communion of Churches in the office power of the Elders,
v. gr. for one Pastor to administer the Lords Supper in another, and for the
Elders of one or more Congregations to ordain Elders in another.


Christ. Officers have a peculiar relation to the Society that has called
them, and there only they are such, and that society only can constitute and
ordain them, and there only they can exercise their particular Office charge.
As a Pastor can administer the Lords Supper only in the Church to which he is
overseer; neither the ruling Elder can govern, nor the Deacon has power to
distribute any where but where he is a Deacon, or has that Office charge
committed to him, for if the Officer of one Church were thereby made an
indefinite Officer to all, it would soon bring confusion to all, and the Elders
of one Church might excommunicate in another.


Phil. I thank you Sir, for this brief account you have given me of your Church
Order. As for the Ordinances of Christ's institution I think all reformed
Churches own them more or less, and the Romanists themselves in their way,
though with innumerable Superstitions and Idolatrous additions. And for the
Church Officers you insist on, methinks I see there is something analogous to
them remaining in our parochial Churches, which has been handed down from the
primitive practice through Antichristian Darkness. As in some of our Parishes
we have the Parson as Pastor, the Assistant in Preaching, as the Teacher, the
Church Wardens as ruling Elders, the overseers of the Poor as Deacons. and
though these labor under many abuses now, and irregularities by Popish
corruptions, yet it shows that these are the Officers that do fully answer the
necessity of a Christian Congregation, and that if it be large none of them can
well be spared.


Chap. VIII. Of Letters of Commendation and Discommendation.
Phil. BEfore we break up this conference, I pray inform me of the manner of
translating of a Church Member from one Church to another. I have heard some
say there is no difference between Letters of recommendation and of dismission.


Christ. I have told you a Letter of recommendation is but a Certificate under
an Elders Hand, that such an one is a Church Member, and orderly walker, in
order to his free admission, to occasional Communion with other Churches; it
need not be a Church Act. 2. It Is not in order to the parting with a Member. 3.
It need not be directed to any particular Congregation. 4. When Members of each
Congregation are well known to one another, they are needless, as the Apostle
says of himself, 2 Cor. 3.1, 2. we need not [(...)] Letters of Commendation to
you?


Phil. I pray in what form does a Letter of Commendation run?


Christ. It may be in these or such like words.


To the Churches of Christ and their respective Elders, to whom these presents
shall come, Grace, Mercy and Peace, etc.
SEeing God by his Providence has called this our Brother. A. B. to be
conversant in places remote from us for a time, and that he may reap the
comfort of Christian Communion in Gospel Ordinances, in any places whither he
is lawfully called, and where any Church of Christ is planted, by virtue of
Communion of Churches; These are to certify that this our Brother, A. B. is
under no censure, but in actual Communion with us, has walked in all Christian
and Holy Conversation, as becomes the Faith and Order of the Gospel, to the
great honor of Christ, and our rejoicing. Wherefore you need not doubt to give
him the Right Hand of Fellowship in occasional Communion, whenever he shall
desire the same. We greet you well in the Lord.

C. D. Pastor.


Phil. Is not this sufficient for to translate a Member to another Church, and
make him an actual Member there?


Christ. No, this makes him not a Member of any one Church more than another.
2. Here the Church to which he belongs, gives up no right in him. Neither does
any Church act pass to that purpose, or is desired by him. The end of this, is
but to be a Testimonial to other Churches, that they may know him to be a
Church Member, and one under no censure but approved, and therefore that no
other Churches may scruple to admit him to their Communion as occasion shall
require.


Phil. I pray then how do you write a dismission, some dismiss Members but to
no Church.


Christ. It may be wrote with these or such like expressions, as the matter
requires, for in some cases variation is required.


Phil. What are those cases?


Christ. I will tell you. Some dismissions cannot be wrote with so great
commendation, as others may, some departing Members giving considerable cause
of offense in their carriages, toward the Church and Ministry before, and in
their asking dismission.


Phil. How do you write a dismission wit^ commendation?


Christ. A dismission with commendation may be after this manner, and it must
be directed to a particular Church.


To the Church of Christ [in such a place] to which the Reverend Mr. L. P. is
Pastor, Grace, Mercy, etc.
Dearly beloved in the Lord,
WHereas F. D. a Brother in fellowship with us, has walked in all good
Conscience and Holy Conversation, as becomes the Gospel and his profession,
continuing steadfastly in attendance on all the Ordinances of Christ in this
Congregation; And now having consulted us, and given us reasons why he
apprehends it his duty to ask his dismission: Which reasons being duly
considered by us, and approved as satisfactory: we think it no less our duty to
grant his said request, and do hereby dismiss him unto you, discharging him
from his nearer relation, and obligation unto us, and commit him to your
particular watch and care, desiring you to receive him in the Lord, and that
you will be every way helpful to him, to promote his edification and comfort.
For which Spiritual ends, we commend you, and him with you, to the word of his
Grace who is able to build you up, and give you an inheritance among them that
are sanctified.

Subscribed by the consent and in the name of the Church of Christ, at K. by A.
N. Pastor.


Phil. But what kind of dismission can you give without commendation?


Christ. There must be some in every one, and charity allows us to give some
commendation to a Member that stands under very dissatisfactory circumstances,
which we hope proceed from his infirmity only, and therefore can say thus much,
That we hope he partakes of the free Grace of God in Christ, though at present
labors under these or those infirmities. And though his reasons for his
departure do no way satisfy us, yet seeing he cannot be otherwise persuaded,
we have granted his dismission in order to his contentment and our peace. But
indeed small or no commendation does in these cases, for there is seldom any
such departer but the Pastor of some other Church, is prepared for the
receiving him right or wrong, with commendation or without, yea with dismission
or without, for all is Fish that comes to Net with some men.


Phil. Yea they say there are some Pastors will receive Members that run away
from other Churches, although they be actually certified that they be under
censure. Do you (...) to send Letters of discommendation to Churches concerning
offending Members?


Christ. Yes, there is as much or more reason for it, than for a letter of
commendation. For as it concerns a Church to know who it admits to Communion,
or rejects, so it is requisite that a due Character be given by the Church, to
which the Member belongs. And there is no particular Congregation, will offer
to receive a person into stated Communion, at least, without consulting the
Church to which he belongs, unless it be such a Church as savours too much of
an Algerine Spirit in Ecclesiastic affairs.


Phil. Have you seen ever any Letters Discommendatory sent from one Church to
another? Show me if you have.


Christ. Yes I can show you one. And such a Letter need not be a Church act no
more than a bare Letter of Commendation. It may be done by an Elder only, and
he is bound by his Office to certify unto other Churches, what capacity a
Member is in, whether under censure or no. For when an offending Member is
brought under the censure of a Church, other Churches ought to be acquainted
with it, that they may not be imposed upon, and that he may be ashamed, being
rejected by the unanimous concurrence of all Churches.


A Letter of Discommendation, may be to this purpose:
To all the Churches of Christ, in particular to that whereto S. T. is Pastor.
WHereas E. F. has been a Member of this our Congregation, and having fallen
by a scandalous Sin, -- or an offense for which he has been duly proceeded
with according to the rules of the Gospel, but remaining impenitent is to our
great grief and humiliation, justly brought under the dreadful Sentence of
Excommunication. -- Or, Whereas F. B. has for so long time withdrawn himself
from the Commumunion of the Church of Christ in E. whereof he was a Member, to
the long distraction, and great grief thereof, and does persist in his
withdrawment, notwithstanding all due means, which has been used with all
tenderness, patience and condescension for the reclaiming of him from the said
disorderly walking: And that you may not be imposed upon by such an one,
offering himself to partake with you at the Lords Table, and that the Violation
of the Communion of Churches ^ay be prevented, as well as the further harden^^
of an offender in sin; These are to signify to (...) that the said person
abovenamed, is fallen (...) censure of this Congregation, before(...) ^fore
according to the known and avowed rules of the Gospel, he can be no longer
allowed a just claim to Communion with other Churches, by virtue of any
relation to, or right by and under the said Church, or of any other pretenses
whatsoever, whilst he stands thus divided from it as has been declared. But
that the God of all Grace will incline his Heart to return to his Duty is the
unfeigned desire and prayer of the Congregation, and of him especially, who is
your unworthy Brother and Servant in Christ Jesus,

A. B. Pastor.


Phil. I thank you for your readiness to satisfy me in these points, wherein I
am now made sensible through Grace, the honor of God and a Christians fixed
comfort, is most exceedingly concerned. I shall exercise your Patience at this
time no longer, but wait another opportunity, when we may further discourse
some points of this nature.


Christ. Sir, you shall always find me (God assisting) most ready and cheerful
in any service of this nature. And though these things seem most strange to
most men, and of an abstruse nature, yet the time is coming when all the great
truths of the Gospel shall b^ cleared up before the World. For when (...) Lord
shall build up Zion, he will appear (...) Glory. Expect we must, yet that,
th(...) retick and Doctrinal part of these (...) Gospel order, will be
ridiculed by many, and the practice thereof brow-beaten and scorned, not only
by the World, but by carnal and ignorant Church Members, that are biassed and
led away by their own lusts, and seductions of others, but through Grace none
of these things shall move me. Vale.


There is to be sold by Will. Marshal.
THE interest of Churches, by J. C.

The true nature of a Gospel Church, by J. O. D. D.

A Treatise of the Dominion of Sin and Grace, by J. O. D. D.

And any other works of the said Author.

FINIS.

