LICENSED,

Nov. 24. 1676. Roger L'Estrange.

THE HISTORY OF THE Grand Uisiers, Mahomet, and Achmet Coprogli, Of the three
last GRAND SIGNIORS, THEIR Sultana's and Chief Favorites; With the most secret
Intrigues of the SERAGLIO.

Besides several other particulars of the Wars of Dalmatia, Transylvania,
Hungary, Candia, and Poland.

Englished by John Evelyn, junior.

LONDON: Printed for H. Brom, at the Gun at the West End of St. Paul's. 1677.

To the High and Mighty Prince GODEFROY MAURICE, De la Tour, d' Auvergne,
Sovereign Duke of Bouillon, Duke d' Albret, and Chasteau Thierry, Count d'
Auvergne, Eureux, Viscount Turenne, Governor, and Lieutenant for the King in
High and Low Auvergne, Peer, and Great Chamberlain of France.
SIR,
THIS Book I look upon as a Present so far from worthy of your Highness, that I
cannot but charge my self with Presumption in the very Dedication of it. But as
the Work it self was written under your Roof, and the Author of it had the
honor at the same time to be generously obliged by your Highness. As it is
properly the Life of an Hero, whom you your self have encountered with his
Scimitar in his hand; an Hero whose Victorious Course was then stopped by your
assistance, when our brave French gave that famous Defeat to the Grand Vizier
near the River Raab; the place where you gave so many signal marks of that
extraordinary Valor, which is essential to the Character of your Illustrious
Family, and hereditary to all that bear your Name; to whom, Sir, should I
inscribe this Book but to your self, either upon the point of glory or
protection? To sum up the number of your Ancestors, whose great Actions fill
the best pages of our History; to present you with your Pedigree, or the
pourtraits of so many Princes who have made your very Name immortal; to insist
upon those that bear it now, and by their own merit, and the great Charges they
possess, are so considerable; that in your Highness and your Brothers, one may
behold all that is high, and exalted in France; to say that in your Family
those Dignities are at present united, which never met in any Kings Reign
before, as the Office of Great Chamberlain, Great Almoner of France, and
Colonel of the Light Horse. I am not, Sir, now to learn, that these are Truths
would offend your Modesty, and that it is peculiar to your House to reject all
praises, how just soever. This is the reason that makes me sparing upon this
subject; and to content my self with this humble profession, that I am with all
respect, and veneration, as I ought to be,

SIR, Your Highnesses most Humble and Obedient Servant, De Chassepol.

To my GOVERNESS.
THere needs no more to declare to all the World who you are, when I shall tell
them, that it is to the most Religious, and virtuous; the most discreet, and
the most charming of your Sex: to speak less, were to injure your Merits, as
well as my Judgment; to say more (and name you) were to undervalue the
discernment of all who know what perfection is, and where all the Graces which
are scattered amongst other Ladies of Quality are assembled in one.

I made choice of this piece (whilst I was lately at Paris) to divert my
Governess with; because the Truth and Dignity of the Historical Part (which you
more affect) may commute for the Trifles of the Romantic (which you less
regard) and have rendered it English, not because you are unacquainted with the
Original (who are Mistress of the most polished Languages) but to give you some
account of the instructions I acknowledge to have received from you, how I
should employ the less serious moments of my Time, as well as the most
studious, and recollected. I had but to imitate your example, to pay at once my
duty to God, my self, and all the world.

This is the express Character of my Governess, the account her Pupil thinks
fit to give of his attempt, and of the veneration he bears

Philothea.
THE HISTORY of the Grand VISIERS.
The First Book.
History of Sultan Amurath the Fourth.
AMurath the Fourth of that name, Emperor of the Turks, had no sooner put an
end to the differences that were between him, and Vladislaus the great King of
Poland, but he immediately resolved to execute his long intended design of
recovering the City of Babylon, vulgarly called Bagdet. Pekier Bassa, the
better to shelter himself from Amurath, had delivered it to the King of Persia.
The importance of this enterprise was such, as made the Sultan think his own
presence necessary to accomplish it. Therefore to reestablish that glory which
his Arms had lost under the Conduct of his Generals, he took the field at the
head of three hundred thousand men, with such expedition, that he prevented the
Sophy, and forced him to retire after he had fortified some places, which were
not before in a condition to make any resistance. Tauris was the first place
that presumed to withstand the Sultan; and it was so vigorously defended, that
it provoked him after he had taken it, to raze it, and plough up its very
Foundations, thereby to strike terror into other places which he designed to
attack; from thence he marched to Revan, where the Governor brought him the
Keys, and came over to his side. Being thus possessed of this place, he turned
all his Forces against Babylon, which he besieged and plied so furiously that
at two and fifty days end, he carried it, after four of the bloudiest Assaults
that were ever made. The Pillage of it he bestowed on his Soldiers, commanding
them to put all to the Sword without regard of Age, or Sex. Not satisfied with
this advantage, he extended his Conquests over diverse Provinces, wasting all
the Country through which he past, and nothing being able to satiate his desire
of revenge but the defeat of the Sophy, he staid not to attend his coming, but
advanced to find him out, and offer him Battle; which the Persian Monarch
thought not fit to hazard against the Victorious Ottoman, but retreated to the
remotest Mountains of his Empire: from whence, the Grand Signior, seeing he
could not draw him by open force, he resolved to send him a challenge, by which
he let him know, that setting apart the consideration of those great advantages
he might certainly promise himself from so powerful an Army, (which was
sufficient to subdue all Persia,) he was ready by a private Combat to
terminate their ancient quarrel, and the War which had so long engaged both
Nations. The Sophy to free himself from the Obligation of answering it, made as
if he had not received this challenge; and dispatched a Cham or Persian Prince,
to make overtures of Peace to Amurath: Who perceiving his Troops to be much
harrassed, to give them some repose, consented to interrupt the course of his
Victories, and hearkened to the Propositions of the Sophy, leaving his Grand
Vizier behind him to conclude the Peace, whilst he himself retired to Damas:
where, till the season was fit to return into Europe, he refreshed himself
after the ^oils of War, in the Arms of a charming Persian Lady, who far
out-shined all his other Favorites.

This beautiful Persian, was Sister to Emir Gumer, who to obtain the Grand
Signiors Favor, when he basely surrendered Revan to him, presented him also
with his Sister Rachima. The effect which her Charms had on the Sultans Heart,
made the Sultaness Roxana, who had followed him to the Persian War, extremely
Jealous. This Princess was not wont to suffer a Rival; her Reign had been long
and uncontrolled, and she had often sent the finest Women in the Seraglio into
the other World, so soon as she was informed that they endeavored to seduce
her Gallant. Amurath being acquainted with, and fearing her humor, to prevent
her resentment, and free himself from her importunate Jealousy, sent her away
before him to Constantinople; where all the extraordinary Honors that were paid
her, were not sufficient to balance her vexation for being supplanted by
another; but not being able to revenge her self on her Rival, she resolved to
fall upon those who rejoiced at her disgrace. Her Jealousy, and cruelty made
her formidable to all the World; but none had more reason to mistrust her than
the Grand Signiors Brothers Bajazet, Orcan, and Ibrahim, the two first, (whose
Valor equaled their Birth) were tired with her persecutions: they knew her to
be the cause that their Brother kept them in Prison, and how she had done her
utmost to destroy them, that none might remain to dispute the Empire with her
own Son. The fear of death which threatened them, had hitherto kept them from
showing themselves justly sensible of the wrongs which the Sultana Valide their
Mother, and the Princesses their Sisters had suffered at her hands; but having
learnt that she had lost much of Amuraths esteem, they laid aside their former
moderation, and began openly to complain of Roxana; who was so enraged at it,
that she vowed their ruin, to let her Enemies see that her Authority was not at
all diminished, and that none should go unpunished who offended her, nothing
was left undone that might conduce to the accomplishment of her design. By fair
promises she gained the Caimacan or Lieutenant to the Grand Vizier, (to whom
the Sultan had left the charge of his two Brothers,) to act without acquainting
Amurath, left that should discover her Treason. She counterfeited Letters which
assured him that these Princes had intelligence with their Brothers Enemies,
and after she had prepared all things necessary to justify what she was about
to do, she produced a false Order of the Sultans, and was so cruel as to go
herself (attended by the Executioners,) to tell the unfortunate Princes that
she sacrificed them to her own hatred rather than to the interest of Amurath.
Bajazet after he had reproached her with all her crimes, and given her thanks
for taking away that life which he could not employ in destroying her,
submitted to the Mutes who came to strangle him. Orcan was not so patient; for
without upbraiding her, he stood upon his Guard, and having slain two, disabled
two more from having any hand in his death, which he was forced to undergo at
last as well as his Brother.

The Murder of these two Princes caused an universal sorrow, and consternation;
their Courage had given the World great hopes, and their death so inflamed the
People against the Sultana, that had not the Grand Signior arrived, they had
torn her out of the Seraglio, and made her a victim to the Public hate. Amurath
was received in Triumph, with more magnificence than was ever afforded any of
his Predecessors, after their most Signal Victories. He had left Rachima at
Damas, which made Roxana believe that she was not quite blotted out of his
Heart, and that she should soon recover her ground. To this end she made it her
whole business to appear more charming in his Eyes, besides she brought him to
thank her for the death of his Brothers, as an extraordinary service, by which
she had diverted the dangers that threatened his Person, and Empire. She had
indeed a greater Ascendent over Amurath than she could hope for, and found it
no difficult matter, to rekindle in him all those flames, which the fair
Rachima seemed to have extinguished. He now heaped new favors on her, and
abandoned himself to such excess of Love, as proved fatal to one of the
Princesses, his Sister. As she came one day to cast herself at his Feet to
complain of Roxanas injurious carriage toward her, and of the unjust death of
her two Brothers, he was so enraged at her, that with a Battle-ax which he held
in his hand, he gave her a blow on the head, of which the Young Princess died
on the place. Roxanas hatred was not satisfied with this Murder, she would
have added that of the Grand Visiers Achomat, because he was of the Sultana
Valides party, of whose Authority she was Jealous. Besides the intention she
had of putting the Caimacan who was wholly her creature, into his place, she
found means to render him criminal, by accusing him of being acquainted with,
and favoring the designs of the Princes. This was enough to ruin him, but the
fall of this great Favorites head, made such a noise, that it awakened all the
Grandees of the Empire; they complained loudly of the injustices which the
Great Sultana made the Emperor every day commit; they ripped up all the Murders
she had been guilty of, and caused the Mufty in behalf of the Public, to
complain of her to Amurath. He had no sooner begun to acquit himself of his
dangerous Commission, but the Sultana Kiozem Amuraths Mother came and presented
her self to him, together with a Slave whom she brought to discover the Plot,
that Roxana had formed against her Life. The Sultan at first would believe
nothing, but the Eunuch whose remorse had made him acquaint the Sultana Valide
with what was contrived against her, protested so earnestly that after he had
discharged his Conscience of those secrets which filled him with horror, he was
not afraid to die, that at last Amurath was convinced. Roxana was sent for to
answer to the crimes that were laid to her charge, which she did with so much
Pride and Disdain, that not being able longer to defer her punishment, by
burying his Poynard in her heart, he endeavored with his own hand to repair
all those ills she had been the cause of. She was three and twenty years old,
and was thought the handsomest woman that ever came into the Seraglio. Her
Picture that Amurath ordered to be Drawn in the first transports of his
Passion, which he always kept in his Closet, shows her to have been an
accomplished Beauty. She was tall and well shaped, her Min was noble, and her
Gate becoming, her Hair of a fair light Brown, the turn of her Face was Oval,
her Complexion was very Clear and Smooth, her Eyes full and sparkling, her Nose
well made, her Mouth little, her Lips Vermillion, her Teeth good and well set,
her Chin was proportioned to the rest of her Face, her Neck perfectly well
shaped, with very pretty Hands, her Physiognomy was promising: There was such
an air of Majesty throughout her whole Person, as drew the admiration of all
the World; but with this she had Vices that rendered her insupportable: she was
so cruel as to sacrifice all things to her Ambition and Jealousy; she
delighted in Treachery and Revenge, and certainly she was the most Proud and
Inhuman Princess that ever lived.

Amurath, having by the death of this Favorite appeased the murmurs of his
People, resolved to keep himself from being so strongly engaged for the future;
but all his Passions were violent; he now wanted employment, had no Wars to
busy himself in, and the remembrance of his past cruelties stung him
continually. Every one endeavored to drive away his deep melancholy, which
was looked upon as dangerous, by entertaining him with pleasures and
diversions. The Empire never enjoyed a greater Calm, and nothing was thought of
in Constantinople but feasting and rejoicing. The Grand Signiors Court since
the Peace concluded with the Persian, was crowded with idle Officers, who
waited there in expectation of some recompense for their Services.

Mahomet Coprogli Pacha was one of this number, The Original of Mahomet
Coprogli.
his Father was named Coprogly, whom some affirmed to be the Son of a Mariner,
others of a Gentleman, who by some concerns of his Family, being obliged to
quit France, and settle himself in Italy, was in his Voyage thither assaulted,
and slain by a Turkish Pirate, by whom his Son then about ten or twelve years
old, was made a Slave, and carried into Cyprus. The Bassa Barac Bey, Governor
of this Island, taking notice of the gallant Spirit of young Coprogli and his
inclination to Arms, Educated him with great care, and when he went to the
Persian War took him along with him, where he behaved himself so well, that he
obtained a Timariots Place for him of the Emperor Achmet, and another very
considerable charge in the Army, in which afterward his Son Mahomet Coprogli,
notwithstanding his youth and the contrary custom of the Turks, succeeded him:
He acquitted himself in his employment with great reputation, and by his merit
and good Min, advantageously maintained that Credit which his Valor had gained
in the War. Though he had been all his Life time in the Camp, yet he had
contracted none of that Rudeness and Barbarity which is commonly apparent in
the Carriage and Manners of Soldiers; but was as refined, as if he had never
been absent from the Court, whose Maxims he was perfectly acquainted with, and
was a better Politician than those that sat at the Helm. This made him bethink
himself of getting some powerful Patron who might advance him in the Grand
Signiors Favor, not being ignorant, that the most deserving Courtiers make no
Progress without such a Protector at their Masters Elbow. His insinuation and
good humor soon gained him the esteem, and friendship of the great men; more
particularly of the Kisler Agasi named Vglan Chief of the Eunuchs in the
Seraglio, and Prime Minister and Confident of the Grand Signiors secret
Pleasures. This Eunuch was so favorable to Mahomet Coprogli, that he promised
to second him in all occasions that might serve to raise his Fortune. He was a
man of great address, had long experience in all the Intrigues of the Court in
which he was grown old, and had obtained this honorable Station by
extraordinary Merit. From him Mahomet Coprogli received Precepts how to behave
himself, which were very serviceable in the raifing him to that preferment
which he soon after arrived to. He discovered to him the most secret privacies
of the Seraglio and the Court; instructed him in the humor and inclinations of
the Emperor, and told him the best means to obtain his good Graces, concealing
nothing which might perfectly instruct him in all the interests of the Great
Families of the Empire, and the Grand Signiors Favorites. Coprogli knew well
enough how to make his advantage of the informations of this crafty Aga. He
began to put them in practice by compliance and submission to the Bassas, and
all those who were near the Sultan. He was ever of the number of those with
whom the Emperor diverted himself; the desire he had to please him made him use
a thousand little arts, and he proved so successful, that Amurath began to
distinguish him from the crowd, and to look kindly upon him; which soon made
the Courtiers jealous of him. Envy is a Vice inseparable from the Favor of
Princes, rendering those hated whom they honor with their Friendship. Coprogli
quickly found the truth of this: Those whose esteem he had purchased by his
Civility, and obliging conversation before he was known to the Sultan, no
sooner perceived the good reception he met with, but they openly declared
themselves his Enemies, and endeavored all they could to overthrow the
Foundation of his growing Fortune: but he having foreseen this alteration, had
armed himself with Constancy against their persecutions. He behaved himself so
wisely, that Envy herself had nothing to charge him withal, yet though he was
prudent enough to avoid all the traps the Courtiers laid for him, he could not
preserve himself from falling into the very first snares of Love. One day
Amurath having (as he was often wont to do) made a debauch with his principal
Favorites, he took a fancy to walk in the Gardens of the Seraglio, and as an
extraordinary favor to let them go in along with him. When the Sultan walks in
these Gardens, it is ordinarily with a design to favor some Sultana; and when
he passes by the Ladies apartment, they use to throw Flowers to him, and send
him Fruits, and Works of their own making, to deserve his kindness. They send
these Presents commonly by young Slaves, or Odalisques, who forget not to
inform him of their Mistresses Name and Beauty. Amurath chose to walk in a
Terrass, which ran along by the Seraglio of the Sultana's, and ended in a
Cabinet that looked on the Sea. This place he had built at his return from the
Persian War, to riot in with the more freedom. Hither he often came with his
Mignions, and that Persian Lord Gumer, who to avoid the punishment due to his
Treason, had followed him to Constantinople. This man was one of the most
exquisite debauchees of his time; he had found the way to gain the Grand
Signior's affection, by teaching him to drink Wine, and a thousand other
excesses not fit to be named. He entertained and discoursed with the Sultan,
while he passed under the Balconies, where he saw several Sultana's. It may be
the good humor he was then in made him go by them, to show them to his
Favorites; or perhaps, not having had any commerce with the Ladies since the
death of Roxana, he began to be weary of living so reserved from the fair Sex,
and had a mind to let the Sultanas know, that he had not resolved to deprive
himself for ever of those sweets which he might taste in their company.
Whatever it was, he was not displeased to see himself accosted by a young
slave, who presented him with a basket of Fruit from a fair one he had not yet
seen. This message did no less surprise him than the Fruits, which were some of
them natural, others artificial; so well counterfeited, that they were hard to
be distinguished. While Amurath was busied in choosing the Fruit, Mahomet
Coprogli who stood behind him, was considering the beauty of the slave who
brought it: he was naturally more gallant than ordinarily those of his Nation
are, and seeing the Sultan taken up with the admiration of the Fruits, and the
Courtiers earnestly commending the Lady who sent them, he thought he had a fit
opportunity to let the young slave know what he thought of her beauty. But he
not being the only man in the company who had discerning eyes, the charms of
Fatima (so was the young Odalisque called) had made an impression on more
hearts than his. He had hardly time to speak some few words to her, but, he was
interrupted by Zelim Achmet, one of the Grand Signiors Favorites. This
impatient fierce man addressed himself to Fatima more calmly then was otherwise
natural to him, and seeing her eyes fixed on Coprogli, whose expressions
without doubt she was not displeased to hear, he could not hinder himself from
showing his distaste, and looking scornfully on a man whom he already
apprehended as his Rival. The presence of the Grand Signior, and the
consideration of the place where he was, kept Mahomet Coprogli from answering
the fierceness of Zelim Achmet with actions, and looks as disdainful as his
own. Respect at present mastered his resentment, which would have broke out in
another place, notwithstanding the splendid fortune of this Favorite. However
to revenge himself in some sort he kept as near Fatime as he could, to hinder
Zelim from having an opportunity of declaring his passion to her. The
difficulty of seeing women in Turkey, and above all, those who are shut up in
the Seraglio, causes Love not to be so tedious there as in other places where
one must sigh a long time before one can make a formal discovery of it.
Therefore Zelim Achmet for fear of wanting another opportunity, thought it not
fit any longer to delay speaking to Fatima: Fair Odalisque, said he to her, if
your heart be as cruel as your face is charming, the sight of you would make me
despair, not being able to look on you without loving you, or love you without
a desire to please you. Mahomet Coprogli could not hear this declaration
without regret. He cast his eyes languishingly on Fatima, who at the same time
turning hers toward him, could not help letting him perceive that his
complement had touched her more sensibly than that of Zelim; and she had
already opened her mouth, to give him doubtless a favorable answer, when the
Emperor, who heard them speaking behind him, turned about to mingle in the
conversation; the subject of which he soon found out by looking on the young
Odalisque, and considering her face more attentively than he had done before.

Amurath, who setting a side his cruelty and avarice, had all the excellent
qualities that can be desired in a Prince, was also infinitely gallant; he
continued the good humor he was in, that he might not interrupt the
conversation of Zelim and Coprogli with Fatima. For all that I see, (said he to
the two Courtiers) your judgment is very good, and I cannot blame you for being
so earnest to gain the friendship of this lovely Odalisque. I my self,
continued he laughing, am beholding to your gallantry for having made me take
notice of her merit; but were you not disputing with her to know whether her
Mistresses beauty equals hers? I Will clear that doubt to day, added he,
addressing himself to Fatima, and I will see if the fair unknown who sent you
hither, has charms enough of her own, not to mistrust yours. The young Slave
answered what he said with so much wit, that he was wholly ravished: but the
joy that he showed, exceedingly disturbed Zelim, and Coprogli, who began to be
Rivals, and already looked on one another as such. They feared lest the Grand
Signior should rob them of Fatima, otherwise they might reasonably enough
pretend to her, as being one of those slaves that wait on the Sultanas, and
that are ordinarily matched to the great ones of the Port, who marry them that
they may gain the favor of the Sultanas. Mahomet Coprogli was deserving enough
to obtain Fatima, but the power of Zelim Achmet made him despair; he knew his
love, and feared, not without good reason, lest he should make use of his
credit with the Sultan, to deprive him of his Mistress: so that jealousy and
fear seized on his soul almost as soon as love, The confusion he was in made
him resolve to discover his passion to the great Eunuch, and implore his
assistance, who promised him to have a care of his interests as well with his
Master, as his Mistress, and was as good as his word.

The Sultana Valide, Amurath's Mother, and the Kislar Agasi who were the two
powerfullest persons in the Seraglio, were very good friends ever since the
death of cruel Roxana. They had plotted between them to furnish the Sultan with
a new Favorite, who being beholden to them for her greatness, should be
obliged to espouse all their interests. The Eunuch Vglan had undertaken to
choose a fair one that should be proper for their design; he had cast his eyes
on Zaime, a young woman that came to the Seraglio in the absence of Amurath,
she was recommended to him by the Bassa of the Sea, who had taken her away upon
the Coasts of Circassia. Her beauty and her wit rendered her worthy of the
place she was destined to; and Nature had made her so surprising that she
needed no body to speak in her behalf. The Sultana Valide, and the Kislar Agasi
made no question but that she would infinitely please Amurath; to which end
they agreed together what means they should use to captivate the Grand Signiors
mind, who seemed to have no more inclination to love. They acquainted Zaime
that they intended to make her great Sultana, and to engage her the more to be
greateful, exaggerated the beauty and merit of many others, before whom they
preferred her. Then they instructed her what she should do to get the Sultan's
good opinion, and persuaded her to send him some of her own Works, which were
done with a great deal of Art, to make him desire to know her. Zaime waited for
an opportunity to execute what they had contrived, being informed that the
Emperor was in the Gardens of the Seraglio. She chose the time when he was
walking on the Terrace we spoke of, to send him her Present, which she had
disposed in little baskets of her own working. She gave this employment to
Fatima, whom she chiefly esteemed; but never thought that Amurath would have
found her so handsome as to fall in love with her: if she had made this
reflection, she would not have hazarded a conquest, the whole glory of which
she intended to reserve to her self. Truly Zaime had need of all her charms to
efface the impression which Fatima had made in the Sultans heart, whom she
wholly possessed so at first sight, that she had no leisure so much as to think
of the Odalisque; and in a short time she rendered her self more absolute over
his will, than ever the crafty Roxana had been; but she made better use of her
power, and forgot not that she owed it all to the great Eunuch, being impatient
till she had testified her acknowledgments to him, when he came to recommend
the interests of Mahomet Coprogli to her, desiring her to beg the Government of
Baruth for him of the Emperor.

This Government is very considerable, it was sought for by many Courtiers and
Officers; but Zaime who had a mind to oblige Vglan, spoke so seasonably to
Amurath, that she obtained it for Coprogli before all other Competitors, even
Zelim Achmet himself, to whom the Sultan had promised it. She immediately got
his Commission drawn, which she put into the great Eunuchs hands, withal
assuring him that this was the least Grace he could ask of her; that she would
make no other advantage of her power but to serve him; and that since he was
kind to Coprogli she would take care of his Fortune. The Eunuch who received
these marks of her goodness, with a great many submissions, and thanks, would
no longer defer the accomplishment of Coprogli's happiness. He told the
Princess Zaime that he was infinitely sensible of what she had done for him,
but that since by an excess of generosity, she was pleased not only to load him
with her benefits, but to extend them also to his friends; he beseeched her to
pity the love of Coprogli, who as soon as he first saw Fatima, became
desperately in love with her. This slave was very dear to Zaime, and the
proposition of the Kislar Agazi surprised her at first: she could not bestow
Fatima on his friend without parting with her for ever. This separation seemed
very difficult to her, and she could have wished that Vglan to whom she could
refuse nothing, had desired any thing else of her; but the great Eunuch who had
undertaken to render Mahomet Caprogli happy, resolved to finish what he had
begun, and at last prevailed so far upon her, that she had no power to deny his
request. Go Vglan said she to the Eunuch, go tell your friend, that he is
beholden to you for a favor, which none but you could have obtained of me. The
Kislar Agazi did what became him on this occasion, and reiterated all the
protestations he had before made of being faithful to her as long as he lived.
His place puts him in a condition of obliging or disobliging the Grand Signiors
Mistresses, which makes them have the more respect for the chief of the Eunuchs
who govern their Seraglio. He was no sooner assured of Coprogli's felicity, but
he sent for him to tell him the good news, who notwithstanding what he knew of
the Eunuchs power, could hardly be persuaded that in so short a time he had
been so successful, as to satisfy both his ambition and his love. But at last
being possessed of Fatima, and Vglan having given him his Commission for his
Government, he thought of nothing beside the enjoyment of his good Fortune,
which by the protection of the Sultana, and the friendship of the Kislar Agazi
seemed to be firmly established. But when he was ready to go and take
possession of his Government, he saw himself exposed to the cruel persecutions
of Zelim Achmet. This formidable Rival was not able to see his Mistress, and
the Government of Baruth to fall to Coprogli's share, without being jealous
even to fury.

He could not endure a preference that made him almost desperate, he presumed
much on his own merit, on the Sultans favor to him, and on the authority of
his Uncle Ragep Bassa, who had succeeded in the charge of Grand Vizier, after
the death of Achomat; so that Coprogli was to expect all the ill offices that a
private man can receive from a great Minister, and a Favorite who has his
Princes ear: but yet having the Sultana on his side, he believed her able to
protect him against his enemies: And he was so confident of this, that without
taking any other measures, he parted from Constantinople with the fair Fatima,
to go and take possession of his Government of Baruth. He exercised his charge
with so much integrity, that he deserved the adoration of the people. But who
can be innocent when merit it self is an offense? The Grand Vizier Ragep was
wholly swayed by his Nephew Achmet, who could not digest the affront which he
pretended he had received from Mahomet Coprogli, and was not satisfied with the
Government of Syria, which the Grand Signior had given him to comfort him for
missing that of Baruth. This insolent Favorite projected the ruin of
Coprogli; but seeing that the Sultana Zaime protected him, policy kept him from
declaring himself openly against him, for fear of displeasing the Emperor who
adored Zaime. He knew Amuraths humor perfectly well, and saw plainly that to
oppose his love, was the way to ruin himself; therefore not to hazard any
thing, he contained himself in expectation of some more favorable opportunity
of revenge: and time had afforded him means, if the authority of the Grand
Vizier his Uncle had continued. Heaven which is weary of the injustice of the
wicked, could no longer bear with those of Ragep Bassa, but destroyed him to
preserve the innocent, who were the objects of his cruelties and treacheries.
The jealousy which this Ragep, when he was but a simple Bassa, had heretofore
had of Emir Ticcardin Prince of Drus, whom the chance of War had made a
Prisoner at Constantinople, after the loss of his Children, his Estate, and
Treasures, made him now afresh persecute him with calumnies, and engage the
Mufti and Religion against him, that he might oblige the Sultan to behead the
Emir, who derived himself from Godfrey of Bouillon, King of Jerusalem, and was
the Protector of the Christians, and Franks in the Eastern Provinces. He had
counseled Amurath to put to death Camtemir King of the petty Tartars, whom he
had brought to Constantinople, under pretense of making his peace with the
Great Cham of Tartary, who had corrupted him with Bribes. At last he had
conspired to depose the Grand Signior, and set up his Brother Ibrahim in his
place, So that the Sultan being informed of the treasons of this first
Minister, who was the Author of all the Confusions in the State: he caused him
to be strangled, and by his death prevented the destruction of many of the
Grandees of the Port, whom he would have sacrificed to his ambition. This
disgrace forced Zelim Achmet to let Coprogli be quiet for some time.

In the mean time Amurath, who had ended the Persian War, and calmed the
troubles of his Empire, abandoned himself to the delights of the Seraglio. But
Death which had spared him in Armies where he was exposed to the greatest
dangers, surprised him in the midst of his pleasures; for in the Beyran, which
is the Turks Easter, at which time they are wont to be very merry, the better
to forget the austerity of their Ramazan, or Lent. The Sultan made a debauch
with the Selichtar, Cham Gumar, Machut, and Iarzai, two other Persians, in
which he drank so excessively of Malvasie, and Rossolis, that he inflamed his
bowels, and fell into a burning Fever, of which he died a few days after.
Several Diseases, had taken away all his Children, and his cruelty had put all
his Brothers to death, except Ibrahim, whom he thought incapable of reigning.
While he was sick, he asked often to see him, intending as some believe, to
have had him strangled, that he might leave none of his Blood behind him, but
what should be born of Zaime, whom he knew to be with child. He had named Rahim
Chiras, Cham of the petty Tartars to be his Successor, and had made a secret
agreement with him, that in case Zaime should be brought to bed of a Son, he
should resign the Empire to him. But the Divan ordained otherwise, and the
Sultana Valide had no sooner closed his eyes but she went to take Ibrahim out
of Prison. This Prince made some difficulty at the proposition which the
Sultana his Mother, the Mufti, the Visiers and Bassa's made him of ascending
the Throne; believing it to be a design to surprise him, and continued to
counterfeit himself mad, as he had done till then, by the advice of the Eunuch
Zomboul his Governor, who had taught him this way to avoid the cruelty of his
Brother Amurath; but when he saw the Emperors dead body, he convinced them that
he had concealed his Reason to preserve his life; and showed so much judgment,
that he at first suprized those who knew the manner of his Education.

Ibrahim having taken up the reins of the Ottoman Empire, began his Reign with
such Justice and Clemency, as seemed to give the people an undoubted assurance
of an happy Government. The first Commandment he gave was to Mustapha his Grand
Vizier, who had succeeded Ragep, That he should put no man to death, unless he
were convict of so enormous a Crime, that he could not be pardoned without
committing a greater. This Prince was extremely good natured, as might be seen
by the lineaments of his face: he had a ruddy Complexion, a broad Forehead, his
Limbs well set, but his Behavior was very silly, and innocent, proceeding from
his obscure Education, which had quite changed the vigor of his mind and
health, so that it was feared he could have no children. This made the Sultana
his Mother have a great care of the Sultana Zaime, whom she knew to be with
child. Zaime who loved the Sultana Valide as her own Mother, had discovered it
to her; and the subtle Sultana Kiozem Ibrahim's Mother not believing he would
leave a Son behind him, would not suffer Zaime to retire into the old Seraglio,
where the Sultanas of the deceased Grand Signiors shut themselves up. She
fancied it would be no hard matter to persuade Ibrahim to love her: Zaime was
young, her great belly appeared not, and no body knew of it; nor was it
difficult to make him believe that the Child she should be brought to bed of
was his own: but there was no need of all this contrivance, for Ibrahim who
never knew what love was, was so well satisfied with Zaime, that examining no
farther, he abandoned himself wholly to the enjoyment of her: yet afterward
not contented with the delights he found in this Princess, who had taught him
to love; he had a mind to try if another could not as well recommend those
pleasures which had so long been unknown to him, and took a liking to an
handsome Georgian, well born, and a Christian, who had been taken from her
Parents at twelve years old, and brought to the great Seraglio at
Constantinople, as a perfect beauty. She had been bred very carefully, having
been taught to sing, and play on several Instruments, to accompany her voice,
which was admirable: and it was by this that she had attracted Ibrahim. This
Prince was a great lover of Music, both instrumental, and vocal. He walked one
evening under a Balcony, where the young Bassee, so was the fair Georgian
called, sung a Song so passionate, that he would needs know the person that had
sung it: but having found by conversing with her, that she had no less Wit than
Beauty, he was so charmed, that immediately he threw her his Handkerchief, as a
sure pledge of his Love, and a certain token that she should that very night
receive more particular favors.

Of all the Passions that Princes are subject to, Love is the most powerful,
and may boast of more triumphs than all the rest; and though it is said that
fruition diminishes it, that of Ibrahim manifested the contrary, for by the
possession of his new Favorite, he became more, and more inflamed: and his
kindness increasing every day, contributed to Bassees good Fortune. The next
morning she had eight women, four Eunuchs, and four Cooks added to her train.

The Sultan sent her six Baskets full of very rich Presents, with a Cabinet
stored with many thousand Shekines, augmenting her allowance proportionably to
his kindness; and not thinking this sufficient, he would have her Train as
great as that of the Sultana Zaime; so that he gave her more Eunuchs, and made
up her number of women sixteen. He furnished a private Apartment for her with
the best Furniture in the Seraglio, where he often did her the honor to eat
with her. The compliant humor of this Favorite diverted his natural
melancholy; she would sometimes prevail with him to walk by the Seaside, and
to hunt in the neighboring Fields.

At last the Eunuch Zomboul perceiving her to be with Child, he carried the
news of it to the Grand Signior, who took a Diamond of a great value off from
his finger to make her a Present of; and not being able longer to contein his
Joy, went himself to congratulate her, that she was become the depository of a
Pledge so important to the Ottoman Empire: afterward he visited the Sultana
Valide, to rejoice with her. Zaime was quickly informed of it, and the news had
like to have killed her; she found her self ready to lie down, which spoiled
hers and the Sultana Valide's design. The time having deceived them, there not
remaining enough to make Ibrahim believe that he was the Father of her Child.
The Sultana Kiosem being one of the most subtle, ingenious Princesses that ever
was, would not quite ruin Zaime, whom she tenderly loved, nor expose a Child
of Amurath; for she made no question, but that Ibrahim when he should come to
know the truth, would sacrifice Zaime's Child to his own safety. Therefore she
resolved to keep her lying in secret, and to convey the Child out of the
Seraglio by some trusty person. They could think of no body fitter to be
trusted with so important a secret than Fatima, who was immediately sent for:
She was ready to lie in her self, which served as a pretense for her coming to
Constantinople, whither the women of Quality often come to lay their great
bellies. She was no sooner arrived, but she fell in labor; and a little while
after, the Sultana Zaime was brought to bed of a Daughter, which she put into
Fatima's hands, desiring her to have as much care of her, as if she were her
own. Fatima acquitted her self very handsomely of her Charge, and brought up
this Princess in her own house, under the name of Iohaime: She had a Son, who
looked on her as his Sister, and was suffered to continue in his error a great
while, as we shall see hereafter when we come to his History.

In the mean time the Sultana Zaime being freed from the apprehensions of her
great belly, appeared more beautiful than ever, which had some effect on the
Grand Signior; but she could not quite regain him: he was constant in his
affection to the Sultana Bassee, whose happiness made all those who pretended
to his favor, jealous, and almost desperate.

Zaime, whose loss was the greatest, was most afflicted; nor did she neglect
any means to destroy her Rival, who alone had banished her out of Ibrahim's
heart. The Sultan perceiving her jealousy, and knowing her to be newly with
Child by him, out of the apprehension he had of her wit and great power,
endeavored to reconcile her to the Sultana Bassee. The two Sultana's willing
to please Ibrahim by their obedience, seemed to have stifled their jealousy,
which put the Sultan into such transports of Joy, as nothing could augment but
the birth of two Princes, which the two Rivals almost at the same time were
brought to bed of. He now renewed the vow which he had before made of sending
one of his Children to Mecha, to give the Prophet Mahomet thanks for the favor
which he believed Heaven had bestowed on him by his intercessions. But as if
the fruitfulness of Zaime and Bassee had distasted him, he took off his
affection from them, allowing them only a place in his esteem, and engaged
himself in new amors, which manifested the inconstancy of his humor. Ever
since this Prince had let loose the reins to his Passions, his counterfeit, or
natural sweetness degenerated into extreme effeminacy, and a bloody brutality.
He began to despise those who ought to have been most dear to him, as the
Sultana Valide his Mother, the Mufti, and Zomboul his protector. He put to
death his Grand Vizier Mustapha Bassa, and Salik Pacha who succeeded him, soon
after had the same fate.

Cappigi Bassa after the great services he had done him, had no better fortune
than the rest; he caused the Captain Bassa General of the Sea, to be strangled
for answering him freely in an important affair.

The Aga of the Ianizaries lost his head for the insolence of the Soldiers,
who complained openly of the effeminacy, and cruelty of their Emperor. He was
so fearful that he would put the most considerable persons of the Empire to
death upon the least suspicion. He craftily invited the Cham of the Tartars to
Constantinople, and beheaded him for saying, that if his Highness should die
with-Children, he should inherit the Ottoman Empire, which belonged to him of
right by Sultan Amurath's Will, the Constitutions of the Empire, and the Laws
of the Musulmans. These cruelties made him odious to the Grandees of the Port,
and the chief of the Seraglio; of which number were the Sultana Valide, the
Eunuch Zomboul, and the Mufti. Several Bassa's revolted, but they were
suppressed by Mehemet Bassa of Damas, who was made Grand Vizier, though he
could neither write nor read. All the Rebels were deprived of their
Governments; that of Aleppo was given to Mahomet Coprogli, who relinquished
that of Baruth, to his sworn enemy Zelim Achmet, who by his Intrigues at the
Port had hitherto preserved himself. The Ianizaries and Spahies which are the
two most considerable orders of the Turkish Militia, raised several tumults one
after another, which were quieted again by giving them money. At last the
Mufti, the new Grand Vizier, and the principals of the Court, being weary of
Ibrahim's cruelty, and ill administration, resolved to rid themselves of him;
but fearing lest if he should discover their conspiracy, he would secure
himself by the death of his own Children, that he only might survive of his
race, and so save himself by the general necessity of the State, because the
Turks cannot endure to have any other Emperors but what are of the Ottoman
Family. They agreed before they undertook any thing to make sure of his
Children, or at least to get one of them out of the Seraglio, whom they might
have in their own power. The best expedient they could think of to bring this
design about, was to let the Sultan know by the Mufti, that he was
indispensably obliged to accomplish the vow he had made while he had no
children, of sending one of his Sons to Mecha; assuring him that if he delayed
it any longer he would bring the wrath of Heaven upon him, and by declaring
himself a transgressor of the Law, might cause an universal revolt. Ibrahim who
was naturally very timorous, yielded to the Mufti's persuasions, sticking only
at the choice of him whom he ought to send. The voyage being very long, the
confidence he had in his Prophet, could not free him from his fear, lest some
ill accident should befall the young Pilgrim: he would not venture his eldest
Son by the Sultana Bassee, who was then about three years old, but was more
inclined to send Prince Mahomet, then but thirty months old, whom he had by
Zaime, who feigned her self to be with child again. She was not informed of the
conspiracy, and knowing the Grand Signiors design, she told him, she would not
leave her Son, and that the inconvenience of her great belly would not permit
her to accompany him in so dangerous a voyage. Perhaps her jealousy furnished
her with this pretense to remove her Rival from the Seraglio: on the other side
Bassee knowing the conspiracy, solicited the Sultan to let her conduct Prince
Ottoman his Son to the Temple of their Prophet; alleging that his eldest Son
ought to accomplish his vow.

The extreme care she had to free her Son from the tempest which she saw ready
to fall on the Seraglio, and her desire to leave a place where she believed she
had been poisoned, made her the more earnest to go, being seconded by the
Mufti, who assured Ibrahim that he ought to send the eldest of his children: So
that the Sultan being pressed by such strong arguments, yielded against his
will to superstition, and a Mothers tenderness. He immediately gave order to
the General of the Sea, to equip the strongest Gally he could find. There was
one of a prodigious bigness, which was not quite finished. The Captain Bassa
sent him word that it would require some time before she could be sit to put to
Sea: But Ibrahim who was extremely importuned, said, that if she were not ready
to sail in four days, his head should pay for his negligence: in the mean while
he employed the little time prescribed for their departure, in ordering all
things necessary for their voyage, intending they should imbark with the
greatest splendour and pomp that had ever been seen.

The day assigned being come, the Sultana Bassee who was otherwise indisposed,
was more sensibly troubled to depart without her dear Confident Zomboul, who
had discovered the plot to her, and desired her to provide for her own, and her
Sons safety by quitting the Seraglio.

This Eunuch had the charge of Ibrahim when he was in prison, and had not only
counseled him to counterfeit himself mad, to avoid his Brothers cruelty, (who
otherwise would have murdered him with the rest of his Brothers) but he
preserved his life when the Emperor commanded him to dispatch him secretly. Yet
Sultan Ibrahim was so ungrateful to Zomboul, that after he had put him out of
his place of Capi Aga, he often threatened him with death; so that his
resentment made him joy with those who conspired his ruin: and foreseeing the
approaching revolution, he was willing to secure his fortune by following the
young Prince, who in all likelihood would soon come to be Emperor. The Sultana
Bassee just before she went away, when she took her leave of the Sultan, cast
her self at his feet, with tears in her eyes, to implore the last favor that
she should ever ask of him, on which the happiness of her life depended. The
Emperor moved by her tears, presently lifted her up, and promised to grant what
ever she would request. Sir, said she, I ask Zomboul of you, to accompany me in
my voyage. I know well enough that I shall rob you of a faithful servant; but
when you consider it is for the service of your Son, and a Mother afflicted by
so cruel a separation, I am persuaded you will not refuse me this last grace.
Ibrahim was a little surprised at this unexpected complement; he could hardly
think of parting with a Slave to whom he owed his life, and one whom he
believed the most faithful of all his Officers: but he had promised, and that
to a person who was dear to him for his Sons sake; therefore he ordered Zomboul
to be ready to part the next day, and gave him the general command of the
conduct of the voyage. He would have their departure kept secret, to which end
about midnight, the Sultana Bassee, Prince Osman her Son, and her Servants
being let out at the Garden gate of the Seraglio, the Grand Signior came
himself in a disguise to the Seaside, to give the Sultana, and her Son his
last kisses. This Princess answered the Sultan's tenderness in such a manner as
would have inspired the most insensible Soul with love and sorrow, Farewell Sir,
said she with a languishing voice, you will never see me more, for I am
poisoned by my perfidious Rival. After these words she went abord the Gally,
and set sail, leaving Ibrahim in a melancholy which continued upon him for many
days. Her last words were imprinted in his Soul, and perhaps he would presently
have made Zaime sensible of his displeasure, had he not believed her to be with
child, it being his desire to leave a great many children behind him. This
inclined him to wait till after her delivery, to punish her for what she was
unjustly accused of. Bassee who it may be had been poisoned by some body else,
was vexed to leave her Rival in the Seraglio, although she had been promised
that she, and her Son Mahomet should be involved in the Grand Signiors ruin.
She would rather have had her fall by the Sultans own hand, and this made her
defame this Princess, who has given too sublime marks of her virtue, to let the
world so much as suspect her of so base a crime.

Those who had conspired the death of Ibrahim, deferred the execution of their
design, till Bassee and her Son were arrived at Alexandria; but the Gally which
carried them, being met near the Isle of Rhodes by the Galleys of Malta,
commanded by Boisbaudran the General of the Galleys of that fraternity, was
assaulted, and made a long and a valiant resistance, in which the Aga Zomboul
after he had given proofs of an extraordinary courage, and done all that a
brave man, and a wise Captain could do on such an occasion, was shot through
the body with a Musket bullet, which disabled him from fighting any longer. He
caused himself to be carried down to the Sultana's Cabin, where having called
the Captains to him, he counseled them to compound with the Enemy: then
kissing young Osman's hand, and taking leave of his Mother, he made them carry
him up again into the fight, where he encouraged the Soldiers to the very
last. His death disheartened the Turks, so that the Knights soon became masters
of the Vessel; but the Prize cost the Victors dear. General Boisbaudran
performing the part of a great Captain, died of a Musket shot in his breast.
Piancourt, great Steward to the Grand Master of Maltha, and Captain of the St.
Mary, was slain as he was drawing an arrow out of his hand: and Monsieur d'
Albigre a Novice of great hopes, lost his life there, with many more gallant
Knights. The great booty was but an inconsiderable recompense for the loss of
so many brave men. The Sultana, and the Prince her Son, with their train were
conducted to the Isle of Malta; An. 1644.
and the news being brought to Constantinople made the Conspirators defer their
enterprise.

The Grand Signior received the news with inexpressible sorrow, but when he
heard that his dear Bassee was dead, his grief grew so excessive that he was
almost distracted. He continued several days without speaking to any body; and
upon coming a little to himself, he remembered Bassee's last words at her
departure; which plunged him again into his former despair. He commanded Zaime
to be brought to him, who apprehending his cruelty, took young Mahomet along
with her, who was then looked upon as heir to the Empire, that she might allay
the Fathers fury by the presence of his Son: but he would have revenged himself
on the Mother, and the Son too, if they had not been delivered out of his
hands. As soon as he beheld Zaime, he reproached her with her treachery, and
without hearing her justification, which she was ready to make on her knees: he
had thrust his Dagger into her breast, if young Mahomet had not staid his hand,
and received the stroke which he intended to have given his Mother. Hers and
the Child's cries brought the Sultana Valide, and some Officers to the place,
who freed them from the danger they were in. The young Prince was hurt above
the right eye, where he has yet a great scar; which a modern Historian imputes
to the scratch of a Diamond, which Ibrahim had on one day when he gave him a
box on the ear. However it was, this action made a great noise in the Seraglio,
and alarmed all the City. Every body thought that the Heir of the Empire was
dead; and Ibrahim himself was induced to believe it by the pains that the
Sultana took to publish it, and her making a magnificent Funeral for him, which
filled the Seraglio, and the Town with mourning.

He was the only man that showed no sorrow for so deplorable an accident, which
made him more hated than before. He sought to comfort himself for the death of
his beloved Sultana, and the taking of his eldest Son, by the furious War which
the undertook against Malta. He swore to ruin that famous Island, and to
destory all the Kinghts that should come into his power: and having learned
that they were French Knights that took his Gally, he could hardly forbear
violating the person of the Sieur de Harley, Count of Cis^, then Ambassador of
France, at the Port, who retired to Pera to escape his fury. He would have
massacred all the French in his Dominions, if the Aga of the Eunuchs who was
very powerful with him, had not hindered him by Remonstrances that had very
near cost him his life. His cruelty augmenting more and more, fell upon the
chief Officers of the Empire. One Hussein whom from a poor Shepherd the Sultan
had raised to an eminent condition, because during his confinement he had
diverted him with his Pipe, and Country Songs, feeding his Sheep near the
Prison, helped to nourish his brutish passions. The Grand Signior gave credit
to none but this man, who being jealous of the authority of the Grandees of the
Port, endeavored to build his reputation on the ruin of their fortune. To
this end, he caused Mahomet the Grand Vizier to be strangled, for going about
to dissuade the Grand Signor from the War of Malta, the event of which he
judged to be very dangerous. This wholesome advice was the reason of his death,
which was followed by that of Bekir, Captain General of the Sea; but whatsoever
is too violent cannot last long. Zelim Achmet, Governor of Syria, and Baruth,
Mahomet Coprogli's enemy was made Grand Vizier by the favor of the Traitor
Hussain, who was his particular friend; either made so by presents, or that the
sympathy of their ill nature had begot their friendship. Achmet was no sooner
raised to this high charge, but he thought of overthrowing all those whose
fortune gave him any suspicion. He wanted but little of ruining Valide, and
Zaime, by the counsel he gave the Emperor, because they had heretofore
thwarted his interest.

The Sultan who had resolved whatsoever it cost him to be revenged on the
Knights of Malta, seeing himself dissuaded from that expedition, that his great
preparations might not be fruitless, chose the Isle of Candy and the Dominions
of the Venetians to be the object of his vengeance, sending all his Forces to
the conquest of the ancient Kingdom of Crete, under the conduct of Mahomet
Bassa, who commanded the Land Army, and of Saffi, who in right of his charge of
Captain General of the Sea, which Ibrahim had bestowed on him after the death
of Bekir who succeeded Pial, commanded the Fleet. These Generals attacked
Canea, and took it, notwithstanding the vigorous resistance of the Governor
Antonio Navario, and the succors which Andrea Cornaro the General of Candy
sent thither, under the Colonels Angeli and Iustiniani, who signalized their
address and courage, on this occasion, as they have done on a thousand others.
They continued the War three years with great disadvantage, and with such
excessive charge, as exhausted Ibrahim's Coffers, without making any great
progress; which either proceeded from the Venetians courageous defense, or from
the frequent change of the Generals, who out of jealousy, or vanity, acted
quite contrary to their predecessors.

In the mean time the Army required continual supplies of necessary provision,
and the General Vssain Bassa was very importunate for money to maintain his
Troops; which not being sent, he suffered the Janissaries who were in Candy to
return to Constantinople to demand their pay, and be relieved by their
Companions; who seeing those who came back so ill satisfied, refused to
embarque unless they were paid beforehand, which so provoked the Grand Signior
that he threatened the Grand Vizier Achmet with the loss of his head, if he did
not find money to carry on the War. This base Minister was glad of this
absolute order, which was a sufficient pretense for him to lay extraordinary
impositions on the people, and to spoil all those Bassa's and Governors of
Provinces, of their riches, whose power he either suspected, or envied. To this
purpose he summoned several of them to give an account to the Treasurers of the
Exchequer, not forgetting Mahomet Coprogli, whom he imprisoned, with a great
many more, as innocent as himself. But he set himself particularly to persecute
him, whom he had now gotten into the snare which he had so long laid for him.
He thought he had now met with a lucky opportunity of revenging the affronts he
had received from him, both in his love, and his fortune. He no longer feared
the Sultana Zaime, who had ever protected his enemy, against whom he had
maliciously fomented the Grand Signiors displeasure since the death of the
Sultana Bassee; and he already beheld the ruin of unfortunate Mahomet with
pleasure: but to accomplish his vengeance he had a mind to make him perish
shamefully, by accusing him, as well as the rest of the Bassa's and Beys (whom
he had imprisoned) of extortion, and rapine. Though Mahomet Coprogli was
innocent, his behavior having always been unblameable; yet he could not but
apprehend so dangerous an enemy, who without doubt would have brought his
pernicious design to pass, if he had not been obliged to neglect his revenge,
to take care of his own life, which was odious to all the world. The injustice
of this Grand Vizier, and the crimes which he committed every day by sending
persons of all ages and conditions to execution, on the least suspicion, and
frequently without any other ground, than the satisfaction of his Hatred, and
Avarice, or the keeping up of his Authority, were not to be endured. The
Grandees of the Empire, the Mufti, and the Sultana Valide her self thought it
not fit to defer the performance of their design any longer. They foresaw the
ruin of the State, if the Government should continue in the hands of such a
lewd hairbrain'd Emperor, who committed the Sovereign Authority of the
powerfullest Empire in the world, to two of the basest Ministers that ever
managed public Affairs. They resolved to take away the root of all the
mischiefs that threatened them, by depriving an unworthy Prince of his Power,
and by punishing the crimes of the Grand Vizier Achmet, and the Traitor
Hussein. The people, and the Janissaries were easily brought into the
Conspiracy, being both weary of the Tyranny. The people were so oppressed by
the Grand Vizier, and the Soldiers so provoked for want of their pay, that
they offered to set the Seraglio on fire. The Mufti, Who is the chief Priest of
the Turkish Law, the Kadileskess who are the Judges, the Visiers and Bassa's
who are the Chancellors of State, and Intendents of Provinces, the Aga of the
Janissaries, who is Colonel of all the Infantry, the Captain who is Admiral of
the Sea, and generally all the principal Officers revolted with one accord. The
Sedition was begun by the request which the Mufti made to Ibrahim, in the name
of the whole State, to have the Grand Vizier Achmet punished. The Sultan
provoked by this boldness, commanded his Guard to chastise the Mutineers for
making such an impudent proposition; but the Janissaries were too much incensed
to obey him; which forced him to fly to the Sultana Valide, his Mother, who
had fomented the Rebellion, that she might revenge the wrongs she had suffered
from her Son by the counsel of the Grand Vizier, whom with the Traitor Hussein,
Ibrahim delivered up to the people to be torn in pieces; naming Mahomet a
popular man who was threescore and ten years old, to supply his place, not
being able to appease the Rebels any other way. But they were not satisfied
with this, they would have Ibrahim himself come and render an account of his
actions before the Mufti, who summoned him before the Divan or Consul, by
sending a Kadilesker to him, whom the Sultan slighted, and tore the Fetfa,
which is a summons to appear before the Judges. This being reiterated in vain,
the Mufti, with the Visiers, the Bassa's, and other Officers went to the
Seraglio, and took him by force out of his Mothers arms, and carried him to the
prison, in which he was brought up; where ten days after he was Strangled, An.
1648.
his Son Mahomet who was then about seven years old, Aug. 18.
being placed in the Imperial Throne, and publicly proclaimed Emperor of the
Turks, and his Mother Zaime, Regent, during his minority.

The Sultana was assisted by a Council of twelve Bassa's, who were to
deliberate with her concerning Affairs of State; in which she was so well
versed, that she soon obtained Authority enough to make any thing pass in the
Divan, which she had resolved in her Closet, and discharged the Grand Vizier of
a great deal of trouble which she was willing to take upon her self. And not
long after, the Vizier died, leaving the Sultana at liberty to bestow his place
on one of her own creatures.

However she was forced to use great caution, in the choice of this Minister,
Policy instructed her not to raise one that might entrench upon her power, or
one who by displeasing the Grandees, and the People, might render her odious to
them both. She had fresh examples before her eyes, of the fatal consequence of
such Elections, and of the dangers that the Sultans were exposed to by the
imprudence of their Ministers. Dissimulation is a virtue in Princes; she had
already formed her design in her head, nothing remaining but to put it
handsomely in execution; to which end, she caused the Divan or Council of State
of the Ottoman Empire to be assembled; to which the Mufti, and all the great
men of the Port were summoned. She represented to them that by the death of
Mahomet, the Office of the Vizier Azem was vacant in a time, that considering
the great Wars he was engaged in with his most cruel Enemies, more than every
required an able and experienced Minister to support the weakness of the
Sultan, who could not in many years be capable of taking care of his Empire
himself. She told them that the Treasures were exhausted, and that she had
brought them together, to take their advice in such pressing necessities:
adding, that it was requisite to re-establish the ancient Taxes, without
oppressing the people, who had suffered so much in the last Emperors time, that
they must not think of laying new imposts on them. She protested to them that
she would wholly resign her self up to their counsel, in the sovereign
administration which the Divan had conferred on her (an honor that had not
been done to any Sultana before her) especially since it was composed of
persons so well able to govern as they were. At last she concluded her
discourse with a command to them to give their votes for him whom they thought
fittest to be her partner in power, and Lieutenant General of the Empire. She
foresaw that by this means she should make the Visiers and Bassa's so jealous
of one another, that they would not resolve to choose any particular man, which
was the thing she wished; and it fell out according to her expectation: for all
those who aspired to the place, being ashamed to ask it, were unwilling to give
their votes for another: and when she pressed them to declare themselves, they
very submissively desired her to make the choice her self, since whatever
liberty she had given them of electing a Grand Vizier, yet there could be none
but such a one as she should approve; which inclined them rather to deserve her
favor by their obedience. The Grand Sultana who understood their meaning, was
glad to see her designs succeed so well. She assured them she would not abuse
the trust they reposed in her, and that she would make such a choice as should
be to their satisfaction, and to engage them the more, she told them it was
necessary to supply those Governments which were vacant, and to examine the
accusations of those Bassa's, Beys, and Sangiacks, whom Ibrahim had imprisoned
before his death, some for Rapine, others for imbezelling the Public Treasure,
that the innocent might be freed, and the guilty punished. This was a nice
proposition, and sensibly touched those Visiers and Bassa's who protected the
prisoners, and had contributed to Ibrahim's destruction. But the Sultana was
glad to find this means to reproach them with the death of her Husband, and to
oblige them to give her some satisfaction Since the love of your Country, and
the interest of State, said she, caused you to remedy the disorders of the
Government, by summoning my Lord, and your Emperor to the Tribunal, you ought
to continue your justice to all the world, by relieving the innocent, who
endure those pains which are only due to the criminal: and it were of odious
example if they should escape that punishment to which you condemned an Emperor
who certainly was not faulty, if you think those whose Sentence you defer,
innocent. As she said these words, she let fall some tears, which she presently
wiped away, for fear of provoking those, whom she intended to manage to her
advantage. She added, That although Sovereigns are above all Laws, and Subjects
have no power to call them to an account of their actions, yet the Sultan her
Son would forget what was passed, and she would sacrifice all her resentment to
the furtherance of that Justice, which she doubted not but they would render to
those who expected it from them.

The Sultanas discourse was very surprising to the Visiers, and the Bassa's,
who had rather have set the Prisoners at liberty, without any farther inquiry.
But the Divan was concerned in honor to approve of her advice, lest they
should be thought to exercise their Justice on none but their Princes.
Commissioners therefore were named to go along with the Nectangi or Secretary
of State, and the Tefterdar or Treasurer General of the Revenue, to visit the
Prisons. There they found Mahomet Coprogli, who seeing himself among a great
many Criminals, had insinuated himself so into his companions in misery, that
with too much freedom they made him, whom they believed as guilty as
themselves, the confident of their crimes: but he did it with design to make an
advantage of their easiness, either of his own accord, or by the command of the
Sultana, who made use of this invention as a means to promote him to that
dignity which she intended for him. She knew where his prison was as soon as he
was led thither, and Fatima who was very dear to her because of the care she
took in the Education of the Princess Iohaime her Daughter, continually
solicited her to use her Authority in setting her Husband at liberty, which she
could not do, being her self in disgrace at that time. However she might have
freed him as soon as she was possessed of the Sovereign Power, but it was
Coprogli's interest to remain in prison then, when his enlargement would have
been fatal to him, because of the Sedition of the Janissaries, who having
already murdered some of the chief of the Port, would certainly have destroyed
him to have weakened Zaime's party. She esteemed him not only for his Wifes
sake, but for his own merit, and left nothing undone to preserve him. She
secretly disposed the Commissioners to inform themselves particularly of
Mahomet Coprogli's case, who behaved himself so well, that every thing seemed
to fall out naturally: for when he had fully justified himself from all the
Crimes that were laid to his charge, he demanded with submission, which yet
showed his courage, and the greatness of his soul, whether his death was
decreed. I am ready, said he, to suffer it with patience though my life might
perhaps be very useful to the State: wherefore I desire my Judges to lead me to
the Sultan before I go to Execution, that I may acquaint him with a secret,
which I will discover to none but his Highness, or the Great Sultana. These
speeches were reported in full Divan, where the Mufti, the Visiers, and the
Bassa's knowing Zaime had a kindness for Coprogli, desired her earnestly, to be
just to so brave a man, to hear what he had to say, and to reward his merit.
She willing to take the advantage of their zeal, to accomplish her design,
commanded them to send for that important man who had the applause of the whole
Divan. Coprogli, when he came, by his good Min, and eloquence, confirmed the
opinion that had been conceived of him: and the Grand Sultana, after she had
enlarged upon the report that had been made her of his virtue and merit, asked
him what it was he had to impart to his Highness. And when she had learned that
it was an infallible expedient to replenish the Grand Signiors Coffers without
oppressing the people, or raising new Taxes, she declared him Vizier Azem by
the authority of the Sultan, and the Divan. The whole Assembly was exceedingly
astonished at this, having never so much as dreamt, that Coprogli should have
been brought out of prison to be raised to the first charge of the Empire. But
the Visiers had consented to it themselves, by the information they had given
the Sultana in favor of him whom she named. Every one murmured secretly,
though they did not complain; and Coprogli He receives the Seal of the Empire
the 5th. of February, 1649.
received from Zaime's hand the golden Box, in which was the Grand Signior's
Seal, which it was his Office to keep.

Here was an extraordinary change, Mahomet who a little before was laden with
irons, is freed from them to take upon him the Government of the most powerful
Empire in the world; and what is more admirable, the alteration of his fortune
wrought no change in his manners: he was not at all dazzled with the splendour of
those honors which were heaped on him, but established the foundation of his
greatness by his discretion. He was complacent to the Great Men, merciful to
the People, and equally just to all, making it appear that he was truly worthy
of his charge, which he began to exercise by restoring several good Laws, which
the late disorders had interrupted. He made every one to do his duty,
terrifying the Magistrates by the sentence which he pronounced against the
Bassa's who were left in prison; where while he was their companion, he had
dived into their secrets, and found none of them innocent. The Crimes they were
convicted of were of such a nature, as could not be pardoned without great
prejudice to the State. He had given marks of the gentleness of his nature
while he was Governor of Baruth and Aleppo, and the people of those Provinces
knew him not to be inclined to bloodshed: but he was now raised to a charge
that obliged him to force his inclination. All the Bassa's, Beys, and Sangiacks
who were found guilty of Extortion, Rapine, or Treason, were condemned to
death. And that the punishment of these Crimes might serve as an example to all
the Officers of the Empire, and a pattern of exact Justice to the Grand
Signior. He got into his hands the wealth of the Bassa's, who had been
executed, and set up two Tables in the Hall, through which the Sultan was to
pass to go to the Devan. On one of them he placed twenty of the principal heads
that had been cut off, and covered them with a great mourning Carpet; and on
the other he set a great many rich Purses full of Gold and Precious Stones,
which was covered with another Carpet, imbroidered with Gold and Pearls; and
then waited for the Sultan and his Mothers coming to the Divan, to show them
this strange spectacle. The great Sultana presently had a mind to know, to what
end those preparations were, and what was under the Carpets; one of which the
Prince her Son, without staying for an answer, lifted up, and in a fright asked
what those heads did there? Sir, replied Mahomet Coprogli, directing his speech
to him, they vomit up the blood of your Subjects, which they have sucked from
them, and which, continued he lifting up the Carpet, you may see in these
Purses: It is fit that Robbers should be punished: those men who have destroyed
so many by their cruelty, and avarice, who have robbed so many innocent people,
are at last stripped themselves, and have rendered that money of which they have
defrauded you. This proceeding seemed a little bloody, and made it feared that
his administration would be very severe; but he regulated his actions with so
much Justice, that he never put any man to death, unless he certainly knew that
he deserved it.

The chief scope of this Grand Vizier was to raise his Princes Authority,
weakened of late by the frequent Seditions of the Janissaries, whose insolence
he endeavored to curb for the establishment of his own fortune too. He told
them they were unworthy of being enrolled, and receiving pay, if they were not
in condition to serve, and ready to obey the Emperors orders. But they instead
of being satisfied with the death of Ibrahim, thought to take the advantage of
Sultan Mahomet's youth; and believing that the Grand Vizier was as weak, and
timorous, as his Predecessors, whom they had either murdered or deposed; they
slighted his commands, and refused to pass into Candy, alleging that the
Janissaries were privileged from making War by Sea, that they were not to march
any where without the Emperor, whom they would not leave, for fear of some
innovation against him in their absence. The Sultana Kiozem furnished them with
this pretense, the better to compass a design which she had contrived.

This Sultana who had still the title of Valide, was Grandmother to Mahomet the
Fourth. She had contributed to the death of her Son Ibrahim, because he took
away the Authority which she had usurped. She fancied that since she had a
share in the Government, in three Emperors Reigns, she should have been made
Regent of the Empire, during her Grandsons minority: but the Grandees of the
Port, and the Divan having conferred the Sovereign Power on the Grand Signiors
Mother, she was extremely offended to see the affairs of the Ottoman Empire
managed by a woman, who owed her fortune and greatness to her. She hoped that
Zaime would surrender her Authority to her, but this being too unreasonable and
improbable a wish to succeed, Ambition which considers the extent of the
desires, more than of duty, made her think of revenge. She thought of nothing
but how to execute her projects, and despaired not yet to make her self
absolute Mistress of the Empire. To this purpose she imparted her design to the
Kislar Agazi, who had always been her confident; but he could not so much as
hear her Treason without horror. How Madam, said he to her, in disorder, is it
possible that you would destroy a Princess who honors you as her Queen, and
respects you as her Mother? could you be so cruel as to kill young Sultan
Mahomet, because he is her Son? is he not yours too? does not nature it self
speak in his behalf? No, continued he, I will rather lose my life than be an
assistant in so foul an enterprise. Well, well, Vglan, replied the malicious
Princess (who perceiving how coldly the Eunuch entertained her proposition,
bethought her self of counterfeiting repentance, lest he should betray her)
endeavor then to restore my Authority, and dispose Zaime to take me along with
her in the Regency; my advice will be very advantageous to her, and I will
always behave my self like a good Mother toward her. The Kislar Agazi promised
her more than she asked, and swore never to speak of what she had imparted to
him; neither had he any time to do it: he spoke with her in the beginning of
the night, and the next morning he was found dead in his bed. No body could
tell how it came to pass, but since that time it has been discovered, that a
Slave whom she had gained, had blown poison into his Nose when he was asleep.
The death of this Eunuch was exceedingly deplored by the Great Sultana, who
reflected on all the good Offices he had done for her: and she would have been
more afflicted if she could have comprehended the greatness of her loss in him
who would have done her a more important service than ever, if death had not
prevented him. The Grand Vizier who owed his fortune to him, and looked on him
as his Father, was inexpressibly grieved, and suspected somewhat of the truth,
but could not guess at it all.

In the mean time the Sultana Valide lost no time; she had by great promises
engaged the Aga of the Janissaries to the Aga of the white Eunuchs, the
Bostangibachi, the Governor of the Pages, called I^hoglans, who are six
hundred of the handsomest young men in the Empire, the Captain General of the
Seas, and some of the most considerable Bassa's. She had so disposed every
thing, that her design would infallibly have succeeded, if Heaven which takes a
particular care of crowned heads, had not put it into the Vizier Azems mind to
go out of his Seraglio at the beginning of the night, and to pass through the
quarters of the Town in disguise, with one Slave only whom he trusted most, to
see what the Janissaries did, of whom he had some apprehension, as not being
well affected either to him, or the Emperors service. He was much surprised to
find them all in the Hippodrome with their Muskets on their shoulders, and
their Matches lighted, and Sentinels placed at all avenues. He was presently
stopped, his looks betrayed his intention of not being known, but he wanted not
courage, and on this occasion manifested the presence of his mind. He asked
with a great deal of confidence for Bactas the Aga of the Janissaries, and being
led to his Oda, was astonished at his arrogance in not rising to salute him,
though he knew him very well; when at another time he would have prostrated
himself before the Grand Vizier, who never goes to see any body but the Grand
Signior, and when he receives a Visit, never rises to any body but the Mufti.
However he dissembled his thoughts at present, knowing himself certainly lost
if he did not make use of some subtilty to disingage himself from the danger he
was in. The Aga in the mean time having made him sit down on his left hand,
which is the most honorable place among the Turkish Soldiers, was just going
to ask him the cause of his disguise, when Mahomet preventing him, Bactas, said
he, I was informed that you assembled your Troops to night for some great
enterprise: I received this notice from the Seraglio, from persons whom you
know to be your chiefest friends, and I disguised my self, for fear of being
known, to come and learn of you what I should do for your security, and my own.
Bactas was struck speechless to hear that the Grand Vizier was informed of all
the Plot; he easily believed that he was come on purpose to him to endeavor
his own preservation: and imagining it would be a great advantage to engage
this first Minister in the Conspiracy, he examined him a little, and then
discovered the whole design to him; telling him, that he was to make himself
master of the Seraglio, and seize on the young Sultan Mahomet, whom he would
either cause to be strangled, or shut him up in prison with his Mother; that
all was agreed on with the Sultana Valide, who was to have the Regency of the
Empire in the minority of Prince Soliman, whom they would place on the Throne
instead of his Brother Mahomet: and finally, if he had a mind to secure his
Authority and his life, he must necessarily be assistant to this change. The
Grand Vizier demurred not one minute to give his assent, making as if he had
been before informed of all that Bactas told him, and expressed a great deal of
satisfaction that it was in his power to serve the Sultana Valide by embracing
her party, which he believed to be the strongest. Bactas suffered himself to be
wheadled by Coprogli's promises, whom he obliged by Oath to be faithful to the
Sultana Kiozem, and as a pledge of his faith to deliver his Boult, a Seal
engraven on a Gold Ring, which the Grand Vizier always wears on his finger, (as
a mark of his Dignity and Power) into his hands: then he sent him away without
Guards, to go and assemble the Divan secretly two hours after midnight, at
which time he was to receive order from the Sultana Valide to enter the
Seraglio with his Janissaries. These insolent Soldiers were resolved on the
attempt, and were impatient to begin it, in hopes of rifling the great Wealth,
and inestimable Treasures, which so many Emperors had heaped together in this
voluptuous Palace.

But heaven which abhors the revolt of Subjects against their Princes, so
blinded the Commander of the rebellious Troops, that he let the Vizier Azem
escape, by whose order soon after, he and his Accomplices received the punishment
they deserved. Mahomet Coprogli had no sooner got loose from him, but he went
to the Seraglio, where he was amazed to find the Gates open, and most of the
Guards besotted with Wine, and Tobacco. Some of them would have stopped him, but
he easily avoided that, by telling them that he carried a Letter from Bactas to
the Sultan Kiosem. His habit of a Slave protected him, and they were so drunk
that they could not discover him. Being passed them he ran presently to the
Apartment of Soliman Kislar Agazi, who succeeded the Eunuch Vglan: but not
finding him, he went to that of the Grand Signior, by the way meeting with the
great Eunuch Soliman, who walked about the Lodgings of the Sultana Valide, whom
he mistrusted. He had that very night found her privately discoursing with the
Bostangibachi, and the confusion the sight of him put them into made him watch
to avoid surprises; fearing lest something was contrived against the Grand
Signior's service, to whom he was very faithful. He was no less astonished to
see the Vizier Azem in that place, at such an unusual hour, than Mahomet
Coprogli was to meet him. They presently acquainted one another with what they
knew, and suspected, and consulted how to free the Seraglio from the storm that
threatened it. They judged it expedient to advertise the Sultan, and the Great
Sultana, that they might interpose their Authority: therefore they went
straight to the Grand Signior's Apartment, who slept in his Mothers arms, and
made signs to the woman who watched by them, to wake them both; which they did
without speaking: it being an inviolable custom among the Turks not to speak,
out of respect in the Seraglio in the night time, but chiefly while the Grand
Signior sleeps: and it is a great crime whatsoever the occasion be, to break
silence in the place where his Highness reposes. A woman went near the
Sultana's Bed, and softly scratching her Feet, waked her, who was surprised to
see two men she did not know at first. Ah my Son, said she, rising briskly, and
taking him in her arms, we are lost. The young Prince without any fear looked
on the Vizier, and taking him boldly by the hand, asked him what was the
matter, and if he were come to save him. The Grand Vizier admiring the Princes
Courage, threw himself at his feet, and kissing his hand, told him he need not
fear any thing, that the Traitors should do him no mischief, and that his
faithful servants would prevent the Treason. But Madam (continued he, directing
his speech the Great Sultana) you must make use of all your prudence to avoid
the danger that menaces us all. Then he sent for the Mufti and signed a
Catecherif or express order of the Grand Signior, to the Captain Governor of
Constantinople to come immediately to his Highness. He caused the Gates of the
Seraglio to be shut up, and commanded that none should be let in or out without
the Emperors permission. The Captain Bassa being come, he ordered him presently
without noise to advertise the Inhabitants of every quarter that they should
arm themselves, and Barricade the Streets, and seize on the Gates of the Town,
that no body might go out. He sent to the chief of the Spahies, Solaquis, and
Capighis to come and watch about the Seraglio, and secure the Emperor: five
hundred of them presently came, and the Mufti, to heighten their courage by
zeal for their Religion, cited several passages of Mahomet's Law, which
admonished them, that those who eat the Princes bread, ought to expose their
lives for his service. And to make his Harangue more effectual, he distributed
some Purses among them, obliging them by Oath to die, if there were occasion in
the Sultan's defense. In the mean time the Kislar Agazi had waked all the
Eunuchs, and Officers of the Seraglio, to the very Cook, and made them take
Arms. The Pages too were put into the same posture, after the seizure of the
Eunuch their Governor, the Bostangibachi, chief Gardener of the Seraglio, the
Capi Aga Captain of the Gates of the Seraglio, and the Aga, or chief of the
White Eunuchs, who acknowled all the particulars of the Conspiracy, and
confessed that the Sultana Valide had plotted with the Aga of the Janissaries,
and the principal Officers, to depose Mahomet, and Crown his Brother Soliman.
This Prince was the second of four Sons which Sultan Ibrahim had by three
Wives. Mahomet the eldest was the Son of Zaime; Soliman his younger Brother was
the Son of the Sultana Maiama; and Bajazet and Orchanes were born of an
Albanese. Maiama in hopes of raising her Son Soliman to the Empire, had
promised the Sultana Kiozem all the advantages that she could desire, and her
extravagant ambition had made her neglect nothing that could bring those over
to her party, who might further her enterprise. Her chief pretense was, that
Mahomet was too weak and unhealthy to be capable of governing so powerful an
Empire: and that besides Zaime was too young and unexperienced to supply his
defects by her prudent Conduct, and would never be fit for so weighty an
employment. That on the contrary, Prince Soliman was strong, handsome, and
promising, and would be able to take care of his own Affairs, when she should
be forced to leave them to him, by age, and incapacity. Thus had she gained all
those we mentioned, who by the incredible diligence of the Vizier Azem were
Arrested, he caused her Apartment to be secured to prevent her escape. The
Sultan though very young had so much tenderness for his Grandmother, that he
could not be brought to sign a Warrant for her Death who intended his: And his
Mother was as good natured as himself, being of opinion that she should only be
imprisoned. She reflected on their former friendship, and her generosity
outweighed the necessity of her wrong: but her Virtue appeared not only in
behalf of the Sultana Kiozem, she was moved with compassion also to her Rival
Maiama, who with her Son Soliman was to have been punished with the rest of the
Conspirators.

She obtained their Pardon of the Grand Signior, and the Ministers who would
have sacrificed her to his Highnesses safety: but she was forced to yield to
the Remonstrances of the Mufti and other Officers, who convinced her and the
Sultan too, that the Sultana Kiozem's Death was absolutely necessary to the
good of the State, and quiet of the Empire: so that her Grandson Mahomet was
obliged to consent to her death. The Ichoglans, Eunuchs, and some of the
Soldiers, out of a brutish zeal, undertook this execution instead of the
Mutes, and running tumultuously to the old Sultana's Apartment, they could
hardly find her; for hearing she was looked for, she hid her self in a
Wardrobe, under the clothes; from whence they pulled her out by the feet, and
forgetting the Emperor's Orders, who charged them to put her to no pain, they
treated her basely without any respect to her Character or age. She in vain
endeavored to stop their insolence by fair words, and offers of great sums of
money; for without hearkening to what she said, they drew her by force out of
her Chamber, stripped her, gave her several blows, and tore her very ears for
Pearls of a prodigious greatness that hung in them. She strugled a great while
with them, defending her self with extraordinary vigor for a woman of her age,
but at last with much ado she was strangled. Thus dyed this unhappy Princess,
after she had lived fourscore years in the reigns of five Emperors. She was of
the Isle of Chios, nobly descended: She had five Sons and two Daughters by
Sultan Achmet; Amurath, Osman and Ibrahim sat on the Throne; her two
Daughters, with Bajazet and Orchanes died by the hands of Executioners. She
seemed not to be above fifty years old. Her Constitution was wonderful, her
great age had abated very little of her strength, and brought no inconvenience
at all along with it. She had still some remains of beauty that showed her to
have been the handsomest woman of her time. Her stature which was the most
advantageous in the world, did not incline her to stoop; she was not grown too
lean, her gate was steady, her conversation pleasing, her hair very thick, and
the change of the color had taken away very little of its grace. Her forehead
was not wrinkled, and her eyes were very lively. Her teeth were still so
strong, that she bit off one of his fingers, who went to take away a rich
Necklace she had on. She was naturally very neat, her heart was magnificent,
her inclination generous, her soul great, resolute, and constant: she was
mistress of a thousand extraordinary qualities, which had rendered her the most
admirable person of her Sex, if she had been less cruel and ambitious. These
were the two greatest defects that could be imputed to her, which at last
deprived her of her honor, and her life. Bactas Aga of the Janissaries, the
Bostangibachi, the Capi Aga, the Captain General of the Sea, the Aga of the
White Eunuchs, the first Capigi, or Captain of the gate of the Seraglio, and
all the other Officers who were concerned in the Conspiracy, expiated their
Crimes, by several kinds of deaths.

And the Grand Visiers command to hinder the Criminals from escaping, was so
well executed, that none of them could avoid the punishment they had deserved.
The Janissaries knew nothing of what had passed till they were disabled from
doing any mischief, and were not in a condition to resist the Spahies, who
would have fallen upon them, and stirred up the people to put them to the Sword
for their Treason to Ibrahim, and their attempt on Sultan Mahomet; and the
Grand Signiors Authority would not have kept them from coming to blows, if the
Grand Vizier had not withheld the Spahies by giving them money, and assuring
them that the Sultan was satisfied with the punishment of their leaders. After
that, he assembled the Divan, whither all the Grandees of the Port, and
Constantinople repaired; to whom he made a fine speech, which he ended with
thanking them from the Sultan, and the Great Sultana who were present. All the
Assembly answered him with a thousand acclamations of Joy; and nothing was
heard all over the City, but, live Sultan Mahomet, and the Great Sultana Valide
his Mother. This Title which signifies Queen, or Empress, was then conferred on
her, it being never given to any but the Emperors Mother.

THE HISTORY of the Grand VISIERS.
The second Book.
AFter that Mahomet Coprogli had thus diverted the dangers that threatened the
Sultana, he made it his business to restore the peace of the whole Empire,
which had been long disturbed by the tumults of the Janissaries: but knowing
their seditious humor, and foreseeing it would be difficult to make them
continue the War of Candy, in which they could never succeed, if they undertook
it unwillingly: He resolved to desist from that a while, and find them
employment somewhere else, where they could make no excuse or objection to keep
them from fighting. He took exceptions at the ambitious projects of Ragotski,
Prince of Transylvania, who was fallen out with the King of Poland, in favor
of the Swedes, contrary to the orders of the Port, which allowed not that
Prince to make any War without its approbation. The Grand Vizier chose the most
factious Officers to send with the Janissaries into Transylvania, as well to
chastise Ragotski's rashness, as to receive the punishment due to their own
disobedience; for he doubted not but that they would meet with a vigorous
resistance. This War proved extremely bloody, and disadvantagious to the
Janissaries; they almost all perished in it either at the siege of Clausembourg,
which they were fain to raise after they had lost most of their Forces before
it; or at the Conquest of Waradin, and the Combats they had with Prince
Ragotski; besides those whom the Plague swept away in the Camp, finishing the
destruction of those who survived the War: so that there hardly remained an
handful of them to bring the news of their total defeat to Constantinople. The
Grand Vizier who hoped for no better success, was satisfied to see his
expectation was not deceived. Their arrogance was so much abated that he could
not have taken a fuller revenge of them who had been so bold as to undertake to
dethrone their Emperor. He deliberated a while whether he should reestablish
this Militia or no, which is accounted the best of the Ottoman Empire, whose
strength and support it is said to be: And this presumption is the reason of
the liberty it so often takes of being seditious. It was in this Ministers
power to abolish them; but considering that then the Spahies who take
themselves to be the only Gentlemen among the Turks, would grow so potent that
they would be no less dangerous to the Emperor and the State. He concluded it
would be better to maintain two sorts of Militia in the Empire, whose emulation
and jealousy would keep them in obedience. Therefore he made a levy of men fit
to bear Arms, out of whom he chose fifteen thousand of the best to be
Janissaries. These he Disciplined for some time, often taking reviews of them,
and exercising them before the Grand Signior. To accustom them to be obedient,
he gave them Captains that were at his devotion, who conducted them into
Candia, where he resolved to continue the War, though it was very toilsome, and
expensive. The Generals who had been sent to the Conquest of this Island, since
the beginning of the War, made use of the command they had over the Army, to
raise their authority; so that they would hardly submit to the Port. They
pretended at least to be equal to the Grand Vizier, whom they no longer looked
on as their Superior. The exigency of affairs, and the troubles that happened in
the State, had hindered the Divan from repressing their insolence: But Mahomet
Coprogli thought it high time to oppose the growth of an authority that
destroyed his, and prevent the ill consequences which the ambition of Bassa
Delle Vssain, General of the Army in Candia, might have, who took a great deal
of state upon him, contemned the Grand Vizier, would receive no orders from the
Port but such as pleased him, and used threats when he had not every thing he
asked. He craftily got this proud General to Constantinople, to make a
memorable example of him to posterity, and to maintain the honor of his
Master, and the authority of his Charge. Vssain Bassa was no sooner arrived at
the Port, whither his own presumption, fortified by the Vizier Azems splendid
promises, had unhappily brought him: but he was thrown into the bottom of a
prison, with a great many Christian Officers, whom he had brought along with
him in triumph, and whom, swelled with pride and rashness, he still abused in
the Dungeon, where not long after he was strangled before them; which afflicted
him more, than death it self.

By this exact Justice, Mahomet Coprogli kept the Soldiers, and all the
Officers of the Empire in obedience. The resolution of this great Minister was
admirable, in this bold action, of putting to death so famous, and so important
a man, who thought his Authority secure, and much more his Life; having gained
an absolute power over the Soldiers, and engaged the chief of the Empire to
his side. But the apprehension of the consequence of this blow, hindered not the
Vizier Azem from giving it, to prevent the Bassa's intrigues, which must needs
have been prejudicial to the Emperor, and his Subjects. He foresaw how much he
should expose himself, but his zeal to serve the State, and his Master, made
him pass by such considerations, and slight all dangers. He was not at all
concerned that his enemies blamed this action, being certain that those who
were of Vssain Bassa's party would impute his death to his jealousy: but he
knew that there is no station at Court free from censure, and no behavior so
prudent, as to prevent all accidents, and that the Ministers of Princes are
most exposed to the wounds of envy. This consideration kept him from punishing
the chief of the Port, among whom was the Mufti. The Sultana Valide was Regent
of the Empire; she knew the fidelity, and wonderful genius of Mahomet Coprogli;
she had an entire confidence in him, relied on his care, communicated all
things to him, and was not ashamed to testify her gratitude to him to whom she
owed her life, and her Son, his life, and Empire. Those who envied the
greatness, and desert of the Vizier Azem, found fault with the Sultana Valide's
kindness to him; which when this wise Politician perceived, that he might
prefer the good of the State before his own interest, he was so generous as to
desire the Sultana to moderate her affection, which perhaps was but the pure
effect of her gratitude. And she did it in conformity to the prudence of this
great man, who established his fortune with so much modesty, and discretion,
that it was never subject to the least difgraces; and he sustained the affaults
of his Enemies with so much constancy and steddiness, that they were forced at
last to beg his pardon; which the generous Coprogli easily granted them,
besides many other favors.

In the mean time the Recruits which he had sent into Candia, and the Troops
which Ali Bassa had led into Dalmatia, gave hopes of great advantages over the
Venetians, who seeing themselves attaqued by two powerful Armies at once,
thought it their best way to make a League with some Prince that was able to
divert the Ottoman Forces. To this purpose they sent to their Agent whom they
usually maintain in the Persian Court, to treat an Alliance out of hand with
the Sophy, to oblige him to take Arms in behalf of the Republic. The Resident
succeeded in his Negotiation, as well as the Signiory could wish. And Achab
Acmes Sophi newly newly come to the Throne by the Death of the King his Father,
took occasion to demand of Sultan Mahomet the restitution of Bagdet, which has
ever been the Domain of the Kings of Persia, and in case of denial, declared
War against him.

Babylon, now Bagdet, is not only one of the best flowers of the Ottoman Crown,
but is a place of such importance, that the Turkish Emperor could not restore
it to the Persian, without opening him the way to Constantinople. The Grand
Vizier thought it not convenient to facilitate the means of so dangerous an
Enemies visiting his Master, when he should have a mind to it: therefore he
sent back the Persian Ambassador with a refusal, which made the Sophy endeavor
to reduce Babylon with a powerful Army. The Grand Duke of Muscovy had
pretensions to the Provinces that bordered his Dominions: he listened favorably
to the Complaints and Propositions of the Venetian Ambassador, and received his
presents, with the offers which the Commonwealth made him of a very
considerable sum, in case he would invade the Turks. He sent an Ambassador to
Venice, to assure the Senate of his assistance. At the same time the Cham or
Emperor of the Tartars thought of revenging the death of his Father, who was
murdered by Sultan Ibrahim. The alliance that has always been between the
Chams, and the Sultans, makes those Princes be thought to hold in some sort of
the Turkish Empire, because they receive great sums of money to maintain the
vast Armies which they have always on foot, to furnish the Grand Signior with
Troops, when he undertakes any War; which causes a continual commerce between
them: therefore the Grand Cham is not treated at the Port like other Foreign
Princes, but is looked on as the presumptive Heir of the Ottoman Empire, in
case the Race of the Sultans comes to fail for want of Males. And this was it
that caused the Cham to send an Ambassador at Mahomets coming to the Empire, to
desire that he might be named Tutor to the young Prince; believing that it
belonged to him before any other, by the right which the laws of the Musulmans,
and the Turkish Constitutions give him to the Crown. But the Divan having
rejected this Demand, he did not openly show his displeasure, waiting an
occasion to make it appear, and to require satisfaction as well for that, as
for the murder of his Father. This conjuncture of affairs seeming favorable
to his design, he declared the cause of his discontent, by denouncing War
against the Grand Signior, and sending his Forces to spoil his Dominions. This
Enemy was very considerable; the Sophy was no less formidable; the Moscovite
was not to be slighted; and the Venetians on their side made great
preparations: but beside, there sprung up a domestic dissension, which was no
less dangerous. The Spahies and the Janissaries who are the two strongest nerves
of the Grand Signior's Forces, and are in continual enmity, by reason of their
jealousy of one another, happened to quarrel, and proceeded so far as to
fortify themselves one against the other; so that they became intractable, and
could not be brought to march to the place where they were ordered. They kept
Constantinople in perpetual fears, no body durst stir abroad into the streets;
nothing was heard of but Murders, and Robberies, and apprehensions of Fire;
the desolation was general, and the Seraglio was in the greater consternation,
because it seemed impossible to provide against so many mischiefs at once. But
as if fate had raised all these disorders together, on purpose to set forth the
prudence of the Vizier Azem, by his prodigious conduct, he found means to
appease the domestic tumults, and to stop the torrent of so many Potentates,
who seemed to have united their Forces in order to the Sultans ruin. However,
Mahomet Coprogli preserved his constancy in the midst of their misfortunes;
showing how advantageous it is both to a Prince, and his people, to have a
Minister whose steady courage no revolutions can shake: He judged it necessary
to resist the greatest danger first. The Persian War seemed the most important,
therefore he resolved to discontinue that of Candia, that he might not be
obliged by so many diversions, to encounter so many enemies at once. It was
requisite to unite the Ottoman Forces to repulse the Sophy, who had made a
furious irruption into the Sultans Dominions: but though he withdrew some of
his Troops out of Candia, and Dalmatia, he left enought behind, to let the
Venetians see that he did not abandon his design. The Garrisons were sufficient
to preserve the conquered places, and the Works that were begun; which were
furnished with provisions enough to subsist till he should be in a condition to
supply them with new Forces to continue his Conquests. These Troops being
formed into the body of an Army were sent toward Transylvania, under the
conduct of Ali Bassa. At the same time he caused a mighty Fleet to be rigged,
with which the Bassa of the Sea was to oppose the Venetians. He ordered the
Governors of Syria, and Mesopotamia, and the Provinces bordering on Persia to
send all the Provisions they could to Bagdet, and to make speedy Levies to
reinforce the Garrisons, whilst he prepared a numerous Army to resist the
Sophy, who on his side also made great preparations for the War.

The Divan seeing the Grand Vizier had so many Armies to bring into the Field,
proposed to him to put the Law in execution, by which all the Grand Signior's
Subjects, above the age of seven years, are obliged to take Arms for the
defense of the State: But Mahomet Coprogli would not suffer it to be published,
though they reproached him of rashly exposing the Sultan's Honor, and Power,
and the liberty of his people, who were invaded on all sides, and had not
forces enough to repulse so many Enemies at once. He answered that it was true,
the summoning of all the Grand Signior's Subjects might compose vast Armies,
but that he did not think it fit to come to those extremities: besides, that
among such multitudes a thousand disorders would happen more prejudicial, than
their assistance would be useful; that it was the way to expose the Emperors,
and the Nations glory: that the Enemies would believe the Empire was reduced to
the utmost straits, and would make their advantage of it; and lastly that the
people whom they advised him to arm, not being disciplined, would make a
tumultuous Army, and would confound the other Troops: and that he hoped the
Sultan might face his Enemies, and finish the War without this last refuge.

But as if Fortune had a mind to punish his presumption, and put his courage
and constancy to the highest proofs, she raised him up a new enemy whom he
never dreamt of. This Orcan Ogli Bassa of Aleppo, who having made use of the
Grand Visier's orders to raise an Army of forty thousand men, caused them to
march toward Constantinople, without declaring his design. Mahomet Coprogli
was advertised of his march at that time, when he was busied in raising of men
to provide against the most pressing necessities. He was much surprised when he
understood that he had taken the Field without his order, not thinking at
first, that he was revolted: but he soon found that this Bassa who had
succeeded him in the Government of Aleppo, and was Nephew to Delli Vssain
Pacha, whom he had put to death some time before, was resolved to make use of
this conjunction of time to revenge his Uncle, and some private grudges of his
own. He had drawn to his side several Captains, and abundance of Souldierr, who
had served under this famous Bassa Dalli Vssain Pacha, whose memory was dear to
them; and to make his revenge the more remarkable, and give the enterprise more
weight, he pretended to establish one Soliman Amurath on the Ottoman Throne,
who said he was the Son of the Emperor Amurat, and joined himself to him with
an Army of twenty thousand Arabians, Drus, and Armenians. Orcan Ogli
acknowledged him, and made his Army own him to be the lawful Successor to the
Empire. This news was quickly spread over all the Provinces, and met with so
much credit, that several Bassa's came to pay homage to the new Prince, who
already behaved himself as Emperor. The Provinces of Asia made no difficulty of
submitting to him. His Authority increased daily, and the little opposition he
found to his new greatness, made the Bassa of Aleppo so confident of success,
that he counseled him to reject the Sophi's Propositions, who offered to
assist him to conquer the whole Turkish Empire. This Prince swelled with his
prosperity, and governing himself by Orcan Ogli's advice, whom he made his
Lieutenant General, slighted these advantageous offers, believing he should
have no need of Succors that would cost him so dear, to gain a Crown, which he
hoped to wear without sharing it with so powerful and dangerous a Prince as the
King of Persia. Therefore he continued his march straight to Constantinople,
where the Bassa of Aleppo, General of his Army intended to place him on the
Throne; not questioning but the Capital City of the Empire would open its
Gates, in obedience to their Emperor Soliman Amurat, as many others had done
already.

The noise of approach put all the world into a strange consternation. The
Divan knew not what counsel to give the Grand Vizier, but the extremity of
Affairs made him find expedients in the greatest necessities. He preserved his
judgment as well now as before, and studying how to prevent what was most to be
feared, seized on those Bassa's and Officers whom he knew to be ill affected,
and might forment the Rebellion: and to suppress all murmurs, immediately
punished these Incendiaries. Then he furnished the City with all sorts of
Ammunition, and commanded his Son Achmet Coprogli at the head of threescore
thousand men, with which he had designed to oppose the Sophy, to march under
the conduct of Mustapha Bassa, a man of integrity and great experience, against
Soliman Amurath, and the Bassa of Aleppo, and give them Battle as soon as he
could. The apprehension of some insurrection, kept him from commanding this
Army himself, believing it necessary for him to remain at Constantinople, to
have an eye to all: he had much ado to contain the Sultan, who burned with
impatience to be in the Field, not enduring to stay in the Seraglio, while his
Favorite Achmet, who was almost of the same age, exercised his Valor against
his Enemies, whom he would have chastised himself: but the Grand Vizier told
him, with the authority of a Governor, that his Highness ought not to remove
from Constantinople, lest the Mutineers should raise some Sedition in his
absence, which would be of worse consequence than all the other mischiefs that
threatened his fortune. That he should not hazard his person against an
Adventurer, and a revolted Subject; that he could acquire no glory by their
defeat, and that it became his greatness rather to punish them, than to expose
himself to the danger of a War, which his Captains might terminate, while he
sat on his Throne, to take care of the Affairs of his Empire, and answer the
Ambassadors of Princes, that arrived every day at the Port. The Sultan yielded
at last to the Remonstrances of this great Minister, and suffered Achmet
Coprogli to go, who made all the haste he could to meet the Enemies; but he
soon learnt that they having notice of his March, discontinued theirs to
Constantinople, and made show to take some other way. He immediately advertised
the Grand Vizier, his Father of it, who at the same time was inforthat the
Sophy advanced toward Bagdet with thirty thousand Horse, and fifty thousand
Foot. Mahomet Coprogli found that the Enemies design was to stay till the Sophy
was come into the Grand Signior's Dominions to make a diversion, which might
facilitate their enterprise, and that this consideration made them decline
meeting his Son Achmet: therefore this Minister, judging truly of events,
hastened the march of the Army, which he sent against the Bassa of Aleppo,
reckoning that it would come time enough after his defeat to the relief of
Bagdet, and the success answered his expectation. Mustapha and his Son Achmet
no sooner received his orders, but they followed the enemy with such
expedition, that they overtook them when they least looked for them; and gave
them no time at all to look about them, and put themselves in order to fight.
Achmet would not suffer his Troops to lose any of their zeal by resting after
their tiresome march. He represented to his Captains and Soldiers, that they
ought to make use of the enemies disorder, and without any longer delay he
charged them so smartly, that he not only remained master of the Field, the
Artillery, and the Baggage; but he took abundance of Prisoners, and so routed
the Army, that the Bassa of Aleppo despairing of saving himself by flight,
persuaded Soliman Amurath to render himself to the Conqueror, in hopes of
better usage than if they should be taken flying.

At first he rejected this proposition, but fearing some treachery from Orchan
Ogli, whom he began to mistrust, and seeing his Army cut in pieces, he suffered
himself to be carried to Achmet, who presently sent him, and the Bassa of
Aleppo, to Constantinople. The rest of the rebellious Troops yielded at
discretion, and he pardoned them on condition they would serve the Grand
Signior faithfully for the future, and having joined them to his own Army, he
marched according to the Grand Visiers order to the relief of Bagdet.

The news of Achmet Coprogli's victory was as satisfactory to his father
Mahomet, as the arrival of Soliman, and Orcan Ogli was welcome to the Sultan,
and the Sultana his Mother. The Vizier Azem was infinitely pleased to have so
hopeful a Son; and nothing diminished the Grand Signior's Joy, to see himself
delivered from a competitor who had shaken all his Empire, but his melancholy
for not having vanquished him himself: But as if Fortune were weary of
persecuting Coprogli, and intended to bless him by an happy return, she
furnished him with fresh subjects of rejoicing, by the pleasing news of the
Sophy's retreat. This Prince being informed that Achmet Coprogli was coming to
meet him with a victorious Army, and that the Mogul or Emperor of India, at the
Grand Signior's desire, was ready to enter into his Kingdom, returned the way
he came, to defend himself from the Mogol; which made Achmet bring back his
Army, to employ it where his Father thought fit: but he would not return to
Constantinople, till he had chastised all the Bassa's, and Governors, who
favored the Bassa of Aleppo's Revolt, and Soliman Amurath's enterprise. The
Grand Vizier caused them both to be beheaded, without regard to their
Remonstrances that his Son had promised to save their lives; and that they had
not yielded but on that assurance. Policy would not give way to the performance
of this promise; and Soliin in Amurath, seeing he had no hope of safety,
reproached Orcan Ogli with his baseness, in forcing him to yield, when he might
have died gloriously with his arms in his hand, and have prevented the ignominy
of dying by an Executioner.

The death of this Prince is no less worthy of compassion, than his story is
odd, and deserves to be known. He was the Son of Sultan Amurath the Fourth, and
that Rachima, of whom we spoke in his reign. Though this Sultana had abundance
of wit, yet she was very superstitious; so that she believed the predictions of
an Almasairis (so are the followers of Hali called, whom the Persians and
Arabians own as a great Prophet; fancying that all his race have the gift of
Prophecy.) Rachima consulted this man upon all occasions, as soon as she found
her self with child, she would needs know the success of her lying in. The
Almasairis after some consideration, answered, That she should bring forth a
Prince, who would be one day Emperor of the Turks, if he could avoid the
cruelty of his nearest kindred: and that if Heaven did free him from a
misfortune that was to happen to him in the capital City of the Empire, which
he was to avoid dwelling in, he would surpass the greatness of all the Ottomans
his Predecessors. Rachima received this answer as an Oracle; she desired
Amurath, who prepared to return to Constantinople, notwithstanding a Prediction
of the Almasairis which forbad it, to leave her at Damas. Sir, said she, lying
at his feet, if I deserve any grace of your Highness, show that your faithful
Slave is not displeasing to you at this time, by granting her one favor. You
know, Sir, that I never importuned you; it is true, your magnificence has
loaded me with all sorts of benefits; but the favor I now implore will be more
welcome to me than any I have already received, because your Highness is
concerned in it: it is to suffer me to stay here till you return: I know no
greater unhappiness than such a separation; it would kill me with sorrow, Sir;
but I had rather lose my life than expose you to the misfortunes that threaten
you, if I follow you to the Seraglio, where my presence would cause too much
disorder. Sultan Amurath was at first more surprised at this request, which he
expected not, than unwilling to grant it; whether he apprehended the effect of
the Almasairis's Prophecy, or that his passion for Rachima was abated, or that
he would not expose her to the resentments and jealousy of the Sultana Roxana,
whose love was increased more than ever by his absence. He bestowed rich
Presents on Rachima, commanding the Bassa of Damas to have a care of her, and
to pay her a very considerable Pension. He assigned her besides, the Tribute
which the King of Arabia paid him, and took leave of her with great marks of
affection. A little while after Amurath's departure, Rachima was brought to bed
of a Son, whom she named Soliman Amurath. She observed the circumstances of the
Prediction, and brought him up secretly, lest Roxana being informed of his
birth, should order him to be put to death. She knew that this great Sultana
was no less dangerous than powerful, and that only her distance from her freed
her from her cruelty. The news of her death was the more welcome to her,
because she hoped to have supplied her place. And she was preparing to let the
Sultan know the birth of his Son, when Amurath's death spoiled her design: and
she thought it not fit to discover the young Prince Soliman Amurath, not having
power enough to place him on the Throne: On the contrary, she was careful to
keep him from being known to Ibrahim, who succeeded Amurath, lest he who came
not to the Empire, but for want of an heir, and was thought incapable of
leaving any, should follow the cruel policy of his Ancestors by sacrificing
Prince Soliman, who alone would dispute the Crown with him. Rachima therefore
stood upon her guard, and contented her self with the Revenue that Sultan
Amurath left her. But Sinan Bassa, Governor of Damas, who always had honored
her in the life of the deceased Grand Signior, and paid her Pension exactly,
discontinued his respect to her in the new Emperors time, and threatened to send
her to the old Seraglio at Constantinople. The Sultana mistrusting the Bassa,
resolved to retire into Persia, where she was born, or to some Prince, whose
Authority might protect her, and her Son, from her enemies. To color her
retreat, she gave out that she had made a Vow to visit the Tomb of the great
Prophet Mahomet, and having begun her journey under this pretense, she went to
Reba King of the Arabians, the same who was to pay his tribute to her. This
Prince not being so barbarous, as usually those of his Nation are, received
Rachima with a great deal of kindness. This young Sultana, who was not above
two and twenty years old, appeared so handsome to him, that he not only
promised her his protection, but also offered her his Crown, and his Heart.
Rachima was no less pleased with King Rabas person, than his generosity: He had
so many good qualities, that he easily made himself be beloved. The Sultana
sought a Protector, and thought it not fit to neglect the Arabian King. They
found they had inclination enough to one another; she received so many marks of
sincere good will from him, that she made no great difficulty to bestow her
heart on him. He took a particular care of the young Prince Soliman Amurath,
being glad of having such a Subject as might revenge the persecution he had
suffered from the Port in the Reign of Amurath, who reduced him to pay Tribute;
from which he would have freed himself by joining with Emir Ficardin Prince of
Dus his Kinsman, whom Bassa Giaphar overcame, and sent to Constantinople, where
he was ignominiously put to death. King Reba preserved his resentment, only
waiting an occasion to show it, and impatiently suffered the obedience and
homage which he was bound to render to the Grand Signior. To shake off this
yoke, he armed Prince Soliman, whhm he educated as his own Son, and negotiated
secretly with the Bassa of Aleppo, and some other Governors of Provinces in
Asia, who revolted from Sultan Mahomet when his Empire was invaded on all
sides, with intention to drive him from the Throne, and place Prince Soliman
Amurath on it in his stead. We have seen how their enterprise succeeded, and
the King of Arabia was slain with his arms in his hand, performing the part of
a brave Soldier, and a great Captain, in the Battle that Soliman lost.

Rachima, who followed him in this War, died a little while after of grief,
that she had destroyed her Son, by endeavoring to bring him to the Throne,
according to the Prediction of the Almasairis. This Prince had something
extraordinary in his air, and Person. The Turks affirmed that he perfectly
resembled Sultan Amurath his Father, who was the handsomest man in his Empire.

After the death of Soliman Amurath, Orcan Ogli, and the Bassa's, and
Governors who followed his Fortune, the retreat of the Persian Sophy left Asia
in a peaceable condition; which made the Grand Vizier apply himself to oppose
the other Wars that menaced the Ottoman Empire. He ordered all his Troops to be
in the Field by March, in the mean time he continued his negotiations with the
Great Duke of Moscovy, to divert him from invading the Grand Signior, in favor
of the Venetians. He expected the arrival of his Deputies at the Port, who were
to explain the Dukes intentions; and not finding it so easy to appease the
Emperor of the Tartars, whom he dreaded more than all the rest of the Sultans
enemies, he secretly engaged the Cham of the petty Tartars to join himself with
the chief of the Great Chams Subjects, who were revolted: so that when this
Prince prepared vast Forces to invade the Grand Signiors Provinces, he was
obliged to make use of his preparations to defend his own Estate; and was glad
to send an Ambassador to the Sultan, to make him reparation, and offer him all
his Forces, when he had appeased the Troubles which the petty Cham, and his own
Grandees had raised. This Embassy secured the Grand Vizier, and freed him from
a very dangerous enemy. However he left not off his warlike preparations, both
by Sea and Land, and continually endeavored to render his Master the most
formidable, and powerful Prince in the world.

While he waited for a proper season to make some expedition, he dispatched a
Chiaux to the Emperor, to demand passage through his Dominions for the Sultan's
Army into Friuli. The Chiaux was sent back with a refusal dishonorable to the
Grand Signior; but the Vizier Azem thought it not time to show his resentment,
or to send any Troops into Dalmatia, till the Sophy were quite determined
either to Peace or War. He feared lest he should agree with the Mogol, seeing
the Ottoman Arms employed in another place, and defer the sending his
Ambassadors to Constantinople to renew the Peace which he had broken.

The Venetians in the mean time being informed that the Troubles of the Port
were accommodated; and that Ambassadors were arrived there from those Princes
of Asia, who had given them hopes of diverting the Ottoman Forces, were afraid
of having them all turned upon them in a short time; and though they had
obtained great advantages over Sultan Mahomet's Fleet, they resolved to send,
and implore peace of him. But this Prince being swayed by his first Minister,
received their Agents very coldly, and told them that the Signiory of Venice
had no other way to end the War, but to yield the Kingdom of Candia to him, and
the Town of Clissa, the most considerable place in Dalmatia; and to pay him
three Millions of Gold for the charges he had been at since the beginning of
the War.

These conditions were too hard to be accepted, and the War it self could not
be more disadvantagious to the Venetians; and it was the Vizier Azem's design
to continue it: he had private reasons not to make Peace with the enemies of
the Empire. He knew by experience that after such considerable preparations, it
was dangerous to dismiss the Soldiers without abating their heat, and
impetuosity, by the toils of War. He had a mind to employ the Janissaries, to
avoid the Seditions they commonly raise in Peace: So that the Venetians seeing
themselves rejected, implored the assistance of all the Princes of Christendom.
The Grand Vizier who foresaw they would have this refuge, prepared to resist
all their attempts, and obstinately pursued the getting of Candia, accounting
it the most glorious and beneficial conquest the Emperor could ever make. He
sent great refreshments to the Troops that were there, and all provisions
necessary to continue the Siege of the chief City of the Island. Now the Sultan
was more desirous than ever of commanding his own Army, threatening if they
continued to withold him, that he would steal away privately to go to the
Camp, and discover himself to his Soldiers. Mahomet Coprogli employed all his
art to moderate his ardor, without incurring his hatred; making use of all his
prudence on so nice an occasion. The Grand Signior honored him as his Father,
and had entire confidence in his conduct; but he listened to the flatteries and
partial persuasions of a great many young men, and Bassa's, who would have
drawn him out of the Seraglio, that they might with more ease insinuate into
his favor, and diminish the authority of the Grand Vizier. This Minister
foreseeing the consequences, desired the Sultana Valide to join her endeavors
with his, to convince the Emperor, that he ought by no means to expose himself
to those disgraces that might be followed by the loss of his Estate, and life
too. The Sultan would not disoblige the Sultana his Mother, or the Vizier Azem;
he permitted him to send an Army into Dalmatia, under the conduct of Mahomet
Coprogli, who had order to besiege Clissa, and Zara; but his Valor was not
seconded by his Soldiers, and with all his attempts, he could not carry these
two places. This young Captain showed a fierceness that astonished the most
resolute; he desired nothing but a Battle to end that War. Those who wondered
at this vehemence, knew not that the desire of glory was not the only passion
that animated his courage: but it is not yet time to discover the cause, and
interrupt the relation of Mahomet Coprogli's Ministry, to treat of his Sons
loves, which we will speak of at length in the sequel of this History.

While brave Achmet pressed the Siege of the Capital City of Dalmatia, and the
Army in Candia endeavored to conquer that Island in spite of all the
Venetians resistance; the Grand Vizier who applied himself to the particular
Affairs of the Empire, and to provide for the subsistence of the Armies, found
himself at the same time obliged to extinguish a Civil War, which began to
break out by the factiousness of some discontented persons. The frequency of
these kind of disgraces had so confirmed Mahomet's soul, and courage, that
nothing surprised him: nevertheless he stopped not this flame without difficulty,
and bloodshed. It cost young Morat, the Author of the Revolt, his life, who was
the Son of Vssain, Captain General of the Sea, whom the Grand Vizier caused to
be beheaded for favoring Soliman Amurath, and the Bey of Togor suffered the
same punishment, for having committed some fault contrary to his duty.

These troubles were no sooner quieted, but the death of Ragotski Prince of
Transylvania, gave the Vizier Azem an opportunity of extending the Grand
Signiors Dominions. This Province had been the seat of a long War, which was
ended by the submission of the deceased Prince, who paid great sums to the
Port. The Grand Vizier pretended this was a Tribute, and that this Province
holding of the Turkish Empire, the right of nominating a Prince belonged to the
Sultan. The States of Transylvania not giving way to this pretense, were
assembled after Ragotski's death, to elect another Prince. Chimin Ianos, and
Count Barelay, were Competitors at this Election. The first, who was the most
considerable, put himself into the Emperors protection; promising never to have
any thing to do with the Grand Signior. The other on the contrary, relied on
the Sultan, and promised to own him for his Sovereign. These two pretenders
divided the Estate by their Factions. Count Barelays submission was accepted of
at the Port, and in his behalf the Grand Signior ordered Ali Bassa to enter
Transylvania with fifty thousand men, who presently took a strong place called
Waradin, which refused to acknowledge Count Barelay.

The Emperor on the other ^ide sent an Army to defend Chimin Ianos, and to keep
the Turks from breaking into his Territories. Ali Bassa was no sooner informed
of this, but he sent to Count Souches the General of the Imperial Troops, to
pay the Sultan Homage for the places which the Emperor possessed on the
Frontiers of Hungary; and in case of refusal, denounced War, and threatened his
Highnesses own coming with an Army of an hundred thousand men. The Emperor
having received this news, put twelve thousand men under the conduct of Count
Montecuculi, to guard the Frontiers, and sent to demand aid of all the Princes
of the Empire, fearing the Grand Signior would break the Peace. But the arrival
of a Chiaux whom the Sultan dispatched to him by the advice of the Vizier Azem,
who was not yet fully prepared to make War on the Emperor, secured him a
little. The Sultan sent him word that he desired to maintain the Peace with
him, and that he disapproved the proceedings of Ali Bassa, whom he had only
ordered to support the Prince of Transylvania, who put himself under his
protection. But the Emperor finding that without any regard to the assurances
of this Envoy, the General of the Turkish Army continued his Conquest in
Transylvania, he stood on his guard, and recalling Count Souches to face the
Enemy, and enter into the Ottoman Dominions, he sent Count Serini to command
his Troops: So that these two parties provoked one another by little and
little, without coming to an open War. The Grand Vizier was unwilling to
declare, yet he would not lose the opportunity of wholly reducing Transylvania,
or at^ least of making its Prince hold directly of the Grand Signior. To this
purpose he solicited Chimin Ianos (whom the Estates owned as their lawful
Prince, and who in spite of the Ottoman Army had possessed himself of the best
places) to submit himself to the Port, giving him hopes of a favorable
protection: but the Prince rejected his propositions, which so provoked him,
who had set his heart upon joining this Province to the Sultans Dominions, that
he could no longer contain his displeasure against the Emperor; resolving to
have satisfaction from him, for hindering his projects: and to revenge himself
more speedily, and obtain that by force which he could not get fairly, he put
the Cham of the Tartars in mind of his promises to the Grand Signior, and
received thirty thousand men from him with which he augmented Ali Bassa's Army.
This General being thus reinforced, divided his Troops, to make several
attaques at once, at the same time besieging Zeiklit, Callo, and Zatmar, three
places that belonged to the Emperor: but he found so much resistance, that with
all his attempts he could take none of them but Callo, and was forced to raise
the other Sieges, and retire, to avoid fighting with the Imperial General, who
offered him Battle.

This War hindered not the Grand Vizier from pressing that of Candia, and
sending continual refreshments to the Army, which held Canea against the
Venetians; and after he had put all the Affairs of the Ottoman Empire to a good
posture, he designed to go in person to carry on the Transylvanian War, not
being satisfied with the General Ali. He mistrusted the great power which this
Bassa had gained among the Soldiers, and feared he would be very troublesome
to him, on the least discontent; he could not take away his command, or revoke
him, without a specious pretense, for fear of reducing him to make use of his
present reputation to maintain himself in his charge. This consideration made
him resolve to command the Army himself, finding no better expedient, to take
away all suspicion from Ali Bassa, who would be obliged to give place to him
without complaining, because the Soldiers always look upon the Grand Vizier,
when he is in the Camp, as their only General. He had a mind besides to
establish his Son among the Soldiers, who already knew how to gain their
kindness: and he flattered himself with the hopes that he should one day be
able to repose part of his cares on him. He knew his valor, and conduct, and
believed him capable of filling up that place in the Army which was not fit for
himself, and which he could not securely trust another with: but death
prevented this great man's design. He was no sooner gone from Constantinople
with the Grand Signior, who removed from thence because of the Plague, but he
found himself attaqued by a violent Fever, which forced him to stay at
Adrianople, whither he sent for his Son; to give him his last instructions;
foreseeing that he should not recover. At this time he imparted to Achmet
Coprogli, all the politic maxims which his long experience, and penetrating
wit had taught him. He charged him never to do any injustice; to sacrifice his
own interests, and particular inclinations to the good of the State; to be
always faithful to the Sultan, and to advise him to undertake no new War till
those of Candia and Transylvania were ended: Remember my Son, said he, to
observe the Laws, and that to serve your Prince is to accomplish the greatest
part of the Law. After these Remonstrances, he called Fatima his Wife, who was
infinitely afflicted to see this great man die without leaving any authority to
his Son: but Mahomet Coprogli having somewhat recovered his spirits, resolved
to do something before he died, worthy of his subtilty, and prudence. He
contrived with Fatima, and his Son, all that was necessary to make his last
designs succeed; and he writ a Letter to the Grand Signior; in which he told
him, that finding himself at the point to die, nothing troubled him more than
that he died before he had finished the Wars which his Highness had with two
powerful Enemies: but he hoped that he would happily put an end to them if he
made use of the counsel which he had given his Son Achmet, to whom he had
delivered the Seal of the Empire, to give it to his Highness, if he judged him
unworthy to keep it: yet if the Sultan had any respect to his passed services,
or gave any credit to the last words of the faithfullest of his Slaves, he
protested to him that he could not choose a man worthier to be Grand Vizier
than Achmet Coprogli, of whose ability he was assured, and whom he had
furnished with all instructions necessary to acquit himself perfectly of that
great charge. He added that he knew well enough this choice was unusual; but
that the Sultans interest ought to make him neglect a piece of Policy that was
not so useful to him as it had been to his Ancestors; and that besides his
Highness should consider, that Empires would perish, if the Laws were not often
subjected to necessity.

When he had written this Letter with a great deal of pain, he commanded Fatima
to send it to the Grand Signior, by the Visiers, who would come to receive his
last words: but he charged her not to give them the Seal, ordering Achmet to
keep it, and to deliver it to none but the Emperor. At last, finding himself
grow very weak, he left off speaking, for fear of being surprised by the
Deputies of the Divan. When he saw them, he made as if he had lost his speech;
and to let them see that he understood what they said, he pointed to his Son,
who was by his bedside. The Visiers, that they might know his meaning, looked
on Fatima, as if they would learn it of her. This cunning Woman bursting out
into tears, told them that his meaning was that the Sultan might know by
Achmet, what he would have learned of him; that he had entrusted him with the
secrets of the Empire, by giving him the Seal, and discovering to him some
particulars, very important to the State, of which she was ignorant: but
perhaps that Letter which she gave them might clear all; that they should carry
it to the Emperor, and inform him in what condition they left the Grand Vizier.

She spoke these words so naturally, that the Deputies suspected nothing, they
were indeed concerned, that they did not carry the Seal of the Empire back with
them; but they never imagined that the Vizier Azems Son should keep it. They
were hardly gone from him, when he expired, and his death was no less deplored
than it was particular to a man of his condition: for it is not usual for a
Minister of the Ottoman Empire to die a natural death. Almost all his
Predecessors, either through the Grand Signiors jealousy, or for their evil
administration, or their injustices, died by the hands of Executioners. The
important services Mahomet Coprogli had done the State, March 7. 1663.
and his great integrity deserved a better end, which happened in the seven and
fiftieth year of his age.

Those who envied the glory of this great man, did all they could to obscure
it. They reproached him with too much gravity, which they ascribed to his
pride; but it was rather the effect of his temper: it is true, he knew the
advantage he had over others by his experience, and was very careful to
preserve it; often handling those very roughly, who contradicted his opinion,
which he never ventured to declare, but when he was well assured of the
consequence. The Divan, which he always governed, taxed him of referring
nothing to them, and invading the Sovereign Authority. The success of his
Ministry manifested that he had reason to act so, and that he had no need of
any bodies assistance: but how unjust soever his enemies are, they cannot
affirm, that since the beginning of the Turkish Monarchy, there were ever so
many troubles, as during the administration of this Grand Vizier. Never was any
Prince more disturbed in his minority than Sultan Mahomet, or more vigorously
defended: and when he was ready to sink under the weight of so many Civil and
Foreign Wars, in his most tender age, he made three parts of the world tremble.
He has increased his Empire by the conquest of a part of Transylvania, and by
the wonderful prudence of this great Minister, constrained the mightiest
Potentates to sue for Peace.

His readiness to punish those who were seditious was accounted cruelty; yet he
never exercised this rigor, but to prevent combinations, which are ever fatal,
and destructive to the people. He knew that the first strokes of Justice and
Revenge are the best, and that the way to quiet a Sedition, was to strike at
the authors of it. He had several other Maxims; and when he was forced to raise
money to defray the charges of the War, he was wont to say, that Peace was not
to be obtained without Arms, or War carried on without money. So he exacted
Tribute, without rendering his Administration odious to the people, who yet
honor his memory in the person of Achmet Coprogli, the Successor of so worthy
a Father.

The Visiers, whom the Grand Signior and the Sultana Valide had deputed to
receive the Seal of the Empire, and the Vizier Azem's last words, having
discharged their Commission, brought the first news of his death, which was
extremely lamented by the Sultan, and the Sultana his Mother: but when they had
learned the particulars that Fatima informed them of by the Letter, which she
delivered to the Visiers, they suspended their sorrow, to consult how they
should proceed in the choice of another Minister. Achmet Coprogli's youth, who
was not yet thirty years old, out-weighed his desert, and seemed an invincible
obstacle to the Grand Signior's design, of complying with the Sultana Valide,
who had a mind to confirm the deceased Vizier Azem's choice of his Son to
succeed him: and she alleged such strong reasons, that the Sultan, who
referred all things to her, at last gave his consent. The Visiers represented
to him, that to give the first Charge of the Empire to his Son who had
possessed it before, was a contradiction to the Laws, and Maxims of State; that
the Divan, the Militia, and the People, would repine to see a young man raised
to a Dignity that was fit for none but a Bassa of extraordinary desert, and
consummate experience. However he was swayed by the Sultana his Mother, who on
the other side, represented to him, that he could not sufficiently reward
Mahomet's services, but by putting Achmet into his place. This was not the only
consideration that made the Sultana favorable to him; she held her self
obliged to endeavor the preferment of a man who had married a person that was
so nearly related to her. This is a story that deserves to be treated of at
length; therefore I will return to those things which I before only touched at,
the better to clear those adventures that have hitherto been obscure: the most
secret particulars of which are come to my knowledge.

THE HISTORY of the Grand VISIERS.
The third Book.
WHen Fatima had received the Princess Iohaime, the Daughter of the Sultana
Zaime, she brought her up as her own child in the house of Mahomet Coprogli her
Husband, who was then Governor of Aleppo. Her Son Achmet was yet so young,
that he easily believed Iohaime was his Sister: he accustomed himself to love
her; and as much a child as he was, conceived a stronger friendship for her
than usually that tender age is capable of. This kindness ness increased with
the beauty of Iohaime, who grew every day more and more amiable. Achmet always
drooped when he saw her not, and Iohaime was equally affected with his absence:
their mutual inclination grew with them, and never was there a stronger
sympathy of two hearts; they were bred up together with a Politene, which is
not common among the Turks. Mahomet Coprogli, and Fatima omitted nothing that
might give them an education conformable to their quality. They knew the union
of these two persons, and their tenderness for one another; but they did not at
all mistrust their virtue, or imagine that they could have other thoughts than
such as were inspired by their seeming nearness of blood: therefore they
suffered them to live at liberty, taking care to maintain their mistake, in
which they continued them, till Achmet whose age made him more discerning,
discovered it by remarking the difference which his Parents put between Iohaime
and his other Sister; that they refused several advantageous matches that were
offered her; and often had private discourses together in which she was
concerned. This made him believe there was some mystery in it, and desiring his
Mother to unfold the whole secret to him, which his own curiosity had already
half discovered. Fatima who loved her Son extremely, and was assured of his
discretion, told him that Iohaime who passed for hers, was the Daughter of a
Sultana, but that it was as much as her life was worth to reveal it. Now
Achmets eyes were opened, he found that all that he had felt for this Princess,
was nothing but a violent passion; and examining his heart more nearly,
wondered that he had so long mistaken himself to be her Brother, whom he had
always beheld with a Lovers eyes. The possibility of having her one day in his
possession, redoubled his joy, which he moderated as well as he could, lest
Iohaime should find out the cause of it, being unwilling to lose the title of
her Brother, till he could assume that of her Husband, of which he did not
despair; knowing that the Daughters of the Sultana's are frequently married to
the Bassa's, and Grandees of the Port. The favor his Father was in augmented
his hopes, and he beheld his felicity with so much assurance, that he was in
pain for nothing but to know the happy moment. Now he became more assiduous
about Iohaime, whom he had promised Fatima always to treat as his Sister: but
he could not keep his promise long; there are transports in Love, that are not
usual in Friendship. Achmet's passion was too strong for a Brother, and soon
betrayed it self to proceed from love. The Princess Iohaime, who had no less
wit, than beauty, observed an alteration in Achmet's behavior: he was more
particularly diligent about her; he received the innocent favors she did him
as her Brother, with more satisfaction than ordinary, and endeavored to make
her bestow them oftener on him. Iohaime perceived it, and he saw that she did.
This reflection put him into confusion, so that he answered her trembling, when
she desired him to moderate his kindness, which seemed too passionate for a
Brother.

Achmet's disorder and ambiguous words surprised Iohaime, What say you, said
she to him, of Passion and Love? do you remember that I am your Sister, and
that you ought not to have any more than an innocent, and a pure friendship for
me? Achmet, who was no longer master of his love, found that he had spoken too
much, that he could not counterfeit any more, and that it was necessary to
undeceive her: besides, a scruple came into his head of being beholden to
Friendship for those pleasures, which he would rather owe to Love. I should
abuse your ignorance, and credulity too much, fair Iohaime, said he, throwing
himself at her feet; you would have reason hereafter to reproach me of going
about to surprise your heart by a stratagem, unworthy of a man who adores you.
You are not my Sister, fair Princess, and love took care to tell me so before
my Mother confirmed it: but Madam, will not the confession I make injure this
love? and will the Daughter of a Sultana permit the Son of Fatima to be her
servant? will she remember the kindness she had for Achmet when she was yet his
Sister? The Princess Iohaime, who was strangely astonished at this discourse,
beheld Achmet at her feet a good while, without being able to lift him up, or
answer him: but having recovered her self, and not comprehending the truth of
all that he said to her, she made as if she did not understand him, to oblige
him to speak more plainly of her condition; which he did after he had made her
promise inviolable secrecy. She having a tender friendship for Achmet, and
being quite ignorant of love, lived still with him as she was wont to do before
she knew that she was not his Sister, and discovered no great joy to find a
Lover in him, whom she had always respected as her Brother. But Achmet quickly
converted her friendship into a reciprocal love. These two Lovers were endowed
with all that was capable of maintaining a lasting passion. They were almost of
the same age, Achmet being but two years older than the Princess. He was well
and proportionably shaped, his behavior and manners pleasing, his eyes were
lively, and sparkling; his complexion white, and his hair of a chestnut color;
he went handsomely about every thing he did; and the Grand Signior has been
often heard to say, that he did those exercises which the Turks usually perform
before him, better than any man in his Empire. The Princess Iohaime had
qualities that rendered her no less amiable: her shape, though not yet quite
formed, was likely to be the best in the world. The figure of her face was
oval, her forehead was large, her eyes full; they were blue, and so sweetly
languishing, that one could not see them without being sensibly affected; her
nose was of a just bigness; her mouth and teeth admirable; her complexion
incomparable; her hair brown, and very thick; her min answered the greatness of
her birth, and her wit was perfectly correspondent to her outward charms:
besides all this, her modesty made all the world adore her; especially Achmet,
with whom she avoided being alone, since the declaration which he had made to
her: her chastity reproaching her with those harmless privacies which she had
before permitted. She lived so strictly, and reservedly, as hindered her Lover
from taking any of those liberties which she had given way to, while she
believed him to be her Brother. Never were so many charms, so much love, and
virtue seen together. She obtained of Achmet, that he should require nothing of
her, but what the most innocent friendship could not refuse, and that he should
keep his passion secret. They lived together very calmly, expecting when
fortune would favor their desires, by rendering them completely happy; but
fate, envying their felicity, disturbed their repose, by a separation, which
almost killed them with grief.

Mahomet Coprogli, from being a Captive, and on the brink of destruction,
became the first Minister of the Ottoman Empire; he was no sooner raised to
this degree, but he took care to render his Son capable of serving the State
under him. He had given Achmet better Education than usually those of his
Nation bestow on their children, and then brought him to the Court of the
Sultan, who at the very first took a kindness to him; and the Sultana Valide
perceiving his good qualities, would have him always be with her Son Mahomet,
into whose favor he so insinuated himself in a short time, that he could not
endure to be one moment without him: but the Grand Vizier had no mind to let
his Sons courage decay among the soft pleasures of the Seraglio, intending him
for a man of business; and the power he had over the Sultan, who minded nothing
but his diversions, prevailed with him to consent that Achmet should go and
make his first Campagna; where he came off with so much success, that he gained
the esteem of all the Captains: who seeing him begin so well, doubted not but
he would be one of the greatest men in the Ottoman Empire. When he parted from
the Princess Iohaime, he left her in inexpressible sorrow. Achmet would have
discovered his love to his Mother Fatima, but Iohaime opposed it so strongly,
that he durst not do it, for fear of displeasing her: besides, he was afraid
his Mother would reproach him with his weakness, and indiscretion, which might
produce an effect contrary to his wishes: therefore he took leave of her, after
a thousand protestations of loving one another eternally. Yet the kindness of
these two Lovers at parting, was not so secret, but that Fatima perceived it;
who whether she already suspected the truth, or feared the effect of so long a
conversation, interrupted it as soon as she could. She knew somewhat of her
Sons love, and apprehended the consequence; not being assured that the Sultana
Valide would approve of Achmets passion for Iohaime. She thought it convenient
to make use of the opportunity of her Sons absence, to return the Princess to
her Mother; knowing that when she was in the Seraglio, her Son could not so
easily see her, and hold correspondence with her: besides, that it would be
more decent for her to be with her true Parents, than in Mahomet Coprogli's
house, whose Daughter she was thought to be. Therefore Fatima persuaded the
Sultana Valide to have Iohaime near her: but the Sultana having some secret
reasons why she would not yet own her for her Daughter, ordered Fatima to
present her to her as the Vizier Azem's own Daughter, which was done without
acquainting Iohaime, who was brought to the Seraglio to live with the Sultana
Valide. This young Princess who was not suffered to know her Mother, foreseeing
the difficulty she should have to see Achmet, and how grievous this separation
which was contrived without his knowledge, would be to him, was so sensibly
touched at it, that a great while she pined away; at last she fell sick, and
had no body about her that she could trust to give Achmet notice of their
misfortune. She was in a place where she was watched very nearly. She
mistrusted Fatima, whom she still called Mother, being thought to be so by
every body. Seeing her very often, she resolved at last to give her a Letter,
which she said the Sultan had delivered to her to send to her Brother (so she
called her Achmet;) Fatima, suspected nothing, taking it to be a mark of the
Grand Signiors affection to her Son, with whom he was sometimes very familiar:
therefore she sent the Letter to him, who received it just as he was going to
fight, and opening it found it, written to this purpose:

As if your being exposed to the dangers of War, and my continual apprehensions
of losing you, were not sufficient to afflict me, that I may quite despair. I
am shut up in the Seraglio, I can accuse no body of it but your Mooher: I still
pass for your Sister, and I fear lest Fatima believes I love you, and that for
that reason she has shut me up in a place, where your absence is not the only
thing I dread; but return quickly, and free me from this mortal disquiet I am
in. Write not back to me, lest your Letter discover the trick I used to
conveigh this to you, which your Mother sent you as from the Sultan.

Achmet was thunder-strook with this news, at first despair seized on his soul,
but his hope of dying in the Battle did a little allay the misfortunes of his
love. The fight drew near, and he was impatient to be engaged; at the first
encounter he rushed in among the thickest, and fought as one that sought not
victory but death; but his good luck had the better of despair; he was not so
much as hurt; and his desire of dying which made him face the greatest dangers,
passed for the effect of an undaunted courage, and gained him the reputation of
one of the bravest men in the Army. The Campagna being ended, he returned to
Constantinople, where his valor received the applauses of all the Grandees of
the Port, who studied to make themselves acceptable to the Grand Vizier his
Father, and the Sultan whose Favorite he was: but all their praises which
perhaps would have satisfied a more vain, or an ambitious man, did not move him
at all. His love wholly employed his thoughts, and he was already weary of
those troublesome complements that hindered him from contriving a way to see his
Mistress. He was warned by her Letter to mistrust his Mother, and he employed
all his subtilty to know why she had delivered Iohaime to the Sultana Valide;
but Fatima found out his drift: She loved him too well, to give any cause to be
angry, or complain of her; therefore she told him, that the Sultana had asked
for the Princess, and that she was forced to obey her against her will. I know,
added she, that it makes you melancholy, and I know the friendship you have for
one another; I would have you always preserve the same thoughts, and should be
glad you could give Iohaime assurances of them your self; but since it is
impossible, I will do it for you. Achmet was vexed at this discourse, but he
dissembled his grief as well as he could, and went to pay his respects to the
Sultan, who received him very kindly. After he had given his Highness an
account of his Campagna, the Grand Signior in requital, told him what he had
done in his absence, and ended his relation with the praise of Achmet's Sister,
who was come a little before, to be with the Sultana Valide his Mother. If the
Sultan had taken notice of the disturbance that appeared then in his Favorites
countenance, he had perhaps suspected something of his love, but he did not
perceive it; and Achmet then discovered part of his unhappiness: he knew not
that the Emperor Mahomet was Iohaime's Brother, and saw nothing that could
hinder him from being her Lover. The thoughts of this wounded his heart, and he
had almost betrayed himself by showing his jealousy; yet at last he forced
himself, and summoned all his reason to assist him, to beg the Sultan's
permission to see his Sister. None but Achmet, who was so familiar with the
Grand Signior durst have asked such a favor which is never granted to any
body; for neither the Father, or the other kindred of the young women in the
Seraglio are suffered to see them, till they go out to be married. The Sultan,
who had a secret end in Achmets discoursing privately with his Sister,
presently granted his request. He no sooner knew his Masters intention, but he
was grieved that he had given him an opportunity of requiring a service of him,
that was so contrary to his passion. The Sultan had seen Iohaime a little
before with his Mother, and he found her to be what she appeared to all the
world, infinitely charming. His heart having never yet been engaged, he soon
lost his liberty, and without considering whether it were as easy to be
beloved, as to love. It was not long before he declared himself to her, not
taking any notice of the Sultana, who he believed would not oppose him. She
being informed of his love, did all she could to cure him; she employed all the
arguments she could think of, to fix him on some other object; and all her
authority was little enough on this occasion; his obstinacy surmounting his
respect; yet he durst not continue his addresses openly, for fear of
disobliging his Mother: besides, he was unwilling to gain the favor of a
beauty by force, which he had rather win by his diligence, and services;
therefore he courted Iohaime secretly, who being prepossessed in Achmet
Coprogli's behalf, easily defended herself from the Sultan's importunity.
Difficulties commonly augment love. The Grand Signiors was heightened by the
resistance he found; but being naturally gallant, and free from those brutish
inclinations which most of his predecessors were subject to: he would try all
honorable means to persuade Iohaime to admit of his passion, and believed that
his Favorite Achmet, (whom he took to be her Brother) might induce her to be
kind to him. In order to this, he desired the Sultana Valide by a particular
privilege, to give the Grand Visier's Son leave to converse with his Sister.
The Sultana, who had thwarted her Sons inclination, thought it not prudent to
refuse what he asked in Achmet's behalf, lest her denial should provoke him to
transgress those bounds of respect he had hitherto kept: therefore she
consented that Iohaime should receive a visit from Achmet; but she charged her
under pain of her displeasure, to repulse the Sultan's addresses, and to be
deaf to what ever the Favorite should plead in his Masters behalf. This
prohibition was needless; Iohaime's own interest was more prevalent with her
than any command; as soon as the Grand Signior had obtained the Sultana's
consent, he ran to find Achmet, who waited impatiently for him in his apartment
where he left him. There, with a rapture of Joy which proceeded from his hope
of succeeding in his love, You may my dear Achmet, see the fair Iohaime when
you please; I have with great difficulty obtained my Mothers leave; and I
believe you will thank me for it, and do me all the good offices, that I may
promise my self from your friendship: you have a great deal of power with her,
and I hope you will make use of it to make me happy; for (added he) I will no
longer conceal from you my love for your Sister: the Sultana Valide opposed it,
she forces charming Iohaime to be cruel to me, it may be against her will: but
you may assure her, that it is her own fault if she be not Grand Sultana. This
declaration made with all the earnestness of a tender and passionate Lover, so
surprised him, that it was a good while before he could answer him. The Sultan
could not tell what to make of this. What? (said he) will you too declare
against my love? These words uttered with some vehemence, brought Achmet out of
the confusion he was in; and hiding as well as he could the jealousy and
despair which the Emperors love for his Princess filled his soul with, he
recovered himself so well as to say, Your passion, Sir, honors Iohaime too
much, and I have too much respect for your Highness, to contradict your
desires; but I am afraid of creating some misunderstanding between you and the
Sultana Valide, by assisting your love. You know, Sir, that your Mother is
positive in her opinion, and will be obeyed; if she does not approve of your
kindness for my Sister, and comes to hear of my negotiation; she will never
pardon me, or Iohaime, and by removing me from you, will render me incapable of
serving you. The Grand Signior, who was pre-possessed by his love, made him a
thousand protestations to protect him, and free him from all that he
apprehended: and conjuring him to pity his affection, cast him into a strange
confusion. This Favorite had two things to choose, which were more cruel to
him than death; on one side he saw himself in danger of losing his Masters
favor, whom he infinitely esteemed, if he refused to serve him in his love;
and on the other hand, he was forced to speak against his own interest, in
behalf of the most dangerous Rival in the world: for the Grand Signior was not
only considerable for his high birth, and the possession of the greatest Empire
on earth; but he was furnished with qualities that rendered him very acceptable.
This Prince is capable of being strongly engaged, and his conduct has
manifested that he is very constant in love, his soul is great, and royal, his
humor is cheerful, sociable, and familiar, but not indifferently with every
body; for he can be grave on occasion, and that with so much majesty, as
imprints an universal awe: his shape is not very advantageous, but it was
straight, before he fell from his Horse one day in leaping a ditch in hunting,
which hurt him on the left side, and makes him a little crooked. He has the
finest eyes that a man can have; his mouth is good, his complexion is a little
gross, and not very smooth, since he had the Small Pox; his beard is of Chestnut
color, like as his hair; his gate is grave, and though his constitution be
somewhat tender, yet he is very vigorous: he is very skilful in the use of the
Bow, and the Musket; he is exceeding generous, and when he has any War in
hand, lays aside all his pleasures^ though he loves them excessively. The
knowledge of so much desert did strangely alarm Achmet, however he resolved to
promise the Sultan any thing rather than lose the opportunity of seeing the
Princess, who was as impatient to impart her discontents, and the Grand
Signiors addresses, to him. The first moments of their interview (which was in
the Gardens of the Seraglio) were taken up with tears of joy to see one another
again. The rest of the time was employed in expressing all that two perfect
Lovers could say to one another, after a long absence. They acquainted one
another with the Emperor Mahomet's love, and contrived what they should do to
hide their own: but they could not find any way to be soon happy, and to
protect their love from the storm that threatened it in the Seraglio. The
Sultans passion was an impediment to their felicity. Achmet was forbid to own
that he knew Iohaime's birth, and she durst not declare that Fatima was not her
Mother; so that they were obliged to keep a secret that contributed to their
unhappiness, They concluded that they ought not to put the Grand Signior in
despair, lest they should want a pretense to see one another; and after a
thousand reiterated protestations of inviolable fidelity, Achmet took his leave
of her, to go and give Mahomet an account of his negotiation, who waited for
his return with all the disquiet of an impatient Lover. He told him that he
found more difficulty in persuading his Sister, than he imagined he should; and
that her fear of displeasing the Sultana Valide made her refuse the honor which
his Highness offered her; but that he hoped in time to render her more
flexible, provided he might have the liberty of conversing privately with her
sometimes. The Emperor embraced his Favorite, and promised him his favor on
all occasions that might require it. In the mean time Achmet and Iohaime, who
abused the Sultans credulity, to carry on their love, had new subjects of
complaint, and were once more forced to suffer the torments which Lovers feel
in long absence. Mahomet Coprogli sent his Son with a powerful Army against the
Bassa of Aleppo, and Prince Soliman Amurath who pretended to be the lawful
successor of the Ottoman Empire. This second separation afflicted him more than
the first; he could not resolve to go, without discovering his passion to his
Mother, and making her promise him that she would assist him, and oppose Prince
Mahomet. Fatima perceiving her Sons despair, promised him all that he desired,
and told him she would endeavor to make him happy; and that if he would write
to the Princess Iohaime, she would deliver his Letters to her, and send him her
answers: But she required of him that he would trust her to manage his affairs
with the Sultana Valide, lest he should provoke the Grand Signior, who would
have reason to be angry, if he should come to know his falsehood. These
assurances did a little compose Achmets mind; he marched against the enemy with
more courage, and fought them so successfully, that he defeated them; and he
took the new Prince Soliman Amurath and the rebellious Bassa prisoners: and his
good fortune was such, that the Sophy of Persia, who intended to besiege
Babylon, being informed that Achmet was coming to its relief, left his
enterprise imperfect. After this expedition he returned glorious, and
triumphant to Constantinople, where all the applause that he met with, did not
please him so much as the hope of seeing his Princess. But this joy lasted not
long; for fate envying his felicity, soon put an end to it: he hoped to have
laid all those Laurels which love had animated him to win, at the feet of
Iohaime: but the Sultana Valide apprehending the consequences of her Son
Mahomets passion for Iohaime, to keep him from seeing her, had confined her to
a secret apartment, pretending that she was sick, and was to bathe her self
privately. The sorrow and melancholy that appeared in Iohaime's countenance,
made her pretended sickness probable enough. The report of her being sick, soon
spread abroad, and Achmet heard it before his Mother could have time to
disabuse him, by telling him the true cause of her feigned indisposition. She
loved her Son too well to let him continue in his mistake, believing that since
she had discovered more important secrets to him, she ought not to let him be
ignorant that nothing troubled Iohaime but his absence. By this means she
comforted him a little, but could not quite cure him of the melancholy which
the impossibility of seeing his Princess put him into. In the mean while the
Sultana Valide endeavored to take off the Sultans thoughts from Iohaime, by
making him fall in love with some other beauty. She found none so capable of
engaging him as a young Candiot, named Eugenia. She was a Greek, and a
Christian, and was born at Retimo a Town in Candia, from whence she was taken
away very young, and made a Slave, when the Turks made their first descent upon
that Island, and took, and sacked Retimo in the reign of Ibrahim. She changed
her name into that of Zachi, which signifies dear, or favorite, in respect of
her beauty, which gave place to none. Her stature was moderate, but so just,
that it could not be higher or lower, without losing some of its grace: her
complexion was admirably white and smooth: her eyes were so lively and
sparkling that one could not discern their color: her mouth and teeth
incomparable: her hair of the finest black that was ever seen: her neck and
arms as one would wish them: her min and behavior were so agreeable, that it
was impossible for Sultan Mahomet, notwithstanding all the pre-possession of
his soul, not to yield to so many charms. He found Zachi so handsome and so
witty, that he could not keep himself from showing that Iohaime had not so much
inslaved him, as to hinder her from having some influence on him. Eugenia was
strictly charged by the Sultana Valide to neglect nothing that might engage the
Grand Signior to love her; but the Sultans own merit, and good qualities
prevailed more with her than this command. So accomplished a beauty as Zachi
finds no great difficulty in the conquest of so tender a heart as the Grand
Signiors. With this new Mistress he diverted the melancholy that Iohaime's
sickness had caused: but unhappy Achmet, who could love none but his Princess,
grieved almost to death that he did not see her: and to increase his sorrow,
the Grand Vizier his Father, who thought of nothing but the good of the State,
and of making his Son capable of being hereafter necessary to his Master,
without reflecting on Achmets amors, or giving him time to contrive any thing,
sent him into Dalmatia, to make War on the Venetians, who were at the same time
invaded in Candia. His obedience to his Father, and his own glory, obliged him
to sacrifice his Love to his Duty: therefore he went away without any other
comfort, than that of writing a Letter to his Princess. His Mother promised him
to deliver it into her own hand. Without staying for an answer he went to
besiege Clissa, where, as I have already told you, he behaved himself with
extraordinary courage. Fatima was not very punctual in delivering her Sons
Letter, but at last she sent it to Iohaime, who found it to this purpose.

Fate, the enemy of my joy, and repose, hinders me from seeing you, my
Princess, and I go a great way off from you, to seek death, which alone can put
an end to my pains: my duty takes me against my will from the place where my
love would detain me. I know not at my departure what your thoughts are; but if
you continue the same to me, I presently know what I ought to be.

Iohaime received this Letter with such sorrow, as is easier to imagine than
express; she could not restrain her complaints and tears from breaking out,
just when the Sultan passed under the window where she was, not knowing that
she was in this Apartment, which in a very remote quarter looks into the
Sultana's Garden. He was wholly taken up with his new passion, which led him to
Eugenia. The Princess blinded, with her tears, did not see him, but the Grand
Signior hearing some body sigh, looked up, and discovered Iohaime. This sight
both moved his compassion, and surprised him to see her there whom he believed
to be at the Sultana's private baths, whither no man, not so much as the Sultan
himself ever comes. His flame which was not quite extinguished, was presently
kindled again with more heat than before; and forgetting his design of visiting
fair Zachi, he endeavored to learn of Iohaime the cause of her sorrow, and why
she was lodged in so solitary a place. She wondering to hear her self named,
and knowing the Sultans voice, notwithstanding all that he could urge to her,
retired from the window without speaking to him. This behavior of hers so
raised Mahomets curiosity, that he ran to the Sultana Valide's Apartment, and
very furiously asked her where Iohaime was, saying he would see her
immediately. The Sultana taking notice of her Sons disorder, and vehemence,
answered him very calmly, that he might be easily satisfied; and adding
flattery to this assurance, desired him to tell her, whence his sudden
curiosity proceeded. The Prince who loved and respected his Mother extremely,
being a little appeased, related to her what had happened to him. The Sultana was
much surprised at this adventure, not being able to guess at the cause of
Iohaime's affliction: but it was necessary to satisfy the Grand Signior, who
challenged her promise, and would needs know why Iohaime was removed under
pretense of sickness. This question strangely perplexed the Sultana, who now
saw the secret, which she had particular reasons to conceal, in danger of being
discovered: but at last she told him, that being informed of his love to
Iohaime, who for some reasons which she conjured him not to inquire farther
into at present, could not possibly come to be Sultana; she had removed her in
hopes of abating his passion by her absence, and engaging him somewhere else:
but since her caution proved to no purpose, he might see her if he pleased; and
that she believed when he once knew the obstacles of his love, he would
continue it no longer. Then she gave him her hand, and bid him lead her to
Iohaime's Chamber, who was in such confusion, that she never thought of hiding
Achmet's Letter. The Sultan seeing it on a cushion, snatched it up, and having
read it, he turned briskly to the Sultana Valide, with his eyes sparkling with
anger, and jealousy: Well Madam, said he, was it perfidious Achmets love then,
that was the invincible obstacle of my passion? do you betray me to favor the
Grand Visiers Son, who by abusing my goodness, kept a correspondence with her
whom I always took to be his Sister? And you, ungrateful woman, continued he,
addressing himself to Iohaime, Could the love of a Slave make you so firm, and
constant in your denials to me? but I know how to be revenged on your contempt,
and the treachery of your base lover. Then fury and grief not suffering him to
say any more, he would have gone away from them to have satisfied his rage by
some cruel action or other, when the Sultana Valide who was astonished at the
discovery of the intrigue between Achmet and Iohaime, immediately reflected
that it was necessary to disabuse the Sultan, and prevent his resentment of the
deceit that had been put upon him. She staid him by the arm, and with tears in
her eyes desired him to hear her. Then she told him that Iohaime was his
Sister, and why she had concealed it from him; conjuring him to own her and
love her as he ought to do. Anger and jealousy now gave place to reason, and
tenderness; and nature spoke more in Iohaime's behalf, than all that her Mother
could say. He immediately relented, and wondered he had not sooner found out
the meaning of those secret agitations that were caused by nearness of blood.
He embraced his Mother, and his Sister, giving marks of a most pure and violent
inclination, and a very particular esteem of her virtue. He promised her that
since she loved the Vizier Azem's Son, he would not hinder their happiness: and
from thenceforwards he addressed himself more assiduously to fair Zachi who was
owned as Sultana, as soon as she was perceived to be with Child. He loved this
Princess so tenderly, and respectfully, that he has always contrived his secret
intrigues, to which he is much inclined, with such caution, as to avoid giving
her any cause to be jealous.

In the mean time valiant Achmet hazarded his life against the Venetians, at
the Siege of Clissa, the Capital City of Dalmatia; from whence the Ottoman Army
was forced to retire: which afforded him leisure to return to Constantinople.
He knew nothing of what had happened in the Seraglio, in his absence, because the
Grand Signior having a mind to surprise him presently at his return, had
charged Fatima not to send him word of any thing. When Achmet came to wait on
him, he received him with open arms, and looking more cheerfully than he was
wont; after he had asked him some questions about the War, he took him aside,
to tell him that he was not only obliged to him for his diligence in serving
him, and exposing his life for his glory; but that he was more particularly
beholden to him for the good offices he had done him in his love, which had
succeeded according to his wishes: for at last, dear Achmet, continued he, I am
conqueror; your Sister Iohaime is no more cruel to me, and I enjoy those
delights in her that make me perfectly happy. He accompanied this discourse
with such transports of joy, that unfortunate Achmet believed him. His color
changed, and his heart was quite overcome with grief: all the respect he had
for the Emperor could not hinder him from yielding to his infirmity; and his
strength failed him so, that the Sultan seeing him ready to sink down, was
afraid he would have died upon the place: when, not to torment him any longer,
Can You Achmet, said he, holding him up, faint away, when the time you have so
ardently wished for is arrived? the Princess Iohaime is still faithful to you,
and may yet before night, assure you her self that she loves you more than
ever. Nothing less than this could have recalled amorous Achmet from death. But
he was in doubt still whether he should believe the Grand Signior; he could not
flatter himself with such hopes, or imagine which way such a change should
happen. The Sultan soon convinced him by expressing himself more clearly: he
told him how he found out the secret of his love, and the mystery of his
Sisters birth, which had been so long concealed from him; and without any more
delay, that very night concluded the marriage between Achmet and Iohaime. He
sent to acquaint the Grand Vizier with it, and celebrated his Favorites
marriage with extraordinary magnificence. Thus were these two Lovers rendered
happy, and for many years tasted the sweets of a consummate love.

This alliance which according to the maxims of the Ottoman Emperors, ought to
have removed Achmet Coprogli from the supreme Ministry, by an extraordinary
event proved the motive, that obliged the Grand Signior to slight the policy of
his Predecessors, who rather chose to marry their Daughters and Sisters to
simple Bassa's, than to their Grand Visiers, lest they should make use of that
honor in the frequent Seditions that molest their Empire; and secretly
contrive the destruction of the Males of the Imperial Family, that by their
alliance they may have right to pretend to the Crown.

The Emperor Mahomet by conferring the charge of Vizier Azem on his
Brother-in-law, showed that a Prince ought not to be a slave to Policy; that he
is above Laws and Customs; that he should not submit to them any farther then
he finds them advantageous to his State and Glory; and that he is always at
liberty to reform them, or establish new ones, when there is occasion, or
necessity requires it. He could not have made a better choice to supply the
first charge of his Empire; and though he did not find as much experience in
Achmet Coprogli, as in his Father, at least he met with the same zeal for his
service, the same courage in the highest undertakings, and the same genius and
resolution in the greatest affairs.

As soon as Achmet was invested in his new Dignity, he showed the greatness of
his soul, and the strength of his wit; for as young as he was, he was no more
surprised, or confused in this place; the burden of which so few Subjects are
vigorous enough to support, than if he had the experience of the ablest
Politicians, and greatest Statesmen. He followed his Fathers footsteps so
exactly, that no body could perceive any other change in the administration,
than that it descended from the Father to the Son; and that one was as expert
as the other, who was the greatest, and most judicious Minister that ever
managed the affairs of the Ottoman Empire.

This young Minister therefore imitating his Father Mahomet Coprogli, acted
every thing with wonderful prudence; he at first accustomed him self never to
let either Malice, Melancholy, Anger, or Haste, which are the four dangerous
shelves of ready and and subtle wits, to have any influence on his resolution.
He is always methodical in his discourse, judicious in what he writes, sincere
in his proceeding, punctual in his promises, secret in his orders, quick, and
ready to engage, and very constant in his resolutions. His good qualities made
the other Visiers and Bassa's of the Divan jealous of him, who could not endure
that a young man should be preferred before them, whom they were obliged to own
as their Superior, and to submit their opinion to his. The most powerful and
discontented of those who pretended to the Dignity of Grand Vizier was Rustan
Bey, Bassa of Babylon. He had great intrigues at the Port, and abundance of
Creatures among the Spahies and Ianizaries that were at Constantinople, whither
the Sultan was not returned since the death of the Vizier Azem. He engaged them
underhand to mutiny, and endeavor by threats to oblige the Grand Signior to
name another Grand Vizier; but the Emperor as soon as he was out of his
minority, made himself absolute among them; and after the example of Sultan
Amurath his Uncle, often came abroad to see them exercise. By this means he
showed that he had more courage, and resolution than his malcontent Subjects
were willing to allow him; and that the Sultana Valide, and the Vizier Mahomet
Coprogli had given him a more heroic education than any Ottoman Prince ever
had before him. That great and faithful Minister taught him to behave himself
like an Emperor, and to make use of his Sovereign power. The Sultan therefore
had a mind to practice his lessons, and employ his policy in maintaining the
choice he had made of his Son to succeed him in his charge, and keeping the
mutineers in order. He was not ignorant of the mischievous consequences of
Seditions; and that it is difficult to appease them, when the people and the
Militia are united in a Rebellion. He concluded with the Grand Vizier that it
was necessary to gain the chief leaders of the Spahoes, by distributing money
among them, to oblige them to withdraw their Troops from the Ianizaries
faction. These two sorts of Militia, as we have elsewhere mentioned, have been
always opposed to one another; nor was it difficult to divide them. The Spahies
being appeased by the Vizier Azems liberality, not only laid down their Arms,
but promised also to resist the Ianizaries attempts; who on the other side
fearing the Grand Signiors menaces, and hoping to be as well rewarded as the
Spahies, if they returned to their duty, declared that they were ready to
punish those that were guilty, This submission caused the Sultan immediately to
leave Adrianople, to come and quiet the trouble at Constantinople, by taking
advantage of the Spahies zeal to suppress the seditious. He assembled the
Divan, whither he came himself with all the Bassa's and Officers of the Port,
and the principal of the City; and with some sharpness told them how much it
displeased him, that they should contradict his actions, and that the
Ianizaries should go about to impose laws on him. He spoke with so much
Majesty, that he struck an awe into the most insolent. At the same time he gave
order to seize the Bassa of Babylon, who was the chief author of the Sedition,
the Aga, and the most criminal Officers of the Ianizaries, and some of the
principal inhabitants, causing them all to be strangled; and threatened to
cashier the whole body of the Ianizaries, if ever they committed the least
disorder.

This proceeding seemed the more rigorous to these Troops, because they
expected more favorable usage; but they durst not complain. The Grand Vizier
in the mean time in conformity to his Fathers maxims, thought it necessary to
employ the Ianizaries, that they might have no leisure to mutiny again. He
intended to continue the Siege of Candia, but he would first make an end of the
Transylvanian War, which Ali Bassa managed with no great success: and he was
preparing himself to march with the Ianizaries, and Spahies, when he was
informed that the Sophy of Persia was about to attaque Bagdet. This news
changed the face of things, and made the Sultan send an Aga, and a Chiaux to
Vienna, to propose a Peace to the Emperor. These Envoys met not with that
satisfaction that the Vivier Azem wished. The Emperor gave them to understand,
that the Principality of Transylvania, which was the cause of his difference
with the Sultan, was a member that had been separated from his Estate, and that
his Highness could not without injustice think of obliging him to quit his
pretensions to that Province, and to desert Prince Chimin Ianos, who had put
himself into his protection: and that he could not agree to the dismantling of
Serinwar, unless the Grand Signior would demolish the Fortifications of
Waradin, and some other places.

This answer did not please the Grand Vizier, who was no less careful than his
Father had been, of his Masters glory, and industrious to enlarge his
Dominions: but hearing for certain that the Sophy marched against Bagdet, he
saw it was necessary to temporize now: therefore he sent orders to Ali Bassa,
the General of the Army in Transylvania, to continue the overtures of Peace.
This General at the same time received the news of the taking of Chimen Ianos
by Michael Abaffi, who succeeded Count Barelay, and was protected by the Port
in his pretenses to Transylvania. The death of Chimin Ianos, whom Abaffi caused
to be beheaded in Prison, as Chimin had treated his first Competitor,
facilitated the Conquest of the Province, and favored the Grand Visiers
designs. Ali Bassa immediately sent a Courrier to him to know what he should do
in this conjuncture; but Achmet sent him word again that he should observe the
orders he had received: so that he pressed the Emperor to send Deputies to the
Port to negotiate a Peace between the two Empires. In the mean time the Ottoman
Army made continual inroads into Hungary, and the Imperial Troops did the like
in the Grand Signiors Dominions. But the Turks being tired with this tedious
skirmishing War, threatened the coming down of the Grand Signior himself with a
formidable Army to invade Hungary, if the Emperor did not very suddenly
conclude a Peace; which made him dispatch Doctor Perez to the Divan. The Grand
Vizier, whose drift was to prolong the Negotiation till his own affairs were in
a better posture, dismissed him, with order to tell his Master that he should
send his Agats to Themidwar, to treat there with Ali Bassa, and the Cappigi
Bassa: but hearing that the Sophy for fear of being invaded by the Mogol, had
given over his enterprise on Babylon, he commanded General Ali not to recede
from the first conditions which he had proposed in order to the conclusion of
the Peace.

The Emperor finding the Sultans propositions unreasonable, and that the Turks
continued their Incursions, believed, the Divan, whatever it pretended, had no
desire to terminate the War: therefore he began to look about him betimes, for
fear of being surprised; foreseeing that it would not be long before the Grand
Vizier would fall upon him; who, as soon as he had put the particular affairs
of the Ottoman Empire into order, resolved to pursue the enterprise which his
Father began, and was forced to leave unfinished by death. After he had rigged
a powerful Navy to encounter the Venetians, and the Christian Princes, whose
Forces he apprehended at Sea, he prepared to march against the Emperor, to let
his Master see that he was as expert as the old Generals, who proud of their
long command, and age, flighted him as a young man, and raised disadvantageous
stories of him. He ordered the Bassa's of Albania, Natolia, Buda, and some
others, to draw toward Hungary with their Troops, and desired the Sultan to
stay at Adrianople, and to permit him to go and exercise his Authority, and
give proofs of his valor. He led with him the old bands of Ianizaries, and
Spahies, placing the Mutineers in the Forlorn Hope, that they might be cut off
in this War, which he hoped to finish in a short time, that he might turn all
the Ottoman Forces against Candia. But while he marched toward Hungary, his
Fleet which he set forth to scour the Sea, and succor Canea, which was
distressed by the Venetian Army, was not so successful as he expected: it
shunned engaging the Venetian Fleet, which would have fought to have prevented
the relief of Canea. The same Fleet however pursued Turkish Galleys in the
Archipelago so briskly, that it took ten Saiques, gave chase to four great
Vessels that followed a Caravan of Alexandria; and being come up with them,
took three, and several Saiques that carried abundance of persons of quality of
both Sexes, who were going on Pilgrimage to Mecha.

The news of this disgrace did more inflame the Grand Visiers courage, who made
long marches to arrive at Belgrade, where the body of the Army expected him
under the conduct of Ali Bassa, who was newly made Vizier of Hungary. The
approach of this great Minister, and the arrival of the Bassa's of Bossina,
Silestria, Waradin, Aleppo, and the Beglerbeg of Natolia, so terrified the
Emperor, that he presently commanded the Baron de Goez, one of his Deputies, to
divert the dreadful storm that threatened the Empire, by granting several of the
demands which Ali Bassa made in the Grand Signior's name. Ali acquainted the
Grand Vizier upon what terms the Emperor was willing to purchase Peace: that he
consented that Michel Abassi who was under his Highnesses protection, should be
acknowledged Prince of Transylvania, and promised to withdraw his Garrisods out
of some places, and to demolish the Fort of Serinwar: but Achmet had no mind to
go back now he was so forward, and had made such preparations for the War;
thinking it below him to make Peace on any conditions, either less advantageous
to his Master, or less glorious for himself, than the Victories that seemed to
attend his Arms; and for this reason, not being satisfied with what the Emperor
offered. He asked over and above, two millions for the expenses he had been at,
with a Tribute of an hundred thousand Rixdollers a year for the Kingdom of
Hungary, which he resolved to make wholly tributary to the Ottoman Empire.
Besides this, he would have the Emperor give free passage for what Troops the
Grand Signior pleased to send into the Venetian Territories.

These proud demands made the Emperor despair of the accommodation, he had
hitherto flattered himself withal. He perceived that the Grand Vizier would not
let the Ianizaries return to Constantinople, till their fierceness and
insolence were abated by the toils of a War, which through the animosity of
both parties would undoubtedly prove very bloody. Achmet Coprogli being
informed of the Emperors continual preparations for War, was glad to meet with
resistance in such an Enemy, whose defeat would augment his glory, and convince
the world that he was as able in the Camp, as in the Divan; and could not only
advise like an Oracle, but could command also like a great Captain.

THE HISTORY of the Grand VISIERS.
The fourth Book.
THE Emperor seeing his Commissioners return without any effect of their
Negotiation, made no question but that the Vizier Azem would endeavor all he
could to come and besiege him in Vienna. Therefore he fortified that City, that
it might be in a condition, if need were, to resist the Ottoman Forces,
implored the assistance of all the Potentates of Europe, and with four distinct
Armies secured the hereditary Provinces of the Empire. The Grand Vizier on the
other side aimed at some considerable Expedition, and having determined what to
do, passed the long Bridge of Essek, and sat down before Newhausel. He
immediately invested the place, and defeated some Troops which Count Forgate,
and Balsi, and Marquess Pio, would have put into it, then he summoned it
according to the custom of the Turks, who do so to all places they besiege. But
Count Forgats the Governor having given such an answer to his summons, as made
him find that fair words and splendid promises were not sufficient arguments to
persuade him to surrender a place which the Emperor had entrusted him with: he
planted so furious a Battery as soon made breaches wide enough to invite the
Turks to an assault, in which great numbers of them were slain by the
defendants. But the Grand Vizier pressed the Siege so vigorously, that the
Governor was forced to yield the place upon composition; and the Articles were
so advantageous, that several of the Officers, and the chief of the besieged
knowing to what necessity of surrendering the Town was reduced, and what
multitudes of their Enemies had perished before their Walls in so small a time,
were of opinion at first that the Grand Vizier readily consented to whatever
Count Forgats demanded, with design to break his word, and to have it the
sooner in his power to revenge the loss he had sustained during the Siege: but
the event showed that they did him wrong to suspect he could be guilty of a
baseness so much below the greatness of his soul, though otherwise such actions
are very common among the Turks. Achmet Coprogli has always professed himself an
enemy to treachery, and thinks himself concerned in honor to keep his word on
all occasions. The Governor of Newhausel was the first that found this to be
true; the good usage he received from the Grand Vizier constrained him to be
just to his virtue and desert, and far from what his Officers apprehended, to
thank him for the complement he made him, upon his generous defense of a Town
which seemed incapable of holding out against so powerful an Army.

Count Forgats being marched out of Newhausel, the Vizier Azem made his entry
into it, and at the same time dispatched an Officer to carry the news to the
Grand Signior; but designing to make an entire conquest of Hungary, to
accomplish it without shedding of blood, for ruining the Country, he bethought
himself of issuing out a Proclamation, that all the places that would submit to
the Ottoman Empire, should be exempted from Contribution for six years, at the
end of which each house should pay but a Rixdoller. This did not succeed so
well as he expected; however he possessed himself of Schinta, Novigrad, Levens,
and some other places of less importance, with which he ended the Campagna,
that he might refresh his Army, and be at leisure to look after the affairs of
the Port, which he still took care of, notwithstanding the War. To this end he
had Courriers continually on the way, who informed him of all that passed, and
carried messages from him to the Sultan, who was then at Adrianople, where he
made public rejoycings for three days together for the Victories of his chief
Minister, and concluded them with the death of his principal Nectangis or
Secretary. His Highness caused him to be beheaded upon the advice he had from
the Vizier Azem, that he was corrupted by the Emperors Ministers, from whom he
had received a very considerable sum of money, which was found in his Coffers;
being not only a certain argument of his Crime, but a mark of Achmet Coprogli's
faithful correspondence in all parts. The season of the year which obliged the
Vizier to retreat, did not hinder him from sending Succors to Canea, and
Recruits to the Troops that were in Dalmatia; so that at the same time that he
had undertaken another War, he pressed the Venetians in two several places, to
show the Christian Princes, that the Sultan could maintain more Armies than one
against his Enemies, and that he did not at all fear the great preparations
they threatened him with; being advertised that Count Serini did very much
distress the Troops that wintered in the conquered places, and along the River
Traag, and Dravus. He composed three small Armies of Tartars, Moldavians, and
some Turkish Companies to wast Moravia, and Silesia, and to make inroads as far
as Presburg, the Capital City of Hungary, by that means to divert Count Serini,
who by the Emperor, and the Diet at Ratisbon was nominated Generalissimo of the
Hungarian Forces. But neither these Forces, nor the extremity of Winter, could
hinder this Hero from taking Bernezet, Raboscha, Seques, and several other
places which the Turks had conquered. He made himself Master of Palanka, and
Peez, a populous trading Town; and leaving his Army under the conduct of Count
Horlac, he besieged and took Tainskirken, and attacked the Bridge of Essek,
where he met with a vigorous resistance, which however could not keep him from
burning that, and many Magazines which the Turks had along the River Dravus.
After this he undertook the Siege of Canisia, a place of great importance.

The Grand Signior hearing of this Siege, was resolved to go in person and
relieve this Town, and stay the course of Count Serini's conquests; but the
Vizier Azem dissuaded him from his design, representing the danger he exposed
himself to, and the mischievous consequences of his absence from
Constantinople; where the people being provoked at the punishment the Sultan
had inflicted on the chief of the City, who conspired against him, were ready
to rise, and spoke of making one of his brothers Emperor. The Grand Vizier too
had a mind to finish the War he had so happily begun, and was unwilling that
his Highnesses presence should rob him of his glory, and be thought to have
effected more than all his industry; yet the care of his own glory was not the
only motive that caused him to divert Sultan Mahomet from this expedition, the
affection and zeal which he ever had for his Masters service, at this time
prevailed over all other considerations, knowing the violence of his nature,
and the greatness of his courage, he feared he would engage himself too far
into danger, and that he would receive more prejudice by the enterprises of the
Mutineers at Constantinople, than advantage by the conquest of the whole
Kingdom of Hungary. Nor did he doubt but that he should finish the Expedition
successfully, without the assistance of the Captains and old Generals that were
in his Army, who out of jealousy opposed his design, and hindered him from
advancing his Conquests so far as he might have done, if he had taken less heed
to their counsel, which he rather chose to follow, and proceed slowly, than to
hazard any thing upon his own account. Being informed of all Count Serini's
exploits, who nearly distressed Canisia, and as valiantly repulsed Sultan
Mahomet's Forces, as his Grandfather did those of the Emperor Soliman, he took
the Field to prevent him from joining Canisia to the other conquests he had
made during the Winter; but the death of Ali Bassa obliged him to suspend his
intention of repulsing the enemy, to allow him those Funeral Ceremonies which
his great services to the state deserved.

Ali was one of the greatest, and most expert Captains of the Ottoman Empire:
he bore Arms first under Sultan Amurath, and behaved himself so well in the
Persian War, that the Emperor in recompense gave him one of his Sisters in
marriage, and made him Bassa-General of his Armies. He had gained such
reputation, that his power made the Grand Vizier Mahomet Coprogli jealous of
him, and resolve to take away his command of the Army in Transylvania, as we
have already mentioned; and he advised his Son to take heed of him as one that
might well be his Competitor for the charge of Grand Vizier: but equitable
Achmet perceiving the extraordinary merit of this brave man, respected his
virtue and age, which was threescore and ten; and instead of following the
politic cautions of his Father, submitted often to his advice, and extremely
deplored his death, which was also lamented by the Grand Signior. After he had
rendered him all the Offices that the Mohammedan Law required, he pursued his
march to Canisia. His Army consisted of seventy thousand men, whose approach
forced Count Serini, Count Hohelac, and Strozzi who were joined with him, to
raise the Siege, and retire into the Isle of Serin. Their retreat was but just
time enough, for as soon as they were gone the Turks arrived, and posted
themselves in the same places that the Christians quitted. The Grand Vizier
having put sufficient relief into Canisia, sent Ismael Bassa with twenty
thousand men to pass the River Mur at the place where it joins with the Dravus,
that by getting that passage, he might have free entry into Stiria, Carinthia,
and Croatia; but Count Strozzi valiantly defended the Pass, and performing the
part of a gallant Soldier, was slain with a Musket Bullet.

In the mean time the Emperor impatiently expected the Succors he had desired
of the Christian Princes. The Pope, the Princes of Italy, and the King of
Spain, had promised him large sums of money, for which he had great occasion,
but they made no haste to send them. Sweden and Lorain gave him hopes of men,
but he heard nothing of their coming; so that he despaired of receiving any of
the Succors he looked for time enough except those of France. The King on this
occasion, as on a thousand others showed himself to be the most Christian, and
the most zealous of all Princes for the good of Christendom; for when Count
Strozzi whom we spoke of, who was sent from his Imperial, to his Most Christian
Majesty, had represented the necessity the Emperor was in, the King granted all
that he desired; and not at all satisfied that they should limit the Succors to
two thousand Horse, and four thousand Foot, that they should think to bound his
liberality, and hinder him from giving more splendid marks of his extraordinary
generosity, and zeal for Religion. This incomparable Monarch could not keep
himself from telling his Courtiers, that he had rather they were in Hungary
than at the Louvre; and that if the Dauphin his only Son were old enough, he
would send him to this War. The chief of the Court, and Kingdom were ambitious
of serving as Volunteers under Count Coligni, whom the King chose to be
General, making the Duke of Feuillade his Marshall de Camp. The Duke of
Bouillon great Chamberlain of France, was the first that begged leave of his
Majesty to make this Campagna, his example was followed by his Brother the
Count d' Auvergn^, the Chevaliers de Lorain, and de Rohan, the Dukes of
Saubieze and Brisac, the Marquess de Guitery, Master of the Wardrobe, the
Marquises de Ragny, Villery, Castelnau, Senecay, Bethune, and Estrade; the
Counts de Saux, and Canaples, the Chevaliers de St. Agnan, and Coaslin, and
several others who prepared themselves to signalize their valor on the bank of
Raab, where by and by we shall see them defeating the most formidable Enemy of
Christendom.

The news of the Troops that were to come to the Emperors assistance being
brought to the Grand Vizier, he resolved to advance his Conquests before their
arrival. Ismael Bassa whom he commanded to gain the passage over the River Mur,
having been repulsed, as we said before by Count Strozzi, sought a more
favorable place, and besieged the Fort of Serin, which commanded all the
Country about it. Count Nicolas Serini did all he could to make the Enemy
retire, and perhaps had effected it, and forced them to give over their
enterprise, if Achmet Coprogli, who earnestly sought an opportunity of
disputing the glory of a victory with this General, whose reputation was so
great, that the Turks trembled at his very name, had not arrived in the Camp,
with the Bassa's of Bossina, and Albania, followed by a body of twenty thousand
men, having made another body of the rest of his Army, which was employed in
another place, His presence animated the Soldiers, who were discouraged by the
stout resistance of their Enemy, and the toils they endured in the Siege. They
were ashamed not to follow their General, who exposed himself to the greatest
dangers, and would have gone to the assault himself, if the crowd of the
Officers of the Army had afforded him any room. They strove who should first
take the Fort, and having at last carried it, they put two thousand men whom
they found there in Garrison to the Sword, enraged that such an handful should
presume to resist an Army of forty thousand men. The Grand Vizier caused this
Fort to be razed; the demolition of which he had before in vain demanded of the
Emperor, because it awed the Ottoman Garrison in Canisia. Afterward he marched
against little Comora, and took it by Composition; and hearing that Count
Souches one of the Imperial Generals had defeated the twenty thousand Tartars,
Moldavians, and Valachians, whom he sent into the high Hungary, at Sernevers.
He determined to extend his vengeance to the very Gates of Vienna, to waste all
Austria, and to besiege the Emperor in the Capital City of his Empire. To this
purpose he approached Sarvar a considerable place on the River Raab; but seeing
no likelihood of forcing it suddenly, and being informed that the imperial Army
advanced to hinder his passage, he resolved to prevent it, and marched in haste
to possess himself of the Bridge of Kermen, a Town on the same River, and in
his march took the Town of Ergevart; but he met with a vigorous resistance when
he came to the Bridge where he intended to pass his Army. Count Montecuculi the
General of the Imperial Troops, and Count Hohenlac, General of the
Confederates, foresaw that the Grand Vizier would choose this passage as the
most commodious, and were come thither to make it good: but they would have
been forced to have quitted it, if a party of Count Coligni, General of the
Auxiliary French Troops Cavalry had not arrived when the Turks were forcing the
Bridge. This General, who according to the order he had received from the
Generalissimo, had hastened his march to join the Imperial Army, advanced with
some Volunteers, and a party of his Guards, and for almost two hours together
withstood all the fire and attempts of the Ottomans. Then the Hungarians who
were deserted by the Germans, seeing themselves seconded by the French, took
heart, and fell upon the Enemy, who was forced to seek a pass two Musket Shot
lower, where the French Horse still behaved themselves gallantly, and drove
back the Ottoman Army, which lost there abundance of Soldiers and Officers,
and among the rest the Bassa of Bossina, who was slain fighting in the foremost
Ranks. The Vizier who would not shrink from the resolution he had taken,
impediments increasing his thirst of victory, persisted obstinately in his
design of passing the Raab. Therefore he went up higher toward St. Godard, a
little Village, now famous for the action that happened there, whither he was
followed by the Christian Army, which he galled with Cannon-shot all night,
while he in the mean time held a Council of War, where it was concluded to swim
over part of the Cavalry, and pass the rest over a bridge, which was made under
covert of the Artillery between St. Godard and Glostorff. Ismael Bassa of Buda
had the conduct of this enterprise, he passed at the head of six thousand
Ianizaries and Spahies, and the flower of the Ottoman Army. The Grand Vizier
commanded him to make a retrenchment on the other side of the River, to amuse
the Christians, while he passed the body of his Army in another place, that
they might charge the Imperialists on both sides: but Ismael being gotten over
to the other side, in spite of the Germans resistance, could not withhold his
Soldiers from assaulting and defeating Count Horlac's Troops that disputed the
Pass with them. After which he possessed himself of their post, where he
retrenched himself, after he had put them to flight, taken their Cannon, and
cut off above two thousand heads. He presently sent the Grand Vizier word that
he was master of the Pass, and that if he would advance with the rest of the
Army, he might cut the Imperialists in pieces. Upon this advice Achmet caused
more Troops to pass over to him, who not having room enough to put themselves
in order to fight, were attacked by the French; and the Cavalry too being in
the same distress, were not able to resist the onset of the illustrious French
Volunteers: so that the first Ranks turning their backs, they were all so
disordered, that they betook themselves to flight, and threw themselves into
the Raab, where they were drowned in sight of the rest of their Army, and their
General, who not being able to assist them, did all that a great Captain could
do to animate his Soldiers, and make them renew the Fight, that they might
revenge the defeat of their companions; but they were seized with such a panic
fear, that they gave back instead of advancing. The Vizier in vain represented
to them how much they were concerned to repair their loss, for they persisted
in their disobedience. He went himself before them with his Simitar in his
hand, promising them victory, and great rewards if they would go where their
honor called them, and conjured them to follow him; but seeing this did not
prevail, he added threats to his entreaties, and upbraided their baseness. His
fury carried him so far, that he had like to have perished in sight of his
disobedient Army, and not able to suppress his indignation any longer, he
killed three Officers with his own hand, whom he in vain called by their names
to follow him, pursuing two more, who cried out to him^ that they came to make
War on the Transylvanians and Hungarians, and not to fight with the French.
This brave General finding there was no remedy, caused his Troops to retreat
into a secure place, and he with his followers only retired into a quarter
apart, to show how he contemned his own Army. He sent with a great deal of
civility to the Christian Generals to demand several Captains, and some
Bassa's, and chiefly Ismael who perished in the Fight, which lasted nine hours;
offering whatever they pleased for their ransom, if they were Prisoners, and
sent back all the Christian prisoners that were in his Camp. After the Battle,
the two Armies attempted nothing considerable, but stood upon their guard only.
The Turkish Officers and Captains being ashamed of their disobedience, desired
their General to let them recover their credit by some Siege, or any thing but
engaging the Christian Army: but the places they proposed to besiege were of so
little importance, that he reproached their cowardice, and flight before an
handful of men tired with a long journey; and told them he would have no more
to do with Soldiers who disgraced the Ottoman Empire, and by their baseness
sullied the glory of their Ancestors.

After this Declaration he sent the Grand Signior word of his loss, and the
disobedience of his Troops, and advised him to renew the Peace between the two
Empires, to prevent his being exposed to a second disgrace: all the Divan was
of his opinion. The Sultan sent him order to conclude it, and gave notice to
the Emperors Resident, that to stop the progress of the War, they should renew
the Conferences that were held at Themiswar. The Resident immediately sent away
a Courrier to advertise Prince Lakowits the President of the Emperors Council
of War, who willingly entertained the proposition, and negotiated so secretly
with the Vizier Azem, that the Peace was published before it was thought to be
treated of.

All the world was surprised at this sudden Peace; the Imperialists were of
opinion that it was opportunely concluded: but it is certain, that if it had
not been made so hastily, and they had then pursued the Turks when they were
discouraged by their losses and disorder in the Battle of S. Godard, the rest
of Hungary and Transylvania might have been recovered, which the Sultan without
doubt would have surrendered, to finish a War that employed the best part of
his Forces, which he wanted to oppose the Sophy, who made new attempts on
Babylon, and the Provinces bordering on Persia, to preserve his Conquests in
Candia, from whence the Venetians were driving him; and to appease the troubles
which the revolt of the Governor Chazan Bassa had raised in Egypt.

All Christendom having taken Arms to assist the Emperor, would have made great
advantages by the continuation of the War against the common Enemy, and
particularly the Commonwealth of Venice would have forced him wholly to quit
his design upon Candia. There can never happen so proper a conjuncture to
humble the Sultan's pride. All the Potentates of Europe were ready to unite
against him. His own Dominions were disturbed with intestine broils; the Sophy
and the other Princes of Asia were about to declare War against him. The
Venetians had a strong Fleet at Sea. Every thing seemed to contribute to his
ruin. But the Emperor by a mistaken policy took false measures, which in the
consequence fell heavy not only upon himself, but the common interest of
Christendom; for he concluded such a Peace as left the Sultan at liberty to
assemble all his Forces against Candia; which proved afterward to be the loss
of that Island. Whereas, had his Imperial Majesty comprehended the Venetians in
his Treaty, it might on the other side have turned as much to the advantage of
that Commonwealth. This proceeding gave likewise great offense to the most
Christian King, who had so generously assisted the Emperor against the Ottoman
power, in the preservation of his Hereditary Countries, which at that time his
Imperial Majesty was not of himself in condition to defend. The French were but
ill requited for their pains, particularly by the Confederates, who shamefully
left them as soon as they saw them engaged with the Turks; insomuch that Count
Horlac the Confederates General, not being able to make them stand, retired
into a Wood, where he was found after the Battle foaming with rage, to see some
of our Captains and Volunteers covered with their own, and their enemies blood;
who asked him what became of his Troops, and why they would not partake of the
honor of the victory, The generosity of our Soldiers which deserved the
acknowledgment, and friendship of the Germans, received so much the contrary,
that they would not allow them so much as victuals and forage; so that the
Officers were forced-to use threats, to get necessaries for the subsistence of
their Troops in their return to France, whither they led them, the Proclamation
of the Peace leaving them no more to do in Hungary and Germany.

Achmet Coprogli was afraid he should have been forced to have relinquished
many of his Masters pretensions; but seeing how easily the Emperor was
satisfied, he managed the Sultans interest as well as he could, and subscribed
to Articles which he at another conjuncture would never have agreed to. He sent
them presently away to his Highness to be ratified, and in the mean time he
retreated to Belgrade, where he dismissed the Asian Troops, to go and Winter in
their own Country, and sent those of Europe to Winter in Bossina, that they
might be the nearer to Dalmatia, which he intended to attacque the next
Campagna.

Nothing now remained for him to do but to return to Constantinople, where his
friends and the people impatiently expected him; but he would not set forward
without the Grand Signior's order, and till he had received the ratification of
the Peace. It was the more welcome at Constantinople at this time, October. 22.
1664.
because it fell out at the birth of the Sultan's Son, who by the death of his
Brother was looked on as Chas Adas, which is as much as the eldest Son, and
Heir of the Empire.

The first Article of the Peace, was, that the Emperors should send Ambassadors
to one another, who should bring the Ratifications, and presents usual on the
like occasions. The Grand Signior pitched upon Mahomet Bassa, and sent a rich
Vest by him to the Vizier Azem, whom he should find at Belgrade, and receive
the Instructions of his Embassy from him. Mahomet acquitted himself faithfully
of his Highnesses Commissions, and at the same time that Achmet received from
him the marks of his Masters gratitude and affection, he was informed of the
death of generous Count Serini. This news so surprised the Grand Vizier, that
he broke off his conversation with Mahomet Bassa, to learn the particulars of
that sad accident, which no relation hitherto has given a clear account of, as
I find by some secret Memoires which have more truth in them.

It was told the Ottoman General, that his victorious Arms having forced Count
Serini to raise the Siege of Canisia, he retired into a Fort of his own name,
which he had built, extremely dissatisfied that this enterprise, as well as
several others before had succeeded no better for want of necessary assistance;
and that his vexation for the loss, and raising of the said Fort, and the ill
usage he received from the Emperor, and the Imperial Diet, caused him to retire
into one of his Country houses, to comfort himself in the tranquillity of a
private life, for the inconstancy of his fortune, and the injustice of the
Court; where those who held the first rank, as being the most powerful, and
considerable persons in the Empire, not satisfied with hindering the Diet from
choosing him Generalissimo of the Army, which command justly belonged to him,
still continued their design of destroying him, to satiate their envy, and free
themselves from their apprehension that this Hero would one day show his
resentment of their ingratitude. But not daring to attempt his life openly,
with their Arms in their hands, their Court-treachery pursued him in the midst
of the Forests, where, as he was wont to do, diverting his melancholy with
Hunting, he was killed with a blow he received in the chase of a prodigious
great Wild Boar, which he had already wounded; to whose fury the authors of his
death falsely attributed his murder, and accordingly contrived the relations of
it; endeavoring so to palliate the enormity of an action which it was their
interest should be eternally concealed.

This recital had a contrary effect to what was reported. Generous Achmet
considering the hard fate of valiant Count Serini, who may well be accounted
the greatest Hero of this Age, far from rejoicing at the fall of so dangerous
an enemy, was so touched at it, that all the satisfaction he reaped from the
Grand Signior's obliging expressions, which Mahomet Bassa informed him of,
could not keep him from showing his grief, and lamenting the unhappy end of a
Captain who had so obstructed the progress of the Ottoman Arms, to that degree,
that he was angry with the neighboring Turks for making Bonfires when they
heard of it.

The Grand Vizier having learned the Sultans intentions, dispatched Mahomet
Bassa, that he might arrive at Vienna, at the same time that Count Lesbley,
whom the Emperor sent to the Port, should come to Adrianople, where the Grand
Signior was. Then having commanded the Bassa's of Bossina and Albania to have
their Troops ready to pass into Dalmatia with the Sultans first orders, he
began his journey to Constantinople, where he met with the applauses due to his
great conduct, and invincible courage. The Emperor Mahomet received him with
open arms, and sufficiently manifested his kindness for, and esteem of this
great Minister, who far from abusing his favor, would have made use of it, to
obtain pardon for those Officers who disobeyed him when he pressed them to
fight, and would hardly suffer the Sultan to put five or six of them to death,
for an example to the rest: not but that he was as sensible of their baseness
as of the bravery of the French, whose courage he commended in the Grand
Signior's presence, and testified how much he valued them, by his kind
reception of, and civility to Monsieur de la Hay, then Ambassador of France at
the Port, whom he entertained three days together in his house, treating him
with more respect than was ever shown to any Ambassador before.

The Grand Visiers return gave the Grand Signior the freedom of diverting
himself with Hunting, and his Women; for leaving all his affairs to his care,
which he had looked after in his absence, he retired to one of his pleasant
Country Houses, which the Turks call Chioufti, not far from Constantinople,
where Achmet Coprogli staid to send relief to Canea, which was still distressed
by the Venetians, and to see the Sultan's Revenues paid, and replenish his
Treasury, which was exhausted by the Wars. That of Candia was incredibly
expensive, all the Ammunition and Recruits that were sent thither were little
enough; and the innumerable Forces that had been consumed in it, had made but a
very slender progress: therefore he considered how he might put a speedy end to
it. He applied himself diligently to put the affairs of the Port into such a
posture, as might permit him to go thither himself; and the conquest of this
Island seeming to him the most glorious that he could ever make, he promised
himself both good success in his expedition, and immortal renown, not only
among the Turks, who knowing the importance of the Kingdom of Candia,
obstinately contended for the mastery of it twenty years; but also among all
other Nations, who would admire the valor of the Defendants, and the constancy
of the Besiegers. Nor did he doubt of effecting more by his presence than all
the Generals that had been sent thither before had done. His design was to
finish the War by taking the Capital City, which he resolved to besiege with
all the vigor and pains that can be expected from a Captain perfectly
instructed in the art of War. He communicated his intentions to his Highness,
and remonstrated to him that he ought not any longer to oppose his departure
from Constantinople.

The great preparations he made were soon known to the Venetians, who on their
side disposed themselves to resist them; but not finding themselves strong
enough, they sent Ambassadors to implore the assistance of all the Christian
Princes.

In the mean time all things being ready for the Grand Visiers Expedition, he
parted from Constantinople with the Grand Signior (who for some reasons you
will learn hereafter, never returned thither since) and followed him to
Adrianople, and from thence to Larissa, where he took leave of his Highness to
go to Thebes, waiting for the union of the Troops he was to lead. As soon as
they were assembled he caused them to march to Napoli di Romania, which place
he chose for the general Rendevouze, and then went to meet his Wife Iohaime,
and Fatima his Mother, who would needs accompany him in his voyage. He was glad
of having the advantage of her counsel, whose wit, and courage was above her
Sex. With these two persons who were so dear to him he embarked at Malvezie,
and set sail for Canea, where his arrival animated the besieged, who were
closely pressed by the Venetians. At his first coming he forced the Enemy to
retire, and after he had visited the place, took a general review of all the
Troops that were in the Island, and those that he brought along with him, and
then with a small party went to view the old Town of Candia, and to take notice
how the former siege was disposed. The Venetians being advertised of his
approach, sallied out, and repulsed him; but his design being to end this
tedious, expensive War, by taking the chief City, he soon returned with a more
considerable body of men, that he might with more safety view the Country, and
the outworks of the place, about which he pitched a new Camp, and drew lines
for a more regular Siege than the former; the execution of which he found very
difficult; for not having been truly informed of the Forces of the Town, and
the situation of the Country. He saw it would cost him more pains, and time,
than he expected it would. However not at al discouraged by the difficulties he
met with, he carried on the works with such diligence, that the besieged were
quickly reduced to employ all the industry of their Engineers to secure them
from the Mines which he continually sprung, and all the strength of their
Soldiers to resist the assaults of the Turks. Never was any place so
vigorously attaqued, and so stoutly defended. This being one of the most famous
Sieges that ever was, several Writers have at large related it; therefore I
shall not trouble the Reader with an useless repetition of what he may find
elsewhere, but only succinctly mention what the story of the Grand Vizier will
not suffer me to omit, without specifying all the assaults and skirmishes that
happened at it.

This General, besides the wonderful resistance of the besieged, had no less
dangerous enemies to encounter with at this Port, who did him all the ill
offices they could with the Grand Signior, and by making use of this
troublesome conjuncture of affairs, endeavored to destroy him. They
represented to the Sultan, that the length of the Siege of Candia proceeded
from the Grand Visiers want of courage, whose Army was powerful enough to
subdue all Asia, or the greatest Empire in the world; but that his cowardice
made him protract the time, that the Christians might have leisure to assemble
their Forces, which would at last oblige the Ottoman Army to quit the conquest
of an Island that had exhausted the strength of the Empire, and his Highnesses
Treasures: that such an affront would be irreparable, and an eternal disgrace
to the Musulmans, and would certainly happen through the baseness and weakness
of the Grand Vizier, who out of a vain presumption had undertaken the
continuation of a War he could never end honorably. Thus these envious persons
omitted nothing that might induce the Grand Signior to recall and ruin him.

The too credulous Prince provoked by the Grand Visiers ill success, who
incessantly sent for Recruits, believed all that was said against him; and
without any regard to his inviolable fidelity, or the high rank he held in the
Empire, which made him subject to the malice of the Courtiers, without
considering that those Ministers who are most affectionate to, and zealous for
the services of their Prince, and the good of the State, are always most
exposed to envy. He took a resolution which would have deprived him of the
ablest, and best of all his Subjects, if Achmet Coprogli's prudence had not
equalled the Sultans cruelty, and injustice. He sent this brave General word
that he should suddenly put an end to the Siege, which his rashness had
prompted him to undertake, and in a very short time either send him his Head,
or the Keys of Candia.

This order was very peremptory, and sufficient to have shaken the firmest
Courage. The Grand Vizier had great reason to think himself very rigorously and
unjustly dealt with; his fidelity and zeal for his Master, and the hazards his
life was so often exposed to for his glory, deserved better usage, and might
have inclined him to revenge himself, and show his resentment by abandoning his
Army, which would undoubtedly have perished, if he had sought to secure himself
by going over to the Venetian side, as he might have done: but honor having
ever been his only object, he never so much as entertained a thought that was
prejudicial to his reputation. He answered the Sultan very submissively, yet in
such terms as showed the greatness of his soul; and that it was not the fear of
death he was threatened with that made him hasten a conquest, which he undertook
for the augmentation of his Dominions, and glory: that he never had any other
end in it, and that if his Highness could reap any benefit by his death, it was
in his power to satisfy himself when he pleased: that as to the Siege of
Candia he hoped to finish it, if he would allow him time, having been deceived
by a false account of the state of the place. Achmet imparted the Grand
Signiors command to his Mother Fatima, and having consulted together, they
concluded that this blow proceeded from the persecutions of his enemies at
Court: and soon after they were confirmed in their opinion by the Couriers
which they sent continually to the Port, to bring them news of all that passed
there. They found that some Courtiers who had insinuated themselves into the
Grand Signiors favor, had attempted to disgrace him, and had succeeded in it.
However he did not much trouble himself, being assured that his conduct would
justify him, and that the detractors would be punished for their calumnies by
their own remorse, and the Sultans anger, who would in time discover their
treachery. He continued to press the besieged, who received great assistance
from the King of France, under the conduct of the Count de la Feuillade, who
was accompanied by the Count de St. Paul, the Duke of Chasteau Thierry, the
Sieurs de Caderousse, de Villemaur, and many more Gentlemen and Officers, who
came to show the Turks that they could overcome them as well in Creet as in
Hungary. And the sallies of these brave men put the Turks almost in despair,
who were encouraged by their Generals presence. He went from quarter to quarter
to animate them, and exhort them to do their duty. He caused new Candia which
the Turks built after the taking of Canea to be demolished, that he might make
use of the materials in his works, and by depriving his Troops of a safe
retreat, force them to secure themselves by their valor, always telling them
that they must either conquer or die.

But while he endeavors to become master of Candia, Constantinople was filled
with tumults raised by the malcontents of the Empire, who seeing the ill
success of the Grand Signiors Arms in this Island, and that several
neighboring Princes were ready to declare War against him, resolved to make
use of this opportunity to revenge his Highnesses contempt of them, and prevent
the punishment that was due to their Rebellion; in which they engaged the
Ianizaries, who remained at Constantinople, to guard the Town, the Sultan, and
the Seraglio. The Mutineers threatened to depose the Emperor, and to set up
Prince Soliman his Brother in his room. The absence of the Vizier Azem
strengthened this Sedition, which all the Sultan Valide's power could hardly
appease. The Sultan was then at Adrianople, and was so displeased with the
Inhabitants of Constantinople, that he would not so much as take notice of
their earnest solicitations of him to return thither. He declared openly that
this proud City should no longer be the Imperial Seat, since she had rendered
her self unworthy by her frequent disorders. The people, and the Ianizaries,
who for the most part have their Families at Constantinople, were extremely
provoked by this reproach. And if Prince Soliman had been among them, they had
certainly proclaimed him Emperor: but he was in the Grand Signiors power, who
not being so barbarous as his Predecessors, would not practice their inhumane
policy of securing the possession of the Empire by the death of all their
Brothers. Far from being so cruelly cautious he allowed his three Brothers an
honorable freedom, and suffered them to employ themselves in exercises
agreeable to their high birth: yet when he went from Constantinople he took
Soliman along with him.

This Princes Mother Maiama was dead, she did all she could to place him on the
Throne; which is partly the cause that the Sultan is jealous of him. His good
qualities render him beloved by all the world, especially by the Soldiers, who
are not ignorant of his vast courage. His impatience to give some proofs of his
valor made him inconsiderately desire his Brother to let him accompany the
Grand Vizier in the Candian War, which his Highness thought not fit to grant;
and the Vizier Azem convinced the Sultan that it concerned him not to trust
this young Prince with Arms, which he might one day turn against him, but to
keep him where his actions might be better observed: not that he gave him this
advice to exasperate him against his Brother, but he knew the Soldiers
inclination to Soliman, who was of an active, undertaking spirit, and capable
of raising great troubles in the State, if he should after the example of the
Ottoman Princes, endeavor to free himself, and affect the Empire. Mahomet who
had never seriously made these reflections, and did not at all distrust
Soliman, suffered him to live at liberty; but the young Princes imprudence, in
repining at his Brothers refusal, opened the Sultans eyes, and made him
rereflect on what the Grand Vizier had represented to him. The Sedition that
happened afterward at Constantinople, caused him to watch Soliman's behavior
more narrowly.

In the mean time Prince Soliman mistrusted nothing, Ambition was not his
predominate passion, he loved hunting as well as the Grand Signior, always
following him to that sport, and sometimes he went alone. But this exercise did
not so take him up, but that he was well enough pleased with another, which is
the usual employment of people of his age. His Brother was the most amorous
Prince in the world, nor was he less inclined to gallantry himself; but he
loved to keep it secret, not affecting to make a noise with his pleasures. He
long sought for an object worthy of his kindness; and at last Zizim Morat Bassa
by an extraordinary adventure furnished him with such an one as he desired. The
Sangiac of Smyrna, who was akin to this Bassa, had sent him a very pretty
Slave, which he bought of a Corsair Tartar, and brought up with a great deal of
care, to make a Present of her to the Grand Signior, according to the custom of
the Governors of Provinces, and Cities, who by this means, acquire, and
preserve his Highnesses favor. The Sangiac Sinan who looked on Zizim Morat as
his Patron at the Port, desired him to present her to the Sultan, who was then
at Adrianople, where he intended to establish the Seat of the Empire, as
Soliman the first of that name surnamed the Magnificent had done before. The
Bassa deferred the acquitting himself of Sinan's Commission till the Grand
Signiors return to Larissa, where he spends most part of the year, as well for
the beauty of the place, which is the finest in all Thessaly, as for the
convenience of Hunting in the great Forests about it. He was an intimate
friend of Prince Soliman, who a few days after came thither with his Brother.
Zizim Morat told him he had a Present to make to his Highness, which would
without doubt be well received; but that it must be kept secret, lest the Grand
Sultana should come to hear of it, who would hate him mortally if he should
know that he preferred a new Favorite to the Grand Signior; then he described
the young woman's beauty to him, which made Soliman desirous to see her, before
she was delivered to the Emperor his Brother. The Bassa not dreaming of what
would happen, carried him home with him, and showed him the fair Slave, with
whom he fell desperately in love. He made no secret of it to Zizim, but told
him with a great deal of joy, that she was absolute mistress of his heart, and
conjured him to give him a proof of his friendship, by letting him have the
young Slave. The Bassa used strong arguments to the contrary, and told him that
he could not betray the trust the Sangiac of Smyrna reposed in him, without
being at the same time false to the Grand Signior, who would punish them both
if he came to know it. But amorous Soliman answered his arguments with so much
force, and eloquence, convincing him, that it might be easily kept secret,
since the Sultan was ignorant of it, and the absent Sangiac could never
discover it, that at last friendship surmounted all other considerations, and
he granted his request. Soliman embraced him a thousand times, and having
expressed how much he was obliged to him, they contrived how they should
conceal this Beauty from the Sultan, that he might not find out Soliman's
treason, and Morat's falsehood. They could think of no better way than to keep
her in a Country house which Zizim had in the pleasant Valley of Ianica,
heretofore the delicious Tempe, watered by the famous River Peneus, between the
Mountains of Ossa and Olympus. In that Country there is a Forest, the same
that Virgil speaks of, where the Grand Signior often hunts, and Soliman with
him, who then visits the fair Zulemai, without being taken notice of. This
lasted some time, during which Soliman's life was as happy as Zulemai could
make it, who loved him, and wanted no charms to engage him. She was perfectly
well shaped; her complexion was so bright that it dazzled those who beheld it,
her hair was brown, her eyes black, and full, her mouth little, her lips juycy,
her teeth white, and well set: she had a sweetness in her chin, and the midst
of her cheeks that became her wonderfully when she spoke. Her neck was well
shaped, as also her arms and hands; her carriage was noble, her speech
pleasing, and her humor the best in the world. Soliman was tall, and strait;
his face round, his complexion smooth, and white; his forehead large, and high,
his eyes blue, and smiling, his nose a little aquiline, his mouth pretty, his
min great, his humor magnificent, and his nature very generous. His
inclinations are like the Grand Signiors, but he is a little more impatient and
quick. His soul is noble, and extremely grateful, and his temper so complacent,
that he easily gains the friendship of all men.

These two Lovers freely enjoyed the pleasures of mutual love, but one day
chance brought the Sultan to Zizim Morat's Country house, where the Prince was
abroad hunting in the Forest. The Grand Signior being thirsty, came alone to
this house to refresh himself, and there seeing the Bostangi's or Gardeners
Daughter, he liked her very well. The good man presently found who he was, and
told his Wife Zabra of it. They were both overjoyed to see that their daughter
pleased the Sultan, and commanded her to use all her art to engage him, and
deserve his favor, their good fortune depending upon it. They endeavored to
conceal Zulemai from the Grand Signior, fearing her beauty would eclipse
Abdimai's, with whom he was so well pleased, that he desired them to take care
of her, and let no body else see her, promising to come and visit her often.
The good peoples joy appeared in their blessing of Mahomet, and throwing
themselves at his feet, they gave him thanks for the honor he did their
Daughter, who they hoped would bring forth a Prince, that should be the
support, and strength of the Musulmans, and should spread the Law of their
Prophet over all the earth. When the Grand Signior was gone, they charged
Abdima not to tell any body what had happened, and to take heed of letting the
Sultan know when she saw him, that Zulemai was in their house. Abdima who had
no less wit than beauty, obeyed their commands, being convinced how much it
concerned her to do so. In the mean time Prince Soliman continued his visits,
and the Emperor his; but it was impossible for them both to go so often to the
same place without meeting there at last. Mahomet has ever had a greater esteem
for the Grand Sultana Zachi than usually the Sultans have for their Wives, and
avoids doing any thing that may make her jealous, who loves him so tenderly,
that she follows him where ever he goes, and seldom leaves him but when she
lies in. Therefore he was glad of having a Mistress whom the Sultana could not
find out, and whom he might visit under pretense of hunting. This was the
reason that kept him from removing Abdima from Zizim Morats house; but the
Sultana Zachi who often went hunting with the Grand Signior, observing that he
always lost himself in the Forest, she believed he had some design in his
wandering, and caused a slave to go after him afar off: by which means she
learnt that he went into a house on the edge of a Wood, whither she failed not
to follow him the next time she saw him go that way. Prince Soliman was got
thither before the Emperor, and was already with the charming Zulemai, when the
Bostangi of the house seeing the Sultan at the gate, made all the haste he
could to hide them. The Grand Signior was no sooner entered into the Chamber
where he was wont to divert himself with the fair Abdima, but he was informed
of the Grand Sultana's arrival^ He presently imagined that she had followed him
to surprise him, and therefore he thought of hiding Abdima from her, that she
might not be exposed to her jealousy. To this purpose he would have opened the
Closet where his Brother Soliman and Zulemai were: but old Zabra apprehending
he might like Zulemai better than her Daughter, offered to dispose of her in a
more secret place. Mahomet on the other side fearing the Sultanas sudden coming
would prevent them, would not let Abdima go out of the room, and commanded her
Mother to open the Closet. Prince Soliman hearing the Emperors voice, believed
his love was discovered, but thinking he might do his Mistress some harm in the
first transports of his fury, he endeavored to keep the door fast, by putting
his Dagger into the lock. The Sultan observing Zabra's delay, snatched the key
from her; and not being able to undo the lock, broke open the door. The first
thing he saw was his Brother Soliman, with a Dagger in his hand, which so
surprised him, that he never minded Zulemai, who was behind him. At first he
fancied that Soliman courted the Gardeners Daughter, and had hid himself in
that place with a design to murder him, as was probable by the posture he found
him in. Rage mingled with jealousy, and fear presently seized on his soul, and
made him draw his Scimitar to have killed Prince Soliman, who could not have
avoided the mortal blow, if the Sultana had not come into the room, and laid
hold on Mahomet's arm, who was no less astonished to feel his arm held back,
than to hear Zulemai shreek, when she saw the danger her lover was in. The
Sultana Zachi having disarmed the Grand Signior, soon guessed why he would have
killed his Brother, when she beheld Zulemai, believing her to be the cause of
his losing his way so often in the Forest; and that having found Soliman
courting his Mistress, he would have slain him. She took his astonishment at
the sight of Zulemai to be affected, and threatened to punish her for being the
cause of such disorder; but the Sultan comprehending her meaning, after he had
commanded Soliman to be seized on, protested he had never seen her before, and
to justify what he said, sent for the Gardener, who without mentioning the
intrigue between the Emperor, and his Daughter, who was opportunely hid,
related the story of Zulemai, and Soliman, who confirmed it, and discovered the
other particulars of his adventure to the Sultana. She easily believed the
Grand Signior, who assured her, that finding himself thirsty as he was hunting,
he came thither to refresh himself with the water of an excellent Fountain in
the Garden, that while they fetched him some water, he went into that room, and
hearing a noise in the closet, his curiosity made him open it, where he found
Soliman with a Dagger in his hand, just coming out to murder him; which he was
endeavoring to prevent when she held back his arm.

The Sultana being satisfied with this Relation, never suspected Mahomet's
fidelity, but requested him to pardon his Brother, and accept of his
justification, as she had of his.

The Grand Signior was so displeased at his Brothers falsehood in depriving him
of this beautiful Slave that with great difficulty he promised the Sultana not
to resent it, and gave him leave to live in the Seraglio at Constantinople with
his Mistress, whose removal from his Highnesses sight was no little
satisfaction to Zachi.

Soliman's confinement to the old Seraglio, which is the usual Prison of the
Ottoman Princes that come not to reign, was rendered less insupportable by the
company of his beloved Zulemai: but his disgrace had like to have caused great
disorders. It was reported that the Sultan would have killed him with his own
hand, at which the Town of Constantinople, and the Ianizaries who love Soliman,
were extremely alarmed: They knew not the particulars of the adventure, and
told the story much to the Grand Signiors disadvantage, with whom they were
dissatisfied. They accused him of cruelty, and as they are wont to do, took
hold of this occasion to raise a Sedition, under pretense of preserving the
lives of the Sultans Brothers, whom they required to be delivered into their
hands. The Sultana Valide who by experience knew the danger of those tumults,
thought the best way to appease the Mutineers, was to go to Constantinople,
where she hoped to have some influence on the Inhabitants, and the Ianizaries,
who have ever been very respectful to her. This Princess was somewhat
dissatisfied with her Sons carriage toward her, who slighted her advice, and
repined to see her continue in that authority which she had exercised since the
beginning of his Reign. Besides, the Grand Sultana looked enviously upon her,
and could not endure she should be more absolute than her self. The Sultana
Valide who always loved her Son extremely, was glad of an occasion of doing him
a considerable service, and of absenting her self from the Port. Therefore she
parted from Adrianople with a train suitable to her quality, and made a
magnificent entry into Constantinople, where she endeavored to quiet the
people, and the Ianizaries, and to divert them from requiring the Grand
Signiors Brothers to be delivered to them, fearing they would make Prince
Soliman, for whom they had a particular kindness, Emperor; she promised them
that no violence should be offered to the young Princes, and protested she
would sooner die her self, than suffer any attempt to be made on their lives.
In order to which she not only took them into her protection, but assured them
she would not stir out of the Seraglio, till the Grand Signior came back to
Constantinople, where the People, and the Soldiers desired he would make his
constant abode: but the Sultan would not hearken to his Mothers solicitations,
persisting in his resolution of not returning thither any more, in which he was
confirmed, by being informed that the Grand Vizier fomented the Sedition of the
Ianizaries in that City, and encouraged them to place Prince Soliman on the
Throne. These Impostures were affirmed with so many circumstances, that how
good an opinion soever his Highness ought to have had of his first Ministers
fidelity, he could not choose but believe them: yet to have a convincing proof
of the Treason he was accused of, and to put his obedience to the utmost trial,
he ordered him to send him the Seal of the Empire, which he had need of, and to
bring back the rest of the Troops as soon as he could. The disorder at
Constantinople increasing every day, enraged him so much, that in the height
of his anger he repented of his past credulity, and clemency; and to take away
all pretenses of revolt, sent an express command to the Sultana Valide to
strangle his Brothers: but this order being discovered to the Ianizaries, was
immediately spread over all the Town, where the people joined with the
Soldiers to besiege the Seraglio; threatening the Sultana terribly if she
executed the Grand Signiors command.

This wise Princess had much ado to appease them by letting them see Soliman,
Bajazet, and Orchanes, and showed themselves very sensible of her kindness to
them; especially Soliman, who still respects her as much as if she were his own
Mother; and not without reason, for she has saved his life twice. She abhorred
her Sons inhumanity, and sent him word, that her affection to him, and care of
his preservation and glory, kept her from obeying his orders, ^ince it was
certain, that if she should put his Brothers to death, the Ianizaries would
endeavor to revenge their murders on his own person. She put him in mind of
his Father Ibrahim, and his other Ancestors, who perished in the Factions of
the Militia, and the people; and conjured him not to occasion his own ruin by
that of his Brothers, whom she desired him to look upon as innocent, and not to
think that the honor they had to be allied to him rendered them criminal, or
engaged them in any seditious tumults. Moreover, she upbraided him severely for
his cruelty, which was so contrary to the education she had given him, and that
good nature which had hitherto made him detest the barbarous Maxims of his
Predecessors.

In the mean time the Grand Vizier knowing that the Grand Signio^s displeasure
proceeded rather from the ill condition of his affairs at Constantinople, than
from any real anger; and that the Selictar his Favorite had, to satisfy his
hatred, caused him to send this injurious order. He was no more concerned at it
than at such another which he received before; and only let the Sultan know by
Iacup Bassa, that he had still fifty thousand men left to finish his
Expedition; and that he understood himself better than to give over the
conquest of a place which he hoped to reduce into his Highnesses power in a
little time, notwithstanding the malice of his enemies, who hindered him from
sending the Succors he demanded; and that he was ready to deliver the Golden
Seal to whom soever he should judge worthy of it, as soon as he pleased to give
him further notice. After this he endeavored to hinder the besieged from
receiving any relief, but in vain; for the Duke of Beaufort arrived at the
Island with a Fleet of fourscore Ships, and landed an Army of twelve thousand
men, which our invincible Monarch sent to Candia, moved by his own generosity,
and the request of Pope Clement the Ninth, and the Venetians, when their
Ambassador came to demand the Marquess of St. Andr^ Montbrun, of his Most
Christian Majesty, to succeed the Marquess de Ville, whom the Duke of Savoy had
recalled, in the command of the Venetian Infantry.

The Duke of Navailles, who was General of the Army, had no sooner landed his
men, but he gave order to attack the Grand Vizier in his Trenches; he was
followed by the Duke of Beaufort, and his Nephew the Chevalier de Vendosme, who
at the head of a great many Officers, and illustrious Volunteers, marched in
good order to charge the Enemies, who prepared to resist them as vigorously, as
they had before defended themselves from the attempts of Monsieur de la
Feuillade: but the Turks found this last encounter much more violent than the
former. They could not withstand the Kings Musketeers, commanded by Monsieur
Colbert de Maulevrier, and the Count de Montbrun, with the rest of the French
Troops; and they began to give ground, when the Grand Vizier perceiving their
disorder, went from rank to rank, encouraging them to continue the Combat,
which they were ready to have quitted. On the other side the Duke of Navailles
behaved himself like a great Captain, and an experienced General. The Admiral
the Duke of Beaufort exposed himself to the greatest dangers, without any care
of his person. The Chevalier de Vendosme, though not above fourteen years old,
signalized his courage in the foremost ranks. The Duke of Chasleau Thierry did
wonders at the head of his Regiment; and his Brother the Chevalier de Bouillon
following his example, received a bruise in his Belly, which forced him to
leave the Fight. These brave men, and the rest of the Volunteers animated the
Soldiers to fight like Lions; insomuch that the Ottoman General seeing his men
yield to the French, who advanced to drive the Ianizaries from their Post,
caused the Mines to be sprung, which he had made to stop the progress of the
Christian Army. The horrid noise and fire which rose all at once in the midst
of the French Troops, surprised and scattered them. Their General, and the Duke
of Beaufort, did all they could to rally them; but not being seconded as they
were promised by the Town, they were oppressed with numbers, and forced to
retreat, and reimbarque after the death of the Duke of Beaufort, who had
performed all that could be expected from a Hero. Many Officers and Gentlemen
of Quality perished in this engagement, but none was so deplored as this great
man.

The Grand Vizier seeing these dangerous enemies retreat, doubted not but that
the besieged, who wholly relied on the French Succors, were infinitely
discouraged. He chose out ten thousand of his best Soldiers to make an assault
at noonday, and to let the Venetians see that he was perfectly informed of the
condition of the Town. He spoke so resolutely to his men, and promised them
success with so much confidence, that they behaved themselves at this time more
courageously than ever: but they were entertained so warmly by the Christians,
and so bravely repulsed, that their General interpreted their vigorous defense
to be the effect of the gallantry of those French who staid to see the event of
the Siege, and to hold the place to the very last. However he renewed his
assaults so often, and the Forces of the besieged diminished so fast, that the
Generalissimo Morosini, seeing there was no probability of preserving the City,
was constrained to capitulate, and surrender on very advantageous conditions,
considering the miserable state the Town was reduced to.

It was agreed on that the City, and all the Island of Candia should be
delivered to the Vizier Azem; that the principal Forts, together with the
little adjacent Islands, which were in the Venetians possession, and all their
other Islands in the Archipelago, and the other Seas, should remain in the
Commonwealths power: that they should keep the Fort of Clissa, and the other
places they had conquered in Dalmatia, and Albania: that neither party should
be obliged to give the other any sum of money, upon any private pretense or
title whatever: that the Generalissimo of the Venetian Troops might carry from
thence three hundred pieces of Cannon, with all the warlike Ammunition, and
Provisions that were there: that the Soldiers should march out with their
Arms, and Baggage: that the Inhabitants who would not stay there might go
whither they pleased with their Families, and Goods: that the Christians might
take with them all the Relics, and other things that belonged to the Church:
that all Prisoners should be freed on both sides: and that there should be an
inviolable Peace between the two Nations.

All these Articles being drawn up, were presented to the Grand Vizier, who
presently signed them, though they were somewhat too advantageous for a place
that could hold out no longer; but he had urgent reasons that obliged him to
grant these conditions, and to hasten the conclusion of a Peace. He had news
from Constantinople that the troubles continued there, which he feared would be
very prejudicial to the State, and the Grand Signior: besides, he apprehended
that the fresh Succors which the King of France, and the Pope were sending
under the Conduct of the Marshall de Bellefonds, might retard the taking of
Candia, which would be more inconvenient to him than all the favorable clauses
that he granted to the Christians. Therefore he received the Keys of the place
with great satisfaction, and gave him that brought them a Purse full of
Sultanines, and sent rich Presents to the Venetian General; who not to be
behind-hand with him in Magnificence, sent him an handsome service of Venetian
Glasses, and several other curious things, which the Grand Vizier received very
civilly, and gave a considerable sum of money to those who brought them.

The Venetians being retired, he made his entry into Candia, whither the
principal Officers of his Army came to complement him: he received them with a
great deal of modesty. I expect not, said he to them, any rejoicing or
extraordinary pomp here in a place that has cost us so dear, over whose ruins
we ought rather to weep. His astonishment increased at every step he made in
the Town; and the desolation he met with every where augmented his good opinion
of the Christians, who had so valiantly defended the City so long after it was
in so wretched a condition. After this he bountifully rewarded his Soldiers,
and dispatched a Courrier to Adrianople, to give the Grand Signior notice of
the taking of Candia; and to let him know that he was now ready to give proofs
of his Fidelity which had been suspected; and that in a short time he would be
at Constantinople with fifty thousand well disciplined men, to reduce and
punish those who had slighted his Highness, and had made use of his absence, to
mutiny, and disturb the Empire. This unexpected news was exceeding welcome to
the Grand Signior, who lived in strange apprehension of the tumults which daily
increased at Constantinople. He thought he could never enough commend his first
Minister, whom he fully absolved, notwithstanding all the ill impressions of
his enemies; declaring openly, that Achmet Coprogli was the prop of the Ottoman
Empire; and that none but he was capable of such brave Expeditions, or could
have so happily ended a Siege that had lasted five and twenty years. He sent
him the Ratification of the Articles of Peace, with a rich Cimarr embroidered
with Gold, and a Scimitar; the Handle, Guard, and Scabbard of which were set
with Diamonds, and Stones of inestimable value; withal assuring him that he
would receive the Chevalier Molino kindly, whom the Republique designed to send
to him with Presents for himself, the Sultana Valide, the Great Sultana, and
the chief of the Port. He likewise gave him notice that he had nominated
Commissioners to go into Dalmatia, and other places where their presence would
be necessary to regulate the bounds of the Venetian Territories, and to remove
all difficulties that might hinder the conclusion of a firm and lasting Peace.

The Vizier Azem having procured this Peace, omitted nothing that might
establish it, and punctually performed all that he promised. He was so careful
not to violate the Treaty with the Venetians, and to show the sincerity of his
intentions, that he caused some Turks to be impaled for abusing the Christians
at Sud^, contrary to his Proclamation, that they should do them no wrong upon
pain of death; and treated the Prisoners that were in his Army very civilly,
and set them at liberty, after he had given them several marks of his
generosity.

When he had ordered all things necessary for the conservation of the Island of
Candia, he prepared to march with the rest of his Troops to Constantinople,
where the news of his Conquests, and design to chastise the Mutineers, quickly
calmed the Sedition; and those who had been most active in it, provided for
their safety by flight; which obliged the Sultan, who might perhaps apprehend
the Visiers approach with so powerful an Army, to order him to send forty
thousand men toward Mecha, and Medina, to punish the incendiaries that were
retreated thither, that they might disturb the remotest Provinces of the
Empire, where they had taken away the rich Offerings which the Grand Signior
sent to Mahomet's Temple; and had slain the Officers, and Ianizaries that
carried them. Achmet Coprogli obeyed the Sultans commands so exactly, that the
Criminals soon received the punishment they deserved, and yet marched on to
Constantinople, where the Sedition was not so well laid, but that there was
still a secret Faction among the Ianizaries, against his Highness, and the
Grand Vizier. The Emperor advertised him of it, that he might hasten his march
to that City, when his presence was absolutely necessary. When he arrived
there, he was of opinion that the surest way to put an end to the Tumults, was,
to remove the Garrison which corresponded with the people, to appoint new
Troops to guard the Town, and the Seraglio, and to employ the others at a
distance, where they might not be able to plot against his own, and the Sultans
Authority. But before he would undertake a new War, he advised the Grand
Signior to maintain a good understanding between himself and those Princes who
might oppose his designs. From thence he took occasion to commend the
extraordinary valor of the French, assuring him that they only had retarded
the taking of Candia, as they had before stayed the progress of his Arms in
Hungary; and inflamed him with a desire of con^racting an alliance with the
King of France, and sending an Ambassador to him to implore his friendship. The
Sultan being convinced of his Ministers experience and judgment, agreed to his
proposition, and resolved to follow his counsel; and not long after dispatched
Soliman Mutafaraca into France, where he was magnificently received, and was
incredibly surprised when he beheld the Majesty and Greatness of the
incomparable French Monarch, to whom he presented a Letter stuffed with the
most splendid Titles that ever any Ottoman Emperor had given to another
Potentate. This Ambassador staid some time at Paris, and after he had admired
the Politeness and Glory of the French, he returned laden with rich Presents to
give Sultan Mahomet, and the Grand Vizier an account of his Embassy.

This great Minister perceiving that Peace rendered the Ianizaries and Spahies
every day more insolent, like a good Pilot, apprehended a tempest in the midst
of a calm, and was considering how he might remove them from Constantinople,
when the troubles of Poland furnished him with an expedient.

This Kingdom was disturbed by the Factions of some private men, who sought to
settle their own authority, during the vacancy of the Throne, by the voluntary
abdication of King Cazimir, who being tired with the cares that attend Royalty,
put it into his Subjects power to elect another King. Several Princes pretended
to be chosen, but none so earnestly as the great Duke of Moscovy, who had a
mind to place this Crown on his Sons head. The Succors which he had assisted
the Polanders with to repulse the Tartars, who broke into their Territories
with a vast Army, seemed to countenance his pretensions. He fancied that the
under hand dealings of Dorosensko, the General of the Cossacks, would gain him
all the voices of the States; but the Election of Prince Michel Wicloveski
convinced him that the Faction of Sobieski Great Marshall of Poland, was the
most powerful, as tending to the good of the Kingdom: wherefore finding his
expectations frustrated, he quitted the Polish Interest, thereby manifesting
that his own ends had obliged him to embrace their Party, more than the
alliance between them: but he was not the only man that was deceived of his
hopes: Dorosensko was so concerned, and took the Great Dukes part so far, that
he could not conceal his resentment. He was one of the most powerful, and
ambitious men in the Kingdom, and could not endure to see Sobieski made Grand
Marshall. His jealousy made him seek all means to lessen his Rivals
authority, opposing whatsoever he undertook; and Sobieski's siding with the
Nobility, whom their own, and Countries interest permitted not to choose the
Prince of Moscovy, was sufficient ground for Dorosensko to form a contrary
Faction, and to favor the Great Dukes design by gaining as^ many voices for
him as he could: but finding this project did not succeed, and that the new
King cherished the virtue and merit of Sobieski, whom he looked on as an
invincible obstacle to his ambitious purposes; and besides, perceiving himself
suspected to be an enemy to the State, and fearing he should be punished as a
disturber of the public Peace. He resolved to secure himself by Rebellion, and
to raise his fortune by betraying his King and Country. In order to this he
endeavored to gain the chief of the revolved Cossacks that inhabit the Vkrain,
which in the Sclavonian tongue signifies the Frontiers. He had a great deal of
power there, and many friends whom he persuaded to revolt. To carry on his
enterprise the better, he went to Constantinople to solicit the Grand Signior
to make himself master of this Province. He represented to him, that this was
the way to keep all the Polanders in subjection, who so often diverted his
Forces, and to get the Kingdom it self when he pleased; promising to put the
best places into his hands, provided his Highness would send an Army to assist
him. The Grand Vizier was glad of this pretense, not only to employ his Troops
who mutinied through idleness, but to require satisfaction of some injuries
which the Sultan had received from the Poles. Therefore he ordered the Tartars
to be ready to join the Army which he sent under the conduct of the Bassa's of
Natolia and Bossina; and at the same time commanded the Bassa's of Albania, and
Romania, to march with the Hospodars of Moldavia, and Walachia.

The approach of such considerable Forces made Poland tremble. King Michel got
together about fifty thousand men to withstand this invasion: but
notwithstanding all his precaution, and resistance, the Turks made themselves
Masters of Caminieck, which was ever accounted inexpugnable, and of the whole
Vkrain: and doubtless they would not have stopped there, if the preparations of
the Persian Sophy had not interrupted their progress, and caused the Vizier to
recall the Ottoman Troops to oppose him, in case he should declare War against
the Grand Signior. Thus this Kingdom obtained a Truce which he broke the next
year, to continue the War, and force the Poles to pay the Grand Signior the
Tribute he demanded. The death of King Michel happening at this time, seemed to
open the way to the designs of the Turks, if they had known how to make use of
so favorable a conjuncture to have extended their Conquests. They assembled
their divided Troops, that they might form a more considerable body of an Army;
so that being united, without comprehending the Walachians, and Moldavians,
they amounted to about two and thirty thousand men under the conduct of three
Generals, the chief of which was Soliman Aga, who commanded the Ianizaries,
Vssain Spahiler Agasi, or the Colonel of the Spahies commanded the Horse, and
Caplan Bassa led the Forces of the Asiatique Provinces. They thought of nothing
less than by taking of Leopold, which refused to pay contribution, to advance
farther into the Country. But the Grand Marshall Sobieski General of the
Polish Army, not thinking fit to expect them, resolved to hinder their
progress, though he was much inferior to his enemies in strength. He caused the
General of Lithuania to join him with his Troops, that they might stop the
passage of the Turks, who had retrenched themselves in a very strong Camp, as
well by situation, as by the Works, and Fortifications they had raised about
it. The Turkish Camp was raised on all sides, being bounded the South by Downs,
and steep Rocks on the side of the River Niester, over which they had laid a
Bridge, with an Half Moon at the end of it, to defend it toward Caminieck,
which is about four leagues off. On the East it was covered by the Castle of
Cotzchin, with which it had communication, by means of a little Bridge over
some flowed ground. On the North it was strengthened by a Trench, and an
Horn-work: and on the West it was raised in form of a Terrace, and divided by a
large depth from another small Camp of the Moldavians, and Walachians, the
Turks never suffering any strangers to incamp with them.

The Great Marshall being arrived at this Camp the ninth of October, 1673.
planted two Batteries of Cannon, to answer the enemies who fired continually.
After this he wrought so far on the Hospodars or Walachia, and Moldavia, who
came not to the War, but through a forced obedience, as to persuade them to
desert the Turks as soon as the fight began: but the Hospodars fearing their
correspondence would be discovered, and their design prevented, retreated the
night following, leaving part of their Troops to the Poles, who immediately
seized on their Post; when General Sobieski advancing to observe the enemies
posture, and finding there was a great disturbance in their Camp, caused
without doubt by the departure of the Walachians, and Moldavians: he thought it
expedient to make advantage of their disorder, and without more delay, brought
the Lithuanian Foot to force the Camp in the weakest place, ordering his Horse
to cover them and oppose the enemies sally, while he attacked them in another
quarter: but when he saw that the Turks stoutly repulsed the Lithuanians, and
made the Poles themselves give ground, he put himself at the head of the
Palatine of Russia's Dragoons, and alighting from his Horse, in the sight of
all the Army, went to the assault, in so difficult a place, that he had much
ado to climb up to the top; from whence with a bravery no less admirable than
that of Alexander the great, when he leaped into the Town of the Oxidracans:
the Great Sobieski threw himself into the Ottoman Camp, where he alone
supported all the brunt; giving some of his valiantest Soldiers who followed
him, time to level the bank, and fill up the Trenches, that the Horse might
come in to their assistance. The Hussars who are deservedly accounted
invincible, since by perpetual Victories they have ever gloriously maintained
their reputation, immediately encompassed their illustrious General, who
dispatched all that came in his way; and having remounted him, they followed
him into the midst of the Battle, where he faced the greatest dangers, and
dealing death on every side, exhorted his Soldiers not to plunder yet, since
the vast riches of the Camp would be assured to them by the Victory. His
example was so prevalent, that the most backward of his men durst not shrink
from their Leader; insomuch that the enemies after they had four hours together
withstood a violent assault, at last disobeyed their Generals commands, and
endeavored to save themselves by flight. Such a consternation seized on them,
that above ten thousand cast themselves down the precipices; all the rest were
put to the Sword in the Camp by the Poles: and some who thought to retire to
Caminieck, were prevented by Colonel Miochenski, who swam the Niester, and cut
them off. This Defeat was so great, that out of two and thirty thousand, but
fifteen hundred escaped, amongst whom was Caplan Bassa: the two other Generals,
Soliman and Vssain, were killed upon the place; the first of them having the
honor to be slain by the Great Sobieski, who encountering him in the heat of
the fight, dispatched him with his Sword, and took his Scimitar from him, which
he now wears himself.

This Camp is fatal to the Turks. Osman, the first of that name was defeated
there by the Poles, in the year 1621. commanded by young Prince Vladislaus,
King Sigismund's Son, and Chodkieuiki, Lubomirski, and Sobieski, the Father of
the Great Sobieski, now King of Poland.

The news of this Victory was as unwelcome to the Sultan, and his Grand Vizier,
as it was the contrary to the States of Poland, who were met together to elect
a King. They believed they could not bestow the Crown on any one that deserved
it more than he who had supported, and preserved it, when it was exposed a prey
to its most dangerous enemies; therefore they offered it him as a just
recompense of his desert, and virtue, and with one accord proclaimed him King:
acknowledging him to be their lawful Prince, preferably to all other pretenders.

The Grand Vizier, who before this Defeat had rejected all overtures of Peace
with Poland, now advised the Sultan to name his Deputies for a Treaty; but the
difficulties that were raised as well by the Tartars as the Grand Signior,
hindered the conclusion of it. The Tartars, who cannot endure to be at rest,
and cannot live without War, required the Turkish Emperor to make the Poles
agree with them about the bounds of their Territories, which had been the
occasion of a tedious War. The Sultan on the other side being unwilling to
restore what he had usurped, would not relinquish his Conquests in Poland,
unless they would pay him a very considerable yearly Tribute.

But the Great Sobieski being invested with the Sovereign Dignity, looked on
the payment of Tribute as a mark of dependence unworthy a Diadem which owns no
Superior Power, and rejected the Grand Signiors Propositions, who soon took the
Field, and advanced with the Grand Vizier as far as Caminieck; where having
received news of the Sophies prepara^ions, and the revolt of some Governors,
he granted a Truce to the Poles, leaving Commissioners to treat with King
Sobieski's Deputies, and returned to Adrianople:

Though the Sultan suffered great losses in this War, yet it caused no great
change in the State. The Grand Vizier having pacified the Provinces, and
allayed the tumults which the Mili^ia raised in his absence, applied himself to
regulate the affairs of the Port, endeavoring to make the people sensible of
the blessings of Peace, by easing them of the extraordinary taxes which the
Sultan had laid on them, to defray the expenses of the War, and to replenish
his treasury, which was exhausted by it.

This great Minister by his industry and prudence, has so gained the esteem and
friendship of all the world, that he is no less respected by the Army, and the
people, than the Emperor himself, whom he governs as he pleases, having
obtained an absolute power over him; which is not so much to be attributed to
the Sultan's weakness, as to his perfect knowledge of Achmet Coprogli's virtue,
and desert, who at this time keeps the City of Constantinople in obedience,
which is so dissatisfied with his Highnesses ill usage, that had it not been
for his first Minister, and the Sultana Valide, it would lately have revolted,
when the Grand Signior threatened to take away its privileges. Nevertheless,
what a version soever this Prince has for the chief City of his Empire, he
would have returned thither, if the Grand Vizier had not hindered him for some
secret reasons, which I may hereafter publish in the continuation of his
Ministry, and the sequel of the History of the Ottoman Family, when I shall be
furnished with new Memoires of the most curious affairs of the Seraglio, and
the Grand Signior's Court^ where nothing is concluded without the advice of
Achmet Coprogli. So that one may affirm that this Minister shares the Sovereign
Authority, and is the supreme Arbiter of the powerfullest Empire in the world.
But that which is wonderful in the pre^erment of this great man, is, that his
virtue and merit is so universally known, that all Nations think him worthy of
his good Fortune.

FINIS.
END
(...) A (...) (...), ^ give over. (...) (...) (...) (...) abidit, b. suffered.
adode, received. adode, b. tarrying. abrayde, b. arose, recovered. abrayde, b.
brake off, up-start. a^eding, upbraiding. ablusions, l. cleansings. acale, d.
cold. access, b. ague. accidie, l. wanhope. accoy, f. assuage. acoyed, f.
panpered, made quiet. achecked, b. stayed. acheked, b. choked. ackele, b. cool.
acloyeth, b. overchargeth. accoke, b. aw^y. acquit, f. match, to dispatch.
adassed, b. abashed. adawed, b. awaked. adjacent, l. adjoining. aduertence, l.
audience: also mind, or thought. aduert, l. mark. adbentasse, f. coat of
Armor. asy^e, f. fined. a^^, f. have trust. asscay, b. sear, stir, assaule.
asscey, f. sturdinesle, also sear. agasteth, b. skarreth. agiler, f. a market
of men. agisted, b. committed, offended. agree, to please, to content. agredge,
f. aggravate, to gather together. agrise, b. afraid. agrisen, b. aseard. (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) * Alnath. alnath is a fixed Star in the horns of
Aries, from whence the first mansion of the Moon takes his name, and is called
Alnath. alledgement, i. case. alleged, i. diminished. Alderan, a. a Star in
the Neck of the Lion. Algate, b. notwithstanding, ever, forsooth, even now,
altogether. alcali, a. Nightshade, salt wort. Algezer, Alegz^ra, a City in
Spam, near the ^^^eights of Gibralter. als, d. also: as well. alessake, d.
Maypole. Almagi^^, a. a work of Astronomy, written by Ptolomie. alembic, a. a
stillitorie. alures, f. walks, alleyes. algoni^^a, a. (canis minor) the
greater dog star. alswa, d. also. ally, f. b. kin. allen, f, allie.
Alisandre, Alexandria in Egypt, now called Scanderia. Almurie, a. the denticle
of Capricorn. algrism, a. (algebra.) The art of figurate numbers. alterate, l.
changed. Almicanteras, a. the name of the Circles, which are imagined to pafs
throw every de^^^^ (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) all a boon, b. made request.
allegiance, i. case. Allibatha, a. the Index of the Astrolade. allaundes, f.
gray hounds. Amabriade^, g. Nymphs, that live and dye with the Tress. Ama^
amyng, using a mixture of quick-lilver and metals. amate, d. daunted. ametised,
f. quenched. amenused, f. diminished. amo^^t^, lovers favous. amortised, l.
killed. Amphsbologies, g. forms of speaking, wherein one Sentence has contrary
senses. ancelle, l. an handmaid. anigate, occasion. anhowde, b. hoover.
Anelace, (Prolog) a falchion or wood-knife. Which I gather out of Matthew
Paris, page 535, where he writes thus; Quorum unus videus occiduam partem
dorsi (of Richard Earl Marshal, then fighting for his life in Ireland) minus
armis communitam, percussit eum in posteriora (loricam sublevando) cum quodam
genere cultelli, quod vulgariter Auelacitus nuucupatur, and laetaliter
vulnerabat eum cultellum usque ad manubrium immergendo; which Aunelace was worn
about the girdlesteed of the Body, as was the pouch or purse: for thus, page
542. writes the same Matthew Paris; Inter quos Petrus de Rivalis primus in
causam vocatus apparuit coram rege in habitu clericali, cum ^onsura, and lata
corona, analaceo tamen alumbali dependente, etc. anney, b. annoy. annueller, f.
secular. anoy, forethink. antiphoner, g. a certain service book. anhowue, to
hover. anticlaudianus, a certain book written by one Alanus de Insulis. antem,
g. a song. appale, b. decay. appayre, b. decay. apparel, f. prepare. apaled,
unpleasant. appeteth, l. desires. append, l. belong. apoplexy, g. dead
palsy. apposen, i. demand, object. aprentise, f. skill. aprise, b. adventure,
or show. aquiler, f. needle-case. arace, f. to deface. arblasters, f.
Cross-bows. arrest, f. durance, quietness, stay, an assault, also he that
tarieth still. aretteth, impute, lays blame. aret, areest, f. quietness.
arrest, f. standers, remainers. aretted, b. accounted. arere, f. behind.
Argonauticon, g. A book written by Apollonius Rhodius Alexandrinus, wherein he
speaks of Jason, and of them which went with him to Colchos to fetch the
golden Fleece. argoile, f. clay. arret, i. to charge. ar^et, the sign Aries.
ar^te, arest, stay. arist, b. arose. arc diurne, l. day. arc, f. compass,
bow. armipotent, l. mighty in arms. armonie, g. music. arsnecke, i.
Zanderacha, Orpin made of red Ceruse burned. arten, l. restrain. arted, l.
forced. arted, l. constrained. ascaunces, as who should say, as though.
asterte, let pass. assise, f. order. asks, d. ashes. astert, b. escaped,
passed. aspect, l. face, or look. Asterlagour, g. an Allrolabe. * Astronomy,
He that will be a Physician according to Homers Prescription, (...), that is,
equivalent to any, ought to be skilful in Astronomy, and Magic natural. For if
by Astronomy he be not able to judge in what state the Heavens stood, and what
their Aspects were, when his patient sickened: and by Magic natural to
calculate his Nativity, thereby to know which of the heavenly bodies ruled most
in his birth, he shall hardly, or but by chance, conjecture to what end his
Sickness will sort. aswith, b. forthwith. asure, f. blew. asckance, b. as if,
aside. ashate, f. buying. assised, sure, asseth, assent. asweued, b. amassed.
asterten, b. escape. assoile, b. answer, declare. as, how. as wis, b. as
verily. attaint, f. tried. atamed, b. set on brooch. atterly, b. earnestly.
attoure, b. toward, also attire. attoure, f. attire for women. at erst, b. in
earnest. * Athalanta, was daughter to Gaeneus, who contending in running with
them which did woe her, was at the last overcome by Hippomenes, who cast three
golden Apples in her way, which stayed her in taking of them up, and so she was
overcome. athroted, d. choked. atwin, b. asunder. attempre, f. moderate.
attenes, b. at ones. attwite, b. to make blame worthy, to upbraid. * Athalus,
That Athalus Asiaticus was the first Inventor of the Chess, Johannes
Sarisburiensis in his Policraticon, lib. 1. chap. 5. does witness, from whence
(no doubt) Chaucer had it, as he had many things else, being a work full of
variety and skill, and therefore justly commended by I. Lipsius. There it may
appear, that Athalus invented the game called Abacus, the which word, as it
has diverse significations, so it is taken for Latrunculorum Iusus, that is,
the Chess play, as out of Macrobius and others may be proved. aureat, l.
golden. aumener, b. cubbard. aurore, l. morning. augrim stones, a. pibbles to
cast account withal. auntreth, b. makes adventure. austrine, l. froward.
autentike, f. of authority. aumer, Amber. autremite, f. another attire. auale,
f. go down. auailed, assaulted. avail, f. send down. auaunt, f. a brag,
forward, apace, set forward. auaunt, f. forward, apace. auenant, f. agreeable,
comely. aver, i. bribery, richess. awayte, watch, circumspection. awayte, d.
watch by way. awayts, (insidiae) b. ambushments. awayte, b. tarrying, watching,
pending, secrecy. awarde, b. judgment. awhaped, b. amassed, daunted. awhere,
desire. awrecketh, b. revengeth. axes, b. the ague. ay, egg. ayle, b. ever.
Azimutes, a. great circles meeting in the Zenith, and passing all the degrees
of the Horison.
B.
Bandon, d. company, sect, custody. bargenet, A song or sonnet. A kind of dance.
bargaret, barme, b. lap. bawsin, big, some say it is a Badger or Gray.
baggingly, (tumide) disdainfully. baronage, f. lords. base. g. the foundation
or ground of any thing. balais of entayle, f. precious stones engraved.
baudrie, b. bravery. barmecloth, (limas) b. an Apron or safeguard. bath, b.
both. bale, b. sorrow. barbicans, b. watch Tours, in the Saxon Tongue, borough
kennings. baudricke, f. furniture, a sword girdle. barkefat, b. Tanners tub.
baselards, (si^ae) swords, daggers. balke, d. escape, fault. baude, d. brave,
bold, lusty. barbe, f. a mask or visard. battelled, made with battlements.
bay, b. stake. balefull, b. sorrowful. babeuries, f. Antiquets. bane, b.
destruction. bandon, i. company, sect. baggingli, (tumidae) b. swellingly,
disdainfully. bailli, f. government. baggeth, disdaineth. bayne, f. a bath.
beausir, f. fair sir. belchier, f. good countenance. beed, continued. bearing,
b. behavior. bemes, Trumpets. beat, b. make, also abate, placed, also to help.
beten, b. made. bedeth, b. offers. behote, b. promise. beshet, d. shut up.
benimmeth, d. bereaveth. beknew, learned out. behight, b. promised. belchose,
f. fair choice. berne, b. bear, convey. bid, b. put, offer. bes^egeden, d.
besieged. beat, b. help. behoteth, promises. bid, dwelled, continued.
bewared, b. spent. bewrien, b. to bewray. belle, f. good. be, f. a beast.
bell Isaude, f. well spoken. behete, behight, b. promised. benison, f. b.
blessing. bendes, f. bands. bey, b. obey. bent, b. a steep place. betressed,
deceived. bewrowned, b. spoken in the ear. besien, b. trouble. bewri, b.
declare. bend, b. a muffler or cale. beten, f. to make a band, to kindle.
beliue, b. anon. besey, b. become. bears, b. behaveth. belamie, f. fair or
good friend. bey, b. buy. behete, b. promise. Belmari, Taken to be that Country
in Barbary, called by Vassens, Benamarin. Besant, g. A Greekish Coin called
Bizantium, as William Malmesbury says, because it was the Coin of
Constantinople, sometime called Bizantium. berne, b. to carry. beset, set
packing. bewrecke, b. revenged. behew, b. gilded. beck, f. b. bill, beak.
belt, b. girdle. betren, b. sprinkled; also winding about. betrassed, b.
deceived, betrayed. beat, abate. bette, d. better, quickly. benes, b. bones.
bemeint, b. lamented, bemoned. beyet, b. begotten. bismar, f. (bizarre)
fantastical strangeness. birell, i. fine glass, also a kind of precious stone.
Bialacoile, f. fair welcoming. bid, d. pray. bit, b. bad, commanded. bineme, d.
bereave. bint, b. bound. bigin, bigot, f. superstitious hypocrite, or
hypocritical woman. bittor, b. a certain water-foul. bidding, abiding. biker,
b. a fray. bigami, g. twice married. blankemanger, f. custard. blew Euage, (
cyanaeus) of blew color. blithe, d. merry. bliue, b. quickly, gladly. blin, b.
cease. blasons, f. praises. blanch, f. white. blandish, i. sooth up. blande, l.
flattering. blankers, f. white. black buried, Hell. bleine, b. a bile. blent,
d. stayed, turned back, also blind. blee, b. sight, hew, favor, look. blend,
b. blind, to make blind. bleue, ^leuen, tarry, abide. blinke, b. looking aside.
blo, b. blew. blondren, d. toil, bluster. bode, b. message or news. bode, d.
tidings; also, could, was able. bodeth, b. shows. boistous, f. halting; also
plain, rude, great. bounty, f. goodness. bosche, l. a bush. boure, b. house.
bo^ne, f. b. good. borne, to burnish. bolne, b. to swell. bottom, f. bud.
boun, b. ready. boot, b. help. bourd, d. a trencher, b. a table. bordels, f.
brothelhouses. boot of bale, b. ease of sorrow. board, bourd, b. jest. borace,
i. soldar. bowne, b. ready. bolne, b. swelled. bole, a Bull. borrow, a pledge, a
surety. borrell, d. plain, rude. bout, b. without. bote, b. did bite. borrell,
f. attire on the head. bowke, b. the body, or belly, or the Stomach. bone, b.
request. Bourd begone, Prologues. This Knight being often among the Knights of
the Dutch Order, called Ordo Teutonicus, in Prussia, was for his Worthiness
placed by them at the Table, before any of what Nation soever. If any desire to
know the Profession of these Knights called Teutonici, it was thus: They having
their dwelling at Jerusalem, were bound to entertain Pilgrims, and at Occasions
to serve in War against the Saracens. They were apparelled in white, and upon
their uppermost Garment did wear a black Cross. And for that this Order was
first begun by a certain rich Almaigne, none were received into the same, save
only Gentlemen of the Dutch Nation. After Jerusalem was last taken by the
Saracens, Anno 1184. these Knights retired to Tolemaida; and that being taken,
into Germany, their own Country. And when as there also the People of Prussia
used Incursions upon their Confines, they went unto Frederick the Second, then
Emperor, Anno 1220. who granted them leave to make Wars upon them, and to turn
the spoil to the maintenance of their Order. After this Conquest of Prussia,
these Knights grew rich, and builded there many Temples and Places of Residence
for Bishops, who also were enjoined to wear the Habit of the Order. Chaucer
will have his Knight of such Fame, that he was both known and honored of this
Order. braudri, b. graven work. braying, f. b. sounding. brawnes, b. sinews,
muskles. brake, steel. braket, b. a drink made of water and honey. braui, l.
reward. brat b. a rag. braide, b. arose, awaked, took, brake out. brast, b.
break. brayde, b. a bur^t, strange fare. bread, b. breadth. bread, a bride.
bredgen, b. abridge. bren, b. branne. bread, abroad. brecke, (ruptura) d. a
bruise, a breach. breme, b. (ferociter) fiercely. bretfull, b. top full. brige,
breach. brike, b. astrait, or narrow. bronde, d. fury, fire. broke, b. enjoy,
to like. broken, b. brook. brocking, b. throbbing. brotell, b. brickle.
brocage, b. means, spokesmen. browded, b. embroidred. browke, b. to enjoy.
burnets, f. hoods, attire for the head. bugle, b. black horn. bumbeth, b.
sounds. but, except. burled, armed. burdon, b. a deep base. burned, b.
brightly filed, burnished. burell, f. fine glass, a precious stone. burdon, f.
a staff. burly brand, b. a great sword. burned, burnished. burnet, f. woollen.
buxioning, f. budding. buxum, b. dutiful. buxumnesse, b. lowliness. byddeth, d.
prays. byg, b. build. by rue, b. in order. bywoxen, b. made senceless,
overwept.
C.
* Caere Inda, Some think it should be Caere Lud, that is, the City of Lud,
called London. caleweyes, Calure, as Salmon, or other red Fish. canceline, f.
chamlet. camysed, f. flat nosed. cankedore, i. woeful case. call, d. (pulcbrum)
bravery. callot, b. a lewd woman. canell, d. a Sinnamon tree. carects, g.
marks, prints. cardiacle, g. wringing at the heart. canon, g. a rule.
caitisned, l. chained. cadence, l. proof. cassidoni, g. a stone growing in
AEthiopia, which shines like Fire. Ex Lib. de Naturae Rerum. capell, b. an
horse. caroll, f. a song or dance. calsening, f. bringing any metal into
powder. catapuce, g. spurge. cameline, f. chamlet. calked, l. cast. * Ceruse,
White Lead, the Composition whereof is thus: Fossa fiat in Terra: claudatur
circumquaque muro paruo ^ demum accipiantur laminae plumbeae oblongae formae
quadrangulae, and projiciantur ex circumfuso super foveam: postmodum
projiciatur in fovea acetum forte, bullietque projectum super superficiem
terrae, and vapor inde resolutus inficiet plumbum: post spacium vero vinus diei
vel amplius rade ab illis laminis, quod illis adhaeret, and illud desiccae ad
Solemn, and erit Cerusa. certres, i. undoubtful signs. centure, g. the point in
the midst of a circle. censing, b. casting the smoke, Frankincense. celerer, d.
butler. cell, d. a study. chasteleine, f. a gentlewoman of a great house.
chaunters, f. singers. chaffer, d. goods, wares. chauntepleure, f. that weepeth
and sings together. chapelet, f. a garland. charters, f. writings. chaffare,
d. buying and selling. chalons, f. blankets, coverings. champartie, f.
maintaining a quarrel. chapter, b. chief Rulers in Abbeys. charge, hurt, harm.
chekelaton, b. a stuff of Checker-work, made of Cloth of Gold. cheuisance, f.
merchandise, devise, a bargain. chees, b. choose. chevice, f. redeem; also to
effect. cheorte, f. love, jealousy, pity. chest, (subjectum) receptable.
cheue, d. thrive. chest, ( opprobrium) slander. cheuesayle, f. a gorget.
chert, f. love. cherisaunce, b. comfort. cherts, f. merry folks. cheuesayle, f.
a gorget. chike, a chekin. chincheri, f. nigardliness. chiuer, b. to shake.
Christopher, l. a picture of a Man, carrying a Child on his shoulders over a
River. chinch, f. nigardly. chirking, b. a noise, making a noise. chirking, (
stridens) crashing. chite, b. chiteth. chilandri, f. a goldfinch. chiuancie, f.
chivalry, riding. churliche, b. plain, homely. churl, b. slave. church Reues,
b. Churchwardens. chymbe, d. the uttermost part of a barrel. citrination,
perfect digestion, or the color proving the Philosophers stone. citrine, f.
yellow. citriall, i. a gitterne, or dulcimer called Sambuca. cierges, f. Wax
Candles, Lamps. clarions, d. trumpets. cleape, b. call. clare, clari, b. wine
and honey mingled (Vinum rubedum) d. red wine. clepen, b. call. clergion, g. a
clark. clenched, b. fastened. cleuis, b. clifts, rocks. clergicall, g. learned.
climb, b. found. clip, clippeth, d. embraces, kisseth. climate, g. a portion
of the Firmament between South and North, varying in one day half an hours
space. clicket, b. an Instrument of Iron to lift up a latch. clotlefe,
(personata) b. the great Burleaf. clomben, d. ascended. clum, a note of
silence. cockney, b. a wisard, disard, fool. controue, f. devise. controuer, f.
deviser. * Constellation, the motion or inward working of the stars or heavenly
elements, upon our earthly bodies. couercle, f. a cover, a lid. contemplance,
l. private study. * Collect, Expans, years, and Roots, are terms belonging to
the Tolitane Tables, and so be his Centres, his Arguments, Proportionels, etc.
Face and Term be dignities belonging to the Planets. costei, d. to walk.
convaile, recover. compere, f. d. gossip. commensall, f. a table companion.
convention, l. a bargain. corare, f. overcome. costrell, b. a wine-pot.
controuer, f. deviser. courtepie, d. a short gawberdine, or upper Garment.
corrumpeth, i. stinketh, putrifieth. couth, b. known perfectly. cogge, a
cogbote. columbine, l. dove-like. cordewane, f. dry leather. conteke, f.
strife. costage, d. charge, cost. corigeth, l. corrects. corven, d. taken,
carved. couched, f. interlaied, underlaied. covent, b. a number of thirteen
Friars. con, d. know, be able. coitu, l. copulation. confecture, l. a medicine.
coy, coyen, f. to quiet, to flatter, also secret, dainty, nice. cop, d. f. top.
conisance, f. knowledge. covine, b. deceit. connen, d. can. coagulate, l.
curdled, joined. colfox, b. a black or fearful Fox. corare, i. overcome.
controue, f. to feign, to devise. combust, l. burnt, scorched. coins, f.
quinches. coynt, f. strange. counterpleted, b. controuled. corosiue, l. eating,
wasting. commoning, l. part taking. coupe gorge, f. cut throat. corbets, f. d.
places in walls, where Images stand. cornmuse, l. Music on Cornets. couenable,
f. convenient. coulpe, l. fault. coure, b. kneel, stoop. commaunce, f.
community. coilons, f. stones. coyse, b. joliness, niceness. coart, l. enforce.
courfine, f. fine heart. compinable, f. fit for company. cope, f. a cloak.
crampisheth, crampesh, d. gnaweth. crallit, b. engraven. creanseth, f. deals
on credit. creance, f. faith or trust. crepusculis, l. crepuscles, or dawning.
cresse, f. a rush. crispe, l. curled. Croiseri, b. they for whom Christ
suffered upon the Cross. crocke, crucke, f. d. a cup, or stean, an earthen pot.
crouched, b. blessed. crone, b. an old prating Woman. crop, f. top. crouch, i.
cross, bless. crowdest, d. thrustest. crosselet, f. a melting pot. crockes, d.
locks of hair. croupe, f. buttock. crull, d. curled. curreidew, b. curry
favor. cure bulli, f. tanned leather: eucurbite, l. a kind of long necked
Glass. * Curfew, William the Conqueror in the first year of his reign,
commanded, That in every Town and Village a Bell should be rung every night at
eight of the Clock, and that all People should then put forth their Fire and
Candle, and go to Bed. The ringing of this Bell was called in the French Tongue
Curfew, that is, Cover Fire. culpons, parts, or streiks; heaps. culleth, b.
pulls, enforces.
D.
* Dan Burnell, Nigellus Wireker, Monk of Canterbury, a Man of great Reading
and Judgment, as Leland writes of him, was not afraid to write of the faults
of Curates, and the mis-spending of Church Goods; even to William Longshampe,
Bishop of Ely, and Lord Chancellor of England, a Man of all Men under the Sun
most malicious. He did write in Verse to the foresaid William, a Book, under
the Title of Brunellus, called Speculum stultorum; And this is it which Chaucer
calls here, Burnell the Ass. He lived, Anno 1200. in the Days of King John.
dawes, b. days, time. daweth, b. springs, begins. daren, darreigne, b.
attempt, challenge. daw, b. wax day. dare, b. stare. daffe, b. dasterd. dagges,
(fractura) latchets cut of leather. dagon, (fractura) a piece or remnant.
dagged, b. slitted. dates, b. accounts. dayned, f. vouchsafed. defayted,
decayed, senceless. dear, b. hurt, grieve. deluge, l. a flood. deviant, l. far
off, wandering. definished, l. proved. desiderie, l. lust. debonairely, f.
meekly. deis, b. a seat. debonaire, f. gentle, humble. deaurat, l. shining.
denwere, b. doubt. destrer, f. horse of Arms. de pardeux, f. by God. debate, f.
to fight. derne, (dirus) earnest, careful, secret. deintie, desire. decoped, d.
peaked. demean, f. behave. deficate, l. deified. deiden, died. deem, condemn.
deep lowpe, (transparens) giving thorough light. deslaui, d. lecherous,
servile, beastly. dey, dead; also (...) a dairy woman. demaine, f. toll,
custom, possession, also to rule. demoniake, g. possessed of a Devil. demin, b.
Judge. dely, b. small. deuoire, f. labor, endeavor, duty. dent, b. stroke.
demean, f. complain, behave. delue, d. digg, ditch. deignous, f. disdainful.
deuinals, l. wisards. defended, d. forbad, forbidden. dequace, b. dash. dexe, a
desk. defouled, shamed. defense, f. charge, forbidding. determinate, l.
limited. dispaired, l. discouraged. dissentori, a kind of still. digne, l.
worthy, mere; also lyth, gentle, yielding, also to vouchsafe. diuinistre, l. a
divine. dike, b. ditch. diapred, f. diversified. diuinaile, (AEnigma) g. a
riddle. dight, b. made ready, handled, used, also to cover. distance, l.
discord, danger. dispended, l. wasted. dim, b. obscure. disheussd, f.
barehairred. dite, b. a treatise. disconsolate, l. without comfort. disinal, l.
(dies malus) unluckey. dispone, l. dispose. disparage, f. disgrace.
distreineth, effects. disceuer, spend. distraineth, vexes. diameter, g. a
line dividing any figure into two equal parts. disease, b. vexation. disapered,
l. vanished. discure, b. show. diuerseth, l. turns. disioint, b. jeopardy.
dissoned, l. dissonant. docked, b. cut off. done hours, b. do servise to God.
doleth, l. grieveth. douced, a pipe made of box, sounding most sweetly.
domesman, b. Jugde. doughtie, b. slout. dortoure, f. dormitorium, a sleeping
place. domed, b. judged. dormant, l. unremoved. doced, f. a sweet Instrument.
dole, b. sorrow. doluen, d. buried. donet, l. a book so called. dowtremere, f.
fair wearing. dowle, b. deal. dow, b. give. dretching, delay. dreri, b. heavy,
sorrowful. dretch, to stay, to hinder, to tarry, to dream. drnftie, d. itkfom,
filthy. drerines, b. sorrow. drenched, b. overcome, drowned. drerinesse, b.
heart-grief. dreint, b. drowned. dray, drey, dry. dri, drien, b. to suffer.
droui, d. filthy. drugge, b. toil. drurie, modesty, sobriety, comeliness.
drough, b. drew. drenching, taking in. drunkelew, d. given to drink, drunken. *
Dulcarnon, is a proportion in Euclid, lib. 1. Theorem. 33. propos. 47. which
was found out by Pythagoras after an whole years study, and much beating of his
Brain: In thankfulness whereof, he sacrificed an Ox to the Gods; which
Sacrifice he called Dulcarnon. Alexander Nec^am an ancient Writer, in his Book
De Naturis Rerum, compoundeth this word of Dulia, and Caro, and will have
Dulcarnon to be quasi sacrificium Carnis. Chaucer aptly applies it to Creseide
in this place; showing that she was as much amazed how to answer Troilus, as
Pythagoras was wearied to bring his desire to effect. duresse, f. hardness.
dwale, (solanum soporiferum) d. nightshade, provoking sleep. dwined, d. dried,
consumed.
E.
Ebracke, Hebrew. ebracke, Jews. ecclesiast, g. a churchman. ecliptike line, g.
the circumference of the circle, wherein the Sun finisheth his yearly motion.
echen, each, b. increase, draw out. echeth, b. helps. eft, b. again, soon.
effunde, l. utter. effated, f. sorted, defaced. eftris, efters, entries, ways,
galleries. egment, b. procurement. eigteth mow, d. may grant. elate, l. stour.
elenge, b. strange. ele, help. eldeth, b. makes old. elth, eld, old age.
eluish, b. wicked, froward. empaired, much grieved. emplede, f. sue. embolfe
cercle, g. the oblique circle. embosed, hanged out his tongue with weariness.
emforth, after, according. emispere, g. half the compass of the visible heaven.
emplaster, f. set out, paint: emprise, f. enterprise; also fashion, order.
enbol^ed, b. swelled. enchafeth, (flag^at) burns. Eneidos, g. a work written
by Virgil, of the travels of AEneas. endry, b. endure. engined, d. racked.
enhansed, f. exalted. enhauncen, lift up, raise. engine, f. wit, devise.
engluting, f. stopping. enbibing, l. sucking. enewed, renewed. enmossed, f.
comforted. encontrewayle, f. prevent, to mere. encheson, f. cause, occasion.
enchafed, f. heated. enpited, delited. enlangored, f. languishing. ensise, b.
quality, fashion, order. entreteden, d. handle. entalenten, f. move, stir up.
entaile, f. graved work. entremete, f. deal, meddle. entermined, l. undermined.
entered, l. buried. entalented, f. ingrafted. enteched, f. defiled. entetched,
f. qualified, spotted. entame, touch, handle. entailed, f. carved. entriketh,
b. entrappeth. entriked, deceived; also mingled. enteched, f. qualified, or
spotted. entremes, f. intermingled. enuelopt, f. wrapped. enuiron, f. round,
round about. equinoctial, l. when the nights and days be all of one length.
ernes, b. promise. erke, b. weary, loathing. erne, greatly. ernefull, b.
sorrowful. * Eros, g. Whereas some Copies have Heroes, some Hernes, and some
such like counterfeit word, whereof can be given no reason; I have set down
Eros, i. Cupid: as most agreeing in my Opinion with the matter; which I gather
thus: Lucian, in his second Dialogue brings in Cupid teaching Jupiter how to
become amiable, and in him, how lovers may be made acceptable to their ladies;
not by weeping, watching, and fasting, nor by furious melancholic fits, but by
comely behavior. The words in the Greek, are thus much in Latin: Si voles
amabilis esse n^que concutias AEgida, neque fulmen geras: sed suavissimum
teipsum exhibe: and vestem sum purpuream, crepidas subliga aur at as: adtibiam
and ad Timpana composito gressu incetle, and videbis quod plures te sequentur,
quam Bacchum Maenades. So that the lovers of Eros, that is, Cupids Servants, do
carry themselves comely in all their Passions, and their Maladies are such as
show no open distemperature of body or mind: which mediocrity this Arcite was
far from keeping. And whereas some will have us read Heroes, i. Noblemen; I
cannot dislike their Opinion, for it may fitly stand with the sense of the
place. err, f. way. erst, b. earnest. escrite, f. a writing. esperance, f.
hope. esplost, perfection. espiritueles, l. heavenly. essoine, f. delay. eth,
b. easy. etymologise, g. to show the true interpretation of a word. euin, b.
equal. euin, b. upright. exiteth, l. moves. exorcismes, g. adjurations.
expleiten, f. make show, counterfeit. eyth, b. easy. ey, an egg.
F.
Fast, wedded. fare, f. gone. falding, a kind of course cloth. fare, fair.
fay, f. truth. fast frets, full fraughteth. farce, f. paint. fage, a fable.
fare, b. cheer. farden, b. fared. famulers, l. helpers. falsed, l. deceived.
fallas, l. deceit. fame, desame, slander. fassed, l. stuffed. faitors, i.
deceivers, flatterers. fay, l. truly, also fidelity. fairy, b. a goodly sight,
the place where Hobgoblins and Fairies dwell. fantom, f. fancy, vain vision.
falke, b. people, folk. faw, b. glad, joyful. fare, f. to go, also a stir.
faunes, g. rustical gods. falsen, f. deceive. fantom, f. vain vision. facond,
i. speech. fendli, b. ugly. fern year, February. fetise, b. handsome.
ferthing, b. a thin scale. fermerere, an overseer of cattle. feel, many, also
feling. ferd, b. fared. fermases, g. medicines. * Fenne, Avicen divides his
Canons into partitions, which he calls Fens. ferth, b. the fourth.
fermentation, l. giving Life to the Philosophers stone. feled, known. fers, the
queen in Chess-play. feture, f. handsomness. fend, b. devil. fern, b. long
time. feestlych, d. pleasant. fendish, b. divelish. ferly, b. strange. ferd, b.
fared. felloun, f. deadly, cruel. feel, b. knowledge. fethered, b. shaked his
wings. feffe, b. indue. feel, find. feel homages, f. faithful subjection.
fell, b. the skin. feast, b. mirth, joy. fere, b. a companion. ferth, b. the
fourth. fete, b. fine. fine, l. cease. finance, f. end. flaming, red. flash of
flames, sheaf of Arrows. flaw, yellow. flay, did fly. flebring, b. flattering,
slander. fleten, b. abound. flemer, b. expeller. flone, a^ arrow. flemed, b.
daunted. fleming, conquest. flid, b. fly. flite, flight, b. chide. * Floreine,
A Coin of the value of 3 s. 4 d. or there abouts, and such were called Florenes
de Scuto. Others there were called Florenes Regales, contained within the price
of 2 s. 10 d. q. flo, an arrow. flode, abounded, floreth. l. florisheth.
floiting, f. d. whistling. fonden, labor. fond, make, contend, to labor;
also to make a fool. fonge, b. take. fonne, b. fool: also to be foolish.
fonnes, devises. fone, fine, l. make an end. fother, b. a Wain-load of twenty
hundred weight. forstraught, b. daseled. fore, gone. forfraught, beset. forrei,
f. to provide horse meat. forage, f. fodder, course meat. forcer, f. copher or
chest. forward, course, condition, promise. forwined, d. dried up. fordo,
overthrown. for thy, b. therefore. forpined, consumed. forleten, forsake,
broken off. forlete, forloine, rechase, terms of hunting. forleien, d. wander.
fordo, b. kill. forleten, foryetten, let pass, neglected, forlorn. fortuna
mayor, l. Jupiter. forgist, forgiving. forth, theft. forwelked, (marcidus) d.
dried up. forlaine, forsaken. fort, l. strong. forleteth, gives over. forlyth,
spoileth. forsongen, b. weary with singing. forge, f. work. foreyne, b. a
Jaques. formel, his make. forfare, b. forlorn. fore, fared, gone. foredid,
killed. foryede, b. overwent. fordo, undone, lost. fone, b. enemies. foison, f.
plenty. foiterers, f. vagabonds. foothot, b. forthwith. fowlefaile, b. err
greatly. folili, f. rashly. fomen, b. enemies. fongeth, takes use. fownd,
framed. foiles, f. leaves. frape, b. a company, a rabble. frained, restrained,
also asked. fret, b. a circle. freneth, makes strange noise. fret, f. fraught.
friend, fremd, b. strange. freelti, b. frail. froy, from you. franks, f. french
crowns. freten, b. devour. franchise, f. freedom. freel, b. ^rail. freteth, f.
rubbeth, chafeth. fret, f. turn, fraught. frouncen, d. f. wrinckling. fremed,
b. wild, strange. fret full, set full. frened, b. strange. frounce, f. a
wrincle. froise, (frixura) f. a Pancake, or Tansey. frounklesse, f. plain.
fryth, b. a wood. fullich, fully. fulke, an hollow place. fur^^ll, f. cruel.
fusible, l. that may be molte^. fuir, i. fury. fie, defic. fined, l. ended.
fish, the sign Pisces. fire leuin, b. lightning.
G.
Gabbing, b. lying. gadling, b. straggling. garnison, f. preparation. Garnade,
Garnata in Spain. garrison, f. a defense. gable, the fore front of an House.
galoch, f. a kind of shoe. gaytere berries, (virga sanguinea) prickwood.
gastnes, b. terror. gargoning, f. strange speaking. gab, b. prate or lie. *
Ganilion, which betrayed the Army of the Christians, under Charlemain, to the
Saracens, and was therefore torn in pieces with four Horses. galaxi, (lactea
via) g. a tract of stars called Watling-street. gale, b. yawle. gale, b. flout,
also chase. galpeth, b. belcheth. galiard, f. lusty, ^rollick. garrison, f. to
defend. * Gawyn, This Gawyn was Sisters Son to Arthur the great, King of the
Britains, a most famous man in War, and in all manner of Civility; As in the
Acts of the Britains we may read. In the year 1082. in a Province of Wales,
called Rose, was his Sepulcher found, and his Body, affirmed by many, to have
been of the length of fourteen foot. galliens, Galens works. gate, occasion.
gaudi, b. brave. gawreth, b. stareth. gawre, b. stare. gawde, b. a trifle.
geri, mutable, also cruel. gerifull, gend, f. seemly. gere, b. jest, frenzy.
gergon, b. chattering, praring. geomancie, g. conjuration by circles in the
earth. gent, f. d. comely, proper. gesseran, a brestplate. gip^ere, f. a bag or
pouch. gippon, a doublet, or light coat. gigges, b. drabs. girde, b. strike.
gigging, sounding. gigges, (garrulitas) babbling. gite, a gown. gisarme, gasa, a
certain weapon. gipe, a coat full of pleits. gigges, bablings. giglotlyke, b.
strumpet like. gladly, commonly. glapeth, b. glistereth. glede, b. fire,
embers, flame, sparkles, ashes. gle, b. melody. glent, b. glanced, cast.
gleire, b. white. glase, b. to gloss. gle^en, d. gone, slidden. g^edes, imbers,
also flames. gleue, b. a spear. glitteren, b. glister, shine. glitering, b.
shining. glode, b. ascended. glowed, b. stared. glombe, b. frown. gloten,
covering. gloss, persuade. gloss, b. flatter, also the exposition of a dark
speech. glede, b. puttock. glowden, d. shined. glittren, b. shine. gnarre, b.
an hard knot, as in wood; a short thick grub. gnast, gnash. gnew, b. gnawed.
gnoffe, i. fool, chuffe, miser. gods son, b. that God sends. gods half, b.
on Gods side. gorget, f. a throat. gore, (lacinia) a pleat or fold. golyerdies,
f. ravenously mouthed. gowreth, b. stareth. gonfennon, f. a little flag. gonge,
b. Jaques. gossomor, b. things that fly in the Air in Summer time like
Copwebs. Goodmes, f. good time, or mood. gourde, b. a bottel, made of a gourd.
golit, d. throat. gotysh, i. sottish. gore, an arbor under a gourd. goodlihead,
gay show. grame, i. sorrow, mishap, d. anger. graythed, devised. grapenel, an
Instrument with many hooks. graspeth, b. catches fast. gratch, b. apparel.
graven, d. buried. grant mercy, f. I thank you. grave, bury. graieth, b. to
make trim. great see (Mar maggiore) anciently Pontus Euxinus. greece, f. gray,
gray amise of Russie Squirrels. greith, b. remove. great, b. weep. grenehed,
rashness. gre, f. good part. grith, b. agreement. greues, b. trees, boughs,
leaves, grass. great, b. saluted. greyned, made. grede, b. cried. grint, b.
grinded. grispe, d. gripe. grisely, b. abhominably, ghastly, fearfully. grill,
b. could. grofly, b. flat on the ground. groine, b. a froward look. growbed, b.
dug. gruffe, b. grovelling. groufe, gruell, b. pottage. guerdon, f. reward.
guerdonlesse, f. unrewarded. guerring, i. brawling. gullet, d. a throat. gye,
b. guide. gyre, b. trance.
H
* Harrolds, whereas in some books it is, my King of Harrolds shall thou be; it
is now corrected thus (my King of Harlots shall thou be.) For so it is in the
French Moralization of Molinet, 149. where he is called Roi des Ribaulds, which
is the King of Harlots, or wicked Persons: an Office of great account in times
past, and yet used in the Court of France. Of this office speaks Johannes
Tillius in his second book De rebus Gallicis, under the title De Praefecto
praetorio Regis. But more hereof when time shall serve in M. F. Thins Comment.
half, d. a neck. hasard, d. dising. haw, a yard, black, have. half, b.
charge. hair, hair-cloth. hayes, f. hedges. haketon, f. a Jacket without
sleves. hawberke, f. a gorget. halpe, b. helped. halke, (angulus) b. corner,
valley. herne, haubergion, (Iorica) f. a coat of male. hate, b. benamed.
habit, l. plite. harlotrise, b. bawdry. halt, b. held purpose. hauten, comely.
haried, b. pulled. hayne, f. hatred. hafe, lifted. hace, b. has. han, b. have.
hawbacke, b. return. hardely, b. stoutly, also verily. hackeney, d. a trotting
horse. ham^led, d. cut off, abated. halow, hollow. halsing, b. embrasing.
harrow, (apage^is) away, away, fie, ^ie. happeth, b. covers, embraseth.
hauselines, (faemoralia) breches. hat, b. was called. hallowes, b. Saint.
haulues, d. parts. hawtently, b. solemnly. halt, held, holds, judges.
haunten, b. use. haunce, set out. hanceled, cut off. halt, b. performs,
holds. halteth, (trahit) draws. hauoire, f. possession. henten, hent, b.
catch. hele, heyle, b. health. hethen, b. mockery. hewn, hewed, b. colored.
hecled, wrapped. herbigage, f. lodging. held, account, accounted. hereid, b.
praised, honored. hewed, b. colored. hew, hewis, b. colors, welfare, beauty.
hestes, b. wills, promise, commandments. heyne, b. labourer, drudge, heaven,
b. to shove, to lift. hewmond, new road. healed, b. covered, heard. heroner, a
special long winged Hawk. hent, b. catched. herborow, d. lodging. heriyng, b.
praise. herawdes, b. furious parts in a play. here and houne, hare and hound.
helmed, b. defended. heal, hele, b. hold, cover. here and hace, b. hoarse and
harsh. healed, heard. helded, b. holden down. herieth, b. praises. helest, did
hold. hend, b. gentle. hernia, g. the disease called bursting. hot, hete,
heten, d. vow, promise. * Heisugge, The Heisugge, called Curruca, is a little
Bird in whose nest the Cuckoo lays her-Eggs, and when they be hatched, and
grown to some bigness, they eat the Bird that bred them. hew, welfare. herden,
did hear. heaven, b. rise up. hem, them. heth, b. brabes or such like. her,
their. hete, d. was named. henters, b. catchers. height, b. were named. heepe,
b. help. heraud, d. proclaim, set forth. hew, to hover. henten, b. to catch.
hemisphere, g. half the compass of the visible Heaven. highest, makes have.
hight, b. promised. hierdesse, b. berdwoman. hith, b. make have. highten, b.
promise. hip, b. the red berry on the brier. hidous, f. b. great. hite, hete,
hot, d. is called. hild, b. powered. hidiously, b. fiercely, fearfully. holt,
holden. hoten, b. called. horologe, g. a clock. hot the knot, make fast.
hoppen, d. leap. howten, b. hallow. howgates, how. hoar, b. white. holoure, b.
horemonger. hostei, to lay siege. homicide, g. murderer. hoten, b. make an
unpleasant noise. hopesteres, (gubernaculum tenentes) pilots. horde, b. heap.
howselin, b. receive the Sacrament. homager, f. subject. howuer, an hoverer.
hold, withheld. houed, b. tarried. hoker, b. stoutness, frowardness. horrow,
(squalidus) beastly, base, sla^derous. houe, b. lifted up, to hover, also a
show. horoscope, g. the ascendent of ones Nativity. hough, how. hostell, f. a
town house. hot, b. promise, bid. hostilements, necessaries. hold, beholden.
hosts hoar, b. woods white. holt, d. a grove. hoting, d. promising. hurleth,
f. falls, makes a noise. * Hugh of Lincoln, In the 20 th year of Henry the
Third, eighteen Jews were brought to London from Lincoln, and hanged for
crucifying a Child of eight years old; which was this Hugh, whereof Chaucer
speaks, as may be proved out of Matthew Paris, and Walsingham. hurleth,
(obstrepit) f. makes a noise. hurtell, skirmish. hurtlest, carries, throws.
hurtlen, b. thrust. hulstred, b. hidden. hurtelen, b. provoke. humling, b.
sounding. hyldeth, yields. hyne, b. a hiend or husbandman. hye^d, heardman,
Governor. hyerds, b. guides.
I.
Iape, Jest, a Word by abuse grown odious, and therefore by a certain curious
Gentlewoman scraped out in her Chaucer; whereupon her serving man writes thus:
My Mistress cannot be content,
To take a ^est as Chaucer meant,
But using still a Woman's fashion,
Allows it in the last Translation:
She cannot with a word dispense,
Although I know she loves the sense.
For such an use the World has got
That words are sins, but deeds are nor.
iambeux, f. armor for the legs. jane, half pence of Janua, or Galy half
pence. iapedst, b. jested. iangleresses, b. brablers. ibet, stamped. ibete, set
forth. icond, b. learned. ich, b. my self. ido, b. undone, spoiled. idolaster,
g. idolatour. iet, b. devise. iewry, the Jews street or sinagogue. iewise,
reward by revenge, also a gibber. ifete, b. effect. ifere, b. together.
ificched, f. fixed. ifounded, b. sunk. ifretten, d. devoured. igourd, fly.
igrauen, d. buried. ihight, b. called, accounted. ihired, honored. ikend, b.
known. ilimed, taken. ilke, b. same. illusion, l. deceit. imasked, f. covered.
imeint, b. mingled. imped, b. grafted. impetren, l. entreat. incantations, i.
charms. in a threw, b. quickly. innerest, f. inward. indulgence, l. pardon.
ingot, the mass or wedge of gold after it is molten, as also the trough wherein
it is molten. intermete, f. meddle. incubus, l. the night mare. indigence, l.
want. intremes, f. middle servise, intermingled. intresse, lining. i not, I
know not. intermeting, changing. inome, d. taken. interual, l. distance of
time. iniquitance, l. disquiet. induration, l. making hard. inde, f. azure
color. in hie, in have. ithe, b. thrive. itwight, b. drawn. ineched, put in.
inomen, d. obtained. inhild, b. infuse. iombre. b. join, jumble. ionglerie, d.
juggling. iordans, b. double urinals. ioleming, d. joyful. iossa, turn. ioyeux,
f. joyful. ipriued, searched. ipulled, smoothed. irayled, covered, spread. ise,
beheld. isped, (expeditus) dispatched. ishad, b. scattered. isperi, g. Orizon.
ishet, b. shut. ispended, l. considered. ishone, set forth. iswent, b. swinged.
* Justinian, In the eleventh Book of the Code, De mendicantibus validis; where
it is enacted, that if any shall beg, having no cause either by need, or maim,
the same shall be examined and searched; and who so shall find him to
counterfeit, and proves the same, Dominium ejus consequetur: and says
Bartoll. He shall be punished, Ad arbitrium Iudicis. iuuentute, l. youth.
iupart, b. adventure. iubeli, l. joy, gladness for freedom. iub, b. bottel.
iudicum, l. book of Judges. iwri, iwrien, hidden. iwri, covered, hanged.
iwimpled, d. mufled, hooded.
K.
Calendar, chief, first. kalends, preamble. ke^^ked, kiken, b. stared.
Ke^^nard, micher, hedg-creeper. keep, b. care. * Kenelme, This Kenelmus king of
the Mercians was innocently slain by his Sister Quendrida, whereby he obtained
his Name of a Martyr. In the same place, for Mereturick we now read Mercenrick,
which is the Kingdom of Mercia, as the Etymology of the word does teach. For
Rik in the Saxon Tongue signifies a Kingdom, and Mercen, the marches or bounds
of a country. So that Mercenrick is regnum Mercia, whereof both Kenulph and
Kenelme were Kings. kele, b. to cool. kest, b. cast. kepen, b. to care kembe,
d. deck. kemeling, a Brewers vessel. kernels, holes or corners in battelments.
kerueth, greveth. ken, d. teach, know. kers, (nasturtium) d. water^resles.
keuer, b. recover. kene, b. sharp. kend, b. made me know. * Kichell, A Cake
which Horrace calls Libum: Vtque sacerdotis fugitibus liba recuso: and with
us it is called a Gods Kichell, because Godfathers and Godmothers used commonly
to give one of them to their Godchildren, when they asked blessing. kith, b.
acquaintance. kinrest, quiet rest. kithen, b. show. kinds, kindels, (faetus) b.
young ones. kirked, b. turned upward. kith, b. make known, show, acknowledge.
kid, b. known, made known. kitheth, b. shows. kin, b. kind. knarri, b.
slubby. kned, knit. knittest, setlest. knockeden, d. did knock. knopped, d.
tied, laced. kon, b. can. koueren, f. to hide.
L.
Lake, fine cloth like lawn. largess, i. liberality. lachesse, f. leysines.
latered, l. laysie, loitring. laas, (laqueus) d. net or gin^ laud, l. praise.
langorous, f. pining. lack, dispraise. laft, lest off, enclosed. lack, d.
offense: also lie, to dispraise. lay, a song. lauen, b. draw empty. lauds, i.
morning servise. languerth, i. languisheth. latonne, f. copper. lacert, i.
sinew. layuers, (corrigiae) thongs. lay, b. law. laund, b. a plain between
trees. lauender, i. f. laundress. laued, b. drew. lath, b. a barn. lasten,
forsook. less, less. lach, f. lasie. larson, f. robbery. lacking, dispraising.
lacken, extenuate, dispraise. Lettow, Lituania, part of Sarmatia, joining to
Polonia. Leyes, taken to be Levissa, upon the Continent not far from Rhodes.
lestis, temptations, lusts, pleasures. ley, a song. lees, leasing, also lost,
release. lewd, b. ignorant. leave, beleve, live, releeve, grant, dear. let,
let, b. leave forsake, leden, language. lene, b. lend. leueth, bears. lever,
better. lech, b. a surgeon. leave, b. dear. let, b. lest off, to leave. lends,
(lumbi) d. loins. lettrure, f. book learning. ledge, d. lay. lessel,
(umbraculum) bush or hovel. lele, right, lawful. leite, light. legends, l.
tales. lere, d. to teach. lever, lefe, d. wont. dear, willing, rather. leueth,
remains. legisters, i. lawyers. leged, resident. let, b. deemed, made show,
showed. lease, praise. letting, leaving. leueth, relieveth, also takes leave.
lemes, b. flames, light. leotorne, a desk. legging, d. lodging. letest fare, b.
make show. leuesell, a bush. lere, complexion, color, skin. letargi, g. a
drousie disease causing forgetfulness. lest, lust. * Litarge, f. white lead;
The Composition whereof, as I find it in an old written book, is thus:
Accipiter plumbum, and funditur in olla, and projiciuntur interius testae
alterius ollae, and postea moveatur olla fortiori manu, quousque commisceantur
testae and plumbum, praeterea projiciatur illud totum, and illud est
litargirum: hoc modo preparatur plumbum ad plumbaciones ollarum. ligne aloes, a
bitter kind of wood out of India and Arabia. licand, b. in good plite.
limitation, i. circuit. liard, b. nimble. lich, lech, b. like. limaile, i. dust
that comes of filing. light, to make light. lith, lies. lisse, f. end, limit,
border. lisse, lees, release. lisse, b. ease. ligne, f. line. lith, (membrum) a
lim. lifthalfe, b. left side. lith, lies, also plain. liege, lege, f. lawful,
true. lignes, likes, yields. litherly, b. slothful. liggen, b. lie. liart,
b. gentle, lithe, smooth. liuen, b. believe. lithi, lethy, b. soft gentle.
lissed, f. bounded. lisse, to have less, to wax less. lieges, f. subjects.
lithe, b. to ease. lorrell, (lurco) devourer. lombes, lambs. loos, lose, f.
praise, also order. lossell, d. crafty fellow. louedaies, arbicrements. loppe,
b. a spider. lodemanage, skill of Navigation by stone and needle. lollar, b. a
breaker of fasting days. louke, a fellow receiver. lorco, a devourer, a
gulligut. Loi, Dunstan, Julian, Runian, and what they were, may be known in the
Legend, Festival, and Votaries. louting, b. kneeling, honoring. longen,
belong. lore, b. learning, knowledge. lorne, b. lost. losenger, f. flatterer or
lier. londles, b. runnagates. loute, b. to bow or bend. lozenge, f. square.
losengeri, f. flattery. loteby, companion, or love. loath, b. lothed. losenges,
f. square figures. lore, b. lost. loode, led. losenge, f. square. lostheld,
accounted lost. lodesmen, b. guides. lore, (ratio) regard, doctrine. low, fire,
flame: also to allow, or like. lordeth, rules. lucerne, l. candel. lugge, b.
pull. lushbrough, a base Coin in the days of Edward the Third.
M.
* Magic, He means this Physician was skilful in Astrology, and could make
his election of fortunate hours, wherein to minister his Potions to his
Patient; and likewise that he was practiced in Magic natural, as in making of
Sigils or Characters stamped in Metal in their due times, fitted to that sign
that governed that part of the Body wherein the Malady was; as the stamp of
Aries for the disease in the Head, and of Leo for the Reins, etc. Hereof he
speaks in the third Book of Fame. And Clerks eke which conne well
All this Magic naturell,
That craftily do her entents,
To maken in certain ascendents
Images lo, through which Magic
They make a man be whole and sick.
* Martes mark, A Skar or Cut which the Children born in his Regiment have,
and that in some part of their face: but this good Wife of Bath will needs have
two; one for the Character of her principal Planet, and the other, etc.
maintenance, threatening. masteling, shining. mazeline, a mazer. manace, f.
threaten. malady, desease. make his beard, deceive him. malles, b. hammers,
betils. maumetri, b. worship of false Gods. martirdom, torment. maskewed,
fensed, fortified. makeles, b. matchless. mate, d. daunted, tame, mad, pined,
consumed. maugre, f. despite. martereth, i. dies. mark of Adam, mankind.
malison, b. a curse. malleable, b. abiding the hammer. marris, b. a fen.
mailes, d. round rings. magonell, an instrument to cast stones. malt, b.
melted. mansuete, l. gentle. maumet, mahumet, b. a toil, babble, idol. mannish,
(virago) b. stout. mauis, f. a bushel. make it, hinder it. maint, mingled.
malt, melted. matire, f. matter. mani, g. madness. masday, b. holy day.
maysondew, f. an hospital. malure, f. mischance. malebouch, f. wicked mouth. *
Mercury crude, l. Quicksilver; for the killing whereof I read thus; Argentum
vivum extinguitur cum forti admixtione salivae hominis, donec dispereat, and
dico, quod si projeceris super ipsum aquam fluentem, si redierit ad primam
dispositi
(...)
