THE GREAT SCANDERBERG: A NOVEL.

Done out of French.

LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley, at the Post House, in Russel Street in
Covent Garden, 1690.

To the Honored Madam JEPHSON.
COuld the exactness of this Performance but equal the greatness of my Subject,
or that Goodness that put me upon it, I should then have done that out of
Choice, which I do now out of Obedience.

Nothing less than your Commands could have engaged me in the Attempt, and
nothing less than your Character could have protected me in it.

Indeed my Hero is all Glory and Triumph, but yet he assures me this is his
highest; and that he is more warmly affected with the Dedication, than with the
Success of his Adventures. But, Madam, what e're his Satisfactions may be, mine
must be allowed to exceed them, on whom you have lain so many Obligations, that
I must own them greater than all things, but the Generosity that conferred
them, or the Humility that received them; and which to acknowledge, shall be as
much the endeavors, as it is now the desires of,

MADAM, Your most Obliged, most humble, and most devoted Servant. N. V.

TO THE READER.
IF Love is a Weakness, one must confess there is none that ought sooner to be
excused, or that is Authorized by so many Examples. It would be a hard matter
to find a Man of any Note, who has never been in Love: The greatest Heroes
could not defend themselves against its Power, and they valued their Crowns of
Myrtle, no less than those of Laurel; the Pleasures which arose to their
Ambitious Minds from their many Exploits, and Illustrious Conquests, did not
seem to them so sweet, as those of Love. Alexander, and Caesar, who had under
their Command almost half the World, thought it Glorious for themselves to obey
that Sex, which has always been the fairest part of it. Hercules himself, that
Prodigy of Strength and Valor, preferred the Fetters of a Woman, to the Honor
of upholding Heaven, and the Gods themselves. One of Omphala's threatening looks
could make this invincible Hero tremble, his Armor was no Proof against her
Charms; her Distaff easily took place of his Club, and his Lions Skin
surrendered to a Woman's Attire. Mars himself the God of War, could not resist
the Charms of the Goddess of Love, and he never thought himself so happy, as
when he shared with Vulcan the Favors of Venus. Since then the greatest
Heroes, and the Gods themselves, have been thus enamored; how can any wonder,
that the Victorious Scanderberg, should yield to the Charms of Arianissa? This
formidable Captain, who never fought without Victory, killed near two thousand
Turks, with his own hand, without receiving the least wound; but Love did what
all his Enemies could not do, and wounded the Heart of this Invulnerable
Conqueror. Arianissa, though but a Slave, loaded with Chains that Vanquisher of
the most powerful Emperor in the World. But how passionate soever this King of
Albania was, Love could never draw one word from him, or compel him to an
Action, unworthy of himself. The person who inspires him with these Discourses,
and these Designs, is used to make Heroes both Speak and Act. And I am
confident that the Amors of Scanderberg, will be as pleasant to the Ladies, as
the great Transactions of his Life have seemed wonderful to those who have read
them in his History.

The Great Scanderberg. A NOVEL.
Valor and Virtue, appeared never with more Splendor, than in the Person of
the Invincible Scanderberg. This Prince was Bred up in the Seraglio of the
Cruel Amurat, preserved there his Manners incorrupt, and his Virtue may be
proposed for an Example to all the Monarchs in the World. After he had freed
himself from a shameful Slavery, recovered his Father's Dominions, struck
Terror, by his Immortal Actions, into the heart of him who had Captivated his
Youth, he saw all his Lands Invaded by the Forces of the Ottoman Empire, which
the angry Sultan led in Person to the sight of the Walls of Croya, a Famous
City, and the ordinary abode of the Kings of Albania.

Scanderberg since his return, had led there a Life which might have been
called happy, if Love had not mixed its sad Displeasures with the advantage of
reigning over the hearts of all his Subjects; he had bore the dreadfullest
brunts of War with unimaginable constancy; he had won Battles, conquered
Provinces, vanquished every where, and given Matter enough to Posterity for
celebrating his Praises, there were still remaining some formidable Enemies,
powerful by their number, and dreadful for their fury, whose only intent was to
oppress him; but the fear of their Arms was not the thing, that disturbed his
rest: Some more tender concerns, cast him into a sorrowful Condition, and if
care of his Subjects, by whom he was extremely beloved, had not kept him at
Croya, he had gone himself to the Camp of the Enemy, to seek out the absent and
unfortunate Arianissa; all the moments which he gave to other Affairs, seemed
to him as so many Crimes against his Love; and Croya, which he could not leave
with Honor, was a sorrowful abode for him, by reason of Arianissa's Absence.

Notwithstanding the care of those, that feared for his Liberty, he did seek
sometimes Solitary Places, to sigh there with more Freedom, and would go a
considerable way from Croya. One Morning going out with Vranus only, he steered
his course toward a Valley that seemed more agreeable with his Melancholy.

The Turks had made already many Incursions, and gained some small Advantages,
which the Sorrow of Scanderberg seemed to neglect. Vranus being solicitous for
his Master's danger, who was come so near his powerful Enemy, and having given
him a considerable while to think by himself, stopped him at last, and showing
him Amurat's Tents, spoke thus to him; Do you intend, My Lord, to go to the
Sultan's Camp, and do you seriously reflect upon that numerous Army, which
bears such an ill will to your Person: That Life for which thou art so
solicitous, answered the King of Albania, is not dear enough to me, to take any
care of it; and my Eyes, deprived of the sight of Arianissa, long to be
deprived of that of the day: What, will you, My Lord, replied Vranus, expose to
a dreadful Fate, a thing which is so dear to Arianissa? I know what your Valor
can do; but in our present Condition -- In our present Condition, said
Scanderberg, do you think that the Army of Amurat can make me tremble? Was I
but certain of seeing Arianissa again, I would venture to fight it my self
alone: yes sure (added he, with one of those threatening looks, which had been
often the Presages of his Victories) I would endeavor it. As he was going on,
some groaning that he heard from behind the Trees interrupted him. The Prince
was Naturally bountiful, and thinking that might be some oppressed Person who
wanted help, he run thither with haste, and found a Man wallowing in his Blood,
this Man was a Turk, but Scanderberg whom no prejudice could hinder from being
kind, drew nearer him, and knew presently (though in the Pangs of Death) Aradin,
the first of the Eunuchs of Amurat, who had taken care of him in his Infancy,
and by whom he was tenderly beloved; the unfortunate Aradin, though dying, knew
also the Features of the King of Albania, and, fetching a deep sigh, he said,
Oh, Scanderberg! Amurat! Arianissa! Knave and perfidious Musselman, I dye. And
really he did so. This strange event was but a new increase of Grief for
Scanderberg: The Nanies which Aradin had pronounced, passed to his very heart;
he perceived the Eunuch had not spoke, but after he had known him, and that he
was nearly concerned in all those things, which Death had forced him to
suppress: Just Heavens, cried he, what News do you intend to tell me? Is
Arianissa Alive, or Dead? Ala^s! Uranus, my dear Uranus, what perplexity do I
find my self now in? What can I do? What can I think? My Lord, replied Vranus,
if I may conjecture any thing, Arianissa is not far from hence. Then she is in
Amurat 's Camp, replied the Amorous Prince of Albania, where she suffers the
troublesome Solicitations of a Barbarous Emperor; or those of the unworthy
Mussulman. Suppose it was so, am I the happier for it? Yes certainly, added he,
for I would go and take her away from the Ottomans.

Whilst Scanderberg was speaking, Vranus went to look whether Aradin did
breathe still, he found him cold, and without motion; but turning him, he
perceived a Paper, like a Letter, just over his Heart, and delivering it to his
Master, My Lord, said he, this Note will tell you, may be, a part of that which
the sudden Death of Aradin hindered him from uttering; the Prince opened the
Letter, and saw there a Sentence more cruel, than if it had been against his
own Life.

To the Great Vizier Orcan.
MY Love has been prevailed upon at last by my Wrath: Such a Man as I, ought
not to hearken to pity; go then Orcan, and Sacrifice the ungrateful Arianissa,
to the Shame of having made me sigh to no purpose; her Blood will quench the
rest of my Flame. Fear some opposition from Musselman, and whilst I shall
vanquish the Rebellious Scanderberg, begin my Revenge that way, which will
prove so sorrowful to him. This is the Absolute Command of

Amurat.


No Man could express the sad effects the Reading of this Letter produced in
the Soul of Scanderberg: In the first fit of his Rage, he was ready to run
toward the Ottoman Army; but Vranus, after a long, but fruitless opposition,
laying aside his wonted respect, told him at last: Do you seek an Inglorious
Death, My Lord, and will not this Triumph of the Turks, blot out all the
Splendor of your past Life? Having lost Arianissa, replied the Prince, I am
resolved to dye in her Revenge. His Despair had likely prevailed over Vranus's
Zeal, if Thopia, a young Prince, and much addicted to Scanderberg, who was
looking for him, because he knew he was gone out of Croya without his Train,
had not come in the same place. Thopia, said the King of Albania to him, None
is more worthy your pity than I: You, My Lord, answered Thopia amazed, you! the
Love, the Terror, and the Admiration of the whole World, in your first Youth,
what Mischiefs can cross so great Advantages? I perceive, replied Scanderberg,
you judge of the Felicity of my Life, by those Actions which have made a great
noise in the World; but do not decide it upon mere appearances. My Lord, added
Thopia, the Turks may surprise your Valor in this place: Let us go to Croya,
where your Presence is wished for. And so jointly with Vranus, they obliged the
Prince to go toward the City, but first they took care of the Corpse of Aradin,
some Albanian Troopers, who were riding about the City, to observe the Motion
of the Turks, carried it away by the King's Command.

Thopia knew very well that Scanderberg was in Love, but he was not acquainted
with the Particulars of his Life, and showed a great Desire to know them.
Scanderberg condescended easily to call again to mind, his most sorrowful
Ideas, that he might satisfy Thopia, whom his Friendship distinguished from all
the other Princes of his Court.

Thopia, (said he, when they were come to the Palace of Croya) you will help me
to bewail Arianissa 's, Fate, when you shall hear me, and you will confess,
that if Fortune has bestowed some Favors upon me, they have been Poisoned by
many bitter displeasures. Scanderberg gave Order none should interrupt them,
and began his Discourse after this Manner.

The History of Scanderberg.
YOU know my Mother was Daughter to the Prince of the Triballians, and that
John Castriot my Father did Reign in Epirus, and Albania; he was envied for his
Valor by Amurat, who rendered himself Formidable in Greece; after he had been
the Terror in Asia; Castriot forced to yield to the swiftness of his prosperous
Fortune, made Peace with him, and sent my three Brothers and me for Hostages,
to Adrianople. Vorsana my Mother, keeping still by her self four Daughters, to
wipe off her Tears: She expected much from my Birth, by reason of a Dream,
which she had when she was Big of me; She Dreamed she was Delivered of a
Serpent, so great; that he covered all Epirus, his head did reach to Turkey,
which he swallowed up, and he did dip his Tail in the Sea toward Venice.
Castriot having heard the Relation of this Dream from Vorsona, assured her she
should bring forth a Man fatal to the Turks, and useful to Christendom.
Nevertheless I was delivered into the hands of the first, Nothing but the
regard of the safety of his Dominions, could ever have brought him to this
Resolution, I being but eight years old, all my Brothers were Elder than I;
this Age exposed me to the Ceremonies of the Turks, wherein they changed my
Name, that was George, into that of Scanderberg, which is as much in the
Turkish Tongue, as Alexander Lord, concerning my Brothers, their Riper Age
freed them from this Violence.

The Sultan who had a good Opinion of my youth, took all the imaginable care,
to make me an Honest Gentleman: The unfortunate Aradin was made my Governor,
and never man performed his Duty, with more Zeal and Diligence. But though his
kind usage made me forget, that I was beholding for it to a Slave, yet my
Condition, and the first Impressions of Religion, which I had received, could
never be blotted out of my Memory.

I shall not relate to you what I did, from eight years, to sixteen. I learned
all Exercises necessary, both for the Body and the Mind; and Aradin did all his
Endeavors to inspire me with the love of Glory and Virtue. The Emperor who
took some delight in my Sight and Conversation, seemed always pleased with me:
I had the advantage of Signalizing my self in his presence, in the first War
wherein I was allowed to fight; and kind Fortune waiting every where upon me,
being yet but nineteen years old, I was made a Sangiac by Amurat, that is to
say, a Leader, and I was trusted by him, with the Command of five thousand
Horses; a little while after, I was nominated a Bassa, which was a Dignity that
made the Sangiacs inferior to me. I confess, my Advancement was very sudden,
but the Sultan, who foresaw I should prove useful to him, had no regard to my
Youth.

In this pass I acquired more Glory in Natoly. I was feared by the Enemies,
loved by the Turks, and esteemed by the Emperor; and I can hardly remember,
without Blushing, that after some important Victories, where certainly Amurat
had had a great share, he would call me his Right Arm, his Heart, his Eye, and
the Defender of his Estates. I enjoyed all the sweet Pleasures of Liberty,
because I was looked upon as a Turk. My Brothers Slavery would sometimes vex
me, but seeing that they did not suffer much by it, and being besides resolved
to make my self famous for the future, that was not able to put a stop to my
Ambition.

Heaven punished me for this hardness of Heart, and permitted that the Cares of
Love, should have their share in my Heart, as well as those of War: Nay, should
wholly possess it. I had not gone for a long while near the Seraglio of the
Women, and my Age did deprive me of those Caresses, I was wont to receive from
the Loveliest Sultanesses: I felt in my heart, neither Aversion nor love for
their Acquaintance. And in this quiet State of indifference, I spent in some
Exercises very pleasant to the Emperor, that leisure we enjoyed at Adrianople:
Those that were then most in favor with him, were Musselman, Bostangi Bassi,
or great Gardener, Mustapha, Bassa of the Sea, and Orcan, the now Grand Vizier.
They possessed infinite Riches, and stately Palaces, and their Families lived
in great Splendor. Musselman prevailed over the others, because in all times
and in all places, he had a free access to the Sultan, his Closet, his Counsel,
and his Gardens were equally opened to him: Proud of these advantages, he
entertained other Courtiers so coldly, that he seemed to despise them, but
because I was loved by Amurat, and he desired to keep in his Favor, I did not
find the same reception as the rest. I had a Natural aversion against him, but
I had learnt Dissimulation, in a Court, where that Art was so necessary.

About this time there came to Adrianople a Tartar Prince, whom Curiosity had
brought thither, the like man had never been seen before, he was of a
prodigious height; being a foot taller than any of the rest of the Turks. Though
he was Proud, and Rude, yet he was received like a Prince, by Amurat; it was
reported he was famous over all Tartary for his Exploits; and he had never
fought without Victory; proud of his own Reputation, he little regarded others
civility; unfortunately for him, he contradicted me in any thing that I said;
we were used to talk about Warlike Matters, and one day he was so presumptuous,
as to tell me that the Victory over twenty such Men as me, would be no
difficult attempt for him; being impatient, I defied him to fight me in a Duel,
in the Emperor's sight. The Tartar was amazed at my boldness, and accepted of
the Challenge: Amurat, who feared the loss of my Life, opposed it: But I craved
his leave so instantly, that at last he consented to it.

The seeming unequality between my Adversary and me, affrighted all those who
loved me, and I was likely the only man who was not alarmed: The Field for the
Fight, was appointed in a spacious piece of ground, which lay over against the
Seraglio. The Emperor gave leave to the Sultanesses, and Slaves, to get upon
the Towers, to see this Spectacle; and other Women, whose Houses looked upon
that place, had the same License.

At last the hour appointed for the Fight came, and we appeared before a
numberless multitude of Spectators. The Tartar began to jeer me bitterly, for
my Age and Weakness, but it was not long before I punished him for it, and my
blows were so fortunate, that after an hours Resistance, he expired in the
sight of all the Assembly. There were never heard so many Acclamations of joy
among the Turks, as after my Victory; they esteemed it a prodigy, and I was
looked upon with great Respect: I carried the Giant's Sword to the Emperor's
Feet, who embraced me, and though some Persons envied me for the Honor of that
day, those that were the Wisest, followed easily Amurat's Example.

The Tartars took away their Master's Corpse, of which they disposed as they
pleased; and for my part, I followed the Sultan to the Seraglio; the Prince
Mahomet, his eldest Son, had received from Heaven some eminent Parts, which had
been cultivated to a great advantage; we lived very freely between us, and though
one could not see that store of sincere Friendship, which ties closely two
hearts together, yet we were not indifferent one to another; he praised my
Action, and civily congratulated me for it.

That same night to avoid the Crowd, of which I was already weary, we went
together, at the Moonshine, upon the Sea Shore, just behind the Seraglio of
the Women; after we had walked a long while, in a very pleasant place,
encompassed one way by the River, and toward the Seraglio with a Hedge so
thick, that it rendered the Gardens more inaccessible, than any strong wall. We
were ready to retire, when a Charming Voice, Sung distinctly these words in the
Greek Tongue.

Since here a Captive, void of all relief,
I bend beneath the weight of deadly Grief;
Why, cruel Love, do thou increase my pains,
And add new Slavery to my former Chains?
The sound of this Voice passed through my Ears, to my very Heart. I had never
felt before any tender motions, and my free and indifferent Soul was capable of
any impression. That! Song was repeated many times: Mahomet hearkened to it with
as much attention as my self, we knew well there were in the Seraglio many Fair
Sultanesses, and Lovely Slaves, whom Europe, and Asia, had offered; but they
were altogether unknown to us: One has never the more Privilege in the
Seraglio, for being either the Sultan's Son, or his Favorite; for their
jealousy is so careful, in hiding what they design for their Pleasures, that
unless kind Fortune favors a man, he can never come to know it.

The Prince, and I having heard this Charming Voice, we knew the person who had
sung it, was not alone, because another began to speak in Greek, but with a
Barbarous pronunciation, Does that Song concern you, said she to another, and
have you lost your Heart in this place, where we see but unpleasant Objects?
Suppose what you said was true; answered another, it would be a hard matter for
my Heart to explain its thoughts in a Song; you have desired me to Sing, and I
have done it: How happy are you, Arianissa, to keep your Heart so free, and
represent another Distemper, without fear of being infected with it; how happy
are you, but how unfortunate is Selimana? You are the Object of the Sultan 's
most tender Affection, answered Arianissa, and that is the only thing that may
well satisfy you, in this Everlasting Retirement. What can you desire more,
Madam, since you are the Sovereign Mistress of him, who can dispose of all?
Though Ambition is well pleased with that advantage, continued Selimana, sighing,
a Soul as nice as mine cannot be contented; and if you had ever been in Love,
you would quickly apprehend my meaning. Alas, Madam, I have had so many
Misfortunes in my Life, that I willingly renounce to that Experiment, replied
Arianissa, with a Charming Sweetness; well, interrupted Selimana, since you do
not know the cause of my suffering, at least do not condemn it. A power which I
cannot resist, forces me to utter this Secret without blushing. I love, I love,
Arianissa, the Prince Scanderberg, and his Victory over the Tartar, is not the
only one he has got to day; he has seemed to my Eyes as Lovely, as he was
formidable to his Enemy, and that short space of time, has assured to him the
possession of my heart for ever.

I cannot relate to you Selimana's Kindness without blushing: But you must be
acquainted with it, that you may the better understand how amazed the young
Sultan and I were. I was loved without knowing by whom, and such a man as I
might have been well pleased with the Idea of this Adventure; but besides that,
Selimana seemed too passionate to deserve my Heart; she was a Sacred Object for
me, being the beloved Sultaness of Amurat, I was more taken with Arianissa's
Modesty, and though I did not wish her so passionate as the other, I could have
desired she had not been insensible.

Some noise made them retire; the Prince drew nearer me, when he heard them no
longer, and clasping his Arm about my Neck, whatever good Opinion you entertain
of your self, said he, did you think, Scanderberg, that Mars, and Love, should
intend to bestow their Favors upon you at the same time? My Lord, replied I
smiling, if we had more Freedom at Adrianople, I would tell you that this
adventure is but a sham. You see, added Mahomet, that there is nothing but what
is Natural in it; the hour, the place, and the person who spoke, in a word, all
things witness your good Fortune, and you have nothing to do, but to rejoice.
Alas, My Lord, said I, though my Heart was susceptible enough, to fall so
easily in Love, I should never forget what I owe to the Sultan. Selimana may be
a charming Person, what she said may flatter me, but Amurat is Emperor, and
worthy of my Loyalty. You think, replied Mahomet, that a great Zeal for his
Passion, will make me betray yours. No, My Lord, interrupted I something
hastily, I know you are generous, and discreet, and I speak what I think. We
went then into the Seraglio, and we parted at the same time.

I did never go to Bed without seeing Aradin; that day pleased with the Honors
I had received, he did not fail to be in my Chamber; as because I had no
acquaintance in the Seraglio of the Women, and all things were changed there,
since my Infancy, I asked him several questions, which surprised him. I
inquired of him concerning Selimana; he answered me, that she was always the
dearest Object of Amurat's Love, who had preferred her to all things, and he
drew her Picture with great carefulness: After that, I asked him about
Arianissa; and my Curiosity about a Slave, who probably was unknown to me,
seemed the more surprising to him. I don't know, Scanderberg, said he to me,
what is your Design, but I can assure you, that among all the Women in the
World, I think there is none more Lovely, than Arianissa; with a perfect Beauty
she possesses a wonderful Wit and Virtue, and I cannot but wonder, that the
Emperor has not yet cast his Eyes upon her: I hearkened to Aradin, with a
trouble which I had never felt before; what ever he said about Arianissa, were
^^ many pleasant wounds to my heart, and I may say, I was in Love, before I had
seen whom I loved; after a long Conversation, I thought I could not hide it
from Aradin; he was afflicted at it, and knowing how dear Selimana was to the
Sultan, and his jealous, and violent Temper, he used his utmost care to make me
understand, how dangerous to me such a concurrence would prove. I assured him,
I had no disposition to love Selimana, however I discovered not my thoughts
concerning Arianissa, but passed the whole night in fancying her to my self, as
lovely, as the Eunuch had described her; I found not my self the following day,
as I had been hitherto; is it possible that Arianissa should be prepossessed
with some tender Inclination, said I sighing, and can my Heart, which she takes
from me, hope any comfort from her? I had no sooner uttered those words, but I
found them unworthy of a man, whose only Ambition was to be great. I knew that
violent Passions were looked upon as a weakness, and my Love for an unknown
Object, seemed to me strange and worthy; nevertheless, it was formidable, and I
could not conquer it as I had done the Tartar.

I was forced to open my Heart to Aradin, who condemned me to think never upon
her, since I could not hope to have any Conversation with her.

There happened then an extraordinary thing at Adrianople, and which is seldom
seen among the Turks: The Sultan of Egypt had sent a magnificent Embassy; and
some rich Presents to Amurat, who to show his Grandeur to Strangers, in the
seat of his Empire, gave them a public Audience, that day the Women went from
their Seraglio, to that of the Sultan's adorned with the most precious things
the East could afford, Selimana, the beloved, as I told you before, appeared
shining with her Natural Beauty, and abundance of Ornaments; She was followed
by a hundred, in the same Splendor, and by an infinite number of young Slaves,
dressed with less Art, but certainly worthy of another Condition: To make this
Spectacle seem the greater, they wore golden Chains, and they had been loaded
with Essences, and Baskets full of Flowers, which they spread in a great Hall,
at whose end, the Sultanesses sat upon rich Cushions, these Slaves stood round
about them, and the Emperor sat upon a Splendid Throne, whose steps were
occupy'd by his chiefest Officers.

After this manner, Thopia, we saw the Secret Court of Amurat, when the Turks
and Egyptians had a free access to the Hall. Selimana sat in a higher place
than the others, and her Beauty, as well as her Rank, distinguished her from
the rest: But among the Slaves who were round about her, the young Arianissa
neglected, and blushing, for appearing before so many witnesses, in a condition
so unworthy of her, was remarkable, in spite of her self, for her Charms. I
could not know her as being Arianissa; but my heart took notice of her, as of
an Object which it was resolved to adore. And according to what I had conceived
of her, upon Aradin's Relation, I wished Aranissa, and that Slave might be the
same; upon that account I abandoned my self to the Passion that possesses me,
and which will never end.

I shall not relate to you what was done there, having taken no notice of the
Ceremony; Arianissa only had all my looks and my attention, neither did I mind
whether Selimana cast her eyes upon me, as caring little for her Favor.

I ran to Aradin as soon as the Sultanesses and the Slaves were retired. Love
which first had engaged me by the adventure I had had with Mahomet, made me
feel now all its power: The Eunuch was amazed at the violence of my Passion,
and was almost angry. My dear Scanderberg, said he to me, you know me well
enough, not to question the sincerity of my advices; what can you hope from an
affection, whose consequences must needs be unfortunate? Fortune condemns
Arianissa to be a Slave for ever; will you confine the Glory of your life in an
hopeless Love? And don't you deserve to be blamed for the unreasonableness of
the design? I confess, Arianissa is a Charming Person, and according to all
probability her Birth is not mean: But what can you hope from her as long as
she is in the Seraglio, where all things breathe only for Amurat 's Pleasure?
Can you fetch out Arianissa in spite of so many Persons, who watch always to
satisfy the Emperor's jealousy? And will you not deserve his hatred, for
breaking these Laws, the least violation of which deserves Death; reflect upon
your self, Scanderberg, forget Arianissa, who can ruin you. Consider you are a
Prince designed for extraordinary things, and covered already with a Glory
which you ought to preserve.

This Discourse of Aradin, which his affection created, confounded my reason,
but did not persuade my heart: My Love for Arianissa was too strong, and it
could not be prevailed on by his Advices, no more than by my own Reflections;
he perceived well my sad Condition, but seeing it was impossible to alter my
mind, he exhorted me not to rule my Conduct according to my blind Passion, but
to have a special regard to Amurat's Severity, and to take my measures
accordingly.

I felt all the griefs of Love, as soon as I knew Arianissa; the impossibility
of seeing her was to me a most cruel pain, despair often makes us slight those
things we desire to obtain, but the difficulties I met with here, did but
inflame me the more.

As if the Obstacles before mentioned, bad not been enough, there arose against
me three formidable Rivals. The Emperor, who had never before looked upon
Arianissa, found her so Beautiful the day of the Public Audience of the
Egyptians, that Selimana seemed to him less Charming. Prince Mahomet, who had
not till then entertained any other thought, but the fear of the common Fate of
the Princes of his Blood, and who had carried himself so well, toward the
Sultan, as not to give him any just cause of Anger or Jealousy, paid to
Arianissa's Beauty, what was due to her from all tender Hearts. And Musselman,
who ought to have rested satisfied with the amorous intrigues, which either his
Inclination or good Fortune had procured him, looked upon her with the same
eyes as we did.

I knew not for a long while their thoughts, and I was very careful to hide
mine. Mahomet became melancholy; and for my part, I loved Solitude so much,
that I could scarce cast my eyes upon those things which formerly had so much
pleased me; we neglected our Warlike Exercises, we minded no more those
Pleasures which we had been so desirous of before, and Solitude was the only
thing we sought after: All admission in the Seraglio of the Women being
forbidden to us, we were continually in the passages to it; where ever my Love
guided me, I did meet there Mahomet: Musselman was happier than we, his Employ,
whose Authority is almost unlimited, did give him access where we could not go,
and we may think he made use of his advantages.

As I was used to spend most part of the day and night about those places,
which hide Arianissa from my sight, I did sometimes forget my self there. One
night I tarried so long in the Emperor's Garden, which was next to that of the
Women, that the Gates were shut up: All the Bostangi's had retired, no body was
up any longer in the Seraglio, no light appeared there, and I was fain to stay
there till day, after I had endeavored to no purpose to get out toward the
Sea.

As I was withdrawing in a retired place, to spend there the rest of the night,
I saw a man crossing the great Flower Garden, and marching toward me with all
possible haste: By avoiding him, I had confessed my self guilty, therefore going
toward him, I perceived it was the Emperor. What do you do here, Scanderberg,
said he to me, with a severe Countenance? being bred up in Our Palaces, and
well instructed with our Customs, ought you to show this Example of boldness to
so many Persons, who can make an ill use of it, and have you some secret design
against my Rest, my Life, or my Authority? I have nothing to say to thy
Highness for my Justification, answered I, and I appear guilty enough, to
deserve thy indignation; but I must say this, that a melancholy humor is the
cause of the fault for which thou blamest me, and I swear I have tarryed here
minding not the place where I was. You are so dear to me, replied the Emperor,
that I am concerned with all your sorrows, and if you have any reason for any,
not only I forgive you this fault, but shall do my endeavors to satisfy you.
Thine Highness, said I, is too kind, and ought not to trouble it self about so
small trifles; the want of Employment is the cause of my sorrow, and thy
Highness, leaving nothing to do for us, makes my young Courage grumble at its
being idle. You have done enough to desire Peace, and enjoy some Rest, replied
the Sultan, but if your Valor wants exercise, I promise you some. Go home
quietly, and expect from me such Employments, as are worthy of a Hero, who
intends to surpass all the Ottomans.

I made a very humble bow to the Emperor, glad I had pacified him, and went
away as he directed me; but that Night was to bring forth other adventures.
Prince Mahomet, brought there by the same motives as I, had been also shut in,
and we saw him coming toward us, thinking we were some Bostangi's, or Eunuchs:
Is this a fit time for you to be here, said the angry Emperor to him, and are
you my Son, only to show your self unworthy of being so? The young Prince was
struck with these words, he saw me, and thought concerning me the same thing I
did concerning him. I have sinned against my own will, My Lord, answered he to
the Sultan, but I protest to thy Highness I shall come hither no more. A third
man who did steal behind the Hedge more slily than we had done, hindered the
Sultan's reply; he did go toward the Women's Lodgings, a place which had always
seemed suspicious to Amurat, but chiesly now in the beginning of his new
Passion; but his fear and vexation increased when he heard Arianissa's fine
voice, with which he was already acquainted, sing these words.

Go on, observe the Dictates of your Love,
The Favors of the shady night improve.
Suppress these sighs which from disorders flow,
And let your noble Flame yet higher grow,
Yield him your heart, his pleasing rules obey,
Who is a God, and does direct your way.
The Sultan felt then all the powers of jealousy, esteeming that Song to be
the signal: we were guilty all three, and never did an innocent Adventure
afford greater cause of suspicion to a passionate Lover: He ran to the third
Adventurer, and knew him presently to be Musselman, whom Arianissa's voice had
stopped.

None of us was a contemptible person, and though Mahomet and I had some
advantages above Musselman, by reason of our Youth, and natural parts, yet his
Authority in the Gardens might be of a great use to a forward man. Though the
Bostangi Bassa had some privileges and few set hours, yet Amurat thought him
more guilty than us. Musselman, said he to him, with that pride which is
natural to all the Sultans, what brings you hither at an hour, when no duty
requires your presence? Was it to introduce you to the Sultanesses, that a
Slave sung just now, and do you leave your house only to come and trouble me in
mine?

Musselman was not amazed at this upbraiding, he is Naturally bold, and
answering without any commotion, I thought, my Lord, replied he, I could not
have too much Zeal for thine Highness, and that all the hours of the day and
night, were free for my Loyalty; by thy Kindness I command in the Gardens, but
I know how to stay in mine, as soon as I shall perceive that my Services are
suspected. I believe, said the Emperor, I shall not be able to unriddle this
Mystery; I will moderate my own Temper, let us retire, and let us be more
careful for the future: So we retired into the Seraglio: I don't question but
Musselman suspected both the Prince's Love and mine. Amurat whom his reflect
thoughts had brought to the Garden at that hour against his Custom, doubled
the Guards toward the Seraglio of the Women, and gave more severe orders to
the Eunuchs, which some faithfully observed.

Aradin upbraided me the next day for my wandering: We concluded Mahomet and
Musselman were my Rivals, and hoping to cure me, he assured me the Emperor was
deeply in Love with Arianissa: That Passion could not destroy mine, though it
ruined all my hopes, I feared neither the Prince nor Musselman, whose condition
was not better than mine: But I ought to fear all things from the Sultan, whose
inclinations were violent, and whose will nothing was able to resist. I sighed
for this with Aradin, I became more circumspect before the Prince; and avoiding
the Gardens, contented my self with the Entertainment my Melancholy Thoughts
enjoyed upon the Sea Shore.

I understood one day, that the Emperor was going to bathe with some
Sultanesses, in a little Island, from Adrianople about an hours journey; he was
used to take secretly such Pastimes, and then he would put off for a while all
sorts of Gravity; his Galley was so shut, that the Sultanesses could neither
see nor be seen; it was led by some Bostangi's, and Musselman by virtue of his
place was at the head of them, but that honor procured him no advantage, since
he could see nothing but his Bostangi's.

But my Jealousy was so strong, that I went all along the Sea a very great way
from Adrianople, and casting my looks as far as they could reach, I saw
something over the water, carried away by the stream: I thought I perceived a
Vail, and believing it might be a Woman ready to be drowned, I threw my self
presently into the water, and using my little Skill, I swam with all possible
diligence, and took really into my Arms a woman, who was almost choked.

I doubled my efforts to get to the Shore, and as soon as I was there, I
perceived it was Arianissa: You may judge, Dear Thopia, what was my grief when
I saw the only thing that was dear to me, in such a lamentable condition,
Merciless Fate, cried I, ought you to have offered her to me in such a
condition? O fair, but unwise Arianissa, why did you seek your death, in so
little important a Pleasure? This transport of mine did not hinder me from
assisting her. I lifted her head, and bending a little the rest of her body,
abundance of water rushed out of it, and within a short while, she recovered
her Breath; this relief called again the natural heat which seemed to have
forsaken her, and drove away part of my Allarms, after a deep sigh, she opened
her Eyes, and seeing her self alone with a man, having but a thin gown on, she
was willing to change her posture. Knowing her Design, and desirous to please
her, I let her set down upon the Grass, and seeing she was able to understand
me; Fair Arianissa, said I, that Fate which has exposed your Life, has been
favorable to my Affection, but let not this adventure trouble you, since
Scanderberg would sooner lose his Life, than his respect toward your Person.

Arianissa sighed twice or thrice, and was some while without answering me, but
at last she replied: Though my Life be not dear to me, My Lord, I am not the less
beholding to you; if you had not been so generous, you had freed me from many
Misfortunes; but you could not have guest my condition. I was as much moved
with Arianissa's words, as with her languishing Charms. I know not what Fate
Heaven designs for you, but I shall think my self happy for ever, since I have
been serviceable to you; in another time, and under another Government, I
should take other measures, and should not let you know my Love, till my
Services and Respect had sufficiently demonstrated it; and deserved your
consent; but as things stand now, how is it possible to see you in a Palace,
where we can have no admission? and how can one speak with you, since it is in
vain to hope to come near you? I Love you, I am forced to acquaint you with it,
and if this free Confession renders me guilty, I shall never repine at my
Punishment, I was the same before I had seen you, and I adored your Virtue,
without knowing your Person. What Discourse is this, My Lord, interrupted
Arianissa, with a charming Sweetness? Is this to try me? Do you consider that I
am a Slave, subject to the Emperor of the Turks, loaded with Chains by
Selimana, and who likely shall not see you any more in all her life time? as
for your present condition, said I, it is an injury of Fortune, which may
easily be repaired, and if you desire to put an end to your Captivity, do but
trust me, and, follow me. What can you do, Scanderberg, cried that fair
Captive? You have Valor enough to overcome Amurat 's Enemies, but you are not
strong enough to deliver me from his Tyraany.

I had done, may be, more than Arianissa could hope for, if on one side
Mahomet, who had followed my steps, had not arrived near us, and on the other,
we had not seen the Emperor's Galley, returning to Constantinople grievously
afflicted, to have seen Arianissa carried away by the Stream wherein she had
fallen, advancing too far in the Bath: Too happy Scanderberg, said the jealous
Prince to me, why don't you content your self with Selimana's Favors? I was
vexed at this Discourse, and Arianissa Blushed: I saw the young Sultan had no
mind to oblige me, but I had not time to let him know my anger. Amurat, in a
kind of Despair, whose eyes sought Arianissa every where, perceived us upon the
Shore, and came to deprive me of what I had acquired, with the hazard of my own
life: He told me confusedly, I had done him a good piece of Service; and
Arianissa, passing into the Galley, assured me by a kind look, she was not
insensible of what I had done for her. I cannot express what my amorous heart
suffered at this parting. Though I had feared it, yet I thought it would not be
so sudden, and I could hardly hide my sorrow.

Scanderberg, said Mahomet to me, we are both in Love with Arianissa, but though
the Laws render our Fortunes equal, by forbidding us from seeing her, yet you
have some advantages that may comfort you for that Misfortune. I could deny to
you, what are my Sentiments, concerning Arianissa, answered I, since any
generous man ought to have done what I did, and that I knew not it was she,
when I went about to serve her, but I cannot dissemble, and I must confess that
I love her. I perceived, My Lord, you were my Rival, and a jealous Rival too,
who cared not to oblige me, when you spoke to me concerning Selimana. Can you
wonder, I should promote my own heart's interest, replied the young Sultan?
Arianissa is not beloved by the Emperor, and were you not my Rival, may be I
should have none. You are mistaken, Mahomet, added I; the Emperor has changed
his Love: What is he in Love with Arianissa, replied he? Yes, said I. Alas!
continued he sighing, what hope can flatter us? and suppose we should follow
the advices of the most violent jealousy, what advantage will that afford us?
Then we entered into Adrianople, where the Emperor was already returned, and
we put an end to our Discourse.

I met Aradin who was looking for me, knowing what had past. Having done so
much for my person, said I to him, embracing him, will you attempt nothing for
my rest? will you abandon me to those sorrows, that Love threatens me with? and
will all your acquaintance in the Seraglio prove fruitless? I ought to employ
them only for the Sultan's Service, replied Aradin, and my Zeal can afford you
but a weak assistance; though you are infinitely dear to me, I am forced to see
you suffer, without attempting any thing in your behalf. I see Amurat is mad
because you have seen Arianissa, he fears without knowing why, and we shall
become Slaves to his jealousy. Is that your way of comforting me, dear Aradin,
cried I? But what will you have, replied the Eunuch, and what can one do under
a Master so powerful, and so formidable as Amurat? Do you think Arianissa will
be able to resist him? and suppose she had no real Love for him, she must still
fear and obey him. Aradin's discourse, filled my mind with so dreadful Ideas,
that I was like to dye for Grief, and he saw me so much afflicted, that he
could not deny me the Favor of carrying a Letter from me to Arianissa. It Is
likely I shall pay dear enough, said he, for what I am going to do for you; but
I shall easily comfort my self, if you are fully persuaded of my sincere
Friendship. I embraced Aradin, and having wrote what Love dictated to me, I
delivered the Billet to his care: There are but these few words in it.

The Prince Scanderberg to Arianissa.
I Could wish, fair Arianissa, for my heart's rest, that you were less amiable,
or less beloved; pity me for having so many misfortunes to suffer, and so many
Enemies to overcome: You cannot but be sorry for my condition, since for the
reward of my Passionate and Faithful Heart, which I present you with, the only
thing I ask, is the leave of telling you, I shall adore you for ever.


The officious Aradin took all the imaginable care to come near Arianissa, but
he could not that day, she was so wearied by her last Misfortune, that she was
forced to keep her Bed. The Emperor took no longer any care to hide his new
Passion, but owned it publicly. Arianissa had a private Apartment for her
self; and Selimana, tormented with other cares, was not sensible at first of
the shame of being forsaken.

But Arianissa was insensible of the marks of the Sultan's Love, so much wished
for by the other Women of the Seraglio. Amurat sighed like other Lovers at the
first growth of his Passion; after that he would fain go farther: But Arianissa
was equally displeased with his Sighs and Haughtiness, and showed a repugnancy
which he little expected, and which was looked upon by him as a Prodigy in a
Girl of her Age and condition; the more because his violent desires had never
met before with such a resistance.

Aradin, a zealous and diligent Friend, performed his errand as soon as he
could; he found Arianissa alone, melancholy, and thinking doubtless upon what
she was to suffer from the Sultan. Fair Arianissa, said he to her, all moments
are here precious, and I ought not to neglect them. Scanderberg, famous for his
Valor, and remarkable for his rare and great Qualities, (forgive me, Thopia,
if I use Aradin's words, to avoid all digressions) Scanderberg, say I, kept far
from you by a barbarous Law, desires you might know his Zea and Constancy; and
to that purpose he is forced to make use of this innocent means. Then the
Eunuch offered her the Billet: But she who knew not our intimate friendship
thought he was come to try her. These Intreagues are not allowed in the
Seraglio, answered she; we might pay both dear enough for them; and your Master
is not so kind a Prince as to permit them. Leave off therefore this Playing,
which cannot but displease me, and may prove fatal to your self: And believe,
that I care neither to love nor to be loved. You may suspect me of
Perfideousness, replied Aradin, seeing it is so common among the Turks, and
because I am altogether unknown to you. But, Arianissa, do not entertain such a
thought concerning me; and do not wrong so far the Prince Scanderberg; he loves
you, and you cannot, but with a Cruelty blameworthy, deny him the favor to
read what he writes to you. Arianissa, after a long resistance, took at last
the Paper, and kept her eyes fixed upon it a considerable while; so that likely
she read it more than once. Aradin observed her, and told me afterward, that
he had perceived in her looks a trouble which favored me, that she had sighed,
and seemed to feel some tender motions in her heart; and considering her and my
own condition, she had said, alas, Aradin, what can the Prince Scanderberg
expect from me, who can dispose of nothing, and find my self bound in that
unfortunate place where my ill Fortune detains me? All his desire, replied
Aradin, is, you would permit him to love you, and that your kindness might be
concerned in all his misfortunes. Suppose I should do what he desires, added
Arianissa, would his condition be the happier? Bid him, sooner forget me, and
if he finds in me any thing that deserves his affection, let him consider, that
all sorts of Conversation is forbidden us; let him take care, not to attempt
any hazardous enterprise that may either undo him or endanger my self; let him
be careful chiefly of his own life. Arianissa, interrupted Aradin, is your
heart so much concerned for his life as to desire its preservation? Ask me no
such questions, replied the fair Slave blushing, and do only what I bid you.
Arianissa, said the officious Aradin, one word from your hand would do more
with him than any thing I can tell him. You ask for too much, replied
Arianissa, and you know your self, I ought not to do what you desire; that all
things are dangerous here, and that very often the most secret Actions become
public. I tremble even now for reason of this conversation; be gone, Aradin,
and leave me to my dreadful sorrow. I leave you to the Sultan's love, replied
Aradin. Cruel misfortune of my Life, and cause of all my Miseries, cried
Arianissa; how dearly have I paid for that love which I abhor? and what sorrows
I am like to suffer upon its account? Some body coming, obliged them to part.
Arianissa kept my Letter, and Aradin came to me to acquaint me with what had
passed.

The Emperor's love was too violent not to be followed by an extraordinary
jealousy; his suspicious increased excessively; and considering Arianissa's
coldness, he thought that either her heart was not free when she came to the
Seraglio, or that since she had fallen in love. His meeting me in the Gardens,
my good fortune upon the Seashoar, and my deep melancholy, which I was no more
able to hide, raised great suspicions in his mind. And though my condition was
but little different from Musselman's, or the Prince's, yet I seemed to him
more formidable than they, by reason of my good Fortune: He observed carefully
all my steps, took notice of my Eyes, which were always turned toward the
Seraglio, explained to himself the meaning of my troubles, and of my Sighs; and
in a word, did not question but I was in love. You may easily conjecture
whether it was an easy matter for me to attempt any thing, being watched by
such an Argus. Aradin, who perceived his jealousy, was continually advising me
how I ought to steer my Conduct, and in this uneasy condition I spent many sad
and useless days.

But, Thopia, I was not the only Man who was troubled. Musulman loved
exceedingly Arianissa: The same Passion wholly possessed Mahomet; and Selimana
being forsaken by the Emperor, began to be sensible of the injury done her
Beauty, and thought the only way to be revenged, was to get a new Lover.

There is always a prodigious number of Eunuchs in the Seraglio, whose duty is
to observe the Sultanesses, and to serve them, and those are picked out from
among the ugliest. Selimana's favor had gained her the zeal of the most
considerable of them: Amaldan had always stuck to her interest; and since
Amurat's new Passion gave her time to mind her own, she managed so well the
Eunuch's Zeal, that he was willing to do her any Service.

Amaldan was about forty years old, he was black and ugly, but witty and bold,
and in a word, a fit Confident to serve Selimana: It had looked a little odd,
if he had acquainted me without any more ado with Selimana's tender affection.
She knew not what the Prince and I had heard, and therefore she could make no
use of that Adventure; had she directly written to me, it was likely my Heart
had not been pleased with that freedom; she therefore wholly relied upon
Amaldan's wit: Having been bred up a Scholar, he understood Greek perfectly
well, and was well nough acquainted with the niceties of Poetry; he thought
therefore his best way at first, was to show me some witty Verses; and having
made some fit for his purpose, he accosted me upon a Terrass in the great
Seraglio's Gardens where, in a melancholy Humor, I was looking upon the
Stream that watered the foot of the Walls. Who could believe, my Lord, said he
to me, that a Prince of your Age and Parts would seek solitary places without
being in love? Was your Heart free, you would not shun with so much care other
Men's Conversation. I beg your pardon, my Lord, for my boldness; but your
natural bounty will excuse this freedom, which is not ordinarily used toward
Persons of your rank, but in whatever condition you are, either free, or not,
those that honor you as much as I do, ought to do always their endeavors to
divert you. I blushed, hearing Amaldan, speak thus, fearing lest he should
suspect something. My Lord, said he then, one does not blush except he has
some reason for it, and this commotion proceeds likely from your Heart. But
without piercing too far into a Secret which I ought to reverence, give me
leave to consult you upon a nice point. And then he offered me some Verses,
which I could not deny to read, and which I remember yet, they were those:

Love, like a dangerous Tyrant still appears,
His fancied Laws sound harsh to tender Ears.
Women, if fair, we must avoid, they say,
Like fatal Rocks at Sea, which often destroy.
Such feigned Advice puts out the glowing Fire,
And turns the edge of every brisk Desire.
The Fears of Shipwraek through the fancy rove,
And fright the Youth from off the Seas of Love.
But when he sees the way before him's clear,
When he is chose and loved, what needs he fear?
If he would then enjoy a happy State,
He must give up his yielding Heart to Fate:
When he is Conqueror owned, then Arms are vain;
To use the Conquest is the sweetest gain.
The greater then his Zeal does prove,
The more's the glory of his Love.
I liked them well enough, and I read them more than once; but I never
suspected the meaning of them. Amaldan was glad I was pleased with them, and
thought it was now time for him to trust me with his Secret. Is it not true, my
Lord, that Love is commonly drawn after a strange manner? and that, if we will
hearken to the Wits, it is a dreadful Monster, which ought carefully to be
avoided? I confess, it appears unpleasant to those that have nothing that
renders them worthy to be beloved; but I imagine thousands of Charms in the
sincere and tender love of two Hearts. I must confess, said I to Amaldan, that
your Verses and your Opinion seem to me to be in the right; but I am so little
versed in Love Matters, that I am no competent Judge of its Effects. My Lord,
replied the Eunuch, when you please you may be a great proficient therein, and
I know a certain way for that purpose. I cannot dissemble with a Prince, as
discreet as you are. I Will tell you therefore, you are loved by Selimana,
Amurat's beloved Sultaness; she acquaints you, what way it is best for you to
follow, by her order I speak to you, and you ought not to be discouraged at the
Seraglio's Maxims, since I can overcome the greatest Difficulties. I did not
expect such a Complement from Amaldan, which did not answer my Inclinations,
and I was a little while without answering him. You bring your self into no
danger by your freedom, said I at last to him. I take it for a token of your
Esteem and Friendship, nor am I willing to make an ill use of it. Selimana may
be fair and kind, but Amurat is a formidable Prince, and my Loyalty obliges me
to all sorts of respects. You don't speak, replied the Eunuch smiling, like a
young Prince favored by Love, but like a fearful Politician, or a morose
Philosopher. This modesty which ought to be praised in a Dervise, seems to me
in you the strangest things in the world; what can all Amurat's power do, since
your beloved Scanderberg's Pleasures easily obtained, lose much of their
sweetness? Besides, was I not certain to serve you, I am not so much out of
love with my own life, as to expose my self to an unavoidable Death: Let me
then be your Guide, and trust me with the carrying on of your Intregue. All
Amaldan's fair words could not persuade me to it. I was not willing to expose
my self to so many Dangers for Selimana's sake, and I alleged still in my
Defense, Custom, and my Loyalty to the Emperor.

Amaldan did not acquaint the Sultaness with the unhappy issue of his first
Negotiation, lest he should drive her into Despair; her hatred against Amurat
increased, as his love for Arianissa; she was capable of any violent Action,
had not Amaldan allayed her Rage.

Prince Mahomet, who seemed to act nothing, and Musulman, whose proceedings
were very secret, had nevertheless some private Intelligences, and gained some
Friends in the Seraglio. Covetousness is so natural to the Turks, that Interest
often makes void the severity of their Laws. Bostangi Bassi being a rich Man,
gained by his liberality almost all the Eunuchs; and except Aradin whose
Honesty was proof against all temptation, the rest yielded easily to his Gold;
having a free occasion in the Gardens, he could freely Converse with them; he
entrusted the cunning Amaldan with his Passion for Arianissa. Another had been
started at this Proposition. But Amaldan harken'd to it without the least
Commotion, and his exaggerating to the grand Gardner, the difficulties they
should meet with, was only to set an higher value upon his Services.

You may judge, Thopia, thereby, how Pernicious is idleness; had the Eunuchs a
different Employment from that of observing the Women in the Seraglio, they
should never apply themselves to barter their Favors.

Amaldan, who knew Arianissa well enough, to perceive her good Nature, feared
not in the least to be punished by her for his boldness. He did Musulman's
Errant, as Aradin had done mine, and represented the Bostangi Bassi's Passion
to her, as the only way to free her from her slavery; she did not entertain him
as she had done Aradin, but with a Noble Pride, she let him understand that it
was in vain for the grand Gardner to hope any thing from her. The covetous
Amaldan was little troubled at this, and was not such a Fool as to discourage
any body, as long as he could obtain his Ends. He resolved in spite of my
self, to bring me one Night into Selimana's company; and little solicitous of
her Honor or Fortune, so he might satisfy himself. He trusted Musulman with
this Secret. He told him that if he could bring me into the private Gardens,
for himself, he would get Selimana and Arianissa to take a walk, which might be
favorable to us, making the grand Gardner believe, that I was in love with the
Sultaness, and that fear only hindered me from courting her. Musulman, who had
suspected I loved Arianissa, was glad to understand this Mystery, and promised
to do whatever Amaldan desired.

The grand Gardner was well enough acquainted with the Maxims of the Country;
the effects of which he ought to fear, but his Love prevailed over his Reason.
He found me out, as he had promised to Amaldan, and asked me, whether I was
willing to walk. I could not guess his intentions, and though I looked upon him
as my Rival, yet, at last I followed him.

We took many turns in the Seraglio's Garden, and the Bostangi Bassi, who was
well acquainted with all the byways, brought me into that of the Women, through
a door which we found opened; I was not sensible at first of my wandering, but
coming near a labyrinth, which I had not seen since my Infancy. I was surprised
to see my self in that place. You are mistaken, or you have a mind to ruin me,
said I to Musulman, and these places are not free for such persons as we. Do
you think I am capable of betraying you? Answered Musulman, and do you believe
I shall not share here the same Fortune with you? Your presence is desired by
Selimana, and her kindness will protect you. As I was going to answer,
displeased with his proceedings, we saw Prince Mahomet coming, who had no more
privilege than we, and who was not there without some Design. He was as much
surprised as we. We could not think but we were guilty all three; yet prudence
would have us hide our Resentments, and had we had a mind to fall out, we had
been hindered by Abaci the Eunuch, who had introduced the young Sultan, and who
knew nothing of our being there. My Lord, said he to him, loud enough to be
heard by us Arianissa is coming, make use of su^^ a favorable moment. Abaci
went hi^ way, and Arianissa, who had parte^ from Selimana, came. Though Night
deprived us of the sight of her Charms, yet by reason of its favorable silence
we could the better hear her sight. Musulman curbed by Mahomet's presence did
not enjoy the happiness he hoped for. And the Prince in a maze by reason of
Abaci's discourse, tarried in the same place. For my part, I was also put to a
stand. Arianissa sat her self down upon the grass, and thinking she was heard
by no body, she let go these sad Complaints. Unfortunate Arianissa, said she,
Princess exposed to ever lasting Sufferings, what can thou expect from
Amurat? What can thou do for Scanderberg? Did Cruel Fate take thee from
Albania, to offer him here too Charming for thy Rest? Castriot, why don't you
ask all the Princes of the World some Succor, to deliver such an Illustrious
Son from those Hands, who likely, for a Reward of his Glorious Exploits, will
one day sacrifice him.

These Arianissa's words made a deep impression upon both our Hearts. But,
Thopia, those two Rivals were not the only I ought to fear, a third more
formidable heard them. Amurat acquainted by some Traitor, that Soliman and
Arianissa were in the Garden, was surprised at it, because they were not used
to go there, running therefore with all possible haste, he heard what I have
already told you. Perfidious Arianissa, cried he in a jealous rage, thou
tellest every moment I see thee, and though thou have my most tender Affections,
yet wishest thou my Ruin. Thy imprudent Heart has condemned Scanderberg to
dye, and I will punish him for having pleased thee, as I ought to do. I am not
afraid of thy Anger, replied the courageous Arianissa, and I am so far from
pacifying it, that I confirm to thee what thou have already heard by chance. A
Power above thine will defend that Prince thou intendest to Oppress, and for my
part, I shall be pleased better with Death than with thy Love.

About that time, Thopia, did the Emperor perceive us. I cannot express his
Rage to you. His Son, and Musulmon suffered but little by it. It fell heavy
only upon me. Take away that Slave, said he, to a great many Eunuchs, and be
responsible of the least of her Actions: and for thee, said he, turning toward
me, Knave, and persidious Scanderberg, unworthy Object of Amurat's Favors, and
the fatal cause of all his present grief, go, and expect such a death as thou
deservest. If thine Injuries proceeds from thy jealousy, answered I, I forgive
them upon that account, because that Passion is used to blind our Reason. Think
of my moderation what thou pleaset, but know, that had any other Man spoke to
me after this manner, besides thee, he should not escape unpunished.

The proud Emperor harkned no longer to me. He commanded I should be shut up in
the dreadfullest Prison, thinking by what he had heard, I entertained some
secret Correspondence with Arianissa. As for Mahomet and Musulman, he showed
them only an angry Countenance, without Arresting them.

Selimana ran away hearing this noise, and Amaldan was not such a Fool as to
come and show his Face. As soon as we were out of the Gardens, Amurat threatened
the Eunuchs, and struck Terror every where. He sent the ugliest of his Seraglio
to observe the Women, and such a vast number of them was placed in Arianissa's
Appartment, that all admission there became impossible.

I was shut up in a Dungeon, without seeing Aradin, whom my misfortune was like
to cast into a despair. He understood the Adventure I have related to you, by
Amaldan's means, whose imprudence and disloyalty he much blamed. Aradin did not
question the heaviness of my grief, in such a sorrowful place, where I had so
many reasons of being afflicted. Amurat upbraided him with my pretended
treachery, and accused him to have bred me up in those, ill dispositions, being
well acquainted with hiss Temper, he yielded to the first transports of his
rage, pretended to condemn me, and by these means prevented his own disgrace.
Having still his wonted freedom, he made use of it, he saw Arianissa in spite
of all her Observers, comforted her, and obliged her to write to me,
acquainting her with my deplorable condition. She did not question in the
least, but I had heard her in the Garden, and therefore was the easier resolved
to it. Aradin sent me this Note by one of my Guardians.

Arianissa to the Prince Scanderberg.
I Am fain to let you know I pity your misfortune, and no consideration can
diswade me from it; those Powers that Tyrannize over you do not spare me. But,
my Lord, I protest your Pains are my greatest Evils; if this assurance may
comfort you, you may entirely enjoy the pleasure of it. I am concerned for your
Rest, I am grieved, and even weep for your misfortunes. Though I dare not tell
you any thing as concerning my heart, you may nevertheless think thereupon what
you suppose will the best satisfy you. This favor Arianissa begs from you,

Arianissa, Daughter to Aranit Conino, a Prince beloved by the King your Father.


Having read this Letter, I was no longer sensible of the heaviness of my
Chains. I enjoyed my hearts desire. I was beloved of Arianissa, born of one of
the most Illustrious Families in Albania. I knew Aranit's name, and though I had
but a feeble Idea of my Father's Court, yet I could remember him. It was quite
impossible for me to answer Ariantssa's Note. And all that I could do was to
read it over a thousand times a day.

But, Thopia, Fortune, which intended to cross me, afflicted me still with new
msifortunes. I learnt from that man whom Aradin had disposed to favor me, that
my Father was dead, that Amurat was incensed against me, and to possess himself
of Castriot's Dominions, had poisoned my three Brothers, designing me for
another Sacrifice; but although he was violent to excess; he durst not destroy
me, in the Presence of the Turkish Soldiers, by whom I was loved, and who
began to grumble at my Captivity.

Amurat's Cruelty produced in my heart that effect which could be reasonably
expected; yet I must tell you, to justify my resentments, that I never
projected any Design against him, unworthy of a Man of Courage; all that I
desired, was to see my self free, and to declare an open War against the proud
Sultan, who regarded so little the Blood I had lost in his Service.

Whilst I was thus grieved and perplexed, both by Nature and Love, the Turks,
who had seen me venture my life for their Emperor's Glory, pityed my Fate, and
demanded my Liberty. Amurat desired my death, but feared the consequences
thereof, and therefore was obliged by reason of the Grumbling of the Nation, to
put an end to my Captivity.

Going out of Prison, I retired to Acomat, a young Bassa, and the only Man
amongst the Turks, upon whose Friendship I did most rely. I met there with a
generous reception; he approved my Resentment, and advised me to go my self,
and upbraid the Sultan for his ungratefulness. But I could not abide his sight,
I could not think without horror on my Brothers death. My Mother's sad
condition, and the miserable Life the young Princesses my Sisters lead in some
retired place of Albania. I heard before it was long, the violent proceedings
of the Emperor's Tyranny; I had a true Relation thereof from Aradin, whom I saw
by Acomat's means, he assured me also of Arianissa's kindness toward me, and
added, that though the Sultan's Rage had not fallen so heavy upon Mahomet or
Musulman as upon me, yet they had smarted for his Jealousy.

Though I was fully at liberty, I did not know what to resolve. Amurat had
possessed himself of all my Dominions, and the only thing I could own, was my
Sword; after a long Consultation with Acomat and Aradin, at last I intended to
depart, though I felt a great reluctance in leaving Arianissa.

Though I had conceived a mortal hatred against Amurat, yet I resolved to speak
to him. I met him one day, as he was going out of the Divan. He had been vexed
at some important deliberation there, and displeased with Arianissa's continual
rigor, so that one could easily read his Rage in his Eyes. I thought, said he,
you should make a better use of the Liberty I granted you at Adrianople, than
to offer your self to my presence, and that your remorse should free me from
the sight of such an odious Object. This Discourse, like the Ottoman Pride, was
too outrageous to me, to be born patiently. If thine ungrateful Eyes had never
seen me, answered I, it is likely you had paid dear enough for it. You are no
longer an Hostage, interrupted the unjust Amurat, but a Captive, of whom the
Janissaries, are to be responsible. If thou had considered Hostages as
sacred, replied I, thou had never poisoned my Brothers, and nothing can hide
the Horror of this Barbarous action from Posterity. I pity thy young age,
replied the Sultan, with a scornful smile, and the trouble thou take of
describing my Actions, deserves a fit Reward; get far from me and Arianissa,
and repent of having offended me. I swear to thee by our most Holy Laws, I
shall never call thee back again.

So he left me spightfully. I saw presently, that it was now time for me to
depart, and to perform for my own Family, and that of Arianissa what Honor
required from me; it was impossible for me to see that Charming Beauty, whom I
recommended a thousand times to the care of the Affectionate Aradin.

Amurat, to cloak his injustice, and not to disoblige the Janissaries, who had
declared themselves my Protectors, offered me by Orcan, his Favorite, and
already Grand Vizier, in the room of the deceased Hersecoli, the Command of
some Forces, which he kept in the entrance of Asia, and sent me word, to tarry
there for his Orders, thinking I should never attempt any thing against him,
since all the Garrisons in Epirus, and Albania were filled up with Turks.
Aradin did not question but Amurat's design was to shut me up in some remote
Fortress. Croya it self seemed well affected for him, notwithstanding all the
Efforts of the Princes Loyal to our Interest.

But, Thopia, as I was ready to depart, seeming to accept of Amurat's proffer,
Fortune procured me the happiness of seeing Arianissa once more.

There happenned one night a fire in the Seraglio, Musulman was suspected to be
the Author of it. It increased so much, that it cast all Adrianople into a
great Consternation. The Appartment of the Women began to burn, and the like
Confusion was never seen; they labored but in vain to put it out in the
Emperor's presence, who encouraged those that labored; all the Water of the
Sea, Channels, and Rivers, had never been able to save Arianissa, had I not
showed my self more eager, and more Courageous than the rest.

You may judge how much I was affrighted at this Accident, and with what haste
I ran to assist her. All the Janissaries, Spahis, and other Soldiers, and all
the Officers of the Seraglio were busied in quenching the Flame, but durst not
venture any farther to save the Women threatened with a cruel Death. Amurat's
fair Promises were in vain, fear rendered them all deaf to his words, and I was
the only Man whom Love emboldened; I ran upon high Piles of burning Cinders to
the Gallery, where the Women with the Eunuchs expected their last hour. And
most part of them did cry after a strange rate, for fear of Death. Selimana her
self looked very pale and fearful. But Arianissa preserved still her magestick
and serene Countenance, and looked upon death without the least Commotion. As
soon as Selimana perceived me, she came to trust her self into my arms, but she
found them not opened. Aradin, said I to the Eunuch who had followed me, save
the beloved Sultaness, whilst I shall endeavor to do the same to some more
exposed Person; he took her away, and I ran to Arianissa, who had observed my
behavior, and I carried her away easily; reproaching the Eunuchs with their
weakness, and exhorting them to do the same to the rest.

Mahomet and Musulman, who had seen me going into the Seraglio, were ashamed to
stay idle, and not follow my Example, but I was more diligent than they, and
brought Arianissa into a safe place. I passed slily toward the Gardens to
converse with her in Secret, whilst the faithful Aradin carried Solimana into
another place.

Arianissa was almost choked with the smoke, and though she had the advantage of
a purer Air, yet she could not suddenly recover her lost Speech; I had also
suffered much by it, and all my Cloths were spoiled; but the pleasure of being
with Arianissa did not permit me to reflect on such an inconsiderable loss. I
think, my Lord, said she to me, when she was a little recovered, that Heaven
had designed you for the preservation of my Life; for as often as it is
threatened with a danger, you hazard your own to secure it. How fortunate should
I esteem my self, Scanderberg, if I could acquit my self of those great
Obligations. Though you prolong but an unfortunate Life, yet that does not lessen
the dangers, to which you expose your self. Madam, interrupted I, had I done a
thousand times more, you should not be beholding in the least to me, your
dangers are mine own, and acting for your Security, I promote my own rest.
Alas! Arianissa, let not your kindness busy it self in taking notice of such
small Services; but consider rather, how grievous your absence will prove to
me, you know Amurat's barbarous proceedings toward our Family; my Mother
stripped of all her Estate and Dignity, leads an uncomfortable life, in some
corner of Albania, with her Daughters, and the illustrious Aranit, that Prince
your worthy Progenitor, is forced to submit to a Foreign Power.

Arianissa was sensibly moved at my Discourse, and her Tears testified it. Go,
my Lord, into Albania, answered she sadly to me, revenge your Royal Blood,
deliver those great Princesses, whose only comfort you are, possess your self
of Castriot's Throne, protect Aranit, and never forget Arianissa. If you were
willing, Madam, replied I, I should not fly alone. Alas! my Lord, answered she,
I could follow you without repugnancy, was it possible for you to take me from
hence; but such an attempt can never succeed well here at Andrinople. To
prevent those Griefs and Alarms which absence might produce in you, I pass my
word to you, I shall resist the Emperor; let him pray or threaten, it is all
one. I embraced then Arianissa's Knees, and could not refrain Tears. I swore an
inviolable Constancy to her, and I bade her Adieu for the last time, I went
away according to her Command, for fear of being surprised with her.

I went to Aradin, and to Bassa Acomat, and I acquainted them with what had
passed: The fire was put out, the Sultanesses shut up again, and Arianissa more
closely than the rest: At last I departed from Andrinople, recommending my
Amorous concerns to Aradin; and instead of going to the place appointed to me
by Amurat, I entered Albania with three hundred men, who came over to my party:
There I performed those happy Achievements which have amazed the whole world;
I turned the Ottoman Power out of Croya, and other places of Albania, where I
was proclaimed King: the Valiant Aradin, Loyal to Our Blood, and concerned for
his dear Arianissa, did for me all that I could expect from an affectionate
Father. Vranus, Illustrious both for his Birth and Merit, stuck very close to
me, I did not enjoy the pleasure of seeing my Mother again, who was dead for
grief, she had given three Illustrious Husbands to three of my Sisters, and
Amissa only was not married.

Amurat fell into a rage, as soon as he heard my advantages, and saw himself
deprived in few days of a great number of fine Provinces. He sent a prodigious
Army to regain them. But first I defeated Sebasia, and afterward Alibeg, who
commanded forty thousand Men. After this, I won an immortal Fame in Varna's
Battle: Amurat wrote to me like a Master, and I answered him like a King, who
despised him. In one word, without mentioning all other passages, Amurat came
in person, followed by a numberless Army, after I had defeated Mustapha his
Bassa.

I could never learn since Arianissa's condition, though I have done all my
endeavors to be instructed by those Turks, who are fallen into our hands,
because they know but little what Amurat does. I have been told only, that she
is loved still, that Musulman is disgraced, and absent, and that Mahomet does
not well agree with his Father. You know, Thopia, what has past since we saw
Amurat about Croya, and by my last cruel adventure you may judge of my grief.

Here the King of Albania made an end of his Discourse, and sighed after such a
manner, that Thopia, who really loved him, could not but pity him. Scanderberg
was not concerned alone for Arianissa's misfortunes. Aranit, her loving Father,
had been extremely sensible of her Captivity, and coming to see Scanderberg, he
heard the cause of his extraordinary sadness. We must all die, my Lord, said he
to Arianissa's Father; but before we die, let us render our Arms formidable to
Amurat, let us return on him that terror he strikes into our hearts, and let
whole Torrents of Turkish blood wash off the Crime committed against the
innocent Arianissa.

Scanderberg was not able to go on. Thopia informed Prince Aranit, what was the
reason of his cruel rage, he was amazed at it, but could not believe what he
feared was true. My Lord, said he to the King, Amurat's Note ^^ a sign of his
rage; but it is likely, an Command has not been executed: And I cannot
imagine, Heavens Justice could permit such a Sacrifice. If Arianissa is dead,
we shall have time enough to be wail her loss; in the mean time, let us inform
our selves about her Destiny Aranit's Constancy, who could not be accused of
loving coldly the most amiable Daughter in the World, pacified i^ little
Scanderberg. Well, said he, let us get some instructions about that, but let it
be with our Arms, and all out Forces. If our Subjects desire to see a glorious
Battle, let them come to this. Go, Thopia, said he to the young Prince,
encourage the Army to do its duty, carry there mine Orders, and the News of my
Displeasure: do not lessen to them the height of my grief: Animate the Captains
and Soldiers, and help me to go in a Conquest.

Thopia obeyed the King's Orders, and within a short time Scanderberg's
Apartment was filled with Persons of Quality, who were ready to signalize their
Valor, seeing him resolved to attack the Turks in their Retrenchments in what
time and posture soever. Thopia's, Commotion did not differ much from that of
Scanderberg. And Aranit in spite of Age showed all the vigor desired in a man
of younger years. The famous Ducagins, the renowned Spani, Dusmani, Zacharia,
Cernoniqui, and many others appeared at the head of their Albanian Forces: The
orders having been given every where, the invincible Scanderberg appeared at
the head of his Army wearing black Feathers; there was to be seen such a
mixture of grief and pride in his Eyes, that his sight would move some to pity,
and strike terror into Others. Having cast his looks upon his Forces, and
having observed the constancy, which appeared in the least of his Soldiers,
Arianissa, said he, sighing, your precious blood will be expiated by that of
your barbarous murders. After that he spoke thus to them.

Generous Princes, Valliant Captains, brave Soldiers, Loyal Subjects of
Epirus, and Albania; he that speaks to you, is going to lead you against an
Enemy, who might affright another Nation, and trusts your noble Courage with
his Glory and Revenge. Arianissa was born amongst you, you know her illustrious
Family; and Aranit's actions have made him famous all the World over: you are
to fight to day for the innocent blood of that illustrious, but unfortunate
Princess; let the Daughters Condition, the Fathers Sorrow, and the Lover's
Despair, inspire you with an extraordinary Bravery. You want no examples, but
had you need of any, Scanderberg may show you some, worthy to be followed,
come, Friends, let us vanquish or dye for Arianissa. When he had said these
words, he let his Horse go, and the rest of that mighty Body followed his
motions.

The Scouts of the Sultan's Camp soon discovered Scanderberg's March, and
brought word to Amurat. He was well experienced in Warlike Matters, and knew
well what he ought to do, Orcan brought his orders to the rest of his Officers.
Every one went where his presence was required, and Sultan Mahomet, hating
Scanderberg, and desiring to keep in his Fathers favor, appeared the readiest,
and the willingest to fight. Aconot, the King of Albania's generous Friend, did
not go there to fight against him. There was as many Soldiers left in the
Camp, as were necessary to secure it, and all the other Forces, which were to
encounter Scanderberg went out.

As soon as he perceived their Standard, he sent forth a Cry, which was
answered by all his Men; and with a threatening Look, and naked Sword, he went
to meet the Enemy.

The Turks, who had seen him vanquish so often, trembled at his first sight.
Amurat himself, notwithstanding all his Pride and Cruelty, was much concerned.
Mahomet, jealous of Scanderberg's Glory, and of the other advantages he had
above him, aspired to an immortal Fame by killing him. And Orcan, desiring to
keep to himself the Sultan's favor, wished nothing so much as to sacrifice
that Illustrious Victim to his Master's resentment.

Scanderberg spared no body in his first transport; even Amurat, whose Dignity
he had respected till then, had felt himself the strength of his Arm, had he
not been encompassed by a crowd of Turks. How formidable is a valiant Man, when
Love and Revenge encourage him to fight! What abundance of Blood was spilt in
few moments! What vast number of Turks did the King of Albania kill? And how
many fine Exploits were that day, performed by his Friends? Aranit was not at
all sensible of his old Age; and the young Thopia let the Ottomans know there
was more than one Hero in Albania.

They had already defeated Amurat's Vanguard, took his Standards, made
Prisoners many of his Captains, and Victory did already begin to incline on
Scanderberg's side, when Night put an end to their Fighting, though the Quarrel
was not fully decided. Scanderberg would have pursued the Turks, but the
Darkness became so thick he was fain to stay till to Morrow.

After the Lights had been kindled, as Scanderberg was going to enjoy a little
rest, there was a kind of Prodigy seen; his Semitar had cleaved so fast to his
hand in the heat of the Fight, that it could not be plucked off but with
extraordinary pains: This was taken for an assured sign of his Strength and
Valor.

His first care was to enquire about Aranit, who was no more to be seen, he was
sought for to no purpose; and Scanderberg feared either he was dead or taken:
He was thinking upon this when he perceived Acomat coming, who to see him, had
revolted in the dead of the Night to his Party.

Scanderberg embraced him with all demonstations of joy; and the generous Turk
received his Caresses with all sorts of respect. My dear Acomat, said the
amorous Scanderberg to him, do you come to confirm Arianissa's death, or to
reproach me with my weakness. No, my Lord, replied Acomat, I do not bring you
so sad news. Arianissa is still alive in the Sultan's Camp. You have a mind,
said the King of Albania, to deceive my grief. I have seen Amurat's Command,
replied Acomat; and then he showed him the Paper found upon Aradin, whose
unfortunate Fate he acquainted him with. I took that faithful Eunuch to be with
you, my Lord, and he left Amurat's Camp, only to pass into yours. But without
doubt, Musselman, who hides himself not far from hence, had killed him. As for
Arianissa, she is alive, and you may rely upon my word for that.

One cannot express how much then was Scanderberg's joy. Aranit was sought
after; but some Soldiers said, they thought he had been made Prisoner, having
seen him venture too far among the Turks.

They took that night the most convenient measures for their safety, though it
was not likely that Amurat, half vanquished, would come again to a Battle;
there were Sentinels placed every where, and the news of Arianissa's Life were
brought to Croya. Scanderberg enjoyed more rest that night than usually; at
break of Day they visited all the Corpse, but could never find Aranit's.

Scanderberg was resolved to fulfill his Victory, and to free Arianissa and her
Father from his Enemies. Acomat assured him Amurat expected a considerable
succor. Scanderberg was but little alarmed with this; and the hope of
delivering Arianissa prevailed more upon his mind than any other consideration.

Aranit's Captivity was soon confirmed; and there were news brought to
Scanderberg's Camp that Amurat had more rejoiced at it than at the gaining of
several Battles, having now in his power what to affright Arianissa with: That
fair Princess had suffered a thousand sorrows since Scanderberg's departure;
and the Emperor's violent desires could not have been resisted but by an
extraordinary Virtue, such as hers: But all her passed sufferings were but
slight, compared with her affliction for her Father's Captivity. Amurat sent
for him; and Aranit, who had not seen Acomat, and was not acquainted with
Arianissa's condition, looked extremely sad. Thou art vanquished and subdued to
our Power, said the Sultan to him, and notwithstanding all the pride of thy
Family, thou must stoop before us. Thou needs not thank Fortune, replied
Aranit, which has delivered into thy hands an unfortunate Victim, and which
longs to be sacrificed: So many great Men as still remain in our Party, under
Scanderberg's Conduct will find thee work enough. Though they have surprised us,
replied Amurat, yet thou may judge by thy present condition of the
inconsiderableness of their advantages; and that I have no great reason to fear
them. But that is not the thing now: I will propose unto thee a safe way to
free thy self. Thou can not propose any, said Aranit, but what is shameful;
and he that had murdered Arianissa -- hold, interrupted Amurat, and do not
accuse me of a crime I was never guilty of Arianissa lives, but still so cruel,
that I want thy assistance to change her mind; thou shall see her, but thou
must use this liberty for my service: I love her, I adore her, but the
Ungrateful despises my flame with a cruel obstinacy. Reflect, Aranit, how
shameful it is for such a Man as I to sigh, and suffer to no purpose, nor any
take care of my resentments.

Aranit was no fit confident for Amurat: Scanderberg, his King and his Friend
was in love with Arianissa, and was beloved by her: These being thus, he was
not capable of a base compliance: Thou know, said he, Christians are seldom
fearful, and that they seldom act against their Parole or Duty; how dear soever
Arianissa may be to me, I would sooner see her dead than to bring her to grant
thee thy request. Hearing this discourse, which could be so easily understood,
Amurat grew mad against Aranit: Tarry my Prisoner, since thou despisest my
Proffers, said he to him; all Scanderberg's Power shall not be able to deliver
thee, and thou shall quickly feel what destiny I prepare for thee. Then he sent
him back into a private Tent, and commanded he should be kept closely.

Having found the Father so resolute, he went to try whether the Daughter would
prove also inflexible: Therefore he went to Arianissa, who knew not what had
passed; Cruel Arianissa, said he to her, I prostrate my self to your feet, for
the last time of my life, to desire some small favor from you, which I promise
to retaliate, by releasing Aranit your Father, who is now my Prisoner. Heavens!
cried Arianissa, is this the last Affliction you prepared against me? And do
you forsake the just party, to cast me still into new Troubles? Alas! dear
Father, Why did not my Death prevent your Misfortune? You may dispose of his
Destiny, replied Amurat, and it depends wholly upon your Behavior. Reflect
earnestly upon this, do not despise mine Anger; and tho you need not fear the
loss of your Death, yet fear that of Auranit's. Tyrant, replied the Princess
full of sorrow and indignation, what has my Father done against thee? Is this
the use thou ought to make of what Power the chance of War has given thee
over him? Alas! he is falln into this danger only to deliver me: Endeavor
then on your side his Deliverance, replied Amurat, since I am resolved to be
cruel except you favor me; either you must love, or see Aranit dye. Is this
thy way of gaining love, replied the fair Arianissa? is Cruelty such a pleasing
Charm, and must we offend the Person by whom we desire to be loved? Give some
occasion to my Heart to be grateful, boast sooner of thy Services than thy
Rage, to the end thou may upbraid me with some reason. You have taken so
little notice of my Sufferings, replied the Sultan, that I intend to follow no
more that course. If you are still the same, I will not warrant you of my Fury;
but if you change, you may expect any thing from me, and dispose at your
pleasure, of my Soul and Empire: Well, answered Arianissa, let me see my
Father. Though I ought to refuse this Favor, to a person who never granted me
any; yet interrupted Amurat, I give you leave to see him, but do not forget
when you embrace him, that his Life depends upon this interview: Take together
such Resolutions as may be agreeable with my Designs. The Sultan went away
without speaking any more, and ordered Arianissa should be brought to Aranit's
Tent, not far from here is.

Four Years absence had made but an advantageous alteration in the Princess:
And Aranit who knew well her Suffering, wondered to find her so fair. Presently
she embraced her Fathers Knees, and weeped there abundantly: He embraced her a
thousand times, and took her up very lovingly. After he had satisfied the first
motions of Nature, I see you again at last, said he, dear Arianissa, after I
have so long bewailed your loss, and lived in a sorrow proportioned to the
cause thereof. If I have taken any care of my days, it was only to the end they
might be serviceable to you. I have seen the Emperor of the Turks; I have
heard, but I find not my self disposed to do what he desired. -- Forgive me, my
Lord, if I interrupt you to praise your Constancy, it is worthy of your self;
but shall I see you dye, rather than give my self to Amurat? And ought I not to
sacrifice the Peace of my Life to the safety of yours? What Arianissa, replied
Aranit, could you resolve your self to be the Mistress of a Turkish Prince? How
sorrowful would this sign of your love prove to me, and by preserving my life,
how intolerable would you render it? I can lose it a thousand ways without
glory; and you ought not to preserve it by so base means, since should I
consent to it, I cannot but lose my good Fame amongst all honest Men. In a
word, Arianissa, forsake sooner both my Life and yours, if there is any need. I
tremble giving you this advice, but I should blush should I do otherwise.
Remember what you owe to the King of Albania, to that Prince who before he knew
you, had served you with so much respect. Alas! My Lord, I have forgotten
neither his Valor, nor his Services. Consider to what dreadful pass I am
brought: Shall my love upbraid for ever my severe Virtue, by reason I have not
saved your life when I could do it? And if I grant Amurat's desire, will not
the whole World look upon me as upon a Princess perfidious, both to Heaven and
Scanderberg? Alas! my Lord, what shall I do? That which I have advised to,
answered the constant Aranit: But then I shall see you dye, said the Princess;
no matter for that, replied Aranit, I shall dye without shame: Then both began
to weep in a sad manner. The Eunuch's Witnesses of this sorrowful Conversation,
put an end to it, and Arianissa was like to dye, taking her last leave from her
Father: Did I see you only, my Lord, to bid you an eternal farewell, cried the
desolate Princess. Cruel Amurat, let me dye with Aranit: Moderate your Grief,
replied the Prince, softly: We are not so far from Scanderberg, you know what
his Valor can do; go away my dear Arianissa, and never despair as long as he
lives.

It Is impossible to express Amurat's Rage, when he heard in what manner the
Father and Daughter had spoke one to another: Am I Sovereign only, said he, to
be hectored by my Enemies? And shall I always see my Power insulted over? Let
them dye sooner; and though I cannot quench a Flame which I abhor, let my Reason
at least condemn to an everlasting Grief the person that causes it; let the
World see what Revenge I will take of a Captive, who does but increase
Arianissa's hatred against me: Let him dye, I don't question but Scanderberg,
whom my Arms shall punish as a Fugitive Rebel, will resent this loss. Let
Arianissa have a just reason to complain of me; heretofore she had only been
the witness of my weakness, but now she shall see me spill her own Blood.

As soon as he had resolved this, he thought upon the means of bringing it to
execution: He chose his Camp to be the Stage where that Tragedy was to be
acted. The most usual kind of Death among the Turks is Strangling; but such
Executions are frequently very private: That would not serve the Sultan's turn,
who intended to show publicly his Cruelty, that Arianissa might be the witness
thereof.

The next day all things were prepared for Aranit's death; a Scaffold was
erected in the middle of the Camp, which was encompassed by the Janissary's,
and other Soldiers of the Guard; Amurat took a convenient place to see his
Orders executed, and the desolate Arianissa was brought near him. The Sultan
kept always his dreadful looks upon her, but she turned hers toward Heaven to
implore its Assistance.

A strange Spectacle was offered to their sight. Aranit appeared in such a
miserable condition, that it could not but shake his Daughter's Constancy: He
was loaded with huge Chains, had his hands tied, and his head uncovered, but he
seemed neither cast down nor affrighted at this barbarous usage: He walked with
a sedate countenance, as despising his Enemies; but when he saw Arianissa so
frighted, almost drowned in her Tears, and almost dead for Grief, he grew pale,
and pityed the deplorable condition of that lovely Princess, who had always
been the dearest Object of his Hopes and Love; he wept, but his great courage
could not allow of such Tears, and presently he wiped them off. He was no more
discountenanced then, than if he had been at the head of his Army; and
recovering his former Tranquillity, he lifted up his Voice that he might be
heard by the Sultan, the Princess, and the rest of the Assistance. Arianissa,
said he to her, do not think this seems either cruel or shameful to me; I find
therein both glory and pleasure, since you see there an Example of which you
can make some use: Hide those Tears from me, which argue your weakness: You are
my Daughter, but remember also that you are a Princess, that rank where Heaven
has set you, requires both constancy and a great resolution; you will see me no
more, it is true, but let this consideration comfort you, That no base Action
will blemish the Glory of my Life; come to your self, dear Arianissa, live for
Scanderberg's sake; nay, dye for him, if there is need, as I am confident he
would do for you. As for the Emperor of the Turks, said he, turning himself
toward Amurat, a Prince born from so many Hero's, from whom thou degenerates
so much, and whose Cruelty thou only imitatest; learn from my Death to despise
Life. Yesterday I was with the valiant Scanderberg, whose very presence
dissipates Fear and Terror, and behold now I am submitted to a Tyrant who
trembles at the least thing.

Let him dye and perish, cried out the Emperor, and let him be punished for
his pride. Then the Executioners went about to obey his Orders, and the fair
Arianissa falling into a Swound, was carried to the Tent where she had always
been.

But whilst they were preparing to execute Aranit, many repeated out-cry's of
the farthest Sentinels, signified Scanderberg's coming, who had enjoyed no rest
since Aranit's Captivity: His Forces brought again to fight, did march with a
warlike Constancy, which struck terror into the first that saw them. Amurat's
Camp was soon in a great fright; he was resolved to hasten Aranit's Execution;
but Orcan, who could prevail the best upon his mind, got it to be suspended,
judging it would be convenient to keep him alive: He was therefore brought back
again, and Amurat put on his Arms, having still considerable Forces left, which
were soon in a posture of Defense.

Scanderberg broke like Thunder through whole Squadrons; Amurat was mightily
afraid of his rencounter, and therefore went another way, leaving Orcan to deal
with Scanderberg: The valiant Thopia attacked the Sultan, and let him know the
King of Albania was well seconded. The Turks turned back every where, confusion
and horror had seized them; Amurat seeing there was no hope of the Victory
left him, ran to Arianissa's Tent with a barbarous intent, but could not find
her there; and was strangely amazed when he heard, that Musselman whom he took
to be far from thence, had stolen her away: Besides this Grif, he was put to a
shameful flight; Scanderberg remained the only Master of the Field and Bagage;
he saw Aranit, but could not find Arianissa. Who can express his Sorrow, when
he saw all his Attempts fruitless, and so much Blood spilt to no purpose, and
when he heard in whose hands she had fallen? He took this at first for a trick of
the Sultan, who being defeated, hided Arianissa's condition: Considering this,
he was resolved to root out his Soldiers before they had time to breath, but
some Turkish Prisoners told him for certain, that Musselman had gotten her away.

Scanderberg could not but think, that Musselman had no design to bring her
into Amurat's Territories, or tarry in Albania; he feared all things; and the
knowledge he had of Musselman's temper, did but increase his dreadful trouble:
To comfort himself, he embraced Aranit, who acquainted him with his past
Dangers. After he had settled his Camp, and left the distribution of the
Pillage to the greedy Soldiers, every one endeavored to divert his Sorrow.
Thopia was more busy in it than any: You were never acquainted with Love, said
the Prince of Albania to Thopia, and therefore you cannot imagine my Sorrow;
Thopia blushed at this reproach, which he was so far from deserving, since no
heart was more addicted to that Passion than his. I am more acquainted with
Love than you think, my Lord, replied he; and because I know its effects, I
pity you more than any. My Lord, replied Vranus, whose only desire was to
divert the King from those sad thoughts, to convince the King of the truth of
what you say; pray let him hear your love Adventures. I shall hear them, said
the King to Thopia with pleasure and attention, howsoever prepossessed I may
be; and if you are not a fortunate Lover, my own Experience will teach me to
commiserate you. My Lord, answered Thopia, both my Love and Fortune wholly
depend upon your pleasure, and the account which I am to give you by your
Command, will make you more sensible of that Truth.

The History of THOPIA.
WAS Love a voluntary Passion, my Lord, and could we rule the motions of our
Hearts according to the advices of Reason, we should never pich upon any choice
without first consulting her. First of all, I must needs tell you, my Lord,
that I love the Princess Asa, and that all my respect could never stop my
passion. I beg humbly your Pardon. -- I do forgive you with all my heart,
replied the King, and I cannot but admire my Sister's Happiness, to possess
such a Noble Heart. Thopia then fell upon his Knees, but being taken up by
Scanderberg, he went on after this manner.

I hell'd a considerable rank in King Castriot's Court, upon my Fathers
account; and after you had been sent to Amurat, I was looked upon as the
chiefest of the Princes of Albania. I was surnamed Carlomus, which signifies in
the Sclavonian Tongue happy, either because I was very aimable in mine Infancy,
or because I was sprung from the Noble Blood of Charlemayne.

The King who could see you no more, never looked upon me without sighing, and
without complaining of that cruel Law, which deprived him of your presence. The
Princesses Angelina, Zella, and Vlacia, your Sisters, comforted the Queen
Vorsana, being already come to years of reason, since they were soon after
married to three illustrious Husbands: But the young Amissa was still in her
first Infancy, so fair and charming, that one could not look upon her without
loving and admiring her. I fell in love with her as soon as I was sensible of
any Reason, and our free Conversation did but increase my Passion.

The Prince Musachius my Father, who had had me in his old Age, when he had no
hopes of any Son, was so overioyed with the advantage of having a ^^on, that
all the care he took, was a^^^t mine Education.

All Amissa's Actions seemed charming to me, and I wished mine had not
displeased her: I was a long while before I could acquaint her with my Passion,
and whatsoever my complaisance toward her might be, she was to young to guess
the meaning of it.

As for me, a little more Age and Experience had taught me to distinguish Love
from Friendship; and Time acquainted the Princess, that one does not sigh
without Love: In my younger Age I had shown but a quiet joy at her sight, but
as soon as I came to my sixteenth year, she observed I was melancholy and
perplexed.

She was used to go very often with her Governants, to divert her self a
fishing in the great Pond, which was in the middle of the Palace of Croya; I
followed her there one day, and whilst her waiting Women were talking at some
distance from us, I saw her longer than an hour apply only her self to that
Exercise: She was so fair, that I looked upon her with an extraordinary
attention, and in that pleasing occupation, I sighed so loud, that Amissa who
could catch nothing, and was vexed at it, turned angrily her head toward me;
Thopia, said she to me, I think you affright the Fishes, and the noise of your
Sighs spoils all my sport. Alas! Madam, replied I, how can they hear what you
do not hearken to. It Is possible enough, replied she, that I hear you without
harkening to you: If you hear my Sighs, Madam, said I, I am certain you do not
understand the meaning of them, and I should be too happy were you acquainted
with that Secret. The Princess left her Fishing to look upon me more earnestly;
and casting one obliging look upon me, I esteem you so far as to pity you for
your misfortunes, said she, and to rejoice at your advantages: And I am willing
to know that Secret, if you think I may serve you therein. Madam, replied I, I
will then impart it to your kindness, and tell you, that you are the cause of
my sufferings. I the cause of your sufferings, cried the young Princess, with a
kind of amazement, mixed with fear, Alas! Thopia, how can that be, since I bear
you so good a will? I do not tell you, Madam, added I, that they are caused by
your will. I suffer, though you do not intend to make me suffer. You puzzle me
strangely, replied Amissa, and I must confess my Wit is not piercing enough, to
apprehend that Mystery. I perceive, Madam, added I, trembling, that my mouth
must be my heart's interpreter. I love you, and those sighs which trouble your
innocent sport, proceeds only from that extraordinary love you have inspired me
with; this passion is almost as old as I, and I was sensible of it, before I
did know my self. Alas! Thopia, replied the Princess with a charming innocence,
do not talk to me about Love, it has been represented always to me, after such
a manner, that I will shun it like a Monster, and if you desire I should see
you, you must rid your self of it. It Is impossible, Madam, replied I, I should
part with it, and I perceive, I am its slave for the rest of my life. But,
Madam, do you think, a Passion, which you inspire me with, can be any thing
frightful? that Love which has been drawn to you, was no such Love as mine,
nor the effect of divine Amissa's Charms. If there is any horror to be found
therein, it concerns me alone, and it proceeds from the fear of displeasing
you. But, Thopia, replied the Princess, what do you desire from me? Your pity,
Madam, added I, and a Confession from your mouth, that you accept of my
Services with some joy. I profess to you, answered the Princess, that I do not
apprehend half of what you say, and that I want many Lessons to understand this
matter; did your heart tutor you so well, added I, as mine does me, you would
be soon as great a Scholar in it as I, I promise you replied she smiling, to
impart to you all that it shall teach me, in the mean time suppress your sighs,
and help me to conquer the ill luck I have to day.

I was well pleased with this conversation, and I did what ever I could to
satisfy Amissa. At last the enchantment ended, and we caught fishes a pace, so
that we entered into the Palace very well contented.

Since that day, the Princess made some Reflections, which opened her eyes. She
had always looked upon me, as upon a young Prince, with whom she was allowed to
live familiar, but after that my discourse, my actions, and her own reason had
acquainted her, that I was in love with her, and when she considered the
consequences which would follow the Courtship of a declared Lover, she took a
severe Countenance, and though she never showed any hatred against me, yet I
could not perceive in her that innocent kindness, which till then had flattered
my hopes.

I was soon sensible of this Change, which is imputed to indifferency; some
time passed before I could complain, but my grief prevailing upon my patience,
at last I spoke thus to the Princess. Madam, said I to her, you have taught me
to love, but I am afraid, I have taught you to hate, and except your kindness
take my part, I fear lest your rigor deprives me of the Liberty of seeing you.
Are these the lessons you have learnt from your heart, and did you consult it
only to render it mine Enemy? You will never be able to teach me to hate; but,
My Lord, replied she, I don't care you should teach me to love; but suppose I
am now a little more reserved, ought you to wonder at it? It Is enough, Thopia,
said she, casting an obliging look upon me, that there is no other difference
between what I was, and what I am. I know not whether this Kindness is a Lesson
from my heart, but as long as it shall not inspire me with any thing
inconsistent with my Duty, you need not fear I should take any resolutions
contrary to your interest. I found so much reason in this discourse, that it
increased both my Love and Respect. It would be both ungrateful and rude in me,
said I, to ask any more, since only my services, and modesty ought to speak for
me.

Amissa seemed pleased with this answer, but whilst I was abandoning entirely
my self to that passion, and she looked upon me, as a man who was worthy to
serve her, Fate prepared it self to cross us.

Castriot, who had married the Princesses his daughters with some Albanian
Princes, could hardly have found a Family more worthy of his Alliance than
ours. The Queen, who loved more tenderly Amissa than the others, fearing lest
some Reason of State should remove her into a Foreign Country, liked my
passion well enough; but the King, who had some different designs, took
measures quite opposite to hers.

Among those that were of some note at Croya, Balse, a Prince as well as I, had
become Castriot's Favorite, he was no man of great Vices, nor of an
extraordinary Virtue, and the only thing that got him in favor, was his
affected compliance. He was ten years older than I, and was not handsome to
please the Eyes of a nice Princess. Yet Castriot had chosen him for Amissa's
Husband, and had thought that his Sons being absent, Epirus and Albania could
not have a better Protector.

Some Broils then called us to the War, I was none of the unwillingest to go,
sacrificing my Passion to Glory, and to the desire of deserving Amissa. I did
not part from her without Sorrow, and I believe she was also sensible of my
departure. Balse commanded our Army, and because there were but few
Frontiere-places revolted, it was not very Numerous. I did not then look upon
him as my Rival, yet I had no love for him; he had, may be, no greater share in
the Victories we got, than I, and the others that served, but he was rewarded a
great deal better. Arriving to Croya, I found the Princess Amissa afflicted,
for Arianissa's loss, whom a Caravanne of Turks had stolen away in a Voyage,
which her Father had imposed upon her without any necessity.

About that time, My Lord, the whole world spoke of you with admiration, and
your Conquests, both in Asia and Africa, amazed the most experienced Soldiers.
Castriot had then good reason to sigh, seeing that what Services you did for an
Infidel, might have proved so useful for Christendom. The Princess wished your
return, and when I would commend you in her presence, Pity that Illustrious
Brother, would she say, that his valor should be engaged to serve a man of a
barbarous extraction, and who knows little what belongs to gratitude, and
friendship. Pity me at the same time for loving him as much as I do, and for
having no hopes to see him again.

But, My Lord, it is time to relate to you my Sorrows; the King your Father, who
thought he was mightily beholding to Balse, prepared to do any thing for him.

This formidable Rival for reason of Castriot's protection, began to court the
Princess in such a manner, that I was deprived of the liberty I had before. As
soon as I saw he had declared himself, I was sensible of my misfortune, and
though he was a King's Favorite, yet I defired my Father to do something for my
love. He loved me too tenderly to deny me any thing I asked, and without
objecting to me all that I ought to fear, he did partly what I desired.

I went to expect with the Princess the event of my Father's design. I sound
her sorrowful, and melancholy. You are afflicted, Madam, said I to her, and
that trouble which appears in your eyes signifies as much. Yes, Prince, replied
she, with a sad Countenance, I am cruelly perplexed. Can I without offending
you, ask you the Cause thereof, replied I? You will know it too soon, and if
you are a little concerned for me, what will you say, when you hear I am near
to marry Balse? This discourse, like a thunder, struck me almost dead, and I
was so little prepared for it, that this surprise stopped my blood, and one could
see upon my Face, the signs of a real despair. The Princess was moved at it.
Alas! Thopia, said she, looking sadly upon me, how dear am I like to pay for my
Obedience to my Fathers Commands? Madam, said I, are you then resolved to marry
Balse, and by a Scruple of Virtue will you sooner renounce your own happiness,
than resist Castriot's will? Would you have me, replied she, incur his
indignation by a rebellious resistance? Though you might love me the better for
it, yet I am sure you would esteem me the less, and you know your self well
enough, that a Daughter of my rank, cannot dispose of her own Fate. I know, I
adore you, Madam, said I, and I shall dye for grief, if Balse enjoy a Fortune
he has never deserved. What great advantages above me can that Fortunate Rival
boast of? I am certain, I give him none, interrupted Amissa, and were you only
to strive with my inclination, you would soon be a Conqueror. But, Thopia, you
know Castriot is my Father, and what power he has over me. What shall I do,
replied I, if you marry Balse, you shall see me no more, or at most? You shall
see me only in public places, replied the Princess. And if I live, I shall
live the most unfortunate person in the World. Can you, Madam, give your self
to him, replied I, somewhat angry? Yes, without doubt, interrupted Amissa, and
I see nothing can dispense me from that Duty, if Castriot requires it of me.
Cruel Princess, said I, you know well enough I cannot live after that; must I
also adore your Fortunate Husband, as I do every thing that belongs to you? Did
you know my hearts Condition, replied she, you would not be so passionate, and
you would sooner endeavor to comfort it. My trouble does not proceed from any
affectation. However you are more fortunate then I, since you are not forced to
give your self to one you hate, and since you may sigh without crime. In my
present confusion, I know not, said I, what to say, nor what to think. All
things seem guilty to me, and I cannot but accuse my self, believing heaven
would never punish me undeservedly. After that I asked the Princess, how she
came to know Balse's good Fortune? And she told me, that after he had often
spoke to her about his love, but in vain, the King at last had declared himself
for him, notwithstanding the Queen's aversion to it, and that he had commanded
the Princess to look upon Balse as upon a Prince whom he designed for her
future Husband.

I perceived then that all my Father's endeavors would prove fruitless, and I
was grievously afflicted at this. Amissa seemed also very sensible of my
sorrow, and her kindness did but give me a greater sense of my loss.

Against my custom I was glad to leave her, intending to go to the Queen, who
had always been kind to me, to implore her assistance. I was told she was in
the Gardens, therefore going that way, I met my Father, whose melancholy
Countenance did but increase my trouble: He confirmed unto me the King's
resolution in Balse's behalf, and exhorted me to take patiently a misfortune
which could not be helped. In the same minute I saw my Rival appear, followed by
many Courtiers, drawn there by his fair hopes; my color changed, and my Father
sensible of my violent commotion, forbad me to enter into any conversation with
Balse: what could I have promised him, since I was mastered by a Passion I
could no longer bridle? It was well I did not attack my Rival in his presence;
but as soon as he disappeared I abandoned my self to Wrath and Jealousy. I
found Balse in the Garden where I was looking for the Queen. Could I speak one
word with you, said I? Yes, replied he, without any apparent amazement. I know,
said I, that you are designed to possess the only thing that may render you the
most glorious Man in the World: But you don't know, it may be, that I sigh for
the Princess Amissa these many years ago, and that you must deprive me of my
life sooner than obtain her. I did not think, replied Balse, in a scornful
manner, which vexed me to the very heart, that the designs of a great King were
to be crossed thus. For my part, I, who know how I am to obey, ought to take
the greatest care to perform my duty. Do not conclude from hence, that I don't
care to fight with you; you shall have that satisfaction: But, Thopia, you will
not take it ill if I defer it till Marriage has given me a full possession of
Amissa.

Having thus spoke to me, he left me scornfully; and I was so much cast down at
those words, that I could not attack him at present. The Place was a Sacred
Place, and I was fain to curb my Passions. As they were acting within me with
the greatest violence, the Queen came, and I went to her in a trouble which she
easily took notice of. That generous Princess cast a sad look upon me; and
leaving her Gentleman Usher to give me her hand, she did not ask the reason of
my sorrow, which she easily guessed, but let me know how afflicted she was at
the King's prepossession in Balse's behalf, assuring me, that if she had had
the disposal of my good Fortune, she had not deferred it a moment. I wish, said
she, I could procure your satisfaction with the loss of my own Blood; but we
have a Master obstinate in his resolutions, and who will be obeyed. I have
strove against them as much as I could, but all to no purpose, and I cannot but
condole with you. The paleness and the despair that appeared upon my face at
the hearing of these words cast the Queen into a great fright. Madam, said I to
her, my misfortunes are so great that it is like they will also prove fatal to
Balse, and all the respect I owe to the King's order can never prevent my
resentment. Castriot came afterward, followed by the Princess, and I retired
in that sad condition.

Amissa, who saw me retire, easily perceived my trouble, since I seemed to shun
her presence. I spent that night in the greatest trouble imaginable. I had a
thousand several Projects in my Head; at last I resolved to render Amissa's
possession impossible for Balse. I had seen him in several occasions, but I
never had the least fear his arms should triumph over me as his favor did: In
fine, I rose up at the break of day, and went to tarry for him near the Palace
where he was used to go every Morning. Balse, said I, as soon as I saw him, we
must fight for Amissa, and you will never be happy before you have killed me.
Then I drew my Sword, my Rival was forced to do the same, and we fought with
equal courage and advantage; we wounded one another in several places; and though
they endeavored to part us, yet our fight lasted so long, that it exhausted
the greatest part of our strength. Balse at last fell at my feet; and though I
stood up still, yet I was in a sad condition; a crowd of people coming then
carried us both away.

The King showed such a great resentment to my Father, who endeavored to
justify me, that his great grief cast him into a Fever, which brought him to
the Grave. I durst not appear, and this increased my despair. The Queen and
Princess sent me word how much concerned they were for me: But nothing could
satisfy Castriot but my death, should Balse live no longer; his wounds were
more considerable than mine; I was curld in a short time, notwithstanding my
grief, but all the care they took of him could not prevent his death.

Then, my Lord, I could no longer tarry in Croya, or in any other place of
Albania; Castriot had no regard for my Love, nor Services, nor Birth, and
granting some tears to Balse's death, he fully resolved my own. The Princess,
whom he suspected to favor me, felt his severity; even the Queen her self
underwent his reproaches.

I thought it very hard to hide my self for a glorious action, and I had fallen
into a despair, if the Princess, who could obtain any thing from me, and who
knew well I was not out of Croya, where I was carefully sought after, and who
feared Castriot's resentment, had not prescribed a Law which I could not
resist. I received her orders in a Letter written with her own hand, which was
delivered to me with a great deal of circumspection.

The Princess Amissa to Thopia.
AS one cannot reasonably expect any rest from violent actions, so we might
have been happier had you not been so passionate. If I have any power over you,
and if you put any trust in me, avoid for a while the King's displeasure: The
Queen wishes it, and I beg it of you. Absent your self, Thopia; I fear the loss
of your life; this Lesson proceeds from my heart: Remember our former
conversations, and believe for your own comfort, that now it is you may be as
good a Scholar as yours.


Though absence seemed to me a more cruel pain than any that Castriot's wrath
could prepare, yet I resolved to obey the Princess, and to acquaint her with
it, I sent her this answer.

Thopia to the Princess Amissa.
THe greatest demonstration both of Love and Respect that I can give you, is,
to go out of Croya and Albania, where I leave you likely for ever. I do not
repine at my sufferings, since your pleasure will have it so. I shall depart,
Madam; but let me beg that protection from your heart, without which I I should
never be able to endure the pains of absence. Adieu, I may dye without seeing
you, but never without adoring your charms.


I wished I could have taken my leave of Amissa, but the then present Juncture
of Affairs would not allow of a private interview. I parted from Croya with a
sound body, but a heart full of grief. I took with me some of my faithful
Servants, abandoning whatever my Father had left me. There was then no War in
any place of Europe, and having no certain Design, I was led at last by my
profound Melancholy into a part of Greece; as I was thinking upon a larger
Journey, I heard of Castriot's death. How unjust soever he had been against me,
I was afflicted at the News; I had returned to Croya, if Amurat's Tyranny, who
had possessed himself of all Albania, had not put an invincible stop to my
Designs. The Queen and Amissa were made Captives, and having no Forces to
defend, I went every where to make some interest for them, and made at last
that Party, which I brought to you after the Queen's Death, which oppressed me
almost with grief, entirely honoring her, and knowing how sensible Amissa
would be of this Misfortune.

In fine, my Lord, I was Witness of your immortal Actions; I saw Amissa again,
whom I found the same, and who told me, that my happiness wholly depended upon
your pleasure. This is that History, my Lord, you desired to know, you are both
my King and Master, but besides you are the Sovereign Umpire of my Felicity.

Scanderberg embraced Thopia as soon as he had made an end of his Relation, and
assured him, that he might possess Amissa when he pleased, and that nothing
would be so acceptable to him as his Union.

But though Scanderberg's violent passion had been diverted for a while by
Thopia's Relation, yet it soon recovered its former strength, the sorrowful
Aranit was much concerned, and they were but little pleased at the gain of the
Battle, since their hopes were furstrated.

Acomat wondered that Musselman, who had so many reasons to fear the Sultan's
wrath, should be so rash as to enter his Camp, and carry away Arianissa, being
not acquainted with all the particulars of his Life, he could give no comfort
to the King of Albania.

In the mean time this Prince could see the Turks had departed, that his Army
was not much weakened, and that Croyae had nothing to fear; being thus free to
act as he pleased, he could not resolve himself to tarry, till he had heard
some News concerning Arianissa, and resolved to venture any thing to find her
out. My Lord, says he to Aranit, our common interest requires mine absence; as
things stand now, there is no danger Amurat should attempt any thing, but we
ought to fear all things from the treacherous Musselman. We must deliver
Arianissa from his Tyranny, and I am weary of my life, when I think she is in
his power. Aranit was far from opposing this resolution, and Scanderberg
prepared himself to depart with the fortunate Thopia, who would never forsake
him. Vranus followed them also, and Acomat, who could not with Honor follow
his Master's Enemies, tarried with Aranit as a Prisoner of War.

The King of Alhania would not take many Soldiers along with him, for fear of
being known, his Equipage was not very great; but he found himself in an
exceeding trouble, concerning the way he ought to take; he was sensible that
Musselman had fled from Amurat, and that it was to no purpose to seek him among
the defeated Army; it was not likely neither, that this Ravisher should retire
into the Emperor's Territories, or tarry in Albania. In this uncertainty he
wholly trusted himself to Chance: not certain of the success of his Enterprise,
and going he knew not where, he found in several places many Companies of the
Turks scattered, and returning to Amurat. He was three days without taking any
rest, and all his inquiries being to no purpose, he began to despair.

But he was not the only man that sought Arianissa. Prince Mahomet seeing her
out of his Father's hands, desired to get her for himself, and looked upon
Musselman as upon a light obstacle, could he but meet with him. Amurat, though
sorely afflicted at his losses, sent several Parties after him; but the young
Sultan, led by his own heart's interest, took that license followed only by
twenty men.

At first he was not more fortunate than Scanderberg, and traveled over a
spacious Country to no purpose; at last being arrived in a savage place, which
properly may be called a Wilderness, he heard some noise over his head, and saw
Musselman retrenched in a steep Rock hurrying Arianissa with violence, and
striving to get her, notwithstanding all her resistance, into a Den, where the
Sun had never shone.

Mahomet had an Ottoman Soul (that is, haughty and cruel) as the rest of his
Life witnessed. The injury done to a fair Princess, whom he loved dearly,
inspired him with the utmost Fury, and crying very loud, he would fain have
gone to Musselman, but he saw every where inaccessible Precipices. Arianissa
and Musselman hearing that noise, looked upon him. The Princess hated all the
Turks, but she had a lesser aversion against Mahomet than against the
Bostangi-Bachi; the Prince who saw her desolate, and oppressed with grief, made
many attempts, which did not affright Musselman; but Heaven, who had designed
that day for the punishment of the greatest Rogue in the World, brought
Scanderberg and his Men in the place where the Prince Mahomet was, it vexed
them to see one another there, but the King of Albania soon perceived
Arianissa. Who could express his commotion at this sight? or Musselman's rage?
The Precipices that were round him, seemed to secure his Cruelty; but such as
they were, he did not think they were inaccessible for the passionate
Scanderberg. Just Heavens, cried he, favor my Passion, and since you grant me
to see Arianissa, grant me also that I may deliver her from that cruel Tyrant.
Then he cast his eyes all round about, and seeing a byway difficult, but less
dangerous than the rest, followed it hastily. Thopia, Vranus, and the rest
followed his steps, and Mahomet, who would not be an useless Spectator, went
after them, tho it was a long circuit, and though Musselman affrighted, threatened
to carry away Arianissa, the courageous Princess hindered his design.
Scanderberg saw many of his Men fall, and bruise themselves upon the Rocks; but
this did not abate his Courage, and at last he found a way easier and broader,
which led him to Arianissa.

But alas! those were not all the obstacles he was to met with, and Musselman's
Fury was more to be feared than those Precipices he had overcome already. That
barbarous man, though he had a far greater number of men, than those that had
followed the two Princes, yet could not trust on his own strength: a hellish
rage possessed his Soul, and seeing he was undone, he resolved to undo all.
With this resolution, he seized Arianissa's arm, and drawing a Cymeter,
Scanderberg, said he to her, with his scared looks, shall never see thee alive,
or enjoy those favors thou designest for him. Thou cannot affright me, in
threatening me with death, replied Arianissa, with a serene countenance, but
tremble for thine own. I look upon it as certain, replied the Turk, but
Scanderberg's hand shall never sacrifice me.

The King of Albania was still drawing nearer, and could already hear them.
Musselman perceiving him, bad him stop if he desired Arianissa's life. The
Prince, who saw his Cymeter, and who was well enough acquainted with the Turks
temper, to expect all sorts of cruelties from them, was strangely surprised,
and durst go no farther. Arianissa seeing him stop, and fearing lest too much
love should make him easily leave her, exhorted him to advance. Come, my Lord,
cried she to him, Musselman is too faint hearted to attempt any thing upon my
life, but suppose he was not, I would sooner die than submit to him. Mahomet,
who had also drawn near, and who was not so much concerned for the loss of her
life, though he was mightily in love, would have advanced farther; but
Scanderberg bad him imperiously not to advance rashly, lest he should consider
him as Arianissa's Murderer. The Prince advanced no more, and Musselman seeing
the well grounded fear of his Rivals grew the more insolent. King of Albania,
said he, if thou love Arianissa's life, thou must allow me to retire freely
with her, since I swear to thee by all that may render an Oath inviolable, that
I shall not spare her, if thou go a step farther. O barbarous! cried the
Prince, is this your way of loving and deserving her? How cunningly thou
know how to make use of my Love and thy Cowardice! Depart Monster, go far
from hence, since Arianissa's safety requires it; but at least respect her
Virtue and Rank. Can you forsake me so, cried out Aranit's fair Daughter, and
do you think, Scanderberg, that I am so much in love with my life as to choose
to live with this Monster? How blameworthy is your faint-heartedness! Must my
own example encourage you? If you do not come to me, I will go meet either
Death or you; then she attempted to get loose out of Musselman's hands, but her
strength was not sufficient: Musselman foresaw then his certain ruin: Love,
said he, without any more ado, guide mine Arm: Then he lifted it up to stab
Aranissa in the breast; and he had certainly done it, if the affectionate
Thopia, whose mind was more sedate than Scanderberg's, foreseeing the effects
of Musselman's rage, had not taken secretly a by way, and got in that critical
minute so near him that he struck him, and sent both his Arm and Dagger to
Arianissa's Feet; another blow divided Musselman's Face in two, so that he gave
up his unclean Soul with his cruel Blood.

Those that were there present were so amazed at this wonderful Action that
they took Thopia for a Man sent down from Heaven: But Scanderberg, whose
terror was converted into a sudden joy, ran to embrace Arianissa's Deliverer
before he went to her self. It Is impossible for us to relate all the obliging
things they told one another. Scanderberg, to show his great passion,
prostrated himself at Arianissa's Feet, and uttered the most passionate
expressions that his heart could invent. She embraced him obligingly, at which
favor Mahomet was sorely vexed. Thopia received from Arianissa such Praises
and Elogiums as his Action well deserved; and Scanderberg showed him all the
imaginable demonstrations of joy and friendship. The Turks who had followed
Musselman fled away, but they were not pursued. Mahomet did sigh, having no
hope left him; and seeing there was now no likelihood to pa^^ Arianissa from
Scanderberg: Cru^^ Fortune, cried he, why must I be the witness of their
Felicity? Must I forsake for ever a Beauty whom I have so long adored? Having
made this sorrowful reflection, he came near Scanderberg with as much freedom
as he might have done at Andrianople. Though we are both Enemies and Rivals, said
he to him, I fear nothing from thee which might be unworthy of a Prince whom
all the World admires, and without any base submission I must tell thee, I
esteem thee, though without love. Compare my condition to think own, and grant
that I am an unfortunate Man, since neither in my Father's Dominions, nor in
this place. I have any hopes left me. Could a reasonably expect to fight for
her with success, and gain her favor, the Ottoman Blood which runs in my vein
should never be allarmed at thy valor. I see you must remain Conqueror, and
since thou have triumphed over Amurat, you can never be vanquished, and I
cannot but be unfortunate for ever.

These words which could not proceed but from a noble heart, made a deep
impression upon Scanderberg; he had always been sensible of Mahomet's excellent
Virtues, which answered well his Illustrious Birth; and seeing that he could
not in reason upbraid him of his Pride; My Lord, said he to him, I shall never
hate you, though you can never love me; and I would willingly part with any thing
besides Arianissa for your satisfaction. Time, interrupted Mahomet, will
without doubt afford us some occasions to see one another again. In the mean
time, enjoy your Arianissa, whom I cannot take away from you. Having spoke
these words, away he rode, and was soon out of sight with his Men.

Scanderberg resolved to tarry no longer in a place where Arianissa had been so
sadly allarmed, and which was like to have proved fatal to her. They told one
another a thousand obliging things; and they chose the fairest Horse for the
beautiful Princess, who rode toward Croya, with her illustrious Lover, leaving
Musselman's Corpse to be devoured by wild Beasts, wherewith those Deserts were
full.

Though Arianissa was not used to any hard exercise, yet she rode a long way
within a short time; and she cou^^ hardly be persuaded to take any (...) at
night; the strong desire she (...) to see Aranit, Amissa, and her other dear
Relations, made her long to arrive at Croya. During that Journey which lasted
two days and a night, Scanderberg had now the opportunity ^^ knowing his own
good fortune, and Arianissa's tender love. Thopia was as well pleased as he;
and never did ^^ greater tranquillity succeed trouble which were thought
endless.

In fine, Scanderberg brought into Croya without meeting with any opposition,
his fair Princess: All the People of the City went in great crowds to see her,
and to congratulate him upon his return. Aranit then the most fortunate of
Fathers, told Scanderberg, That since he had deserved so well his Daughter she
belonged by right to him: Amissa and Arianissa kissed and embraced one another
for a long while; and Thopia, who had been so glorious an Instrument in
procuring Scanderberg's Happiness, received from Amissa such protestations of
Love as he deserved.

Croya, where Sorrow had reigned during the War, and Scanderberg's Grief, then
quite altered, Pleasures and Sports had now their time, and all possible
endeavors were made to divert Arianissa, who had led before such a sorrowful
life. Among all these pleasing Diversions, Scanderberg neglected nothing
concerning his important Affairs; and whilst Amurat was hearing what had
passed, and was taking new resolutions, both against the Life and Fortune of
the King of Albania, this Prince who now enjoyed his dear Arianissa, kept his
Army in a capacity of resisting all the Ottoman Forces.

He knew not what had passed at Andrinople since his departure thence:
Arianissa who had seen Acomat, and bewailed the Death of the Loyal Aradin, was
willing to satisfy Scanderberg's Curiosity; one Evening being with Amissa and
Thopia, who had heard her former Adventures, she thus related the last to the
King of Albania.

The History of ARIANISSA.
AS I had passionately wished for your departure from Andrinople, so was I
overjoyed at the News of it, since you ought not to expect there any favor;
and though I could not absolutely flatter my self with the Idea of a future
Liberty, yet I had some glimmering hope still left me. Aradin and I
congratulated one another upon this occasion; but the fearful Sultan fell into
an exceeding Rage, when he heard you had been proclaimed King by the Albanians.

As his wrath increased, so did his troublesome and imperious Solicitations:
He did not question, but I had some secret Intelligence with you; and he
suspected Aradin of having favored our Designs; he threatened him with Death,
and me with the utmost Severity, and so cast me often into dreadful Fears.

Selimana seeing she had lost you for ever, endeavored to regain the Sultan's
Love; I did what I could to facilitate that Conquest unto her, yet she hated me
as a dangerous Rival, who deprived her of the Sultan's Affection, and who
likely had hindered you from loving her: She conjectured from the words which
you heard me sing, and which truly proceeded from my heart, that since the day
you fought the Tartar, I had not looked upon you with indifference.

Prince Mahomet, who was no longer observed by you, and who feared only his
Father's Jealousy, resolved to venture any thing to see me; and the cunning
Musselman got also into the Seraglio, after the way I shall relate to you.

Amurat thought, that having no hope left of your return, I should never be
able to resist him; but seeing all his moderation was to no purpose, after he
had sighed, he began to threaten, and showed me all that cruel Pride natural to
the Ottoman Blood. You try my patience too far, cruel and ungrateful Arianissa,
said he one day to me, and you do not regard at all my kindness for you. Do you
think I spare you by reason of my own weakness? No sure, but my Heart protects
you against my Reason; you ought therefore to own your self obliged to me;
otherwise I swear by all the Powers above, that I shall make use of all mine
Authority, if your unkindness forces me to it.

This Discourse had been proceeded by so many of the like nature, that I did
not look upon it as a new thing, but Amurat's countenance was quite changed.
Thou know well, that I never abused thy Highness, replied I, and that I
never promised thee any thing; I am sensible both of thy Power and Dignity:
But, my Lord, thou ought to know, That thou can not require from me, but
the respect due to thy Rank; I am no person of a mean Birth, and the Chains I
am loaded with cannot depress my Courage; those Countries which are subject to
thy Power, afford thee Beauty's enough, whose only desire is to please thee;
thy Religion allows them that liberty, and their Inclinations are agreeable
with the condition; as for me, Fortune only had made me thy Slave; I am not thy
Subject, if thou art just, and there are Laws above thine, which forbid me to
favor a Mohammedan. If Scanderberg did sit upon the Ottoman Throne, replied the
angry Sultan, you would not be likely so nice; and all your Reasons about
Independance and Constancy, would not prove so strong as you pretend them.
Well, Arianissa, said he proudly, persist in your resolution; but expect no
longer from me any moderation, since I will have no more regard to your Sex,
your Religion, or your Birth.

Being in such a humor, he left me; Selimana exasperated him by her
Reproaches, and both the Seraglio's were witnesses of his violent Rage.

Since the Conversation I had had with the Sultaness in the Garden, and which
you heard: Our Friendship had not been great, because Amurat's love changed
soon after, and for reason of the new rank which he forced me to take; she
judged by what had happened in the Garden, where she had desired me to walk
with her, when the Emperor met us, that you were no indifferent Person to me;
she had looked upon the Sultaness love, as upon a thing which authorized in
some manner her freedom with me, and her in constancy: But when she knew that
you loved me, and that I had some gratitude for you, she fell in a Rage against
me, and called me perfidious and treacherous, because she had trusted me with
the Secret of her own Heart.

Jealousy had soon inspired her with an immortal hatred against me, and I was
like to feel its cruel Effects: You have deprived me of all my comfort,
dangerous Arianissa, said she one day to me, and you have rewarded the sincere
confidence of my Heart with Perfidiousness; but believe what I say, this place
in spires no moderation; and whatever kindness I am forced to show you, may be
soon changed into hatred. Fear mine, since you have so basely served me. I am
so far from deserving these Reproaches, replied I, with a sedate mind, that I
feel neither remorses of Conscience, nor terror at the hearing of them. My
Behavior had been always innocent; I never endeavored to please the Sultan;
and as for your confidence, Heaven knows whether I have abused it: But you
loved Scanderberg, replied she, and when I acquainted you with my passion; you
hid your Sentiments from me with a criminal Dissimulation: Suppose what you say
was true, answered I, you have yet no reason to accuse me, did not your
Jealousy blind you. Was I obliged to open my heart to you, by reason of your
confidence, which I so little desired? And instead of complaining of me, ought
you not to commend my prudence for not declaring my self your Rival? But
Selimana, let us not trouble our selves any longer about what is past, or what
is to come: Let us consider, that Scanderberg is like to be King of Albania,
that we are Slaves, and that I would willingly give most of my Blood to regain
you the Sultan's love; if you are acquainted with my endeavor, you may know
how I deal with him. Alas! replied she, your only desire is to see Scanderberg
again, and that Crown you talk of, renders him more lovely to your Eyes: But
though Fortune confines me here, you are also like to share the same Fate.

The Emperor who went by, interrupted us; he was that day in a rage that
cannot be expressed, having heard of the new progress of your Valor; he
upbraided me for it, without considering the pleasure he gave me, by telling me
of these News.

But, my Lord, it is time to acquaint you with a more remarkable passage: I was
one night upon a little Terrass, which rendered mine Apartment very pleasant;
the Emperor kept his Bed by reason of a violent Fever, which proceeded from
his Anger. I was thinking upon your Advantages, and I had spent part of the
night in that pleasing Occupation, had I not been interrupted. I heard at the
foot of the Terrass, a Voice, which I knew presently to be Amaldan's, because
there was none sweeter than his in the Seraglio, and by reason we had sung
often together to divert Selimana, he sung but these four Verses, likely of his
own making.

Awake, prepare for gentle Love's Alarm:
No, prying Argus now can do you harm.
And whilst all things are here by sleep possessed,
May you in sweet Delights of Love be blessed.
I hearkened to Amaldan; thinking he had no design; but turning my head at a
little noise, I saw a Slave, whom I took to be one of those Women that waited
upon me; but it proved the bold Musselman in that Disguise.

I cannot express my amazement and my wrath; this way going to break out
against the Bostangi Bachi, when another Woman (as I thought) drew near me, as
rash as the first, and in the same Disguise; this was Prince Mahomet.

Had I followed my first passion, I had ruined them both, and drawn likely upon
my self the suspicion of favoring one or the other; they were as much amazed
as I at the Conformity of their Adventures. After I had looked upon them a long
while, to be the better assured, that I was not mistaken; at last I told them,
that they hazarded more than I, and that their Enterprises which rendered them
so guilty toward the Emperor, could not prove pernicious to me. There is no
need, said I, I should instruct you about the Laws, which you know well enough,
and which you cannot violate, without Crime or Danger. But, my Lord, said I,
turning my self toward Mahomet, I must needs tell you, that though my civility
may hide your Actions from the Sultan, yet you ought to make a good use of it:
And as for thee, O Musselman, the perfidious Subject of an Emperor, who had
honored thee with the first Diguities of his House, if thou escapest free;
thank my Indulgence and Mahomet.

The Bostangi Bachi felt a secret Rage at these words; he believed that your
absence had changed mine Inclinations, and that I was in love with the young
Sultan.

I have interrupted your Designs, replied he, with a boldness like himself: You
wish Mahomet should come again; but I am not so little concerned in Amurat's
Interest, as to hide from him what has passed. You Rogue, interrupted the
Prince, do not offend Arianissa, and acknowledge your fault as I do mine. Since
our passionate Love has brought us hither, against all common prudence, let us
confess our selves guilty: Though you ought to question me about what I do, yet
though I am your Prince, I Will give you what satisfaction you can desire from me:
Come therefore to another place. These words did but confirm him in the Opinion
he had, that I loved Mahomet; they were both forced to retire; and after I had
seen them go out, I went into my Chamber, resolved to tarry there for fear of
the like Surprisal, seeing that all the Eunuchs in the Seraglio were debauched
in their Duty. Amaldan, who designed nothing else by favoring the Bostangi
Bachi, than to make use of his Liberality, cared little whether he was pleased
or no; those that served Mahomet, were not more zealous for him.

Some of my waiting Women had their Share in this Intreague, but for fear of
communicating these things to those that were innocent, I thought it fitter to
be silent; I got all the Passges to my Appartment closely shut up. Aradin did
assuage my displeasure, by telling me he had received News from you, and that
nothing being able to resist you, you would soon be Master of Croya.

Your happiness made me look less melancholy than I was used to be, Amurat,
who was sick but a little while, soon perceived it, and upbraided me for my
sedate mind, as if it had been a great Crime.

In fine, My Lord, we heard at Adrianople your arrival to Croya, and I cannot
express to you, what was Amurat's rage, when he heard of the defeat of his
Basha's; he resolved to go in person to fight you. But he was not willing to
leave me behind him. I was not afflicted at this news, reckoning it a happiness
to come near the place, where you and my Father were, Selimana mad at this
Resolution, designed to have killed me, and to make her self certain that way,
that I should never belong to you, or to the Sultan.

I have told you already that we had no great correspondance. She knew what
preparations were made for my departure, and seeing she had quite lost the
Emperors love, she resolved to punish me for it; by her liberality she
endeavored to induce some Eunuchs to poison me, some were persidious enough to
attempt against my Life, but all to no purpose, though I used but a little
circumspection. These slow enterprises, did not agree with the violence of her
hatred; therefore one night, being mad at Amurat's Scorn, she entered into my
Chamber, with a dagger in her hand, which she had used without any mercy, had
not my good Fate brought there Aradin, who, full of Zeal and Terror, threw
himself upon her, and hindered her design. The proud Sultaness turned her head,
and perceived her own weakness, she told us all that a violent hatred can
inspire. She cursed the Emperor; reviled me basely, protested against me,
named you many times, and at last stabbing her self with two strokes, she fell
dead at my feet.

I ran away at this cruel sight. The Emperor coming in was little concerned
for her Death, though he had loved her passionately, because he could no longer
abide her apbraiding humor.

At last, my Lord, we departed from the Seraglio at Andrinople; I was put in a
covered Cart with two old Women, it was imposible for any man to see me, and no
body was ever observed with greater care, notwithstanding all this, the rash
Musselman endeavored to steal me away; he was discovered the first time, and
forced to fly from the presence of the angry Sultan, who was resolved to have
punished him; he suspected Mahomet also, and that poor Prince was like to
undergo the Fate, which has ruined so many of his Predecessors.

We arrived in sight of Croya, with the Ottoman Army. I felt some tender
motions, when I saw these Towers, and Amurat redoubled then his Efforts to
soften my heart but never found me Kinder, than I had been at Andrinople. Vexed
at this, he would always threaten me with your or Arianit's death. I was often
alarmed at his: But the trust I had in the Valor of you both, dissipated my
Terrors, and kept up my Courage.

One day after he had extraordinarily tormented me, he resolved to sacrifice me
to that rage my unkindness had caused in him, he thought he should forget me,
when he should see me no more; and being loath to use any other Executioner,
than his loyal Orcan, a favorite, worthy such a Master, he wrote the Note to
him, which you found upon Aradin, and trusted it to an Eunuch. Aradin, who knew
the exceeding and violent wrath of Sultan, observed all his Actions, and
meeting the Eunuch, who carried his orders to Orcan; he likely brought him out
of the Camp, and fought him, having no other way to get his Note of him; I do
not question but he went toward Croya, to acquaint you with my miserable
condition, but he was assassinated in the way by Musselman, who had never loved
him, according to what he told me, after he had stolen me away, that he had
already sacrificed that passion to himself.

I expected nothing good from Amurat's Anger, and seeing Aradin no longer, I
thought he had been arrested by his Orders, as being too much affected for your
Service and mine.

As Passions are not always equally violent he had no sooner ordered my death,
but he thought with himself, how cruel this was like to prove to him; he sent
for the Eunuch, but he was no longer to be found.

Amurat at last saw Orcan, who had not received his orders, and who had never
approved it. Considering what advantage it would be to them to keep me alive,
in a Country where the chance of War might not favor them always. Amurat, who
had harkened to his own reasons, more than to those of Orcan, gave me leave to
live, but swore he should have no longer any respect for me.

You know, my Lord, all the rest that had past, my Father's captivity, your own
Victories, and Musselman's stealing me away; he broke open the Tent where I was
carefully kept, killed many men, and carried me away without any resistance,
assuring me, that to make amends for what he had done, his only desire was to
deliver me into your hands; I could not trust him, but that discourse flattered
my hopes; that Traitor brought me away with all the immaginable swiftness,
whilst all the Camp was full of confusion, and I lost soon after the sight of
the Walls of Croya, and that of Amurat's Tents.

You may judge, my Lord, of my grief, to fall from Amurat's hands, into that
Traytor's, whom no consideration had been able to divert from such a dangerous
attempt. I weeped, but all to no purpose, my Prayers were but in vain, he made
me wander a long while, without letting me enjoy any rest, and hurried me in
that place, whether Heaven moved by my tears brought you in such a Critical
Minute.

The Princess made an end of her Discourse, Scanderberg showed how much moved
he was at her several sufferings; in the mean time, Aranit came to acquaint the
King, that the Turks fortified themselves, and did intend to attack them within
few days; but Scanderberg was no less formidable in his joy than in his sorrow,
and was not much frighted at Amurat's designs.

All the moments he spent with the Charming Arianissa, were attended with
happiness, and joy. Thopia also, who feared no longer any Rival, nor the King's
opposition against his Love, enjoyed a perfect Tranquillity, which Amissa's
Protestations assured him of.

Amurat grievously vexed to know his Enemy's perfect happiness, offered him the
Battle again, and made a new attempt to oppress him. Arianissa, who was well
acquainted with Fortune's inconstancy, was afflicted at it; but the invincible
Scanderberg assuring her so confidently of the Victory, rendered her less
concerned at his departure.

And really he triumphed again, but after such a glorious and advantageous a
manner, that the Sultan being vanquished, and weakened, dyed some days after for
shame and despair, after his last defeat; Mahomet, who was not then in a
capacity to make War any longer, seeing the Ottoman Army exhausted, left
Arianissa, and Albania in the Victorious Scanderberg's hands, and went to
Andrinople to be proclaimed Emperor there. Acomat being at liberty to do what
he pleased, followed him and parted from Scanderberg, after he had promised him
an everlasting Friendship, which he religiously observed, being neuter in all
the Wars, between Mahomet, and the King of Albania.

Scanderberg, at the highest degree of his glory, feared by his Enemies, adored
by all his Subjects, and dearly beloved by the fairest Princess in the World,
married her publicly in Croya, with all possible demonstrations of joy; the
same day was chosen for Thopia's marriage with Amissa. Aranit full of
Satisfaction and Glory, took upon himself the management of State Affairs, to
give more time to Scanderberg, to enjoy Loves delights. All those that had been
Loyal to Castriot's Family were fully rewarded, chiefly Vranus. Never a King
lived with more content, or performed such famous Exploits as Scanderberg did.
But it is enough for us to have tied him here for ever with his Charming
Arianissa. The great Achievements of his Reign, are so commonly known, that it
would be to no purpose to relate them here.

FINIS.

