Neonomianism Unmasked: OR, THE Ancient Gospel PLEADED, Against the OTHER,
CALLED A New LAW OR GOSPEL.


IN A Theological Debate, occasioned by a Book lately Wrote by Mr. Dan.
Williams, Entitled, Gospel Truth Stated and Vindicated: Unwarily Commended and
Subscribed by some Divines.

Applauded and Defended by the late Athenian Clubb.

As many as are of the Works of the Law are under a Curse, Gal. 3.10.

And the Law is not of Faith, Ver. 12.

Christ is the End of the Law for Righteousness to every one that believes,
Romans 10.4.

By ISAAC CHAVNCY, M. A.

LONDON, Printed for J. Harris at the Harrow in the Poultry, 1692.

TO ALL True Lovers OF THE LORD JESUS, BOTH Ministers and Christians Of any
Persuasions whatever.
THE Apostle Paul does declaim against nothing more than Another Gospel, which
is not another Gospel, (as he says) because no Gospel: Quod nusquam est cum
unum fit Evangelium non plura, says Beza on the Gal. 1. It is no where, seeing
there is but one Gospel, and not more. This pretended other Gospel was a
Doctrine that taught the Conjunction of the Works of a Law with the Grace of
God, and the Righteousness of Christ in the Juctification of a Sinner before
God, which some False Teachers did zealously press upon the Galatians, in
opposition to the Apostles Doctrine: These he calls, Troublers of the Churches,
and Perverters or Subverters of the Gospel of Christ, viz. The Doctrine of
Justification by Free Grace. Such as teach Justification by a Law, of Merits,
not of Christ, but our own, [ See Beza on the pl.] "Although we say they were
wrought in us by Christ, as if Christ could be said to Justify, by giving us a
way or means to justify our selves; you may as well reconcile Light and
Darkness as these two.

As to the Introducers and Teachers of such Doctrine, the Apostle denounces a
bitter Curse against them, whatever they were, (pretending to never so much
Holiness) Apostles, or Angels: Yea, he puts himself under this Anathema, if at
any time he should be guilty in this kind: And to show that he speaks not
rashly or passionately, but by the Spirit of God, and to awe Men's Minds the
more, and deterr them from such Attempts, he redoubles the Imprecation. But
you will say, May we not a little make bold with the Gospel of Christ? How far
may we venture to go, and not fall under this Anathema? The Apostle answers, v.
9. If any Man preach any other Gospel unto you than that you have received, let
him be accursed. And the Doctrines which they had received was Justification by
Faith without the Works of a Law: And that a Law is not of Faith in the Point
of Justification, chapter 3.12. Mr. Beza justifies our Translation in rendering
(...) besides, rather than against. For (says he) the Apostle said not, If
they preach contrary things, and subvert the whole Gospel, (as Chrysostom has
it.) But, If they pervert it a little, if they preach any thing besides that
Gospel which they had received, etc. If they, as the Apostle says many did, 2
Cor. 2.17. (...). Caupanariam Exercentes.

(...), Caupones, Infames semper and sordidi sunt babiti, quod merces
corrumpunt and adulterant. Jun. Beza.


Corrupt the Word of God, as fraudulent Vintners, (who dash their Wines with
Water, or any base Liquors.) But, says the Apostle, We are of those who Preach
the Word of God, (...), in Sincerity, in the Truth of our Hearts, as we will
answer unto God, without any thing of Craft or Double Dealing, or mixing our
omn Schemes or Fantasies therewith, that speak the very Truth, as we have
dealt plainly and truly, not shunning to declare unto you all the Counsel of
God, Acts 20.27. not shuffling and hiding some great Truths, that we think are
not fit for the People to know; and therefore, says he, we have abdicated
(...). Abrenunciavimus pudendis latebris, non calliditate ambutantes, neque
falsantes sermonem Dei. 2 Cor. 4.2.
this shameful hiding the Word of God, not demeaning our selves craftily, nor
handling it deceitfully.

And to such as receive this other Gospel, who have professed to the receiving
the True Gospel, he says, I marvel you should be so soon removed from him that
called you into the Grace of Christ unto another Gospel: Calls them Fools, Gal.
3.1. says, they were fascinated, bewitched, the Devil had got a great hand
over them; tells them they were Apostates, had began in a Spiritual Gospel, but
ended in a Carnal: Nay, he testifies, that whoever is Justified by a Law, [it's
(...)] are fallen from Grace; and that all their former Sufferings, how great
soever they have been, would prove in vain. Oh! that Professors of our Days
would seriously consider these things, who are so ready to run after this other
Gospel!

Lastly, It is also needful to observe how the Apostle Paul complements Peter
that Great Apostle, and one of the Pillars in the Churches, for his double
dealing in these matters, in so much as countenancing this False Gospel, or the
Imposing Teachers of it: He withstood him to the Face, and publicly; he
rebuked him sharply, because he was exceedingly culpable; and in that he not
only committed a great Sin himself, but carried away Barnabas, and many
professing Jews with his Dissimulation; insomuch that they all played the
Hypocrites (...).
with him, to please the Neonomians. He aggravates their Fault, in telling them
they countenanced a Doctrine, which they were convinced was false, chapter 2.16.
That they made Christ a Minister of Sin, that they condemned themselves in
their Practice, by building the things which they had destroyed. He takes off
also all Apologies that they might make from the seeming Smallness of the
Fault, as to refuse to eat with the Gentiles. Come, come, says he, the
mischief lies in it is Tendency, viz. To encourage the Preachers and Receivers
of the Doctrine of Justification by the Works of the Law, (...): For, says he,
we have believed on Christ, that we might be justified by the Faith of Christ,
and not by the Works of a Law; for by the Works of a Law no Flesh living shall
be justified. I hope they whom these things do nearly concern at this time,
will duly weigh and consider them: Though I doubt not but they know them, yet it
may not be amiss to stir up knowing Men, by putting them in remembrance, 2 Pet.
1.12, 13. Verbum sat sapientibus.

As to the present Grand Assertor of a New Law, and of the Doctrine of
Justification by the Works of the said Law, I thought it due to the Grandeur of
his Appearance in the Head of a New Sect, to treat him by the Name thereof,
viz. A Neonomian One that Asserts the Old Law is abolished, and therein is a
superlative Antinomian, but pleads for a New Law, and Justification by the
Works of it, and therein is a Neonomian.
, and the rather, because by that Rectoral Rule of Government which he has
usurped to himself, and the Rule of Sin, he has judicially Sentenced all his
Opposers to the Name of Antinomians, or Abetters of them: Insomuch that all our
first Protestant Reformers, and any known by the Name of Calvinists, fall under
his severe Censure, as Ignorant Setters up of the Name of Christ and his Grace
against his Government. I thought it meet to call in the long-ago deceased
Doctor also, under what Name or Title soever he is pleased to call him, (whom
he carries about to scare Children with, and as a Trophy of his pretended
Triumph) that he might be made speak, and the World may hear what he has to
say for himself, and be acquainted how he is abused, and that he may be
hereafter permitted to rest quietly in his Grave, and not used as Wickliff was,
i. e. Burnt for an Heretic so many Years after be has been dead.

In a Word, Shall we stand still with our Fingers in our Months in such a Day
of Peace and Liberty, while we are Brow-beaten, or wheadled out of the great
Fundamental Points of Eternal Life and Salvation, which in all Ages of
Antichristian Tyranny have triumphed over the smartest Persecutions, through
the Blood of the Lamb, and the Word of his Testimony, in the Faith and Patience
of the Saints, who have not loved their Lives unto Death in the Heroic Defense
of them, against the very same sort of Opposition? And who, I pray, will harm
us now, if we as strenuously defend the Truth as it is audaciously attacked?
Have any of us suffered to the spoiling of our Goods in the Defense of Truth,
of a subordinate and subservient Nature to these? and shall we suffer all this
in vain, and cast our selves tamely at the Feet of such a confident Invader of
our most choice and precious things in the World? yea, our very Life in Christ?
What is it that affrightens us? Does the Scripture, Law or Learning terrify us?
If so little a Footman can run us out of Breath, how do we think to contend
with Horses, Dragooners I mean, if they should come? And if in the Land of
Peace we are wearied, what shall we do in the Swelling of Jordan? If Popery
should ever overrun us again (which God forbid) and we should be called to
bear Testimony to these Truths at Fire and Paggot, as the Famous Martyrs have
done? It Is to be feared now, that many Protestants would provide for their
Safety, by flying to the Neonomian Asylum. But to conclude, however we shrink
from the despised Truths of Christ, shuffle and cut with him, and sometimes
huff and bounce at him, or some Truth of his, I am fully assured the God of
Glory and all Grace, who has hitherto preserved the pure Doctrine of his
Gospel, not only from the impure Mixtures of Pretenders to Holiness, the crafty
Methodists of Satan as an Angel of Light, but also from his open Rage as a
roaring Lion, will continue yet to maintain it against all the b^ting Winds of
False Doctrine: That Christ has his Fan in his Hand, and will thoroughly purge
his Floor; and that if any Man lay any other Foundation than what is laid,
which is Jesus Christ, and continues so to do, his Root shall be Rottenness,
and his Blossom go up as Dust.

I. C.

Some of the Paradoxes contained in the Neonomian Scheme.
1. SINS of the Elect are not forgiven immediately upon, nor merely by Christ's
Enduring Sufferings, but there were by Divine Appointment to interpose a Gospel
Promise, of Pardon, the Work of the Spirit, for a Conformity to the Rule of the
Promise in the Person to be pardoned, and a Judicial Act of Pardon by that
Promise on the Person thus conformed to the Rule thereof.

2. The Gospel has another Sanction to the Preceptive Part of the Law, than
the Covenant of Works had: Though nothing be abated in the Rule of Sin and
Duty, yet Blessings are Promised to Lower Degrees of Duty, and a continuance in
a state of Death with a Bar to the Blessing, are not threatened against every
Degree of Sin as the Covenant of Works did.

3. This Change of the Sanction supposes the Death of Christ, and his
honoring the Law by his perfect Obedience, wherein God has provided for his
own Glory, while he promises Life by Forgiveness to Imperfect Man, and yet
insists on some Degrees of Obedience, to which of his mere Grace he enableth us.

4. The [Degrees of Obedience] the Covenant of Redemption secures to the Elect,
though the Grant therein is pleadable only by Christ as the stipulating Party for
us; and our Personal Claim depends upon the Gospel Covenant, whereof Christ is
Mediator.

5. The Gospel-Sanction determins as certain a Rule of Happiness and Misery as
the Law of Works did, though it be not the same; for while it promises a Pardon
to all believing repenting Sinners, and declares a Bar to Pardon to the
Impenitent Rejecters of Christ and Gospel Grace, it fixes true Repentance and
Faith unfeigned to be the Terms of Pardon.

6. When it promises Heaven to the sincerely holy persevering Believer, it
fixes sincere Holiness and Perseverance in Faith as the Terms of possessing
Heaven.

7. Hence the use of Faith and Holiness as to those Benefits is not fron the
Conformity to the Precept, but their Conformity to the Rule of the Promise.

8. Our applying Christ's Righteousness, and relying on it, would no more
Justify us, than our Holiness would Save us, were it not for the
Gospel-Promise, God will justify for Christ's sake all such as believe.

9. God in dispensing Gospel-promised Blessings, does judicially determine a
Conformity to this Rule of the Promise. When he forgives, he judicially
declares a Man has true Faith; when he admits to Heoven, he judicially
declares a Man sincerely holy and persevering.

10. The Wedding Garment, Matthew. 22.11. is true uniting Faith.

11. Forgiving, Adopting, Glorifying, and Conveyance of every Gospel-Benefit
given on God's Terms, are Judicial Acts of God as a Rector; if not, he does
blindly and promiscuously dispense them, without any regard to our being
Believers.

12. With respect to what is declared, the Gospel is a Law of Faith, and it
especially insists on that Sincerity of Grace and Holiness, which the Rule of
the Promise makes necessary in it is Description of the Person whom it makes
Partaker of it is included Benefits.

13. The Merits of Christ are the Cause of this Gospel-Ordination, his
Righteousness Imputed is the Cause for which we are Justified and Saved, when
we do answer the Rule of the Gospel.

14. The Righteousness of God, Phil. 3.9. principally intends the Gospel
Holiness of a Person justified by Christ's Righteousness, both which by Faith
in Christ all his Members shall be perfect in.

15. The Grace of God is hereby stated as free as is Consistent with his
Government and judicial rectoral Distribution of Rewards and Punishments.

THE Ancient Gospel DEFENDED: AND THE New Gospel UNMASKED.
TWO Gentlemen, who had for their Recreation walked forth into the Fields in
Vtopia, happened to fall into Company together, and after mutual Salutation,
and general Discourses of News, (having not as yet a particular Acquaintance,
or Knowledge one of another) one of them among many things mentioned by him
that were great ground of Sadness to a considering and gracious Mind, said, He
was most affected with and grieved at the great Eclipse fallen of late upon the
Doctrine of the Gospel, insomuch that for the Doctrine of Justification
especially we are in a manner returned again into Egypt, that of Justification
by Works being brought into the room of Justification by Faith, and only
varnished over with the Profession of the Protestant Religion, and the change
of a few Terms which are used to the same purpose that the former were.

The other Gentleman looked hard upon him while he thus spoke, and said, Have
you seen a Book lately come forth, called, Gospel Truth Stated and Vindicated?
It Is a Book much talked of, and commended. Yes, Sir, said the other, I have
seen the Book and read most of it, but I will assure you I was much grieved at
the reading of it. I pray your Reasons. He replied, Pray Sir, excuse me there.
The other returned, I begin to have some Apprehensions what your Principles
are; I find you are an Antinomian: I pray what is your Name? I crave your
Excuse, Sir, you have given me a Name, you may call me by that, or what you
please; for by this I do as well ken you: For I know of what Principles those
Men are of, that are so ready to asperse the Asserters of the Doctrine of
Free Grace with the Reproachful Name of Antinomians, the true Account of which
Sect, and most ancient, is from the Apostle Paul's time, that they took
occasion from the Doctrine of Free Grace, to plead for and practice all manner
of Licentiousness. Hoc anno prodiit Secta eorum qui dicuntur Antinomi. Sleid.
com. l. 12. fol. 199.
And in Sleiden we have an Account of a Sect of Libertines, or Carnal
Gospellers, which brake out in Germany after the Reformation, circ. An. 1538.
the Ringleader whereof was Islebius Agricola, the Compiler of the Interim.
They merited this Name of Antinomians by the loose Opinions, and looser
Practices, against whom Luther wrote several Books, and Calvin also, with great
Invectives in his Instr. advers. Libertin. Which were Learned and eminent
Witnesses to the Doctrine of Free Grace, as it ought to be held forth in all
its Gospel-Splendor and Luster. The other Gentleman replied: As for Luther, he
was an Antinomian himself, and Calvin but a little better, according to the
Opinion of our Modern Divines. We say they are Antinomians that deny
Justification to be by Faith as a conditional receiving Act, and by Repentance
as a qualifying Act; and that the continuation of our Justification is by
Works: These Men which you name, and their Followers indeed pretend to
Holiness, but they ascribe not that to it which they ought, for the Honor of
God's Rectoral Rule of Government.

Antinomian. If these be the Men you call Antinomians, they are falsely so
called. I think they that come nearest to the Doctrine of our Lord Jesus Christ
and his Apostles are the most Orthodox; and I know no such Doctrine that they
have taught, but contrary to what you call Orthodox; you seem to be of the
Sect-truly called Neonomians, because they assert, That the Gospel is a new
Law, the Condition whereof is imperfect, sincere, persevering Obedience, which
I take to be no other than a Covenant of Works.


Neonom. I am indeed of that Opinion, and my Scheme is according thereunto. I
say, the Covenant of Grace is a conditional Covenant, and the Condition of it
is sincere Obedience in Faith, and other Graces and Duties persevered in: But I
say not that we are Justified by the Covenant of Works, the Law of Innocence
that is Abrogated, transiit in Sentontiam, but that Christ has in satisfying
that Law merited another with milder Terms and Conditions, viz. of Imperfect
Obedience.


Antinom. I perceive then that you are the Antinomian indeed, for you set aside
the Old Law as Obsolete and Abrogated, and of no use to us at all: For the
Apostle Paul says, The Promise is not against the Law, but it does establish
it.


Neonom. i. e. It does establish the New Law, not the Old; we are for a Law,
and Justification by it, though not for the Old: For Paul still opposes the Law,
of Faith and the Works of that Law to the Old Law, i. e. The Law of Perfect
Obedience. You must not confound one with another: That was a Law of
Perfection, this of Imperfection. I have stated the difference between Truth
and Error in these matters.


Antinom. Now you say you have stated the Difference, I begin to suspect you to
be the Author of that Book lately come forth, called, Gospel Truth Stated and
Vindicated. For that Gentleman pretends to a singular Dexterity in stating
Questions, and Superlative Nicety, even to the splitting a Hair between Truth
and Error; and I perceive diverse Divines do esteem him a Cuminopristes that
way, by the Commendation they have given him, and the Recommendation of his
Treatise.


Neonom. Truly it is no more than what it deserves, not to say any thing of the
Author, who I know, how unworthy soever he thinks himself to be, yet has no
greater Ambition than to remove Mistakes from Men's Minds about Gospel Truths,
of which there are many, even among honest well-meaning Divines, (as well as
others) who are too much unstudied in these matters, and therefore frequently
utter their crude and undigested Conceptions in the Pulpit and Press too, and
as he would reach forth light to them, so he would be Malleus Hereticorum.


Antinom. My thinks I am the more confirmed by this that you your self were the
Author. Are you Mr. D. W?


Neonom. I was either the Author, or will personate him so far as to defend the
Book, if any one has any thing to say against it. I must confess, D. W. Pref.
p. 1.
a dislike of Contention has long restrained my engaging in this Work.


Antinom. I doubt too much of the contrary appears in that Book, or else the
Author would never have raked up the Ashes of an Holy Man, that has been so
long at rest, to contend with and spurn them about with his Foot in so much
Scorn and Contempt.


Neonom. I have been often solicited to this Work by many able Ministers.


Antinom. Because they looked upon you as the ablest, (as you seem willing to
be thought) I perceive now I be not mistaken.


Neonom. But finding what Principles you are of, I know you are mistaken in
many things, which I shall rectify you in, if you have Patience and Will to
hearken to me. Do but read my Book, and consider it well; Peace is the Blessing
which I cheerfully pursue, and it with the Truth what I propose in this very
Endeavor.


Antinom. It Is well if it be so, but (as they say) the Proof of the Pudding is
in the Eating. It Is no new thing for Men to pretend well, let their Undertaking
be what it will: But Non videtur id manticae quod in tergo est. Apollinarius
the Heretic had a School cum Titulo Orthodoxi. And Nestorius the Heretic
shrouded himself under (...), Error sibi ex principiis fidem perstruit ut cum
magna mercede fallet: It Is observed that Error will always shelter it self
under a plausible Pretext of Truth, that it may do it with the greatest
Advantage.


Neonom. I am convinced after many Prayers, and serious Thoughts, that the
Revival of those Errors must not only exclude that Ministry as Legal, which is
most apt in its Nature, and by Christ's Ordination to convert Souls, and secure
the Practical Power of Religion; but also renders Unity among Christians a
thing impossible.


Antinom. You know also another old Proverb, In Nomine Domini, etc. Livy
reports of Scipio Africanus, before he set upon any Business, he entered the
Capitol alone, pretending thereby a Consultation with the Gods, whereupon apud
multitudinem plerumque velut mente divinitus monita agebat; thereby he had a
great Vogue among the People, of the Justness of his Cause. I cannot persuade my
self that the Composure of that piece of Work that has so much Moral Evil in
it, and bitter Opposition to Gospel Truth, is an Answer of Prayers; neither can
I pray as those Gentlemen, whose Names stand over your Porch, but think it my
Duty to pray quite contrary; and as for what you speak of Revival of Errors, I
judge that your Dictates are no Rule to judge of Faith and Error by, how
magisterially soever you impose them: And I think we are come to a sad pass, if
a Man of your declared Principles must be set up as a Reformer of Error, and
Former of Articles of Faith, and such as are in Fundamental Points directly
contrary to the Doctrinal Part of the 39 Articles; yea, such as our first
Protestant Reformers decryed by Scripture and the best Arguments, as highly
Antichristian, and destructive to the Souls of Men; which Witness of theirs
many of them sealed with their Blood. You say, the Danger of such things as you
call Error, will be in excluding the Teaching of your Doctrine and Ministry as
Legal. Would to God such Ministry as the Spirit of God call's Legal Preaching,
were excluded by the brighter Shining of the Grace of God into the Hearts both
of Ministers and People; from which Light some, and too many this Day have
swerved, having turned aside unto vain Jangling, desiring to be Teachers of the
Law; understanding neither what they say, nor whereof they affivm, 1 Timothy 1.6.
But you call that Evangelical, which we call Legal: We cannot help your calling
Light Darkness, and Darkness Light; Law, Gospel; and Gospel, Law; and you say
it is most apt in its own Nature to secure the Power of Religion: Whereas
Experience has showed to the contrary, how well the Doctrine of Justification
by Works has secured it among the Romanists: And the Apostle Paul testifies by
the Spirit, That whosoever is justified by a Law [it's not the Law] is fallen
from Grace, Gal. 5.4. And therefore its false that such Doctrine is Christ's
Ordination. It has not Fitness in it to convert Souls, for the Law brings none
to God: No Man is justified in or by a Law in the Sight of God, Gal. 3.11.
Those Places, and diverse others, should be read a Law, and not the Law, because
the Spirit by them excludes all Laws, even your Law: Its (...); the emphatical
Particle is not put in, and therefore there is no ground to say this or that Law
only is excluded from Justification, but every Law; and where there is no true
Justification taught, there can be no true Practical Obedience. But the last
Prejudice is, That such Doctrines as are opposite to yours, renders Unity among
Christians a thing impossible. Good Reason there is for it, because they cannot
unite in their Head Christ Jesus, and therefore cannot unite as Members. There
lies the Impossible: For what Communion between Christ and Belial? By this it
appears you strike at the Union.


Neonom. Every Sermon will be matter of Debate, and mutual Censures of the
severest kind will be unavodable, while one side justly press the Terms of the
Gospel under its Promises and Threats, for which they are accused as Enemies to
Christ and his Grace, etc.


Antinom. Reason Good, that every Sermon that makes the Gospel a Law, i. e.
That press Duty under a Law-Sanction, should not only be matter of Debate, but
earnestly contended against; for the Performance of Duty as Terms enforced by a
Law-Sanction, is a Covenant of Works. So that such Men are Preachers of a Law,
its no matter what Law. Works performed under a Law-Sanction are Legal Works,
and do make the Covenant enjoining them a Covenant of Works. Censures are here
justly made of such a Ministry; and they that preach such Doctrine, are
certainly Enemies to the Grace of God, under whatsoever Vizards of pretended
Holiness they vail themselves.


Neonom. And the other side ignorantly set up the Name of Christ and Free Grace
against the Government of Christ and the Rule of Judgment.


Antinom. I think the Stomach of every Good Man may justly rise not only
against your Insolent, but profane Expression. All Men besides Neonomians are
Ignorant Men. What says the Poet, -- (...)
(...).
-- O miserimos mortalium
Qui spiritus tumidos gerunt.


Arrogance is called (...), a tough Itch not easily cured. How far does this
Spirit come short of the Imitation of Christ in Meekness and Lowliness? Yea,
how far from his Rule, [which you would seem to be so zealous for] To do
nothing out of Strife and Vainglory, [(...)] but in lowliness of Mind let each
esteem other better than themselves, Phil. 2.3. But with you all that adore
Free Grace, and set up Justification by Faith without the Works of a Law, do
ignorantly set up the Name of Christ. Is this a piece of Ignorance to set up
the Name of Christ as a Savior of Sinners, and as that Name whereby we are
Justified from all things from which we could not be justified by the Law of
Moses, or any other Law. Beware lest that come upon you which is spoken of in
the Prophets, Behold ye Despisers, etc. Acts 13.39, 40. And what do these Men
so ignorantly do? They set Christ against himself: Set up his Name and Free
Grace against his Government. And why? Because they say we are saved not by our
Works of Righteousness which we have done, but according to his Mercy; and that
it was the mere Kindness and Love of God our Savior that appeared to us in the
Gospel-Salvation, Tit. 3.4, 5. Therefore they set up the Name of Christ against
his Government. Is his Name Jehovah our Righteousness, against his Government?
See whether Paul is one of those Ignorant Advancers of Christ, Gal. 2.8, 9.


Neonom. I believe many Abettors of these Mistakes are honestly zealous for the
Honor of Free Grace, but have not sufficient Light to see how God has
provided for this in his Rectoral Distribution of Benefits by a Gospel Rule.


Antinom. We are beholding to you, Sir, for a Drop of Charity mingled with your
supercilious Contempt of Holy Protestant Reformers, who in my poor Judgment
were knowing and learned Men, (that asserted both the Grace and Government of
Christ against your new Law) you esteem them but ignorant honest Men that meant
well, but ignorantly zealous for the Grace of God, carried on only by a blind
Devotion, and did not understand the Mystery of God's Rectoral Distribution.
The Apostle tells us who are ignorant, Romans 10.3. They that are ignorant of
God's Righteousness, and go about to establish their own. What do you think of
the Mythologists of the Late Athenian Society? I hope you esteem them Learned
and Knowing as well as Honest.


Neonom. Indeed I am bound to give them a high Character, because they have
given so ample a Testimony to my Scheme. After their Learned Defense (that
somebody took Care of, that it should be well done) they give me and my Book
this Character:

The Book is worth Perusal of all sorts of Persons for the Antidote which is
annexed to each Argument, and we must deliver our Opinions, that Mr. Williams
has without Passion, plainly, learnedly and solidly established the Truth with
incomparable Brevity and Criticism, upon many Texts.


Antinom. But I suppose they have wronged you in one thing, viz. Branding you
for a Critic upon Texts of Scripture. I would do you right, I believe you were
never guilty of that. As to what they say besides of you and your Book, I leave
others to judge when the matters are impartially tried.


Neonom. You may say what you please; you see it passed the Judgment of those
Wise, Learned, and Judicious Men, Divines and others, that were Eyes to the
Nation in all Points of Difficulty, both in Policy, Law, Divinity, Matrimony,
and something else.


Antinom. As to the Politics, or the Oeconomicks, or what else you will call
it, their Skill failed, tho to their Fatal Ruin. But I meddle not with those
Points, I am most concerned at the Inscription upon their Altar. (...), to the
unknown God, which they ignorantly worship.


Neonom. What do you mean by that?


Antinom. I mean they are ignorant of God according to the Articles of the
Church of England.


Neonom. It Is Impossible, I am sure they give no such ground of suspicion by
the Credit they have given my Scheme.


Antinom. That may be, Bona Ingenia jumpunt, I doubt not but they are of your
Opinion in Doctrinals.


Neonom. But you say they know not God according to the Church of England:
Prove that Charge, we will both fall together; sure if you make not that good,
I cannot but take you for a wicked Slanderer and Backbiter of a worthy, solid,
learned Society of men.


Antinom. If I do not prove my Charge let me be accounted so: Sc. As to the
Doctrine of Election, in answer to this Q. Does the Scripture any where affirm
an Election of a determinate Number of men to Eternal Life and Happiness? Vol.
7. Athen. Merc. Number. 26. July 26. 1692.
They make this Answer, (I must confess as Men to be pitied for their
Ignorance:) It Is an easy thing to be mistaken in matters of this nature;
howsoever if we are so, we'll profess our selves ready to change our Opinion
(this is modest and Ingenuous,) on the producing better Reason, and in the mean
time not to have angry and uncharitable thoughts of those who are of a
different Judgment.

Now thus far they set you a Pattern, for you (forsooth) must Dogmatize and
Anathematize all men that are not of your Opinion. But to the Question: We
cannot be satisfied by any of those Scriptures which are brought for that
purpose, that there is any such an Election of a determinate number as either
puts a Force to their Natures, and Irresistibly saves them, or absolutely
excludes all the rest of Mankind from Salvation.

Not to stand upon the fotching in some words improperly brought (as forcing
Men's Natures, which is so much like your way of Canons and Articles, that I
have a great suspicion that they drew up this Answer by your Direction) I shall
for all your shifting and shuffling, that I see you are prepared for, and I am
as ready to answer, for brevity sake say thus much, That these Gentlemen do in
this Opinion of theirs deny Absolute Election, which you will also be found to
do at the long run, and that this assertion in denial of Absolute Election, is
contrary to the Doctrine of the Church of England, Art. 17.

Predestination to Life is the Everlasting Purpose of God, whereby (before the
Foundations of the World were laid) he has constantly decreed by his Counsel,
secret to us, to deliver from Curse and Damnation, those whom he has chosen in
Christ out of Mankind, and to bring them to Everlasting Salvation, as Vessels
made to Honor. Now your Servant Sir, I think I have proved what I promised: I
am sure this Article intends an absolute and unconditional Election of some,
and such an Election as excludes all others Eventually, which I am ready to
make good: But this is not all yet, there is another Question, concerning the
Salvation of the Heathens, you advance in order to that Text, There is a Qu.
Vol. 7. No. 29.
There Is no other Name under Heaven given: That if we believe in God, we
believe vertually in Christ; I desire to know what is meant by a Vertual Belief?
A. The Jews were under the Dispensation of believing Our Father, having Faith
in the Messiah, and whereas the Heathens were under the Dispensation of the Law
of Nature, the Divine Light written in Man, which is the ordinary Voice of the
Spirit in every man to restrain him from Murder, Idolatry, etc. if they kept to
that Law, they should receive the Virtue of the Lamb of God slain before the
Foundation of the World by the Fathers Decree for the sins of all men; contrary
to the Article 18. of the C. of E.

They also are to be had accursed, that presume to say, that every man shall be
saved by the Law or Sect which he professes, so that he be diligent to frame
his Life according to that Law and the Light of Nature: For Holy Scripture has
set out to us only the Name of Jesus Christ whereby men may be saved.


Neonom. You are under many mistakes, you neither understand those learned
Mythologists, nor the Articles; for the Articles speak Old English, and the
Mythologist the New Divinity, but they both mean the same thing; for I have
subscribed the Doctrinal Articles, as very tolerable Divinity for those former
well-meaning times; but you know the Opinion of our modern Divines about
Subscriptions, how far a man may go in those cases with a safe Conscience. But
to proceed to what I was saying, That by the pretense to the Honor of Free
Grace, Antinomianism so corrupted Germany, and in N. E. etc.


Antinom. It was the Pretense of those that abused Free Grace to
Licentiousness, in St. Paul's time: Therefore you might have gone further back
than the Antinomians in Germany or New England. And do we not know that a
Pretense to Holiness, and the Exaltation of that in Opposition to the Doctrine
of Free Grace, is that which has brooded all the Doctrine of Popery,
Arminianism, Quakerism, etc. And is it not this that you shelter all your
Errors and false Accusations under, whereby you endeavor to murder the Name
of one who was an holy Man and a Gospel Divine, and hereby would deceive the
Reader into the Belief of a gross and notorious Falsehood in the Entrance into
your Book, which is this: You say, I have in nothing misrepresented Dr. Crisp
's Opinion, nor mistaken his Sense.

This Assertion I shall prove to be as I said.


Neonom. It bid fair to Overthrow Church and State in New England; and by its
Stroke at the Vitals of Religion, it alarmed most Pulpits in England. Pr. p. 1.


Antinom. It was by reason of some such as you are, that beat the Cushion and
Kettle-Drums, as they do sometimes against the Truth, it may be oftener than for
it. The Pulpit and Press are like the rest of London Roads, you will meet both
Truth and Error upon the Tantivy there, and the fewest in number must break the
way: So he that can make the greatest Cry of Error, and Magisterially cry down
Truth for Error, he is the Man.


Neonom. Many of our ablest Pens were engaged against those Errors, as Mr.
Gataker, Rutherford, Burgess, Provincial Synod, etc.


Antinom. Sir, These Persons were worthy Divines, but dead and gone. I will not
rake in their Ashes, as you have done in this good Man's; and whatever Errors
you pretend they were against, it may be we shall find their Opinions were no
more, as you represent them in your Book, than Dr. Crisp's was, as you
represent him.


Neonom. To the Grief of such as perceive the Tendency of those Principles, we
are engaged in a new Opposition.


Antinom. After a certain zealous Neonomian had taken his leave of us, there
was a great deal of Probability this Controversy would have fell to the
ground: But since that you have been the only Bellweather that has set it on
foot, thinking to make your self the Head of a Party; but do not believe that
so many do admire you as you think, nor persuade your self you can wind all the
Divines in London about your Finger, as you think you have done some here, and
all at Dublin.


Neonom. I believe many Abettors of those Notions have Grace to preserve their
Minds and Practices from their Influence: But they ought to consider the
Generality of Mankind have no such Antidote; and themselves need not to
fortify their own Temptations, nor lose the Defense which the Wisdom of God
has provided against Remisness in Duty, and sinful Back sliding.


Antinom. The great Advantage the World is easily persuaded of, that the
Opposers of the Doctrine of Free Grace in the Salvation of Sinners, ^^ve had
against the Assertors thereof in all Ages, is a Suggestion, that the said
Doctrine tends to the Countenance and Encouragement of Sin. And this Accusation
the Apostle Paul does industriously set himself to the wiping off, Tit. 1.10,
11, 12. and diverse other places: And to affirm that the Grace of God is the o^^
Root and Foundation of true Holiness in the freest and fullest Despensation;
the Truth of which does not only abundantly appear in the Word, but by manifest
Experience, that your Self-Justiciaries, Free-willers, Neonomians, that seek
Justification by a Law, they are least observant o^ any Rules of strict
Obedience or conscientious Regards to the Commands of God. I will go no further
now for an Instance than your self, who now come forth into the World in a
Vizard of Holiness, to the deluding of such as can discern but Skin-deep, when
your Treatise it self is sufficient Evidence to contradict what you pretend to,
being stuffed with so many Immoralities. Immoralities I say; for such are false
Accusations, Malice, Envy, Evil Speaking, and all shot from the Quiver as it
were of a Persecutor, at the good Name of one that was upright in heart, Psalm.
11.1, 2, 3, 4. if not at the Name of Christ, and other his Faithful Servants.

And as for the Danger of those Truths to the generality of Mankind which you
call Error, it is an high Impeachment of the Grace and Wisdom of God; because a
wicked, carnal, corrupt World, for such is the generality of Mankind, do abuse
the Grace of God as well as refuse, count it Folly, yea, and stumble at it;
therefore it is to be blamed and shunned as an Error, and such a Doctrine of
Life and Salvation is to be set up as may be of better Influence upon the
generality of Mankind, and more suitable to their Nature, i. e. Their Carnal
Reason and Corrupt Affections. And therefore you would have Antidotes to take
off the Poison that Mankind is apt to suck in from the Doctrine of Free
Pardoning Grace, and this must be the Doctrine of Neonomianism, and likewise a
Cure of that which Believers have sucked in already, and are apt to perish
under, by reason of Temptation: Therefore as it may be supposed you have given
it the Name of a Remedial Law, to cure the Distempers that arise from the
Doctrine of Free Grace.


Neonom. Who can wonder at the Security of Sinners, the mistaking the Motions
of sensible Passion for Conversion, and the general Abatement of exact and
humble walking, when so many affirm Sins are not to be feared as doing any
hurt, even when the most flagirious are committed; Graces and Holiness cannot do
us the least Good: God has no more to lay to the Charge of the wickedest Man
if he be elected, than he has to lay to the Charge of a Saint in Glory. The
Elect are not governed by Hope or Fear; for the Laws of Christ have no Promises
nor Threats to rule them by, nor are they under the Impressions of Rewards or
Punishments as Motives to Duty, or Preservatives against Sin.


Antinom. As for this great Flourish, it is but like Don Quixot 's brandishing
his Sword against a Windmill. It Is not only a Rule that Calumniators go by, and
known to be their Practice, Fortiter calumniari aliquid adhaerebit: But
Calumnies go no further than the Ears with wise Men; according to a Proverbial
Saying apud Aeschium, (...). At the first light of a black Tongue, it is easy
to judge of the Foulness of the Stomach, and that the whole Mass of Blood is
infected with ill Humors, or the Morbid Constitution of some Parts. Out of the
abundance of the Heart the Mouth speaks, says our Savior our great
Physician. Is it not sad when there is a poysonsom Juice under the Lips, and a
Mouth full of Bitterness? Romans 3.

You first charge the Ministry of some (and most hereabout know what sort of
Men you mean) with being the Cause of Men's Security in Sin: And why? Because
they preach the Doctrine of the Gospel, in a free Justification of a Sinner by
Faith without the Works of a Law, according to the Apostle Paul, and preach
down your Doctrine of Justification by Works. But you express the Effects of
this dangerous Doctrine to lie in these things: 1. Security in Sin: A Doctrine
that quickens Men that are dead in Trespasses and Sins, (one part of which
Death is Security in Sin,) does not cause Security in Sin: But the Doctrine of
Free Grace in Justification of a Sinner, without Works of any Law, does so,
Ephesians. 2. I shall not now enlarge upon you. 2. Another ill Effect is, you say,
That it causes the mistaking the Motions of sensible Passions for Conversion.
This is rather the Effect of your own Doctrine, wherein you lay the whole
Stress of Justifying and Saving Grace upon Sensible Passions, and set Men
wholly to judge of their State thereby. It Is marvellously to be wondered at,
that any Man should have the Impudency to charge those Effects upon an opposite
Doctrine to his, which are the natural and palpable Effects of his own, and he
sees so to be. 3. You charge upon it the general Abatement of an exact and
humble walking. This Charge is likewise of the same Nature: Whereas the Spirit
of God has disclaimed any true Cause of exact walking, beside the Grace of God
that brings Salvation, and then teaches it, as has been proved. As for Humble
walking, what is a greater Inducement thereto than the Doctrine of Faith, which
ascribes all to the Gift of Grace, empties us of every high Imagination and
Thought? It exalts Christ, and makes him all and in all. Whereas yours is the
contrary: no Doctrine tends more to the lifting up of the Creature than that of
Neonomianism, next to that of the Papists.

And no wonder, say you, when so many affirm such and such things. Where are
the many or the any that you can charge with saying these things in the same
Sense you put upon them? Many Expressions, that taken together with their
Connection in the explained Sense of him that speaks, are not only true, but
safe and sound; but abstracted and wrested, may be made to look as black as
Hell. You may say David says, That there is not an honest Man upon the Face of
the Earth, Psalm. 12. That he says, There is no God, Psalm. 14. That Moses
affirms God to be a Man, Exodus 15.3. And in a Thousand Places in your way and
manner it is easy to charge Blasphemy upon the very Scriptures. And how often
Lying, if Hyperbole's be not allowed to be used without Wrong to the Truth? As
to the particular Charges, I shall speak to each in it is proper place, and lay
open your Prevarications, Errors, and false Imputations to the World.


Neonom. In this present Testimony to the Truth of the Gospel, I have studied
Plainness; Pref. D. W. p. 3.
and to that end often repeated the same things in my Concessions, to prevent the
Mistakes of the less Intelligent, though I could not think it fit to insist anew
upon all.


Antinom. Your Testimony is against the Truth, as shall be made appear, and is
not to be accounted a Testimony. For a Testimony is a credible Witness or
Evidence: As the Apostle Paul says, Our Testimony among you was believed, 2
These. 1.10. And this Testimony is with a good Conscience, 2 Cor. 1.12. And Paul
testified the Gospel of the Grace of God, Acts 2.24. 1. Your Testimony is not
to the Gospel of the Grace of God, but against it, and therefore not materially
true. 2. Your Testimony is formally naught, it being not accompanied with a
good Conscience, but with a purpose and design to deceive. You pretend to do
Good, but you manifestly design Evil; to blast the Honor of God's Free Grace,
as if it were a Sin-teaching Doctrine, and blacken a Holy Servant of Christ
(who is now in Glory) for Preaching the Gospel: your Testimony cannot be
believed, because of your manifold Prevarications, Equivocations, and False
Teachings in this Treatise of yours. And whereas you say you have studied
Plainness; if you mean that, in some places is no better than plain Falsehood,
in others plain Error, it is true enough: Or if you mean Plainness in respect of
Style, it is homely enough, and hardly plain Sense: But if you mean Plainness of
Simplicity, without double-tonguedness, I utterly deny it: For when you speak
of things, that one would think at first Glance you intend Truth by, it is
nothing so: No Jesuit in the World can outdo you at Equivocation, and there
lies your Natural Excellency: You have impertinent Repetition enough, your
Concessions every where fall about your own Ears in your glozing Oppositions to
the Truth you deny: You design the rectifying the Mistakes of the
Non-intelligent. This is false, it is manifest you design the blinding of them
more; else why do you quote Dr. Owen and the Assembly for countenancing those
Errors which you know they directly oppose? Let but the Mistakes of the less
Intelligent be removed, their Stomachs will rise sufficiently against you and
your Book too.


Neonom. I have in nothing misrepresented Dr. Crisp 's Opinion, nor mistaken
his Sense.


Antinom. This must be true or false, and here is the turning Point of the
whole Book; Either Dr. Crisp was, or you must be. -- If you have not
misrepresented him, then according to your Representation he was so: If you
have misrepresented him, and unjustly blackened him, what are you? But that
which we have in hand is Falsehood and Lying. As to this Assertion of yours, we
shall prove you guilty of Falsehood throughout the Book, that though you have
repeated some of Dr. Crisp's Words from time to time, yet you have only
repeated such part of his Words as might render him odious, not those that give
a true and can did Sense of what he intended; and herein you misrepresented
him, and that on purpose. Now the Spirit of God lays the Formal Nature of a Lie
upon an Intention to deceive, or to deal injuriously with others, as in the
Case of Doeg. Though I do not design now to come to Particulars, I will give
one Instance wherein you in your Book, and your Party, do frequently expose Dr.
Crisp and his Abettors, such as you call Diverse, as also Crispians and
Antinomians, that he and they do assert, Sin can do no hurt; and you would have
Men understand that he means, That no Person in Christ need fear to commit Sin,
and that Sin in it is Abstract Nature is good: That Dr. Crisp renders Sin
innocent, that is your Expression, page 198. Now you charge him for saying,
That the grossest Sin that a Believer can commit cannot do him the least harm,
neither ought they to fear the least hurt by their own Sins, page 181. By this
you would give us to understand, that he means Sin is in its self Innocent, and
that Sin bears no Evil Fruits of its self; that it may be boldly committed
without Fear. Whereas Dr. Crisp declares plainly, and with much endeavor to
prevent Mistakes, that the Hurt he means is only the Penal Effects of Sin; and
declares again and again he speaks this not to encourage Sin: He speaks of the
Sins of a Believer in Christ, they that are under the Dominion of Grace: He
speaks not of Sins to be committed, but that these ought to be looked upon as
the most odious and hateful things in the World, and that which here he does
speak is only upon the Account of some poor distressed Consciences, whose Sins
lay so much upon them, as thereby their Souls were driven from the Grace of God
in Christ. For to prove this, take only a few of his Words, (you shall hear
many more heareafter,) Dr. C. p. 513. Thus I speak of Sin, not as it smiles
upon a Man with a promising Countenance before it be committed: For it is most
dreadful and odious to the Faithful, as that which crucified the sweetest Lord,
but as already committed and lying upon the Conscience of a Believer,
endeavoring to drive him to deny the Free Grace and Love of God, and the
All Sufficiency of Christ: In this regard it is crucified by Christ, and so a
Believer need not be afraid of Sin, the Handwriting of Ordinances is taken
away. His whole Discourse is to evince, that the condemning Nature of Sin is
taken away; the Fear he speaks of is only in respect of Sins that a Believer
has fallen into, and to prevent their falling into unbelieving Despair. Now
let any Intelligent Person judge whether you have not misrepresented Dr. Crisp,
and basely traduced him. You your self say, page 11. The Obliquity of the Fact
against the Precept shall not hurt, where the Sanction of the Law is answered.
I think this being duly weighed, is worse than any thing Dr. Crisp says.

I Will instance in one Misrepresentation more: For you charge him for holding
the Uselesness and Unprofitableness of Holiness, in saying, Graces and Holiness
do us not the least Good.

Dr. Crisp, p. 41. Preaching upon Christ the way, shows Christ to be the way
to Justification, and says, You that are Believers are in a near way to
Salvation. Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved. Such a near way
Christ is, yet still People will be cavilling. Where are good Works all this
while? what justified by Faith alone? Saved by Christ alone? I tell you, if
Christ be the way to Eternal Life, then Works are not the way, except they be
Christ. But must we not work? Yea, but for other purposes: [ i. e. than for
Justification and obtaining eternal Life by them] the Lord has propounded
other Ends for which you are to work. Ye are bought with a price: That Is done,
therefore glorify God in your Bodies, being delivered out of the Hands of your
Enemies, wear to serve him in Holiness and Righteousness. He says much to
this purpose, often speaks in the High Commendation of Holiness, but speaks
against putting it in the place of Christ. By these things we may see what
Credit is to be given to you, when you make it so much of your business in
Pulpit and public places, to charge Men and Books with saying those things
which they never spoke, and meaning such things as they never intended. And let
all Men judge whether you have not misrepresented this good Man, (whom in the
end of this Preface you own to have been a holy Man: And could that be true, if
you have not misrepresented him as to what he said of Sin and Good Works?) and
spoken here a very great Falsehood. These two Proofs may serve to evince for the
present, which also shall be made good that it is so in most, if not all the
Chapters of your Book more or less. The great Quarrel you have with him is,
that he makes it so much his business to vindicate the Honor of Free Grace,
and of the Lord Jesus, in our whole Salvation, and in Justification to exclude
Works altogether. You talk of Works necessary to Salvation, but how? You mean
as a working Condition, whereby you put Works in the place of Christ, and mean
as your Oracle plainly speaks: For you are not so honest as he, but play the
Jugler more. He says, Quoniam and Christus Mediator and Fides in Christum,
Method. Theolog. p. 394. 36. Par. 2.
sunt tantum media ad hominem Deo per sanctitatem and amorem restituendum: Ideo
sine Hesitatione dicendum est, ex natura rei, Fidem Sanctitatem and amorem Dei
ad salutem magis esse necessaria, quam aut fides in Christum, aut Christi
ipsius Sacrificium. I will not construe it, for the Reputation of him that
wrote it; but theirs a Bone for you to pick: And I think to all Learned Men it
gives your whole meaning in making such a noise as you do, (which you think in
very allowable Terms that none dare oppose you in) that works are necessary to
Salvation.


Neonom. His Scheme is this, That by God's mere electing Decree, all saving
Blessings are by Divine Obligation made ours.


Antinom. He never erected his Scheme, and cast Theological Figures as you have
done, to find out a new Gospel. He took his Measures of Truth from the Word of
God; but Bernardus non videt omnia, some things he might be mistaken in as well
as others. But you say that he said, By God's Electing Decree all saving
Blessings are by Divine Obligation made ours. But where is the Expression? I
remember it not. He might say, That from God's Electing Grace it proceeds, that
all Divine Blessings are made ours by Obligation; in the Terms that you have
put it, its improper, because it seems to confound Election and the Covenant of
Grace. I can say nothing further to that, till I see his Words, being not
willing to believe your reporting of them: For it is manifest you make to
Conscience to misrepresent any Man, to put your Meanings, and draw your
Consequences upon him.


Neonom. But he says, There Is nothing more needful to our Title to these
Blessings.


Antinom. Is not this Spirare (...), one of the First Rate? Does not Dr. C.
assert Christ to be needful to Salvation, and as our Title? Does he not assert
the Covenant of Grace to be needful, the Free Gift of Grace? Sure Christ and
the Covenant of Grace are both distinguished from Election; and these he
affirms needful to our Title to Blessings. But Blessings in your Sense are odd
things. Sanctification is no Blessing with you, but only a Condition of getting
Blessings.


Neonom. He says, that on the Cross all the Sins of the Elect were transferred
to Christ, and ceased ever to be theirs.


Antinom. Then there was something more needful to our Title to Blessings than
the Electing Decree, viz. The transferring our Sins to Christ on the Cross. It
is a Truth, that our Sins were laid upon Christ, and that but once, and after
the manner of Imputation in foro Justitiae Divinae, they shall never be laid
upon us. This I will prove against you when you please, and indeed its this
Doctrine, viz. of Imputation, that you are still bantering; it is that you have
the greatest Pique at.


Neonom. That at the first moment of Conception, a Title to all those Decreed
Blessings is personally applied to the Elect, and they invested actually
therein.


Antinom. If that be his particular Judgment in that Point, he says something
for it, and I know not that you can disprove him. If God does secretly and
invisibly apply his distinguishing Fruits of Electing and Redeeming Love upon
the Elect, as is manifest in Jeremiah, John the Baptist, yea, Paul; and without
Dispute in the Instance of Jacob that he gives; Is any Man the worse for it?
Must he therefore come under your Anathema for an Heretic? Yea, is not the
Blessing thus applied to all the Elect dying in Infancy?


Neonom. Hence he says, the Elect have nothing to do in order to an Interest
in any of those Blessings, nor ought they to intend the least Good to
themselves by what they do. Sin can do them no harm, because it is none of
theirs, nor can God afflict them for any Sin.


Antinom. You may erect such a Scheme upon Paul's Epistles, after this manner,
and take the Apostle James to prove it in your way. He says, The Elect can do
nothing in order to an Interest in Eternal Blessings; nor when they have
Eternal Life bestowed upon them, and the Grace of Sanctification as an
undoubted part of it, ought they to put their Graces and Duties in the place of
Christ, or design the procuring or deserving so much as de congruo, in what
they do, and that sin cannot harm them as to it is Penal and Vindicative Effects:
He says therefore, it can do them no real harm, and so he explains himself.
And therefore Gods afflicting them proceeds not from Vindicative Justice; he
does not afflict them so as to execute Justice upon them for Sin, but to reform
them. His Term is, from Sin, i. e. to purge Sin out of them, and make them
Partakers of his Holiness: As the Apostle says, Heb. 12.


Neonom. And all the rest of his Opinions follow in a Chain, to the dethroning
of Christ, enervating his Laws and Pleadings, obstructing the great Designs of
Redemption, opposing the very Scope of the Gospel, and the Ministry of Christ,
and his Prophets, and Apostles.


Antinom. It Is strange, a Holy Man, (as you own he was) should do Christ so
much mischief. Here Is a swinging Bill of Costs; but that is not fair before we
have a Hearing and Trial: Your Word is a Law. Ego ipse dixi is enough; if you
pass the Sentence, there is nothing but Death and the Cobbler. But you say all
his Doctrine is linked together as in a Chain: That Is like the Analogy of
Faith, not like a Scheme that must be erected a new every Minute, or else it
will not agree with the Heavens. Nowmenians or Neonomians must be often
erecting new Schemes. Your Opinions are so far from Consistency and linking
together, that they hang together like a Rope of Sand, and like Particles of
various Shapes, that are always justling one another till they break each
others Shins. Does this Doctrine incur all this Damage? By what Law? Nay, all
this Damage is excluded by the Law of Faith: And your boasting too of Works.
Does the Apostle Paul's Doctrine preached Ephesians. 1. and 2. Chapter and Romans 4. and
Gal. 5. (where he testifies, That Christ is become of none effect to whomsoever
is justified by a Law,) dethrone Christ, and enervate his Laws and
Intercession? Does he plead your Works? Does it obstruct the great Designs of
Redemption in advancing him in all his Offices, and the Glory of God's Free
Grace? Your Bill of Costs will never be allowed you, till you have confuted
Paul's Epistles, or by your Canons made them no Canonical Scriptures.


Neonom. The Dr. had not entertained these Opinions, if he had considered; that
God's Electing Decree is no Legal Grant, nor a formal Promise to us. The Decree
includes the Means and the End in order to the last: And as it puts nothing in
present being, so it bars not God as a Governor, to fix a Connection between
Benefits and Duties by his Revealed Will.


Antinom. Here I see I must have a Care of my Crown. The Dr. Seraphicus holds
up his Fist. Well Dr. Cr. you should go to School to learn new Principles in
Divinity, if you lived in our Times. You did not consider that God did not
legally Elect you. But Sir, is not this a very insolent thing of you to say,
that the Purpose of God in Election was not a Legal Grant. Was it a Grant or
no? Or was it an Election without a Grant? Is not God's Designation of Good a
Grant so far as designed? Is not a choosing in Christ before the Foundation of
the World, that we should be holy and without Blame before him in Love; A
granting that we should be holy and without Blame before him in Love, and
predestinating us to the Adoption of Children by Jesus Christ to himself,
according to the good pleasure of his Will: A Granting that we should have the
Adoption of Children. But you say, this was not Legal. What! Was it not lawful
for God to do this according to the good Pleasure of his Will? That we usually
mean, when we say a thing is not Legal. Or do you mean, God did not elect by a
Law? If he had been bound by a Law to Elect, he had not Elected freely: For a
free choice implies a Person under no Obligation external or previous to his
own intention and purpose. 2. You say, nor a formal Promise, i. e. Explicit,
you mean. It Is enough that it is an unchangeable purpose to make a formal
Promise; and as there was an Eternal Election, so there was an Eternal Promise,
the Covenant of Grace between the Father and the Son being eternal: And it is
expressly said, that God's Purpose and Grace was given us in Christ before the
World began, 2 Timothy 1.9. Tit. 1.3. We were no sooner efected, but the purpose
and Grace of it was given us in Promise. Election eternal, the Promise eternal,
both equally eternal in puncto Eternitatis; though in Nature Election is before
the Promise, and the Cause of it. 3. You say, the Decree includes the Means and
the End. Do you think Dr. Crisp did not know that? Yes, how to express it
better than you do. He would have said, The Decree was of the Means and the
End; and he would not have said Willing the first, i. e. The Means in order to
a Will of the End, but willing the End to be brought about by the Means. Quod
primum est in Intention uttimum in Executione, as to our Conception. 4. You
say, it puts nothing in present being. I say, it puts the Promise in an Eternal
Being. And if you mean as to Created Beings, and the manner of them, it puts
them into a determinate Futurition. 5. You say, it bars not God of his
Government. No, it is not fit nor possible his own Pleasure should bar him of
it, neither is it possible it should bar him of what he would have; neither is
he the more barred, because you are pleased to find Fault; and it was his
Pleasure to govern as he willed to govern, and all the Connection of Events, so
as they come to pass in a way of Necessity and Contingency. But he determined
absolutely, and nothing that falls out is contingent to him; for he judges not
of Events as probable by Opinion, but as certain to his Knowledge; and
therefore knows them, because he wills them to come to pass, according to his
Counsel and Purpose in himself.


Neonom. So if the Dr. had animadverted, that Christ's Sufferings were the
Foundation of our Pardon, but not formally our Pardon: For them our Sins are
forgiven whenever they be forgiven: Without them Sin cannot be forgiven; and
they were endured, that the Sins of all the Elect, when Believers, should be
forgiven.


Antinom. There Is no doubt but the Dr. was so Learned and Wise, that he
animadverted as much as you can tell him, and undoubtedly what was the main of
his Judgment that he insisted upon, was not from Inanimad version, Ignorance or
Mistake. But you have found out, it seems, some subtle Distinction that he
thought not of. You say he should have said, That Christ's Sufferings were the
Foundation of Pardon. All that he says and means, is, that our Sins were
fundamentally pardoned in Christ. But your fundamentally is only a remote
Causality, as Election is to Creation and Redemption; for that is the Foundation
of both. If you had not intended so, why had you not said the Material Cause,
seeing you deny them to be the Formal; but you will have them to be neither; and
you say, For them our Sins are forgiven. Take heed how you touch there. Be
careful you come not too near Christ. It Is a tender Point; For them our Sins
are forgiven. How! For them? For them as an End? Or how for them? As a
satisfying Reason to the Law and offended Justice of God? Or only as a Benefit
procured? For them remotely, or for them immediately? For them alone, or for
them in conjunction with other things? All that we have at present of your
Meaning of for them, is, that without them Sin cannot be forgiven. A poor Causa
sine qua non. As a Judge gives Sentence upon a Malefactor, or acquits him: Why
does he sentence or acquit him? For his coming to the Judgment-Hall? For, say
I, unless the Judge had come to Court, the Prisoner could not have been
condemned or acquitted. Christ is beholding to you for what you give to his
Sufferings. But we shall see more of this hereafter.


Neonom. But yet they are not forgiven immediately upon, nor merely by his
enduring those Sufferings.


Antinom. But you mean by something else besides them; not by an immediate
Application of them, but mediate and remote a causa fine qua non, but not causa
solibitaria suo genere.


Neonom. But there was by Divine Appointment to interpose a Gospel-Promise of
Pardon.


Antinom. Now we come to the Nicety of the Point. We shall split a Hair here
with a Beetle and Wedges: There Is the Curiosity of it. What! The Promise come
after Christ's Sufferings, to interpose between us and Christ's Sufferings? Was
not the Promise the Cause of Christ's Suffering, in the hidden State and
Mystery of it, before the World was? Tit. 1. Was not the Promise declared and
promulgated before Christ's Sufferings, to Adam, Abraham, etc.? And was not
Christ in all his Sufferings and Triumphs the great Gift of the Promise, as
well as the Condition of the Covenant? But you will have Christ to be provided as
an Indefinite good Medicine, to stand in the Apothecaries Shop for some body or
other when the Physician prescribes it. Nay, it is not an absolute sick Patient
neither, that must have this Medicine; it is one that the Apothecary has in a
manner cured before: But there is some ugly Chronical Symptom or other remains,
which the Physician must be sent to, for. Before the Person be pardoned, he
must be in a very sound and safe Condition, I suppose you mean.


Neonom. There must be a work of the Spirit for Conformity to the Rule of the
Promise in the Person to be pardoned, and a Judicial Act of Pardon by that
Promise on the Person thus conformed to the Promise.


Antinom. The plain English of this Position is, that there must be an Inherent
Righteousness in the Person to be pardoned, upon the condition whereof he is to
be pardoned; and that the Use of Christ's Sufferings are, to compound with God,
for Sinners upon the Account of the Old Law, and put a Bar upon his Proceedings
according to that, and procure another Law, by the Righteousness whereof we are
justified, which Righteousness is our own inherent Righteousness, and not
Christ's. This I affirm, has two things in it. First, the Abrogation of the
Old Law. That we have nothing to do with it at all, it is altogether out
a-doors: This is Antinomianism, higher than ever Dr. Crisp affirmed, or any of
his Abettors, as you call them. Secondly, Here is Erection of a new Law of
Works for our Justification, which is Neonomianism.


Neonom. To clear this Point, consider, 1. The Law is sometimes taken for the
Perceptive part of God's Will, with the Sanction of the Covenant of Works.


Antinom. The preceptive Will of God with the Sanction of Rewards promised upon
Performance of the things required, and Threats of Punishment upon the
Nonperformance, is always a Law or Covenant of Works.


Neonom. In this Covenant Life was promised to sinless Obedience; and Death was
threatened against every Sin, without admitting Repenance to Forgiveness.


Antinom. To talk of any other Obedience to a Law besides sinless, in respect
of that Law in it is preceptive part, is Nonsense: For sinful Obedience, which
you are going to plead for, is Disobedience; and whereas you say, Life was
promised in that Law to Adam's sinless Obedience: That Is a Supposition; but
there was no explicit Promise in the Sanction, neither was there any need there
should: For a Sovereign may command a Duty, or make a thing a Duty to a Subject
upon a Penalty, without promising a Reward. And whereas you say, Death was
threatened without admitting Repentance to Forgiveness: It was not expressed, no
more was the Admittance of a Surety. But if God had intended the Salvation of
Man by a Law of Works, this might have been admitted. When once a Transgressor
is sentenced by the Law, he falls into the Hands of Prerogative, and the Prince
may do with him what he pleases. God also might have put Repentance into the
Conditions of the Law of Works at first, and said, If thou do not eat, or
repent of thy eating, thou shall have thy Reward. But God never intended to
accept Repentance as a Foederal Condition of any Covenant whatever, nor no
other Imperfect Obedience. There was never but one Law of Works, and to
fulfilling it, he always stood upon perfect sinless Obedience.


Neonom. Upon the Fall Life is impossible by the Law with this Sanction.


Antinom. Yea, or by any Law whatsoever with this Sanction.


Neonom. And hence to preach it to Sinners as a way to Blessedness, is sinful
and vain, and no saving Benefit, is dispensed to any of us by this Rule.


Antinom. To preach any Law to Sinners, as a way to Blessedness in this
forementioned Sense of a Law, is sinful and vain, and no saving Benefit is
dispensed to any of us by such a Rule: Therefore the preaching a new Law is as
sinful and vain.


Neonom. The Gospel includes the Moral Preceptive part of the first Law, with
some additional Precepts, which suppose our Apostate State: As Faith in an
attoning Savior, and Repentance for Sin; these could not be enjoined as Duties
upon innocent Man by a Rule of Happiness and Misery: Nor could they be
necessary to his Right to Life, because they would suppose him a Sinner.


Antinom. 1. I deny that the Gospel takes in or includes any Moral Preceptive
part of the Law, as a Rule of Happiness and Misery, with Sanction as a Foederal
Condition, nor any Additional Precepts, which suppose our Apostate state, as
Faith and Repentance. For it were vain to set up such a Law, seeing a Law of
Works proved fruitless to Man in his perfect State, it is much more likely to be
of none effect, we being now a Thousand times more unable to perform the old
Law, or a new one with Additional Precepts: And it becomes not the Wisdom of
God to make a Law to enjoin new Obedience to dead Men, unless he makes them
alive first. Moreover, all the Preceptive Will of God then or afterward to be
revealed, was enjoined to Man as his Duty to observe, in the Law of Nature
imprinted on his Heart. As for Faith, it was an eminent part of his Perfection,
and that which the Serpent first wounded him in by Temptation. Repentance also
is an included Duty, required in every Command of God upon a Supposal of a
Transgression; but that Repentance, or any Duties, are enjoined as a Rule of
Happiness and Misery, (if I understand your Rule aright, viz. A Foederal
Condition giving Right as such) since the Fall, I utterly deny; and the rather,
because any such Duties suppose him a Sinner, as will be very easily made
appear when need requires.


Neonom. The Gospel is taken in a large Sense, when I say, it includes all the
Moral Precepts: But yet the Gospel does so, and they are the Commands of Christ
as Redeemer (to whom all Judgment is committed) as well as the Law of the
Creator.


Antinom. In your Sense it is taken in so large a Sense, as to make it Gospel,
is Nonsense. If it takes in all Moral Precepts as Foederal Conditions, (that is
your Sense) then it sets up the Old Law again, only new vamps it with some
Additional Precepts: You have the Old Law you say, and a great deal more, the
Precepts of Faith and Repentance, which are a Thousand Times more hard to
perform by Man in his Apostate State, than ever a hundred Laws would have been
to Adam in his Innocence. Now here is in your new Law brought in not only all
the Precepts of the Old Law for Condition, but the difficult Task of a
Blackamore's changing his Skin, and a Leopard his Spots, before the Sinner has
the Benefit of the Promise, so much as in any taste of pardoning Mercy, which
you make (when he has it) the Foederal Reward (for so it must be) of his
Conformity to the Rule. 2. Christ our Redeemer gives Commands, and exerts a
Kingly Power in Government of his Church, and has Judgment committed to him;
but these are not of the Gospel Conditions of Life unto Sinners propounded in
the Gospel. God does not require Obedience to the Laws of Christ in his Church
as Foediral Conditions of Eternal Life. Such Obedience is part of the Life
promised. There is the Essence of the Gospel, and the Effects of the Gospel.
The Essence of the Gospel is altogether Promise and Free Gift, the Effects of
the Gospel is every Privilege and Blessing, and the Production of all Good
Fruits in Service and Obedience to our Lord Jesus Christ. 3. It Is true, all
Judgment is committed to Christ as his Reward, but all that Judgment is not the
Gospel. viz. Whenever Christ is found in a way of Judgment, to destroy, not to
save: So the Word Preached, where it proves a Savor unto Death, it is not
Gospel to such in the Event. 4. You say, they are the Laws of a Redeemer, as
well as the Laws of a Creator. It Is true, Christ is Creator: But is the Gospel
a Revival of his Law as Creator, in a way of Redemption? If you mean so, then
the Ministry of the New Testament is the same to us with the Ministry of Death
and Condemnation, contrary to 2 Cor. 3.7, 9.


Neonom. 3. The Gospel has another Sanction to the preceptive part of the Law,
than the Covenant of Works had.


Antinom. This is a strange Assertion: For there was never any Law of God with
Sanction, but it was always the same. Suppose that your new Law were a Reality,
(and not a Fiction of Men's Brains as it is) can there be any other Sanction
than what was annexed to the old? is it not a Promise of Life upon the
Condition of performing Obedience, and a Denunciation of Death to the
Non-performers? What other Sanction have you, or can you pretend to besides
this?


Neonom. Though nothing be abated in the Rule of Sin and Duty, yet Blessings
are promised to lower Degrees of Duty.


Antinom. The Change you pretend to therefore is not in the Sanction, but in
the Condition; the preceptive part, or the Obedience to it required, your
Sanction still remains of Life or Death, as in the first Covenant of Works. But
see how well your Scheme hangs together. You say there is nothing abated in the
Rule of Sin and Duty. 1. I never thought God gave a Rule of Sin; therefore
that is mighty improper; but let it be a Rule to judge of Sin by. 2. You say,
There Is nothing abated of the Rule of Sin and Duty, therefore nothing abated in
the conditionary preceptive part of the Law: And there can be nothing abated in
the Sanction, it must be Life or Death, Ergo, There Is the same Law still, and
we must be saved by the Covenant of Works, or not at all. But, 3. The Reason
you give of changing the Sanction, is, because the Blessings are promised to
lower Degrees of Duty. This, as I said, is no Change in the Promise, but in the
Condition; and then see how you contradict your self in the same Breath. You
say, there is nothing abated in the Rule, and yet lower Degrees of Duty
admitted. How can these Lower Degrees be admitted, but by the Rule of the
preceptive part? For the Degrees of Duty required are according to God's
Commands; and he requires in a Law Duty answering the Perfection of the Precept.


Neonom. And a Continuance in a State of Death, with a Bar to the Blessing,
are not threatened against every Degree of Sin, as the Covenant of Works did.


Antinom. This is not Sense as expressed: But I take your Meaning: 1. Death was
threatened in the Covenant of Works, but it spoke not of a continuance in that
State, with any such Bar to a Blessing, as should hinder God from the saving
of Sinners: But you own that Bar might be removed, and was; but your Covenant
puts as great a Bar as that, That if Men perform not the Condition, they must
continue in the state of Death notwithstanding all that Christ has done to
remove the Bar from the Old Covenant. For their Concernment (in your Sense) is
not now for a Righteousness to answer that, but to answer the New Law, which
lays them under Life or Death. 2. Is the Condition the same, and more? And the
Sanction the same? How is it possible it should not threaten Death to every
Degree of Sin? 3. It seems our Salvation is according to the Degree of Sin. We
must know what Sins are of such a Degree, as that they are pardonable; what
Venial, and what Mortal; and if Law and Gospel are distinguished by the Degrees
of Sin, Gospel lies in Sin, not Grace it seems; for if it be from the Degree of
Sin that we are saved, then not from the Blood of Christ which takes away all
Sin. 4. Does God's Law admit of Sin in any Degree, then I say as the Apostle
says, Is the Law Sin? To admit of Sin into Law is Sin. No; the Law is Holy,
Just and Good, and the Promise does not make void the Law, by abating one Jot
or Tittle of it, but establishes the Law: Therefore the Law cannot admit of
Sin.


Neonom. Can any doubt this to be the Grace of the Gospel-Promise?


Antinom. Yea, I do, not only doubt it, but know and do testify to the World,
according to the Grace of God given to me, That it is not the Grace of the
Gospel-Promise.


Neonom. Does it promise Life to all Men, however vile and impenitent they be?


Antinom. It promises and gives Life to the vilest and most impenitent
Sinners. Where Grace gives Life, it supposes Men dead, and not alive. For,
Repentance is part of the Life given; and to talk of giving Life to penitent
Sinners, is to suppose them alive before Life is given; but it does not suppose
that where Christ gives Life, the vilest Sinners shall remain so, or impenitent.


Neonom. Or does it threaten Damnation, or a continuance of it unto any true,
penitent, believing, Godly Man, because he is Imperfect.


Antinom. Let a Man pretend himself, or be looked upon to be never so penitent,
believing and Godly, and seek to be justified and saved by his Works; I mean
such as you mention, Moral Obedience, Acts of Faith, Penitency, etc. I affirm
thereby he is fallen from Grace, Gal. 5.4. Being fallen short of the
Righteousness of God, Romans 10. And as he puts himself under a Law for
Justification, so a Law condemns for imperfect Obedience. For I roundly assert,
That no Law of God, with a Sanction of Life and Death upon Performance, or
Nonperformance of Obedience, does admit of the least Imperfection in the said
Obedience: Therefore such are under the Curse for their Imperfections. Cursed
is every one that continues not in all things. And I say, if your Gospel be a
Law, it does denounce Damnation to the Holiest and most Godly Man upon Earth.


Neonom. This Change of the Sanction supposes the Death of Christ, and his
honoring his Law by his perfect Obedience; wherein God has provided for his
own Glory, while he promises Forgiveness to imperfect Man.


Antinom. I have proved the Sanction is not changed: But in your Law it seems
the Condition is changed. It was in the Old Law Perfect Obedience, in the New
it is Imperfect. Verily it is changed for the worse; for Imperfect is worse than
Perfect. But how comes this to pass? God has provided for his own Glory in
Christ, that saving of Men is upon the Conditions of Imperfect Obedience, i. e.
by a worse Law, an unholy and unjust Law might not turn to his Dishonor. God
has provided for himself, you mean, seeing he rashly made such a Law as he
finds will not answer his Ends, Justice shall have it is due in his Son, and
then he shall be at liberty to make a Law with such easy, imperfect and sinful
Conditions, that Sinners may be saved. Is not this admirable Stuff for Gospel?


Neonom. And yet he insists upon some Degrees of Obedience, unto which of his
mere Grace he enables us.


Antinom. He could by his Grace as well enable us to Perfect Obedience, if it
were for his Honor that Obedience should be the Condition: But does it make it
make it ever the less a Covenant of Works? Does what you say, make it of Grace.
For, 1. Forgiveness, that is but the Reward of Life. But you will say, it is for
the sake of Christ; well, that is but in respect of the Old Law, that it may not
condemn you, whereby you are come into a capacity to stand again for Life upon
new Conditions. 2. You say, it is to imperfect Man. But is it not the same thing
to save by Perfect or Imperfect Works, so Works be the Condition? 3. What if
Grace enables them? This alters not the Case. Did not God give Adam his
Holiness before the Fall, and enable him to do what he did?


Neonom. This the Covenant of Redemption secures to the Elect, though the Grant
therein is pleadable only by Christ as the Stipulating Party for us.


Antinom. As for your Notion, that your Covenant of Redemption is Distinct from
the Covenant of Grace, I deny it, and shall hereafter make it appear, that the
Covenant of Grace and Redemption is one and the same Covenant. And for the
present, I tax you for saying, That the Covenant of Redemption is pleadable by
none but Christ. Do we never plead Redemption, nor the Promise made in Christ,
nor Christ himself? What, is all in the Covenant of Redemption? Do we not plead
it daily? And what Christ stipulated in this Covenant for us; may we not plead
it? Is not the Promise of Life in Christ pleadable? 2 Timothy 1.1, 9.


Neonom. And our Personal Claim depends on the Gospel Covenant, whereof Christ
is the Mediator.


Antinom. So the Covenant of Redemption is not the Gospel Covenant; but neither
is there any Claim to be made by it, but another that interposeth between the
Second Covenant and us. We are not entitled at all to this new
Covenant-Blessing by Christ, but by our own Obediance (you mean) in performance
of the Conditions of this Covenant, you say. How? To defend from the Old Law
Prosecution, that there may be no Interruption: but our New Law may have quiet
in allowance of our Imperfect Obedience. Christ Mediator with you is but as the
Angel that defended Paradise; so Christ stands and defends the New Law, that no
exception may be taken at its proceeding in Justification by Imperfect
Obedience. This is to make the Lord Jesus Christ the Minister of Sin, to offer
up himself a Sacrifice to procure an imperfect Righteousness for a Covenant
Condition: For in all Imperfections of Obedience there is a mixture of Sin. And
is not this to make Sin good in its own Nature? And implicitly to assert, it
can do us no hurt in the lower Degree, it coming in as an Allay to the
strictness of the Covenant of Works: There Is a necessity of it as to the very
formal Nature of it in the Condition: For otherwise it would be a perfect
Condition, and then exclude us from all Blessedness, as you say.


Neonom. 4. This Gospel Sanction determines as certain a Rule of Happiness and
Misery as the Law of Works did, though it be not the same.


Antinom. To determine Rules of Sin and Misery, as your frequent Expression is,
is to make the Gospel to approve of Sin and Misery, and it is great Design and
Business to send Men to Hell. Take your way of Expression in what Sense you
please, it is so Unscholar-like, that a Schoolboy should be whipped for it. 2. I
tell you, the Gospel has no Law Sanction at all of its own, but it only
establishes the Sanction of the Law, by way of Promise to all saved ones;
Christ is the End of the Law to them; and as to those that are not saved, the
Law takes it is Course upon them; they come not under the Efficacy of the Gospel
at all. 3. In the whole you have said, you have affirmed the Gospel to be a
Covenant of Works, as it is your usual manner.


Neonom. While it promises Pardon to all believing repenting Sinners, and
declares a Bar to pardon to the impenitent Rejecters of Christ and Gospel
Grace; it fixes true Repentance and Faith unfeigned to be the Terms of Pardon:
So when it promises Heaven to the sincerely holy persevering Believer; it
fixes sincere Holiness and Perseverance in Faith at the Terms of possessing
Heaven.


Antinom. 1. I would fain know whether the Gospel offers not Pardon unto
unbelieving and impenitent Sinners? Not that they should continue unbelieving
and impenitent, but that they should believe and repent. For the Promise of the
Gospel is an Offer and Tender of Forgiveness unto Sinners; and it is preached to
them as such, to persuade and encourage them to believe; and whether this
Promise be not before Faith, to work it? if not, the Sinner has no ground to
believe: For where there is no Promise, there is no ground to believe. 2. If it
declare a Bar to all present impenitent ones and Rejecters of Christ, it is
preached in vain; for all are so till they receive Christ by Faith. 3. Whether
Faith and Repentance be not included in the Promise of the Gospel? I say, They
are: All Gifts of Grace belong to the Promise of Grace; but Faith and
Repentance are Gifts of Grace: The Scripture is express in it. Now then I
argue, First, That Faith and Repentance belong to the Promise, to the same
Promise that gives forth Pardon, and therefore are no Conditions; they are
Benefits, they are Life in Christ, and there is none can have them but such as
are in Christ: And therefore Pardon is not promised to Faith and Repentance, as
things distinct from the Promise; but Pardon is promised together with Faith
and Repentance to the Sinner. The Spirit of God only gives us to understand
that they are to go together. Pardon is rather the Conndition of Faith and
Repentance, and much more, having a causal Influence thereunto, then Faith and
Repentance of Pardon. 2. The Gospel does not fix Faith and Repentantance as
Conditions of Pardon in your Sense, i. e. Working Conditions to entitle us to
Christ; for we are pardoned and justified freely; and though there be Faith and
Repentance upon giving forth of Pardon, yet Faith, Repentance and Remission of
Sins are given in the same Promise to the Ungodly, to Persons that were even
till now Impenitent Rejecters of Christ. 3. But you go on with your Mystery.
First, The Sinner must be qualified with Faith and Repentance, before he is
reconciled to God in a way of Pardon; and when he has that, he is to come on
upon another Covenant for possessing of Heaven. Now there must be sincere
Holiness and Perseverance to qualify him for Heaven: The Promise of Heaven,
its upon other Conditions. What a Sad Case is a poor Sinner in, if he make a
shift to scramble by his imperfect Conditions into Covenant! He is like every
Day to be turned out again: And when he has done the best he can; yet he must
never believe that he shall go to Heaven till he lies a dying. It were happy
for him to be knocked on the Head when he is in a good Frame, lest he should
lose all again, and put to begin to go through all his imperfect, sincere,
persevering, moral Righteousness, believing he knows not what. For if he falls
into Sin, he must conclude his Perseverance is at an end; you must enform us
what Degrees of Sin in our imperfect Obedience may be admitted before we
conclude that our Perseverance is at an end; and then, though you say Happiness
will come upon Perseverance, in imperfect Holiness, I suppose, then perfect
Holiness is that which qualifies us for perfect Happiness, and is the Condition
of it: Therefore we must arrive at it in this Life, that so we may have the
Condition before the Promise. Are not these miserable Chimera's for Protestants?


Neonom. Hence the Use of Faith and Holiness to those Benefits, is not from
their Conformity to the Precept, but their Conformity to the Rule of the
Promise.


Antinom. Now we come to the Whirligig, that is the Mystery of the Scheme. 1.
We would know whether there be any difference between Conformity to a Rule and
Precept in a Law? And, 2. What is the Rule of the Promise? Is it not with you
the Precept? If it be not, how is Conformity to it Obedience? 3. The Promise is
not properly a Precept as such, though the Gospel-Promise is the Ground and
Reason of all Gospel-Precepts; but not Precepts of Promises: And how can any
Man conform to the Precept in your Sense, and not expect and have from thence
the Use of the Benefits? Yea, and not look upon it as Federally following
therefrom. 4. I would fain know what gave the Use of the Benefit in the
Covenant of Works? For you say, this determines the Rules of Happiness and
Misery in the same manner. Was not the Use of Adam's Faederal Holiness as to
Happiness from Conformity to the Precept? Where was the Rule of the Promise
there? Either it must be in the Precept, or the Promise it self, or in the
Connection of Promise and Precept. Have I hit it now? It Is sure, the Connection
is the Rule of the Promise. Now how is that a Rule of the Promise, but in
Conformity to the Precept? and then it is Conformity to the Rule of Precept and
not of Promise: Or is it possible to come with a Conformity to the Connection
between the Precept and Promise? Now all the Intricate Harangue is only to tell
us in the Clouds, that Faith applying the Lord Jesus Christ will not justify
us, but as it is a working Condition to which the Promise is annexed.


Neonom. Yes, it follows, our applying Christ's Righteousness, and relying on
it, would no more justify us, than our sincere Holiness would save us, were it
not for this Gospel-Promise, That God will justify for Christ's sake all those
that believe.


Antinom. The Business here that is the Kernel of this Nut, is, that Faith does
not Justify us by applying Christ's Righteousness in the Promise, by virtue of
Christ's Righteousness it self imputed, but by its own Virtue, as being a
Righteousness it self, whereby it answers the Promise as a Condition upon which
it is made. As for Faith's receiving Christ and his Righteousness, it serves
thereby to bar the Old Law: But Christ's Righteousness has nothing to do
here; it is our own Faith and Repentance is the Righteousness in their
Conformity to the Rule of the Promise; and that is Latin for the New Law. Here
are great Mysteries more than Paul understood, and all the Apostles, any other
than to reckon them another Gospel, and vain talking. And truly, as for your
comparing Christ and Holiness in the matter of Justification under the Umbrage
of your Invented Rule of Promise, is perfect Stuff: It amounts but to this at
best, That if God had not promised Justification, there had been none at all,
neither by Christ's Righteousness, nor by ours. But how came this Promise? Do
you not say, Christ purchased it as an conditional Grant?


Neonom. Hence by Gospel Grace there is a great difference between imperfect
Faith and utter Unbelief; between sincere Holiness, and formal Profaneness or
Wickedness; true Love to God and prevailing Enmity, etc. By the Law of Works
nothing was Holy but what was perfectly so, etc. But read the Bible, if thou
doubtest whether there is not a true Faith, Holiness, Love, etc. which be short
of Perfection.


Antinom. I thought we should have had a greater Instance of the Grace of God,
than in giving us a worse Condition of the Covenant than Adam had. You should
have told us what Perfection here you mean; I suppose it must be only of Parts,
that it may be a Gospel Foederal Condition, which must be imperfect; and it
must be mingled with Sin, or else it will not answer the Rule of the Promise.
Now you will not allow it must answer the Rule of the Precept, for there is
nothing abated of it; but it must chop in between the Precept and Promise as
the Gospel Condition in a way of Imperfection: So that without Sin our Holiness
is nothing Foederally: We must take heed it become not perfect Holiness; for if
once it comes to that, we fall under the Law of Works: This were to begin in
the Spirit of Imperfection, and end in the Flesh of Perfect Holiness. And this
is the sad Condition of the Saints in Heaven, that they are fallen under the
Covenant of Works. Again, you do here not a little insinuate what I know lies
in your Breast, that there is no specific difference between Grace and mere
moral Endowments; and it appears so upon all your Hypotheses. For you declare,
there ought to be such and such Qualifications to entitle a Man to the Promise
of Grace, or Grace in the Promise, before he has the Promise. And as to your
Exhortation to the reading of the Bible, etc. I must tell you, I have read the
Bible several times, and hope to read it, and meditate on the Word of Grace
contained therein, as long as I live. But if that be the true Doctrine of the
Gospel which you have delivered in this Book, I am utterly at a loss for my
Salvation, which I would be loath to be now at last, after so many Years
Satisfaction: And let the World take notice, that I do believe your Gospel to
be another Gospel, such as Paul speaks of, and accurseth, Gal. 1.8, 9.


Neonom. God in dispensing of Gospel-promised Blessings, does judicially
determine a Conformity to this Rule of the Promise. When he forgives, he
judicially declares a Man has true Faith. When he admits into Heaven, he
judicially declares a Man sincerely holy and persevering.


Antinom. This is plainly as much as to say, God dispenses the Gospel-Promise
Judicially in the same way as a Law of Works. He looks whether or no we have
fully performed the Conditions; and upon finding of them, he judicially gives
the Promise, i. e. In a way of Reward to the Works performed: Whether they be
Perfect or Imperfect, it is no matter, the Reward is of Debt, and not of Grace:
And in this way Pardon is given upon Imperfect Faith and Repentance: And thus
Heaven is given Judicially for persevering Holiness. Here Is not a bit of
Enquiry whether they have Christ or no, he is a Cipher in the matter of our
Salvation. No Papist can utter more gross Divinity. But this is a strange way
of Dispensation of Gospel-Benefits: First to determine a Conformity to the Rule
of the Benefit. As for Example, In dispensing Faith, for that is a Promise; God
determins judicially, a Man has a Conformity to the Rule before Faith. Again,
Is Forgiveness a judicial declaring a Man has true Faith? Or does this
judicial Declaration go before Pardon and Justification? If so, a Man has
always true Faith before he is justified and pardoned, what absurd Consequences
will follow thereupon? And what can this be but a declared Judgment that he is
de Congruo, deserving Pardon? And I think, ex Condigno too before he is
pardoned; and upon the same Terms are the persevering Saints at last admitted
to Glory.


Neonom. As upon a View of his Guests he cast out him that had not the
Wedding Garment, viz. True uniting Faith; so by keeping out the Foolish
Virgins, etc. Can any think that Forgiving, Adopting, Glorifying, or the
Conveyance of every other promised Benefit given upon God's Terms, are not
Judicial Acts of God as Rector.


Antinom. If you understand Judicial in respect of the Justice of God, answered
by the Righteousness of Christ, purchasing all good Gifts and Blessings for
Sinners that deserve nothing but Wrath, it may be said of Justification. But if
you understand Judicial in respect of any Duty, Grace or Qualification that is
found in us, though wrought by the Spirit, I abhor it as an abominable Position:
And your Saying, the Wedding Garment was Faith, and not the Righteousness of
Christ apprehended by Faith, is a wretched wresting and Abuse of Scripture,
turning the sweet and precious Doctrine of our Lord and Savior against
himself. I shall meet with you again upon these Points more largely, therefore
I pass them over briefly now: But in the mean time take notice, that all our
Protestants, and particularly the Assemblies Catechism, define Justification
and Adoption always Acts of Free Grace.


Neonom. If so, does he despense these blindly and promiscuously, without any
regard to our being Believers, etc. or no? Whether our Faith be true or no, any
one would blush to affirm.


Antinom. I would know whether, if God distribute his Free Grace to poor,
wretched, and worthless Creatures, according to his Election and distinguishing
Mercy, does he do it blindly, because he finds no Reason in them? And I pray,
does God dispense the Grace of Faith blindly, if he does it without respect to
Men's being Believers first? So if they believe before, they shall have the
Gift of Faith; and their Faith must be true too, before they have Faith given.
I can' but think you are Fricatae Frontis, or you would blush at the delivery
of these things.


Neonom. With respect to what is above declared, the Gospel is a Law of Faith,
a Law of Liberty, etc. And it especially insists on that Sincerity of Grace and
Holiness which the Rule of the Promise makes necessary in it is Description of
the Person whom it makes Partaker of it is included Benefits.


Antinom. You do here begin to make Conclusions on your Premises; but your
Premises not holding Water, your Conclusions will no way follow; you conclude
the Gospel is a Law of Faith. We have briefly showed, as you have given
occasion, that the Gospel as such, is no Law, and has not a Sanctio, it is
wholly a Promise of Life, and the Performance of the Promise does not depend
upon any thing a Sinner can do as a Foederal Condition. I shall show fully
hereafter, that there is no ground from that place, Romans 3. nor that of James
1. to conclude the Gospel to be a Law, i. e. A Command of Duty for a Condition
with a Sanction of Threats upon the Nonperformance, or Promises as Rewards
upon the Performance, whether the Condition be Perfect of Imperfect Obedience.
You make the Sincerity of Grace and Holiness to be this Condition, and you call
it the Rule of the Promise, (which you say is not the Precept neither) neither
is it the Promise, but a Rule that is neither Precept or Promise. So what your
Rule is, he is wise that knows. And you say this Rule makes Sincerity necessary
in the Description of the Person: So the Rule of the Promise describes a Person
only, and therefore makes him not, but tells us he must be sincere before he
has any thing to do with the Promise. From whence has he this Sincerity
described? From Law or Gospel? From God or himself? If from God, then by way of
Grace and Gift, and so through the Promise. If of our selves, it is Dross: They
that are in the Flesh cannot please God, and therefore much less perform such a
Duty, for which God will give the promised Benefits.


Neonom. And the main of our Ministry consists in pressing Men to answer the
Rule of Gospel Promises.


Antinom. What this means is very strange, when you say the use of Faith, and
Holiness, as to Benefits, is not from their Conformity to the Precept.
Therefore what do you press them unto, when you press them to answer the Rule
of the Gospel? When the Conformity to the Precept does no good, I suppose in
the same Sense as you say Obliquity in regard of the Precept will do no hurt.
But the main of our Ministry consists in Preaching Christ, and bringing Sinners
unto him, and building them up in him.


Neonom. And dissuading Men from those things which the Gospel threatens shall
hinder their Interest in all, or any of their Benefits, with an Aggravation of
their Misery if they be final Rejecters of Grace.


Antinom. Whatever befalls Sinners retaining their sinful state, and rejecting
Grace, is from the Law, and not from the Gospel. To talk of a Gospel-Threat, is
a Catechresis at best, and nothing else can save it from being a Bull. But what
are those that will hinder a Sinner from the Benefit of being turned from
Darkness to Light? This I can suppose is the Non-improvement of the Grace
(which you take every one to have) which either hinders or makes that they are
not converted.


Neonom. We call Men to be reconciled to God, upon which we know God will be at
Peace with them.


Antinom. But you tell them not, according to 2 Cor. 5.18. That all things are
of God, who has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ. And this is the
ground of the Ministry of Reconciliation, and the ground of Persuasion to
Sinners to be reconciled unto God. But this Portion of Scripture to the End of
the Chapter you take to be hardly Canonical.


Neonom. These things will help thy Conceptions, still remembering that the
Merits of Christ are the Cause of this Ordination.


Antinom. The Council of God is the Cause of the Ordination of Salvation, Means
and Order. But you mean, they will help to blunder and confound poor Men's
Conceptions. Per Nebulam, per Caliginem, per Somnium.

Non lectore tuis opus est sed Apolline libris. But you would have us not to
forget the Causa sine qua non of this rare Gospel Scheme. You should have told
us that your own corrupt Imagination was the Procatarctick Cause of this new
Law Ordination.


Neonom. His Righteousness imputed is the Cause for which we are Justified and
Saved when we answer the Gospel Rule.


Antinom. It Is ad Graecas Calendas, when a poor wretched Sinner must be saved,
then Christ is the cause of setting up this new Law, and that we should be
justified thereby, when we perform the imperfect Conditions thereof; and that is
your answering the Gospel Rule. Since Christ has put a Bar upon the Old Law,
now we must set up for a Righteousness of our own to answer the Gospel-Rule by,
and that is not Conformity to the Precept neither; but answering the Gospel-Rule
by Imperfection. Is not this sad Divinity?


Neonom. And I exclude not this Righteousness, when I affirm, That the
Righteousness of God, Phil. 3.9. principally intended the Gospel-Holiness of a
Person Justified by Christ's Righteousness: Both which by Faith in Christ all
his Members shall be perfect in.


Antinom. It seems the Righteousness of Christ there spoken of, is a mixture of
Christ's Righteousness and Evangelical Obedience; but the principal par it is
Evangelical Obedience; Christ's is but a Complement of ours. The Reverend Dr.
Beverly has abundantly evinced, that Christ's Righteousness alone is there
understood according to the hest Interpreters. We shall have further occasions
to deal with you upon this Point, and your crude and false Interpretation of
that excellent Portion of Scripture shall be laid open in our Progress. You
should have told us, whether you mean we are perfect in Christ's Righteousness
for Justification, without our own Righteousness, or Evangelical Obedience
joined with it; and whether our Perfection in Holiness be in the same manner as
in Righteousness? And whether it be in this Life, that we are made perfect in
Holiness by Faith in Christ.


Neonom. The Grace of God is hereby stated as free as is consistent with his
Government, and Judicial rectoral Distribution of Rewards and Punishments.


Antinom. That is, you have set Bounds to the Grace of God, and told God and us
how far he may lawfully exercise his Grace: He must take heed that no
unqualified Sinners have any thing to do with it; and that he be sure,
notwithstanding the Righteousness of Christ, that he dispense Grace in the way
of a Law, that it may be consistent with his Government; and all Grace must be
distributed Judicially, by Rewards and Punishments. Let all the World see now
whether you have not stated the Grace of God very fairly out of Doors, and gone
about to establish a Law of Works, as shall more manifestly appear afterward.


Neonom. And there is none have need of the Grace of God more than I?


Antinom. The truest Word you have spoken at all. But according your own
Principles its a Question whether you have not put a Bar upon the Grace of God,
by making so audacious and daring an Opposition to it, as you have done in this
Book: I am sure, if this be part of your Gospel. Obedience that you intend for
your Justification, it will not do, if you persevere in it. But the Lord in his
mere Free Grace look in Mercy upon you, pardon you, and turn you from Darkness
to Light!


Neonom. Note, that in this Book I still speak of the Adult, and not Infants.


Antinom. I find you see you are like to run your Head against a Post; but for
all your Foresight, you are certain of a Knock in the Pate; for hereby I find
you see God justifies some without Works. God has not one Righteousness of one
kind to justify Infants by, and another of another kind to justify the Adult by
Adult Persons are no more justified by Works than Infants.


Neonom. Forget not, though the Doctor in his Book speaks to Men as Believers;
yet in every thing true of the Elect.


Antinom. Every thing that is true of the Elect, is so of them when Believers;
but every thing that is true of an Elect Believer, is not so of him before he is
a Believer: And to prove you charge the Doctor falsely, I Will bring but your
acknowledged Sense of the Doctor in your next Words. It Is true of a Believer,
that he knows the Saving Blessings he is entitled to; but it is not true of a
Person in Unbelief, that he knows the saving Benefits he is to be partaker of.


Neonom. They have as much a Title to all Saving Blessings, only they know it
not, this was his Judgment.


Antinom. His Judgment was, that nothing entitleth us to the Blessings of the
Covenant, but the Promise. Deed of Gift is that which entitleth us, whereby we
claim when we take Possession of it when we believe, whereby we know our Title
more or less by believing.


Neonom. I have carefully avoided to make any Reflection on Reverend Dr. Crisp,
whom I believe a Holy Man, and abstained the exposing things according to the
Advantage offered.


Antinom. These things are but ad Populum Phalerae. Whether here you be not as
false as in other things, a little time will discover. We call such an one
Phaleratum, who is as Horace describes, Introrsum turpis speciosus pelle
decorus.


Neonom. Look who is that that is coming toward us? it is sure Mr. A. B.


Antinom: It Is so indeed: Meditatus venit. He Is a perfect Calvinist. I Will
warrant you you will find him of my Opinion concerning your Book.


Neonom. Your Servant, Mr. Calvinist. I have a Question to ask you in the first
place, before we talk of News or any thing. I pray, what do you say of my Book?


Calvin. I cannot like it by any means; I was sorry to see it, knowing
something of your Principles before; but when I read it, it raised Variety of
Passions in me.


Neonom. I must confess I am willing to hear what most Men think of this Piece
of mine; though I think I need not regard what many Men say, seeing it has so
large and ample an Encomium by several very grave Divines and others,
especially the Learned Mythologists of the late Athenian Clubb, the Dessolution
whereof is greatly bewailed by me: They might have proved of Great Use to me in
these matters. But I pray, Mr. Calvinist, tell me the Reason of your Dislike of
my Book,; I thought it might have pleased Calvinists, tho Antinomians (whose
Opinions are not much to be valued) are so angry at it; and I have showed that
what I have asserted is the Sense of the Assembly 's Confession, the Savoy 's,
Dr. Owen, Mr. Norton, and many Learned Calvinists.


Calvin. I shall deal ingenuously and plainly with you, and tell you why I
cannot approve of your Book. My Reasons are these:

1. I except against your Magisterial way of Writing, by Canons, as it were
Anathema's, in the manner of a Council, National or Provincial Assembly,
whereby you would have all Men to believe that our Faith in all matters of
Salvation is to be measured by your Scheme, and pinned upon your Sleeve: So
arrogant a way of imposing upon others in Doctrines, has not been as I know
practiced by the Conformists, whereby you endeavor to make Humane Authority
the Standard of our Faith, prescribe New Articles contrary to those of the 39.
and all our English Confessions, and give an Example unto others so to do: For
if 20 Men of one Persuasion may recommend their Opinion in Doctrinals by a
concurrent Subscription, by the same Reason others may do the like; so that
hereby is laid a Foundation of incurable Factions and Division about the main
Points of our Salvation; whereas, whatever of Differences has been in lesser
matters, and Men's private Opinions in greater, yet hitherto there is no Set of
Men as I know, has publicly in the like manner invaded our Confessions,
wherein those of the Conformists and Nonconformists has harmoniously agreed in
matters of Faith in the Sense of the Scriptures and first Reformers.

2. That you have plainly drawn in, or rather trickt some Divines (under a
Pretense of bearing Witness against Error) into these Practices of Subscribing
to your Book, merely to put a Countenance upon the gross Errors that you would
vend among the People, and that you might the better slurr and brand some
Faithful Ministers of Christ in this City with the odious Name of Antinomians,
and the Preaching the Doctrine of Free Gra^^^s our Lord Jesus Christ and his
Apostles have done, with Antinomianism; and have in your Pulpit at Public
Lectures, and at Public Houses, made it your business to blow up a Flame of
Contention in this Town, as if no Man was to be esteemed Sound and Orthodox in
Gospel Truths but your self, and such as will dance after your Pipe, and think
all others ignorant Setters up of the Name of Christ, etc.

3. That in your Writing, in decrying of what you would charge upon such that
you call Antinomians, you take Dr. Crisp and set him up as a pretended Butt (a
Man dead many Years since, an holy Man, as you own,) falsely representing unto
the World as to his Sense and Meaning, almost in every thing, that through his
sides you might wound the Doctrine of Free Grace. I assert, your way is very
unreasonable to ground a Polemical Opposition, and fasten a Charge of Error
upon, to Excerpt Expressions here and there from Popular Sermons not printed by
himself, but from the Notes of Sermon Writers. How liable the true Words and
Expressions of the exactest Men are to mistake and abuse, Dr. Crisp Printed
nothing, all the Sermons reprinted were Printed from Sermon-Notes taken after
him in Preaching.
I need not to insist on to evince, common Experience is evidence enough.
Moreover, considering that this is the way the worst of Men have always taken
to expose Religion, to encourage and seed Atheism and Profaneness in the World;
Not to name Edward's Gangrena, our present time gives an ample Example in that
late Pamphlet, called the Scotch Presbyterian Eloquence, or the Foolishness of
their Teaching. You may see how the Sentences taken out of the Sermons of the
Reverend Mr. Rule, and of diverse other Presbyterians, does look, when separated
from the main Sense intended by them: I say, I do highly disapprove of this
Sermon-hunting Trade, as a most disingenuous way, unless a Sermon be Preached
and Printed by the Author to establish a manifest Error, and the whole Sermon
or Sense of the said Author be impartially represented and argued.

4. That the more to insinuate your self and Doctrines for Truth into the Minds
of Christians sound in their Principles, that they might think you mean nothing
by your Uncouth and Equivocating Expressions; and to deceive the less
Intelligent (as you call most Divines that are not of your Persuasion) you
grossly abuse the two Reverend Assemblies, with Dr. Owen and Mr. Norton, quoting
them for Asserters of your Errors, in places where they speak or dispute
directly against the Principles that you assert. Now what is this but to Ape a
Deceiver at least?

5. That you that have subscribed solemnly the Doctrinal part of the 39
Articles, should so palpably and openly go about to overthrow some
Foundation-Principles therein contained, as Imputed Righteousness, and
Justification only for the Merit of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ by Faith,
and not for our own Works and Deservings, and that we are justified by Faith
only. Article 11. And that Principle asserted in the 13th, That Works done
before the Grace of Christ, and the Inspiration of his Spirit, are not pleasing
to God, forasmuch as they spring not from Faith in Jesus Christ, neither do
they make Men meet to receive Grace, etc. The Contrary Doctrine to both these
Articles (under whatever Evasions and Prevarications you seem to abscond your
self) you make the great Business of your Book not only to insinuate, but
manifestly enough to assert and endeavor to prove, viz. 1. In that it appears
to be your Design to blast the whole Doctrine of Imputation, (whatever you
pretend,) both of Imputation of our Sins to Christ, and of the Imputation of
his Righteousness unto us. 2. That you make it your great Business to set up
and establish a Covenant of Works, boldly asserting the Gospel to be a Law with
Sanction of Rewards and Punishments, and that the conditional part thereof are
Imperfect Works, and that we are justified by those Works as a Subordinate
Righteousness to the Righteousness of Christ, and that Faith it self is
concerned therein but as an Act, in the same manner as Repentance and other
parts of imperfect sincere Obedience, tho in a little kind of Precedence. Your
Book also is full of many other Errors, that have dependence on these Capital
Ones, which for Brevity sake I will not now rehearse; besides your many
Inconsistencies, Contradictions, Equivocations, False Insinuations, illiterate,
absurd and unsound Expressions, that render your Book very Offensive to sound
and solid Minds.


Antinom. These things which you speak of I have already found, and have made a
little Inspection into, and Discovery of unto him in Discourse even now,
wherein I took the boldness to open the lower Venture of his Morbid Body of
Divinity, in order (if we can agree upon it) to a thorough Dissection.


Neonom. You both of you go upon great Mistakes, and are led to censure my Book
from Prejudice, especially Mr. Antinomian, because the principal Scope of it is
to lay open his Errors: And as for those things which you call Inconsistencies,
Contradictions, absurd Expressions, etc. they are Terms of Art which the
Learned understand, such as, The Rule of Promise, The Rule of Sin, and, The
Rule of Happiness and Misery, etc. If you once come to see how fully and
rightly I have stated the Truths and Errors mentioned, you will be of another
mind.


Calvin. Nay, it is very just and meet to give your Book an impartial
Examination, that we may have a full and clear Understanding of your Scheme,
how you state and defend the Points therein contained; and if you will consent
thereto, we will appoint some place where we may meet from Day to Day at a
certain Hour, where we will dictinctly debate the Material Points that you
assert, as either Truths or Errors.


Neonom. I highly approve of it. But where shall, this be with most Convenience
upon all Accounts?


Antinom. Why, may it not be, Mr. Calvenist, at your Calvinian Society? I
suppose you debate Theological Questions there most of all, and there are many
worthy and learned Gentlemen attend there frequently to very much purpose.


Calvin. I like your Motion, Mr. Antinomian, and will undertake that both of
you will have a very candid and welcome Reception there.


Neonom. I have but one Objection, and that is, seeing Mr. Antinomian moves for
this place, I fear it smells too much of Antinomianism. Is there liberty to
take a Pipe of Tobacco now and then to clear an ill Scent out of the Throat.


Antinom. Yes, yes; else how do you think we could be able to endure the Scent
of so many Morbid Theological Bodies, which we make our great business to
dissect; though this hot Weather we are fain to clear them off-hand as fast as
we can.


Calvin. Never trouble your self with such weak Objections as these: You know
strong Smells are good to repel Fumes arising from the Spleen, by I know not
what kind of occult Quality, of Antipathy, Antiperistasis, or Militation of
Abstruse Particles one with another.


Neonom. Well, I agree: I pray how shall I find the place?


Calvin. I will give you such Directions that you cannot miss: The Calvinian
Society is in Gracious Street, at the Sign of the Geneva Arms, just opposite to
the Sign of Cardinal Bellarmine 's Head, at the Foot of the Bridge that
crosses Reformation-River, that divides between the Protestant and Popish
Cantons.


Gentlemen, Now fare you well till to morrow five a Clock, where I expect to
meet you according to our Agreement, and I pray have a care you mistake not the
Sign.


FINIS.
Neonomianism Unmasked: OR, THE Ancient Gospel PLEADED, Against the OTHER,
CALLED, The New LAW.

The SECOND PART of the Theological Debate, occasioned by Mr. Dan. William's
BOOK, wherein the following Points are Discussed.

I. What the State of the Elect is before Effectual Calling? II. Whether God
laid our Sins on Christ? III. Whether the Elect were Discharged from Sin upon
Christ's bearing them? IV. Whether the Elect cease to be Sinners from the time
their Sins were laid on Christ? V. What was the time when our Sins were laid on
Christ? VI. Whether God was separated from Christ while our Sins lay upon him?
By ISAAC CHAVNCY, M. A.

LONDON, Printed for H. Barnard at the Bible in the Poultry, 1693.

An Animadvertisement.
READER,
OBserve the following Debate is by may of Dialogue, the Rule of which is, that
each Interlocutor is to be allowed to speak his own Sentiments, and of such as
he represents, and therewith to produce what Light and Evidence may be had to
evince the Truth of what is offered, and defend it from the Charge of Error,
under whatever Denomination he stands, thereby truly or falsely called. Here is
no attempt to pole, or vouch for Truth, or against Error, to impose upon the
Faith of the Reader, but he is left to take or leave as he finds sufficient
ground to be persuaded in his own mind from what is offered by either of the
Dialogists.

If any one would know (among any Variety of Apprehensions that he may
sometimes find concerning matters in Debate) what the Author's Opinion is, he
would not have it weigh with any one, so as to carry a Bias in his Judgment,
and therefore does rather choose modestly and impartially to Argue than to
Determine, allowing each Dialogist his full Scope: But for Satisfaction to the
more earnest Enquirer, he does declare, that he does acknowledge the Scriptures
to be the Word of God, the perfect and only Rule of Faith and Practice, and
acceunts him sound who owns the Doctrinal part of those, commonly called, The
Articles of the Church of England, the Confessions and Catechisms, Shorter and
larger, compiled by the Assembly at Westminister, and the Confession agreed on
in the Savoy, to be agreenble to the said Rule, according to their Genuine
Sense and Meaning. And as to his Design, it was not what the Comeedian says
his was, Quum primum animum ad scribendum appulit, id sibi negotii credidit
solum dari, Populo ut placerent quas fecisset fabulas. Which he says fell out
much otherwise than he expected, Verum aliter evinire multo intelligit. How
little Cause has he then to be surprised, whom the Doctrine of Christianity
has taught better things; viz. That if he please Men, or seek so to do, he
should not be the Servant of Christ; and that he is not Judged at Man's Day,
but He that Judges him is the Lord: His Comfort is that the Cause is good,
whatever Infirmity may accompany the Management.

Progreditur incepta quam fecisset Fabula.
THE Calvinian Society being sat, there came in an old fashioned black
Gentleman, with short hair, Mustachoes, a Beard brought to a Point, Pallidus,
and mortis imago, whom Mr. Calvinist (being in the Chair) remembering (since he
found him discoursing with Mr. Neonomian in the Eutopian Fields) saluted and
welcomed in the Name of the Society, and caused to sit down by him, saying, My
Brethren, this is that Gentleman that Mr. Neonomian has so egregiously exposed
in his Book, as fundamentally Erroneous in the Doctrine of the Gospel, and
called Antinomian. I found them both together lately in the Fields, earnestly
debating the Principles maintained in the said Book, and the Circumstances that
attended the publishing of the same, which I thought not to be a convenient
place for such Discourse, because of so many that passed and repassed, and
therefore invited them to this our Calvinian Society, which they very readily
and thankfully embraced. Whereupon there was much Whispering in the Company
upon the appearance of this new old Face, one saying one thing of him, and
another another; but in the mean time Mr. Neonomian being not yet come, Mr.
Calvinist takes Mr. Antinomian into a Withdrawing Room, and thus he begins with
him.

Calvin. I pray how was your Discourse with your Antagonist modified the other
Day before I came to you. He says, Quaedam dicta in se inclemetius
existimavit: You were too sharp upon him.


Antinom. I remember a little School-boy's Lattin too, Ne sis tam cessator ut
calcaribus indigeas: What a Drone then and Dull Animal should I be, if I were
not sensible of the severest Stimulations! Quaeso quis lasit prius, and
quantum? You declared enough of your Reasons why you had so ill a Resentment of
this his so pernicious an Undertaking, so grossly circumstantiated; and I think
I have reason to be much more concerned than you; for he makes me to have laid
the Seed-plot of the worst of Heresies, denying a possibility of Union with me
as a Christian, rendering me no better than a Mohammedan. He says, I set up the
Grace of Christ against his Government, and so he makes me a Traitor to him. He
renders me very lewd, in charging me for making Sin innocent, and Holiness Sin:
He makes me a Monstrum Horrendum, without Principles, Learning or common Sense,
in the Representation he gives of me to the World. Moreover, How many nauseous
Circumstances have attended these abusive Projects and Practice o^ especially
that of obtaining Hands that are prefixed to his Book, which he did
subdolously, clandestinely and precariously, because it could not nare sine
cortice: And this Aggregation of Hands must go throughout the Nation for an Act
of the United Brethren; and some ancient Brethren must be by some Art drawn in
under specious Pretenses, who have in Print refuted his whole Scheme keenly and
strenuously, and their Labors are extant to witness against their own Hands.
Others also who have preached contrary Doctrine several Years, both which must
come under the Rebuke of building what they have destroyed il and many of these
never read the Book before they recommended it. Among the others, there are
near a dozen young Candidates to the Ministry proselyted to this corrupt
Scheme, who are neither Pastors, nor Ordained in any Sense, or so much as ever
came under any due Pro^^tion of their Fitness for the Ministerial Work; are but
sitting at the Feet of their Gamaliel as yet. Lastly, It is not easy to
foresee the dangerous Consequences that will ensue these things. A promising
Union must be broken, a New one set up, Ministers and Christians alienated in
Judgment and Affection, Flames of Contention kindled, the Gospel and ways of
God reproached; Bellum Theologicum begun, (what could the Devil have done
more?) For if the Truth be so publicly attacked, God will have (among all the
wise and prudential Men) some of those the World calls Fools to defend it, such
as he will enable to run the Risque of Reproach and Censure, and through Grace
shall not be ashamed of the Truth of the Gospel of Christ; and rather than
there should be no other than the reputed wise and prudent Professors among
Men, that commonly betray Truth instead of defending it; God will raise up some
Fools from the Dead to do it, such as I am; and as for my Antagonist, I say to
him with the Comoedian, with whose words you began, De hinc ne fraudetur ipse
se, aut sic cogitet
Defunctus jam sum, nihil est quod dicat mihi
Is ne erret moneo, and desinct lacessere
Habeo alia multa, nunc quae condonabuntur,
Qua proferentur post, si pergat laedere
Ita ut facere instituit.



Calvin. What you have spoken calls for Consideration, and will be considered
by all good Men. But Mr. Neonomian is come, let us not therefore lose time.


ERRATA.
PAge 5. line 41. read our Jus. p. 16. l. 35. r. charging. p. 17. l. 33. r.
that distinction. p. 18. l. 13. r. men being under. p. 21. Marg. l. 17. r.
supplicia pro maleficiis. p. 27. l. 2. r. (...). p. 28. l. 9. r. affirmantia.
p. 30. l. 20. r. cleansing. p. 31. l. 6. for Date r. Doctrine. p. 38. r.
fideles. p. 58. l. 8. r. ipsius. ibid. l. 9. r. (...). p. 64. l. 27. r. Elect.

DEBATE I. of the State of the Elect before Effectual Calling.
Calvin. GEntlemen, it is well you are come, pray what Case will you propound
first to be spoken to?


Neon. I have this Error to charge Mr. Antinom. with, viz. That he says the
Elect are at no time of their Lives under the Wrath of God, nor are they
subject to Condemnation, if they should die before they should believe; yea,
when they are under the dominion of Sin, and in the practice of the greatest
Villainies, they are as much the Sons of God, and Justified, as the Saints in
Glory. D. W. p. 1. This I prove from Dr. Crisp, p. 363, 364.


Antinom. He says, It Is thought by some, that in Case such a Person should die
before God call him to Grace, and give to him to believe, that Person had been
Damned. But that is a vain Supposition, for it were to suppose a Man Elected
and not Elected; a Man Elected to the End and not to the Means, or that the
Sins of the Elect are laid upon Christ, and the Elect not secured thereby from
Condemnation. And he says therefore, That the Lord has no more to lay to the
Charge of an Elect Person [considered as such] than to the Saints in Glory; his
reason is, because his Sins are laid on Christ; and though the Person remain yet
Unregenerate, and in the height of Iniquity, yet God has no more to lay to
his Charge than to a Believer, or to a Saint in Glory. By this he means there
is so full security and provsion made for all the Elect, that as to Christ's
bearing their Sins, and satisfaction to Divine Justice, there is as much
already done by Christ as ever shall in respect of satisfaction; for he was
once offered to bear the Sins of many, Heb. 9.28. And if the Sins of the Elect
were born by Christ, they were satisfied for, and in respect of Divine
Essential Justice there can be nothing laid to their Charge, so as to affect
them with a stroke of Vindicative Justice; those that are Elected are Redeemed
by Christ, Ephesians. 1.5, 6. And when the Spirit of God speaks of an Elect Person,
it always speaks of him as secure in his Person from Wrath and Condemnation, as
to the real Execution of the sentence of the Law upon him, Romans 8.

It Is one thing to say an Elect Person is free from Condemnation as such, and
another thing to say a Sinner is thus freed from it. He says not, that if a
Man die under the dominion of Sin, or the practice of the greatest Villainies,
he shall be saved; that is a false Charge. Paul as an Elect Vessel, was by
virtue of Election and Redemption secured from Condemnation in Execution of the
Law Sentence upon him, all the time of his Unregeneracy; neither could a Charge
be laid against him that could cut off his Person from the Benefits designed
for him in Election, or prepared and purchased in Redemption. See what Dr. Cr.
says to this Charge, p. 637.


Neonom. He says the Elect are at no time of their Lives under the Wrath of
God or under Condemnation.


Antinom. That Men are not under the Sense of the Law, and by the state of
Nature under Wrath, he does not say, and in foro Conscientiae, when the Law
speaks to him as under it, for he says, p. 359, 360. There Is a laying Sin on
Christ, 1. By way of Obligation, so he bore the Sins of the Elect [before he
suffered actually] from all Eternity, and by virtue thereof the Elect were
justified before Christ came [as the Lamb slain from the Foundation of the
World.] 2. By way of Execution, and this was his Real bearing, the other was
Vertual; but there is a third, which is the Lords laying Iniquity on Christ by
way of Application. i. e. When it is that the Lord does single out this or that
particular Person, and lay his Iniquities on Christ. Concerning the Elect in
general, they were in the Eye of God before they had a Real Existence. So all
their Iniquities were laid on Christ from Eternity, but it must needs be
granted that a particular Application of this Grace to Persons must be in time,
before a Person is in being there cannot be a Personal Application of the Grace
of God; God cannot apply his Grace to nothing.

P. 361. Know also that this Application is double, there is Gods Application
and Man's; Gods Application is when he himself does say, he loves such a Person.
Man's Application is, when God gives to Men to Believe, and by this Act of
believing to be persuaded and resolved that God has done it.

He distinguishes likewise, and says, God lays the Iniquity of every Elect
Person two ways, in respect of the Application of this Grace. 1. Secretly. 2
Manifestly. As to secret applying, he instances in God's Declaration of his
Love to Jacob, Romans 9. and says, We have here, ( p. 362.) the Lord's declaring
himself personally and judicially unto the one whom he loved, Jacob; there was
a Love to him from Eternity in the Election of Grace; but till there was a
single Individual Person, as Jacob, the Lord did not say, Jacob have I loved,
etc.

Now he concludes, That this secret Application of the Grace of laying Sins on
Christ, is at the very instant of such a Persons having a Being in the World,
then God does appropriate this Grace to an Elect Person; and therefore in the
Unregenerate Estate of such a Person, in the Excess of Riot, [he is secured
from the Judicial Charge of Sin, from Vindicative Justice.] There Is great
diversity of Judgment about the time of applying this Grace, (says he.) Some
say it is at Baptism, some say at first Conversion, etc. page 364. It Is true, an
Elect person not called, is never able to know individually of himself, that he
is such an one that God has nothing to charge upon him, because till Calling
God gives not unto Persons to Believe: And it is only Believing is the Evidence
of things not seen; and this he calls the Application of pardoning Grace by way
of manifestation. Thus I have given you the Sum of Dr. Crisp's Opinion in this
matter.


Calvin. I perceive then his Opinion is, that, 1. In General, That by Electing
and Redeeming Love the Elect are secured from the Stroke of Vindicative
Justice, and God has nothing to lay to their Charge, having accepted the
Satisfaction of Christ on their behalf. 2. That the Application of this Love to
a particular Person is in time, as to God's Sentence concerning him, and as to
some Fruits of this Love from his first having a Being; as suppose,
distinguishing of him as a chosen Vessel, as he did Jacob from Esau: As he
separated Paul to the Designs of electing Love, as to preventing Grace, yea,
and providential Grace, to bring such a Person, it may be, under the Secret
Effects of the Promise, and the means of Grace. 3. He says, The manifest
Application is, when God gives to Believe: So that notwithstanding all the
Security he has by Election, Redemption, and secret Application, he is before
Faith, but in a state of Death, and under the Law-Sentence in Foro
Conscientiae, and by Nature born a Child of Wrath, and so in Foro Mundi. Hence,
that he knows nothing of all this, spoken of an Elect Person, any more than a
Reprobate does, till he does believe: I think this is Dr. Crisp's Full Sense,
and therefore I think, Mr. Neonomian, you are too partial in your
Representation of the Doctor; you take those Expressions only that may render
him odious, and leave out the Grounds and Reasons thereof. As to that Opinion
of his concerning God's secret passing over his Love to the Elect Persons so
long before they believe. What if he be singular therein, yet there may be more
in it than you or I can tell, seeing it is manifest that it has been so in
several that have lived to be Adult; and I doubt not but it is so daily as to
Elect Infants that die in Infancy. And I must tell you, if you deny this
Covenant of Grace to belong to the Infants of believing Parents, as it is
claimed by virtue of a Gospel-Promise, you can have little Ground to plead for
Infant Baptism, which is a Sign and Seal of Forgiveness of Sins in some
Gospel-Sence or other. But I leave that Point now; and I must tell you, that
there is no doubt but that there is a secret passing over of the Grace of God
in Christ to every Elect Person, before he can put forth anyone Vital Act.


Neonom. He says, the Elect of God are Heirs of God; so that their first Being
puts them into a right of Inheritance, etc.


Antinom. He gathers this from Gal. 4.1, 2, 3. See Page 367. Though God does
secretly give over his Right and Title of his own Grace to a Person in the
Womb, yet he does not make it known to him that he has that Right and Title,
till such time as he does call him; during which time, being under the Law, he
is under a Schoolmaster, Tutors and Governors. And here he says, The Heir, so
long as a Child, differs nothing from a Servant, though he be Lord of all. From
which I observe from hence, 1. That there is an Heirship during Childhood it
self. 2. That there is this Heirship when there is no difference between being
a Child and a Servant. 3. A Child is an Heir as soon as born; yea, when first
conceived. If a Man of Estate leaves his Wife but a Month gone with Child, he
leaves an Heir, etc.


Calvin. Mr. Neonomian, though you grant not the secret Application of Grace he
speaks of at Conception, yet you cannot deny a secret and sure Relation by
Virtue of Election and Redemption. Relata affectio in Deo ponit objectum
correlatum: A Right must be in the Object whenever it has a Being: Jus adrem,
if not in re. All that are redeemed by Christ, are called the Sheep of Christ
before Calling, John 10. Show me a Person that is an Elect and Redeemed One, I
can tell you God's Justice is satisfied on his behalf, and eternal Life
procured for him, though he be yet an Unbeliever, be not in Possession, nor can
make any Claim as yet. I pray, was not Paul in his unregenerate State an Elect
Vessel, and secured from the Hands of Vindicative Justice by Christ's
Satisfaction, and Heaven secured by Christ's Impetration? Impetratio dat Jus ad
Beneficium. I pray, Mr. Neonomian, what would you say of Paul a Persecutor in
the Height of his Villainy, had you known then that he was an Elect Vessel?


Neonom. I would say thus, That Paul when a wicked persecuting Saul, while
breathing forth Cruelty against the Churches, should not die under the Dominion
of Sin; and being an Elect Person, and Christ having born his Sins on the
Cross, was the Object of God's Love and good Will even while he was so wicked
and vile, and that God continues his gracious purpose of doing him good,
notwithstanding all his Wickedness and Abomination; that Christ has made full
Atonement for his Sins, and merited Eternal Life for him, and that he shall
certainly be Justified, Adopted and Glorified in God's appointed way and time;
and that Christ has left nothing to be done by us in a way of Atonement and
Merit; yea, I affirm, [that distinguishing Grace] does make a very great
difference between an Elect Sinner, and others. D.W. p. 1. p. 3.


Calvin. I pray now what is it more that Dr. Crisp has said?


Neonom. He says, the Elect are at no time of their Lives under the Wrath of
God.


Calvin. So must you too, if you understand Wrath in the same Sense that he
does: For Christ cannot bear their Sins, and the Wrath of God for their Sins,
and yet they bear it themselves too. Shall not the Judge of all the World deal
Righteously? And you say, They continue Objects of his gracious good Will, and
full Atonement made. God cannot be wroth with a Person with whom full
Atonement is made.


Neonom. But what if they should die before they should believe?


Calvin. He does not say, They shall be saved if they die before they believe;
or under the Dominion of Sin, etc. You fasten that Charge without Ground; and
never fear that, for you say their Justification and Adoption is certain,
there is no doubt then but they shall certainly believe.


Neonom. But they are actually Unpardoned, and not Adopted to Life, which the
Dr. says they are.


Calvin. The Doctor speaks not here of the Elect's Actual Pardon or Adoption:
He says indeed, their Sins are laid on Christ, and therefore God has nothing
to lay to their Charge. And you say, Christ has made full Atonement for them.
I pray what difference is here? He says, They have a secret hidden Right to
Life: You say, by virtue of Election, and Christ's Merits, they shall certainly
have Justification, Adoption, Glorification. So that you own your Jus ad rem.
He does not say an unregenerate Man is Adopted, or has received the Spirit of
Adoption, any where as I know.


Neonom. But the Elect, while dead in Sin and Unbelief, are Children of Wrath,
condemned by the Law, not justified by the Promise. This I affirm, and the
Doctor denies.


Calvin. The Doctor in this point, for ought I know, affirms and denies but as
you do. He says, a Sinner in respect of his Visible Estate is under the
Law-Sentence, and dead in Sin and Unbelief. He will not deny this, but that an
Elect Person as such, has a hidden Relation, Standing and Right, not only in
respect of Election, Satisfaction and Procurement, but a secret passing over of
Grace. So that to be a Child of Wrath in regard of the Law-Sentence, and a
Child of Mercy, are not contradicentia; they may be predicated of the same
Subject in diverse respects: A Man may be a Child of Wrath in one respect, and
of Mercy in another. A Man may be poor in one respect, and rich in another, as
the Church of Smyrna condemned in one respect, and secured from it in another.
Wrath is understood two ways in Scripture. 1. For the Sentence of the Law, that
all the World is under, as having sinned, and come short of the Righteousness
of God. 2. For the real Execution of the Sentence of the Law by Essential
Vindicative Justice: This the Elect are abundantly freed from, and the Wrath of
God shall never fall upon them as such.


Neonom. But he says, the Elect have right to the Inheritance.


Calvin. Yes, a secret and hidden Right, but true and certain, though not
Possession or Claim, till Grace embraces them, and this Grace manifested to
them. A Child that has a good Right to an Inheritance may be taken Captive in
Infancy, and remain in Algiers a Slave many Years, and never know of any Estate
belonging to him: But upon his return to his Native Country, finds by Writings
and Court-Rolls that he has had Right all this while, though kept out of
Possession, and knew no Ground of a Claim. A Man may be Heir to a Crown, and
yet during the King's Life be no King; yea, it may be, out in Rebellion against
his Father many Years, and yet come to possess the Crown upon his previous
Right. A Man may have a good Right to an Estate in one Court where it is
enrolled, whenas another Court knows nothing of it. Every Elect Person is
enrolled by Name in God's Book of Election, and the Lamb's Book of Redemption,
while there is nothing of this to be sound in Foro Conscientiae, nor in Foro
Mundi. And your own Assertion at first cuts you off from all Pleas to the
contrary. For you say, chapter 1. p. 1. It Is certain from God's Decree of Election,
that the Elect shall in time be Justified, Adopted and Saved in the way God
has appointed, [then they are Heirs of Justification, Adoption and Salvation,
upon some ground of right or other] and the whole meritorious Cause and Price
of Justification; Adoption and Eternal Life were perfect when Christ finished
the Work of Satisfaction. So now it appears here is a complete Right adjusted
for them, the Estate is bought, and the Money all paid, and the Title is
enrolled in their Name, what hinders them from being Heirs in Law, and having a
Right of Inheritance belonging to them?


Neonom. I will prove the Elect before they are effectually called, to be
Children of Wrath, Ephesians. 2.2, 3. Col. 1.21.


Calvin. As Elect Persons the Scripture no where faith; but as Sinners, and as
dead in Trespasses, we acknowledge they are under the Law Sentence, imprisoned
in their natural Estate, in a State of Bondage and Darkness: But this hinders
not the Foundation of God in Election and Redemption, they have a hidden Safety
and Security from Wrath by your own Confession.


Neonom. The Gospel bars all Unbelievers and dead Sinners from Pardon and
Adoption, and denounces a continuance of Condemnation against them, limiting
it is Benefits to such as believe, John 3.18. ver. 36. 1 Cor. 16.22. 1 Cor.
6.11. D. W. p. 4.


Calvin. If the Gospel bars all Unbelievers, and those that are dead in Sin,
from Gospel Benefits, who shall be saved? it must bar them from Life; for Life
is the first and greatest Benefit a Dead Man can receive; nay, you say, it
declares continuance of Condemnation against them: It Is certainly therefore
impossible they should ever be saved. And are not Regeneration and Faith
Gospel-Benefits? And are Unbelievers for ever barred from them? This puts a
Bar upon their possibility of Salvation, and keeps them from ever being
Believers. The places you quote are nothing to prove your Assertion; for the
most they say, is, That whilst a Person is in a state of Unbelief, he is in a
state of Condemnation, under the Law; but the Gospel does not put a Bar to his
Salvation, but rather take off the Bars, opens the Prison-doors, gives him
Life, gives him a Door of Hope, brings him to Christ, who is the Resurrection
and Life.


Neonom. If it were not so, neither the Spirit nor the Word of God would have
any Influence in the Saving of Sinners.


Calvin. Non sequitur. Cannot the state of the Elect be secured by Election, and
yet Redemption have it is place? Why notwithstanding both, may not the Spirit
have it is place and Influence?


Neonom. Gospel-Benefits imply, that there is a time when we are actually
guilty and miserable, Romans 7.4. Col. 2.12.


Calvin. Grant it, there is such a time, when we are so in our selves; but yet
quoad Deum, Election and Redemption is not in vain; they have their Force: The
Changes that pass upon us does not make a Change as to Electing Love, nor as to
the Satisfaction and Merits of Christ.


Neonom. The Dr. may well infer, that we are sanctified and possessed of Heaven
in the Womb; for God has elected us to those, as well as to Pardon; and Christ
merited these also.


Calvin. No, but he might not: One imports a Relation, the other a real
Subjective Change. A Child may be a Son, and yet a very wicked one: There is
also a great difference between a Right and a Possession.


Neonom. Do you not find that God justifies none but what are called, Romans 8.30?


Calvin. 1. He Justifies Infants dying in Infancy, that were never called by
the Word. 2. What you would prove by that place, that effectual Calling is
before Justification, is not manifest; for, it is whom be called, them he also
justified. It might be before Calling as well as after, for any thing appears
in that Text. 3. But you go from the Terms of the Question all along; for that
which the Doctor says, is, That the Sins of the Elect being all laid upon
Christ, who shall lay any thing to the Charge of God's Elect? It Is Christ has
dyed and rose again, for them: Now God has no Charge against the Elect
considered as such; if Justice remain unsatisfied, Christ dyed in vain.


Neonom. There is Joy in Heaven for one Sinner that repents, Luke 15.7, 10. And
would there be such, if they were pardoned and safe before.


Calvin. Yes, Why not? For I question whether the Angels be acquainted with the
Secrets of Election and Redemption as to the Persons concerned, till it be made
manifest by their Actual Faith and Repentance. And as for the safe Estate of
the Elect before believing, you have said enough, i. e. As to their Security
from Wrath, and Certainty of Eternal Life: Therefore it is strange you should
deny it now, say and unsay the same thing.


Neonom. How much is our Ministry and Concern for Souls debased, if all we can
prevail with are actually pardoned.


Calvin. You should have said, If all you prevail with have had their Sins laid
on Christ, whereby God was in Christ reconciling the World to himself. Paul
might have said, How then is our Ministry debased, to be only Ambassadors for
Christ to beseech Sinners to be reconciled to God, when their Sins are already
laid on Christ, and to Preach, That all things are of God, who has reconciled
us to himself by Jesus Christ, who has slain the Enmity, and made Peace on the
Cross, etc. There Is great difference between God's being reconciled to us, and
our being reconciled to God.


Neonom. Who can reconcile this Notion to the Pleadings of God with Sinners,
Ezekiel. 33.11.


Calvin. Every one. The Pleadings of God in his Word with Sinners, is in Order
to change their Hearts by his Word and Spirit, in the Embassy of
Reconciliation, which God has sent unto Sinners: Therefore the Apostle says,
We beseech you for Christ's sake to be reconciled unto God; and all Arguments
used in the Word are to that end and purpose, viz. To work Faith and
Repentance, and to bring them unto God: One great End why Christ bore their
Sins.


Neonom. I have the Assembly and Dr. Owen on my side.


Antinom. We deny not what the Assembly and Dr. Owen says, according to their
true Meaning and Intention: For they all say no otherwise than what I have
showed the Doctor sincerely means, and your own Assertions will bear out as
well as his: as to his particular Opinion, That the Grace of laying Sins on
Christ is secretly applied as soon as we have a Being, as to some Effects
wherein we are merely passive, and it is unknown to us till effectual Calling;
you see he grounds it upon matter of Fact, in the Instance of Jacob, which
undoubtedly deserves Consideration. Though I say not, that it is so with every
one, but apprehend the Spirit of God has these things to instruct us thereby,
that Justification of a Sinner before God is not for the Act of Faith, or
Gospel-Obedience, because Jacob was justified before either. 2. That the
Children of Believing Parents dying in Infancy may be justified and saved. 3.
That a believing Parent has Promise Ground to baptize his Child, and exercise
Faith, that his Child is embraced in the Arms of Free Grace, to work upon it
how, and when, and in what manner he pleases; and though he cannot be active
therein, yet he may be passive. This we pray for, and in praying believe: God
saying, I will be thy God, and the God of thy Seed. I am not for Baptismal
Regeneration, nor Baptismal Justification: Though there is something Analogous
to it, and therefore a kind of Justification in Foro Ecclesiae, it being a
significant Seal of it, as Circumcision was called the Covenant: And therefore
if there be any secret Application of the Grace of Election and Redemption
accompanying that Institution of Christ, or coming before or after, neither we
nor our Children shall be ever the worse for it. And therefore let us not
banter and condemn such as have higher Apprehensions of the Secret Workings of
Grace before we are aware of of it. I am sure many Divines that you would not
call Antinomians, have defended Infant Baptism upon this Notion, That Infants
are capable of the Habit of Saving Faith. And if so, I am sure according to
your Notion, they must be Justified, because they have the qualifying
Condition: For a Habit is a Quality, and a Conformity to the Rule of the
Promise, (as you phrase it) and therefore must Justify as such.


Neonom. The Dr. mistakes the Nature of God's Decree, because a Decree
ascertains a thing shall be in time; therefore he thinks a Decree gives a thing
a present subjective Being.


Antinom. The Decree of God gives an Objective Being to the thing Decreed; for
the Will willing, and the thing willed, are relata; all things in time are
present with God, looking upon them in one Eternal Act; there is neither Time
past or to come, or Succession, that his Decrees are measured by; his Decree is
himself. But if we consider the Objects of the Decree in Execution, they are in
time, and measured by Succession; but yet things thus standing, are the Objects
of the Decree, they have their first Cause in his Divine Idea, and have their
unchangeable Fixation, as to their Nature and Order in the present or future
Being and Working, either as necessary or contingent Agents.


Neonom. Because Jacob was an Elect Person, or the Object of Electing Love in
the Womb, therefore he was then actually a Pardoned and Adopted Person.


Antinom. Nay, there was more in it than that: For mark the Text, ver. 11, 12.
r. It does not only tell us Jacob was Elected, but that it was published and
declared unto Rebecka, Jacob have I loved. If God should tell my Wife when with
Child, I have Elected, and do love this Child that is in thy Womb, I should
look upon this as a Justification of this Child, it being a declared Sentence
of God concerning it is standing in his Favor and unchangeable Love. 2. The
Text is particular in the Reason of this Declaration to Rebecka, ver. 11. that
we may see that God accomplished his purpose of Election in the applying of the
Grace thereof without Works, not so much as upon the Account of Faith as a
Work, because the Children were not capable of doing Good or Evil, the
Application of his distinguishing Love could not be upon that Account, viz. Of
any Condition found in them; nor could the Foresight of any such thing in them
be the Cause of God's Purpose in Election, and shows it is one and the same
Righteousness that an Infant and Adult Person is Justified by.


Neonom. Because an Eldest Son is an Heir in the Womb, therefore an Elect
Person who is in time to he Adopted, is an Heir in the Womb.


Calvin. There Is a Difference between an Heir and Adoption. If you know there
is an Elect Person in the Womb, as Rebecka did, he is a more sure Heir to
Heaven than ever any great Man's Son was to an outward Estate. And as to
Adoption, that may not be till some time after: For that is the Grace of
Sonship. It Is one thing to be a Son, and another to have the Grace of Sonship.
And is the calling them the Sons of God, manifestly taking them into the
number, and endowing them with the Privileges of the Sons of God? The Relation
of an Heir, and the state of Adoption, admit of different Considerations. The
State of Adoption, is the grown state of an Elect Person; he is put into
Possession of the Estate, and all Privileges, sit together with Christ in
Heavenly Places as a Coheir. And thus we are the Children of God by Faith, Gal.
3.26. The Spirit bearing Witness with our Spirit that we are the Children of
God, and so Heirs ex abundanti, Joynt-Heirs with Christ, Romans 8.17.

Let us now hear what our approved Calvinists say in this Point, that speak
most particularly and distinctly to it. Speak Dr. Amesius.


Dr. Ames. The Transaction between God and Christ was a certain previous
Application of our Redemption and Discharge to our Surety, and to us in him,
which has the Nature of a certain efficacious Pattern to that Secondary manner
of Application which is completed in us; so that this is the representation of
that, this is produced by virtue of that. Now it is inferred hence, That our
Freedom from Sin and Death was not only determined in God's Decree, but also
granted and communicated to us in Christ before it is perceived by us, Chap.
24. 3.

Mr. Rutherford, pray speak, you wrote against Antinomianism. Sane priusque
electus credit, etc. Certainly before an Elect Person does believe, the Wrath
of God, and all the Effects of his Wrath, are removed from the Persons by
virtue of Christ's Satisfaction. Exercit. Apologet. per gratia, p. 45.


Mr. Pemble. That God does actually love the Elect before they are Regenerate,
or can actually believe, may appear further by these Reasons. 1. Where God is
actually reconciled, there he actually loves; for Love and Reconciliation are
inseparable; but with the Elect before they are converted and believe, God is
Actually Reconciled, Ergo, he loves them before Faith and Conversion: The Minor
is evident, because before they are Born a full Atonement and Satisfaction is
made for their Sins by Christ, and accepted on God's part, whereupon all Actual
Reconciliation must needs follow. 2. God did Actually Love the Elect before
Christ's time, when Actual Reconciliation was not yet made, much more therefore
after the Atonement made. 3. Justification, Effectual Vocation and Faith, are
Fruits of God's Actual Love, etc. De gratia and fide, p. 22.

Chamier. Persuasissimum est, etc. We are most fully persuaded that our Sins
are forgiven before we believe; for certainly we deny Infants to act Faith, and
yet their Sins are forgiven them. And although it be true, that our Sins be
forgiven before we believe, i. e. before we know it as Actual Believers, we do
believe the Remission of our Sins, because this is proposed to us, yea promised
to us in the same words which we rely upon by Faith, and it is Sealed by the
same Spirit, whereby that word is Truth. Panstr. Tom. 3. lib. 13. c. 10.


Antinom. I think I see Mr. Baxter appear in this Cause, though I suppose he is
seldom in this Society.


Calvin. I pray let us hear Sir what you say to this Point.


Mr. Baxter. The Anabaptists bring Ephesians. 2.3. against Baptism of Infants, and
say, Because they are by Nature Children of Wrath, the Promise belongs not to
them. Ans. What though we are by Nature Children of Wrath, does it follow that
we may not be otherwise by Grace; the state of Wrath goes first in order of
Nature, and whether in order of time also is not worth our disputing; but may
not a state of Grace immediately succeed? Jeremy was Sanctified in the Womb,
and John Baptist; and the Infants that Christ Blessed were all by Nature
Children of Wrath, and yet by Grace were in a better state. As they come from
old Adam they are Children of Wrath, but as they receive of the Grace procured
by the Second Adam, so they are not Children of wrath. If a Prince should
Entail some Honors upon all your Children; you might well say by Nature, or as
they were your Children, they were not Honorable or Noble, and yet by the
Favor of the Prince they might be all Honorable from the Womb. The Godly at
Age may say that they are still by Nature Children of wrath, even when they are
sure they are Children of God by Grace; and they use in their Confessions to
say, That we by Nature are Enemies to God, Firebrarnds of Hell. R. Baxter of
Inf. Bapt. p. 110, 111.


Calvin. I would willingly hear what the Learned and Judicious Mr. J. Cotton
says.

Mr. J. Cotton, in Answer to that Objection made by the Anabaptist against
Infant Baptism. Faith comes by Hearing, Ergo, Infants have not Faith. Ans. It
is no Extraordinary thing which Christ speaks concerning Infants, when he
says, Except you receive the Kingdom of God as little Children, etc. and they
cannot receive it without Christ, nor without Faith in Christ, and yet received
not Christ nor Faith by their own immediate Hearing of the Word; and for the
second thing which you make Essential to Union with Christ, ( viz. a Heart
fitly disposed to apprehend and receive Christ,) be not unwilling to understand
that which is Truth. The Heart is fitly disposed by Faith to apprehend or apply
Christ, when Faith is begotten in the Heart; for by this Gift of Faith begotten
in us, Christ apprehends us, and by the same Gift of Faith the Heart is fitly
disposed to apprehend Christ even in Infants; for when Faith is wrought in
Infants, the Heart is quickened with Spiritual Life, and made a Sanctified
Vessel to receive Christ, which reception of Christ though it be passive, yet
it is all one with Regeneration, (as Dr. Ames. Medul. c. 26. 21.) wherein not
Infants only but all Men are passive, which gave the Lord Jesus Christ occasion
to say, That whosoever receives the Kingdom of God as a little Child, [i. e.
in respect of the passive reception,] Luke 18.17.


DEBATE II. Of God's laying Sin on Christ.
Neonom. YOU know at last Conference our Subject we discoursed upon was The
State of the Elect before Effectual Calling. If you please let us discourse the
Point Of Laying Sins on Christ, I shall here charge considerable Errors on Mr.
Antinomian.


Calvinist. I pray Sir proceed, I perceive Mr. Antinomian is very willing to
hear you with patience.


Neonom. I charge him with this Error, that he says, D. W. p. 8, 9.
That God did not only Impute the Guilt, and lay the Punishment of the Sins of
the Elect upon Christ, but he laid all the very Sins of the Elect upon Christ,
and that as to their real filth and loathsomness; yea so that Christ was really
the Blasphemer, Murderer, and Sinner, and so accounted by the Father.


Calvin. Mr. Antinom. Did you lay down this Position?


Antinom. Sir it is bad enough if it be as he says, and in his sense and
meaning: I find his way is to put first a wild Beasts Skin upon me, and then
fall a Hunting of me. I pray Mr. Neonom. how do you prove this Charge?


Neonom. You tell us, It Is Iniquity it self that the Lord laid upon Christ; D.
Cr. p. 312.
not only our Punishment but our very Sin, etc. The Transaction of our Sins to
Christ is a real Act; our Sins so became Christ's that he stood the Sinner in
our stead, and we discharged, D. Cr. p. 270.
[and he is not contented to mean only the Punishment, but says it is Iniquity
it self] I mean, says he, the fault of the Transgression it self, etc. To
speak more plainly, Have thou been an Idolater? Have thou been a Blasphemer,
Murderer, Drunkard, etc? If thou have part in the Lord, all these
Transgressions of thine become Actually the Transgressions of Christ: D. Cr. p.
26.
Nor are we so completely sinful, but Christ being made Sin, was as completely
sinful as we, etc. And God himself did account him among the Number of
Transgressors.


Calvin. You should first have told us, Mr. Neonomian, what you mean by Guilt
and Punishment of Sin, how you distinguish reatus from culpa, and how you
understand the filth of Sin; and should have alleged some Expression of his
whereby it might have been evinced that he held Christ to be the very
Perpetrator of the Sins of the Elect; that he had said, Christ was Actually
Drunk when Noah was; that Christ killed Vriah and lay with his Wife, and made
the Golden Calf in the Wilderness, that he denied himself when Peter did, yea
that he Slew and Murdered himself. You should have told us what you mean by
Imputation, etc.


Antinom. I shall show you by comparing his Charge and Proof together, how
fallaciously he deals with you, and Invidiously with Dr. C. He says, I said
God laid all the very Sins of the Elect upon Christ, he should have added, by
Imputation, for his Proof runs thus, Our Sins so became Christ's, that he stood
the Sinner in our stead, and we discharged: Now I pray is it to become the very
Person and Actor, when I stand in the stead of another Person that did it. The
Proof makes his Charge false, the very Evidence he brings is enough for my
Defense against his Charge; and when he brings these words of mine [to prove,
that I hold Christ became the real Murderer, etc.] if thou be a Thief,
Murderer, Liar, etc. all these Transgressions (if thou have part in the Lord)
become Actually the Transgressions of Christ, he should have told you how I
explained my self; and he knows I mean no otherwise than what can be Christ's by
Actual Imputation. Here Is a Great Sputter of Real and Actual, and very Sins,
etc. He might as well if he had dealt heartily, told you all my meaning, and
not perverted it to serve his own Reproachful Tongue. I say thus in handling
this Text, Isa. 53.6.

This Iniquity was really laid upon Christ; Christ was as really the Bearer of
the Sins of Gods People, D. C. p. 373.
as a Surety is really the Debtor when he willingly puts himself into the Room
of the principal Debtor. Insomuch that God cannot expect the Debt any where but
of Christ. Christ gives the Bond, and by giving the Bond makes himself the
Debtor. God accepts of this, and upon it discharges the poor Sinners
themselves, and if he will have payment he must have it where himself has laid
the Debt. God was in Christ Reconciling the World unto himself, not Imputing
their Trespasses to them, 2 Cor. 5.3. verse.

Now Sir you have the great prodigious Error that Mr. Neonomian charge me to
be guilty of. As the Surety gives Bond for the very Debt of the Principal to a
Farthing, the very Debt of this or that Party by Name, Living in such a Place,
of such a Calling, for a Debt contracted at such a time. So that it is that
Debt, not another that he contracted at another time, or the Debt of another
Man, but the Debt so and so circumstantiated, described and subscribed by the
Debtors own Hand. A Surety enters into the same Bond, changing only the Names.
D. C. p. 330.
Sin is called our Debts by Christ himself who is our Surety. Did he not bear
our very Debts? He that bare our very Debts, bare our very Sins; but Christ
bare our very Debts; and now for me to pay the very Debts of a Debtor that is
become Bankrupt, and spent his Estate upon Luxury, is it to become the
Luxurious Contracter of the Debt.


Neonom. You may think, Gentlemen, that this Man means only Punishment that was
laid on Christ.


Antinom. No, no, I do not mean only Punishment, as you mean; I know, whatever
you say, you mean not Punishment in a right sense, but only Suffering. But you
must blot out, for Sin, then it is not Punishment; for if the Law inflict
Suffering it is for Sin; and if for Sin, it is Punishment; and if a Punishment,
Sin was in some sense or other sound upon him, or else the Law wronged him in
inflicting Sufferings on him. Now when I say it is Iniquity it self that the
Lord has laid on Christ, D. C. p. 270.
I mean as the Prophet does, it is the fault of the Transgression it self; and
to speak more fully, that erring and straying like Sheep, that very erring,
straying and transgressing, is passed off from them, and is laid upon Christ, [
viz. by Imputation.] To speak it more plainly, Have thou been an Idolater,
Blasphemer, Murderer, etc. If thou have a part in Christ, they become Actually
the Transgressions of Christ, D. C. p. 268.
[by Imputation,] and so cease to be thine, -- for he was numbered with
Transgressors. God himself did account him among the number of Transgressors,
for he himself made him a Transgressor at that time; bear with the Expression,
for the Apostle has a higher than this, though it may seem harsh to you, 2
Cor. 5. c. He was made Sin for us; there is a great deal of difference between
being made Sin and a Sinner, the Expression in the Abstract going beyond the
Concrete. I know the word may be spoke Hyperbolically; not that Christ simply
could be made Sin, not that his Essence could be turned into Sin, but the
Apostles meaning was, that no Transgressor in the World was such a Transgressor
as Christ was. But still he was a Transgressor, as our Transgressions were laid
upon him; not that he was the Actor of any Transgressions. Now Sir you hearing
me say this, that Christ was a Transgressor by way of Suretiship only; not as
the Actor of any Sin in his own Person, do not you traduce me slanderously,
charge me with saying, that Christ was really the Blasphemer and Murderer, and
Idolater? And that because I say, If thou be a Thief, Murderer or Drunkard, if
thou have part in the Lord, all these Transgressions of thine become Actually
the Transgressions of Christ, i. e. by Actual Imputation, as the Debts of a
Bankrupt becomes a Surety, that undertakes them. Was not Noah's Drunkenness,
David's Murder and Adultery, Rachel's Theft and Idolatry Imputed to Christ? How
would you have these great foul Sins forgiven? I suppose you are not for the
taking away so great Sins by the Blood of Christ; with you it would redound to
the disparagement of Christ.


Neonom. Yes, if he should bear the filthiness and loathsomeness of Sin, as you
say, D. C. p. 436.
he bears the loathsomness, abominableness, and hatefulness of Rebellion, which
is laid on Christ's Back; he bears the Sin as well as the Shame and Blame.


Antinom. I was opening, Psalm. 68.18. Thou have received Gifts from Men, yea,
for the Rebellious also; an Eminent Prophecy of Christ. The Text says also
that thou might dwell among them; who is that them? The Rebellious: Beloved,
you must know that no Evil dwells with God; the Lord stands fully off and
separated from all Iniquity. -- Therefore seeing God cannot dwell with Iniquity,
there must be a taking away of Iniquity, before there be a receiving
graciously, Hos. 14.2, 3. As long as there is Iniquity to be charged upon any
Person, there is no receiving graciously; therefore seeing God cannot dwell with
Men where Iniquity is, Christ he received Gifts for Men that the Lord might
dwell among the Rebellious, and enlarging here I spoke what he rehearses by
way of Reproach unto me. It is easy to misrepresent any Man's words, and make
them look very odiously, if you hang, draw and quarter them, pluck a Sentence
limb from limb. But the thing in Dispute between us is, Whether Christ did not
bear the very Sins of the Elect in some sense or other?


Neonom. Yes, it is so, for you say it is Sin opposed to Guilt, and to say that
God laid the Guilt of Sin, D. W. p. 9.
and not Sin it self upon Christ is contrary to Scripture.


Antinom. For the Objection about Guilt, that the Lord lays the Guilt and
Punishment, D. Cr. p. 271.
but not simply the Sin it self; for ought that I see it is a simple Objection.
For first, you shall never find there is distinction in all the Scriptures,
That God laid the Guilt of Sin upon Christ, and not Sin it self; Dr. C. 272.
nay to affirm that God laid the Guilt of Sin upon Christ, and not Sin it self,
is contrary to Scripture. [ i. e. to deny that God laid Sin it self, by saying
he laid Guilt and not Sin, must needs be so, because the Scriptures affirm
positively God laid Sin, yea Iniquity upon him, and that he bore our Sins etc.]
What presumption then is it for Man to say, God laid the Guilt and not the Sin,
[ i. e. to assert the laying of Guilt on Christ, with a denial of laying Sin.]
2. That you may have a little Light concerning the Word Guilt, for I know many
Spirits are troubled at it, for my part I do not think as some do, that Guilt
differs from Sin, as that which is an Obligation or Binding over to the
Punishment of Sin, rather than Sin it self being past and gone, [for when Sin
is committed it leaves behind the Conscience of Sin committed, which is the Sin
lying upon us.] But that you may have the true Nature of Guilt, Genesis 42.21,
When Joseph's Brethren were accused for Spies, there it is said they spoke one
to another, We are guilty concerning our Brother. (...). Buxtorf renders it
Delinquentes, and it is applied to, being under Levitical Uncleanness actually,
Levit. 5.2. the Chald. renders it (...) Debitores, we are Debtors to the Law in
breaking of it. We have contracted the Debt of Sin, an (...). And its not a
little remarkable how the LXXII. LXX. Isa. 53.6. (...).
Interpret the forementioned word, Genesis 42.21. (...). We are in our Sins, or
the Sins are upon us, which we committed about our Brother.] What is the
meaning of Guilty here? D. C. ibid.
Reuben Expounds that Ver. 22. Did not I say to you, Sin not against the Lad,
but you would not hearken unto me, and therefore behold we are guilty: What is
that? We did Sin against the Child: to be guilty then, and to commit Sin, is
all one; they are but two words expressing the same thing; for further
understanding: A Malefactor is asked Guilty or Not Guilty? He answers Not
Guilty; he means he has not done that Fact which was laid to his Chage; when
the Jury say Guilty, what do they mean? Do they mean any thing of the
Punishment, [no, they enquire only of the Justness of the Charge concerning
matter of Fact,] the Jury have nothing to do with the Punishment, but only
matter of Fact, whether done or not done, so that Guilt and Sin are all one:
And to say Guilt is laid upon Christ, but Sin is not laid upon Christ is a
contradiction; and whereas some say the Punishment of Sin, and not the Sin: I
say, that Scripture that warrants the laying Punishment on Christ, he was
wounded for our Transgressions, warrants the laying Sin upon Christ, in
speaking it thrice plainly in the same Chapter. P. 383. 281, 288, 290. -- I say
here is a real Act, and not supposed only, God does really pass over Sin upon
him, still keeping this fast, That Christ Acted no Sin; so that in respect of
the Act, not one Sin of the Believers is Christ's: But in respect of
Transgression, [i. e. the (...), the relation that Sin has to the Law as a
fault,] in respect of conveyance, as to passing Accounts from one Head to
another, in respect of that, there is a reality of making Christ to be Sin;
when one Man becomes a Debtor in another Man's Room, Legally and by Consent,
this Surety that does become the Debtor, is not barely supposed to be the
Debtor, but by undertaking it, and legally having it passed upon him, he is as
really and truly the Debtor, [yea has the same Debt upon him] as he was who
was the principal before; I say as really and truly the Debtor: So that there
is an absolute truth and reality in God's Act of passing over Sins to Christ,
and laying Sins upon him. -- There must be [in Criminal Cases] of necessity a
present desert upon a Person on whom he inflicts Punishment; he must not
inflict Punishment upon a mere Supposition.


Mr. Calvin. I do not see but that he has given a very clear and distinct
account of his Notion, but I find you will condemn whatever Mr. Antinom. says,
right or wrong.


Neonom. No, no, I will lay open his mistakes more plainly before you, I will
assure you he knows not what he says, I will convince you both immediately.
The Ground of his Mistakes are these. 1. He seems to speak of Sin as a positive
material thing, and does not distinguish between God's laying our Sins on
Christ as a Physical Act, and as a Moral Act, and thinks God took our Sins as a
material Burden, and laid them upon Christ. D. W. p. 13.


Calvin. Sir, I must tell you then, that you mistake him, I doubt wilfully, for
he no where speaks of Sin as a Physical Act, but as a Moral Transgression; Does
he not say as plainly as may be the contrary to what you suggest, viz. Here is
a real Act of God, God does really pass over Sin upon him, still keeping this
fast, that Christ Acted no Sin. [Doth he not plainly here deny the Physical Act
to Christ?] And does he speak of Sin as a material Burden, when he says Christ
bore it as a Fault, Debt, Law-Breach, etc. D. C. p. 283. He speaks of it as a
Moral and Judicial Burden, and so does the Spirit of God speak of it, Psalm.
38.4. Mine Iniquiquities are gone over mine Head, as an heavy Burden they are
too heavy for me. And Christ bore them as a Burden in his Body on the Tree; it
was not sweet and pleasant naturally to him.


Neonom. He seems not to Apprehend what the true Notion is of Imputing a thing
to another in Law in Criminal Cases.


Calvin. Nor do you understand that of Mr. Antinomian, I suppose he means you
were never used to the Crown Bar, you only have been exercised at the Nisi
Prius side.


Antinom. I am no Lawyer, but yet am fain to use some Law terms (that the
Scripture uses, and most Men are acquainted with) in this matter, and most
Divines hold necessary to explain these Mysteries by; though Mr. Neonomian will
not understand them, nor allow them any otherwise than in his own Sense,
contrary to all received meanings of them. Do not I talk of Sin as a Criminal
Case, when I say David's Murder and Adultery was Imputed to Christ, and the Sin
of those and such like Actions? Imputation is of the same Nature, whether the
Default be Debt, or Criminal nature, both Debts of Money and Fellonies are
Moral Transgressions; nay, both are the breach of one Law, Theft; and not
paying another, or his own Money due upon Bond, or Rentcharge, or the like,
is breaking the Eighth Commandment, Thou shall not Steal, and is not Theft a
Criminal Case? See Dr. Cr. p. 288, 289.


Neonom. God's laying Sin on Christ is a Moral Act of God as a Rector, i. e. he
Agreed and Appointed that Christ should in his Person stand obliged to bear the
Punishment of our Sins, that we might obtain pardon, and that Punishment was
Actually laid upon him, and suffered by him.


Antinom. What do you mean by a Rector? do you mean as a Rector under a Law for
the Rule of his Moral Obedience? or was God Bound by his Moral Law to appoint
Christ to bear Sin? What do we with this diminutive word Rector; methinks you
might Entitle God, our Great King, Sovereign Lawgiver, who is King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords, and does whatever he pleases in Heaven and Earth, and you
make him little Moral Rector, and as such he Covenanted with his Son to bear
Sin: Did God Act in a way of Government and Dominion over his Son as his
Rector, when he said, If thou shall make thy Soul an Offering for Sin, etc?
Isa. 53. Or as with one that counted it no Robbery to be equal with God, Phil.
2.6. Was it not when he was with him, one brought up with him, his Delight, his
Delight, his Fellow? And was agreeing with Christ to bear Sin, and Actually
laying it upon him, the same Act? whereas one was Immanent, and the other
Transient; God in laying Sin or charging Sin upon Christ, or executing the
Punishment upon him, freely submitting himself to be dealt with in a way of
Justice, did Act as a Great Judge, the Judge of all the World, in foro
Justitiae Divinae. Why must we have this mean Title for God, Rector? God did
not Covenant with his Son in a way of Judicial proceeding, though that Covenant
was executed in a way of Vindictive and Remunerative Justice. And you say the
Punishment of Sin was laid on Christ, but not Sin it self. What Justice is it
in a Judge, or as a Rector, as you call him, to punish him for Sin, that is not
justly charged with Sin, its Transgression charged is the only Meritorious
Cause of Punishment; where there is no Law, there is no Transgression; and where
there is no Transgression, there can be no Punishment, though there may be
Sufferings they cannot be Penal. Sin and Punishment are Relata in Logic as
well as Law. And you say he was obliged to bear the Punishment, that we might
obtain pardon, cunningly worded indeed; this is an answer to a Bill, saving all
Advantages that hereafter may be taken: You mean Christ has bore the
Punishment of our Sins, that we may hereafter by the Righteousness of another
Law obtain pardon.


Neonom. Again, also because a Man that is Bound in a Bond of Money becomes a
Debtor; therefore he thinks because Christ suffered to save the Idolater or
Blasphemer, therefore Christ must be the Idolater and Blasphemer. D. W. p. 14.


Antinom. But pray Sir show first, (...) signifies propter, Romans 4.25.

(...), for these things comes the Wrath, etc. Ephesians. 56.

And (...) has the same force, 1 Cor. 15 3.

Pro peccatis nostris, Gal. 1.9.

Et (...), for Sins, 1 Pet. 3.18.

(...) and (...) use to signify no less the Impulsive Cause than the Final
Cause.

See Romans 15.9. 2 Cor. 1.11. Ephesians. 1.16. 2 Cor. 5.21.

Grot. de satisfact.

Vlciscipio Injuriis.

Sceleris poenas persolvere suppliciis and maleficiis metuere. Cicero.

Castigare pro commerita noxia. Plaut.

Pro dictis and factis ulscisci. Terrent.

Pro peccatis Passus aut Mortuus. Grot. de sat.


that he thinks Christ became the very Idolater and Blasphemer; you heard him
again and again deny that he thought so, but he said that Christ was charged
with, and bore the Sins of the Idolater and Blasphemer; and I stand to it, and
I must tell you, if a Man Bound for Money becomes a Debtor, it is for that Debt
which is owing. And if Idolatry be a Sin whereby a Sinner is a Debtor to the
Law, Christ becomes a Debtor in the same sense for Idolatry. And I told you, a
Debtor is a Moral Transgressor, if he make not due payment as well as a Thief,
both Sinners against one Command.


Neonom. Christ paying our Debts was a satisfaction for Criminals, not a
payment of Money.


Antinom. Not Silver and Gold, but a better sort of Money. 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. You
know the Spirit of God alludes to that Metaphor; he calls our Redemption, Our
being bought with a Price, or a Ransom, etc. 1 Cor. 6.20. therefore I think you
should not pretend to be wiser than the Spirit of God; and Christ's paying our
Debts was making satisfaction for Criminals, and he was a reputed Criminal, he
was numbered among Transgressors not only by Man [as you say] but by God.


Neonom. And yet it is plain, that if I were bound for Money for one, that by
Drunkenness wastes his Estate, my being Bound to pay the Money, does not argue
that I was, or must by the Creditors be so accounted when I make payment.


Antinom. It is very true, Mr. Moderator, I think it is time for us to break up
our Club at this time, for if the Constable should happen to look in, and hear
such high-flown Reasoning as this is, I do not know but we may be in danger of
being laid by the Heels, the best of it is, that we shall not be reckoned
Constables for being laid by the Heels.


Neonom. Once more, to clinch the last Conviction a little closer, because
Christ was made Sin, i. e. an Offering or Sacrifice for Sin; therefore he
thinks our very Sins was laid upon him, and he made filthy.


Antinom. Because he was made a Sacrifice for Sin, therefore I say he was made
Sin, the Sacrifices were made Sin, and bore the Sins of the People Typically as
Shadows, Christ really, and as the Substance; and as the Sacrifices became
Levitically Unclean by the bearing of Sin, so Christ the true Sacrifice was
Judicially Unclean when he bore our Sins in his Body on the Tree.


Neonom. To add no more, because men wickedly arraigned him as a Blasphemer,
therefore ^he Doctor thinks he was so indeed, and in God's account.


Calvin. What blundering Doctor is this to have so many gross Mistakes in such
a plain point of Divinity, and of so great concern; that ever any Man's Skull
should be so thick, as to think that Christ Actually Blasphemed God, because he
bore the Sins upon the Cross of those that reproached him for a Blasphemer, and
Arraigned him as such.


Antinom. I pray Sir let me ask him one Question for Information, now he talks
of Blasphemers, and he is so good at rectifying Mistakes: Tell me the meaning
of that place, Psalm. 69.3. applied to Christ, Romans 15.3. Some take it to mean
that the Blasphemies of Blasphemers were charged upon and imputed to Christ;
and I think the Apostle Paul quotes the place in that sense, but it may be the
Apostle Paul and I may be both mistaken; I pray Sir make it so, and add it to
the other mistakes.


Calvin. You have been a great while showing what laying of Sin upon Christ is
not, and convincing this Dr. of Antinomianism, and want of Brains; I pray Sir
now let us be the better for yours, and let us know the Truth in this great
matter, and that we may not be liable to be led aside by such dark Larthorn
Doctors as you make this to be.


Neonom. I came on purpose to be a Guide to you, I know you are all at a loss
in these Points.

Truth. Though our Sins were Imputed to Christ with respect to the Guilt
thereof, so that he by the Fathers appointment, and his own consent, became
obliged, as a Mediator, to bear the Punishment of our Iniquities; and he did
bear those Punishments to the full satisfaction of Justice, and to our Actual
Remission when we believe; nevertheless the filth of our Sins was not laid on
Christ; nor can he be called the Transgressor, or was he in God's account the
Blasphemer, Murderer, etc. D. W. p. 7.

That you may not be mistaken, I will tell you in several particulars what I
hold. 1. Christ bare the Punishment of our Sins. D. W. p. 9.


Antinom. Sir, I desire to remark upon your Concessions as you Name them.


Neonom. I pray take your liberty as to that.


Antinom. Punishment is such no otherwise than as the Wages of Sin, and where
Sin is not charged there is no Wages due, and therefore if Punishment be taken
only as Suffering for Sin, it is no Punishment but bare Sufferings. An Innocent
Person may suffer, but none can be punished by justice but a nocent Person,
that is so in the Eye of the Law that inflicts the Suffering.


Neonom. 2. Christ bare the Guilt of our Sins, which is that respect of Sin to
the threatening of the Law, whereby there is an Obligation to bear the
Punishment.


Antinom. We have told you the Scripture every where says Christ bore our Sin.
You say before, that our Sins were Imputed to Christ with respect to Guilt, as
if they were not laid on the guilty. 2. We find God's People for whom Christ
bore Sin, do often labor under Guilt of Sin. 3. Guilt of Sin is a result of
Sin, belongs to the Committer, and all the World is found Guilty before God; or
else it is the Judicial Charge, or Accusation by the Law, whereby the Sinner is
made to deserve Punishment; thus it is with Thousands that have no sense of
Guilt in Conscience. 4. Guilt in Conscience is taken off at the application of
the satisfaction of Christ to the Soul, by the sense of his bearing Sin. 5.
Guilt in Judgment is upon proof of the Charge or Confession of it, either from
Conscience of the Fact in the Person that committed it, or from a submitting to
the Charge in the place and stead of another, whereupon the Person becomes
Guilty, i. e. blameworthy, and faulty in the Eye of the Law. 6. You mistake in
saying Guilt is that respect of Sin to the Threatenings of the Law, whereby
there is an obligation to bear Punishment. Guilt is the just Charge of Sin,
which is (...), a Transgression of the Preceptive part; it is Extrinsick to Sin,
to suffer Punishment for Sin, and though they are relata by God's Constitution
that wherever there is Sin there must be Punishment, yet it is not so by
necessity of Nature. 7. Hence obligation to Punishment is from the Will of the
Lawgiver, and the Nature of the Law; not from the Sinner; the Law has tied
Sin and Punishment together, and it is not Sin to be obliged to Punishment, but
it is for Sin; obligation to Punishment is part of the Wages of Sin, and not
Sin in it self, nor the guilt of Sin; a Murderer that is cast, he is guilty
before Sentence or Execution, not because the Law will Sentence him, but
because he has committed the Fact which the Law has forbid, and therefore
has annexed a Penalty to it. There Is a Privative Nature in Sin, which is a
contrariety to the Goodness of the Law, which is the Fault, therefore the Law
to avenge it self makes it worthy, or deserving such a Punishment, and upon
Trial binds over the Sinner to it; there is hardly to be found a difference
between reatus culpae and poenae, as Dr. O. says; but Sin committed or justly
charged upon some account or other, is in it self by virtue of the Constitution
of the Law an obligation to Punishment, being the Meritorious Cause thereof.


Neonom. I own Christ was esteemed by Men a Transgressor, and Arraigned as
such.


Antinom. If it were only so, he bore Sin no otherwise than the Saints and
Martyrs, who also were accounted Transgressors by Men, Arraigned and Condemned
as such, but it seems you will not own him accounted a Transgressor by God, and
therefore no Sin was laid upon him, nor any Punishment, and here you fall in
roundly with the Socinians.


Neonom. We grant also that Christ's Sufferings were as Effectual to put away
Sin, as if our very Sins had been transacted on him.


Antinom. I doubt not but you will ascribe as much to your Gospel, as Paul did
to his; there was never any Coyners of new Doctrine, (Papist, Quaker, Socinian
or Arminian, all Well-wishers to your Divinity, in some part or other of it)
but will still each of them cry up your Doctrine, and decry the Truth for
Error; and this Truth of laying Sin on Christ, as vehemently as you, especially
in the Sense that you do.


Neonom. But I say he became obliged as Mediator to bear the Punishment of our
Iniquities.


Antinom. If as Mediator, then to take up the difference between God and us,
for it is Sin makes the difference and not punishment; this is but the effect of
the difference, the High Priest, the Typical Mediator, was to bear the
Iniquities of the People, and offer a Sacrifice on which they were charged.


Neonom. He did bear those Punishments to the full satisfaction of Justice.


Antinom. Unless Sin be taken away in a Law sense, Justice is not satisfied,
bearing Punishment only does not satisfy for Sin, the Law will have the
Sinner, or the Sin taken away; therefore the Damned must suffer to Eternity
because they cannot take away Sin by Suffering, but Christ did more than
suffer, he put an end to Sin by the Sacrifice of himself.


Neonom. Yea, and to our Actual Remission when we believe.


Antinom. It seems there is Fundamental Potential Remission before; and I doubt
you will not suffer this Remission to take place without a new Law and the
Righteousness thereof.


Neonom. The Real difference lies in these things.

1. Whether Sin it self as to its filth and fault was transacted on Christ?
This you affirm, and I deny.

2. Whether Christ was made and accounted by the Father the very Transgressor,
the Adulterer, the Blasphemer? This you affirm, and I deny. D. W. p. 10.


Antinom. You might have put the Questions into one, and stated it as it lies
between the Apostle Paul and you.

Whether God Imputed Sin to Christ at all?


Neonom. I go on to confirm my Positions.

1. To transact our Sins on Christ as opposed to Guilt, is impossible, for it
would argue either a mistake in the Divine Mind to account him the Committer of
our Sins, or a Propagater of our corrupt Qualities to him, which is impossible;
and any other way besides Imputing the guilt there is none.


Antinom. This Argument, I judge, is to prove both Positions. As to the First,
it runs thus: That which is impossible cannot be done; but to transact Sin as
to it is Fault, is impossible, Ergo. As to the Major, I judge the Impossibility
is meant in respect of the Nature of God, or the Constitution of God, otherwise
I know not why a Fault may not be taken away, as well as Obligation to
Punishment; when as Fault is that for which a Man is obliged to bear
Punishment: For if the Fault remain, the Punishment is still due.

The Minor you prove thus: It would argue a mistake in God, or suppose him a
Propagator of Sin.

1. It does argue a Mistake in you to say, that is transferred from us which was
never in us. For the Obligation to Punishment in it is active consideration is
subjectively in the Law, and that cannot be taken from it; it is the Debt which
the Law owes to the Sinner, by reason of it is Sanction, and the Punishment is
the Payment; 1 John 3.3, 4. (...).
the Wages of Sin is Death. For Punishment is not the Sinners Debt, but the
Law's Debt, and the Sinner's Due. The Sinner's Debt is, doing the Duty the Law
requires. His Disobedience is an Offense to the Law, a Fault blamed by the
Preceptive part of the Law; and this is Guilt, Reatus culpae, to which Meritum
poenae does by virtue of the Constitution belong. There Is two respects in Sin.
1. To the preceptive part of the Law, and that is Fault. 2. To the Penal part,
and that is Meritum. Now these by reason of the Justice of the Law, and the
Connection made by it is Institution between the Accusing and condemning part,
are inseparable before God; and being but two different respects of the same
individual Act, it is a Fault and a Merit, and a Merit because it is a Fault;
the Merit is a Result from the Fault, and are such relata, that they cannot be
parted in Judgment. Now then, will not your Argument rebound upon your self?
Would it not argue a Mistake in God, to lay the Merit of Punishment upon a
Person that has not any meritorious Cause of it in no respect? If the Fault be
not imputed, how can the Merit? There can be no Merit without a meritorious
Cause, and this is our Sins, and not Christ's, by way of Perpretation. In
laying Sin on Christ, there are these things. 1. The Spirit of God says it is
Sin, and does not confound Sin and Punishment: And it is absurd if it should,
for Punishment is not Sin. 2. It says, It Is our Sins, not Christ's. 3. That
these Sins are Juridically imputed and accounted to Christ: The Payments by
Christ's Sufferings is his own Money, not ours; the Debt is imputed, not the
Payment: A Surety is charged with, and takes upon him the principal Debt, but
does not take Money from him to pay it; the Money is his own; the Debt is the
Principal's transferred to him, but the Payment is the Surety's subjectively
and properly: Therefore to say the Payment is imputed to the Surety is
Nonsense. The Spirit of God speaks expressly, that our Sins were laid on Christ,
no less than Three times in Isa. 53. and expressed by three different Words,
(...), ver. 6. (...), ver. 11. (...), ver. 12. It Is express, 1 Pet. 2.24. the
Apostle plainly there speaking after the Prophet, says, He bore it as a
Sin-offering, Heb. 9.28. Was made Sin, 1 Cor. 5.21. Therefore we neeed not fear
to say, Christ bore our Sins, let the Sense be what it will which the Spirit
means; it was certainly so, as to take away the Charge of Sin, which is Fault
and Blame, from before God, 1 John 3.3, 4. To take it away as (...), which is
so to take it away, as to set a Man right in the Eye of Justice.

Your next Branch of Proof to the Minor, is, That to impute Sin to Christ,
would argue him a Propagator of Corrupt Qualities. What could be done or said
more by a Socinian, to load the great Truths of the Gospel with reproachful
Consequences. 1. Sin is no positive Quality as such, but only privative. 2. All
Qualities of a pernicious Nature to the Sinner, consisting of Natural Causes,
are Subjecta peccati, not Peccatum it self, and they are separable from Sin in
it is Moral Consideration: There were in Christ himself Effects of our Sins, in
Infirmity, Sorrow, Reproach, etc. They were very uneasy Qualities, though not
corrupt. 3. God himself tells us. He laid Iniquity upon him, and made him Sin,
and yet says Positively, He was no Committer of Sin. And you charge the Spirit
of God with Nonsense and Contradiction. For you say, it is impossible to impute
Sin to Christ any other way than punishing of him, it is to mistake, and make
Christ the Committer, which Punishment is not sin; therefore what the Spirit
says is false, Sin was not laid on Christ at all, and yet the Spirit speaks it
expressly. 4. You will infer these Absurdities. 1. That Sin cannot be laid on
Christ but by Transfusion, wherein you deny Imputation. 2. That Christ must be
corrupted thereby: Whereas the Spirit of God tells us, he bears Sin as a Lamb
without Spot: You will have it, that he had the Macula fixed on him by bearing
it. 3. You will have God, by laying Sin on Christ, to become a Propagator of
Sin. The Spirit of God says, he appeared to take away our Sins, and in him is
no Sin, 1 John 3.5. How audacious is our Carnal Reason, to set upon Divine
Mysteries.


Neonom. It was needless to the Ends for which our Sins were laid on Christ.


Antinom. You should have said, what is needless. Your Argument should have run
thus, Laying Sins on Christ is needless to the ends for which they were laid on
Christ; and therefore those Scriptures that say so, are needless.


Neonom. Sins were laid on Christ, that he might make Atonement by suffering
for them; and so release us who had transgressed.


Antinom. Now, Sir, you say something, you speak like a Divine, if you can hold
there. Now you own something laid on Christ besides Punishment; for the
Atonement was made by being punished, and say well now, that Sin was laid on
him, that he might make Atonement for them, viz. by being punished. For bearing
Sin is one thing, and making Atonement is another, but are inseparable relata,
and therein contraria affirmantiae.


Neonom. Now Christ, by submitting to the Guilt as an Obligation to Punishment,
according to the Terms of the Covenant of Redemption, was sufficient to this
End, and all that was needful.


Antinom. That Christ bore the Desert or Demerit of our Sin, which is done only
by a Judicial Charge and Accusation in our stead, is sufficient. What is Sin
after the Fact is committed, but reatus culpae? Guilt is the Fault declared and
applied somewhere in a way of Judicial Proceeding: And this is often the
Conscience of Sin, and is not removed but by Faith on Christ crucified, who
bore our Sins before God.


Neonom. All that endangered us, was the Threatening of the Law, and the
Punishment included in the Threat.


Antinom. Where there is true Godly Sorrow, it is more upon this Account, that
he has sinned against a Holy God, and broke his holy, just and good Law, than
for fear of the Threats of Wrath. I thought I had better understood the Nature
of Sorrow for Sin, that it had been the nature of Sin in Contrariety to God,
had more grieved than the Fear of Punishment.


Neonom. The Obliquity of the Fact, as against the Precept, shall not hurt,
where the Sanction of the Law is answered.


Antinom. I think this is that you call Antinomianism with a Witness; you shall
hear of it again e're long; only observe, That this is as much a Doctrine of
Licentiousness, as any you charge on me: Secure but your self from Hell, and
you need not regard the preceptive part of the Law, you may live as you list.
See how you will clear your self, when you charge it for a great Crime upon me, in
saying, Sin will do no hurt in some Sense, etc.


Neonom. And he that suffers as Sponsor for another, need not sustain in
himself the filthiness of the Crime, to make him capable of giving
Satisfaction, Genesis 44.13. Phil. 18.


Antinom. No, that is true upon your Hypothesis, there is no need of a Sponsor;
for the Filthiness of Sin is too foul for Christ to bear, the Sinner must be
his own Expiator, and carry away his Filth himself; or if he keep it, it will
not hurt. See 1 John 7.9.


Neonom. This transacting of the Filthiness of our Sins on Christ is
blasphemous.


Antinom. Friend, that is a cruel Bomb to shoot at a good Man, to charge him
with Blasphemy. But where is the Blasphemy, to say, Christ bore the Filth of Sin
in a Sense. Is not Sin filthy under all Considerations? Does not the Spirit of
God call it filthy and abominable in all respects? 1. Is not the Guilt of Sin
Filth and abominable in God's Sight? And is it not so, when it lies upon the
Conscience? I think the Spirit of God represents it always as the greatest
Foulness and Uncleanness. I say, a Conscience polluted with Sin, to those that
are defiled and unbelieving, and cannot by Faith fetch and derive cleansing
Virtue from the Blood of Christ into their Consciences, to such nothing is
clean, (...), Tit. 1.15. Now this is the very Rooot and Foundation of a
Defilement: And what is it that takes it off, but Faith in the Sin-cleansing
Virtue of Jesus Christ? The great Contrariety of Sin to the Holy Law, is the
Filthiness of Sin. And the Apostle tells, Heb. 9.14. How our Consciences come
to be purged from dead Works; it is no other way, than by the offering of Christ
without Spot to God. This spotless Sacrifice, whereon he bore Sin, and was not
defiled: And hereby the Conscience of Sin, i. e. the Guilt of Sin, (which is no
other than Sin charged upon the Conscience) is taken away; and thence the
Levitical Services could not make any perfect, as pertaining to Conscience, but
it is the Blood of Christ that sprinkles from an evil Conscience, Heb. 10.22. 2.
A condemning Conscience, without which we stand but loathsomly before God; yea,
while for want of Faith we apprehend God deals with us out of Christ, we are
very loathsome, and all our Works and Services dead, God loathes and abhors them.
Is not the Virtue of Christ's Blood compared to a Fountain to wash us in, and
intended especially of Justification and Pardon, and the Saints to betake
themselves to it under the Notion of it is cleansing Virtue in that Sense? 1
John 1.7. Rev. 1.5. Guilt of Sin then is as great a Pollution as belongs to
Sin: It Is no other than Sin lying upon the Conscience with an Accusation, 1
John 3.20, 21. Greg. Nysson says, He bore (...), the Filth of our Sin. Dr. O.
p. 42.

Again, Wherever Sin is to be purged out by Sanctification, it is to be rid
away by Justification, but all Filth is to be rid by Sanctification, that
indwells. Now it is manifest, that the cleansing Virtue of the Blood of Christ
applied by Faith, is the first Gospel-effectual Means of Sanctification; and it
must be the great Cause of Mortification; wherein we are planted together in
the likeness of his Death, Romans 6. And what did Christ in his Death, but
destroy the Body of Sin by carrying it away? 2 Timothy 1.10. He has by carrying
away sin, abolished Sin and Death, slain the Enmity that lay in Hatred of God,
Pravity and Dominion of sin. Whence was it that David was cleansed from
Blood-guiltiness? Was it not from it is being laid on Christ? Was it not that
very Filthiness of his Sin? Psalm. 51.14. Does he not pray to God to be washed
thoroughly from his sin, and to be cleansed from it? Was not that by the
Application of the Blood of Christ? Does he not mention all his Pravity,
Original as well as Actual, from which he would be purged as with Hyssop, and
made whiter than Snow? And wherein lies this Washing? Is it not in respect of
sin? (not in respect of Punishment, he mentions not) he explains what he
means, it is that radical Washing, ver. 9. Hide thy Face from my Sins, and blot
out mine Iniquity, i. e. From the Face of God's Justice. Then follows the
Creation of a clean Heart; He gave himself for us to redeem us from all
Iniquity, Tit. 2.14. There is no Pravity, Defilement, Pollution of Sin
whatever, that is so but because of it is contrariety to the preceptive part of
the Law, must first have it is Foundation of cleansing from Christ's bearing of
it away, and this Faith applying purifies the Heart from the indwelling Macula
in us. Whence that Promise, Ezekiel. 36.25. The clean Water there is the Spirit
working in Application of the Blood of Christ; and therefore Gospel-cleansing
lies chiefly in Application of Promises, 2 Cor. 7.1.


Neonom. He took care his Body should not see Corruption, Acts 2.3. he would
much more abhor to take in our Pollution: He was holy, harmless, undefiled, etc.


Antinom. All this we say over and over, that he bare Sin, but was not defiled
with Sin, nor corrupted in his Nature; but the Spirit of God is not to be
believed. See Christ's taking away of Sin by Atonement, is called (...), Heb.
1.3.


Neonom. It was Condescension enough, that he agreed to be treated as a Sinner:
But how odious is it to load him with Sin it felf! To spit that in his Face
that the worst of Men abused him with; and it would justify his Persecutors
who punished him, if he was really the Person your Principles renders him to
be.


Antinom. The Spirit of God renders him to be the Person that my Principles
renders him to be. It says he bore our Sins in his Body on the Tree, the Lord
laid Iniquities on him, he was made Sin for us, and yet how dare you reproach
the Spirit of God in such a manner! To say, that it is an odious thing: To say,
be bore the Load and Weight of all the Sins of the Elect; that it is spitting
in the Face of Christ, doing that which the worst of Men did to him, and
justifying his Murderers: I am surprised with great horror to hear such things
out of the Mouth of a Man that is called a Gospel Minister. I pray God give you
Repentance, and lay not these things to your Charge.

But Sir, you have here declared your defiance of the Date of the Imputation of
our Sins to Christ, and yet would pretend you hold that Doctrine by saying God
laid the Punishment of Sin only upon Christ. The mere Punishment of Christ (I
must tell you) was not the bearing our Sin; for the bearing the Punishment was
the payment of the Debt, and was his Righteousness which is Imputed unto us: if
Imputation of our Sins to Christ lay in nothing else, they were not Imputed at
all to him; Punishment was laid upon him, and he bore it by way of Suffering in
his Humane Nature, and was that Righteousness that is Imputed to us in
Justification, the Argument against you is this:

That which is Imputed to us was not Imputed to Christ, but Punishment of
Christ to Satisfaction for our Sins, is his Righteousness Imputed to us. Ergo,
not the Imputation of our Sins unto him. If your rooted prejudices will suffer
you to consider, I pray weigh well that Argument, you will have more by and by.

But you still say if Christ bore Sin he must be polluted with Sin. Ans. It
argues not that Sin was his by perpetration or Infusion, but only by
Imputation, they were our Sins by Perpetration and Inhesion, which he bore by
Imputation: The Spirit of God tells us he was a Sinner in one respect, and no
Sinner in another; as the Church of Smyrna was Poor in one respect, and Rich in
another. Omnia diversa natura sua abstracta sunt opposita; as Poverty and
Riches, Sin and no Sin; tamen eidem attributa ratione tantum dissentiunt; as a
Man may be Rich and Poor, Wise and Foolish in diverse respects.

And as to the filthiness of Sin it could not stain him, he remained untouched
in his Holy Nature, but yet I must tell you, as bearing Sin by the Sacrifices
caused a Typical Uncleanness, insomuch as the Bodies were Burnt without the
Camp, and they that Burnt them and gathered up the Ashes became Unclean; such a
Judicial uncleanness was Jesus Christ our Sacrifice under, wherein he answered
those great Types, and we are not without ample proof of it, especially from
Heb. 13.11.


Neonom. Arg. 2. Had he been Esteemed the very Transgressor, his Atonement had
been unavailable, for he could not Atone for himself. D. W. p. 11.


Antinom. You should have said, had he been the very Transgressor; he was a
reputed Transgressor, and stood instead of the actual Transgressor; he
therefore was a becoming High Priest, because he needed not to Offer for his
own Sins, but did at once Offer for us when he Offered up himself, Heb. 7.25,
27. All the places you mention are against you, that especially, 1 Pet. 3.18.
and that of Heb. 9.14. above all as we have showed before.


Neonom. Christ then suffered for his own Sins.


Antinom. So far as they became his own by Imputation.

To conclude, because you will have it, that in pleading for the Imputation of
our Sins to Christ, I must hold that Christ was the very Transgressor. See what
I said: There is a certain transacting of Sin on Christ, so real, that indeed a
Believer though an Actual Transgressor is as absolutely and truly discharged
of his Sins as if he himself had not committed them. As a Debtor when a Surety
has taken the Debt on him, and the Debtor receives an Acquittance and
Discharge, he is as free of the Debt now as if he never run into the Debt: So I
say it is with a Believer, Christ being made a Surety of a better Testament,
and thereby becoming really and truly the Debtor, instead of the Believer, he
so bears all the Debts himself, that they are altogether released and
discharged, as if they had never been in Debt. Still I say, this hinders not,
but there is an Acting of Sin, and Committing of Sin every day by a Believer,
but still the virtue of Christ's Suretiship takes off the Sin as soon as it is
committed; nay he has a Proviso, or Stock in Bank to satisfy it as soon as it
is Committed. Dr. Cr. p. 289.


Calvinist. If this be Mr. Antinomians Judgment, I see not but it is sound, and
according to the Scriptures; and you have little reason to make such a noise as
you have done, and load him so invidiously with your loathsome Consequences, and
misrepresent him so hideously to the World, as if he were a Person of no
Divinity, Logic, Religion, Brains, or common Sense; I must confess, I think
you have given a great deal of Ground of just offense, in wresting the words
and sense of so good a Man; besides your taking advantage to insinuate to us
Errors; for I apprehend your Spleen is most especially vented at the Doctrine
of Imputation, it is that which you principally aim at to Wound and cast to the
Ground.

Laying Sin on Christ no other than that whereby Christ becomes accountable to
God for our Sins, and there is in it these things very easy and plain to be
understood.

1. Christ's Offering himself freely to be accountable to God for our Sins;
because none can be forced to be accountable for the defaults of another. 2.
His answering the Will and Pleasure of the Lawgiver, the Judge of all therein,
being called thereunto and accepted in so doing, in the room and stead of the
Delinquents. 3. Hence it is for our Sins and not his own, that he is
accountable. 4. Our Sins are the Material and Meritorious Cause of his
Sufferings, which he takes upon him; our very Faults in nonconformity to the
Law; our Sins in the delinquency, our very Sins in opposition to Punishment,
our Sins in their greatest foulness, under the greatest Aggravations, they are
the very offending, meritorious Causes; and whereas when we are without Christ
they are accounted the offending and the meritorious Cause of Suffering to us;
so Christ being substituted in our room, they are the very offending
meritorious Causes of Suffering to him; Sin has a double resp^ct as a Fault
and Demerit, but as a fault is a demerit. To be accountable is to stand under
the demerits of Sin; and indeed that is Guilt; or reatus culpae, which the
Orthodox mean when they say Christ bare the guilt of Sin, and it is no other
than the charge of Delinquency. Dignitas poenae and obligatio ad poenam is the
same thing, and there is little weight in the distinction between Reatus Culpae
and Reatus Poenae; for Reatus Culpae is nothing else but Dignitas Poenae
propter Culpam. D. O. 280. And hence they say there is no difference between
Guilt and the Sin it self; for Sin is no positive thing but privative, and that
which is remaining besides the Physical Act of that which is a Moral Guilt, or
just Charge of Abberration from the Rectitude and Duty required in the Law, for
which Men must be accountable to God, and according to the sanction of the Law
give satisfaction; and that is in this case by receiving the Wages of Sin, and
in so doing the Payment is made.

And I shall now prove by many Arguments that it is our Sins, and our Sins in
the highest degrees and aggravations that Christ was accountable to God for,
and that he bore them in this sense, by way of Imputation, though none of the
macula or stain by way of Inherent pollution or defilement fell upon him, nor
could cleave unto him. And we defend the Position as the Spirit of God every
where states. it. That it was Sin as (...) that Christ bore, and in bearing
took away from before God, it is said to be laid on Christ as (...) and (...).

1. That which is the Radical Cause of God's displeasure against a Sinner was
laid upon Christ to take away, but Sin was the Radical Cause of God's
displeasure, Ergo, Sin in the radical Nature of it as it is a Fault, and blamed
of God as such. Now obligation to Punishment is not the Cause of God's
displeasure, but the effect of it; that which renders a Person abominable in
the sight of God is Sin, as it is against the preceptive part of the Law: as to
the Major it is plain, unless the Radical Cause of God's manifesting displeasure
be taken away, God cannot be reconciled to us; it is called the Enmity, Ephesians. 2.
even on God's part, which is upon the default of Sin, and it is Enmity on ours.

2. That which Christ bore in his Body on the Tree, was Sin it self, our Blame
as well as Demerit; for there is no demerit where there is no blame: He that
suffers for a fault bears the fault; the fault stands and claims the
Meritoriousness of Sufferings. The Apostle is express in it, That he bore our
Sins on the Cross, (...), 1 Pet. 2.24. This is the Punishment only you will
say; but the Holy Ghost will tell you he bore (...) in the Nature of it; (...)
is not the Punishment of Sin, but Sin it self, 1 John 3.4. (...), and mark what
follows, ver. 5. and ye know that he was manifest, (...), that he might bare
away Sin in bearing it; and notwithstanding this, (says he) there was no Sin
in him; this does plainly evince that the Anomy of Sin was accounted to him.

3. That the fault of Sin is separable from the Person of the Sinner, but can
never be separated from the demerit without payment. David's Person is freed
from the fault of Murder, but his Murder cannot be freed from the desert of
Death: Now that which Christ did especially, was to make the Elect without
fault before God, to take off that relation which they had to the Law, lying as
to the blame of it. God's Reconciliation to the Persons of Sinners is by taking
away the fault of Sin before God, and this is done by the Person of Christ
bearing Sin.

4. That in a Sinner which is to be pardoned whenever he receives Christ, was
said on Christ; but the fault of Sin is to be pardoned whenever he receives
Christ; there is the least part of pardon that frees only from Punishment, but
forgives not the Fault or Offense; just as a King's Reprieving a Felon, but not
Pardoning him. To save him from the Gallows, but charge him never to see his
Face.

5. That without the taking away of which the Conscience of a Sinner can never
be purified from Guilt, was certainly laid upon, and taken away by Jesus
Christ, Heb. 9, 14. But the Fault of Sin is such without the taking away of
which before God, the Conscience can never be purified from Guilt; Ergo, the
fault of Sin was laid upon Jesus Christ to take it away: let a Man be sure he
should never see Death, yet if the fault lie upon him, there will still be
Guilt; his Conscience will accuse, he cannot have Peace toward God.

6. If the Wages of Sin be in the very Nature of Sin, viz. Spiritual Death and
it be inseparable from (...), or Sin it self; then that Death cannot be removed
without taking away the Sin before God; but the Wages of Sin, which is Death,
is inseparable from the Nature of Sin in the Fault before God; etc. Ergo, he
that by Death slays our Death, slays and carries away the Sin which is this
Death. The Apostle to the Romans 7. calls the Body of Sin the Body of Death, 2 Timothy 1.10.

7. That which Essentially belongs unto Christ's Office as Mediator, must be
performed by Christ, but bearing our Sins so as to take them away before God,
is Essentially belonging to Christ's Office as Mediator. It Is not the Essential
part of a Mediator to bear the Punishment of the wronged Party, but to
reconcile the Parties at variance; he may save one Party from utter Ruin by
bearing Punishment, yet cannot reconcile them without taking away all matter of
offense; but it is the fault of Sin that is the cause of variance; God hates
it, and the Sinner loves it. God is not offended at the Creature because he
must be punished, but because it is he who has broke his Law, therefore he
punishes him.

8. If the Creature will never be Reconciled to God till it has some prospect
of God's being reconciled first, by Christ taking away the fault of Sin before
God, then Christ bore it away; but the Creature will never be reconciled to God
without this prospect; Ergo: for the Ministry of Reconciliation as to its
Efficacy is founded upon this, 2 Cor. 5. And it is there described to be God
being in Christ first Reconciling the World to himself; and how is he said to
be so, but by making Christ Sin for us who knew no Sin.

9. All the Sin Offerings of the Law hold forth Christ's bearing Sin; if you
consider their Names, the proper Sin-offering was called (...), Levit. 4.3. It
was called a Sin because made Sin for us Typically, as Christ Really, by
Imputation, the (...), the Trespass or Guilt-offering was for Sin, that for the
whole Congregation was such, Lev. 4.15. So the Burnt-offering was designed to
the taking away of Sin by bearing it, that Called (...), and the
Peace Offering, (...), was in order to the making Peace and Reconciliation for
the Sinner; therefore in the Consecration of all these, there was the charging
them with Sin by the laying on of the hands of them that brought them, to be
Offered up for them, Levit. 1.3. The Hebrew Doctors say, all Oblations of
Beasts which particular Persons Offer of Debt, or voluntarily, they lay hands
on them, and so it was on the daily Sacrifice, as Mr. A. on Numb. 28.2. says,
signifying that it was constituted instead of the Sinner, and the Sacrifice
placed in the Sinners Room, thus charged with his Sins, the Priest was to offer
to make Atonement by, to Expiate and make Reconciliation in regard of Man's
Sin, and God's Wrath for the same. That these Sacrifices were Types of Christ,
our Sacrifice in beating Sin, appears abundantly, Heb. 9.28.

Neither do we say, that this bearing of Sin by Christ does free a Person from
being formally a Sinner, but because we are formally Sinners, therefore our
Sins are thus born to bring us to God, 1 Pet. 3.18. The Physical Substratum of
Sin remains, and in us; yea, the Moral macula in pravity and obliquity to be
gradually removed in the Application of Christ's Blood, by the Spirit of
Holiness; but yet the (...) before God must be taken away, which is the fault
blamed by the Law, (...) and (...).

Dr. O. of Justification, p. 287. proves Sin was laid on Christ as to the
Guilt, which we have showed, and is either the Sin it self, or is so conjoined
with it, that it cannot be separated; where there is a demerit there is a
fault; if Christ had a demerit to Sufferings it was for Sin, though ours, and
subjective in us, which his bearing Sin by Imputation always supposes. His
Arguments are these.

1. If Guilt of Sin was not Imputed to Christ, Sin was not Imputed to him in
any sense, for the Punishment is not Sin.

2. There can be no Punishment but with respect of the Guilt of Sin, personally
Contracted or Imputed; Guilt alone gives what is materially evil and afflictive,
the formal Nature of Punishment; and what is Guilt but Sin manifest by
Conviction, whereof the Sinner is charged in foro Dei, or in foro Conscientiae.
The first kind Christ took off by bearing it, immediately the other is removed
by Application in Believing.

3. Christ was made a Curse for us, Gal. 3.13, 14. but the Curse of the Law
respects the Guilt of Sin only, [ i. e. a Person manifestly faulty, and a
Delinquent to the Law.]

4. The Express Testimonies of Scripture unto this purpose cannot be avoided,
Isa. 53.6. Psalm. 32.5, etc.

5. This was represented in all the Sacrifices of old, especially in the Great
Aniversary Expiation with the Ordinance of the Scapegoat.

6. Without supposition of this, it cannot be understood how Christ should be
our (...), or suffer (...).

He likewise vindicates the Imputation of Sin to Christ in the sense of Guilt
opposed to Punishment; from all these odious Consequences that you would lay
upon it; such as this: That if our Sins be Imputed to Christ, then Christ is a
Sinner and Child of the Devil. A. That which the Scripture affirms is, that he
was made Sin for us; this the Greek Expositors, Chrisostom, Theophyl, Oecumen.
and many others take for a Sinner, but all affirm that denomination to be taken
from Imputation only, he had Sin Imputed to him, and underwent the Punishment.
2. This Imputation did not carry with it any thing of Pollution and Filth of
Sin to be communicated by Transfusion. 3. The Denomination of an Idolater,
Drunkard belongs not to him upon this account, etc.

In Sin there are three things. 1. The Offense of God, which is the fault. 2.
Obligation unto Eternal Punishment, which is the Guilt. 3. The Stain or
Pollution of the Soul, the Inherent Vicious Inclination of the Soul. Sin does
not remain in those that are Justified in the two first respects, of Fault and
Guilt, both which are taken away by the Death of Christ. But Sin does remain in
the Regenerate according to the third respect; viz. the Vicious Quality and
Corruption thereof, inherent in the Soul. Pemble of Just. p. 183. fol.

Pinch. says, 2 Cor. 5.21. The meaning of these words, is not that he was made
Sin for us but as a sacrifice for sin, etc. Norton against Pinch. p. 53.

Answ. He was made sin for us, as we are made Righteousness, i. e. by Judicial
Imputation, without the Violation, yea, with the Establishing of Justice; he
was made sin as he was made a Curse, Gal. 3.13. the Greek word used here and
there are the same: But he was made a Curse by Judicial Imputation, because he
was the sin-offering in truth; therefore he was made sin by real Imputation, as
the Legal Sin-Offering was made sin by Typical Imputation. Likewise in
Vindication of Isa. 53.6. from Pinchon's false Glosses, who used this Argument
against Imputation; Christ's sacrifice was Effectual to procure Atonement,
therefore sin was not imputed to him. p. 4. 46.

Here is a mere non-sequitur; nay the contrary consequence is true Christ
appeared to put away Sin, Heb. 9.26, 28. was once Offered to bear the Sins of
many, ver. 28. The Greek word used here by Paul, and elsewhere by Peter, 1 Pet.
2.24. signifies to take, carry, bear up on high, and that so as to bear away;
and in Allusion to the whole Burnt-offering, -- the Person that brought the
Sacrifice was to put his Hand upon the Head thereof -- The Apostle whilst he
was speaking of the Antitype, chooses out such a word to express Christ's
bearing of sin, to teach us thereby that Christ did both carry up and bear the
load of our sins, Imputed to him on the Cross, and also bear them clear away:
And thus Isaiah, Paul and Peter sweetly agree together, and Interpret one
another, as concerning Christ's bearing the Imputation of Guilt and Punishment
of sin. See more in his Refutation of that Socinian.

I do not see how he could be said to bear the Punishment of sin, (that being
strictly taken) if first he should not take its Guilt: We all grant Christ's
sufferings to be Penal, but how could they have been so without Guilt?
Therefore having no Guilt of his own, he must be looked upon as assuming ours,
upon which he might be said properly to undergo Punishment: And he also
vindicates, 2 Cor. 5.21. showing that his being made sin, is his voluntary
susception of the sinners Guilt. Dr. Jacomb on Romans 8. p. 490.

Etsi Peccatum interdum vocatur Victima ex Hebreor. Idiotissimo, etc. yet the
reason of the Antithesis here requires that Christ should rather be said to be
made Sin for us, i. e. the sinner, not in himself, but from the Guilt of all
our sins Imputed to him, of which thing that pair of Goats was a Figure, Levit.
16. Beza on 2 Cor. 5.21.

Quemadmodum Christus (...), coram Deo peccatum nostrum and Execrationem
sustinuit, non ficte sed revera; ita fidelis fiunt Justitia Dei, i. e. Justi in
conspectu Dei, etc. i. e. As Christ being Righteousness and Holiness himself,
bore our Sin and Curse before God, not feignedly but really; so the Faithful
are made the Righteousness of God. Camerar. upon the same place.

It is of singular Consolation so to Cloth Christ with our sins, and to wrap
him in my sins, thy sins, and the sins of the whole World. And so to behold him
bearing our Iniquities; for the beholding him after this manner, shall easily
vanquish all the Fantastical Opinions of the Papists concerning Justification
by Works; for they do imagine by a certain Faith formed and adorned with
Charity, sins are taken away, and Men are justified before God; and what is
this but to unwrap Christ, and strip him quite out of our sins, to make him
Innocent, and to charge and overwhelm our selves with our own sins, and to look
upon them not in Christ but in our selves? yea, what is this but to take Christ
clean away, and to make him unprofitable to us? Luth. on Gal. 3.13.

-- Let us receive this most sweet Doctrine, and full of Comfort, with
Thanksgiving and assured Faith, which teaches, that Christ being made a Curse
for us, ( i. e. a sinner subject to the Wrath of God,) did put upon him our
Person, and laid our sins upon his own shoulders, saying, I have committed the
sins which all Men have committed; therefore he was made a Curse indeed
according to the Law, not for himself, but for us; for unless he had taken upon
himself my sins, and thine, and of the whole World, the Law had had no right
over him; which condemns none but sinners only, and holds them under the
Curse; but because he had taken upon him our sins, not by constraint, but of
his own good will, it behooves him to bear the Punishment and Wrath of God; not
for his own Person, which was Just, but for our Person. Fol. 140.

Spanhem. says, Culpam and Poenam esse (...), adeoque se mutuo ponere and
tollere, nec illam dari sine abnoxitate ad istam, nec istam sine retentione
illius, absurdum est esse hominum culpae omnis and propriae and Imputatae
expertem poenae ulli addici. The sum whereof is, It is absurd to say, that a
Man can be void of his own sin, or the sin of another, and yet Condemned to any
Punishment. Spanhem. Dub. Evang. pars tert. p. 117.


DEBATE III. Of the Discharge of the Elect from Sins upon their being laid on
Christ.
Neonom. GEntlemen, you may remember what Point was discoursed the last time we
met in this Conference: now Mr. Antinomian is come, I pray let us proceed in
order and method, and if you please, I will propound the subject of our
Discourse, because I would have it to be such as may lead to discover the
Errors of the Antinomians, and if it be possible to convince this Gentleman
whom I take to be so deeply immersed in them.


Calvin. I remember you have Charged him with some already, how far he is
guilty, we leave every Man to his own Judgment, to think as matters of proof
does evince: It Is not a practice to subscribe our Names to commend Truth, or
condemn Error. Have you any more Errors to Charge him with.


Neonom. Yes Sir, very foul ones, I will Name you one, and it is this, he
holds,

That the very Act of God's laying Sin on Christ upon the Cross, is the very
Actual Discharge of all the Elect from all their Sins.


Mr. Antinom. Are you sure, 1. That this is my Opinion? And, 2. That if it be,
it is an Error? It may be there may be such an ambiguity in the terms of the
Question, that you may understand them in one sense and I in another, the
greatest, I judge, lies in Actual Discharge. But I pray make proof of your
Charge first, and then we will endeavor to find out the true matter in Debate,
and discuss the things in difference; it may be you mistake me.


Neonom. This is your declared Opinion, that runs as a Line through all your
Discourses, and is the Foundation you Build most upon.

I say all the weight, and all the Burden, and all that very sin it self is
long ago laid upon Christ; and that laying of it upon him, is a full Discharge,
and a general Release and Acquittance unto thee, that there is not any one sin
now to be charged on thee. Did not you speak these words in a Sermon you
Preached, you know where, upon Isa. 53.6. D. C. p. 298.


Antinom. Yes, I did speak these words; but you deal with me as you always have
been wont to do, you rehearse only part of my words, and conceal or take no
notice of such Expressions as may make my true meaning manifest.

I was speaking to that place, Romans 8. It is God that justifies, who is he that
condemns? I said the same God that justifies, will not eat his own words, and
pass Sentence of Condemnation upon a Person that has received the Sentence of
Absolution already: No, you will say, God does not Condemn, but he will let Sin
be charged upon the Spirit of a Man; does not he then Sentence him to be
unjust? Answ. There be diverse Condemnations: Condemnation in Sentence, and
Condemnation in Execution. Condemnation in Sentence is the pronouncing such a
Person guilty. The other is the Execution of Punishment deserved for this
guilt, and it is but an effect of Condemnation, rather than Condemnation it
self; so far as God charges fault upon a Person, so far he condemns that
Person; so that if God should charge a Person as faulty, how can you believe
still that this Person is manifested and pronounced just by God? I beseech you
stop your Ears against the Quirks of Satan, and of your Hearts deceived by him,
clamouring still to you, that Sin lies upon your own Spirits. It is but the
Voice of a Lying Spirit in your own Hearts, that says, That you that are
Believers have yet Sin wasting your Consciences, and lying as a Burden too
heavy for you to bear, [now comes in the words which you rehearsed] I say all
the weight, and all the burden, and all the very sin it self, etc. Dr. Cr. p.
292. Now I pray judge whether this Gentleman has dealt fairly with me.


Calvin. No indeed, I must needs say he has not; for you see he speaks not of
the Elect indefinitely; but of Believers, and is it not of the Devil that any
true Believer lies under Conscience-wasting sins? And was not all the sins of
the Elect laid long ago upon Christ, in full Discharge of every Believer? And
is not every Believer bound in Duty to believe it so?


Mr. Neonom. You teach that the Elect are Justified before they do believe;
otherwise till such Believing, the Person of the Elect does bear his own
Transgression, and is Chargeable for them. D. Cr. p. 616, 617.


Antinom. Sir, I was preaching from 1 John 2.1, 2. and was showing Faith is the
Fruit of our Union with Christ, and proved it from, John 15. I am the Vine, and
ye are the Branches; and I showed that there must be a Union to Christ before
the Branch could bring forth Fruit; and that Fruit is Faith, and proceeds from
our Radical Union with Christ. I also alleged, Col. 3. Your Life is hid with
Christ in God, etc. And inferred that the Life of every Elect Person has a
Being in Christ before he does believe; believing therefore does not produce a
new Life that was not before, [ i. e. Fundamentally and Efficaciously to the
producing of Faith,] but it makes that Life that was before an Active Life, or
is an Instrument by which that Life which was hid in Christ, does now after
believing become an Active, and Appearing Life in this Person. So that all that
can be made of this, is that till believing there is no Life and Activity in
the Person that is Elected, his Life is in Christ, and was in Christ, and
reserved in Christ for him till the time of Believing; and then does he, the
Elect Person become Active in Life when Christ does give him to believe
actually. D. C. 615.


Calvin. And do you Mr. Neonom. reckon this false Doctrine, I wonder what kind
of Gospel you Preach; I am much deceived, if this be not true Gospel Doctrine,
and so strongly Built that no Sophistry, or all the Gates of Hell will never
shake. I see every thing is not false Doctrine which you are pleased to call so.


Neonom. Truly now it plainly appears that I am not mistaken in Charging
Calvinists with Antinomianism, if all be of this Gentleman's Opinion.


Antinom. But Sir, if you be pleased to give me leave, I will proceed in the
further account of my Discourse. I showed the dangerous Consequences that must
follow this Principle, that there is no Justification, [ i. e. Fundamentally]
and Union at all belonging unto Elect Persons, till they do Actually believe in
Christ. I say if Persons are not United unto Christ, and do not partake of
Justification before they do believe, but that believing is the Instrument by
which they are first United. 1. That this in some respect would be bringing to
Life a Covenant of Works, Do this and Live; whereas the Covenant of Grace runs
upon contrary terms, Live and do this: God in the Covenant of Grace gives Life
first, and doing comes from Life.

2. If there must be our Act of Believing before our participating of Christ,
then those Sins that were laid upon Christ, and taken away from the Elect, [i.
e. in foro Dei] are returned back again -- I say, if there must be believing
before there be Union with, or Interest in Christ, it must necessarily follow
the Person does bear his own Transgression, is chargeable for them, and Imputed
to him -- Hence,

3. If they bear their own Sins, till they Actually Believe, there must be an
Hatred of God to such Persons till they Believe Actually, [which is Death,] and
a Person may perform a Vital Act in a state wherein he is Actually Dead, and at
the same time.

4. This must follow, that there is Believing before Union with Christ, and then
there must be some other Root from which this Fruit of Faith does spring; and
it is said Heb. 12. expressly, Christ is the Author of our Faith. I have received
this Principle merely for the vindication of the Glorious Privileges which are
proper and peculiar to Christ alone, and therefore refer the being of Faith it
self to Christ; to this end I deliver, that Elect Persons have a participation
and share in Christ himself, even before they do believe; neither would I
thereby diminish the Prerogative of Believing; for there are glorious things
done by Faith in Believers: God has honored it above all mere Creatures in
the World; he has made it the Conduit-pipe for the conveyance of all Peace and
Comfort; nay of all that strength which believers have all their Lives; no
Faith, no Comfort, no Faith no Peace of Conscience, no Faith no Pleasure to
walk with God -- The Soul lies in Darkness while in Unbelief. But still that
which is proper and peculiar to Christ alone, is not to be ascribed to
Believing. D. Cr. p. 616, 617, 618.


Calvin. Mr. Neonom. We shall be the better able to take our measures, if you
will be pleased to state this Point aright, and tell us what we may receive for
undoubted Truth, and what is to be Anathematized for Error in your Judgment.


Neonom. I Will tell you then first what is Truth.

Truth. The Atonement made by Christ by the Appointment of God, is that for
which alone the Elect are pardoned, when it is applied to them. D. W. c. 3. p.
15.


Antinom. Pray Sir give me leave to make my Remarks as you dictate, because my
Memory is but short.

1. You grant then that there is a complete Atonement wrought, finished and
accepted by God; if so, there is a Fundamental Life of Justification laid up
and reserved for them in Christ.

2. That this precedes their Actual Justification by Faith.

3. That this influenceth to Justification by Faith and is objective to Faith,
and Meritorious of Faith, and of the Work of the Spirit working Faith.


Neonom. But the Elect are not immediately pardoned, upon Christ's being
appointed to suffer for them, nor as soon as the Atonement was made.


Antinom. The Question is, Whether there is not upon Christ's Atonement Pardon
with God that he may be feared? Or whether there be not a Life laid up for them
in Christ which needs no addition to it? There is a difference between Pardon
and Pardoned; one is the Abstract, and the other the Concrete. We say where
there is Atonement for any, there is Pardon; but it follows not that because
there is Pardon for any, that therefore they are pardoned; there may be a
Pardon Sealed for a Traitor by the King, and yet he not pardoned, but the Law
proceeds against him, till the Pardon is sent down and read in Court. So the
Pardon is certain and finished for all the Elect, but they have not the
particular Pardons taken out, nor pardoned till they believe.


Neonom. Nor is that Act of laying Sins on Christ, God's forgiving Act by which
we are personally discharged.


Antinom. I doubt you are too presumptuous, to prescribe to God which shall be
his forgiving Acts, and which not; if God's laying Sin on Christ be not of a
pardoning and forgiving Nature to us, I know not what it was, did he not do it
as a God pardoning Iniquity, Transgression and Sin? was it not his casting our
Iniquities behind his Back? And is it not this Act of God which reaches every
Elect Person unto Actual Pardon and Forgiveness? Yea, are we not Justified by
this Act of God apprehended and applied by Faith? For is not an Act of God
removing Sin from us, and laying them on a Surety, a Pardoning Act.


Calvin. I pray Sir deliver your self more distinctly, for you do darken and
confound things extremely.


Neonom. I will tell you what is not in Dispute between us in diverse
particulars, that you may not take up a wrong sense. 1. The Question is not,
Whether Christ made a full Atonement for Sin.


Antinom. Give me but the right scent of you (which is hard to keep, you make
so many banks and turns) and I will follow you as close at the Heels as I can.
You grant Christ made full Atonement for Sin; there is Pardon in that Atonement
without Question for all God's Elect. Atonement always carries Pardon in it as
its formal Nature, or else it is no Atonement.


Neonom. 2. Nor whether that shall in time be applied to the Elect for their
Actual Remission as the Effect of it? D. W. p. 16.


Antinom. Then there is Atonement wherein is Pardon eventually certain; i. e.
shall certainly be applied, and being applied is actual Remission as the
Effect; therefore this Atonement is the Remission, as the Cause and as the
Object to be applied.


Neonom. 3. Nor whether we be so far Released thereupon, as that God can demand
no Atonement from any who shall submit to the Gospel way of Application of it.


Antinom. It seems then if they will not submit to the Gospel way of
Application, God can demand some other Atonement from them. I never understood
before that the Suffering of the Damned was Atonement; for where there is
Atonement God is at last appeased, but he will never be appeased toward the
Damned. 2. You said but now that the application of the Atonement to the Elect
in time should be (I understood you) certain, but now you make it only
conditional, in case of their submission to the Gospel way of Application.


Neonom. Nor 4thly, Whether the Law be answered, and God's Honor so vindicated
thereby, that the Sins of Men cannot hinder an Offer and Promise of Forgiveness
and Life.


Antinom. There Is a great Theological Intriegue here, we must endeavor to
unravel it. What do you mean by answering the Law, is it by Active or Passive
Obedience, or both? and for whom? for some absolutely or conditionally? you
tell us of a conditional Atonement, and such an Atonement the Scripture is a
stranger to.

2. You would have us to understand the end and use of Atonement is to fence
and secure God against his Law, that so he might be at liberty to save Men;
this is to make an Atonement to Sin, and not for Sin; your suggestion is, that
God cannot in Honor offer Life and Salvation till his Law be vindicated, i. e.
I suppose he took out of the way, and abolished that Law, so another Law more
practicable might be set up in the room of it; this is a fine way of
vindicating a Law, to Abrogate it.


Neonom. Nor whether, when we are Pardoned, the whole Meritorious Cause of
Pardon be that Atonement, and what is required of Sinners is only a meetness to
receive the Effects of it.


Antinom. What do you mean by the whole Meritorious Cause? Do you exclude
Christ's Active Obedience from the Meritorious Causes? And do you mean the
Merit of Satisfaction or Procurement? There Is a great deal of difference in the
Case before us; and what is the meetness? whether it be not a meetness of
Congruity, if not of Condignity? And whether this meetness be not of the
Effects of Christ's Merits, and if not from what other Cause it arises?


Neonom. Nor whether this Atonement is the only way of Forgiveness which we can
apprehend?


Antinom. I had thought a meetness to be forgiven, had been with you one way to
be forgiven, which you make to be distinct from Atonement, and the Meritorious
Cause of Forgiveness.

Now Sir, you say these things are not the Question, but they are questionable
to me; you might have told us of a Thousand more Questions which are not ours;
for there is no one thing but in genere disparatorum is separate from all other
things in the World. But after, Sir, you have freed our Brains from the mixture
of all Impertinent Questions, I pray put your Finger upon the very Spot.


Neonom. The Real Difference, lies in two Things.

1. Whether the Elect were Actually discharged of all their Sins at the time
that Christ made Atonement? D. W. p. 16.


Antinom. The Question is, whether a Believer is not to look upon the laying of
his Sins on Christ his full Release; for I speak of an Elect Believer; I say
not that any other can, whether Elect or no; for all the burden and load of Sin
was long ago laid on Christ, it is not now to do.


Neonom. Having spoken to the Question before, I insist now only upon this,
Whether the very Act of laying Sin upon Christ on the Cross, be the discharge
of the Elect from all Sin?


Antinom. You state your Questions still with great Ambiguity; for what mean
you by the Act of laying Sin on Christ? The laying Sin on Christ must suppose
and imply all things that conduced to the making him a complete Sacrifice for
Sin, God's Acts and his own: on God's part it is to be supposed there was not
only a charge of Christ, but a discharge on Christ's part; not only a
Subjection to the Charge, but a Suffering by way of Satisfaction; not only an
undertaking of the Debt, but a payment; I suppose you mean, whether the
Atonement that Christ made was in any sense a discharge unto the Elect; for no
wise Person will give a Discharge to a Debtor till the Money be paid, or
Suretiship accepted; now then we distinguish of Pardon, it was perfect and
complete by way of Impetration for all the Elect, but it has not an Actual
Application till the Persons are in being to whom it is to be applied; and that
Application in regard of the time of their Lives, is according to the
dispensation of Grace. Now all this you seem to grant, and need not put to any
further Question; you say Christ made full Atonement for Sin, and it shall be
certainly applied; you say only that a Sinner is not discharged till
Application: we distinguish of Discharge. 1. There Is that which is Vertual and
Fundamental, and Real in Christ; or else he could not have rose; for the Charge
upon him was our Sins, and he must have a Discharge as a Surety; and it was the
Elects Discharge in the Mind of God and of Christ, and really transacted. But
2ly, There Is a personal sensible Discharge, which is at or by Application.

Now then in the same sense that Christ bore our Sins by Imputation, as a
Representative, in that sense we were Discharged; for the Discharge must be as
large and full as the Charge, to the very Person of Christ, and all he
undertook for, or else he is bearing Sin still, and the Sins of some of the
Elect must be still upon him. And 3ly, If Christ obtained what he bore our Sins
for, then he had a Discharge not only for his own Person, but for all he
undertook for and represented; and Christ having made good and full payment,
cannot remain undischarged, for he finished the work which his Father appointed
him to do.


Neonom. But we can claim no Interest in his Atonement till we Believe.


Antinom. A Sinner's first Ground of Claim is the Promise and free Offer of
Christ in the Gospel, and Faith is a laying hold upon him, and receiving of him
in whom is full Atonement and Pardon. It is one thing to have Jus ad rem, and
another to have Jus in re; a Child new Born, or to be Born Heir of an Estate,
has a good Right to the Inheritance, else he could not be Heir, which is
previous and lies dormant until the time of Claim and Possession, and therefore
the Apostle seems to speak in this way of Allusion, Ephesians. 1.11. He says, In
whom we have obtained an Inheritance, (...), and it is grounded upon what he
said, ver. 7. in whom we have Redemption. And Dr. Goodwin says, That the
Apostle speaks not there of the Redemption that we have here, [ i. e. the
Fruits of Redemption] but of the Work of Redemption which Christ himself has
wrought, which is the cause of all the Redemption we receive. And 2dly, We have
Redemption in Christ as in a common Person; and we have it not only when it is
applied to us, but we have it in him as we had Condemnation in Adam before we
were Born into the World; so we had Redemption in Christ when he dyed. So Dr.
Goodwin on Ephesians. 1.


Neonom. It was not that Will or Purpose of God, or Christ, that the laying our
Sins on Christ should be the Immediate Discharge of the Elect, John 6.40. 1
Pet. 1.2. D. W. p. 17.


Antinom. It was the Will and Purpose of God and Christ, that upon Christ's
Satisfaction for Sin he should have an immediate Discharge, and all the Elect
Vertually and Really in him, a general Discharge, but not manifested, and
personally applied to particular Persons, and in this sense the Elect are
Discharged at and by Application; and the places mentioned hold forth no more
than this; and this is all the Dr. says, That the Church had a general
Discharge in Christ, not a particular Application till Being.


Neonom. This overthrows the whole Scheme so wisely contrived for the
distribution of the Effects of his Death.


Antinom. It may overthrow your Scheme, but it overthrows no true Scheme of the
Gospel Mystery.


Antinom. Things are so adjusted, that forgiving the Elect should be the Effect
of Christ's Kingly Office as well as his Priestly Office, Acts 5.31. 1 Cor.
6.11. Acts 26.18.


Antinom. Christ wrought out our Forgiveness by way of Atonement as a Priest,
and God was Atoned and Appeased thereby; and therein he also Gloriously
Triumphed in his Kingly Office, spoiling Principalities and Powers, Triumphing
over them on the Cross, Col. 2.14. And through Death he destroyed him that has
the Power of Death, even the Devil, Heb. 2.14. In that place, Christ is meant
in all his Offices; first as a Priest entered into the Holiest of all, Heb.
4.14. Application is by virtue of his Intercession to obtain the Ends of his
Death; likewise as a Prophet he teaches by his Spirit and Gospel, the Promise
of Eternal Life, and the whole Mystery of his Incarnation, and Sufferings, and
Exaltation; he as a King Conquers and Subdues the Hearts of Sinners to himself,
and gives forth the Promise of the Father, and hence there comes the
Application of Pardon, and that Life laid up and hid in himself, Colos. 3.1, 2,
3. And all the places mentioned by you, speak but of our receiving Forgiveness,
so all the Offices of Christ have the Honor due unto them, when we were
Enemies we were Reconciled by the Death of his Son, Romans 5.10. Reconciliation
was by his Atonement; and therefore the Apostle says, ver. 11. not only so,
but through Jesus Christ we have now received the Atonement; viz. through all
Christ, in all his Offices; it is one thing to make Atonement, and for God to be
reconciled to us; that is the accomplishment of the Reconciliation of God to
the Elect, considered as Sinners: and another thing to Reconcile us, which is
done by the Gospel Ministry, whereby also we receive the Atonement. Dr.
Davenant having showed many ways of Redemption, says, Vltima and unica ratio
nos redimendi, est ea quae fit per modum Justitiae, etc. The last and only way
of Redemption, is that which was by way of Justice all our Debts being paid by
our Surety Jesus Christ; which price being paid, the great Debt is discharged,
1 Pet. 1.18. Christ averts the Wrath of God from us, by undergoing the
Punishment undue to him, to free us from our Debt, Gal. 3.13. -- And here it is
to be observed, that although the Devil do detain us Captives, yet the price of
our Redemption, viz. The Blood of Christ, was Offered in satisfaction to God,
not to the Devil, etc. Deo satisfactum and expiata sunt peccata nostra. Dr.
Davenant on Colos. 1.14.


Neonom. Arg. 3. By the opposite Error the Elect would have been discharged if
Christ had never risen again.


Antinom. We excepted against this Quirk before, as if any Man understood not
by laying Sin on Christ, all things that concern the satisfaction to be made;
speaking of things by Synechdoches and Metonimy's as the Scripture does,
mentioning sometimes the Blood of Christ, sometimes his Body, for all the
satisfaction of Christ by Sufferings, and by Metonymies the Cross of Christ for
his Sufferings on the Cross. Secondly, Christ's Satisfaction had never been
completed if he had never rose from the Dead, and then we had been still in
our Sins, 1 Cor. 15. and 1 Pet. 1.3.

But let your Supposition go, (though no such thing is to be supposed) make
what you can of it; and observe, I pray, was not the Sins of Believers under
the Law Actually taken away before Christ either Dyed or Rose again? I say if a
Creditor do accept of an Insolvent Person for Paymaster, and Cancel the
Debtor's Bond, the said Creditor cannot recover his Debt of the Principal,
though it may affright him, fearing it is not Cancelled; there is nothing truer
than that the Handwriting of the Law that was against us, which was contrary
to us, was taken away and Nailed to the Cross, Col. 2.14. Dr. Davenant after a
long Explanation of the Text, says, In all these words this one thing is
showed, that by virtue of the Passion of Christ dying upon the Cross, the
Damning Power of the Moral Law was taken away, and all the Rites of the
Ceremonial Law were at once abrogated. The Handwriting of the Law bound us to
Obedience, and bound us over to Punishment for Nonperformance thereof; Christ
therefore our Surety, by performing that exact Obedience which the Law
required, and undergoing the Punishment which the Law exacted of the Violators
thereof, did that which we were bound unto by this Handwriting; and so blotted
out the Handwriting, for the Blood of him being shed who was without spot, the
Handwriting of all faults are blotted out, as Augustine says, Christ was made
in subjection to the Law, that he might redeem them that are subject to the
Law, Gal. 4.4, 5. Dr. Davenant on the place. He adds,

But that is to be observed, this Handwriting may be said to be blotted out
two ways. 1. Quoad Deum, as to God, Vniversaliter and Sufficienter, Universally
and Sufficiently, because there is such satisfaction given to God by the Blood
of Christ; because that Handwriting of the Law cannot be exacted of any as
Debtors, when they fly by Faith to this Redeemer, but he must absolve them. 2.
Particulariter and efficaciter, Particularly and efficaciously, when it is
actually blotted out from the Consciences of Individual Faithful ones who do
apprehend Christ by Faith, [and he follows the true Spiritual sense of this
Scripture most Evangelically, I choose to give the Sum of it, because it
decides the whole Point in Controversy most excellently,] according to that of
the Apostle, Romans 5.1. A Man in Debt cannot have Peace so long as he sees he
owes more Money than he can pay, and sees he is bound in a Bond under his Hand
to the payment thereof; but as soon as any Person apprehends Christ by Faith;
immediately the Handwriting is Cancelled [in his view] and he enjoys blessed
peace of Conscience. Here Paul excellently resolves the Case of doubting
Consciences by an admirable kind of Gradation; not content with what he had
said in the former Verse, all your Sins are forgiven; but he adds, the very
Handwriting is Cancelled; but it may be said, Happily not so blotted out but a
new Suit may arise, he subjoyns therefore e medio sublatum, it is taken out of
the way; but it may be said again, it may be it is kept and hid, and hereafter
may be produced; yea, says the Apostle it is Nailed to the Cross, Cruci
affixum, it is Cancelled, torn in Pieces and Nailed to the Cross; this he
says, we ought to believe; not only that Christ has deserved the blotting out
of this Handwriting, but that it is even Actually blotted out as to our selves
in particular.

I think Sir, now I need say no more of this Debate, seeing I have given you
the Opinion of the Learned Dr. and of whose Opinion I know you are in the Point
of Universal Redemption; and I believe your other Arguments are here Answered.


Neonom. I will allege them for all that.

Arg. 4. If taking Sins of the Elect, and laying them on Christ was their
discharge, they would be discharged before the Sufferings and Death of Christ,
etc. D. W. p. 18.


Antinom. This Argument is as it were the same with the former, and admits the
same Answer. And would it be so absurd to say a Believer may be discharged
before the Death of Christ, were not the Faithful under the Old Testament
discharged before the Death of Christ? We say, when the Charge of Sin is taken
off from one and laid upon another, there is a discharge real in one sense or
another. Generaliter; but not particulariter; here is a blotting out of Sin,
quoad Deum, though not quoad Conscientiam. Christ took away Sin by way of
Suretiship before he did it Actually, and so the Faithful before his Coming
were saved.


Neonom. If this Error hold, the Gospel Notion of Forgiveness by the Blood of
Christ is destroyed. D. W. p. 19.


Antinom. You mean I suppose if this be Truth; No, It confirms Gospel
Forgiveness by the Blood of Christ; but prove that it destroys it.


Neonom. Forgiveness denotes a Person guilty; it is a Judicial Act of God as
Rector Acting by a Gospel Rule.


Antinom. The Apostle says, He justifies by free Grace through the Redemption
of Christ, that he may appear just also, in so doing, because his Justice is
satisfied. He shows God justifies sitting on a Throne of Grace; Grace is the
Impulsive Cause so far as it consists in the Pardon of a Sinner; but it is
through the Righteousness of Christ to show forth his Righteousness, and in
forgiving in and through the Righteousness of Christ; he has the high
concurrence of Justice therein, that as he is a Gracious Justifier, so he is
justified as Righteous by doing it in this way; and whereas you say, It Is a
Judicial Act of God, Acting by a Gospel Rule; I think you should rather say, It
is a Gracious Act of God Acting according to the Rules of Justice therein; for
so the Apostle clearly describes it, Romans 3.24, 25.

And methinks you turn my Stomach to hear you give so pitiful, a low and mean
Title to God as a Rector, (as if he were but a Mayor of a Corporation, or some
little Earthly Prince.)


Neonom. And this supposes the full and perfect Atonement made by Christ, and
the Grant made in Virtue thereof.


Antinom. What have we been Disputing about all this while? I am glad to see
Mr. Neonomian's Ingenuity, that now he grants all we Dispute about, only
differs in naming a thing; you say the Atonement of the Wrath of God by Christ
for Sinners (which is in my sense Fundamentally and Really Pardon quoad Deum)
is full, complete and perfect; and that Forgiveness supposes it, and the Grant
made in the Virtue thereof; if you had said, it had been the Grant made in the
virtue thereof, I take it you had spoken your own sense fuller, than to say it
supposes the Grant made in the virtue thereof; unless you mean the Grant made
to Christ as our Representative, which comes more to our sense; but let these
Mistakes in Expression pass.

You seem to distinguish between a Discharge and a Discharge, so do we; you
distinguish between an accepted Atonement for us, and giving out the Grant and
Patent to us, and so do we; between Impetration and Application, and so do we;
between Forgiveness in foro Dei, and Forgiveness in foro Conscientiae, or
Evangelii; but as to that first I find you do not Love to call it Forgiveness,
though you think it carries the Nature of Forgiveness in it; why should you
represent me as such an Heretic, to scare People from my Ministry upon the
mere naming a thing, by a word which by your own terms contain the Nature and
Substance.


Neonom. But Forgiveness supposes a Person Guilty.


Antinom. Christ's bearing Sin supposes all the World is become Guilty before
God, and the Elect as well as others; and therefore he became a Propitiation
for Sin to God, that we who are by Nature under the Law, and thereby Condemned
as Children of Adam, and in our own Consciences, and thereby guilty, might
receive Forgiveness of Sins, or an Atonement (both signifying the same thing)
by believing. A Man is reus quoad Deum, and reus quoad Ministrationem Legis in
Conscientia; and in this sense shut up under the Law till Faith comes, and then
is his Personal and Particular Discharge through the Blood of Christ; and this
last I apprehend to be the Justification by Faith, which the Apostle Paul
speaks so frequently of; neither do I say that this or that Man has any part
in Christ or Pardon, any more than in Election and Redemption, till he does
believe.


Neonom. But you are of Opinion a Person is never guilty.


Antinom. I never had any such Opinion, if you distinguish right concerning
Guilt.


Neonom. You say Man, that Sins were laid on Christ before we were Born, and
therefore never upon us.


Antinom. How old are you? Was not Christ's Death and Suffering almost 1700
years ago? And do you not say Sins were laid then on Christ; and if they were
then laid on Christ, they cannot return to us in the sense as they were taken
off from us; and therefore they are never upon us in the same manner as they
are on those that are not Elect, and this must be in respect of Guilt
quodamodo, some kind of guilt; distinguish then of guilt, there is guilt in
respect of the Righteous Judgment of God in foro Dei; and guilt that
accompanies the Letter of the Law setting in with our Consciences, and in that
sense the Law works Wrath. Sins were laid upon Christ, and they lie upon us,
but not both in the same Manner, nor for the same End.


Neonom. A Judicial Act by a Rule there is none.


Antinom. What your new terms of Art mean, I will not trouble my self, my
Scheme, as you term it, of Justification, imports that God graciously pardons
in a way of Manifestation of his Justice, and all God's Acts are according to
the Rule of his good Pleasure, and Will, and that is enough.


Neonom. For the Gospel Grant of Pardon is not to the Elect as Elect; but as
penitent Believers, neither is the Atonement of Christ supposed to our
Forgiveness.


Antinom. Pardon as to the Nature of it belongs to Sinners, as such, and eo
nomine; Faith and Penitency is given together with Remission of Sins; and how
can you have the Face to say, I do not suppose Atonement in Forgiveness, or
belonging to it, when it is upon that account that you have fell so foully upon
me, because you think I lay too great a stress on Atonement, and give too much
to it in Forgiveness.


Neonom. You own the laying of our Sins on Christ before the making of
Atonement; and without our Sins lay on Christ, he could not justly be punished.


Antinom. And do not you own that it is first in Nature to making Atonement, and
how could Christ be justly punished without he had the Merit upon him either by
his own Sins, or by the Sins of others; but I find you own a Man may be justly
punished that deserves it in no sense whatever.


Neonom. So that our Discharge being a transferring of Sin from us to Christ,
and this being done before Christ made Atonement, we are discharged not for the
Atonement of Christ, nor by any Act of Forgiveness for the sake of this
Atonement; I need not add, that by this Notion Heathens may be in a pardoned
State, and there is no need of the Gospel or Knowledge of Christ to bring them
out of a state of Wrath.


Antinom. I hope by this time you have pretty well spent your Powder and Ball.

I told you before, when we spoke of laying Sins on Christ, we understand his
offer to bear them, the Charge and Imputation laid on him, and the payment he
made of our Debt, all which is the Atonement; for bearing of our Sins was an
Essential part of it, as shedding his Blood was of the Payment; this payment
and bearing Sin was in the Eye of God from Eternity as if already done; hence
the Patriarchs were Actually and Personally Justified by it; and does it follow
that they were Justified without Christ's Atonement? And whereas you talk of
God's Acts of Forgiveness, you should tell us what you mean; if Immanent,
there is but one Act of Forgiveness, there is no new Acts arise in God, and it
was the Promise of Eternal Life before the World began, Tit. 1. If you mean a
Transient Act, it is but one, viz. the performance of that Promise to Christ our
Surety and Head, and to us in him, Virtually and Fundamentally, 1 John 5.11.
This is the Record that he has given us Eternal Life, and this Life is in his
Son; and from him derived to us, terminates in and upon us by the same
Effectual Grace of God in Christ toward us; so that the same Forgiving Act of
God terminates in Christ and in us, and therefore you must allow our Life of
Forgiveness first in Christ, and then bestowed upon us in and through him,
whereby we are as Sinners brought in to him, and receive of his fullness both
for Justifying and Sanctifying Grace.

Whereas you say, Heathens by this Notion may be in a pardoned state; you foist
in another term to impose upon us, as if we had said, that immediately upon
laying Sins on Christ, all the Elect were in a pardoned state; there is none can
be in a pardoned state before a being natural, nor before a being Spiritual at
least beginning; but what hinders but that the Eternal Life which is given me,
should be in Christ before I was Born, and inferrs not that therefore when I
come into the World there will be no need of Gospel or Knowledge of Christ to
bring me out of my Natural Estate into Christ? See Colos. 1.25, 26, 27. Ephesians.
3.3, 4, 5, 6. And are not Gentiles as well as Jews pardoned through Christ?


Neonom. The Assemblies at Westminster and the Savoy are both against you.


Antinom. They say in a manner but as we do, if you distinguish between a
Forgiveness in Christ and Forgiveness bestowed, between Impetration and
Application, Justification and Justified.


Neonom. I will show you your mistake, Mr. Antinomian; because it was God's Act
to appoint Christ to suffer for our Sins, that we might in his way and time be
discharged, therefore you think we are immediately discharged by that Act.


Antinom. You take greatly upon you, to tell what I think, and makes me think
contrary to what I have expressed; you take upon you to make me speak what you
please, and to think what you please; I take you to be a fit Man to be a Guide;
was there nothing but God's appointing Christ to suffer for our Sins? was there
not God's accepting of his Sufferings for us? Was not Christ Justified from the
Sins of the Elect? for when he rose, was there not a Radical Justification of
all the Elect in Christ? If there had not been so, they could never have been
personally Justified: but you would have Christ only purchase our Justification
by something else; but I must believe and say that he wrought out our
Justification, which being in him, is the same that we do partake of; and that
our Discharge is begun and carried on in Christ, and is completed in him, and
received by Faith in his Blood.


Neonom. Because Christ's Atonement is the Sole Meritorious Cause of
Forgiveness; therefore he thinks God suspends not Forgiveness till he works any
thing else in the Soul, which he made requisite to our being Forgiven, though
not as a Meritorious Cause.


Antinom. No, you mean Christ shall have the Honor of being the Meritorious
Cause, but it is that way of Justification intended that Christ has merited,
that though we have broken the Law, and cannot be Justified by it; that a new
way of Justification should be set up, not through his Blood, but by something
else a peculiar qualification that shall make us meet to be forgiven, that
there may be some reason found in the Sinner why he should be forgiven; this is
now the new Divinity to sham off the Satisfaction of Christ from the
Justification of a Sinner; and you think you have been very kind to Christ, to
say, this new Qualifications are not Meritorious Causes, but Christ's Suffering
was, though they must stand afar off and look on upon a Justification by
something else.


Calvinist. I think, as you said, Mr. Antinomian's Ambiguity lies in the word
Discharge, concerning which you must distinguish, there is liberatio in Christo,
and liberatio a Christo; though Mr. Antinomian has abundantly cleared himself,
as to his Intention and Meaning; but you Mr. Neonomian are so harsh in your
Censures, that nothing but the worst Interpretation of his words can be
admitted by you.

My Opinion is, that as Christ bore our Sins by Imputation; so he made full
payment of our Debt, and had a Discharge so far as concerned himself and us,
represented by him and in him; and hence through this Discharge, and the
perfection of the New Nature in freedom from all Original and Actual Sin, and
perfection of all Righteousness, our Eternal Life which God hash given us, is
fully and completely in him both for Grace and Glory. I say fully,
Fundamentally, Originally, and as in a Fountain or Root, and of this fullness we
do receive, even Faith the first Vital Act, and by Faith all discharge in
Justification, and all conformity to him in Sanctification through the
operation of the Spirit of Holiness; so that it was impossible but Christ must
be discharged bearing our common Nature, and standing in our stead; and that we
were in our measure discharged in him; but it is also as impossible that we
should be discharged personally, and in ours, till we had our Personal Beings,
and were first in that State, and under that Wrath in some regard, from which
we were to be delivered, and brought into the New Nature by Reconciliation and
Actual Union on our part, and till then we are Prisoners of the Law, without
God, without Hope, Aliens to the Covenant of Promise.

This account I trust may give both satisfaction, and I think it is that which
is generally received as the Truth of the Gospel by the Orthodox. I think those
Testimonies, Mr. Neonomian, brought for your Extreme, do all in a manner say as
I have said, they do not so deny the discharge of the Elect before believing,
as to deny Christ's discharge, and the Elects in him, so far as they were
capable, nor do they assert our discharge in Christ so as to affirm our
Personal discharge before Faith.

The Assembly says thus, The Lord Jesus Christ by his perfect Obedience and
Sacrifice of himself, which he through the Eternal Spirit once offered up to
God, has fully satisfied the Justice of his Father, and purchased not only
Reconciliation, but an Everlasting Inheritance in the Kingdom of Heaven, for
all those which the Father has given to him. Assembl. Confess. c. 8. 5. [Here
are two things that Christ has done, satisfied for our Sins, and over above
purchased a great Estate, he could not have done the latter had he not done the
former; and he has the Grant or Covenant Deeds in his Hands; the Lambs Book of
Life wherein the Names of all that are given him are Recorded and Enrolled; and
this is Life which he now has the dispensation of in his due time through the
Gospel; and therefore they further say, VIII. To all those to whom Christ has
purchased Redemption, he does certainly and effectually apply and communicate
the same, etc.] The Catechism and Savoy Confession say the same in effect in
every thing; and so does Dr. Owen.

When the Lord Christ dyed for us, and offered himself a Propitiatory
Sacrifice, God laid all our Sins on him, Isa. 53.6. 1 Pet. 2.24. Then he
suffered in our stead, and made full satisfaction for all our Sins, as appears,
Heb. 9.26. c. 10.14. He whose Sins were not Actually and Absolutely satisfied
for in that one Offering of Christ, shall never have them Expiated unto
Eternity; -- Notwithstanding this plenary satisfaction, yet all Men continue
equally to be Born by Nature Children of Wrath -- Dr. Owen of Justification,
305 [This old Nature Christ never Purchased and Redeemed, but intended always
to pull down and destroy, for the whole Nature is under Wrath; and we cannot be
in a state of Life till we be in the New Nature, and be Created in Christ
Jesus.] What the Lord Jesus Christ paid for us, is as truly paid as if we had
paid it our selves; -- And what he underwent and suffered, he underwent and
suffered in our stead; but yet the Act of God in laying our Sins on Christ,
conveyed no Actual Right and Title to us, [ i. e. immediately, for all our
Actual Right is founded on it, and flows from it,] therefore he adds,] They are
not immediately thereon, nor by virtue thereof ours, or esteemed ours,
[personally and in possession] because God has appointed something, not only
Antecedent thereunto, but the Means thereof; viz. Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness to us.

I shall add the state of the Question how the Learned Dr. Pride. states the
Question de satisfact. D. Pride. Praelect. 19. p. 297. de satisfact. Christi.

Vtrum Christus filius Dei and B. Virginis Justitiae Divinae [non commutativae
sed distributivae and Judiciali, tam premiativae quam vindicativae] vere h. e.
non praecario, impetrative, tantum aut metaphorice, sed, reipsa, meritorie and
integre, non omittendo aliquid qui stricto Jure fieri debuit, satisfecerit tam
agendo quam patiendo quicquid saluti nostri erat requisitum. Hic affirmamus
Orthodoxi cum nostris Art. 31. oblique negant Papiculae, and subdole
labefactant Remonstrantes. Sed (...) quasi (...) aperte, and toto Impetu
oppugnant Anabaptistae, Familistae, and hisce omnibus Acutiores and Astutiores
Sociniani, hanc positionem confirmat variis Argumentis Irrefrigabilibus, and
adversariorum objectionibus responsa dedit.

Christ satisfied the Justice of God, not Commutative but Distributive, and
Judicial, as well Remunerative as Vindicative, not Precariously, or by way of
Impetration only, or Metaphorically, but Really, Meritoriously, and Fully, not
omitting any thing that in strict Justice ought to be done, whatever was
requisite to our Salvation.

Christ by his Obedience and Death did fully discharge the Debt of all those,
that are thus Justified, and did make a proper, real and full satisfaction to
his Fathers Justice, [ i. e. for all them that should believe.] Assemb.
Confess. c. 11.. 3.

And Mr. Neonomian, I must not forget to tell you that there is nothing more
frequent than for mistaken Men to tell others how much they are mistaken, as
you do tell Mr. Antinomian about the Scapegoat.


Neonom. I say he mistakes the Type of the Scapegoat, because the Scape-Goats
carried their Sins into the Wilderness, who expressed Faith and Repentance by
laying Hands on it, and confessing Sin, therefore the Sins of Men are taken
away by Christ while they continue Impenitent and Unbelieving.


Calvinist. You may see how in this matter you speak after the Socinian, for
they give this Interpretation of this Type; for though the Confession of Sin
over the Head of the Scapegoat or Sacrifice, did hold forth Faith and
Repentance, yet there is a difference between an Act Typifying God's Imputation
of Sin unto Christ, and an Act testifying our Faith concerning God's Imputation
of Sin to Christ. Norton against Pinch, p. 49. So Ainsworth, There Is nothing
more plainly holds forth Christ's bearing away our Sins to be remembered no
more. So Dr. Pride. Quemadmodum etiam Hircus iste Azazel sive Emisso^is, habuit
imposita super caput ipsis populi peccata, Levit. 16.21, 22. Haud aliter
Christo contigit, quem proposuit Deus, (...), ipsius, Romans 3.25. Pride. de
satisf.

As that Azazel or Scapegoat had the Sins of the People laid on his Head, and
so was sent into the Wilderness, Lev. 16.21, 22. so Christ was dealt with, whom
God set forth for a Propitiation through Faith in his Blood, to show forth his
Righteousness, Romans 3.25. which those Sacrifices did manifestly point out
(however they fell short in themselves) yet in relation to the Antitype they
were not only Expiatory but also Satisfactory, whence the satisfaction wrought
by the Antitype is the more strongly argued. Praelect. de satisf.

Mr. Norton. We may distinguish between the being of Justification, and being
Justified, between Justification in the Abstract, and Justified the Concrete;
that being without the receiving Subject; this considered, together with the
receiving Subject, viz. the Believer's Justification considered in the Abstract
Sense, and in it self (in which sense it signifies Remission of Sins and
Righteousness to Acceptance prepared, though not yet conferred on the Elect)
has before Faith a Being, not only in the purpose of God, but also in the
Covenant between the Father and the Son, and the Mediator, and in the purchase
of Christ; this truth held forth in the Gospel makes the object of Faith, and
thus the Object is before the Act. Orthod. Evan. p. 214, 215.

Mr. Perkin's speaks, Christ is first Justified, Acquit of our Sins, and we
Justified in him. On Gal. 3.16.

Dr. Ames. Our Freedom or Discharge [liberatio nostra] from Sin and Death was
not only determined in the Decree, but also granted and communicated to us in
Christ before it is perceived by us, Romans 5.10, 11. Medul. c. 24.

The sentence of Justification was conceived in the Mind of God by the Decree
of Justifying, Gal. 3.8. 2. It was pronounced in Christ our Head when risen
from the Dead, 2 Cor. 5.19. 3. It Is vertually pronounced from the first
relation, which results from Faith wrought in the Heart, Romans 8.1.14. 4. This
Sentence is expressly pronounced by the Spirits witnessing with our Spirits our
Reconciliation to God, Romans 5.5. C. 1. C. 27.. 9.

Mr. Rutherford. There is a Justification in the Mind of God Eternal, and a
Justification in time terminated in the Conscience of a Believer, Exercit.
Apologet. per gratia, p. 45. He wrote against the Antinomian; and therefore
this Testimony you have no pretense to refuse.

Dr. Twiss speaks, and says, The Righteousness of Christ was ours before we
did believe, ours I say in respect of Right; because in the Intention both of
the Father and the Son it was performed for us, though not in respect of
Possession and Enjoyment. Vind. Great. l. 1. p. 2. 25. N. 5. p. 197.


DEBATE IV. Of the Elects ceasing to be Sinners from the time their Sins were
laid on Christ.
Neonom. GEntlemen, now we are come together again as we are wont, to make
Discovery of Truth and Error: I am willing we should be very clear in this
Point of Imputation: For I will assure you, as it is usually understood, I
cannot digest it: It Is the Foundation of this Antinomian Error; therefore I
would propound this following Question to be discussed at this time. Q. Whether
the Elect cease to be Sinners from the time their Sins were laid upon Christ?


Calvin. This Question is the same with the last, and it is resolved in the
Resolution of that, viz. So far as the Elect are discharged by the Satisfaction
of Christ, so far they cease to be Sinners.


Neonom. You are mistaken, it is not the same Question; there is difference
between being discharged of Sin in a way of Justification, and ceasing to be
Sinners in respect of Sanctification.


Calvin. Ay, if that be your Meaning: Do you charge Mr. Antinomian with that
Error, That the Elect never sinned since Sin was laid on Christ?


Neonom. Ay, that I do, and will make good my Charge too.


Calvin. Say you so; then I have no more to say. Mr. Antinomian, answer for
your self.


Antinom. He says what he pleases of me; for he has a^ inveterate Spirit
against me: However, I am willing to hear ^^at he says. I pray, Sir, declare
your Charge in express Terms, that you will not start from, and then prove it.


Neonom. I must premise some things first, and then tell you, what is Truth,
that you may the better know the Error, and judge of it.


Antinom. I had rather you would fall downright upon the Error; for your way
is to make long Speeches and Explications of things, that others know as well
as you. --


Calvin. Pray let him take his own way; sometimes the furthest way about is the
nearest way home, they usually say.


Neonom. I premise two things. The First, That Men are Sinners, or not Sinners
in diverse respects. 2. As to the Filth or Obliquity of Sin, with respect to
this they are more or less Sinners, according to the Degree of their Innocence
and Holiness D. W. p. 22.


Antinom. There is nothing in Sin but is Filth and Obliquity; God looks upon it
all as so, as it stands in opposition both to Justification and Sanctification,
and it consists in it is Contrariety to the Moral Rectitude of the Law, and the
Duty required by it; where there is no Law there is no Sin: Those Actions that
are gross Sins in Men, are no Sins in Bruits, because they are not under a
Moral Law. And for Degrees of Innocence I know none, though there be of
Holiness.


Neonom. 2. With some as to the Guilt of Sin, which refers to the Sanction of
the Law against Offenders; with respect to this, the Offenders are more or less
Sinners, as they are forgiven or not forgiven.


Antinom. With some! What mean you by that some? I judge they are Neonomians by
the Glimpse you give of them. You say the Guilt of Sin is no more than this,
that a Man is bound over to be punished whether right or wrong; and a poor
Creature that is tried for Murder is guilty, because he is to be hanged. I
thought always that he was obliged to be hanged because he was guilty; and if
the Law finds not the Fault upon him, he is never guilty. Is it Sense to say, a
Man is guilty? being Whipped, Burnt in the Hand, or being Hanged, never: unless
he hang himself. Obligation to Punishment, or the Punishment it self, is no
Sin, it is but an Effect of it founded in the Law. I do not understand more or
less Sinners in respect of Guilt, as forgiven or not forgiven; for in the sense
of Guilt, whether the Fault be more or less, Forgiveness takes all off, and all
Sinners stand equally upon that account before God. A Believer here on Earth is
as fully forgiven as a Saint in Heaven. Justification admits not of Degrees.
But it may be you distinguish Sinners in respect of Guilt, into Forgiven and
not Forgiven, as Men are more eminently Sinners before Justification than after.


Neonom. As to the Charge of the Fact, which was sinful, neither
after-Sanctification nor Pardon will deliver a Transgressor from having been a
Sinner; the Fact was his.


Antinom. I told you already the Charge of any one with sinful Fact, which the
Party had done, makes him guilty, it is a Fault; and tho it be true, that the
Physical Act clothed with it is moral Pravity was done by him, yet God forbid
that Pardon and imputed Righteousness should not deliver him from being a
Transgressor. I pray, Is David now a Murderer, and Noah a Drunkard? You would
seem to speak some great Thing, but you thought safest to change the Tense, and
say, from having been.


Neonom. The first and last denominate a Man a Sinner most properly.


Antinom. i.e. The Filth of Sin, and the charge of a sinful Fact; and they are
near a Kin; for a sinful Fact is Filth, and the Filth of Sin is a sinful Fact;
and that is a Fault, and a Fault charged and proved, or confessed, is Guilt; so
that it is Fault or Guilt (for they are reciprocal) denominates a Sinner.


Neonom. The Second denominates a Man punishable, but not a Sinner Formally.


Antinom. This 2d is Guilt of Sin, which, say some, is a Relation to the
Sanction of the Law: We say Guilt refers to the preceptive also, and is Fault.
You say, to the Sanction only; and therefore I say, no Sin. You say, the guilty
Person is no Sinner formally. What then, a punishable Creature? Do you mean a
Creature capable of Suffering; so is a Dog, or a Cat, or a Horse: Or do you
mean a Man under a Law? If under a Law, he is not punishable but as a Sinner.
Sin is Subjective formalis ratio poenae, Sin is subjectively the formal Reason
of Punishment: So that a Man must be denominated a Sinner formally, or else he
is not punishable in any way of Justice.


Neonom. In the whole Scheme of your Principles, it is Elect as Elect who cease
to be Sinners. When you speak of Believers, you do not mean that he was a
Sinner before he believed; for you state the time when Christ had his Sins laid
upon him. D. W. p. 23.


Antinom. Believers of great Antiquity, older than Methuselah. But methinks a
Man that would be taken for a great Divine, and one that in tender^ess to
Holiness will rather withold the Truths of the Gospel, and abscond them, lest
Men should take too much liberty thereby to sin: I say, one would think such a
Man should for his Reputation s^ke make Conscience of speaking Truth, and much
more tremble at the Temptation to Bantering, and exposing the great Truths of
the Gospel to Scorn and Reproach. How can you dare to toss, tumble, reproach
and load this great Truth of the Gospel in the very Words of the Holy Ghost,
with all the odious Consequences imaginable? You may value your self as you
please, or other Men may judge of you and your Words as they please; I shall
only desire you to read Job 19.27, 28, 29.


Neonom. Now I will tell you what is the Truth.


Antinom. No, no; I hope we know the Truth. Tell us the Eror you charge me
with, and if there be time, we will hear the Truth afterward.


Neonom. If you are in such haste for it, you shall have it then.


Error. The Elect upon the Death of Christ ceased to be Sinners; and ever
since their Sins are none of their Sins, but are the Sins of Christ; and this I
prove to be your Error from your own Words.

You put this Objection, Must he not be reckoned a Sinner while he does sin? A.
I answer, No: Tho he does Sin, yet he is not to be reckoned a Sinner; but his
Sins are reckoned to be taken away from him, etc. A Man does sin against God;
God reckons not his Sin to be his, he reckons it Christ's, therefore he cannot
reckon it his. Dr. Cr. p. 8.


Antinom. Gentlemen, I would have you observe the things that are Asserted by
Mr. Neonom. (for I beseech you do me Justice) that it appears that I speak
always of the Elect as Elect, and not Believers; and when I mention Believers,
that I do not mean he was a Sinner before he believed. I will read my Discourse
to you taken from me as I delivered it.

Preaching from John 14.6. I was showing Christ was the Way from a State of
Sinfulness -- There is a twofold consideration of Sinfulness, from which
Christ is our Way in a special manner. 1. That which is called the Guilt of
Sin, which is indeed the Fault, or a Persons being Faulty as he is a
Transgressor. Is, 2ly. The Power and over-masterfulness of Sin in Persons:
Christ is the way from both these. 1. From the Guilt of Sin. Christ is the way
from the Guilt of Sin: It is briefly no more but this, to be ^^d of the Guilt
of Sin, viz. Upon Trial to be quitted and discharged from the Charge of Sin
that is laid, or may be laid to him, and to be freed from it: This is for a
Person in Judgment to be pronounced actually innocent, and a just Person, as
having no Sin to be charged on him: This is to be free from the Guilt of Sin. A
Man is not free from a Fault, as long as the Fault is laid to his Charge; and
he is then free, when he is not charged with it -- He is only the way by which
a poor Sinner may be pronounced innocent; and having proved, that Christ is the
way to take away the Guilt of Sin, which, I say, is the Charge of Fault, by
many plain places of Scripture, and by the Type of the Escape Goat: I came to
answer this Objection, But do not those that receive Christ actually, commit
Sin? I answer, Yea, they do commit Sin; and the Truth is, themselves can do
nothing but commit Sin. If a Person that is a Believer has any thing in the
World, he has received that; if he does any thing that is good, it is the
Spirit of God that does it, not he: Therefore he himself does nothing but Sin,
his Soul is a Mint of Sin. Dr. Cr. p. 3. and 8.

Now therefore judge, Gentlemen, whether here I say, the Elect ceased to be
Sinners ever since the Death of Christ: If Sinners after believing, much more
before, in respect of the Indwelling of Sin and Corruption; and do not in this
Sense cease to be Sinners after believing. I went on,

Then you will say, If he does sin, must not God charge it where it is? [all
this while speaking of a Believer] Must he not be reckoned to be a Sinner while
he does sin? A. I answer, No; though he does sin, yet he is not to be reckoned
a Sinner, [i. e. Being a pardoned Believer, God does not reckon him so, and he
ought by Faith to behold all his Sins taken away in Christ] but his Sins are to
be reckoned to be taken away from him. A Man borrows 100 l. some Man will pay
it for him: Does he not owe this 100 l. seeing he borrowed it? I say no, in
case another has paid it for him. A Man does sin against God, God reckons not
his Sin to be his, he reckons it Christ's, therefore he cannot reckon it his,
God has laid it upon Christ. -- 'Thou have sinned, Christ takes it off;
supposing, I say, thou have received Christ. Is this any other Doctrine than
what John teaches? 1 John 1.7, 8. Chap. 2.1, 2. I say, in one respect they are
not Sinners, in another they are Sinners. And is this any other Doctrine than
what the Scripture and all our best Divines teach: Therefore judge ye how
justly now I am charged with this Error.


Neonom. But you said, If thou have part in the Lord Christ [which he thinks
all unbelieving Elect have.] All those Transgressions of thine become actually
the Transgressions of Christ, and so cease to be thine. Dr. C. p. 270.


Antinom. Is it not very unfair dealing for you to impose a wrong meaning upon
my Words, when I express my self so plainly. If thou have received Christ, if
thou have a part in the Lord Christ, who will understand these Expressions, but
of our active receiving and partaking of Christ? though I do speak elsewhere of
our having Benefit by Christ, and a hidden Right in him; and it has an
Influence on us, and we are passive therein before we believe, yet it is not
that I speak of here. I was showing from Isa. 53.6. that Christ is our great
Play Master, and how sad a thing it is to have Sin lying upon our Spirits:
Separate Sin from the Soul, and the Spirit has Rest in the worst conditions --
You will never have quietness of Spirit in respect of Sin, till you have
received this Principle, [ viz. By Faith] that it is Iniquity it self that the
Lord has laid on Christ. Now when I say thus, I mean with the Prophet, that it
is the Fault of the Transgression, etc. -- Reckon up what Sins thou can
against thy self; if thou have part in the Lord [ i. e. by Faith] all these
Transgressions of thine became Christ's, [ i. e. Thou see them laid on
Christ: Not that they were just then laid on Christ when thou believe: I
would think your Divinity is not so gross, as to assert that, but that a
Believer by Faith sees that he is one of those Elect ones, whose Sins were laid
on Christ.] What the Lord beheld Christ to be, that he beholds his Members to
be. -- So that if you would speak of a Sinner, supposing that Person of whom
you speak to be a Member of Christ, [is this speaking of the Elect merely as
the Elect, and no more?] you must not speak of what he manifests, but what
Christ was, page 271. What Unsoundness, I beseech you, is in this Doctrine? I
pray speak, Gentlemen.

The Company generally smiled; but being afraid to displease Mr. Neonomian, and
affrighted at the Name of Antinomian, which Mr. Neonomian called every one that
contradicted him, were silent: But at last a brisk Gentleman, Learned and
Solid, stood up and said, I think you have greatly abused Mr. Antinomian, and
charged him unrighteously, both in your misrepresenting him, and in your
charging him with Error and False Doctrine in the things alleged against him.
For, says he, I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, though I see some of
my Brethren here seem to be so, that will not speak for the Truth when they
hear a Man of Confidence run it down. I say and affirm, that he that has a
part in Christ, is confidently to believe that Christ bore his Sin in his Body
o^ the Tree, Tit. 2.14.


Calvin. I pray Mr. Neonomian, give us your Thoughts clearly what you hold, and
what you deny in this Point.


Neonom. I shall tell first what is not in Dispute between us.


Calvin. There Is 100 things are not now in Question before us, I pray you to
cut short, that we may not lose so much time; come to the very Point in
Difference first.


Neonom. You are not capable of understanding it, till I have told you what is
not in Dispute: I Am sure you will mistake the Question, if I tell you not what
the Question is first.

The Difference is not, 1. Whether the pardoned Sinner shall be delivered from
Condemnation. D. W. p. 24.


Antinom. But it is, whether the pardoned Sinner is not delivered from
Condemnation, and that Delivery the Ground and Reason of his Pardon.


Neonom. 2. Nor whether God, for Christ's sake, will deal with a pardoned
Sinner as if he had not been a Sinner.


Antinom. The Question is, Whether God can deal with any one Salva Justitia, as
if he were not a Sinner, and yet be esteemed by him formaliter, and in the just
Sentence of the Law, a Sinner; and whether a pardoned Sinner be in the
righteous Judgment of God a Sinner; and can be a Sinner and not a Sinner at the
same time, and in the same respect.


Neonom. 3. Nor whether Forgiveness does take away Sin as to it is Obligation to
Punishment.


Antinom. If Fault in the Judgment of the Law be made the Obligation to
Punishment, and the Demerit of Sin lies in the Fault, it is a great Question
how the Obligation to Punishment can be taken away, without taking away the
meritorious Cause; and whether if the Obligation to Punishment could be taken
away, without taking away the Sin in the Eye of the Law, whether it were
Forgiveness; for Forgiveness lies formally in taking off the Fault, and but
consequentially in remitting the Punishment.


Neonom. Nor whether the Atonement of Christ, when it is applied in it is full
effects, will perfectly remove all Punishment, and purge away all Filth and
Defilement from the Elect: Each of these I affirm.


Antinom. But it is a Question, whether upon the Atonement of Christ made and
accepted, any of the Elect were punishable for Sin in a way of Vindicative
Justice, even before Faith, much more after? So that the things which are
without Dispute to you, are questionable to us, especially according to your
ambiguous way of expressing them.


Neonom. I shall now acquaint you with the Questions that are in debate betwixt
us.

1. Whether because Christ obliged himself to bear the Satisfactory Puunishment
of our Sins, they did therefore become the Sins of Christ?


Antinom. You state this Question fallaciously. The Question all this while
between us is this, Whether if God laid our Sins upon Christ, (in the way that
he laid them) they did in that way become the Sins of Christ? If you will have
it in the Notion of Christ's bearing Punishment only, it must run thus, If
Christ was obliged to bear, or did bear Satisfactory Punishment, whether or no
our Punishment, or the Punishment due to us did thereby become his? Both these
we affirm.


Neonom. Whether our Sins were pardoned when Christ suffered on the Cross. This
you affirm, and I deny.


Antinom. I affirm it in my own Sense, but deny it in your false and imposed
Senses.


Neonom. Whether even they that are Members of Christ, yet if they do sin, are
they Transgressors and Sinners, and are the Sins they commit their Sins? This
you deny, and I affirm.


Antinom. This Question, as you you state it, I both affirm and deny; because
in one Sense a Man must be a Transgressor, in another none. But the Question,
Whether the Members of Christ while Sin remains, are Sinners, and in the sight
of God do stand fully justified from all Sin? This I affirm.


Neonom. One would think this needed no Proof, whether he that does a sinful
Fact be a Doer of it.


Antinom. It needs no Proof, I always own it to be so. I tell you, the Saints
commit Sin, and are therefore the Doers of it; and I have told you, it is all
that they can do of themselves, and that it is my Sin, my sinful Fact; and yet
my Debt that I contracted may become another Man's, if he engages for it.


Neonom. Christ teaches Believers to pray for the Pardon of Sins, Luke 11.4.


Antinom. So they had need, for Sins are pardoned when they have it not, and
it is to them as if they were not pardoned at all, if they have not the Comfort.


Neonom. It would be vain to object, they pray for manifestation of Pardon.


Antinom. Why in vain? Is it any more that a true Believer can pray for? For he
sees and knows all his Sins are pardoned, but yet continues to pray for a
further manifestation of Pardon. Did not David tell us what it is, Psalm. 1.10.
Restore to me the Joy of thy Salvation.


Neonom. For were it so, yet it is for our Sins; it would sound strange to
pray, Forgive us the Sins of Christ.


Antinom. Yes, we pray for the Pardon of our Sins that were laid on Christ; and
though we do not pray to forgive us the Sins of Christ, yet we pray to God to
forgive us for the sake of Christ, whose bearing of Sin and Satisfaction
wrought, we always plead believing. But you will banter Christ's bearing Sins.


Neonom. The Saints in Scripture esteemed them their Sins, and themselves
Sinners, when they committed Sin, and found it is Motions, Jer. 14.7. Isa.
59.12. Job 7.21. Psalm. 25.11. D. W. p. 25.


Antinom. So do we, though they and we ought to acknowledge Sin always in Faith
of the pardoning mercy of God in Christ; we should ask Pardon in Faith, nothing
doubting; but sometimes there may be but weak Faith, next to none, in God's
Children, and great Doubtings, and therefore great Guilt lying upon their
Consciences, and from thence great Darkness in times of Temptation. Thence did
flow those Pathetical Expressions of many of the Faithful from God's hiding of
his Face, and the Weakness of their Faith, as if they were reprobated ones, and
cast away; and so it is even now sometimes: And though we believe Christ has
born our Sins, yet this is the greatest Ground of true Gospel-brokenness of
Heart, that they were our Sins, and are now the Product of corrupt Flesh, the
Old Man remaining in us, which we labor under, endeavoring to get more and
more into Christ by a strong Faith, that the Body of Sin, the Source of
Corruption in us, may be destroyed: Therefore Repentance and Godly Sorrow is
exercised even for our Sins laid on Christ


Neonom. 3. God reckons Sins to be their own; he reproves them, he forgave
them, 1 John 2.12. Jer. 33.8. Rev. 2.20. Rev. 3.19. 2 Timothy 4.16. D. W. p. 26.


Antinom. Sins are Sins, and our Sins, (we have said it again and again) and
therefore reprovable in us, and to be forgiven in us by the Application of
Pardon: All this hinders not, but that we be without Fault before God, and our
Sins cast behind his Back, we have a Perfection and Fullness of Pardon and all
Grace in Christ Jesus, though Sin it self was never reconciled to God; and
therefore God sets us to the killing of it; Christ destroyed Sin on the Cross,
as to the obstructing God's complete Love to the Persons of the Elect; so that
it cannot condemn before God; but it is Sin Yet in the Elect, and will accuse
and condemn wherever it is, or at least the Law will by Reason of it, and
therefore it has it is Influence this way sometimes on the Holiest Men. It Is in
the Nature of Sin to condemn, but God does not condemn for Sin; though he
condemns Sin daily in the holiest Men, and through Unbelief they are apt to
think their Persons condemned of God himself. When God denounces Judgment
against a sinful Church or Nation, they are ordinarily, hypocritical, profane
and Apostate, and therefore a mixed People, many or most under a Covenant of
Works, and a People in their Sins, which God awakens by Threatenings or
Judgments themselves; and therefore the places quoted by you affect us not. The
Force of your arguing lies here. Those Sins that God calls our Sins, and we
ought to call our Sins, are not laid on Christ and taken away; but God calls
Sins our Sins, and we ought to call them so, Ergo.

The Major is utterly false: For all places that we bring to prove, that Sin
was laid on Christ, do call them our Sins; and we speak of them as such, and
it is cause of Abasement in our selves, and thankful Admiration of the Free
Grace of God in Christ, and so the Church acknowledge their Sins, Jer. 14.7, 8.
Isa. 59.12, 16, 17.


Neonom. Mark what will follow hence: No Elect Members of a Church are justly
censured for Offenses, and no Christian Criminal could be punished; for they
are not the Sinners, the Sin is not theirs.


Antinom. It is a shame to hear a Mininister argue in this manner: Your
Argument runs thus; If the Sins of the Elect were laid on Christ by Imputation,
then no Church or Court of Judicature can proceed to condemn an Offender, Ergo.
Baculus stat in Angulo, ergo pluit. Does Man see and judge as God does? Is
there no difference between Forum Divinum and Humanum, Ecclesiastic and Civil;
the Law before Man, and his Administration of it, knows no difference of
Persons, it proceeds secundum allegata and probata: Churches censures is in
order to a Justification before the Church, that by Faith and Repentance it may
appear, that God has forgiven such an one, that he belongs to Electing and
Redeeming Grace, and the Sinners Sin laid on Christ; and when they find that,
they are soon reconciled to an offending Member. And you say, If Sins were laid
on Christ, no Christian Criminal can be punished. A very sad Case indeed; for
then any Criminal condemned justly by Man's Law, can never be saved: For if
Christ bore not his Sins, he cannot be pardoned; nay, may not a Godly Man,
through Temptation, fall into a Crime whereby he may justly suffer in Foro
humano; and does this hinder his Salvation by Christ? And is it an Argument his
Sins were never laid on Christ? Are not these consistent, a Sinner and
condemned by Man's Law, and an absolved Sinner by the satisfied Law of God? Was
not the converted Thief a Sinner justly condemned by Man, though absolved by
God, because Christ bore his sins on the Cross; and if he had repented before
he had been hanged on the Cross, would it have freed him from Man's Sentence.
Satisfaction to God's Law is not to Man's, nor Satisfaction to Man's is not to
God's. Men stay not Execution of a Malefactor because he repents to Salvation;
but Man's Law must take it is course upon him. I doubt not but the Ordinary of
Newgate can teach you better Divinity than this. A Man may be in one respect
guilty, and in another not: And so likewise God deals with his Children two
ways, in case of their eminent Falls, in a way of his common Providential
Government of the World, in foro mundi, as he dealt with David, that those
Evils of Affliction (Judgments in the Apprehension of the Men of the World)
should befall them; and so in the Participation of external, common Calamities,
there should not be any manifest difference between them and other Men.
Therefore the Wise Man says, That Love and Hatred is not known by these
things. But notwithstanding all this, the other and certain way of God's
dealing with them, is according to the Covenant of Grace, which is the Secret
of the Lord: he fully pardons their Sins, is reconciled to them in Christ, will
never leave or forsake them, his Loving Kindness shall not depart from them,
and all things shall work together for their good.


Neonom. An Hundred such Consequences naturally proceed from this Error, which
fully tends to render Sin and Sinners Innocent: Not to say what Popery is in
it, as if Justification did remove the Filth of Sin.


Antinom. By such consequent Drawers as you are, who will charge the greatest
Truths of the Gospel with any Absurdities that are forged by carnal Reason.

As for danger of Popery, where is most, in Justification by Free Grace, or
Works? And when you make it appear that Justification does not take away the
Guilt of Sin, then you shall convince me, it takes not away Filth in that
respect: For I take no greater Filth to be in Sin than Guilt, and that which is
the Fountain of all other Filth that is in it, or produced by it, causes the
inherent Macula.

And whereas you say, the Doctrine of laying Sins on Christ, tends to make Sin
and Sinners innocent. To make Sin innocent is a contradiction; Sin is never
made no Sin, though the Sinner may be made no Sinner in a Gospel Sense, and your
Position is dangerous.


Neonom. I will show the Grounds of your Mistake: You think, because God
removes our Sins by Pardon, so as to acquit us from Punishment, therefore our
Sins cease to be ours. D. W. p. 27.


Antinom. That is no Pardon to acquit only from Punishment, if the Fault
remain, so that the Person is under the Charge of it. 2. Remitting of
Punishment only does not discharge us from Sin. 3. Sin imputed to Christ, is
not imputed to us: It Is a Contradiction to say, that it is in the same respect;
and yet we say, it was our Sins imputed to Christ, and so it is still. We say
not, they are not ours imputed to Christ, but they are ours by Commission, and
his by Imputation.


Neonom. Because a pardoned Sinner is discharged from Condemnation, therefore
you think that Person is not to be denominated a Sinner from the Violation of
the Precept.


Antinom. Pardon discharges from the Fault it self, and forgives it, or else
it is no Pardon. A Man may many ways escape Punishment, and not have the Fault
pardoned. He that is pardoned is no Sinner in the Eye of the Law, but we call
him a pardoned Sinner; and such an one ought by Faith to look upon himself as
perfectly righteous before God.


Neonom. Because Christ took upon him to make Satisfaction for Sin, therefore
he thinks no Filth can cleave to the Offender, nor he be a Transgressor by the
Offense.


Antinom. You know I do not think so; for you know I said, a Believer of
himself can do nothing but sin. And do not you contend with me for saying, Our
very Righteousness is Sin, polluted and unclean: And you know my Meaning is,
that we are pe^fect and complete in Christ; in our selves all things are
polluted and unclean: And I take this to be very sound Divinity. I will tell
yau what Luther says.

There is no more Sin, Death or Malediction, since Christ now reigns; we
daily confess also in the Creed of the Apostles, which we say: We believe there
is an Holy Church, which is indeed nothing else but as if we should say, I
b^lieve there is no Sin, no Malediction, no Death in the Church of God. F^r
they (...) do believe in Christ are no Sinners, are not guilty of Death, but
are holy and righteous, Lords over Sin and Death, and living for ever. But
Faith only sees this; for we say, I believe there is an Holy Church. Luth. on
Gal. 3.14.

Obj. If thou will believe Reason and thine own Eyes, thou will judge clean
contrary; for thou see many things in the Godly which offend thee, they fall
into Sin, are weak in Faith, subject to Wrath, Envy, and such other Evil
Affections; therefore the Church is not holy.

Answ. I deny the Consequence. If I look upon my own Person, or the Person of
my Brother, it shall never be holy: But if I behold Christ, who has sanctified
and cleansed his Church, then it is altogether holy: For he has taken the Sins
of the whole World: Therefore where Sins are seen and felt, there are they
indeed no Sins. For according to Paul's Divinity, there is no Sin, no Death, no
Malediction any more in the World, but in Christ that is the Lamb of God, that
has taken away the Sins of the World; who is made a Curse, that he might
deliver us from the Curse. Contrariwise, according to Philosophy and Reason,
Sin, Death, and the Curse are no where else but in the World, in the Flesh, or
in Sinners; for as a Sophistical Divine can speak no otherwise of Sin, than
does a Heathen Philosopher: Like as the Color (says he) cleaves to the Wall,
even so does Sin in the World, in the Flesh, and in the Conscience: Therefore
it is to be purged by contrary Operations. But True Divinity teaches, there is
no Sin in the World any more; for Christ, upon whom the Father has cast the
Sins of the World, has vanquished and killed the same in his own Body. He once
dying for Sin, and raised up again, dies no more. Therefore wherever there is
a true Faith in Christ, there is Sin abolished, dead and buried; but where no
Faith in Christ is, there Sin does still remain: And albeit the Remnants of Sin
be still in the Saints, because they believe not perfectly, yet are they dead,
in that they are not imputed unto them, because of Faith in Christ


DEBATE V. Of the Time when our Sins were laid on Christ, and continued there.
Neonom. LET us now discourse about the Time of God's laying our Sins on Jesus
Christ. I take Mr. Antinomian to be unsound in this Point. For he says,

That the Time when our Sins were laid actually on Christ was, when he was
nailed to the Cross, and God actually forsook him, and they continued on him
till the Resurrection. D. W. p. 28.


Antinom. My Words were these, Now there was a pitched Time wherein God did
serve Execution actually upon him, and that was, when God did forsake this Son
of his, when he called him forth, and served Sin upon him as the Desert of
Transgression, when he said, My God, my God, etc. -- Now was the time of
Payment and Satisfying God. Dr. C. p. 356.

I do not say that this was the first time of his bearing Sin, he bore them in
the Garden, and was there sorrowful unto Death, and lay under Soul-sufferings;
but upon the Cross he finished his greatest Sufferings, made payment in full;
and therefore the Apostle Peter ascribes his bearing of Sin mostly to that time
when he was upon the Cross, and under Complaint of the Punishment of Loss,
God's forsaking of him. Besides, I distinguish between the charging Sin on
Christ as our Debt, and the Payment of the Debt; and say, this was the time of
Execution and Payment; though I know you confound bearing Sin as a Debt, and
making Payment: So that you will have Payment made when nothing is due upon any
account. D. W. p. 28.


Neonom. But you say, look upon the Execution, or rather the serving the
Execution, i. e. the actual laying of Iniquity on Christ: This Iniquity was
laid upon him at that instant when he was upon the Cross, and God nailed the
Sins of Men to the Cross of Christ, and from that time there was not one Sin to
be reckoned, etc. Dr. Cr. p. 357.


Antinom. You should have rehearsed a little more: You are only for exposing me
as much as may be, and therefore will not rehearse my whole Sense.

I said, From that time there was not one Sin to be reckoned to Believers, who
are the Members of Christ, or to Christ himself, he having then made
Satisfaction, and upon it given out to the World, It is finished. What was
finished? It was the Payment of the Price so long looked for, the utmost
Farthing laid down. It is proper to say, Payment is made, when it is finished.
Dr. Cr. p. 357.


Calvin. Pray, Sir, from what Time do you date the laying of Sins on Christ?


Neonom. The Obligation of Sufferings for our Sins was upon Christ, upon his
Undertaking the Office of a Mediator, to the Moment wherein he finished his
Satisfactory Atonement; the Punishment of our Sins lay upon Christ, from the
first moment to the last of his Humiliation. D. W. c. V. p. 28.


Antinom. First then you grant his bearing Sin by way of Obligation from
Eternity, D. W. p. 3. It was a little while ago you charged this for an Error
upon me, that our Iniquities were laid upon Christ by way of Obligation from
all Eternity, though you call it suffering for our Sins; but we say, Sin charged
upon him unto Suffering. And you own Obligation from the first Undertaking his
Mediator's Office, and I take that was from Eternity, and that he was indebted
from thence to the Moment when he finished his Satisfactory Atonement. I think
there is no great Difference between us in these things, provided you do but
grant this Obligation was from the Demerit of our Sins, which necessarily
inferrs the charging our Sins upon him as a Fidejussor or Sponsor, that takes
upon him another's Debt; and you say also, Satisfactory Atonement; wherefore
God was satisfied with the Payment made. Now why must I be dealt so hardly
with, as to be censured for Erroneous, for saying, He was under Obligation to
pay our Debt from Eternity, and stood obliged till he made full Payment by way
of Execution upon the Cross.


Calvin. As to the last part of your Assertion, that the Punishment of our sin
lay upon Christ from the first moment to the last of his Humiliation, it is
false; for tho he was the Lamb of God, in our Nature yet he bore not sin
actually, till he was offered up in Sacrifice, then he was made Sin as a
Sacrifice, and not before.


DEBATE VI. Of God's Separation and Abhorrence of Christ while our Sins lay
upon him.
Neonom. I Shall acquaint you with an Error of a gross nature that Mr.
Antinomian is guilty of, and it is this;


Error. Christ was on the Account of the filthiness of Sin, while they lay
upon him, separate from God, odious to him, and even the object of God's
Abhorrence, and this to the Time of his Resurrection. D. W. p. 31.


Antinom. I pray Sir let us see how far this great Error of your own forging
is Chargeable upon me.


Neonom. I will acquaint these Gentlemen with what you delivered; you said,
Nay, for this I affirm, as Christ did bear our Iniquities, so Christ for that
Iniquity was separated from God, and God was here separated from Christ, or
else Christ spoke Untruth. Dr. C. p. 294.


Antinom. Take my words as they were. Object. Iniquity cannot be laid on
Christ, because it separateth from God; but Christ could not be separated from
God. A. This Objection makes it most manifest that Christ did bear Iniquity;
because in that bearing of Sins there was a separation from God, or else
Christ's Words were not true, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? for
where Iniquity is, there will be a separation from God.

And my Argument stands thus, Where there is a forsaking of God, there is a
separation from God in the sense of sins separation from God; but in Christ's
bearing Sin there was a forsaking of God; Ergo.

Object. It may be this forsaking was but for a little moment. A. It was as
long as Sin was upon him, had not Christ breathed out the Sins of Men that were
upon him, he had never seen God again; he having taken Sin upon him, he must
first unload himself of Sin before he could be brought near to God; therefore
you find that passage in the Psalm 2. Thou art my Son this day have I begotten
thee, Expounded by the Apostle of the Resurrection of Christ, Acts 13.33. As if
the Lord at the Resurrection of Christ did beget his Son a new as it were;
there was a separation and forsaking when Christ dyed, but at the Resurrection
there was a meeting again, a kind of renewing of Sonship with God; therefore
Romans 8. the Apostle says, It is Christ that dyed, yea, rather that is risen
again from the Dead, and sits at God's Right Hand; and what does he infer from
thence? Who shall lay any thing to the Charge of God's Elect, i. e. till Christ
himself came off from Men's Sins, Men were in danger of being Charged with Sin,
but Christ has dyed and made satisfaction, nay, rather is risen again, and
has his Discharge, etc. p. 295.

And I pray, Gentlemen, wherein is this Doctrine contrary to the Scriptures, or
Reason guided by the Word of God.


Neonom. You say, It it a higher Expression of Love that Christ should bear the
Sins of Men, than that he should be given to die for Men, etc. D. C. p. 408.


Antinom. My reason of that Assertion was added, for Christ to be given to die,
comes short of the Love he expresses in bearing Sin; Affliction is not
contrary to the Nature of God, etc. but Sin is; where God does Charge any
Sinner he has an Abhorrence there; i. e. so far as God charge and sees Sin.

I said, God never did do such a wonderful thing to the Astonishment of the
Creature, as laying Sin on Christ; Iniquity is the hatefullest thing in the
World to God, [therefore the Sin charged is abhorred by God] where Iniquity is
found, a Toad is not so ugly unto Man, as that Person is in the sight of God,
where Iniquity is found -- Sin is the most horrible and abominable, nay, the
most abhorred thing in the World to God. That this is so the whole Scripture
bear me witness; but observe what follows -- That God should make Christ to be
Sin, is out of the reach of all the Creatures in the World to apprehend how God
should do it, and yet that he should retain his own Power, by Love, and respect
to his Son, p. 180. Now as there was an Abhorrence of Sin charged on Christ,
yet, and accordingly a Separation or forsaking upon that Account, so far as he
bore Sin in his Humane Nature; yet God did retain that Love and Respect to him
as his Son: Neither do I say, that Christ in his Humane Nature was separated
from the Divine by a Dissolution of his Hypostatical Union: And therefore it is
a false Charge to say I said, God abhorrtd the Person of his Son, or that there
was a Separation between the Divine and Humane Natures of Christ. D.W. p. 33.


Neonom. You say, Christ was separated from God, which you affirm and I deny.

Answ. If you understand me according to the Language of the Scripture and
Analogy of Faith, I say so. i. e. As Sin brings inevitably the Punishment of
Loss as the Curse, and the greatest part of it, which is a Judicial Separation
of God from the Creature; this I affirm, Christ suffered this Punishment in his
Soul. But if you will wrest my meaning to be this, that he was separated by a
Dissolution of the Hypostatical Union, I deny it. I say, Should Iniquity be
laid on the Humane Nature, and the Divine Nature not support it, it would have
sunk under Sin, as a mere Humane Creature. D. Cr. p. 378. Therefore it is
apparent I intended no such Separation, (as also by my whole Discourse it
appears) that you would impose upon me.


Neonom. The Question is, Whether Christ was at any time under God's
Abhorrency, or odious to him, because under the Loathsomness of Sin? This you
affirm, and I deny.


Antinom. That I affirm it in your Sense, is false; for you know I said in
express Terms, that God retained his Love and Respect to his Son: For it is not
inconsistent, that God should retain his Love to his Son in respect of his
Divine Nature, and yet lay him in respect of his Humane Nature under his
manifest Displeasure, being now under the Charge of all the Sins of his Elect,
and so Sin on Christ was the Object of God's Abhorrency.


Neonom. Whether Christ was thus on the Account of the Filthiness of Sin, etc.
This you affirm, and I deny.


Antinom. When you can clear Sin from being Filthiness in the sight of God,
upon any account; and that Guilt of Sin, reatus culpae, (I mean, not liableness
to Punishment, that is not Sin, but the Effect of it) is not the greatest Filth
of Sin: I shall tell you, I do not think Sin as to it is Filthiness was not laid
on Christ: But this has been argued before. You think you have a great Claw at
me here; but I am sorry you understand the Nature of Sin no better, as to think
it in the Law relation to be so clean, as not to be Filth in the sight of God.


Calvin. I pray Mr. Neonomian, lead us into the Truth of this Point, that we
may not be mistaken: We are willing to receive Light in these Truths; but we
think it of dangerous Consequence to part with them, or darken them.


Neonom. Truth. Though God testified his threatened Indignation against Sin in
the awful Sufferings of Christ, Soul and Body, in his Agony, and suspended
those delightful Communications of the Divine Nature to the Humane Nature of
Christ, as to their wonted Degrees; yet God was never separated from Christ,
much less during his Body's lying in the Grave; neither was the Father ever
displeased with Christ; and far less did he abhor him, because of the
Filthiness of Sin upon him. D. W. p. 31.


Antinom. This is a mavelous Aphorism indeed. 1. Did God testify his
threatened Indignation against Sin in the awful Sufferings of Christ, Soul and
Body? What is this less than what you would condemn for Error in me? 2. Did God
suspend his Delightful Communications to the Humane Nature? What was this but
the Separation I always showed that I intended? 3. That God was never separated
from Christ in the Hypostatick Union, I always affirm: No, not during his lying
in the Grave. 4. But 4ly, I never said, the Father was displeased with Christ
as his Son, or in relation to him as Son by Eternal Generation, but in relation
to him as our Surety, and as a Sacrifice to bear Sin, he was displeased with
him, or else you give your self the Lie in the same Paragraph, where you say,
he testified his threatened Indignation against sin in the Sufferings of his
Body and Soul; and how could this be without Displeasure. 5. What have we been
doing all this while? Have you not been arguing against Christ's bearing sin?
And now you say, God testified his Wrath against sin in the Sufferings of
Christ. If sin was not imputed to him, could he bear Indignation for it? 6. And
was not the Father as Judge displeased with Christ as Debtor, and bearing our
sins? How could he deal with him else in a way of testifying his Indignation,
as you say? 7. You say, He did not abhor him; so say we, not his Person, nor
in such a way of Abhorrence that is in Man's Affections. God is not as Man, in
natural Appetite or Aversion; but he exerted such an Abhorrence or Aversion as
was proper to his Nature; we desire to term it but as you do, a manifestation
of threatened Indignation to Sin, condemning Sin in the Flesh of Christ, Romans
8.8. As Christ was made sin, does not the Spirit of God say he was made a
Curse? Is not Sin a cursed thing, that which is odious and abhorred? Suppose
then we use not those Words Odious, Abhorred, and we say, God testified his
threatened Indignation against sin in Christ, even to the making him a Curse for
us: What greater and higher Expression can be used? And how could God's
Indignation be showed against sin on a person upon all Accounts innocent, no
way chargeable? Sin cannot suffer Indignation, but the Sinner may: Sin in the
Abstract is not capable of Suffering, it must be sin bringing some Person under
a Law-Condemnation, so that he have the Denomination of a Sinner. 9. And
whereas you will not have sin filthy, where is it the Spirit of God represents
it any otherwise, and the efficacy of Christ's Sacrifice as to the Purgation of
Filth? therefore it is said, (...), Heb. 1.3. But of this elsewhere.


Neonom. This Separation was impossible, because of the Union between the
Divine and Humane Nature of Christ, etc. D. W. p. 33.


Antinom. This Argument affects us not, for we never thought of of any such
Separation, as I have told you; and it is your Impudence to charge it.


Neonom. 2. The Father has promised constant Supports to Christ in the whole
of his Undertakings and Sufferings, Isa 42.1, 4, 6. Isa. 50 7, 8, 9.


Antinom. Shot beside me still. I said, Should Iniquity been laid on the Humane
Nature, and the Divine Nature not support it, it would have sunk under sin; and
you own that I say so. Dr. Cr. p. 378.


Neonom. And is it not strange, Gentlemen, that after he had said this, he
should affirm a Separation?


Antinom. And is it not strange, that you cannot distinguish between
Separations: I may separate from a thing in one respect and not in another: I
may separate from another as to Communion, but not as to Relation, let it be
Son, Wife, Brother, etc. and it is strange you cannot understand forsaking to be
but of a Relation.


Neonom. The Lord Jesus could not be abhorred or odious to God, for in him God
was always well-pleased, Isa. 42.1. Matthew. 17.5.


Antinom. We say the same: Christ's Person in his Eternal Sonship was so. All
the Indignation that was testified toward him in his Humane Nature, in which
only he was capable of Suffering, in that he became a Curse as well as Sin, God
says it.


Neonom. Mr. Calvin, How horrid a Sound has it to the Ear, to say, that Christ
is odious to God, and abhorred by the Father?


Calvin. Methinks those new Words applied to Christ do not sound so well, and
some Ears are offended at them. I think it is better to use the
Scripture-Expressions, Christ made Sin, and Christ made a Curse for us: Let us
but have the thing, Mr. Neonomian, we will part with any Word that is not
Scriptural, if you give us another that will express it as well.


Antinom. Does not this make as horrid a Sound in a Christian Ear, that God
manifested his wrathful Indignation against sin in the Person of Christ, in a
most awful and dreadful manner?


Calvin. But that is his way of expressing it, he does not like yours.


Antinom. Then I will abdicate those Words Odious and Abhorrence, and use his
Words; I be not fond of mine.


Neonom. 5. Christ could not be separated from God, or abhorred: while his Body
lay in the Grave, his Soul went into Paradise.


Antinom. No, his Hypostatical Union was not dissolved, nor God's Fatherly Love
removed from his Person; but yet at the same time he was under the Suffering of
Death, which was Penal for sin, he finished his Soul-sufferings on the Cross,
but was under the Separation of Body and Soul, which was part of the Threatened
Indignation against Sin; as also the lying of his Body in the Grave.


Neonom. I will show you your mistakes. You do not distinguish between the
Affection of Wrath and Effects of Wrath, because God forsook Christ as to the
usual Degrees of Comfort, he thinks Christ was separated from God.


Antinom. Sure this is a soul Mistake; if he should mistake his Logic, as to
take the Cause to be the Effect, and the Effect the Cause: But I doubt you
mistake your Divinity, as to ascribe an affection of Wrath to God. But I pray,
where there is an Effect of Wrath in the Creature, is not Wrath the Cause of it?
He that lies under the Effects of Wrath, is he not under Wrath? If Christ
suffers the Effects of Wrath, he suffers Wrath. I know not how any one
should suffer Wrath any other way. As to my Thoughts about Separation from God,
they are only your Imposition of Thoughts and Meanings upon me, as I have told
you.


Neonom. Because he that is formally a Sinner is odious to God, therefore he
thinks Christ was odious to God, who had on him the Punishment of Sin, with the
Guilt or Obligation to bear Punishment by his own Consent, neither of which
have any thing of the Loathsomness of Sin.


Antinom. I will not use the Word Odious, because you love not the smell of it:
I say therefore, because a formal Sinner, or Committer of sin unpardoned, is
the Object of God's threatened Indignation bearing the Effects of Wrath,
therefore an imputed Sinner is also the Object of God's threatened Indignation
bearing the Effects of Wrath. You will be at the old Socinian Notion still,
That Christ bore but the Punishment for Sin, and Guilt is only Obligation to
Punishment; which is absolutely false, unless you mean reatus culpae; for
nothing is a Demerit of Punishment, but reatus culpae.


Neonom. I know not why you think Christ came not near God from the time of his
Death to his Resurrection, unless because of your Conceit, for the Loathsomness
of Sin God could not bear the sight of him.


Antinom. Your frequent Banter and Scoffs at the Scripture-Account of the
Nature of Christ's Satisfaction, and of Sin, I am sure is very odious, and a
horrid Sound to a Christian Ear. I shall not think such reasoning worthy of any
thing but a Note of Contempt.


Calvin. Mr. Neonomian, you must know we cannot part with this Article of our
Faith, That Christ was made a Curse for us, no more than that, That he was made
Sin; That Christ bore the Curse of the Law, and was made a Curse for us, is
such a Gospel Truth, that we need no other Authority for it, than what is
contained in the Scripture, being so expressly declared; which all sound
Protestants always understood of bearing the Wrath of God in his Soul and Body,
especially in his Soul, undergoing Poena Damni and Sensus, the first whereof I
look to be the greatest and Cause of the other, and also fully enough expressed
by our Lord Jesus Christ upon the Cross.

Take Mr. Calvin. in his Harmony on the Evangelists. Although there appeared more
than Humane Courage in Christ's Outcry, yet it is certain it was uttered from
Extremity of Grief. Verily, this was his chiefest Conflict, and more grievous
than all his other Torments, because that in his Anguishes he was not so
refreshed with his Fathers Holy Favor, that he did in some respect perceive
him alienated from him; for neither did he offer his Body only as the Price of
our Reconciliation with God, but in his Soul he bore the Punishment due to us;
and they are Men of unsavory Spirits, that slighting this part of Redemption,
do insist only on the external Punishments of the Flesh; for as Christ
satisfied for us, so it was requisite that he should be set as guilty before
God's Tribunal: For nothing is more horrible than to perceive God as a Judge,
whose Wrath exceeds all Deaths -- Neither does he complain Feignedly or
Theatrically that he was deserted of God, according to the insipid Cavils of
some: For the inward Grief of his Soul from the Depth of Anguish, compelled him
to break forth into this Outcry. He did perfectly fulfill the Law, endured most
grievous Torments immediately in his Soul. Conf. Assemb. c. 8. 4.

He bore the Weight of God's Wrath, and laid down his Life an Offering for sin.
Large Catceh. p. 249.

Quest. What Death did Christ suffer when he Sacrificed himself? Mr. Perkin's
Catech.

Answ. A Death upon the Cross, peculiar to himself alone: For besides the
Separation of Body and Soul, he felt also the Pangs of Hell, in that the whole
Wrath of God due to the Sin of Man was poured forth upon him.

The Apostle does not say that Christ was cursed, but a Curse, Calv. on Gal.
3.13.
which is more; for it shows that all Malediction was included in him: This may
seem hard, that it may look like a Reproach to the Cross of Christ in
Confession, of which we glory: But God was not ignorant of what kind of Death
his Son should die, when he said, Cursed is every one that hangs on a Tree.
But one may here object, How comes it to pass that the Son in whom the Father
delights, should be accursed? I answer, Two things are here to be considered,
not only in the Person of Christ, but also in his Humanity: One is, that he was
the Lamb of God without spot, full of Blessing and Grace. The other, that he
took our Person; therefore he was a Sinner, and under the Curse, not so much in
himself as in us, but yet it was necessary he should die in our stead, which he
could not do out of the Grace of God; and yet he underwent his Wrath, else how
could he reconcile the Father to us, whom he looked upon as incensed against
us; therefore the Will of the Father did always rest satisfied in him. Again,
how could he free us from the Wrath of God, unless he had translated it from us
to him; therefore he was wounded for our Sins, and experienced God as an angry
Judge. This is the foolishness of the Cross, but admired by Angels, and
swallows up all the Wisdom of the World.

We must not imagine Christ to be innocent, and as a private Person, (as do the
Schoolmen, Luther on Gal. 3.14.
and almost all the Fathers have done) which is holy and righteous for himself
only. True it is, that Christ is a Person most pure and unspotted; but thou
must not stay there, for thou have not yet Christ, although thou know him to be
God and Man: But then thou have him indeed, when thou believe that this more
pure and innocent Person is freely given unto thee of the Father to be thy
Priest and Savior; yea, rather thy Servant, that he putting off his Innocence
and Holiness, and taking thy sinful Person upon him, might bear thy Sin, thy
Death and thy Curse, and might be made a Sacrifice and Curse for thee, that by
this means he might deliver thee from the Curse of the Law.

As Paul applied unto Christ that place of Moses, Accursed is every one that
hangs on a Tree; so may we apply unto Christ not only that whole 27th of
Deuteronomy. but also may gather all the Curses of Moses's Law together, and expound
the same of Christ. For as Christ is innocent in this general Law touching his
own Person; so is he also in all the rest. And as he is guilty in this general
Law, in that he is made a Curse for us, and is hanged upon the Cross, as a
wicked Man, a Blasphemer, a Murderer, a Traitor, even so is also guilty in all
others. For all the Curses of the Law are heaped together, and laid upon him;
and therefore he did bear and suffer them in his own Body for us; he was
therefore not only accursed, but made a Curse for us.

I will tell you what an Eminent New England Divine, Mr. Stone. MSS.
no Antinomian, said to this Point, It may appear that Christ was made a Curse
for us, because he suffered the Perfection of the Second Death, which he began
in the Garden; He began to be sorrowful, Matthew. 26.27. He drank the first
Draught of the Cup of Wrath, and afterward it is said, He was in an Agony:
There was the Second upon the Cross: He drank up the Bottom and Dregs of the
Cup of Vengeance, and said, It is finished, John 19.30. He was cursed of God in
an eminent manner, Deuteronomy. 21, 22, 23. compared with Gal. 3 13. If a Man be
guilty of Sin worthy of Death, and to be hanged for it, then he is accursed,
otherwise not; Christ was accursed hanging on the Tree, and therefore it is
certain he was guilty of our Sins charged upon him, being the greatest Sinner
by Imputation; and hence he was really cursed of God, and that in an eminent
manner; and not only cursed, but a Curse in the Abstract; whereby it is most
evident that he suffered the immediate Impressions of the Wrath of God, and the
Second Death, which takes possession of the whole Man, and therefore must have
suffered while his Soul and Body were united, or standing together; he was
those three Hours in the Darkness of Hell, encountering the Powers of Darkness,
and wrestling with the Wrath of an infinite God: Man by Sin having displeased
such an infinite God, must suffer that infinite Displeasure which Christ
suffered in our, room. The Perfection of which second Death consisted in this,
that he was utt^rly deprived of all the Sweetness of his Fathers Love and
Presence, and filled with the Sense of all the Bitterness of his Wrath, Psalm.
22.1, 2. Isa. 53.4. to 11. Matthew 27.45, 46. Gal. 3.13. in which we may attend,
1. The Punishment of Loss, a total Privation and Desertion in respect of Sense
and Feeling of the Sweetness of his Fathers Love and Presence: This Desertion
appeared in that the God of Glory forsook him, left him destitute and desolate.
God the Father hid his Face from him, God would not send in any Comfort, by
Sun, Angels, Saints, Psalm. 16.12. God did not only stand at a distance, but
locked up himself in Anger from him, would not be entreated by him, Psalm. 22.1,
2. etc. 2. There was not only Dereliction but Malediction, Gal. 3.13. He was
assailed by all the infernal Powers of Hell, Luke 22.53. This is the (...), the
Authority of Darkness; they might do their worst now, they had their full
Scope; the great^st Battle was fought upon the Cross, Col. 2.15. 2. He wrestled
with the Fierceness of the wrath of an Angry God, consuming Fire; he was
smitten of God, Psalm. 69.27. Isa. 50. Zech. 13.3. He was his Executioner. 3. A
Confluence of Plagues and Evils fell upon him, and settled themselves on his
Sacred Person, and he was filled with them, he was in the depth of them, Psalm.
69.1.

Quest. What did our Savior suffer in Soul? Dr. Usher's Div. p. 172.

Answ. He drank the full Cup of God's Wrath filled unto him for our sakes; the
whole Wrath of God due to the Sin of Man being poured forth upon him, therefore
in Soul he did abide unspeakable Vexations, horrible Griefs, painful Troubles,
Fear of Mind, feeling as it were the very Pangs of Hell; into which both
before, and most of all when he hanged upon the Cross, he was cast, which
caused him before his bodily Passion so grievously to complain.

The Death of Christ is the last Act of his Humiliation, whereby he underwent
the most extreme, Ames. c. 22.
horrible and greatest Punishments for Man's Sins. 2. It contained the greatest
Punishments, because it did equalize all that misery which the sins of men did
deserve. Hence is that Plenty of Words and Phrases whereby that Death is
expressed in Scripture? For it is not called simply Death, but cutting off,
rejection, treading under foot, a Curse, an heaping up of wounds and stripes,
Isa. 53. Psalm. 22. and Sect. 7.

The Inchoation of the Death of Christ in genere damni, in respect of Loss, was
the loss of Joy and Delight the Enjoyment of God and the Fullness of his Grace
was wont to supply him with, which he lost not as to the Principle and Habit,
but as to the Act and Sense. The Inchoa^ion of the Spiritual Death in the
Punishment of Sense was his tasting of Divine Wrath, and a kind of Subjection
to the Power of Darkness, which Divine Wrath was most especially the Cup which
was given to him to drink, Matthew. 26.39. Christ as Sponsor was that Object of
this Wrath absolutely. Sect. 9.


FINIS.
Neonomianism Unmasked: OR, THE Ancient Gospel PLEADED, Against the OTHER,
CALLED, The New LAW.

BEING The Continuation of the SECOND PART of the Theological Debate,
occasioned by Mr. Dan. William's BOOK, Entitled, Gospel Truth Stated and
Vindicated, etc.

By ISAAC CHAVNCY, M. A.

LONDON, Printed for H. Barnard at the Bible in the Poultry, 1693.

DEBATE VII. Of the Change of Person between Christ and the Elect, and their
being as Righteous as he.
Neonom. HAving stated, and finished the Doctrine of Imputation of Sin, let us,
if you please, in the next place examine the Doctrine of Imputation of
Righteousness, I have in this Point, as I shall state it, great Errors to
Charge upon Mr. Antinomian.


Antinom. I pray Sir proceed, I shall be very attentive to your Charge.


Neonom. You hold that every Believer (or Elect Person) is as Righteous as
Christ; and there is a perfect Change of Person and Condition betwixt Christ
and the Elect; he was what we are, and we are what he was, viz. Perfectly Holy,
without Spot or Blemish.


Calvin. If I mistake not, this is the 22th Error Mr. B. charge upon the
Antinomian, but that he stateth it truer than you.

Error 22. They feign Christ to have made such an Exchange with the Elect, as
that having taken all their Sins, he has given them all his Righteousness; not
only the Fruit of it, but the thing it self: So that they are as perfectly
Righteous as Christ himself, and so esteemed of God; and this Doctrine subverts
all the Gospel; viz. That God makes an effectual Grant and Donation of a true,
real and perfect Righteousness, even that of Christ himself, to all that
believe, accounting it as theirs. Scripture Gospel Defended, B. Err. descr. p.
11. Err. 22. and p. 108.


Antinom. Let the Question go in his own Terms; I choose to hold him to them,
because he reckons no Man states a Question better than himself; pray Sir make
proof in Matter and Form as charged by you.


Neonom. That I can easily; you say, D. C. p. 270, 271.
Mark it well, Christ himself is not so completely Righteous, but we are as
Righteous as he; nor we so completely sinful, but Christ became so, being made
Sin, as completely sinful as we. Nay more, we are the same Righteousness, for
we are made the Righteousness of God; the very sinfulness that we were, Christ
is made that very sinfulness before God. So that here is a direct Change;
Christ takes our Person and Condition, and stands in our stead; we take
Christ's Person and Condition, and stand in his stead -- So that if you reckon
well, you must always reckon your selves in another's Person, and that other in
your Person: God gives Christ, i. e. God gives the Person of Christ to Men, as
much as to say, God gives Christ to stand in the Room of Men, and Men to stand
in the Room of Christ; so that in giving Christ it is as it were to make a
change, etc. Dr. C. p. 180.


Antinom. When I speak of completely sinful and righteous, you must know that I
still understand by way of Imputation, that which was not originally in the
Subject; and so the Perfection is a Perfection of Imputation, which is as real
and complete in its kind as any Relative Perfections. A Man may be a weak
sickly Man but a perfect Father; a Poor Man, but as perfect a Son as the Son of
the Richest; a Man may be free from Debts, and yet make himself as perfect a
Debtor for the Debts of others as any Man for his own; and a Man may be a poor,
wretched, miserable Creature, but made as Righteous in respect of the Law as
the Richest Man on Earth, by the Money of another Man; that which denominates a
Man perfectly Righteous is this, that he owes nothing to the Law; and if a Man
be worth but Forty Shillings, and owe nothing, he is as Righteous in a Legal
Righteousness, as he that has a Thousand Pound; therefore it is no Hyperbolical
Expression for one that owes nothing to the Law, to say, I am as Righteous as
the King, meaning such a Righteousness which the Law requires of him,
respecting the Precept or Sanction, Active and Passive Obedience; I mean not
the Righteousness of Legislation or Execution of Justice in a way of
distribution, but such a Righteousness that I am capable of. So when I say, we
are as Righteous as Christ, I mean not Christ's Mediatorial Righteousness as
you suggest; I do not mean Justitia Mediatoria, sed Justitia Mediatoris; not
Mediatorial Righteousness, but the Righteousness of the Mediator.

When I say I am as Righteous now (after my Debt of Five Pound is paid, and owe
no more in all the World,) in the Eye of the Law, as my Friend that paid my
Debt, and fetched me out of Prison: I do not thereby say that I have as good an
Estate as he, or that I have so many Thousand Pounds as he; or as able to pay
the Debts of others as he is; and as for the other part of your Charge about
our commutation of Person, I justify my self in it, that as Christ bore my
Sins by Imputation, so I have his Righteousness, and am Righteous in his
Righteousness, by Imputation, 2 Cor. 5.21.


Calvin. What do you, Mr. Neonomian, reckon to be Truth in this Point?


Neonom. The Truth is this. D. W. p. 37.

The Mediatorial Righteousness of Jesus Christ is so Imputed to true Believers,
as that for the sake thereof they are pardoned and accepted unto Life Eternal;
it being reckoned to them, and pleadable by them for these uses, as if they had
personally done and suffered what Christ did as Mediator for them, whereby they
are delivered from the Curse, and no other Atonement or Meriting Price of
Saving Benefits can be demanded from them?


Antinom. Your Doctrine of Imputed Righteousness necessarily inferrs the
Consequents that you would draw upon us; for if the Mediatorial Righteousness
of Christ be Imputed (as you explain it your self, Diff. 1. To be Habitual as
well as Active and Passive;) then we must be reckoned Mediators; for we must be
reckoned such as Christ is, in Person, and in Office; but we deny that the
Mediatorial Righteousness was Imputed, but Justitia Mediatoris not Justitia
Mediatoria.

2. You say this Righteousness is so Imputed to a true Believer, as for the
sake thereof he is pardoned; I am sure by your so, you mean another sense than
we mean; that we are only pardoned effective, and that is no more than we are
sanctified and glorified for it is sake; and this appears by your second
Difference, p. 39. where you say the difference is not, Whether our
Justification, and all other Benefits, when we are partakers of them, be the
Fruits of this Righteousness as the only Meritorious Cause. So that you have no
reason to quarrel with me for saying, That through Christ's bearing of Sin we
appear in perfect Holiness, (speaking there of Glory;) for you say,
Justification and all other Benefits flow from it; therefore in the same manner
as we are Justified by the Righteousness of Christ, in the same manner we are
sanctified and glorified, i. e. effective, in your sense.

3. You say also pleadable for these Uses, i. e. for all Uses in a like manner.

4. As if they had personally done and suffered what Christ did as Mediator for
them; your meaning is, That it is as well done as if they had done it
themselves. A Man may do a thing as well as another, that he does not for
another in his stead; yea, a Man may do a thing for another, and not do it in
his stead; as a Tailor makes a Minister a Suit of Clothes, but does not do it
in his stead; because it is not his Business to make his Clothes; but it is
another thing for a Man to come and preach for him, that is, to do it in his
stead; because it is his proper Work, Profession and Business.

5. And hereby you say they are delivered from the Curse. What mean you by the
Curse? We shall find this Curse is not the whole Vindicative Wrath of God, only
Eternal Curse. And for our Comfort you tell us, this is all the Attonenement or
meriting Price of saving Benefits that God can demand of us. It Is so in our
stead, as that God can exact no other Atonement, and so a Security from God's
hurting us.

In a Word, the Description of Imputation here that you have given, is but a
mere piece of Sophistry; that Imputed Righteousness may be any thing for all
this, and we shall see by and by what you will have it be.


Neonom. Nevertheless this Mediatorial Righteousness is not subjectively in
them; nor is there a Change of Person betwixt them and Christ, neither are they
as righteous as he, but there remain Spots and Blemishes in them, until Christ
by his Spirit perfect that Holiness begun in all true Believers, which he will
effect before he bring them to Heaven.


Antinom. Now you come to the Negative part of your Description, which should
have been first; and having said nothing of the thing at first, you tell us
it is nothing at last. 1. You say this Mediatorial Righteouscess, Sir, is not
subjectively in us. I know no Judicious Divine ever talked so, nor would you,
if you understood mediatorial Righteousness, as it is apparent you do not. 2.
You say there is no change of Person betwixt Christ and them. You mean, that the
Believer becomes not Christ, nor Christ the Believer: We mean so too. 3. You
say too, that Believers are not as righteous as he, you mean such a
Righteousness Mediatorial. 4. You basely insinuate, that their Righteousness in
Justification is imperfect; for the Spots and Blemishes we speak of is in
respect of Righteousness.


Neonom. I question not whether Christ by his Righteousness merited for all the
Elect, that they should in his time and way be certainly Partakers of it is
saving Effects; and did not only purchase a conditional Grant of those Effects,
viz. That Proposition, He that believes shall be saved. P. 39.


Antinom. It seems Christ then merited a certainty of Salvation only of the
Elect; I thought their Salvation was made certain by Election; the Foundation
of God stands sure, 2 Timothy 2.19. Your meaning is, Christ's Merits made our
Salvation certain, which in respect of Election was uncertain. 2. And but
certain in another way, viz. Of a Conditional Grant that is not yet performed,
and belongs to the Non-elect as well as to the Elect; and there is yet an
Uncertainty remaining, notwithstanding the Certainty purchased. 3. It Is very
odd to say, Christ purchased a Proposition, and a conditional one too, the
Condition whereof must be something not purchased to be performed by us, that
we may have the Gift promised: For if the Certainty depend upon the Merit and
Purchase, then both the Condition and Promise is purchased, and then the
Purchase is absolute. I would know whether the certainty of the Salvation of
the Elect be purchased conditionally or absolutely; if purchased conditionally,
then this Proposition, The Elect shall be saved, is yet uncertain in respect of
the Purchase of Christ, and is but a contingent Proposition, and not certain,
which is a Contradiction. If you say Christ purchased absolutely the Salvation
of the Elect, all your contingent Purchase falls to the Ground: But Christ
purchased Persons absolutely, not conditional Propositions; and is he that
believes shall be saved, a conditional Proposition indeed?


Neonom. Nor whether besides these Effects being made ours, the very
Righteousness of Christ be imputed to true Believers, as what was always
undertaken and designed for their Salvation, and is now effectual to the actual
Pardon and Acceptance to Life; yea, is pleadable by them for their Security,
and is as useful to their Happiness, as if themselves had done and suffered
what Christ did.


Antinom. Gentlemen, you would think that Mr. Neonomian had here owned the
Doctrine of Imputation; but it is nothing so, he does but sham it still. Mark,
he says, Besides the Effects of Christ's Righteousness, the very Righteousness
of Christ is imputed as to Effects, or Effectualness, i. e. Pardon and
Acceptance is the Effects; but he tells you not that it is the proper and
immediate Righteousness, he will have the Righteousness of Christ to have some
Effects, and is imputed as to such: So that Sanctification and Glorification
being Effects, are as much the Imputation of the very Righteousness of Christ.
It Is a strange thing to confound the Cause and Effects; to tell us the very
Cause is imputed, and presently to tell us he means the Effects: This is to
talk Daggers; for Cause and Effect are opposita. But he says, the
Righteousness of Christ is what was undertaken and designed for their
Salvation, and is effectual, and in that Sense imputed. Very good; so that it
was a subordinate means to accomplish that end, as was also Creation, (which
was by Christ, Col. 1.) preaching the Gospel, their Calling, Sanctification;
hence the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness is but to give it a place in the
order of means for our Salvation, and in that order of means has it is Effects.
But he says, there is a Privilege by it as well as a proper Effect, it is
pleadable for their Security. I would know how it comes to be pleadable; is it
from its own certainty to us, and our Salvation by it, or from our performance
of the condition of the Grant? if a Conditional Grant he purchased, we cannot
plead the certainty of our state from the purchase, but very remotely after
another plea first; if the condition of the Grant be never so small, we must
first plead it, before we can plead the purchase; we must have a plea for the
right to the purchase before we can have any plea to the Grant by the purchase.
Lastly, he says, The Righteousness of Christ is as useful this way as any, as
if Christ had suffered in their stead he means; i. e. a New Gospel will do your
business as well as the Old and True.


Neonom. I question not whether Christ by his Righteousness merited -- that
Believers shall be perfectly Holy, even without Spot and Blemish.


Antinom. But you say, Christ's Merits are Imputed only as to their Effects;
and in that sense the Merits of Christ are Imputed for Sanctification in the
same manner as to Justification.


Neonom. I doubt not but Spots and Blemishes may consist with his Justified
State, etc.


Antinom. Nor I, Spots as to Inherent Holiness, but by virtue of Christ's
Righteousness Imputed unto Justification, he is without Spot before God; this
Righteousness has no Spot in it, but you charge it for Error to say they are
so Righteous that they have no Spot in them.


Neonom. The difference lies in these Points.

1. Whether there be a change of Person between Christ and the Elect, this you
affirm, and I deny.


Antinom. I affirm there is in the true Gospel Sense, not in such a forced
inviduous Sense that you would put upon us.


Neonom. 2. Whether the Mediatorial Righteousness of Christ be subjectively in
us? This you affirm, and I deny.


Antinom. It Is false, I affirm it not.


Neonom. Whether we be as Righteous as Christ, be a proper and safe Speech?
This you affirm, I deny; though I yield that we are for the sake of his
Righteousness, delivered from the Guilt of Sin, and entitled to Life; yea,
accepted with God against all Excluding Bars.


Antinom. We deny a Believer is as Righteous as Christ in respect of Justitia
Meditoria; the Righteousness Imputed is not that Righteousness; neither is it
communicable by Imputation; but it is the Justitia Mediatoris, that is quasi,
the Material Cause of our Justification, materia ex qua, you make it Imputed
but in the Effect; and in the best sense you make it but a cujus gratia res
est; and so we are Sanctified and Glorified: but we say the Righteousness of
Christ is the Material Righteousness of our Justification, no other
Righteousness or Condition coming in with it in the Imputation, and that
thereby Believers are as free from the Condemnation of the Law, and in the Eye
of Justice, as Christ himself; if his Righteousness had not been such, he could
not have arose from the Dead. You say you yield that for the sake of Christ's
Righteousness we are delivered from Guilt; How? Is it not because he bore the
Guilt, and satisfied for it? It Is this bearing Guilt, and satisfying God's
Justice, that we by Faith stand in, and all our Guilt covered by, it is this
very Satisfaction in the full Nature of it, is Imputed to us. -- You say,
accepted of God against all Excluding Bars. This is little better than
Nonsense; however your meaning lies very fair in it, that our acceptance to
God's positive Favor and Love is not here, but elsewhere; and Acceptance as to
Excluding Bars, is only a Negative acceptance, an Acceptance and no Acceptance;
the removing the Bars and Obstacles to acceptance, supposes there may be an
acceptance upon some other Terms. It is a miserable thing that Christ's
Righteousness should do no more than remove a Bar. The Apostle says, We are
accepted in the Beloved, Ephesians. 1. he should have said, The Bars of acceptance
are removed by the Beloved: now provide for your Acceptance as well as you can.


Neonom. Whether because Christ is perfectly Holy, can we be said to be perfect
in Holiness upon the account of any Imputation of his Holiness to us, or we so
Esteemed by God? This I affirm, you deny.


Antinom. You should affirm it upon your Principles, allowing no Imputation,
but as to the Effects of his Righteousness; and I tell you, in a perfect
Person, such as Adam in Innocence, and Christ the Second Adam, there is no
difference between Personal Righteousness and Holiness.


Neonom. The Question is, Whether the Elect Believer before he is perfectly
Holy, is wholly without Spot, Filth and Blemish? This you affirm, and I deny;
though I grant that those Spots, Blemishes, and Filth shall not subject them to
the Curse and Wrath of God, nor forfeit Saving Benefits.


Antinom. We say in respect of the perfect Righteousness of Jesus Christ, that
is Imputed unto a Believer, he is perfect and without Spot in the Eye of God's
Justice, and that in Christ this Righteousness is perfect Holiness, and as
such, is theirs as in their Head, Col. 1.19, 21, 22. Chap. 2.10. And in your
Divinity you say these Spots, etc. shall not subject them to Curse and Wrath:
If so, it has perfectly freed them from the Charge of Sin in the Eye of God's
Justice, all their Iniquities are forgiven, and their Sin covered with the
Righteousness of Christ, that they stand (...), before the Throne, Rev. 14. For
if Justice charge them with Sin, i. e. lay it to their Charge, it must condemn
them to the Curse and Wrath due; but (...) Who shall lay any thing to the
Charge of God's Elect? it is God that Justifies, Romans 8.33. And then follows,
(...), Who shall Condemn? Therefore where there is just Accusing before God,
there is also Condemning; and hence though there be remaining Sins and
Corruptions in the holiest Believer, yet God mark^ them not so as to lay them
to their Charge in the way of Vindicative Justice; they are not (say you)
subjected to Curse and Wrath.


Neonom. I shall confirm my Positions.

1. There is no Change of Person between Christ and the Elect. D. W. p. 41.


Antinom. I pray what do you mean by that Position?


Neonom. Christ was the Savior, and never ceased to be so, we are saved;
Christ was the Redeemer, and we the Redeemed; Christ forgives, we forgiven.


Antinom. Imputation of Christ's Righteousness in Redemption, for Justification
or Forgiveness, does not denominate us Saviors, or Redeemers; Relata sunt
contraria negantia, and as they stand mutually affected, cannot be converted
into each other; you are now upon a sure side. A Father cannot be the Son in
that respect as he is the Father, and yet he may be a Son too; and therefore,
relata sunt contraria, quia referuntur ad idem subjectum attributionis; and
though they are contraries, yet do consist ex mutua alterius affectione; and
hence, omnis integra relatio constat ex duabus partibus; in respect of one, the
relatum is causa, and correlatum the Effect. In the respect of the other, the
relatum is effectum, and the correlatum causa. Redeemer and Redeemed are Mutual
Causes and Effects, and yet Contraries; and the Contraries yet do Exist by the
Mutual Affection that they have to each others.


Neonom. What is all this to the purpose?


Antinom. I would hereby give you to know that I understand the Logical
Difference between Redeemer and Redeemed and if you knew it your self, you
would be ashamed to use this Argument to any Men of Learning; but such studied
Divines take themselves to have such puzzling Pates, that they can be dictators
to all Men.


Neonom. It Is profane Arrogance for us to pretend to his Prerogatives; and
it is Blasphemy to debase him among their number, who were Enemies, and without
Strength.


Antinom. Logic failing, it is not amiss to betake your self to some high
strains of Rhetoric; some great words may make a Man look big, but never
affright Wise Men from the Truth.


Neonom. My sec^nd Argument is, The Meditorial Righteousness of Christ is not
subjectively in us.


Antsnom. No, nor by Imputation neither, i. e. Justitia Mediatoria, but
Justitia Mediatoris is both subjectively in Christ and us; Originaliter in
Christ, Imputative in or upon us; we are the Subjects by your leave of Imputed
Righteousness, and Christ of Imputed Sin; and this very subjectiveness cuts off
both your Arguments at once, because the very proposition that we are the
Subjects of Imputed Righteousness, denies our selves to be the Authors of that
Righteousness, and affirms another to be so; my very saying that the Creditor
took another's Bond for my Debt, and delivered up my Bond to me upon his
Payment, does sufficiently acquaint all rational Men that I not only ascribe
the Payment to another Man, but do affirm that his Money was accepted on my
Account; and if any should hear me say that I became a Surety, because he paid
my Debt, they would think I were Mad; but if I say, that the Creditor took such
an one as Play Master in stead of me, and his Money paid was reckoned to me, no
Man but would judge it very good sense besides Mr. Neonomian.


Neonom. I do not speak of Inherent Righteousness, of which he is not only the
Pattern, but also is the Cause and Worker, Phil. 3.9.


Antinom. We would not mistake you, you would be understood that we are the
Subjects of Inherent Righteousness; and I tell you, so are we of Imputed
Righteousness, genere Imputationis, Christ is not; as Christ is the subject of
our Sins, genere Imputationis. That which God Imputes to us, and Faith Applies
to us, we are the Subjects of it, for subjectum is cui aliquid adjungitur; and
here is a note of Conjugate Arguments, wherein is Abstractum, concretum and
modus Agendi, Justus is subjectum Justitiae Imputatae; and in this pair of
Relates, the adjunct is also the cause of the Subject, which is a Logical
Mystery that every unstudied Divine does not understand. As for Phil. 3.9.
which you pervert and understand of our Inherent Righteousness, we shall
examine that anon. I see you are very fond of your first Argument, and every
Argument must run into it like a Mathematical Principle, that must clinch every
demonstrat^on; such as this, Three Angles of a Triangle are equal to two square
Angles; or that any two Lines not Parallel protracted will at last cut, etc.
Now say you, if Christ's Righteousness be Imputed to us who was a Savior, then
we are Saviors; and it runs thus; if a Surety pays my Debt, then I am a
Surety; if my Father pays my Debt, I am thereby made a Father, whether I have
Children or no. If a Rich Merchant pay the Debt of a Poor Cobbler, and fetch him
out of Ludgate, the Cobbler hereby becomes a Merchant. A Justice of Peace takes
off the Penalty from a Constable for some Fault, whereby he has forfeited his
Office, and therefore the Constable must become a Justice of Peace. The
absurdity of your Inference hence easily appears, Imputation of the Action of
one Party to another, no way inferrs Physical Change, or Individual Identity,
but signifies a Relative Change, not of one into another, but of both to the
Law; the Law takes the Surety for the Debtor, and the Original Debtor to be a
Play Master in the Surety. As the Sponsor becomes a reputed Debtor, and the
principal Debtor becomes the reputed Play Master; and note, when we speak of the
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, we understand not the Imputation of his
Offices, as you would have us: is not that the Commutation here meant by you?


Neonom. It Is Inconsistent with the Nature of Gospel Imputation.


Antinom. It is Inconsistent with our Doctrine of Imputation, but must
necessarily follow from your Notion of Mediatorial Righteousness; and all your
Inferences upon this Hypothesis is but Fighting with your own Shadow; and
therefore we shall leave you therein, Canere tuis Musis, your Arguing affects
us not in the least.


Calvinist. The Doctrine of Imputation of Christ's Righteousness to us to
Justification, and a sweet permutation of Persons in a Law sense and relation,
we must assent and stand by, notwithstanding all your Cavils against it; the
Scriptures are plain and express for it, and will stand as Bulwarks to defend
this Doctrine against all Papists, Socinians and Neonomians; and because you
Mr. Neonomian quote Dr. Owen, would have us to believe that he is a Patron to
your Notions, and Men that read him not may think so from your Authority, I
would disabuse them, and show you now naked, how diametrically opposite to you
that Learned Doctor is? he says,

There is in Scripture represented to us a Commutation between Christ and
Believers, Dr. Owen of Justific. p. 39.
as unto Sin and Righteousness, i. e. in the Imputation of their Sins unto him,
and of his Righteousness unto them. In the Improvement and Application hereof
unto our Souls, no small part of the Life and Exercise of Faith does consist.
This was taught the Church in the Offering of the Scapegoat, Levit. 16.21, 22.
This Goat was sent away with this Burden upon him; and whether he did Live, and
was a Type of the Life of Christ in his Resurrection, or whether he perished in
the Wilderness, being cast down the Precipice of a Rock, etc. its generally
acknowledged what was done to him, and with him, was only a Representation of
what was done really in the Person of Christ -- He did not transfuse Sin from
one Subject to another, but transferred the Guilt of it; and to evidence this
translation of Sin from the people unto the Sacrifice. Aaron in his Confession,
put and fixed both his Hands on his Head. Thence the Jews say, That all Israel
was made as Innocent on the day of Expiation as they were in the day of
Creation; from v. 30. wherein they came short of Perfection or Consummation,
Heb. 10. But this is the Language of every Expiatory Sacrifice; quod in ejus
caput sit, let the Guilt be upon him; hence the Sacrifice was called (...) Sin
and Guilt, Lev. 4.29.7. 2, 10, 17.

And so God laid on Christ the Iniquities of us all, that by his stripes we
might be healed, Isa. 53.5, 6. Our Iniquity was laid on him, and he bear is, v.
11. and through his bearing it we were freed from it. His Stripes were our
Healing, our Sin was his, Imputed to him; his Merit ours, Imputed unto us. He
was made Sin for us, etc. that we might become the Righteousness of God in him,
2 Cor. 5.21. This is that Commutation I mentioned, he was made Sin for us; we
are made the Righteousness of God in him, God not Imputing Sin to us but
Righteousness. -- The same is expressed by the same Apostle, Romans 8.3, 4. The
Sin was made his, he answered for it, and the Righteousness which God requires
by the Law is made ours, the Righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us, not
by our doing it, but by his. This is that Blessed Change and Commutation,
wherein alone the Soul of a Convinced Sinner can find rest and peace. So he
has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us, that the
Blessing of Abraham might ocme upon us, Gal. 3.13, 14. He was made a Curse,
whereof his Hanging on a Tree was a Sign and Token; hence said to bear our Sins
in his Body on a Tree, 1 Pet. 1.24. compare Deuteronomy. 21.23. And in the Blessing of
Faithful Abraham all Righteousness and Acceptance with God is included.

And to take off Impertinent Clamours of some against this Doctrine, he quotes
the original words of Justin Martyr, (...), etc. He gave his Son a Ransom for
us; the Holy for Transgressors; the Innocent for the Nocent, the Just for the
Unjust, the Incorruptible for the Corrupt, the Immortal for Mortals. For what
else could hide or cover our Sins but his Righteousness? In whom else could we
Wicked and Ungodly ones be justified or esteemed Righteous, but in the Son of
God alone? O sweet Permutation, or Change! O Unsearchable Work! -- That the
Iniquity of many should be hid in one Just One, and the Righteousness of One
should justify many Transgressors. Gregory Nysson speaks thus, He has
transferred unto himself the Filth of my Sins, [observe the Expression Mr.
Neonom. (...),] and communicated to me his Purity. So Augustine, He was Sin that
we might be Righteousness, not our own, but the Righteousness of God, not in
our selves, but in him, as he was Sin, not his own, but ours, not in himself,
but in us. And he thus Comments on, Psalm. 22.1. How says he of my Sins,
because he prays for our Sins, he made our Sins to be his, (mark Mr.
Neonomian) that he might make his Righteousness to be ours; O sweet Commutation
and Change. And he quotes Chrysostom on 2 Cor. 5. Hom. 11. What Word, what
Speech is this? What Mind can comprehend or express it? for he says, He made
him who was Righteous to be made a Sinner, that he might make Sinners Righteous
-- And he speaks not of an Inclination, but expresses the quality it self. He
faith not, He made him a Sinner, but Sin; that we might be made not merely
Righteous but Righteousness; and that the Righteousness of God; when we are
Justifified, not by Works, (for if we should there must be no Spot found in
them,) but by Grace, whereby all Sin is blotted out. And how far is this from
your Divinity, Mr. Neonomian? See more, p. 43, 44, etc.


Calvin. He quotes also Bernard and Luther, and diverse others, which you may
read, Mr. Neonomian, at your leisure, I find you have the Book, especially that
Excellent Discourse of Albertus Pighius.

He adds, Nor are we to be moved that Men who are unacquainted with these
things in Reality and Power, do reject the whole Work of Faith herein, as an
easy Effort of Fancy and Imagination. For the Preaching of the Cross is
Foolishness unto the best of the Natural Wisdom of Men. P. 49.

Dr. Owen gives the Original of your Argument against Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness to us, P. 509. viz. That if the Righteousness of Christ be
Imputed to us so as to be made ours, then are we as Righteous as Christ
himself, because we are Righteous with his Righteousness. Dr. Owen shows this
to be Bellarmine's Argument against the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness,
Lib. 2. C. 7. Si vere nobis Imputatus Justitia Christi, etc. If the
Righteousness of Christ be Imputed to us so as to be made ours thereby, then
are we as Righteous as Christ himself, because we are Righteous with his
Righteousness.

A. These things are plainly affirmed in Scripture, that as unto our selves, we
are all as an unclean thing, and all our Righteousness is as filthy Rags, Isa.
64.6. on the one hand, and that in the Lord we have Righteousness and Strength,
Isa. 45.24, 25. on the other. That if we say we have no Sin we deceive our
selves; and yet that we are the Righteousness of God in Christ; wherefore these
things are consistent whatever Cavils the Will of Man makes against them;
unless we take Socinius's his Rule of Interpretation, namely, where any thing
seems repugnant to our Reason though never so express in Scripture, not to
admit of it, etc. 2. Notwithstanding the Imputation of the Righteousness of
Christ, and our being made Righteous thereby, we are Sinners in our selves, and
so cannot be said to be as Righteous as Christ, but only made Righteous in him,
who are Sinners in our selves. 3. We must distinguish between the Personal
Righteousness of Christ, and our Personal Righteousness, and between
Righteousness of Inhesion and Imputation, being of diverse kinds. 4. The
Righteousness of Christ was the Righteousness, personally of the Son of God, in
which respect of Infinite Perfection, and not to be compared to, etc.

And as to that place which you boast of, it is wholly against you; Page 242,
243. Here you prevaricated with your Reader in rehearsing Dr. O.
for having showed what Imputation is, he tells us, That Righteousness it self
is Imputed, and not any of the Effects, but the Effects of it are made ours by
virtue of that Imputation. To say the Righteousness of Christ, i. e. his
Obedience and Sufferings are Imputed to us only as unto Effects, is to say, We
have the Benefit of them, and no more, but Imputation it self is denied; so say
the Socinians, but they knew well, and ingeniously grant that they overthrew
all true, real Imputation thereby, and quotes Schlictingius, saying, We concede
Christ's Righteousness is ours, as it redounds to our Good and Righteousness,
etc. And is it not pleasing to see some among our selves with so great
Confidence take up the sense and words of these Men.


Neonom. But Dr. Owen says, That Imputation is not the Transmission or
Transfusion of the Righteousness of another into them that are justified, that
they should become perfectly and inherently righteous thereby, etc. p. 242. D.
W. p. 51.


Antinom. We say so too; but Dr. Owen does not say, We are justified by the
Imputation of the Effects of Christ's Righteousness, he opposes that
Imputation as a Socinian Notion.


Neonom. He does not: For he says, That the Righteousness of Christ is imputed
to us as to it is Effects, has this sound Sense, namely, The Effects of it are
made ours by reason of that Imputation. It is imputed, so reckoned unto us of
God, as that he really communicates all the Effects of it unto us.


Antinom. But what immediately follows in the next Sentence? Dr. O. p. 243.

Why did you not quote all the Dr. said? Is not this base false dealing? You
would only quote as much as should serve your turn. But to say the
Righteousness of Christ is not imputed unto us, only its Effects are so, is
really to overthrow all Imputation: For (as we shall see) the effects of the
Righteousness of Christ cannot be said properly to be imputed to us; and if his
Righteousness it self be not so, Imputation has no place herein: nor can it be
understood why the Apostle should so frequently assert it as he does, Romans 4.
Therefore the Socinians, who do expressly oppose the Imputation of the
Righteousness of Christ, and plead for a Participation of it is Effects and
Benefits only, do wisely deny any such kind of Righteousness of Christ, i. e.
of Satisfaction and Merit, as alone may be imputed to us. Here Is matter of
Fact, to show your double-dealing.


Neonom. But the Assembly is of my mind. Q. 69. What is the Communion in Grace
which the Members of the Invisible Church have with Christ. A. In their
partaking of the Virtue of his Mediation in their Justification, Adoption,
Sanctification, and whatever in this Life manifests their Union with him; so
that in their Judgment it is the virtue of Christ's Mediation operates on us,
and not the Mediatorial Righteousness in us.


Antinom. This is strange Language, to talk of Imputing the Mediation of Christ
to us; and this is that you now plainly tell us, is the Mediatorial
Righteousness that you mean all along; or that partaking of the Virtues of
Mediation and Imputation are convertible Terms? Those Reverend Divines do not
say, the Mediation of Christ was imputed to us, no more than his Kingship,
Priestship, Prophetical Office; yet we are in a Sense made Kings, Priests and
Prophets, but not by Imputation: They tell you only of the Effects of his
Mediation, of which Justification is one. If you would have told us what they
say of Imputed Righteousness, you should have rehearst the next, Q. 70. What is
Justification?

A. Justification is an Act of God's Free Grace unto Sinners, in which he
pardons all their Sins, accepts and accounts their Persons righteous in
his sight; not for any thing wrought in them, or done by them, but only for the
perfect Obedience and full Satisfaction of Christ by God imputed to them, and
received by Faith alone.

See the Shorter Catechism, Q. 33. See also the Confession, directly condemning
all your Scheme of Divinity at once, C. 9. Of Justification.

Those whom God effectually calls, he also freely justifyeth, not by infusing
Righteousness into them, but by pardoning their Sins, and by accounting and
accepting their Persons as righteous; not for any thing wrought in them, or
done by them, but for Christ's sake alone; not by imputing Faith it self, the
Act of believing, nor any other Evangelical Obedience to them as their
Rigteousness, but by imputing the Obedience and Satisfaction of Christ unto
them, they receiving and resting on him and his Righteousness by Faith. The
Savoy Conf. chapter 11. is the same verbatim.

Now, Gentlemen, I appeal to all Men of Sense and Honesty, whether Mr.
Neonomian has dealt fairly, thus to represent the Judgment of Dr. Owen and the
Reverend Divines of the Assembly, or thus to impose upon the weak, and such as
have not Will or Leisure to search into the Truth of what he says.


Neonom. I tell you what the Savoy says, which is the same Articles with the
Assemblies.


Antinom. But you tell us, or would have us to understand, that the meaning of
the Assembly about Imputation, is, that the Virtue of Christ's Mediation ( i.
e. in your declared Sense) the Effects only operates upon us; and then after
rehearsal of the Words of the Savoy, you add, Thou see it is Christ's
Righteousness is imputed for Pardon, and not infused. You Will oppose imputation
to Infusion, which none of us plead for: But this Imputation is in your Sense
only as to the Effect, which you would have us to believe is the Judgment of
Dr. Owen and the two Assemblies: And I find you lamely rehearse the Article of
your Confession, as being ashamed to behold your Erroneous Doctrine so fully
condemned by them.

Do not think such pitiful little Sophisms as these, are such as do become a
professed Minister of the Gospel, or that your Reverend Vouchers have not
prejudiced their Honor by asserting so publicly to the World, That in all
material things you have fully and rightly stated the Truths and Errors in this
Treatise; and look upon this as a Work of considerable Service to the Church of
Christ, etc. when your manifest Design is to hide Truth by Equivocations, false
Representations, and odious forced Consequences; and to impose old palpable
decried Errors. Veritas non querit angulos.

Now, Sir, that you may see we have more than Authority for this great Doctrine
of Imputation of Christ's very Righteousness:

1. I prove, that to say Christ's Righteousness is imputed only as to Effects,
is to deny the Doctrine of Imputation.

Consider, from the Nature of Imputation it self. Imputation is the reckoning
and esteeming that unto one man, which is done by another: As in case of Debt
or Wrong done by one Man to another, a third comes and does, or promises that
thing whereby the Offended Person becomes satisfied with the Offender, previous
to which Satisfaction in Nature is his reckoning the Payment made, or to be
made, unto the Offender; it is not the taking of this or that Payment in any
kind that is Satisfactory for the Offender, unless it be by the offended Person
reckoned to him.

Paul to Philemon, v. 18. gives the clear Notion of Imputation both as to Wrong
and Righteousness, (...), If he has criminally or unrighteously done thee
wrong in filching or stealing, impute this to me, or put it upon my Account:
Take me as Paymaster, and put my Payment on his Account, i. e. In respect of
any wrong that he has done thee, or Debt that he owes thee; Here Is my hand for
it, (...), I will repay it to thee. Now Paul stood bound for Onesimus to
Philemon; and unless Philemon had accounted Paul's Payment or Obligation to
Onesimus in respect of any Wrong sustained by him, Onesimus is still peccant,
and an unreconciled Offender in the Eve of Philemon.

Now the Effects of Righteousness is the Benefits received by Imputation, not
Imputation it self. Suppose the nearest Effects of Christ's Righteousness, as
Satisfaction, Reconciliation, Justification, Adoption, Imputation, is cause of
those Effects. God is satisfied, and reconciled, and justifies the Sinner,
because he imputes and reckons to him the payment or appeasing Act of the
Surety. I argue then,

1. That which is a Benefit received by virtue of Imputed Righteousness, is not
imputed Righteousness it self, but God's being satisfied, reconciled, and
Justifying us, is the Benefit only of Imputed Righteousness, Ergo. As to the
Major, That thing which is received by virtue of something else, is not the
same with it; nay, they are contraria affirmantia. Now God's giving us the
Benefit of Imputed Righteousness, is that which does in a way of Justice result
from the said Righteousness imputed: The Imputation is the Gift of Grace,
therefore Christ's Righteousness is first imputed, and graciously reckoned ours
to all intents and purposes. Hence results in a way of Justice God's
Satisfaction, Reconciliation, and the Sinners Justification. Hence it will
needs follow, if there be no more in Imputation than God's being satisfied,
reconciled, Justifying, I will say, how comes it to pass? You Will say, Through
Christ's Righteousness, it is an Effect of it. I say so too. But how come we to
have these Effects, if God never reckoned and accounted Christ's Righteousness
unto us? either we are righteous some way or other before God declares us
righteous, or we are not: If not, it is not a true Sentence: If we are
righteous, we are so by our own Righteousness, or another: if by another, it
must be some way or other ours either by Communication of it essentially, or by
reckoning and esteeming it unto us as if it were ours; but to reckon the Effect
only, is not Imputing of it at all.

Arg. 2. To say the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness is only the bestowing
of the Effects, is to ascribe Justification to the Righteousness of Christ in
no other sense than we do Sanctification and Glorification; for it is to say
that Justification is but a Meritorious Benefit, and so is Sanctification and
Glorification; for all those are purchased and procured by him. Now there is a
vast difference between payment of a Debt owing, and making a purchase of a new
Estate: it is true Christ did both, he satisfied and he purchased; as for the
purchase Money there is no need it should be Imputed to us; if the Estate being
purchased be bestowed freely, it is enough, but as for Satisfaction made for
our Wrong or Debt, this must be reckoned and accounted to us before we can come
at a Legal Discharge, or procured Riches.

Arg. 3. To say Christ's Righteousness is Imputed to us only as to Effects, is
to say, That there is some other Righteousness besides this for us to be
Justified by, for it implies that we are become Righteous by another
Righteousness; the Privilege of having whereof is only procured by Christ's
Righteousness; and the plain truth of it, the Original Rise of this Notion is
only to open way for another Righteousness to come in to our Justification,
which is another Gospel; yea, not only contrary to Sound Doctrine, but
Radically Destructive to the true Grace and Gospel of Jesus Christ.

Arg. 4. If we cannot have the Effects of the Righteousness of Christ, unless
the very Righteousness of Christ be Imputed to us, then the Righteousness of
Christ is Imputed otherwise than in Effects; but we cannot have the Effects of
the Righteousness of Christ, etc.

The Consequence of the Major is so clear it needs no proof.

I prove the Minor; we cannot have the Effects of the Righteousness of Christ,
unless his very Righteousness be Imputed. The Reasons are, 1. Because our
Offenses will stand in the Eye of Justice, and we shall remain unrighteous,
having no Righteousness of our own, nor any of another reckoned to us. For we
can be Righteous no other way but by our own, or by another; and Christ's
Righteousness signifies nothing as to us, if it be not placed to our account;
and hence being not made Righteous by it, can never be Sanctified, etc. 2. We
can have none of the Effects, because they all proceed from Love of
Reconciliation unto Sinners; now the Enmity being not taken away by
Satisfaction, there is no Reconciliation, and therefore we cannot possibly
partake of the Effects of Christ's Righteousness.

Arg. 5. To say we have only the Effects Imputed, is to deny Imputation, for
the Effects are not ours by Imputation, but Personally and Really; as suppose
Justification, God does not Justify us by Imputing Justification, but really
upon Imputed Righteousness. 2. If Christ's very Righteousness be not Imputed or
Accounted to us in Justification, some other Righteousness must, for God cannot
Justify a Sinner without accounting him Righteous by some very Righteousness
either of his own or of another.

2. I prove that the very Righteousness of Christ is Imputed.

Arg. 1. That Righteousness that satisfied the Justice of God for our Offenses,
is Imputed unto us; but the very Righteousness of Christ satisfied the Justice;
Ergo, The Major is very evident; for if A do pay Money for B, and D to whom it
is due accepts it in discharge of B's Debt; then D does place it to B's
Account, and gives a Receipt accordingly to A, as having paid him so much for
the use of B.

As for the Minor, that the very Righteousness of Christ satisfied the Justice
of God for us; it appears, 1. By his Intention in giving himself for us, and
God's accepting of us in him as his Beloved. 2. Because if God be satisfied for
our Breach of the Law, it can be no other Righteousness that could do it; it
must also be the very Righteousness, and not the Effects; now that which God
was satisfied with upon our account, is accounted to us; for if it be not
accounted to us, it is not accepted for us, our Debt stands still, and the
Handwriting against us. 3. If the very Righteousness of Christ do not
satisfy, no Effects of Righteousness can; for nihil dat quod non habet.

Arg. 2. That Righteousness which Christ our Advocate pleads for us, is Imputed
to us. But Christ our Advocate pleads his very Righteousness; for he entered in
with his own Blood, and pleads those very Sufferings, and that payment upon our
very account, Heb. 9.14. C. 10.19, 20. C. 7.25.

Arg. 3. That Righteousness which answers all the demands of the Law on behalf
of a Sinner, is Imputed to Justification; but it was Christ's very
Righteousness answered all the demands of the Law, in Active and Passive
Obedience, Romans 10. Ergo, Minor, there is nothing that the Law expects expressly
as to Active or Passive Obedience, but Christ has performed it in his very
Righteousness when he was in his state of Humiliation, what was done was done
then, the Effects were afterward in his Exaltation.

Arg. 4. That which is pleaded in Prayer by us for Forgiveness, and ought to
be, is Imputed to us; but the very Righteousness of Christ is pleaded by us,
this is the sake of Christ for which we ask of God pardon of Sin, we have
nothing to do to plead that Righteousness which is not accounted to us. There Is
none of us pleads our own Righteousness, but the very Righteousness of Christ.

Arg. 5. That Righteousness upon which a Sinner has peace with God, is the
Righteousness reckoned to us for Justification; but Christ's very Righteousness
is that by which we have peace with God, Ephesians. 2.13, 15. and Peace of
Conscience, Heb. 9.14. c. 1. beg. Rev. 1.5.

Arg. 6. Christ could not be said to be Jehovah our Righteousness, if his very
Righteousness were not Imputed to us, but only the Effects, Jer. 23.6. And upon
what is it grounded that the Church is named as it is in Chap. 33.16. but upon
Christ's Imputed Righteousness?

Arg. 7. I might add that Argument which others have urged, that as the Sin of
the first Adam was Imputed to his Seed, so the Righteousness of the second to
his Seed. See Romans 5. But it is easy to prove the Sin of Adam was Imputed to
all his Posterity, he being a public Person, and all we in his Loins; if Mr.
Neonomian deny this, we will go upon the proof of it another time.

It behooves him to bear the Punishment and Wrath of God, not for his own
Person, but for our Persons, and so making a happy Change with us, he took upon
him our sinful Person, and gave unto us his Innocent and Victorious Person,
wherewith we being now clothed are freed from the Curse of the Law. Luth. on
Gal. 3.14.

Christ's Mediation was a Redeeming Mediation, he must give himself for a
Ransom or Counterprize. 1. The price is a standing price that the Law requires,
without the least Variation or Abatement. 2. There must be an Exchange betwixt
the Mediator and us; he must be a Counterpane standing in our room or stead, 1 Timothy 2.6. 3. There must be an Exchange of Person for Person, which is the
surest Exchange in War or Captivity, when nothing but one Person will be taken
in the room of another; no Gifts or Rewards could unbind the Infinite Justice
of God, 1 Timothy 2.6. Tit. 2.14.4. There must not only be Person for Person, but
like for like. 1. In Nature; one of an Inferior or Superior Nature would not
do, Heb. 2.16. Phil. 2.7. 2. There must be an Exchange of State for State,
Phil. 2.7. 2 Cor. 8.9. Isa. 53. 3, 4. Mat. 20.28. Gal. 3.13. Mr. Stone of New
Eng.


Neonom. You seem to speak as if Christ's Holiness were Imputed to us, and that
we are perfectly Holy.


Antinom. You know I told you, it may follow from your Doctrine, viz.
Imputation of Sanctification, as well as Justifying Righteousness; because
Sanctification is an Effect and Virtue of Christ's Mediation. I shall now speak
but a word to this Point; viz. That our Life of Sanctification is in Christ, we
are sanctified in Christ Jesus; and he is made of God to us Sanctification: As
we are Created in him, so we live in him as to Holiness, and we have a
compleatness of Sanctification in him; and though that fullness of
Sanctification is not properly said to be communicated by Imputation, as by
derivation of Grace; yet this Infused Grace arising into Duty, and our Duties
mingled with much Corruption, must be covered by the Imputed Righteousness of
Christ, that they may be accepted as well as our Persons. Dr. Horton on Romans
8.3. understands the Law of the Spirit of Life that is in Christ, to be all
that Holiness wherewith the living and quickening Spirit of God, has filled the
Humane Nature of Jesus Christ, which is the fullness of Sanctification in all
Grace and Holiness.


Neonom. Though Christ be perfectly holy, yet his Holiness is not so imputed to
us, as that we are perfectly holy, p. 46. You say we appear before God perfect
in Holiness, p. 428.


Antinom. You seem to imply, as if Christ's Holiness were ours by Imputation,
so much as it is ours; and therefore you insinuate as if there were such a
thing as partial Imputation: But we speak not any thing either of Christ's
Holiness, as so Sanctification by way of Imputation, but of real Communication
from him to us; of which perfect Fullness we do receive, by the new Creation in
him, and Grace received from him, as Members from the Head, in our measures, by
virtue of our mystical Union to him.

2. I said, Let me tell you, if God had not laid the Iniquities of Men on
Christ, Dr. Cr. p. 428.
there is never a Soul had entered into Heaven: For there is no Refuge to fly to,
there is no hope of drawing near to the everlasting Kingdom of Blessedness, till
the Lord Jesus cleanse you thoroughly from all Sinfulness and Filthiness; and
so you appear before God perfect in Holiness. It is his white Raiment makes us
worthy to walk with the Lamb in White; he counsels the Church of Laodicea to
buy of him White Raiment. Now see now we are abused by you. The Words you refer
your Proof to, does relate to, and is intended of the state of Glory, that the
Saints must be personally and perfectly holy before they can draw near to God
in that full Fruition of him in the state of Blessedness in Heaven. If there is
any thing understood of the Saints Perfection in this Life, it is not denied
but that their Graces and Duties are imperfect here, as they come from and are
acted by them, and are mingled with much Sin and Pollution; but their
acceptance with God must be in a way of Perfection. 1. In that Christ, of whom
we are Members, and who is made unto us Sanctification, as the Head of the
Body, the Ro^ and Fountain is perfect in Sanctification, and we in him, Col.
1.19. chapter 2.10. 2. That all the best Duties and Services as coming from us, and
performed by us, being mingled with Sin and Corruption, must be accepted in and
through Christ, and covered in his righteousness; so that as they are presented
unto God by our Advocate, they come before him washed white in the Blood of the
Lamb, and persumed in his Incense.


Neonom. God cannot account a sincere Christian perfectly holy: The Union in
Marriage does not transferr habitual Qualifications from Husband to Wife. Is a
foolish Wife perfectly wise because her Husband is so? It Is absurd: Our
restored Holiness is through the Operations of the Spirit, and not by
transfusion. If the very Holiness of Christ's Persons be in us, if increated,
then we are God's; if created Holiness of Christ's Humane Nature be in us, it
must depart from him, and cease to be in him. P. 47.


Antinom. It would take up deservedly some Paper to show the Error and
Sophistry of what you have spoken: The Sum is, that you deny Christ to be a
public Person, and that all that Grace and Fullness that is in him by reason of
the Hypostatical Union of both Natures, and that Unction without measure which
he received, was only to qualify him singly and for himself, as an Individual
Person, and not to be conveyed and communicated unto us; and therefore none of
his Fullness is received by us; that the Spirit, not his Spirit: Neither do we
live by virtue of our Union to him, as a Root, Head, Fountain; but if we
partake of the Divine Nature, as the Apostle Peter, Ephesians. 2. chapter 1. says, We
are made Gods. If we partake of the Virtues of Christ, we rob him, and they are
no more in him. You abuse the Similitude of Husband and Wife used by the
Apostle, Ephesians. 5. and would make it run on Four Feet. You consider not that Adam
and Eve at first was the true Type the Apostle aims at to represent Christ and
his Church by: Eve being taken out of Adam, had her Nature in him first, and
was created out of him, and so was Flesh of his Flesh, and Bone of his Bone.
You must distinguish between the Individual Person and Qualification of the
first Adam, and his public Capacity, Headship and common Nature; he had a
peculiar distinct Person and Habits belonging to it as such, but he had also a
common Nature communicable to his Wife and to his Posterity by Propagation, not
only Eve's Nature, but ours was in him radically. And therefore the Prophet
Malachy says, that God made but one at first, Mal. 2.15. though he had the
residue of the Spirit, and could have made more, as he did in the Creation of
Angels; but therefore one, that he might seek a Seed of God, (...). Now this
Seed of God was found in the Seed of the Woman that was made out of Man, and
was but one; as Adam was made but one common Person, so Christ, and the Church
his Wife is made out of him, created in him as Eve was, and have a Nature
common in Christ. And does it follow, that because Adam had the common Nature
to Eve and his Posterity, 1. That his Individual Qualities were communicated,
taken from him, and given to Eve? Was Adam turned into Eve? Was Adam's Wisdom,
Holiness, his Natural or Moral Virtues taken from Adam, and given to her or
them? The common Nature of a Genus is communicated and propagated by
Individuals, without robbing the Individual. Mankind is propagated daily by
Individuals, yet those Individuals lose nothing of their proper Adjuncts. If
Men were not Strangers to Logic and Natural Philosophy, and ordinary Terms of
Law, they would not make so much ado about this common Nature of Christ, which
in him is Mystical and Transcendent.

I shall not here enlarge, but enquire what is the Opinion of the Protestant
Divines.


Calv. Dr. Davenant, I pray speak in this matter what your Sense is. Dr.
Davenant on Col. 1.19. 1. There was in Christ a fullness of habitual Grace;
neither take we this to be Infinite, seeing it was a created Qualitas, and
inhered in the mind of Christ, which also was a Creature, it could not be
infinite; but by fullness of Grace we understand all those Perfections to which
the Nature of Grace does extend it self. 2. We consider why Christ ought to
have a fullness of Grace: 1. E Debito congruitatis, it was due to him in a way
of meetness, by reason of his Union to the Word. 2. It was meet that which was
nearest to the influencing Cause, should partake most of the Influx. 3. There
was Debitum necessitatis, It was necessarily due, from the Supposition of the
End, by reason of the Habitude [or relation of Christ himself to the Humane
Nature; for Grace was conferred upon him, not as a private Person, but as an
universal Principle,] from whom it is transfused into other Men, [you say it is
not by Transfusion, p. 47.] All things ought to be full, and in an oneness. The
Evangelist shows, that Grace is diffused to us, Ephesians. 4.7.

And on Colos. 2.10. (1.) To be complete in Christ, 1. Is spoken from the
Effect. Christ is not only perfect, in whom dwells all the Fullness of the
Godhead, but he makes us perfect and complete, we having all things in him and
his Doctrine necessary to Salvation. 2. The Second Reason is taken from his
Office; Christ is the Head. As to the first, We have perfect Wisdom, right
Knowledge of the Doctrine of the Gospel, John 17.13. 1 Cor. 2.2. 2. We have
complete Righteousness, for Satisfaction to the Law of God, and for our Sins.
3. In Christ we have Sanctification or inherent Righteousness: For what is
Sanctification other than the washing away of our Errors and Vices, whereby we
are set at a distance from God, and the Susception of Gifts and Graces, whereby
we may draw nigh to God in his Service -- And this is done as we stand united
to Christ by his Spirit, Romans 1.4. chapter 8. 9.

In eo] non ex eo aut per eum solummodo. In him, not from him, or by him only;
but he says, We are complete in him, to give us to understand, that we have
that foresaid Wisdom, Righteousness and Holiness, not as we behold Christ as
existing far from us, but as we are incorporated in Christ, as we have Christ
abiding and dwelling in us; and we have this Grace from Christ, not the Stream
from the head Fountain; for it is not needful that he that will drink of a
Fountain, should go into the Fountain -- But it is otherwise here; for we cannot
receive of Christ's Fullness, unless we are in him. As the Old Adam is in us, as
the cause of Corruption and Death, so the New Adam dwells in us as the Cause of
Righteousness and Salvation. So we are said to be in Christ, to dwell in him,
to abide in him, John 15.4, 5. Whatever therefore Men hope or please themselves
with of Grace, Righteousness, Sanctification or Glorification, it will prove a
mere Mock and Dream, if they be not in Christ, and Christ in them. And now
Christ is in us, and we in him, when we are united to our Head, and grafted as
Branches into the Vine, by the Bond of the Spirit, and Faith wrought by the
Spirit in our Hearts, Romans 8.9. John 3.36.


Calv. Speak to this Point, Dr. Horton.

In that Text, Romans 8.2. There are three Terms before us; There Is Life, the
Spirit of Life, there is the Law of the Spirit of Life. 1. By Life we are to
understand, the Grace of Holiness and Sanctification; not that which is
inherent in our Nature being regenerate, but the full and perfect Holiness
which is in the Humane Nature of Christ as the proper Subject of it; this is
the Fountain from which there is a continual flowing of Grace to all that are
truly united unto Christ. 2. By the word Spirit we understand the Spirit of
God, the Original from whence it flows, the Activity and Intention of it. This
Life; for Spirit is a Word of Emphasis -- 3. The Law is the Prevalency and
Force of this Spirit of Life -- All Holiness wherewith the living and quickening
Spirit of God has filled the Humane Nature of Christ, and it has freed thee
and me, and all others that are in Christ from the Power of the sinful and
deadly Corruption of our Nature; and there is a Fullness and Sufficiency of all
Grace and Holiness in Christ considered as Man. Col. 1.19.2.3, 9. John. 1.14.
Psalm. 45.7. John 3.34.


DEBATE VIII. Concerning the Conditionality of the Covenant of Grace.
Calvin. BEcause the Question about the Conditionality of the Covenant of Grace
has been greatly Controverted, and is one of the most considerable Points on
which matters in difference does depend, I am desirous some one or other of us
first may truly describe, and impartially unfold the Nature and Difference of
Covenants. Mr. Philalethes, I take you to be an unbyassed Man; and I think I
have heard you offer some things of this kind, which may tend much to the
clearing up of many Points before us of this nature.


Philal. Sir, I shall readily contribute my Mite, and submit it to the
consideration of your better Judgments.

1. The word Covenant comes a Conveniendo; because when two Parties agree in
some one thing or more on mutual terms, it is usually called a Covenant; and it
comprehends and takes in the Nature of a Contract or Bargain. The Latin have
diverse words to express a Covenant by; Pactum, compactum, conventum, foedus.
Cicero gives a very plausible account of the Etymology of foedus, that is,
quasi fidus, quod in foedere interponatur fides; that in a Covenant there is a
plighting of troth; but it seems the word is most probably derived from an old
Heathenish Custom of ratifying a Covenant by the Sacrificing of a Sow great
with Pigs, quod in foedere foeta porca feriretur. I take pactum therefore or
compactum to be the better word, and expressing enough of the thing meant,
coming from paciscor, quasi pacis Actum; and if it carry the significancy of
any Ceremony in Covenanting, it is that of striking of Hands, percussio manuum;
thence Covenanting is called striking a Covenant. The Greek words some of them
vary not from the Import of the Latin, such as (...); but these are hardly used
by the N. Te. or the LXXII Interpreters for a Covenant, and therefore we need
not stay upon them. The word in most use is, (...), a Testament, such a
Covenant as is like a Last Will and Testament; for this seems to be the true
original meaning of this word; Isocrates using it thus, (...), Fortunas populo
ex Testamento reliquit; and yet many instances may be given, wherein it appears
that all sorts of Covenants are expressed by it; but it is observable the Spirit
of God pitcheth upon this word as most expressive of Sacred Covenants; because
the promulgation of the Covenant of Grace was always managed in a way of
Testament, Typically with the Patriarchs, and under the Mosaical Dispensation,
and really by the Offering up of Christ; and the Apostle gives us this account
of it, Heb. 9.15, 16. Hence the Promise of Life confirmed by the Death of
Christ, declared and promulgated in the Gospel of the Old and New Testament is
(...). The Hebrew word for it is (...) from (...) elegit; because the Persons
Covenanting do it on free choice, and so the Conditions or Terms are mutually
agreed on, or from (...) precidit, succidit, quia Victimae cedi in foederibus
pangendis solebant, in making the Covenant, the Sacrifice was cut in pieces,
and laid so that the Covenanters passed between them, Genesis 15 10. And by a
Metonimy, the Sacrifice or Ceremony used in Ratification was called by the Name
of the Covenant it self; and after this manner is Circumcision called a
Covenant, Acts 7.

2. A Covenant then is a mutual Obligation upon certain terms between two
Parties. Poedus non est pactum tantum (...) unius lateris, quale illud cum
creaturis irrationalibus, Hos. 11.18. Clopenb. de Foed. Vet.
A Covenant differs from a Vow, because in a Vow there need be but one part; a
Man may promise to, and resolve with himself to do this or that thing, there
need not be two parties in making a Vow; though most times it is making a
promise to God, and then it carries the Nature of a Covenant, and to this may
belong a Sanction by way of Imprecation upon nonperformance.

3. As there are two parties in a Covenant, so in a Covenant properly so, there
are two parts, a Condition and a Promise. The Condition is the Terms offered by
the Covenanter to the Covenantee, Foedus e^ pactum mutuae fidei.
upon the performance of which the Promise becomes due unto him; and this
supposes these two things necessarily. 1. The Covenantees ability to perform
the said tendered Condition. 2. His Consent and Acceptance of the Terms; and
here there is no other Sanction usually than the Promise and Forfeiture
expressed in the Obligation upon nonperformance, confederatorum mutuose
obligantium.

4. A Covenant is either express and complete in parts, There Is a Covenant
express, and a Covenant in Law; a Covenant express, when all Terms are
expressed; a Covenant in Law is that which the Law intends to be made in such
a case, though it s not expressed; the first is called also a Covenant in fact;
there is also a Covenant Personal and Real. Olden Dorpius, Cook.
i. e. a Covenant perfect, or modo quodam. A perfect Covenant is when two
Parties of equal Liberty and Rank do freely, voluntarily, and upon deliberation
enter into mutual Obligations, with express Conditions and Promises; and here
it is always requisite that there be as it were an equality, i. e. at least a
due proportion between the Persons Covenanting, that each may be capable of
standing upon his own Terms as well as the other, and not one bound to Terms at
the mere good will and pleasure of another; as a Child cannot in Nonage stand
upon Terms with a Parent, but must be concluded in his or her will and
pleasure; or a single Subject with a Sovereign Prince, etc. and therefore the
condition to be performed ought to be such, which is not precedently due by any
former Relation or Duty; here must be a power in each party, as sui juris, to
take or refuse without breach of any former Obligation. In this Covenant the
Sanction is agreed upon by way of stipulation and restipulation, exchange of
conditions with forfeiture mutually.

5. There are Covenants which are not Express, Explicit or Complete in the
former manner, i. e. not between parties bearing a proportion to one another;
and therefore one bound in Duty or Relation to be subjected to the Will and
Pleasure of the other Antecedently, or fallen under the Breach of their Duty,
and Relative Obligation, and so lying at his Mercy; and such are the Covenants
that are made between Parents and Children under Age, Masters and Servants
while in Service; between Sovereign Princes in Actual Dominion, and their
Subjects. Of these Covenants there are two sorts. 1. A Covenant by way of
Legislation, or a Law Covenant. And, 2. A Covenant by way of Promise, or free
Obligation, without Condition required to Entitle to the Promise; the Spirit of
God calls the first of these a Law, and it is properly so, and the second a
Covenant of Promise.

6. A Law Covenant, 1. Presupposes these two things. 1. Foedus minime hic
intelligitur reciprocum aut equale jus contrahendi propter partium
inaequalitatem cum altera sit Deus altera homo, creatura, non est humani sed
divini hujus foederis institutio dicitur (...) Legislatio. Clopenberg. de Foed.
Vet.
A Sovereign Legislative Power duly lodged in the Lawgiver, or else his Law
Covenant is but Usurpation. 2. A Power and Ability in the Subject to perform
the Conditions his Law requires, or else the said Law is Unreasonable, Unjust
and Tyrannical.

2dly. It implies, 1. That both the Condition and Sanction be at the will and
pleasure of the said Sovereign Lawgiver. 2. That the first and natural end of
the Law is Obedience to the preceptive part, which Obedience is due first by a
Relative, Politic or Natural Relation of the Subject to the Legislator, so
antecedaneous to the Law, and secondarily to that particular Law Obligation.

3dly. Consequently to this Obedience, whether it be little or more, there is
an Entitling to the remunerative part of the Law, if any expressed, or implied;
and by virtue of the compact is a Reward, and the said Obedience, though
infinitely disproportionable, is meritorious. But in case of Transgression, the
Sanction by way of Penalty takes place, and is called the Wages of Sin, such a
Covenant as this was the Covenant of Works; and it is not to be supposed that
this Law Covenant was grievous to Adam, having a Concreated Perfection both of
Ability to perform it, and an absolute Delight in the whole revealed Mind and
Will of God, from the highest Principle of Love to God with all his Heart and
Soul; neither could his Obedience be without unwavering, steadfast Faith,
wherein when he began to stagger, his Fall began.

7. Adam stood under this Law Covenant as under a Covenant of Works, wherein he
is to be considered, and the Law it self. 1. He himself under these
Considerations. 1. As Endowed with a Personal Perfection, and lying under a
particular obligation to Obedience, both previous to, and directly by that Law
with Sanction, which the Sovereign Creator brought him under. 2. God brought
not him only as a single private Person under this Obligation only, but as a
public common Person, the Head of all Mankind; and he was not only the
Covenant Representative, but the Natural Fountain; the whole Nature being in
his Loins, and therefore that first Covenant Breach of his threw the whole
Nature out of Covenant, the Law charging Transgression upon the whole Humane
Nature, and laying it under the sentence of Death, Romans 5. Hence his Sin is
justly Imputed to all his Posterity, the whole World becoming guilty before
God, besides that a Corrupted Nature which is propagated to all his Posterity.
2dly. The Law it self. 1. The particular Command, or rather Prohibition that
Adam stood under, had these things in it. 1. It was but a small Branch of that
Moral Obedience which God expected from him, and put him upon trial by, but his
breaking thereof in one point made him guilty of all, God showing thereby unto
him and the World that no Condition could be accepted but perfect Obedience. 2.
He was not required to work out unto himself any further Grace than he had
freely received, but to persist in that, and therefore the Duty incumbent upon
him was perseverance in Grace. 3. The particular Obedience required of him for
his probation, was very easy and small, next to nothing; negative, and but
withholding his Hand from an Apple, and bore no proportion as a Condition to
the Promise of Eternal Life, and therefore could never have merited in respect
of the Value, but would have been Meritorious by reason of Law compact. 3. If
he had persevered, it must have been by Grace, as his Ability was of Grace, and
so it is with the Angels that stand; they have nothing but what they have
received, and therefore they are saved by Grace in a Covenant of Works.

8. The Law by reason of the Fall of Man, and God's Will to restore him by a
Savior, is not Vacated and Abolished, but remains the same still in the
commanding Part and Sanction. It requires Moral Obedience of Man as God's
Creature, and continues to condemn Man for the first Sin, and all Sins derived
from it, both Original and Actual, in Unregenerate and Regenerate; the
preceptive parts of it are Rules of Obedience to Redeemed Ones, and the
Sanction remains even to them in Christ Jesus, the Law obtaining its complete
end as to Righteousness Active and Passive in the second Adam. Besides this,
the Law that God governs the World by, and will Judge it by at the last Day,
the Works of Wicked Men will be Condemned, and their Persons for their Works;
the Saints shall be also Justified by their Works, because their Persons and
their Works are perfect in Christ Jesus, they being in him, shall be found
perfect before God, and there is no Condemnation belonging to them, nor Sin to
be laid unto their Charge.


Of a Covenant of Promise.
THere is a Covenant by way of free unconditional Obligation, and that is where
the Principal or Supreme Covenanter binds himself to the Covenantee, absolutely
requiring no condition to be performed by the Covenantee before his performance
of the Promise; and in a sense this Covenant is (...), not as a Covenant with
the Stones of the Field, that abide incapable Subjects of Restipulation; but it
supposes the Covenanters to be such as are by the Promise made capable and
willing to restipulate and perform all Duties for matter and manner, that may
answer the design of the Covenant consequential to the bestowing of Promise, in
which their Obedience is contained.

2. That God has Covenanted thus with the Creature, without requiring previous
Conditions to the Performance of the Promise, is not to be questioned; such was
that made with Noah, Genesis 9.11. (...) LXXII. (...), I will [i. e. alone, and by
my self] set up and establish my Covenant with you, without calling you forth
to restipulate or perform Conditions; and the Promise was, that all Flesh
should not be cut off any more by the Waters of the Flood, nor shall there be a
Flood to destroy the Earth any more. God laid Man under the performance of no
condition to Entitle him to this Promise; yea, though he lay under a Forfeiture
of all good things promised in the first Covenant, and a Desert of all Calamity
and Destruction, and neither able or willing to enter into Covenant with God by
the performance of any Duties, yet God ties himself that for that this kind of
Destruction should no more come upon the Earth; there was also the Covenant
concerning the continuance of Day and Night, and that the Seasons of the Year
should be opportune, regular and constant, Genesis 8.22. To both these Covenants
is the Covenant of Grace compared in respect of its Absoluteness and
Perpetuity, Isa. 54.9. Jer. 33.25. The Promulgation thereof under the Old and
New Testament, are thence called (...), the Covenants of Promise.

3. Such a Covenant as this is a Testament which takes place among the most
Entitling Covenants in the World, The Apostle does more than once speak of the
Covenant of Grace by the Nature of a Testament, which is the immutable purpose
of God, and suspendible upon no condition, but as it were his last Will of
bestowing Eternal Life upon the Elect, which being built upon the unchangeable
Counsel of God, and has its Sanction in the Death of Christ the Testator, it
cannot be subverted by any Infidelity of the Elect, neither it is firmness depend
upon any Faith of man, seeing in the said Covenant God has provided
unchangeably no less for their Faith than Salvation. Wits. de foed. p. 195.
whereby a Legacy is freely Bequeathed, Entitling the Legatee to the Estate
Bequeathed, without any Duties or Conditions previous to the said Title by
Bequeathment; but the Estate Bequeathed by Will and Testament becomes due upon
the Death of the Testator, according to his free Constitution; hence the
Exhibition of the Covenant of Grace in the Old and New Dispensations, are
called Testaments because of their Absoluteness, under whatever Vails of
Conditions they seemed to be clothed; and because it was confirmed and become
due by Death Typically, under the Mosaical Dispensation by the Death of the
Sacrifices, but really by the Death of the Testator, accomplished in the
Gospel-Days: And this was it is Sanction, and the proper Sanction of a Testament.

4. This Covenant is said to be absolute, free and unconditional in respect of
us that are saved by it, because there was no Capacity, Ability or Will in Man
since the Fall to perform any Covenant-Conditions or Duties to God as such, but
he lay utterly condemned and dead in Sin. All Salvation must come to him of
Free Gift, even Life, whereby he might perform any vital Act; for all Action is
from Life, and no Action can be before Life, but must proceed from it: Man in
Innocence acted from Life in Innocence; and that he should act before, or
without Life, is most absurd to think, or that in a state of Spiritual Death he
should act for Life: The natural Man can do neither; before he can do any thing
for God the Absolute Promise must be performed of giving him Resurrection from
the Dead, the new Birth, the new Nature, the new Heart. So that the Covenant of
Grace is considered as totally free and absolute as to the Tenure of, and
Performance relating unto Man in his lost and fallen estate and condition, all
the good contained in it relating to us by way of Promise, and bestowed upon us
by way of Free Gift, even Faith and all Holiness, Grace and Glory.

5. But taking the Covenant of Grace or Promise in the full extent of it,
Foedus gratiae respectu Sponsoris magis foederis notionem habet significationem
pactum mutuae fidei (...) respectu nostri magis Testamenti rationem habet quasi
(...) esse. Witsas, p. 597. de Foedere.
it is a mixed Covenant, a conditional and absolute, a Covenant of express
Compact between two stipulating Parties, upon propounded Terms; and a Covenant
of Promise, wherein God has freely given us his Son, and in him Life eternal.
It is therefore to be considered as it respects Christ, and as it respects the
Elect in him.

6. As it respects Christ, it carries the Nature of an express complete
Covenant of Works, Sponsor Testamenti Christus vocatur Heb. 7.11. non eo
precipue nomine qui pro Deo and promissis illius nobis spondet, aut quia pro
nobis spondet nos obedituros quemadmodum Moses Exodus 19.3.3. Quanto Christus
major Mose tanto prestantiori modo sponsor fuit, sponsio illius in eo
consistet, quod in sese recepit prestare conditionem illam, citra quam salva
Justitia Dei, gratia and promissiones ipsius ad nos non poterat pervenire and
qua prestira omnino illae ad filios foederis perventurae erant. Nisi ergo
Christi sponsionem evacuare velimus, and Socinianis pessimis Scripturae perver
soribus gratificari velimus, necesse est foedus aliquod concipiamus cujus
conditiones Ch^istus in se recepit spondendo apud parrem se eas pro nobis
prestiturum, and quibus prestitis spondere nobis pro parre possit de gratia
gloria infallibiliter nobis donanda. Herm. Witsus de Oeconomia Foed. p. 104.
and that in respect of the Party's covenanting, and the tenure of the said
Covenant: The Party's covenanting was the Father and the Son; God the Father
proposing, and God the Son accepting the Terms: Here the Parties Contrahentes,
or Confederantes, were equal, Phil. 2. and had equal freedom of accepting or
refusing the Terms; hence the Agreement was Mutual and Reciprocal. The Tenure
of the Covenant was Express Conditions and Promises upon the performance of
them by Reward in a way of Remunerative Justice, Isa. 53. The Conditions were
of the highest Nature, 1. To satisfy offended Justice on the behalf of the
Elect, looked upon as fallen by the Transgression of the Law Covenant in the
first Adam, and to be the end of the Law for all Righteousness both Active and
Passive to all them that should believe. 2. That the Condition performed by
Christ should not only be Meritorious, Virtute compacti, as therefore Adam's
should have been, but that they should be adequately so, they bearing an
equality to and with the Eternal Life promised, by reason of the Transcendent
Excellency of the Person, and the performances: And herein he became, and
stands the Middle Person or Mediator betwixt God and Man; and hence as he was
the Covenanting Head and Representative of the Elect, so he undertook to be,
and was the Foederal Condition in what he was, and what he did; and to him as
such was all the Promises primarily made, and in him performed, all being Yea
and Amen in him; and hence he became the Fundamental Promise, the Father giving
us his Son, and Eternal Life in him; upon which accounts he is fitly called the
Covenant.

7. This Covenant is Conditional in respect of the Justice of God and the Law
of Works, for Grace being to be magnified in a Salvation by way of Mercy, the
Subjects of it were such as had broke God's Righteous Law and offended Justice,
and such who were never able to fulfill this Law by perfect Obedience;
therefore it was Incumbent on the Mediator to make Reconciliation, by coming
between the Justice of God and the Elect, to stand in their stead, and to
fulfill all Righteousness on their behalf.

8. Again the Conditionality of the Covenant may be considered to be in Christ,
as he is the men way of conveyance of all good things from God to us, all
Blessings come in and through Christ to us; all Union and Communion that God
has with us and we with him, is in and through Jesus Christ, there is no other
Name for it given under Heaven; and he is become the Living and Dispensing
Fountain of all Grace and Glory, the Way, the Truth, and Life, John 14.

9. Upon a due consideration of the Federal Conditions there will result an
appearance of two sorts of Promises not differing Specifically, but modo
quodam, and respectively only; some that refer most immediately and directly to
the Elect, and others that have their Aspect more immediately on Jesus Christ.
As to the first sort they are to the Elect as such, and therefore to Christ the
Head of them, and the Firstborn among many Brethren; and so the Promise of
Eternal Life is made unto him and them. As to the second sort which are
Rewarding unto Christ, and the Crowning him with Glory and Honor, though they
primarily respect Christ, yet fall down from his Head to the Skirts of his
Garment, and become a Joy, Comfort and Crown to all the Elect, what other can
such be? As seeing his Seed, and prolonging his Days, and the prospering of the
good pleasure of the Lord in his Hand.

10. Divines differ about the Conditions of the Covenant of Grace; we are of
their Opinion, who think that in accurate speaking, that the Covenant of Grace
has no Conditions properly so called in respect of us. A Condition properly so
called in the matter of a Covenant, is such an Action, which being performed,
gives a man a right unto the reward: Such a Condition in the Covenant of Grace
cannot he exacted of us, its very plain, because a right to Life cannot come
upon any action of ours, but only upon the righteousness of Christ; seeing he
was for us (...), The Righteousness of the Law; he fulfilled it perfectly, and
left nothing at all to be required justly of us to the gaining a right unto our
selves. Wits. ad Foed. cum Elect. p. 195. 9.
The Nature of the Covenant of Grace is Absolute, and a Covenant of Promise,
notwithstanding all the Conditionality contained in it, and that must be
understood in these respects. 1. In respect of the Original Proposer of this
Covenant, it came from the free and absolute Will, Grace and Purpose of the
Father, 1 Timothy 1.9. and ver. 1. This Covenant was not purchased, no not by
Jesus Christ; the Covenant it self, Christ in it, and all the Glory of it lay
in the Eternal Council of Gods Will, and became the purpose thereof, and
accordingly transacted with Jesus Christ, and in him with all the Elect as
their Representative. 2. Hence it was free and absolute as to the Elect
personally considered, the whole of the Foederal Conditions lay upon their Head
as Undertaker for them. 3. The Covenant, and Grace thereof is free and
absolute, and not conditional and suspended upon the unstable will of man --
Between God the Father indeed and Christ as the second Adam, the transaction of
the Covenant was wholly conditional -- Yea, he undertook not only for his own
works, but for ours. True indeed it is, that when we believe, it is we only
that believe! and when we work, it is we that work but our working is not the
cause of his Grace, but his Grace is of our working. Dr. Reynolds Works, last.
Edit. p. 923.
If the Covenant be considered, as it is applied actually unto the Elect in
time; this is done absolutely in bestowing the Gift of the Promise to dead
Creatures, in whom there is an absolute impossibility of performing the least
entitling Act to the Promise; and therefore there can be nothing freer than
Life to a dead Creature; neither does Life given entitle to action; that is very
absurd to say, but it is a Principle of Action; but Life, and such a Life, and
all the Effects of it proceeds from the same Gift, and this is Eternal Life. 4.
Hence all those Promises that contain the Promulgation of the Covenant in it is
O^iginal Nature, and as respecting us, express the Tenure of it as most free
and absolute, as it was revealed to Adam, Abraham, David, and in the
Gospel Dispensation since Christ. 4. The Absoluteness of this Covenant appears
as to us, in that all the Federal entitling Conditions contained in it is to be
found in another, and not in us, nor wrought in us; for whatever is wrought in
us, is from free Gift, and of Promise, and must have some condition performed
by another as Federal, before we can partake of it. Therefore there is nothing
in us before or after Conversion that does belong to the Federal Condition; all
our Gospel Obedience is to be referred to the Promise, and is built upon it;
therefore it is absolute, because both Christ, the Condition, and all the good
things promised, are freely bestowed upon us.

11. For the better understanding of the Nature of the Covenant of Grace,
Medium est vox communioris significationis quam conditio, non omne medium est
conditio licet omnis conditio fit medium, sed medium ad aliquid obtinen dum ex
contractu vel foedere illud demum est conditio. Dr. Twiss.
we must distinguish well upon the Nature of Conditions: There are two sorts of
Conditions; Conditions Federal, and Conditions of Connection or Dependence of
things one upon another. Federal Conditions are Terms agreed on in
Covenant-contract between the Parties covenanting; whereupon the Promises made
become due by Reward and Debt: And this supposes, that the Terms proposed be
accepted before it become a Covenant. A Covenant is not forced; and therefore
if the Covenant of Grace were made upon conditional Terms with Sinners, it
could not be a Covenant-Agreement consummated, till they had first accepted the
Terms. 2. It always supposes there is a Power and Ability in the Party on whom
the Covenant-Condition lies to be performed, previous to the Proposal of the
said conditions, otherwise they would be vain and absurd. Hence to assert Faith
or Obedience to be the Federal Conditions, does unavoidably throw Men into the
Arminian Doctrine of Free Will, and of a Natural Power in Man to provide for
his Salvation in the performance of the said Foederal Conditions. But we
affirm, neither Faith it self; no, not the Gift of the Spirit that works Faith,
not our Union to Christ, no Gifts that accompany Salvation, are Foederal
Conditions. Christ in the Exercise of his Mediator's Office in his Humiliation
and Exaltation, is the only Foederal Condition wherein all entitling Conditions
particularly mentioned in the Gospel are lodged and treasured up, and are
freely by Christ bestowed on us.

12. There are also Conditions of Connection by way of Order and Dependence of
things one upon another, Whereas the Scripture often inculcates such
Expressions as these, Without Faith none can please God, Without Holiness none
can see God; as if they had called Faith and a new Life Conditions of the
Covenant; when in accurate speaking, and according to the nature of this
Covenant, on God's part they are Executions of former Promises, and an Earnest
of future good: But if we will call these Conditions, they are not so much
Conditions of the Covenant, as of the certainty that we are in the Covenant.
Wits. de Foed. 196.
which are rations rerum inter se, and belong to Logic; and they arise from
all Arguments Artificial or Inartificial, Prime and Ort, Simple or Comparate,
Consentany or Dissentany, and they run in a Connex Axiom, when the said
Conditionality is expressed. As thus, Si Animal est homo est rationale; si
figura est trigularis est and trilateralis: If a Creature be a Man, he is a
Rational Creature. If a Figure have 3 Corners, it has three sides; all things
in the World are capable of coming under this kind of Conditionality; yea, the
most absolute Beings: As if God be the first Cause, he is the Creator of all
things. In this Sense Creation is a condition of Salvation. If a Man be saved,
he must be created. So Election a condition, if a Man be saved, he must be
elected; but Election is not a Foederal Condition. So if a Man believe he shall
be saved, Believing is a condition of connection to Salvation. If a Man have the
Spirit of Christ, he shall believe unto Salvation; but neither Faith nor Union
are Foederal Conditions. A state in Grace is a condition to a state in Glory by
way of connection in the Promise: But one is not a Foederal Condition of
another, but both come in in the Gift of Grace. In this Sense the Covenant of
Promise contains all the Conditions of Order and Dependence in the Exhibition
and Performance: The Hearing the Word is the Condition of Faith, but hearing
the Word is not a Foederal Condition: So the giving the Spirit is the condition
of Union to Christ and Faith, Faith the condition of receiving Pardon and
living in Holiness. And the giving of Pardon the condition of receiving it,
Holiness the condition of seeing God and eternal Happiness: But these kind of
Conditions are not Foe^eral entitling to the Promise, but are contained in the
Promise, and denote only the connection and dependence of one promised Benefit
upon another.

13. Hence the Ministry of Reconciliation runs conditionally. because in it the
absolute Covenant is preached. 1. Indefinitely to Elect and Non-elect. 2. The
Covenant is declared in all the Promissary and Duty-Dependances contained in
it, and Duty required because promised. 3. We must distinguish of the Ministry
of Reconciliation in respect of the Letter of it, Insertae sunt novisaederis
conditiones novae obedientiae, legali quidam Schaemate, ad normam probationis
nostrae ipsius and gratitudinis debitae -- Sic tamen and alio quoque Schemate
ipsa resipiscentia in peccati mortificatione and bonorum operum studio
promittitur tanque Dei donum quod ipse operaturus sit in nobis ut isthoc signo
and argumento fas sit, ex quo vere resipuimus and credimus (...) sperate in eam
quae ad nos defertur gratiam in patefactione Jesu Christi, 1 Pet. 1.13.

Promissionis formulae expressissimae novum foedus sancientes donatione
rescipiscentiae and novae obedientiae extant. Jer. 32.40. Isa. 52.2. 1 Pet.
1.4. 2 Pet. 1.3. 1 John 3.9. and ver. 18. Clopeub. d^ fo^d. p. 516.

Quicquid conditionis locum obtinere concipitur id omne vniversalitare
promissionum includitur si vitam aeternam solum polliceretur Deus non de^sset
specie aliqua dicendi rescipiscentiam fidem, etc. Conditiones hujus foederis
esse. Verum cum and initium and progression, and non intercisam continuationem
and consummationem denique novae vitae odem quasi ^^lur addicat. Deus in
universalitte hac promissorum nihil remanet quod totius foederis conditio
censeri queat. Nos hic de condition foederis sic agimus, non de aliqua re in
homine quae actuaalem fruitionem consummatae felicitatis precedere debet. Witf.
p. 195, 196. de Foe^ere.


and the Spirit of it, 1 Cor. 3.6. In the Letter of it, the mere external
Dispensation, that kills, because a Sinner looks upon all these conditions of
Dependence to be Foederal Conditions; but the ministration of the Covenant by
the Spirit in that Ministry is absolute, according to the Original Contract,
and the fullest Discovery in its highest Freedom: And therefore the Apostie
tells us, this Spirit gives Life. And the believing Corinthians are said to be
the Epistle of Christ written and transcribed from the Original
Covenant-Contract, not with Ink, but with the Spirit of the Living God; not in
Tables of Stone, but in the fleshly Tables of the Heart, according to that
Promise of a new Heart. Hence therefore we must distinguish between the
Covenant of Grace, it is absolute Tenure, and the Ministry of the Grace of the
Coventnt, which Ministry is conditionally dispensed, according to the connection
and dependence of good things contained in the Promise, to a mixed People,
Elect and Non-elect. The effect of this Ministry is, either to work effectually
by the Spirit according to the nature of an absolute Promise, and then becomes
a Savor of Life; or else it works only in the Letter in the conditional Nature
as a Covenant of Works, and then it kills eventually, and is a Savor of
Death and Condemnation.

14. The Covenant of Grace is to be distinguished according to its different
Revelation and Dispensation, under the Names of the Old and New Testament,
which is no Specific Difference, but only secundum adjunctae Revelationis. The
Absoluteness of this Covenant was abundantly revealed under the Old Testament
Dispensation unto the Patriarchs and Prophets, but not so clearly by the
Ministry of the Worldly Sanctuary, but veiled, on which vailedness the
faultiness of that Dispensation was charged, and did consist, in comparison of
what was to ensue. 1. It stood veiled under a Figurative, Carnal Ministry and
Ordinances. 2. Such as were weak and insufficient as to reaching those Ends
that were designed by the Grace of the Covenant, Heb. 10.1. and that in respect
of the main Gospel Grace in pardon of Sin, and purifying the Conscience. 3. In
that it insisted so much upon the Conditionality of Works, and wherein it is
said they continued not, viz. In the Mount Sinai Covenant which God gave them
when he brought them out of Egypt, Heb. 8.9. 4. In regard of that sort of
Promises which they stood encouraged by to the performance of this External
Obedience; they were usually Temporal Blessings only, and the Threats and
Curses denounced against Disobedience was usually in rsepect of outward things;
though under all this Cloudiness and Conditionality the Covenant of Promise was
applied in its Absolute Nature, as at first revealed to Adam and Abraham, which
was to all the Elect living before Christ, the Ministry of the quickening
Spirit, and a Savor of Life.

15. The Original Contract of this Covenant before the World was, is by some
called the Covenant of Redemption, and distinguished from the Covenant of Grace,
but such do greatly mistake, for both the Original Contract, and the
Manifestation thereof are one and the same Covenant, there is no Specific
Difference, that which is, is but secundum adjuncta Ordinis and Manifestationis.

Neonom. Next to the Doctrine of Imputation, which I think I have sufficiently
cleared up according to my Scheme, and fully and rightly stated Truths and
Errors in those Points: Let us now Debate the Conditionality of the Covenant
of Grace.

This being a Point of Great Concern, I shall premise an Enquiry nto some
particulars for the explaining this Subject. Q. 1. What is the Covenant of
Grace? D. W. C. 8. p. 53.

A. 1. It is not the Covenant of Redemption between the Father and Spirit as
one Party, and the Eternal Word the Lord Jesus as the other Party.


Antinom. Who ever put the Father and Spirit on one Party in the Covenant of
Grace? it is New Divinity; and secondly, you are very Magisterial in this
Negative Position, Quadam confidentia non est Virtus ut audacia. Methinks the
Judgment of the Reverend Divines should have weighed so much with you as not to
have blowed it off at one Puff.

In the Larger Catechism. Q. 30. Does God leave Mankind to perish in a state of
Sin and Misery?

A. God does not leave all Mankind to perish in the Estate of Sin and Misery
into which they fell by the Breach of the first Covenant, commonly called the
Covenant of Works, but of his mere Love and Mercy delivers his Elect out of
it, and brings them into a state of Salvation by the second Covenant,
commonly called a Covenant of Grace.

Q. 31. With whom was the Covenant of Grace made?

A. The Covenant of Grace was made with Christ as the second Adam, and in him
with all the Elect as his Seed.

You say, That the Covenant Agreement made with Christ, was not the Covenant of
Grace. You call it a Covenant of Redemption as another thing from the Covenant
of Grace. I acknowledge the Covenant of Grace is a Covenant of Redemption, and
the Covenant (you call) the Covenant of Redemption is the Covenant of Grace;
and therefore shall not incumber our Discourse with a Debate about Names, but
shall affirm that there is no such thing as an Essential Difference between the
Covenant of Grace and Redemption, the distinction made between them is but
Novel, at least that it was but lately so generally received; for it appears by
what is here spoken in this Answer of the Assembly so plainly and positively,
that they owned but two Covenants, that of Works and that of Grace. They are
only distinguished between the making and manifesting this Covenant of Grace. A
Covenant hidden, or secret, and manifest, is but distributio ex adjunctis;
therefore after they had told us that this Covenant of Grace was made with
Christ the second Adam, and with all the Elect as his Seed. They enquire next;

Q. 32. How is the Grace of God manifest in the second Covenant?

A. The Grace of God is manifested in the second Covenant, in that he freely
provideth and offers to Sinners a Mediator, and Life, and Salvation by him,
etc.

So that the Covenant of Grace contains all Grace and Mercy, Redemption, and
the offer and application thereof.


Neonom. Were this Covenant understood, I think many well meaning People would
be undeceived: In that Covenant [i. e. of Redemption] all the Causes of Man's
Salvation are adjusted and secured; all Satisfaction and Merit are on Christ,
as his undertaking, etc.


Antinom. It seems then this well-meaning Assembly was deceived, and many Able
Divines besides, who have not admitted of this Novel Distinction between the
Covenant of Redemption, and that of Grace. 2. You talk at least very
improperly; that the causes of Man's Salvation are adjusted and secured in the
Covenant of Redemption, which places it before Election; for I take the Grace
of Election to be the first adjusting and securing cause of Men's Salvation, and
not so only, but of the Covenant it self made with Christ. I thought all the
causes were sufficiently adjusted in the Council of God's Will, and that by the
purpose of Grace they were secured to us, and Redemption too. Christ's
Undertaking the charge of Satisfaction and Merit, is a cause of our Salvation,
not adjusting and securing it, they were adjusted and secured before.


Neonom. Yea, it is provided there that the Elect shall obey the terms of Life,
and certainly possess Salvation.


Antinom. 1. It Is manifest that you esteem not Redemption one of the Terms of
Life, but some other Terms distinct from it, I had thought that Christ's
Righteousness had been the great condition of our Life and Salvation, but it
seems it is but provision for the performing the Terms of Life. 2. I thought it
had been provided in Election, that all the Elect should certainly believe and
obey the Gospel, but it seems by what you say here they were only conditionally
Elected, and provision made in the Covenant of Redemption, that they should
perform the Condition, and obey the Term, (very improper) it is to perform the
Terms. Now what is in such a Covenant of Grace more than Adam's would have had
if he had stood; for God must have provided that he should obey or perform the
Terms of Life, which were to him very small and easy, no more than giving a
Pepper-corn, or not so much; only to forbear plucking and eating an Apple when
he had enough besides. There Is no Essential Difference in your Opinion, for
wherever the Creature performs a Condition of a Covenant of God's making, God
must provide for that performance, by Grace given and confirmed.


Neonom. Yea, as that Covenant was not made with the Elect, though for the
Elect; so they have nothing to do as a Condition of this Covenant.


Antinom. Rare Divinity! Men's tua sublimis supra genus eminet ipsum. 1. You say
that Covenant was not made with the Elect. The Assembly say it was made with
the second Adam and his Seed; but you I suppose deny Christ to be a second
Adam, a public Person, and a Spiritual or Mystical Root. 2. I would fain know
whether Christ in his Humane Nature was not Elect, and the Head of all the
Elect; therefore if we consider him but singly, whether he was not the
Principal Elect one? and I pray, was the Covenant made with him or for him? I
say it was made with him and for him, and so it was made with the Elect in him,
both with them and for them; or else how comes God's Purpose and Grace to be
given us in Christ Jesus before the World began; 2 Timothy 2.9. But you tell us
that the Elect have nothing to do as a condition of this Covenant; you reckon,
you highly honor Christ in giving all the Conditionality of this Covenant to
him; and what is that? It Is that he provided for our performing the condition of
another Covenant, and why might he not have prepared us by that condition for
another Covenant condition after that? But it seems your Covenant of Redemption
is but a subordinate Covenant to that of Grace, and its Righteousness
subordinate to our Righteousness, which you make the condition of the Covenant
of Grace.


Neonom. And to this [Covenant of Redemption] all absolute Promises and
Prophesies of Grace are reducible, they being a transcript hereof. D. W. p. 54.


Antinom, What is your meaning in this, it is hard to guess, whether Absolute
Promises are made in the Covenant of Redemption. And, 2. If so, whom in that
Covenant they are made to, to Christ? You must mean so; for you say we are not
in it: Then the Promise of giving a new Heart is made to Christ, and not to us.
Or, 3. If you mean they are reducible to it, as being the Covenant of Promise,
and so Christ and all his Benefits are given absolutely and unconditionally to
us in it; this makes us concerned as a Party in the Covenant; for to whom the
Promise of the Covenant belongs, to them the Covenant belongs as a Party
concerned.


Neonom. This Dr. Owen makes to be a distinct Covenant from the Covenant of
Grace. P. 268, 269.


Antinom. It is true, Dr. Owen and other Learned Divines have spoken of a
Covenant of Redemption, as in some respect distinct from the Covenant of Grace,
but make not such an ill Use of that Notion as you do: The Dr. says, He does
not call these Foederaal Transactions the Covenant of Grace absolutely: Nor is
it so called in Scripture. [And it may well be so, for we find not the Term
Covenant of Grace mentioned in Scripture] and some will not distinguish between
a Covenant of a Mediator, and the Covenant of Grace, because the Promises of
the Covenant are absolutely said to be made to Christ, Gal. 3.16. of which some
its plain the Assembly at Westminster was. And therefore it appears there have
been different Apprehensions in this matter. I reverence and honor both
Parties as Orthodox and sound in what they intended and meant in this Point;
but I must adhere to the Word of God as the most infallible Guide in this and
other things, according to what Light I receive. All the difference that I find
they make, is no more than respectu adjunctorum, that is Hiddenness and
Declaration, or at most to Execution. And indeed all I understand by Dr. Owen
is two things: 1. To show us under how many Considerations the New Covenant
comes. And, 2. Which of these Considerations it is the Spirit of God seems
mostly to point at, when it speaks of this New Covenant, as a Promise, Covenant
of Grace or Peace. And he says, It Is variously represented, 1. In the
Designation and Preparation of its Terms and Benefits in the Council of God,
which although it have the nature of an eternal Decree, yet is it not the same
with the Decree of Election, etc. 2. It may be considered with respect of the
Foederal Transactions between the Father and the Son. 3. In respect of
Declaration of it by Special Revelation. (1) By way of Absolute Promise. (2) By
way of Additional Prescription of the way and means whereby it is the Will of
God that we should enter into a Covenant-state with him, etc. 4. The Covenant
may be considered as to the actual Application of the Grace, Benefit and
Privileges unto any Persons, etc.

Now all this while he makes not two Covenants, a Covenant of Redemption, and
of Grace, but gives diverse Considerations of the New Covenant in it is
Dispensation, and under which Consideration it may most usually and properly be
termed by us a Covenant of Grace: And the ground of this Discourse is to
disprove your Notion, That the Covenant of Redemption or Surety ship is the
procuring Cause of the Covenant of Grace: And he shows that it is no where said
in the Scripture, That Christ by his Death merited, procured, obtained the New
Covenant, Dr. O. p. 266, 267.
or that God should enter into a new Covenant with Mankind; yea, that which is
contrary to it, and inconsistent with it, is frequrnrly asserted.

Now he comes to show what respect the Covenant of Grace has unto the Death of
Christ, and what Influence it has thereunto?

A. Supposing what is spoken of his being a Surety thereof, it has a
threefold respect thereunto. 1. In that the Covenant, Dr. O. p. 271, 272.
as to the Grace and Glory of it, were prepared in the Council of God, as the
Terms of it was fixed in the Covenant of the Mediator, and as it were declared
in the Promise, was confirmed, ratified, and made it revocable thereby. This
the Apostle insists on at large, Heb. 9.15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. 2. He thereby
underwent and performed all that which in the Righteousness and Wisdom of God
was required, that the Effects, Fruits, Benefits and Grace intended and
designed, and prepared in the New Covenant might be effectually accomplished
and communicated unto Sinners. 3. All the Benefits were procured by him, etc.

Now says he, The Sum of these things is, Whereas it is affirmed the New
Covenant was procured by the Death of Christ, Dr. O. p. 273.
if it be understood with respect unto the Actual Communication of all Grace
and Glory prepared in the Covenant, and proposed unto us in the Promises of it;
it is most true, all the Grace and Glory promised in the Covenant was purchased
for the Church by Jesus Christ. In this fence by his Death he procured the New
Covenant; but as to the New Covenant it self it is not procured.

All this is rather a Confirmation than a Denial of the Truth of what the
Assembly affirms concerning the Covenant of Grace.


Neonom. I say, that the Covenant of Grace is not the Covenant of Redemption
between the Father and the Son.


Antinom. You should have told what the Covenant of Grace is.


Neonom. The Covenant of Grace is the way that God has ordained to apply to
Sinners that Salvation which is prepared by Christ, and which he will enable
the Elect to comply with.


Antinom. This Definition or Description I except against. For first, it
contains not the Genus or common Nature of a Covenant, viz. to be an Agreement
wherein two Parties do mutually consent; nor the Parties wherein the Nature of
a Covenant does consist, which is a Condition and Promise; nor is there a
Covenant in the more improper fence denoted, viz. A Promise; for if it be a
Covenant of Grace, it must be at least a Covenant of Promise. 2. You say, it is
a way ordained of God: Here Is no Forma or Differentia; for many things are ways
and means, which are not Covenants; you should have said (according to your
Sense) it is God's Agreement with Sinners upon Terms of Faith and Repentance. 3.
The Application of the means effectually is part of the Salvation it self. 4.
You say this Salvation is prepared by Christ; you should have said, By the
Father in his Council and Purpose for the giving his Son, and blessing us with
all Blessings in him: The Life and Salvation is Christ, and in Christ; he is
our Life; the Father has given us Life, and this is in his Son. 5. You should
have said, Which he has promised to enable the Elect to comply with, or else
it has nothing of a Covenant in it; it carries only the force of electing
Will; and if he has promised, then to some or other, either to Christ, and
then it brings in your Covenant of Redemption; if to any other excluding
Christ, then to the Elect out of Christ: For the Promise to make a Person
comply, must be made, and must be in Nature before he does comply.


Neonom. I pray, what do you say is the Covenant of Grace.


Antinom. I shall tell you the Parties between whom it was made. It was made by
God in the Person of the Father with Man in the Person of the Son. You speak
improperly to talk of the Father and Spirit covenanting with the Son; you
should rather say, The Father, Son and Spirit covenanted with the Son: For by
this Notion you take in the Persons of the Trinity; for you must take them all
in the covenanting part; and then there is as much reason to take them in all in
their stipitulating part, because the Son is God, and so the three Persons
covenanted with themselves under the same distinct consideration in the
Godhead. But we say, God essentially considered covenanted in the Person of the
Father, with Man in the Person of the Son. His Son taking Man's part, being his
Representative, as having his Nature in the same Person; therefore as the
Second Adam, having all the Spiritual Seed in his Loins, and as a common Person
foederally.


Neonom. And what is a Covenant between these ^a^^sks?


Antinom. It Is the Promise of Eternal Life made to Christ, and to the Elect in
him to be performed in and through Jesus Christ as the great Condition to all
them that shall be saved by him. Covenants are denominated from either part, by
a Synechdoche here chiefly from the Promise, as the same is sometimes from the
Condition.

The Covenant of Grace is a great Mystery, etc. Romans 16.25. Col. 1.26. 1.
Because it was Eternal, Tit. 1.2. 2 Timothy 1.9. 2. That though between God and
Man, yet being made with us in Christ, it was between Equals, Phil. 2.6. 3.
That though it was a Covenant of Works, yet a Covenant of Grace, to Christ a
Covenant of Works, and most conditional, Isa. 53.10, 11, 12. To us absolute and
free, being a Promise of the Gift of Christ, and all Blessings in him. 4. It is
mysterious in respect of the several states that it has had. 1. Hidden. 2.
Revealed. Hidden in God before the World was; Revealed since the World. 1. Less
manifested in the Promulgation before Christ's coming. (1) In respect of the
few Emanations and Discoveries of its Brightness and Luster in Absolute
Promises to Adam, Noah, Abraham, Jacob, David. (2) In regard of it is Veiled
state. First, Under the Veils, of Sacrifices, Types, Figures. Secondly, Under a
Legal, Moral and Conditional Administration. 5. It is mysterious in regard of
the various Names and Titles that it has had from it is different
Dispensations; that under the Law was called Old and Faulty, because it made
but a partial Discovery of it is Glory and Luster. In the New Testament it is
called the New Covenant, in respect of the new and clear Dispensation; it is
called the Promise, because it appears absolutely given forth in a Promissory
way; it is called the (...) as well as (...), from the Nature of it in relation
to Sinners it is good News to them. It Is called a Testament, because confirmed
by Christ's Death.


Neonom. But you tell me not how you prove the Covenant of Grace and Redemption
are all one.


Antinom. 1. Because I know them not spoken of any where as distinct Covenants.
The Scripture of Isa. 53.10, 11, 12. is a place wherein this Covenant is so
clearly described between the Father and the Son, it holds forth the Covenant
of Grace fully and clearly, the Promise of all Grace and Benefits that are
contained in the said Covenant of Grace. And the Apostle tells us expressly,
That this Covenant-Agreement was the Will by which we are sanctified, through
the offering of the Body of Jesus once for all, Heb. 10.8, 9, 10.

2. That Covenant that contains in it the whole Matter and Form, in Conditions
and Promises, of the Covenant of Grace, does not Essentially differ from it:
but the Covenant of Redemption does. It contains Conditions and Promises of
Grace, all things that pertain to Life and Godliness; and it contains in it all
conditions upon which we may be partakers of any Promises, Christ's Person,
Offices, Sacrifice, Righteousness Active and Passive, there is no Covenant
condition, of Atonement, Propitiation, Satisfaction unto the Justice of God,
but it is here, Christ is the Great Fulfiller of the Law, and Satisfier of it;
he is the End of the Law for Righteousness to every Believer, Romans 10.4.

3. From the Veiled Dispensation of the Covenant of Grace before the coming of
Christ, their Sacrifices, and their Ceremonial Administration held forth in a
Figure, that it is made to Christ, and confirmed in him as the Great Offering,
and Atonement; Christ is there exemplified and set forth as the fullness of the
Covenant of Grace, both in respect of Promises and Conditions.

4. When we plead any thing of the Covenant of Grace, it is the Promises of Life
made to us in Christ, as Yea and Amen to us in him, in respect of obtaining and
performance to us.

5. Our Justifying Acts of Faith is fixed on Christ as the Sum of the Covenant
of Grace, as Satisfying for our Sins, and as to whom the Promises were made,
and the great thing promised, as the Fountain and Meritorious Cause of all
Blessings; he is given us as the Covenant.

6. There is all Grace to be had in this Covenant, frustra fit per plura quod
fieri potest per pauciora; there is no Grace but is given forth and received by
us in this Covenant between the Father and Son; the Gift of the Spirit, the
Grace of Faith, Justification by his Blood; by him came all Grace; yea all
other supposed Grace that came not from the Father, and through Christ, is no
Grace, and will not profit us.

7. Where the Covenanters Condition and Promises are all from Grace and Love to
us, there is a Covenant of Grace; but in that which you call a distinct Covenant
of Redemption, the Covenanters, the Conditions and Promises are of Free Grace
and Love to us; God the Father from his Free Grace and Love to us called his
Son to this Undertaking and Covenanting with him; God the Son in our Person
from his Love and Free Grace Covenanted with his Father, he came and freely
offered himself to perform the Covenant condition. The condition of this
Covenant in all Mediatorial Perfections and Performances, is freely promised
and bestowed upon us. The Promise of Eternal Life, all Grace and Glory are
promised and given, in this Covenant. That is a Covenant of Grace, wherein God
is to us a God of all Grace.

8. If the Covenant of Redemption be not the Covenant of Grace, then there is
more Covenants than the Covenant of Works, and the Covenant of Grace for Life
and Salvation, but there is no more Covenants for our Life and Salvation, but
that of Works, and that of Grace. The Minor I think hardly any will deny; but
if it be said there was Moses Mount Sinai Covenant; that was but a darker and
faultier Dispensation of the Covenant of Grace in the Moral and Ceremonial Law;
if Church Covenants be alleged under the Law or Gospel, they add nothing to
this grand Covenant, but are Accomplishments of the Promises thereof to whom it
does belong, it being promised that they shall be God's People; in this
Covenant Christ stipulates, and we in him, as we did in the first Adam, then
when we believe we stipulate, moved thereto from the Grace of the Promise, and
enter personally into this Covenant, embracing that Covenant which was made for
us in Christ, it is called laying hold of it. It is solemnly also owned,
professed and restipulated to, when we enter into Church Fellowship; repeated
Restipulations, and Renewings of the same Covenant may be, without changing the
Covenant; for as we find God often repeats this Covenant, and renews it with
his People in Revelation and Establishment, as with Adam, Noah, Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob, yet it was but the same Covenant; so are God's Children excited and
encouraged thereto from the Free Grace of the said Covenant.

I shall not here enlarge any further, but refer the Reader to that Excellent
Treatise of the Reverend Mr. Petto concerning the Covenants; where C. 2. p. 18.
he gives us this account of the Covenant of Grace, viz.

The Covenant of Grace was made and established not only with us, but jointly
with Jesus Christ, and us in him; so that both are within one and the same
Covenant, for the great Transactions with Jesus, yea, even the giving and
sending of him, and his accepting the Office of a Redeemer, and undertaking for
us, these are all of Grace as well as what is promised to us through him;
therefore the Covenant of Grace must take in all that conduces (otherwise than
a mere Decree) to our Restoration and Eternal Salvation.

1. There is no Scripture Evidence for making these two Covenants, one of
Suretiship or Redemption with Jesus Christ, and another of Grace and
Reconciliation made with us; that distinction which some use is improper, for
the parts are coincident, seeing that which was with Christ was of mere Grace
also, John 3.16. And it is promised that he should be given for a Covenant, Isa.
42.6. therefore it is of Grace we are Redeemed by him, 2 Timothy 1.9. There was
Grace before the World was, and that must be in the Covenant as with Jesus
Christ, which was for Reconciling the World to the Father, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19.
Colos. 1.20, 21. It Is true, Christ only is our Redeemer and Surety, not we in
our own Persons, -- And Christ has some peculiar Precepts and Promises
appropriated to him, which are not afforded to us in the same manner and
degree, yet this hinders not the Oneness of the Covenant with him and us.

2. The Covenant of Grace was made with Jesus Christ as a Public Person, a
Second Adam, and therefore with all his Seed in him.

3. All in the Covenant as with us, is undertaken for and promised in the
Covenant as between the Father and the Son, and so together make but one
Covenant.

4. All Covenant Blessings are primarily granted to Christ. See more, p. 23,
etc.


Neonom. Q. 2. What is intended by a Condition?

A. I answer in the Words of the Worthy Mr. Flavel (Discourse of Errors, p.
248.) An antecedent condition signifies no more than an Act of ours; which
though it be neither perfect in every degree, nor in the least meritorious of
the Benefit conferred, nor performed in our natural Strength, yet according to
the Constitution of the Covenant, it is required of us, in order to the
Blessing consequent thereupon, by virtue of the Promise; and consequently the
Benefits and Mercies granted in this Order, are and must be suspended by the
Donor, or Disposer of them, till it be performed; such a Condition we affirm
Faith to be.


Antinom. Mr. Flavel was a worthy Man; but it may be not without some Hay and
Stubble. I wish it do not prove an attempting at another Foundation besides
Christ, 1 Cor. 3.10, 11, 12, 13.

You tell us, what an antecodent condition is; that it signifies no more than
an Act of ours, and such is Faith. I suppose you and he mean, in distinction
from a consequent condition: The Antecedent gains the Estate; the Lawyers
reckon it the Purchase-Mony, the consequent condition keeps it, and it is the
Quit-rent, which if it be not duly paid, the Lord can enter and take to the
Estate: So that Faith you will have to be the Antecedent condition money
deposited and laid down, before you have any thing of your Spiritual Estate.
And you say, it signifies no more than an Act of ours. I pray, whose should it
be but ours, if the condition be to be performed by us? And why is this put in,
it signifies no more? Unless the meaning be, that Christ's Righteousness should
be shut out, and it should be reckoned under the nature of this condition
merely as an Act of ours, without respect to Christ the Author of it, and
Christ the true Object of it. And now you tell us it is Negative Qualifications.
1. It Is not perfect in every degree. What Is the meaning of that? This
insinuates as if it were perfect in some degrees. I had thought no Grace were
perfect in degrees, though as to Kind and Truth. But you will have it perfect in
some degrees, and imperfect in other degrees: Pray in what degrees is this
condition perfect, and in what imperfect? And whether it be not an imperfect
Covenant that has an imperfect Condition? 2. It Is not in the least meritorious
of the Benefits conferred, by no means, i. e. by any Intrinsic Value and
Worth, either adequate to, or excelling the Benefits received. No, your meaning
is, what you have for it is well worth your Money; it is a good Bargain: But by
your Favor, every Foederal Condition is ex pacto, meritorious; so that you may
challenge your Bargain upon Performance, if it be but 20 Guineas to purchase an
100 l. per Annum: So that we have only your Word for it, that it is not
meritorious, when it is so in reality; the nature of the thing speaks it to the
Understanding of all Men of Sense. No, no; do not think to wheedle Christ out
of his Merits, and God out of the Honor of his Free Grace, and us out of the
comfort of both. 3. You say it is not performed in our Natural Strength. No, and
yet a condition of Covenant made with Man? A most unreasonable thing, to
require a Condition of a Covenant of one, that we know has no strength to
perform it. If a rich Man should offer an Estate of 1000 l. a year to a poor
Man that he knew was not worth a Groat, provided he fetched him Twenty Pound of
his own Money; this Act would be reckoned a mocking and ridiculing this poor
Wretch. God did not require that small Condition of Adam, but that he actually
had natural Strength to perform it. You will say, God will give him Ability to
perform, so he did to Adam, previous to the Covenant. As the rich Man tells the
poor, I will give thee 20 l. to pay me for my Estate, he will say, Well, Sir,
when you give it me, I will then bargain with you; and when I have it, though
you gave it me, I shall reckon it mine as much as if I had raised it my self,
or another had given; and if we bargain, I shall expect to have my Bargain upon
this condition. Though it is a good Bargain, yet it is a Bargain, and whatever I
have of you is Debt. I can sue for it as purchased by me, says the poor Man.
Now see how well qualified this Condition is; no, no, believe it, God makes no
such lame Bargains as these: Yet you say, according to the Constitution of the
Covenant, it is required of us in order to the Blessings consequent thereupon
by virtue of the Promise. This I must confess is an Orthodox Paradox indeed.
What mean you by the Constitution of the Covenant? Is it not as other
Covenants, by the Constitution of your Scheme? Is it not by a Condition and
Promise? And is not this Condition performed Foederale Meritum? And is not, Do
this and Live, Ordo foederalis, and the Blessings consequent ex pacto, and
therefore Debt? Think not to beat us out of our Senses, that the Blessings of a
Covenant are only a consequentia Ordinis vel posterioritatis: As one Man
follows another in a narrow Path, or Ordine Naturae, as a Son is after a
Father: But here it is in Ordine ad, Virtute pacti, in order to a Foederal
Right and Challenge of the Benefits as a due Debt. But how do you understand
that Clause, By virtue of the Promise?


Neonom. It Is from God's Will in the Promise, that they are made to be
Conditions: He connected the Benefit and the Duty; though he chose those
Conditions that were fit, yet their fitness would not have availed to our
Interest in the Benefits, unless he had promised that they should avail. A
Penitent Believer had not been saved but for the Promise, though it is unlik^ a
God to have saved any that were not such. D. W. p. 55.


Antinom. Wherefore God's Will in the Promise? Are not the Promise and the
Conditions both equally willed by God? Is God's Will in the Promise any thing
besides that Will of God that is in the Condition? The plain Truth is, this is
a puzzling Doctrine, God's Will in the Promise that makes Conditions. But how?
You tell us, he connected Benefit and Duty. But in what manner? For he
connected Benefit and Duty in the Covenant of Works; and it was as much God's
Will in the Promise as you can pretend to, if I understand the Riddle: But you
say, he chose fit Conditions. It was fit God should choose his Conditions, and
it became his Wisdom and Power to make fit Conditions: But imperfect, lame,
sinful Conditions of a Covenant do not become a holy and perfect God to choose;
to cast away perfect Conditions, and take Imperfect in their room. But though
God chose fit Conditions, yet they would not have availed, (sufficient, you
reckon, but not efficient) God's choice of Persons or things in your Sense,
makes them not certainly future; yet we find that many things that God has
chosen do avail to attain the End to which he chose them, though there be no
Promise of their availing. But it seems God makes a Covenant with Man, and is
fain to enter into Bond for Man's Performance of the Condition, and perform
them himself at last in giving the first Grace. But what indeed should be the
true English, after all this Splutter about a Condition? It Is but a little
thing wrapped up in the Promise, and is ours by virtue of Promise. So that at
last our conditional Covenant is become Absolute; for we have the Duty as well
as the Benefit by Promise. The Penitent Believer has his Faith and Repentance
as a part of eternal Life given to him by Promise.


Neonom. And consequently the Benefits and Mercies granted in this Order, are,
and must be suspended by the Donor or Disposer of them till it be performed,
and such a condition we affirm Faith to be.


Antinom. And a fine business you have made of it. And consequently, i. e.
Foederally; for it is no otherwise consequently: There must be a Suspension of
the granted Benefits, not by the Donor, that is improper, but by the Bargainer:
And how long? Till he is pleased to give the Man Money to make the Purchase
with: And is not this Reason, if he be to find the Money? And is it any Fault
in the poor Man that he does not make the Purchase, when he that should sell
him the Estate has all the Purchase-money in his Hands? You bid poor Sinners
come and buy; and you say not with the Prophet, without money and price, but
you must have such a parcel of Money to do it with, which Money is in God's
Hands. They will tell you, when God gives us the Money, we will buy, and till
then it is not our Fault. He is a hard Master if he looks to reap where he sowed
not.


Neonom. These Conditions are our Duty by God's Command, and no less so by
being made Terms of the Benefit in the Divine Grant. D. W. p. 55.


Antinom. It seems you make more Conditions than one; we shall meet with them
by and by. 2. You make the Covenant of Grace a Covenant of Legislation, and so
a new Law directly opposed to the Covenant of Promise, as we do make appear.
Was not the condition appointed to Adam by God's Command, and had antecedent
Power given him to perform? Is it not unreasonable to command the performance
of a condition, where the Commander knows there is no Power to perform? Is it
consistent with the Wisdom of God to command an Impossibility to his Creature,
as a Covenant-condition? And is it just to deal with him upon his
Nonperformance, according to the Sanction of a Law? And you say, His Duty no
less by being made Terms, etc. You should have said, Legally much more. In
stead of Terms of the Benefit, you should have said, Terms of the Covenant, if
you had spoken properly. And as for the Grant you speak of, it is but
conditional, and there is no Grant at all pleadable till the Condition be
performed.


Neonom. The Covenant, tho conditional, is a Disposition of Grace: There Is
Grace in giving Ability to perform the Condition, as well as bestowing the
Benefits; God's enjoining one in order to the other, makes not the Benefit to
be the less given. D. W. p. 55.


Ant^nom. In a conditional Covenant (that is a Covenant of Works in the highest
Sense) there is always a Disposition of Grace to the Creature, even in that by
which the very good Angels stand, and was in that made with Adam. It Is Grace
that God offers Happiness to his Creature upon any Terms, when he is in a
capacity to perform them. It Is Grace to take his Creature into Covenant. The
Angels are saved by Grace, and so would Man have been, if he had stood; and
though he fell, there was that Grace you speak of in giving Ability to perform
the condition, and giving it before he put the condition upon him, which is not
here; for you will have the condition put upon a Sinner, before the Disposition
of Grace to give him Ability; which makes it a harsh dealing, and unreasonable,
and hence far from Grace, and therefore this enjoining makes not only less
Grace, but no Grace.


Neonom. It Is a Display of God's Wisdom, in conferring the Benefit, suitably to
the Nature and State of Man in this Life, whose Eternal Condition is not
Eternally decided, but are in a state of Trial; yea, the Conditions are but a
meetness to receive the Blessings.


Antinom. Gross Divinity! I had thought Christ in the Covenant had been the
great display of God's Wisdom, 1 Cor. 1. But you must have a pitiful condition,
an imperfect, sinful Righteousness instead of him, and a Covenant agreeable to
the corrupt Nature and State of Men, and indeed so is yours, for there is
nothing suits more with our carnal, corrupt Hearts, than to seek Salvation in
such a way as you pretend to. And is not the State of Believers decided in this
Life? But is it still a contingent Axiom that John a true Believer shall be
saved? What miserable consequences will hence be inferred, the conditions are
still performing these Federal Conditions and Subjective Qualifications, it may
be the Man may not perform them all, and then he perishes Eternally; there is
no certainty of Salvation here, no Man can have any more than an Opinion of it,
shake hands with the Papists and Arminians. Nay hence it seems that all the
Grace given here is no part of Eternal Life, but qualifying conditions to make
them meet for it Federally, and that in true English is to make them merit it.
Lastly, All the Doctrine of Election is hereby overthrown, you may tear out,
Ephesians. 1. and Romans 9. and several other places of Scripture out of your Bible. No
Man's Eternal Condition is by the Eternal God decided. The best Man is but upon
his Trial as Adam was, whether he will stand or fall.


Neonom. I will show you the Reason why we use the word Condition. 1. Because
it best suits with Man's Relation to God, in his presents Dealings with us as
Subjects in Trial for Eternity. D.W. p. 55.


Antinom. I know not why you should make any Apology for using the word, for
undoubtedly it best suits with your System of Divinity; though it would not
have suited with Paul's conditions, it will suit our Nature that are Dead in
Trespasses, without strength, in the Flesh, and cannot please God in the
performance of any conditions; and it suits his present Dealings you say in way
of trial for our Eternal Estate, upon our good Behavior in performance of
after conditions as well as first conditions, our Calling, Election,
Justification, Union with Christ, the Promises of Perseverance, all does not
decide our eternal Estate, nothing but our final Performance of conditions.
Lord have Mercy upon us and our Ministers! Where Is our Gospel?


Neonom. Christ as Priest has merited all.


Antinom. He ought then to be content, and not except against your Scheme, you
allow him enough.


Neonom. But as King or Priest upon his Throne he dispenses all, he enjoins
the Conditions in order to the Benefits; and makes the Benefits Motives to our
Complivnce with the Conditions: He treats with Men as his Subjects, whom he
will now Rule, and hereafter Judge.


Antinom. Now he comes to his Rectoral Rule of Government, and gives forth his
new Law. I had thought Christ had been a King, and exerted his Kingly Office
upon the Cross as well as upon the Throne; but now you say he acts as a King or
Priest upon the Throne; and as such, either King or Priest, you know not which,
he enjoins Conditions in order to Benefits. You should speak plainly; you mean,
He sets up a new Law, justifies or condemns Men by the Works of this Law, and
treats all the World as redeemed Subjects, deals with them according to this
new Law, bringing them upon their Trial for Eternity. Your meaning is, that
Christ has merited a Power to himself to exercise Dominion in the Earth, and
bring Men under his Trial and Judicature in performance of Conditions; and they
that are saved shall be saved by his Regal Power. It Is enough for his Priestly
Office, that it merited what he was to do as King: But not all; for the first
Grace must not come from his Merits; and now there is but a little Use for his
Priesthood; all the rest depend upon our Conditions.


Neonom. Now what word is so proper to express the Duty as enjoined means of
Benefits, like this Word Conditions?


Antinom. It seems you hug this Word Condition extremely.


Neonom. Yes, I do. There Is few Author's of Note, even of any Persuasion, but
make use of this Word in my Sense. viz. Twiss, Rutherford, etc.


Antinom. Few of them understood the Word as you do, or at least made use of it
in your Sense: But whether they understood it so or not, it is no great matter.
I would wish you to build a Condition-School, where all Persons might resort to
the hearing Condition-Lectures, to sit them to understand your Terms of Art in
Preaching: And let us consider a little the Nature of it. Condition comes under
several Considerations.

1. Logical; and there it is Conditio conditionans, or Conditio conditionata.
It Is more Ordinis, aut Relationis, respectu Ordinis; It arises from a Priority
and Posteriority of things: All things cannot be at once, but one thing must be
before another; and here one thing is the condition of another respectu
temporis; there is Conditio relativa; and so all Arguments are mutual
Conditions one of another, and consist e mutua alterius affectione; and here is
not Prioritas temporis sed nature Pater est conditio Filii; or rather,
Paternitas relata affectio est causa filietatis correlata affectionis. There is
Conditio Axiomatica, which arises from a Contingent Axiom, or necessary; and
either connex, because they are mostly expressed Conjunctione connexiva si. And
so there is also Conditio in dispositione Syllogistica, ex dependentia inter
conclusiones and premissa. There is also Law-Conditions. Dr. Cawel says, It is
a Rate, Manner, or Law annexed to Men's Acts or Grants, staying and suspending
the same, and making them uncertain whether they shall take effect or no. And
Papinian says, Conditio dicitur cum quid in casum incertum, qui potest tendere
ad esse aut non esse confertur. This is a general Account of a Condition, as
arising out of a Contingency, the effect depending upon an uncertain Cause. And
a Learned Lawyer says, A Condition is a Restraint or Bridle annexed and joined
to a Promise, by the performance of which it is ratifyed and takes effect, and
by the Nonperformance of it becomes void.

Such a Condition I perceive you and Mr. Flavel will have Faith to be; a
Condition upon which the Promise is made, and the Performance suspended by the
Disposer till the said Condition be performed. Conditio adimpleri debet
priusque sequatur effectus. Now this being your Condition, I say, it is
Foederal. It Is Conditio Foederalis; and let it be in value less or more, it
makes a Covenant of Works, and is clothed with all the Logical Notions of
Condititions besides. The Logical Conditions are in all things ex necessitate
dependentiae mutuae rerum, and a Man cannot move a Hand or Tongue without them.
Even Brutes and all inanimate Beings, as well as Men, they belong to the whole
Fabric and Constitution of created Beings. But a Foederal Condition belongs
only to rational Beings; and it is related to the Promise ex pacto, in a way of
Merit, and the Promise belongs to it by way of Debt. And in this Sense the
Apostle always decries the Law, or any Law, to have to do with our
Justification; he affirms, that it is always of Grace, and never of Debt, upon
the least Consideration whatever of our Performance and Qualification.

And this is the Condition that I contend against, and say,

That neither Faith, or any other Gracious Qualifications or Graces of the
Spirit, are Foederal Conditions, or Conditions of the Covenant of Grace. My
Arguments, some of them in brief are these.

That which is a Gift of the Promise of eternal Life, is no condition of it;
but Faith is a gift of the Promise, Ergo. For the Major, it is clear; for one
thing cannot be another eodem respectu and tempore. The Condition and Promise
are Opposita; they are Foederalia relata, and therefore Contraria affirmantia;
a Father cannot be a Son in that respect as he is a Father. As to the Minor,
it is out of all doubt by Divine Testimony. See John 17.3. Ephesians. 2.8. To know
Christ by Faith, is Eternal Life; and this Life of Faith is the Gift of God.
Hence Faith, that is the Benefit promised, is not the condition of it. A
Promise, or Gift of the Promise, cannot be the Condition of it self.

2. That which would make the Promise a Debt, and the Gift of it a Reward of
Debt, is not to be allowed: But to make Faith a Foederal Condition of the
Covenant of Grace, would make the Promise to be Debt, and the Reward a Reward
of Debt. Therefore Faith is not to be allowed to be a Condition of the
Covenant. For the Major, it will stand with invincible strength from the
Apostle Paul's Divinity and Logic, Romans 4.4. Believing and working are opposed
as working and not working, as Contradicentia. It Is vain and frivolous to shift
by evasive Interpretations; and all that is said to that purpose, is easily
wiped off. For the Minor, That putting Faith in as a Federal condition, would
make the Promise a Debt. The Performance of any Work, or doing any Act as a
Federal Condition, let it be never so small, the promising Federator becomes
indebted thereby to bestow the Benefit promised on the Confoederator, ex
obligatione foederali, and therefore a Debtor. Now the Apostle will not allow
any thing of this in the least Measure.

In those places where the Apostle opposes Faith to Works he speaks of such
Works as contain perfect and perpetual Obedience, such as God required of man
under the Law, but not of those Works which comprehend that Obedience which God
requires of us who believe in Christ Racov. Catech. c. 9. Therefore your
Doctrine of Conditions is Socin.
3. That Doctrine which will make all the Graces of Sanctification or gracious
Qualifications, Federal Conditions, is not to be admitted. But to say, Faith is
a condition of the Covenant in the Sense pleaded for, will bring in all other
Graces as well as it is self, Ergo this Doctrine is not to be admitted; for
there is as much reason that all of them be allowed to be Conditions, as that
Faith should; and therefore I see you and your Party bring in Repentance and
other Graces together with Faith; and say, Our eternal Life is given unto us at
the last, upon conditional Meetness for it. But the Scripture no where speaks
of our Justification, for or by Repentunce, Love, Patience, Mortification of
Sin, etc. not so much as once in the Sense that it speaks of Justicfiation by
Faith: And therefore Faith justifies not in it is qualifying nature, which it
has in common with other Graces of the Spirit. God never intended our
strictest Holiness and highest degrees of Grace should be our Justifying
Righteousness before God, or Federal Conditions of the Covenant of Grace.

4. That any Act of ours should be a Federal Condition of the Covenant of
Grace, destroys the very Nature of it, Romans 11.6. Ephesians. 2.8, 9. Tit. 2.5. Romans
5.17, 18. Isa. 55.1, 2. 1 Cor. 2.12. Romans 3.24.
as it stands in opposition to the Covenant of Works; it cannot be distinguished
otherwise from the Covenant of Works; for the Condition of the Covenant of
Works was as small as any thing, imagining the Ability was given before the
Condition was required. He should have had persevering Grace in the Promise,
had he outstood this Temptation. Now the formal difference between the Covenant
of Works, and Grace was in the Condition, that in the Covenant of Works the
Righteousness which was the Condition was in Man himself that was to be
Justified. In the Covenant of Grace the conditional Righteousness is in
another: Not only the Promise, but the Condition is freely given, and is in
another. If we must provide the Condition; nay, if it must be inherent in us,
though wrought by God, it makes our Covenant-standing no otherwise than the
first and old Covenant-standing. Besides, the Design of God in the Covenant of
Grace, is not only to save graciously, so he does save Elect Angels, but to
save mercifully; to take them into Covenant with him, that not only are without
good Qualifications, but such as are most sinful and miserable, and not to
qualify them with meriting or dignifying Righteousness first, but to save them
so, that neither they themselves, nor God himself, will see any Federal
Conditions of Righteousness in them. The design of Grace is to save the
Creature in the highest Degree of Abasement in himself, and far from boasting,
or seeing any reason in himself to do it.

6. The great and Evangelical Promulgations of this Covenant of Grace was
always in absolute Promises, and no mention made of Federal Conditions in us.
Jer. 31.33. Ezekiel. 36.25. Hos. 2.18, 19, 20. See Zanch. upon the place, He does
not say, If thou will repent, I will receive thee into favor, and betroth
thee; but absolutely, Tom. 5. fol, in Hos. p. 4^, and 55.
I will betroth thee. It is therefore a most absolute Covenant, wherein God
without any Condition does promise that he will receive his People into Favor,
and save them. The first Promise to Adam was absolute; and was not those
repeated Promises of it to Abraham and the Patriarchs absolute? The forenamed
Author speaking of the Covenant made with Abraham, Genesis 17.7. notes, that this
Promise is altogether free, absolute, and without Condition, because in the
Words of the Covenant we find no Condition.

7. That which is a New Covenant Condition to some saved ones, is to all; for
it is not to be supposed that the New Covenant has diverse sorts of Conditions,
but faith or Evangelical Obedience cannot be a condition to some, Ergo, not the
condition. Minor. It cannot be the condition to saved Infants nor Idiots, but
it is not to be doubted but God saves many of them by the Covenant of Grace.

8. If Jesus Christ himself be the Sole Condition of the New Covenant, then
Faith nor no other Grace of the Spirit is not the condition. The Spirit it self
is not the foederal condition of the Covenant, but promised to work Faith and
Holiness in us. But Christ is the only condition. 1. His Righteousness is our
Condition in Satisfaction of the Law, both as to Active and Passive Obedience,
Romans 10.4. He is the Condition in whom it is, through whom Eternal Life is
conveyed to us, 1 John 5.11. He is the condition through whom all the Benefits
flow, Ephesians. 1.3. Redemption, Forgiveness, ver. 7. He is the Condition of all
Good, in him, through him, and by him we have, (1 Cor. 1.30.) Reconciliation;
Col. 1.21. Of him we have our Faith, Heb. 12. beg. That Christ is the only
Foederal condition of the Covenant, is so clear and plain a Truth thoroughout
all the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, that he must deny the Sun in
the Firmament that denies this Truth; Christ himself is the Sole Condition of
the Covenant.

1. It Is impossible any thing else should be the Condition, etc.

(1.) There Is nothing else can reconcile Sinners to God in bearing Sin and
Curse; he only was our Condition for Reconciliation.

(2.) There Is nothing else pleadable with God.

1. Christ can plead nothing else in his Intercession, but his own
Righteousness.

2. We can plead nothing else with God, not our Faith or Obedience, when be
come before God in Prayer, Dan. 9.18.

3. Our best Holiness cannot have any satisfying Virtue for Sin committed.

II. Christ must be the only Condition, that the Covenant of Grace might be
free to us: That Grace might be free Grace.

III. He that is the Condition of bestowing the Spirit which works Grace, is
the condition of all Grace that ensues, but Christ is the condition of the
bestowing the Spirit; Ergo, He has purchased this Gift; he sends the Spirit;
it is his Spirit, he had it for this end without measure.


Neonom. I will tell you what is intended by the Benefits of the Covenant? A.
The Good Things or Privileges promised to such as by Grace are enabled to
comply with the Terms of the Covenant, especially whatever is Essential to our
Felicity. D. W. p. 56.


Antinom. I pray to what does that Grace that does enable a Man to comply with
the Terms belong? Is it any Privilege or Benefit of the Covenant? Or has he
it out of Covenant? And what is that Benefit that he has in changing his
Heart, in turning him from Darkness to Light? Is not this the performance of
the Promise of Eternal Life? What condition have you to Premise to this Gift of
God? You talk of the Grace of God enabling a Sinner to comply, just as if he
were to keep his Old State, and the Grace of God did only help and assist him
by some Moral Persuasion; I pray tell me:

1. Is not the first Life of Grace a good Thing and Privilege? What in us is
the condition of it?

2. Nay, Is not the Preaching of the Gospel a good Thing and Privilege? And
does not Faith come by Hearing? You should make Hearing a condition of the
Covenant; for every Duty to be performed Antecedaneous to another in Order
thereunto, or as a Means for it, is it is condition, but not a Federal
condition; dressing Meat is such a condition to the eating of it; making a Suit
of Clothes to the putting it on, etc.


Neonom. It Is needful that I acquaint you, wherein the conditions of the
Covenant of Grace, differ from conditions in the Covenant of Innocence, or
Works as vulgarly called; for both lie in doing something, though not the same
thing, nor to the same end, p. 56.


Antinom. We are like to have Excellent Doctrine now; here is a plain
declaration that the Covenant of Grace is a Covenant of Works, though it is not
the same individual thing, and something else designed, but it lies in doing.


Neonom. 1. The conditions of the Covenant of Grace are performed by the Grace
of Christ freely given to Sinners. The conditions of the Covenant of Innocence
were performed by a strength due to and inherent in our Innocent Nature. D. W.
p. 57.


Antinom. To say the conditions of the Covenant of Grace are performed by the
Grace of Christ freely given to Sinners, and that any Act of ours is a
condition, I affirm to be a contradiction. 1. Whatever is freely given to a
Sinner, is no part of a Federal condition as such, but of a Promise. 2. That
which is to be ascribed wholly as to all its Good to Grace, is no condition of
a Covenant in us, or conditionary part, if there be any it is in Christ. 3. You
do manifestly own that Sinners are not capable of a Covenant condition, it must
be wrought in them, therefore how absurd is it to say a Covenant Promise was
made to them upon condition of their own Act, when they do not Act, nor have
Power to Act. 4. The conditions of the Covenant of Innocence (as you would have
it improperly enough) were performed by a strength given freely, and that
before the condition was imposed; you make the New Law harder, because it
commands Duty as a condition before it gives strength to perform; and how was
it due to our Innocent Nature? no more than a distinct Nature from Bruits was
due to us; it was all of Gracious Bounty and ex beneplacito; there is nothing
due to the Creature from the Creator, but what he will from his free good Will
and Pleasure make due; well then, hitherto you show us no more Grace in your
New Law than in the Old Law, and I am mistaken if not less.


Neonom. 2. The Principal Conditions of the Covenant of Grace express the Guilt
and Misery of them that perform them. Repentance owns our Filth and Guilt, and
Faith in a Redeemer expresses our sinful and lost Estate; neither of these
could have place in our Legal Righteousness, as being utterly inconsistent with
an Innocent condition: Nor can they have much Room in Heaven, where we shall be
perfect, whereas the Terms of the Covenant of Works implied nothing but
Innocence and Happiness.


Antinom. You tell us of Faith and Repentance being the Principal condition; I
pray which are the rest of the conditions, it is fit we should know them all,
and when we have performed our part that we make our claim, for we can make
none till we have performed all. 2. If our Repentance only as a condition
express Guilt and Filth, it expresses our Condemnation only, and thereby not a
condition of Salvation; it works Wrath, and thereby belongs to the Law of
Works broken, Romans 4.15. If it be a condition of Salvation it must take off
Guilt and Filth by Expiation, which you dare not say Repentance does make; and
so Faith, it is not enough to express a sinful and lost Estate; that is but a
Sentence of Death, but it must as a condition take off this Sentence, by its
own Nature. 3. Whereas you say neither of these, i. e. Faith or Repentance
could have place in our Legal Righteousness; it is false, for Faith had place in
our Legal Righteousness. Adam's Legal Righteousness was Faith and Obedience,
and his Legal unrighteousness was begun in Unbelief, which is manifest from the
Serpents Temptation, Genesis 3.3. which Adam complied with; our First Parents fell
first by Unbelief. And why could not Repentance have been one of the
conditions, if the Lawgiver had pleased to put it in? Why might not the Law
run in these Terms, In the day thou eatest, and do not repent thereof, thou
shall die, and so one Law should have done all? Why could there not have been
as many conditions, and the same in the Old Law as you will have in the New?
therefore there is nothing hinders in the Nature of the thing that makes it
inconsistent, as you say, with an Innocent condition; why may not a provision
be made in a state of Innocence for the cure of Nocency, if the Legislator
pleases? For he made not his Law by necessity of Nature. And know, that
Repentance ^^th great consistency with the Law, and naturally follows in case
of Transgression, and there was no need of it but upon that Supposition, and
upon the Fall Adam naturally fell into Repentance, expressing the Guilt and
Filth of his Sin. 4. Nor (you say) can they have much room in Heaven; it seems
they have a little, at least so much as to retain the Nature of a condition, or
else the Covenant is lost in Heaven; for the Covenant must always be made up of
Condition and Promises, or Performance of things promised, it is an Everlasting
Covenant. But b^ your favor, Faith has place in Heaven, and that a higher
Faith than we are capable of here. 5. You say, the Terms of the Covenant of
Works implies nothing but Innocence and Happiness; there was not a Promise of
Happiness expressed, tho employed, and God never intended to give us Happiness
by that Law; for the Apostle says, Gal 3.21. If there had been a Law given
which could have given Life, verily Righteousness should have been by the Law:
Therefore God never intended to give Life to us b^ that Law or any other; if he
had, he could have given a Law sufficient for it at first; and were there no
Terms but Innocence and Happiness? was there not Terms of Transgression and
Condemnation? and those were the expressed Terms, the other were but supposed or
employed.


Neonom. 3. The Conditions of the Covenant of Grace make us capable of no
Happiness, except what Christ has bought and prepared for us, his Blood is the
Price of all. But the Happiness granted to sinless Obedience was immediately
from the Creator, and knew no Atonement or Mediator. D. W. p. 57.


Antinom. Does that make your Covenant the better or the worse? Is not a
perfect entire Covenant without any flaws in it, better than a faulty Covenant?
The Apostle condemns a faulty Covenant, but you choose to prefer a Covenant that
is faulty, made up of sinful Obedience, and that must have a Mediator to
provide against it, and to mend the faults of it; and hence this Covenant could
not be without a Mediator, because of its faultiness; and you say your Covenant
makes us capable of no Happiness but what was bought and prepared for us. 1.
Then this is a Covenant that capacitates us first for what Christ bought, and
then when we are capable we shall be partakers of Christ, by a previous
Covenant where Christ has nothing to do but Extrinsecally only; this
capability is by congruity or condignity. 2. It Is a kindness to Christ that you
will allow him the honor to buy and prepare Happiness for us, and have it
ready against we have occasion for it. 3. What other kind of Happiness can you
suppose? Is there any but what comes to us in or by Christ? Would the Life
promised to Adam have differed in specie, and be of another kind? But is not
the Gift of the Son himself a Happiness? (all Blessings of the Covenant are
Happiness to Sinners,) the Father's Love was not purchased, nor the Gift of the
Son; God so loved the World that he sent his Son, etc. 4. But his Blood is the
Price of all, there is enough for him, he bought your whole New Law at a Lump,
both your Inherent Foederal Righteousness for a condition, and the Reward of
Debt; he capacitated the Law, and brought it to so low Terms, that you were
capable of performing the conditions of it. But has his Blood no capacitating
Faculty in it, but merely to be a Price to free us from the Old Law, that we
may come upon New Terms now with God in the Second Law? 5. And what if the
Happiness granted to a Sinless Obedience came immediately from the Creator, was
it the worse for it, provided it were the same Happiness, and knew no
Atonement? (you say) why? because it needed none. But it might know a Mediator,
though no Atonement; a Mediator may be where there is no Atonement. What did the
Tree of Life import? Lastly, I would fain know whether Christ, and all the
Gospel Blessings, come not immediately from God the Creator? And whether they
that come from Christ, come not from a Creator? Were not all things made by
him? Col. 1. And is not our state in Christ a New Creation?


Neonom. The Blessings promised on the Conditions of the Covenant of Grace, are
merely of Grace; they be for another's sake, and not our own.


Antinom. You cannot make that merely of Grace that requires a previous
condition in us to the bestowing of it; you allow this indeed, that Christ has
obtained a good Bargain for us, and this we have for his sake, but the Purchase
Money must be paid by us, though we borrow it, and get it as we can; and if a
Friend be so kind as to give us the Money, yet the Purchase must go in our
Name, we must be accounted the Buyers.


Neonom. They are given to them that are Condemned by the Covenant of Works,
and that are still Condemnable by the Law for the Imperfection of the performed
Gospel Conditions.


Antinom. Therefore their condition of the Happiness must be an adequate
satisfaction to that Covenant, which you dare not say can be found in your
conditions; Condemnation cannot be taken off upon any other condition. 2. But I
pray what a strange Law is your Law of Imperfection, is it an imperfect Law? Or
a Law to allow imperfect Obedience for a Gospel condition, that is a sinful
Obedience, in distinction from the sinless Obedience which was the condition of
the first? This Law of Imperfection little becomes such a Perfect Lawgiver, to
drop a Law of Perfection, and set up a Law of Imperfection. 3. It seems this
Law of Imperfection is soundly so; for it is not only Imperfect in the
conditions, but in the Happiness; for you say they are still condemnable by
this Law, truly by the conditions you have brought us into a pretty condition,
you have brought us from a Law wherein we were condemned, and into another Law
wherein we continue condemnable, we are condemned by one, and condemnable by
the other, when we have performed these conditions; here we perform Imperfect
Gospel Conditions, and remain Damnable, liable to Damnation, not passed from
Death to Life. What Miserable Divinity is here!


Neonom. Ay, but it is forgiveness which renders these Persons blessed, Romans 4.7.


Antinom. i. e. When they can get it; for they are condemned by the Law of
Perfection, and remain condemnable by the Law of Imperfection. And this is not
sure a Holy, Just and Good Law; it is not holy, because sinful Obedience is the
condition, and it becomes not a Holy God to command sinful Obedience, for the
Law condition is a command of Duty; neither is it Just, to give a Reward to a
Person condemnable by the Law; neither is it Good, for that which is neither
Holy nor Just is not Good; and therefore we condemn that Law which will do no
more than make us condemnable; is this your Remedial Law?


Neonom. But the sinless Obedience of Innocent Adam made the Reward to be of
Debt, Romans 4.4.


Antinom. It seems that God may make his Reward to be of Grace, he throws away
the sinless condition, and blends up a condition with Sin; is this the way for
Grace to abound, to make Sin a Sharer in the Foederal Condition, yea, and
Damnation too, a sinful, imperfect Condemnable Condition; the Covenant of Grace
is to save from Sin and Damnation, not by Sin and for Damnation. And is there
not a Reward of Debt, if a Man purchase an Estate with Brass Half Crowns, Washed
and Clipped Money, if they be accepted, as well as if he paid in good Current
Money? It seems now God's willing to take your Copper Money, he shall have the
Credit of giving you an Estate; I tell you, if Copper Money will pass, it makes
as clear Debts and Purchases as Silver and Gold. But I must say this is but
washed Divinity, and clipped too; and there is no part of it but is filthily mixed
at best.


Neonom. The Use and Interest of Gospel Conditions, is not from the Conformity
of them to the Preceptive part of the Law, (though in a degree there be that)
but from the Conformity to the Rule of the Grace of the Promise.


Antinom. It is good now we should know how to use these Law Ingredients, and
mix them well by weight and measure, secundum artem; and then to know the
Virtues and right way of Application, and it is fit we should have good
Testimony from Dr. Experience, that this Remedial Law is a Panacaea. Let the
case be never so deplorable: It seems the great difficulty lies in finding from
whence the Use and Interest of the Money ( i. e. I suppose the Virtue) does
arise. It Is not from any conformity to the Law Precepts, that would make it too
good and too strong for a weak Stomach, besides it would be too costly. But
there is a little of it in a degree, the proportion is not above a grain of
conformity to the Preceptive part of the Law, to a Pound of conformity to the
Law of Imperfection, which is your Rule of the Grace of the Promise; but though
there is a little touch of conformity to the Old Law, to season the Julep, as a
few drops of Spirit of Vitriol to make it more palatable, yet the Virtue lies
more absconded than what the Patient can presently find; but where do you
think? In the Imperfection of it. This mixture is contrary to all Natural
Remedies, that the worse the Ingredients are, and the more imperfectly
prepared, the better it is; if it should be perfect it would spoil all, it
would make the Happiness Debt, as bad as it would have been to Adam in
Innocence, or to the Saints in Heaven.


Neonom. The Promise of Pardon through Christ being to the Penitent Believer,
and no other; Repentance and Faith becomes necessary and useful conditions of
this Pardon, by the Order of God in that Gracious Promise.


Antinom. The Promise of Pardon is not to a Sinner as Penitent, but as a
Sinner; neither does a Sinner when he applies Pardon rightly, apply it to
himself as Penitent, but as a Sinner. Repentance is part of the Promise, and is
given with Remission of Sins through Faith in the Blood of Christ; and without
Justifying Faith applying to Christ for Pardon first, there can be no
Repentance to Life; Pardon through Faith is first in Nature before the Exercise
of true Gospel Repentance; Repentance is turning from Sin to God, and this must
be by Faith, for none can come to God but by him. Repentance and Faith do
become necessary and useful by Virtue of the Promise in the way of Salvation,
but by no means in the Nature of Foederal Conditions, God never constituted
them in such a Covenant Order.


Neonom. In the Covenant of Works the mere Work gave an Interest in the Reward,
as it was Obedience to the Precept by a Sanction, which had Goodness, but no
such Grace in it.


Antinom. It Is a gross mistake that Adam's Obedience would have Merited from
Intrinsic Value or Worth, it was ex pacto; and whatever condition of the
Creature-Performance the Legislator puts into the Covenant, let it be less or
more, perfect or imperfect it is all one, they do ex pacto, make the Benefit
promised a Debt, and this I will maintain against all the Neonomians in the
World.


Neonom. Upon these accounts I shall never fear that Conditionality of the
Covenant of Grace should turn it into a Covenant Works, till I see it proved
that God can promise and apply no Benefit purchased by Christ to a poor Sinner,
upon a condition of an Action he commands, and freely enableth the Sinner to
perform: The Judgment Day is past, and a state of Trial is over whenever it is
proved. Thus much for Removal of Mistakes.


Antinom. And poor confident Man, I can but pity you to see how miserably
mistaken you are. All that you have said is so far from turning your Law of
Imperfection into a Covenant of Works, that it proves it to be a Covenant of
Works against all the World. What God can do is one thing, and will do is
another. I am sure he has made no other Foederal Condition of the New
Covenant, than Jesus Christ himself and his Righteousness; and when the
Judgment Day is come, and it may be through Grace before, during the state of
Trial, as you call it, you will be glad to throw away all your conditions, and
hold Christ alone as the only Foederal condition of Life and Salvation.

And let me tell you again, that you forget it not:

That God never promised or applied any Benefit to the most Perfect and
Innocent Creature, upon the condition of any Action he commands, but what he
freely enableth the said Person so commanded to perform; and hitherto you have
given us no Specific difference between the Covenant of Works and Grace, it is
only in degree that this is worse in condition, and we are all together without
strength to perform it.


Neonom. Having premised these things to remove Mistakes, I will tell you the
Truth, which I will express in the words of the Assembly. D. W. p. 58.

Q. 32. How is the Grace of God manifested in the Second Covenant.

A. The Grace of God is manifested in the Second Covenant, in that he freely
provideth and offers to Sinners a Mediator, and Life and Salvation by him,
requiring Faith as the condition to Interest them in him, promises and gives
his Holy Spirit to all his Elect, to work in them that Faith with all other
Saving Graces.


Antinom. In the first place you should have observed that they speak only of
the manifestation of the Grace of the Covenant, and no distinct Covenant from
that of Redemption. 2. They make not Faith a Condition of the Covenant of
Grace, but only of Interest, Reception or Participation of the said Covenant.
With them it is no more than modus recipiendi, or participandi, which is
generally called the Instrument, and therefore explain themselves thus:

Quest. 73. How does Faith justify a Sinner in the sight of God?

A. Not as if Works, or any Grace of Faith, or any Act thereof were imputed to
him for his Justification, but only as it is an Instrument whereby he receives
and applies Christ and his Righteousness. 3. I made no Question but that it
was that Fly that you caught at, and watched for. The Word Condition was then
but a very small inconsiderable Word, that none made any great matter of, as
importing no more than the Connection of the Congregrative connex Axiom, whose
band of Connection is the Conjunction Si: And this conditional Connection may
fall upon any things that have necessary or contingent dependency one upon
another, whereby they have a mutual Affection or Dissatisfactions one to
another, and I call it a relative Condition, and all things may come under it
which way soever they look. The Affirmation of this Proposition, Si sit homo
est animal. If the Antecedent be true, then the Consequence is true. If John be
a Man, then he is an Animal, and the Negation is, Non si Johannes sit homo sit
animal; and though both antecedent and consequent may be false, yet the It may
be a true Proposition by virtue of the Connection. As if a Man be a Lion, he is
a Four-footed Beast. So if Judas be saved, he did believe. It Is a true
Proposition; though Judas never did believe, nor was saved; neither was there any
Covenant of Grace made with him. So that such a Proposition as this imports
no Covenant-Condition, unless it be foederal over and above. If the Devils
shall be saved, Christ died for them. It Is true as a connex Proposition,
because there is no other Name given under Heaven by which any Sinner can be
saved. But neither parts of this Proposition is true, for Christ died not for
them, nor shall they be saved. So here, if a Sinner partake of Christ, it is by
Believing, because believing is his Participation, and giving and receiving are
relata, and is no more a Condition here, than Faith is to Holiness. As thus, If
I believe I shall bring forth Fruits of Faith, and it will be a Condition the
other way, if I bring forth good Fruits, then I believe. So that this sort of
Condition attends the Expression of all sorts of Relations and Dependencies,
either Logical, Mathematical, Natural or Theological. But when the Word
Condition is carried further, to denote a Foederal Bond or Obligation, it
becomes a big-bellied Word (as you have phrased it) and is always a
distinguishing Character of a Covenant of Works. And that the Assembly intended
no other than a Relative Condition, not a Federal, I can give you many grounds
from themselves.


Neonom. But I will give my Reasons why they must understand a Federal
Condition. For, 1. They judge, that though God provided a Mediator for Sinners,
yet they have no Interest in him till they believe.


Antinom. They by Interest mean Claim of Interest and Participation, which we
have by Faith; and there Faith is no more a Condition, than my hand is to the
receiving a 1000 l. When it is brought, it is only a Relative Condition: Where
there is giving there is receiving; but if there be any Condition on one side
more than another, it is in the giving side, which in nature and causality has
the first place: For it runs thus, If you receive, there is some body gives: So
the Giving is the Condition of Receiving. Or see it thus, If you be a Father,
you have a Son; they are mutual Causes one of another, but the Father is first
in respect of Nature and Causality. If Receiving lie upon the Condition of
Giving, then Receiving is not the Condition of Giving, but vice versa: but
Receiving lies under, and depends upon the Condition of Giving; for if there be
no Giving, there can be no Receiving.


Neonom. They judge the Covenant is conditional; they scruple not to call Faith
the Condition of our Interest in Christ, and Salvation by him.


Antinom. They do intend, and so do we, that the New Covenant is conditional,
and has a great Condition, Jesus Christ: He is the Foederal Condition
satisfactory and procurative; but they mean not, that Faith is a condition of
the Covenant, but a condition relative in the manifestation: For they could not
suppose Faith to be the Condition of what they make the Covenant, for it is but
in the Foregoing Answer they say, The Covenant of Grace was made with the
Second Adam, and in him with all the Elect as his Seed. They speak not of any
Condition of the Covenant of Grace, which they give an Account of, Quest. 31.
but speak only of the way and manner of the manifestation of the Grace of God
in the Second Covenant, and that they tell you it is by Faith as a correlative
receiving Condition: They speak not of any Condition of the Covenant, but of
the manifestation of the Grace in the Covenant, by the Participation thereof.


Neonom. 3. They judge that Christ and Salvation are offered to all Sinners on
the same condition, though God effectually enable the Elect to obey the
Condition.


Antinom. They say he freely provideth and offers to Sinners a Mediator and
Life. Is Faith the condition of God's providing a Mediator? And upon the same
Terms, that he provideth he also offers, i. e. freely. If you look for a
condition, here it must be of providing and offering: And they say, God
requires and works Faith as a Condition, i. e. no more in their Sense, but a
means of conveyance the Grace of the Second Covenant unto them. Now that this
is their meaning, take a full confirmation, their Sense fully expressed in
their Confession. In Chapter 11. Of Justification, speaking of the Nature of
Justification, says, -- It Is not for any thing wrought in them, or done by
them, but for Christ alone, not by imputing Faith it self the Act of believing,
nor any other Evangelical Obedience to them as their Righteousness; but by
imputing the Obedience and Satisfaction of Christ unto them, they receiving and
resting on him and his Righteousness by Faith, which Faith they have not of
themselves.

Faith, thus receiving and resting on Christ and his Righteousness, is the
alone Instrument of Justification. Thus, Gentlemen, you see what a Catch he
has got of the Word Condition made use of by the Assembly.

When they used the Word Condition, it was but Aaron's Rod, it is now turned
into a Serpent, and every one that savours Christ aright will fly from it: It
is no better now than a Nehushtan, and is to be brokee in pieces in the Sense
of a Foederal Condition.


Neonom. Error. The Covenant of Grace has no Condition to be performed on
Man's part, though in the strength of Christ: Neither is Faith it self the
Condition of this Covenant, but all the saving Benefits of this Covenant are
actually ours before we are born: Neither are we required so much as to believe
that we may come to have an Interest in the Covenant-Benefits. D. W. p. 59.


Antinom. We have told you, and proved to you your Error, in saying, That
faith is the Condition foederally of the Covenant of Grace; and we have showed
how far saving Benefits are prepared for us and ours in the Promise right
before we believe; yea, before we are born; and though it is our Duty to
believe, and do believe, as thereby partaking of Christ unto Salvation, yet not
in your Sense as a condition of a Covenent of Grace, but as a promised Gift and
Benefit bestowed upon us in Christ, and wrought in us by him.


Neonom. You spend more than a Sermon to prove this, and say, there is not any
Condition in this Covenant. D. C. p. 81.


Anntinom. In preaching on Isa. 42.6, 7. I showed by way of Doctrine, Dr. C. p.
81.
That the Father is pleased to give Christ for a Covenant to the People; and in
opening it I showed, what it is for Christ to be a Covenant: Where I showed,
That the Lord means not a Covenant of Works, but the Covenant of Grace, which
Covenant is mentioned Jer. 31.33. and renewed again, Ezekiel. 36 26. and also Heb.
8.6. where you shall find this appropriated to Christ, to be his great
Privilege to have the sole hand and managing of this New Covenant. But now
says the Apostle, He has obtained a more excellent Ministry, by how much also
he is the Mediator of a better Covenant. And what is this better Covenant? Mark
what follows, Ver. 8. Behold the days come, etc. Here see the substance of the
Covenant, I will be their God, and they shall be my People.

Now I show the difference between this Covenant and others; all others run
upon Stipulations; the Promise runs altogether upon Conditions on both sides.
The Condition on God's Part, They shall live. The Condition on Man's Part, That
he might live, he must do this. And in the Old Covenant, in case Man failed,
the Condition was broke: But in this Covenant there is no Condition on Man's
part to be performed, because the Covenant is everlasting, Heb. 8. God says, I
will be mer^iful to your Iniquities, and your Sins I will remember no more. Now
suppose there were Conditions for Man to perform, and suppose Man did fail in
those Conditions, what were become of the Covenant? The Covenant is frustrated
as soon as the Conditions are broken. Dr. C. p. 81.

Obj. 1. There are many Conditions mentioned in this Covenant, there must be a
Law put in the Mind, writ in the Heart, etc.

Answ. It is true, God says, I will put my Law in your inward parts. But it is
not said, This is a Condition to be performed on Man's part.

Obj. But Conditions or no Conditions, a Man must have his Heart in this manner.

Answ. I answer, It Is true by way of Consequence, that after we are in
Covenant, he will bestow those things upon us as Fruits and Effects of this
Covenant; but it is not true by way of Antecedence, That God will require those
things at our hands before we be Partakers of this Covenant.

Answ. 2. You shall see plainly, that Man has no tie upon him to perform any
thing whatsoever in this Covenant as a Condition to be observed on his part --
Mark how it is in Jer. Ezekiel. Heb. God says, I will put it in, I will write it;
they shall be my People. [Shall] here is a Word of Power. And it follows, They
shall not teach every one his Neighbor. -- for they shall know me. How? By
their own Study and Industry. No. See John 6.45. The Condition of knowing the
Lord is to be performed by the Lord: They shall be all taught of God. Observe
also the larger Expression of the Covenant, Ezekiel. 36.25. etc.

Obj. If all lies on God's part, and Man must do nothing, then all his
Lifetime he may live as he list.

Answ. You must make a difference between doing any thing in reference to the
Covenant as a Condition thereof; and in doing something in reference to Duty
and Service to God, who freely enters into Covenant with you. I say only in way
of Condition of the Covenant you must do nothing.




Calvin. You see, Mr. Neonom. he does not deny Duties to belong to this
Covenant, and Duties to be performed under the highest Obligation of God's free
and bountiful Acting toward us in this Covenant; but he speaks against your
Principium and modus agendi; that we are not to perform these Duties in a
mercenary way, as if we were thereby Obtainers of the Benefits by Foederal
Conditionality, which way of Performance brings us under a Covenant of Works;
but we are to do all as such, who receive both to will and to do by virtue of
the Covenant, and as the Effects thereof; and I am very much mistasten, if this
be not Gospel Truth.


Neonom. But he says in Answer to an Objection, (D.W. p. 60) I must needs tell
you directly, That Faith is not the Condition of the Covenant. Dr. C. 84.


Antinom. I did say so, and say so still.

Obj. But you will say, He that believes shall be saved, he that believes not
shall be damned. Is not Faith therefore the Condition of the Covenant?

Answ. There is no Person under Heaven shall be saved till he has believed
this, I grant; yet this will not make Faith a Condition of the Covenant. Faith
as an Act is our Act, and our Act of believing is a Work; but it does not
depend upon a Work. For the Apostle says, To him that justifies the ungodly.

Thus far to satisfy you from what I discoursed.

Now I tell you further, that the Proposition, He that believes shall be saved,
denotes no more than the necessary Connection of Faith and Salvation by virtue
of the Promise, viz. Of one Gift of the Promise to another, the Lord making
many of the Gifts or Duties from a Covenant-Principle, not upon Terms of
foederal Conditionality on our part; but that all is to be done by virtue of,
and flowing from the Promise of Eternal Life, whereof Faith it self, and the
lively Fruits thereof, are parts, as well as Glory it self; and all Eternal
Life is in one Promise, though not bestowed together; but the several Gifts
thereof have Conditionem Ordinis, i. e. Prioritatis and Posterioritatis and
conditiones relativas inter se. But none of these Gifts are Foederal Conditions
one of another, but all alike belong to the Promissory part, Grace as well as
Glory.


Neonom. But you say, That after we are in Covenant with God, he will bestow
these things upon us as Effects; and that the Covenant in the actual Substance
of it is made good to a Man before he can do any thing. Dr. C. p. 81. and 83.


Calvin. Great Truths; for without Christ we can do nothing; therefore Christ,
the Substance of the Covenant, must be given to us first, or else Christ
himself has not spoken Truth.


Neonom. I will show you now how far I agree with you in this point, and then
it will the better appear where the difference lies.

1. The Question is not, Whether God has promised, and Christ engaged in the
Covenant of Redemption, that the Elect shall believe and possess Christ, etc.
This I affirm.


Antinom. Then you own a Covenant between the Father and the Son, and the
Promise of it was Christ and all his Benefits. This one Assertion lays the
Covenant of Grace higher than it is possible that you or I can reach by our
Conditions; only you would not have this the Covenant of Grace, though it
contains all Grace, but a Covenant of Redemption, contradistinct to the
Covenant of Grace, which is most absurd: For what is Redemption but rich Grace?
God has accepted us in the beloved, in whom we have Redemption through his
Blood the forgiveness of Sins, according to the riches of his Grace, wherein he
has abounded toward us in all Wisdom and Prudence, having made known unto us
the mystery of his Will, Ephesians. 1.6, 7, 8, 9. This Mystery of his Will is the
Covenant of Grace, which I can easily also evince, made manifest by the
appearing of Jesus Christ, and working out our Redemption, and by the Preaching
thereof, 1 Timothy 1.10, 11.


Neonom. Neither is there any Question, Whether there be any Duty on Man's part
as a Condition of Christ's Undertaking, or of the certainty of the things
undertaken in that Covenant. This I deny.


Antinom. Then you deny all Conditions of ours as required in the Covenant of
Redemption, as you call it: Call it then but the Covenant of Grace as it is,
and the Assembly call it, and then you say as we do in that Point.


Neonom. Nor whether the Conditions of the Covenant of Grace be performed in
our own strength, or be uncertain as to the Elect. This I deny. D. W. p. 61.


Antinom. Then this Performance by Divine strength and certainty is founded on
Promise; and if so, is the Gift of God; and thence it is frivolous to talk of
Conditions to be performed on our part: God does not give his Gifts to us to
make Purchase with, and rob his Free Grace and his Son of the Honor due to
them.


Neonom. Nor whether the Performance of the Conditions move God to enact, offer
or appoint this Covenant, whereby the Grace of Christ is applied. This I deny.


Antinom. What mean you by enacting or appointing this Covenant? If you mean,
your Law of Imperfection, we know no such Covenant of God ever enacted or
appointed.


Neonom. Yea, I add, That God enacted this Covenant before we were born, and
offers an interest in it on it is proper terms to men when Sinners.


Antinom. Then the Covenant was an Eternal Covenant, or at least the
completing of it did not depend upon our coming in with our personal foederal
Conditions: But I do not grant, that your Covenant of Imperfection was ever so
enacted. And, 2. You say, offers an Interest in it to Men when Sinners. Now our
Covenant of Redemption and Grace come to be all one: All that remains to be
done, is to bring Sinners to a participating Interest in it. Undoubtedly, when
the Covenant was enacted, it was provided that Sinners should have a free
unconditional participation of it, for the Infinite Wise God knew Sinners would
be so poor and wretched that they would have no Condition Money; and never
thought fit to make them Purchasers with his Money, lest they should boast and
claim all as Debt, when he had given them Forty Shillings to begin with. 3. But
you will have Popish Terms come in at the Tail of this fair Story; your dead
Fly of Conditions must be in every Pot of your Apothecaries Ointment.


Neonom. Nor whether the Performance of the Conditions of the Covenant be a
Purchasing Price, or Meritorious of the Benefits promised on such Conditions.
This I deny, for Christ alone paid the Price, and it is the Covenant Promises
gives the Benefits to such as perform the Conditions.


Antinom. What security will you give us that they be not a purchasing Price or
Meritorious? What if Christ will say they be such as will Rob him, and that he
say, if we put in and stand upon our conditions he shall profit us nothing?
What if poor Creatures that you infuse your Notions into, and put your
conditions upon, they take them to be purchasing Prices of an Interest in
Christ? How will you answer the Preaching another Gospel than Paul Preached,
and free your selves from the Anathema? But secondly, If a Man that has
purchased an Estate for me, and left me an Hundred Pound to pay of the Purchase
Money, I reckon that I pay part as well as he, though he paid a Thousand Pound,
and so will all Men judge. 3. It Is not enough for you to say, Christ only paid
the Price, when Foederal Conditions besides lies to be performed by some
others; and we do as confidently affirm, and do prove, that where there is a
Covenant stipulated by conditions and promises, the performance of the
conditions, though never so small and disproportionable to the Benefit, carries
a Merit of a Reward as of Debt, virtute pacti, though it lie not in the
Intrinsic Value of the Condition, whether it be mine, or imputed to me by Loan
or Gift, to buy the Benefit, or Swop for it. And this is such a Truth that
every Child almost that runs about to play in the Street knows and daily
practices.


Neonom. 6. Nor whether the first Grace by which we are enabled to perform the
Condition be absolutely given. This I affirm, though that be dispensed
ordinarily in a due use of means, and in a way discountenancing Idleness, and
fit Encouragement given to the use of Means.


Antinom. It seems as to the first Grace, it is absolute, then we come at first
into an unconditional Covenant, but afterward we must pay for what we have; God
gives a Stock of Money, and then we must buy; first begin in the Spirit, and
then finish in the Flesh. I pray what Covenant Promise does this first Grace
belong to, to the Covenant of Redemption, or the Covenant of Imperfection? It Is
plain then that a Sinner does not come under an Obligation to the Covenant of
Imperfection till he has been furnished with conditions some other way. So
that he must needs come under two distinct Covenants; first an absolute, and
then conditional; What a cutting and hacking is here of the Covenant of Grace,
to puzzle and confound poor Souls in the great concernment of their Salvation.


Neonom. Nor whether all the Conditions of the Covenant be of the same use, to
the same purpose, or a like complete Terms of the Principal Benefits; this I
deny, for Faith is supposed to all other Conditions, etc.


Antinom. It is not to our Business, whether they have other distinct Offices,
but respectu Conditionalitatis foederalis, they are equally conditions; the
comparison is not here in Quantity but Quality. One Shilling is as much a
condition in the price set upon a Horse or Cow that is sold, as Five Pound,
though it be not so great in quantity; but it seems here are diverse sorts of
conditions, some greater than others, and Faith has the pre-eminence. I have a
Question or two to ask, Whether if one of these little conditions be not
performed, I do therefore forfeit my Bargain? One inconsiderable one that has
ten times more Sin and Imperfection in it than Good? And whether this Covenant
of Imperfection does not look upon the Imperfectest Conditions, and most
sinful, provided there is a little good in them, to be the best Conditions? And
whether it be fit that we should have good, sound and perfect Commodities for
debased Coin?


Neonom. Nor whether upon the performance of the Conditions, the Covenant Grant
becomes not as Absolute, and the right to the Benefit no longer suspended. This
I affirm, for the Promise conveys the Title as soon as the Terms of the Grant
are Answered.


Antinom. As Absolute as what? It Is Nonsense. I take it to be an Erratum, but
it is not among them, and that as should not be there; and therefore it is thus,
that upon performance of the conditions the Grant should become Absolute; this
is impossible, for Absolute and Conditional are adversa, quae inter se velut
and regione perpetuo adversantur. As much as if you should say, after I have
bought a House of you and paid my Money, that you gave the House to me freely.
And what do you talk of the Promise conveying the Title, it is the Condition
gives me the Title, the Promise is challenged upon the performance of the
Condition.


Neonom. I come now to the Real difference betwixt us. D. W. p. 62.

1. Whether Men have an Actual Interest in the Saving Benefits of the Covenant
of Grace, while they live in Unbelief; this you affirm, and I deny.


Antinom. Did you not grant a real Interest to the Elect in the Covenant of
Redemption, which to us is the Covenant of Grace? That God has there
Covenanted that they shall believe; and that Christ has undertaken for the
certainty of their Faith and Holiness; and that Christ has paid actually all
the Price of Redemption for them, and are all those no Saving Benefits? What if
they know not their Interest, have they therefore none? Does that follow? A
good Estate may be bought and made over to me, that I have as good an Interest
in, and Title to as any Man in the World to his, and yet I not know it; it may
be it is in the Barbados, bought or given by a Friend, and I know not of it a
Year after, but when I hear of it, or enter Possession, is my Title any better
than before? And when is the first Grace given which you said is absolute, but
when we are in unbelief? For there is no Medium between Unbelief and Faith.


Neonom. Whether God does offer the Saving Benefits of the Covenant upon
Official Terms, as Believe and thou shall be saved; this I affirm, and you
deny.


Antinom. You mean by Official Terms only Foederal Conditions, Do and Live, or
Believe and Live in the same sense as Do and Live. I say the Covenant of Grace
speaks otherwise, it says Live and Do; and the command in the Gospel becoming
effectual to Believe, is the performance of the Promise, in quickening and
raising him from the Dead; believing is his very Saving, it is his Life begun,
and not the condition of it. Believe and be Saved, is a Proposition declaring
the near and indubitable connection of all the Gifts of Grace, as Blessed are
they that Mourn for they shall be Comforted; Blessed are the Merciful, they
shall obtain Mercy, etc. These Propositions of Beatitudes do not declare any
Foederal Conditionality lying in the Antecedent, but a Covenant Connection of
good things in the Promise of Life to be bestowed, that one of these Blessings
will be where the other is, either first or last; for Meekness, Godly Sorrow,
Purity of Heart, Faith, etc. they are all the Gifts of Grace, and belong to the
Promissory part of the Covenant, and not to the Conditional, and yet become
Duties by Virtue of the Promise and Precepts accompanying.


Neonom. Whether the Beneficial Privileges of the Covenant be not suspended on
the Terms of Duty? As does not God forbear to pardon us till we believe? This I
affirm, and you deny.


Antinom. It is as much as to say that Duty is no beneficial part of the
Covenant; the change of the Heart is no beneficial part of the Covenant; but
you say these beneficial parts are suspended upon the Terms of Duty. It Is as
much as to say he shall have no Benefit by the Covenant, and all Benefits are
suspended till he do some Duty that is no Benefit of the Covenant. And as to
your Enquiry, Whether God forbear to pardon us till we believe: I Answer,
Pardon is with God before it is with us, if it were not we should never have
it; and the Pardoning Grace of God is at work with us before we do believe, and
does by the Light of it in the Glorious Gospel work Faith in our Hearts. As for
your phrasing it thus, that God forbears Pardoning till we Believe, it
insinuates thus much according to your Scheme of Conditions, That God suspends
his Acts toward the Creature till he sees something in it to encourage him,
and that God would have wrought sooner than he did, if it had not been our
fault; whereas God works, and none can let, neither does his working, or not
working, depend upon the Creatures, but that it is in his own way and time, and
when he will pardon he works Faith; and it must be so, because the Believer is
Pardoned in application of Pardon, therefore the Pardoner and Pardoned are
relata; and though as relata they are simul natura, yet in respect of Causality
the Pardoner is first; and if he should forbear pardoning till the Sinner were
fit for it by good qualification, it would be long enough before it come unto
us. You say the first Grace is absolute, and if the second Grace or Benefit be
Conditional foederally, where lies the condition? and if a man be fallen into a
deep Well, and have broken an Arm or Leg, would it not be very odd to say, I
forbear the Setting of his Arm or Leg till he comes out of the Ditch, whereas
it lies upon me to fetch him out of the Ditch first. As God pardons who and
when he pleases, so by the same Grace he has provided for all ways and means
of Application.


Neonom. It Is enquired, Whether God does engage to bestow the promised Benefits
of the Covenant on all such, who through Grace perform the Conditions? This you
affirm and I deny.


Antinom. I affirm, that God does bestow all the Benefits of the Covenant upon
all those unto whom through Grace they do belong; and to perform any Duty of
the Covenant required, is a Gift of Grace: You say, through Grace, and
therefore a promised Benefit, Creation in Christ Jesus, a New Heart, Union to
Christ. Where are there Conditions through Grace to be wrought in us before the
effectual Power of Grace? To say any thing is to be performed through Grace,
that is not the Gift of Grace, and is not a Benefit of the Covenant, is
something; otherwise your Conditions are but in order of working, or at most
Relative Conditions, the connection of one Gift of Grace or Benefit to another,
and then your conditionality is no more than the Apostles, Romans 5.1, 2, 3.
Faith the condition of Hope, Hope of glorying in Tribulation, Tribulation of
Patience, Patience of Experience, etc. These may all be brought into a connex
Proposition forward and backward. If I Believe I shall Hope, if I Hope I shall
glory in Tribulation, if I have Patience I shall have Experience; but yet all
Gifts of Grace are none of them foederal Conditions, but Promises bestowed.


Neonom. All may be reduced to this, Whether our believing consent to the
Covenant of Grace be absolutely necessary by God's Command, and promised to our
Interest in the saving Benefits of the Cevenants. This you deny and I affirm.


Antinom. It Is one thing to be antecedently necessary, another thing to be
consequently necessary. Whatever is commanded in the Covenant of Grace (as you
will insinuate) is also promised; and being promised, is a Benefit: Therefore
if you make believing antecedently necessary (which is a Work and Gift of
Grace) to all the Benefits, you contradict your self and all right Reason. And
as to the great Ado you make about Interest, I have told you it comes under a
double consideration, of real and known, or manifest. All the Elect have a real
Right and Interest in the Covenant even before believing, such a Right as
entitles them to believing: For Christ has undertaken, that all that the
Father has given him shall come to him; and it is therefore absolutely
necessary they should, as promised in the Covenant, not as a Condition, as a
leading Benefit, and no otherwise. And do you not call them Saving Benefits?
Show me a Condition to be performed before any saving Benefits that we do
receive, and then you will say something. What Is a greater Benefit than Life it
self?


Neonom. I will confirm the Truth by several Arguments.


Antinom. Let it be Truth first: It Is very little Truth that hitherto you have
affirmed, as I think I have made sufficiently appear. But go on; I am willing
to hear what you can say, and to embrace Truth.


Neonom. Each of the Benefits of the Covenant are offered to Men on Condition,
and not absolutely in relation to God as his People is. So Levit. 36.3, 12.
compared with 2 Cor. 6.16. Matthew. 22.2, 3, 9, 10, 11. Romans 10.9. chapter 4.25. Gal.
3.7.


Antinom. Your Argument is very confused and rough drawn; for you tell us not
what you would conclude of all the previous Questions. I take it for grant,
that you would conclude your imperfect conditions in whatever Question you put
about the Covenant. 2. Then you use very ambiguous Terms; you talk of offering
the benefits of a Covenant: It Is one thing to make a Covenant, and another
thing to offer to make a Covenant; for there are conditions to the Offer, and
the conditions to the making, and what you mean by offering absolutely in
relation to God, I know not. Does not God offer absolutely? Is he provoked to
offer Grace from any thing out of himself? Sure he offers absolutely and from
himself, though he offer upon condition, or makes Conditions in his Offer: And
how that comes in, as his People is, I know not. I take the whole put together
not to be Sense. But I will extract your Argument as well as I can.

If each Benefit of the Covenant is offered to Men upon condition, and not
absolutely in relation to God, then there are Conditions in the Covenant of
Grace to be performed by us before we can have the Benefits: But each Benefit
of the Covenant is offered so, etc. Ergo. Here I deny the consequence of the
Major first; for there are conditions of Offer, and conditions propounded in
Offer; mean them if you please: God's propounding the Grace of the
Covenant-condition, is no ground of Proof, that therefore there are conditions
to be performed by us before we receive the Benefit: For the Duty required, and
Good thing promised, are but both of them Benefits, and the leading Duty it may
be the greatest, and the greatest Exemplification of the Grace of the Promise.
Here is connection then of Benefits as to Relation and Order, and therefore I
deny your consequence, That Promises conditionally made do infer necessarily
foederal conditions distinct from the Benefits. Minor also denied; for each
Benefit of the Covenant is not offered conditionally; as the making a new
Heart, the Gift of Faith, the uniting Power and Efficacy of the Spirit, whereby
we are inserted into Christ as our Root, before we can bring forth the Fruit of
Faith. As to the places mentioned, I say, First, That the Covenant of Grace as
dispensed under the Old Testament, was veiled and covered two ways. 1. By Types
and Ceremonies. 2. By a Legal Ministration in Denunciations, Conditions,
Promises of Temporal Blessings, whereby they were carried on to Duty; but yet
in the Sacrifices they had some sight by Faith of the Absoluteness and Freeness
of the Grace of God in the Promise; and it is evident the unconditionality of
the Promise, though it was manifested sometimes to the Patriarchs and Prophets,
yet was mostly under a Cloud; as in a cloudy day the Sun may now and then break
out with mavelous Brightness and Splendour, when for the generality a Legal
Darkness clouded and obscured the Grace of God.

In other Ages the Mystery of the Covenant was not made known and revealed so
as now, Ephesians. 3.5. But as to Lev. 26.3, 12 it makes nothing against us; for God
does but by his Commands and Promises bring them into participation of the
Covenant of Grace. For what is Faith and Obedience but the Gifts of his Grace?
And it is he who through the Blood of the everlasting Covenant works in us the
things that are well-pleasing in his sight through Jesus Christ, Heb. 13.21.
And this was the way of his working with them, being under this Tutorage,
differing little from Servants till the time appointed of his Father, Gal. 4.1,
2, 4. And accordingly you see, Lev. 26.3. the Promise of Encouragement is, Then
will I give you rain in due season. And likewise as he promises outward
Blessings, so Spiritual Privileges, His Ordinances and Presence among them, in
them, ver. 12. Not that their walking in his Statutes was the condition of his
being a God in Covenant; for he chose them before they chose him. And God
says, ver. 13. notwithstanding these conditional Promises, I am the Lord your
God that brought you out, etc. Likewise as the Promises were mostly of outward
good things Temporal, and the continuance of his Ordinances, so performance of
these were connected to their external Conformity to his instituted Worship;
they were to be a separate and peculiar People, sequestered from other People
unto his pure Worship and Ordinances; and to that Sense does the Apostle apply
this place, 2 Cor. 6.17. For he presses Purity in Church Fellowship in the
foregoing Verses by diverse Arguments; and among others, this of Leviticus, That
God expected such Purity of the Church of the Old Testament, much more of them;
and hence presses Separation in external Church Fellowship and Ordinances; and
then as they have the Blessings of Ordinances, they will have the Blessing of
God's Visible Presence: Whereas I said before, Benefits are connected. A Duty
Benefit to a Privilege, to be as motives to Performance, the Spirit working
with the Word: There may be Commands, Directions, Motives to Duty in the Word,
and none of these make Duty antecedently necessary and conditional to our being
in Covenant, but all consequently necessary, being a Series of connected
Benefits flowing in after we are taken in to Covenant.

As to Matthew. 22.2, 3, 9, 10, 11. you say, Coming to the Wedding Supper was a
Condition of having share in it, You say in your Preface to that place, that
the Garment is Uniting Faith: You should have said, Putting on the Garment is
the Garment. Is the coming to Christ, or putting him on, the Wedding Garment,
or Christ himself and his Righteousness?
so is it of pardon of Sin and acceptance to Life. Coming to the Wedding-Supper
was not the Condition that gave Right, but the Invitation. Coming is a
privilege which the People that are invited to receive the Gospel have, whom
Christ by the Power and Efficacy of his Grace working with the Word compels and
constrains, overcoming their Rebellious Hearts. As to that place of Romans 10.9.
you have as much Reason to infer thence, that Confession is a Condition, as
well as Faith; the great Antecedent Condition there mentioned, is Hearing, by
which Faith comes. As for Romans 4.25. Gal. 3.7. they all show but connection of
Covenant-benefits, all absolutely given in the Promise of Eternal Life, Pardon
and Faith, Faith and Holiness, Grace and Glory, all sounded upon one Condition
of the Covenant, the Lord Jesus Christ.


Neonom. I pray, By what Justice then do you say the first Grace is absolute?
It Is Injustice to add new Terms to any of those Benefits, if they be ours by
the Covenant as absolute before.


Antinom. I see you will stand upon Terms with God, and will have him stand
upon Terms with you. But God never made any such Terms as you dream of: Blessed
be his Name.


Neonom. If the Covenant be not Conditional, as to the disposing of Benefits,
it would follow, 1. That all to whom the Offers are made, have an Interest in
them, or it is not a serious Offer; no, nor a true Offer, as not containing a
real and natural Connection between the Benefit and the Duty. D. W. p. 63.


Antinom. I must take notice of your shifting in your Antecedent, what do you
put in as to the Disposal of Benefits; the Disposal of Benefits is the
Performance of the Promise; your Condition ought to lie before the Disposal of
Benefits: If you mean an adjusted Order in the disposal of Benefits, you
multiply Conditions to the end of the World, and turn all Benefits into
Conditions. We are to talk of a Condition, upon which as such, all others are
Benefits, and relative Conditions are given forth by Promise: And we say,
Jehovah our Righteousness is that Condition for which we are blessed with all
Blessings in and through him; in and through him they are bestowed, and all
ways and means of bestowing them are Blessings provided in him, and bestowed by
him; that there is a Method of Order in bestowing them, and a relative
Connection between them there is, as also among the Blessings and Benefits, and
is no hindrance to the Absoluteness of the Promise. A Man gives me an Estate to
come gradually to me 20 l. per Annum this year, and 20 l. next, etc. is my
having 20 l. per Annum this year the reason, by way of condition, of my having
20 l. per Annam more the next. The Condition of all this Estate is resolved
into the Free Will of the Donor, and his purchasing of it for me with his Money.

As to your consequence, it follows, you say, That all to whom the Offer is
made have an Interest in them. I deny it utterly in such Offers as God makes;
for though the Tender of Grace be indefinite, yet God knows who are his by
Election and Redemption, and to them he gives his Son and his Spirit, and the
first Gift of the Promise to persuade and enable them to come unto Christ. Or
you say, It Is not a Serious Offer, viz. To offer Grace upon such Terms and
Conditions, which the Sinner is not able to perform. This Inference will
rebound back again upon you, for saying, That these Conditions are freely
wrought of God in us. Does God work these Conditions before he offers them the
Grace of the Covenant? If so, you say something, and work them in all too to
which they are offered; if not, it is not serious, as you and the Arminians will
say. Therefore to support your Hypothesis, you must grant a Free Will in Man,
and Power of himself to perform the said Condition. Now it is true, you say, as
not containing a real and natural Connection between the Benefit and Duty. Why
so? Cannot Benefits be relative and truly connected, without there be a Foederal
Condition? Having Food and Raiment, let us therewith be content. Contentment is
the Benefit here, and it is a Duty, and the Condition ^^od and Raiment, a
manifest Benefit too; and cannot these be con^^^ted, without one be a Foederal
Condition of the other? which wanting, the Blessing is not looked for. Then you
may say, Not having Food and Raiment sufficient, I need not be content. Know
this, the Spirit of God makes the Promise the Condition of the Duty. As to
Abraham, I am God All-sufficient, walk before me; and its always so, if we
rightly understand the Language; for it first bids us live before it bids us
do. And this is the difference between the Covenant of Works and that of Grace.


Neonom. 2. Faith it self is no more necessary to our first Interest in those
Benefits, than any other Grace; nay, than Unbelief. Let no man object, It Is a
Sign; for so is any other Grace; so might be the Description of Paul by his
Name, by his Abode, yea, Sin, a Persecutor, etc. D. W. p. 63.


Antinom. There is an Interest antecedaneous to Faith, but hidden, yet such as
our Faith can never come into being without. And as to our Interest by Faith
you speak of, Christ by Revelation of his Grace in the Gospel makes us Partaker
thereof: It Is an Interest of Possession; and yet a Man may be thrown out of
Possession, unless he have this antecedent Right and Title to it. And the
Interest by Possession of, and Communion with Christ, is greater by Faith than
any other way, because it is directed to Christ objectively, and receives more
eminently Christ himself: And though it do so, yet it cannot be the Condition of
receiving Christ. That is, the very receiving of Christ; for the receiving
cannot be the Condition of receiving, then an Act should be the Condition of it
self.


Neonom. Let not any one say it is a Sign, for so is any other Grace, and Paul
may be known by this Name, Abode, etc.


Antinom. Faith is for those Uses that Christ has appointed, but he never
appointed it for a Moral Foederal Condition: For if it be a Condition, it is so
as an Act; and if as an Act, a Duty; and as a Duty, Moral, and so makes your
Covenant only a Moral Law. Believing is more than a Sign; but it is most
naturally so in your Sense; for in it is Conditionality you make it but the same
with other Graces and Duties. But we say, Believing is feeding on Christ;
seeing of him, receiving of him; and it is not proper for to say, Feeding is a
Condition of Feeding, Seeing a Condition of Seeing, yet it carries it is
Evidence with it abundantly, because there is Perception of all I see and feed
upon.


Neonom. Men are said to enter into Covenant with God, Deuteronomy. 29.12, 13. Psalm.
50.3. To keep Covenant, Psalm. 103.18. To perform the Covenant, 2 Chronicles. 34.31.
To take hold of the Covenant, Isa. 6.6.


Antinom. In the Covenants mentioned betwixt God and the Church of the Jews, we
must always consider the Pedagogy that they were under, and that they were
under the Covenant of Grace veiled, and not only with Levitical Types, but
Legal Dispensations in respect of Duty. And the Apostle tells us, that this
Ministry was faulty; and therefore he says, Christ has obtained a more
excellent Ministry, far differing, (...), By so much, that he was the Mediator
of a better Covenvnt, which is established on better Promises; Heb. 8.6. For if
the first Covenant had been Faultless, (...), there had been no place found for
the Second. This Second is not to be understood of the Covenant of Works, but
the Mosaical Ministry of the Covenant of Grace, which is fully expressed in the
beginning of the Chapter. Neither does the Apostle mean only the mere
Ceremonial part of that Ministry, but the morally legal and conditional way of
Dispensation like the Covenant of Works: And therefore he says, The new
Covenant that he would make or promulge by the more excellent Ministry of the
Mediator, it should be published in the true, absolute, and unconditional Light
of it, not according to the Mount-Sinai Covenant upon their coming out of
Egypt, (...), They abode not in that Covenant, by performing the conditional
Duties; (...), says the Lord, ver. 9. i. e. He did not give them those
Promises of external good things that he made unto them; for the Promises were
external for the most part, as the Conditions of them were morally Legal. 2.
Besides these explicit Covenants, there were Ecclesiastical Covenants, as they
were a National Congregational Church; and in these Covenants they promised
Subjection unto God, and Observation of all his Appointments in that
Dispensation, whereby God would have them to be visibly a peculiar and separate
People; and what they did in this kind in a right manner, was an Effect, and
not a Cause of their true Interest in the Covenant of Grace; but the Covenant
it self as externally made, was a National Church Covenant, as appears Deuteronomy.
29.15. and so when it was renewed in Joshua's time, chapter 24. And I think any one
that reads that Solemn Covenant, Deuteronomy. 29. will see, that it carried with it
all the Thunder and Lightning of Mount Sinai to enforce it, and also the
Blessings promised were Temporal, and the Conditions were the Duties of the
Moral Law and Ceremonies, ver. 26. Now I wonder that any can pretend that this
Covenant was the New Covenant, for so it was not in the Sense of the Apostle,
and that it was a Ministry of the Covenant of Grace any more than in a carnal
and legal Dispensation after the manner of the Covenant of Works: And you shall
find among the great things promised for the strengthening and encouraging of
the Faithful, one thing was the reforming the external Dispensation of Grace in
taking off the Vails; and therefore always in those places we have it run as a
free absolute Promise, and God beginning first with them before any Condition
is performed on their parts, Ezekiel. 26.25. I will sprinkle clean water upon you,
and you shall be clean, etc. So Exek. 27.26. I will make a Covenant of Peace
with them, and it shall be an everlasting Covenant, etc. Jer. 31.31, 33. Zech.
8.8.

Hence all external Covenant-Obligations that the Church makes are effects of
this new Covenant Interest; Covenants that they are obliged to, and Covenants
that in the New Covenant are promised absolutely as their Blessings and
Privileges, and in that way commended to Gospel-Churches, 2 Cor. 6.16, 17, 18.
I will be their God, and they shall be my People. It Is all Promise, and upon
this account they are commanded to walk as a becoming People under such an
Obligation of Free Grace laid upon them. Yea, God always in these Old Testament
Covenants made his goodness and kindness to them first as a motive and
condition unto them to build their Obedience upon, whereby he preached
Free Grace to them, Exodus 19.4. chapter 20.1. and innumerable other places. And you
mention places your self, which show our Covenant with God is promised by him,
Jer. 50.4, 5. -- They shall go and seek the Lord their God -- They shall ask
the way to Zion, saying, Come, let us join our selves to the Lord in a
perpetual Covenant that shall not be forgotten. We grant every Believer does
actually and freely enter into Covenant, but it is because God has covenanted
with him first: We are not reconciled to God but upon believing God's
Reconciliation to us: Therefore the Gospel Ministry is the Declaration of God's
Reconciliation, and from thence an Argument to persuade us to be reconciled
unto God. So it is Ezekiel. 20.37.


Neonom. All these Expressions are convincing, that there is a restipulation on
Man's part, and that it is a Covenant in respect of that mutual Stipulation
between God and us.


Antinom. It Is a strange thing, that most of those Men that quote the
Church Covenant of the Old Testament to make good their Notion of the Covenant
of Grace, that it is a moral conditional Covenant, are against all Explicit
Church Covenants, whereby Men that profess Godliness should have an external
visible Tie to walk in the Faith and Order of the Gospel, which was the main
Intent and Design that God had upon his People in the days of the Old Covenant,
and never intended it as a condition of their Personal Covenant with him, but a
fruit and consequent after they were in Covenant. It Is mightily to derogate
from the Covenant of Grace, to make the Promise thereof to depend on a
stipulation on our part: For if we stipulate with God, we also promise to him,
as well as he to us before Performance, and likewise that we do our part before
he does his; for the Stipitulation is covenanting; and for any Man to talk of
any such thing, runs upon multitudes of Rocks: Our radical Stipitulation was in
Christ, all other Stipitulations are effects of it.


Neonom. To sappose the Covenant to be the sole Act of God, and an Act that is
merely absolute, renders all these Phrases impertinent and impossible.


Antinom. The Covenant of Grace is the Act of God in the Person of the Father,
with us in the Person of Christ, in him we did restipulate; he was the great
Covenanter on our part, and the Condition of this Covenant; and when we, by
virtue of the Promise, take hold of this Covenant, we stand upon this Condition
with God, and God dispenses all Benefits upon this Condition to us: And it is a
free and absolute Covenant to us, a Covenant of Promise, because not only the
Promise is bestowed without Foederal Conditions performed by our selves, and
the great Foederal Condition the Lord Christ is freely bestowed on us.


Neonom. It was his Act to appoint a Covenant, and enable us to keep it; and
it is his Act to restipulate on his part, etc.


Antinom. This frees it not from being a Covenant of Works; for God appointed
Adam's Covenant, and gave him strength to keep it, which strength he had when
God gave him the Law; but to talk of God's covenanting with fallen Man in that
state, and say, Man has restipulated while in a state of Enmity, is most
absurd. Or to say, he shall restipulate when God gives him Power so to do, is
as much as to say, I have sold to a Man my Horse for 10 l. and when he brings
me that 10 l. he shall have it, but has not a Groat to pay, Rags to his Back,
or Bread for his Belly, and he refused my Horse too, and hates me with a
perfect Hatred, yet I will make him willing to take the Horse, and I will give
him the Money to pay for it; there is no Man can think this Man has any other
Design than to lose the Honor of giving away his Horse, that this Man and all
the World should look upon the Horse as purchased; and so it was, and the Law
will find it so, for all his giving him the Purchase-Money.

And it is no less absurd, that God restipulates to our covenanting, to make us
first in covenanting with God, which is contrary to all the Account we have of
the Covenant of Grace; and when any place speaks so, it is ad hominem, and in
the Language of the Covenant of Works.


Neonom. Consider the Seals of the Covenant, Baptism and the Lord's Supper;
they seal not absolutely, but conditionally.


Antinom. Baptism is for Remission of Sins, which is an absolute Gift, and it
supposes it given where there is no Qualification for it; and this is an
Argument to baptize Infants. And if you will have it to Seal the Performance of
conditional Duties, you must never baptize Infants. I would desire no stronger
Argument to manage against Infant Baptism than your Principle of Conditionality
of the Covenant. And as for the Lord's Supper, it holds forth Christ's Body
freely given, and his Blood freely shed for us, and that his Blood was a Seal
and Ratification of the New Covenant, where-by it becomes a Testament.


Neonom. 1 Pet. 3.21. Baptism that saves us, is not the putting away the Filth
of the Flesh, but the Answer of a good Conscience toward God, i. e. Upright
consent of Heart to the Vow and Profession.


Antinom. The Words are thus, (...). To what was Baptism an Antitype? Was it
not to the Waters of Noah, that saved Persons by bearing up the Ark, when the
rest of the World were drowned. What condition was there of God's saving those
Eight Persons? And to bring it home, the Apostle tells us, the mere Element in
Baptism and external Administration (...), not the washing away External or
Levitical Uncleanness, as it was used by the Jews, but as it signifies the
Blood of Christ reaching to the purifying of the Conscience from Guilt, Heb. 9.
and 10. and thence is (...), Through the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, as it
signifies the carrying or washing away our Sins by the Blood of Christ, and our
rising again, wherein we were fundamentally Justified, and the application of
both by Faith, whereby our present Sense of God's Wrath and Condemnation is
removed. To talk that it signifies a Vow or upright Consent, is very Jejune,
against the Stream of Interpreters.


Neonom. An Elect Person known by Revelation to be so while unregenerate, is
not entitled to the Lord's Supper.


Antinom. He that has that Revelation, I suppose, will have something more
revealed: But in the mean time I wonder why you that stand upon such strict
moral Qualifications for an Interest in Covenant-Benefits, and so sparing of
Gospel Grace, stand upon so slight Terms for admission to the Lord's Supper,
and are so lavish of Covenant-Benefits upon such easy Terms. I am sure you may
know some of them are not Regenerate without Revelation.


Neonom. Unbelief, and whatever Sins are contrary to the Terms of the Covenant,
are the only hindrances to a Sinners Interest in the Benefits of the Covenant,
and by these we are said to reject and refuse the Covenant. The Scripture lays
Men's want of Forgiveness on their Unbelief as the culpable cause, etc.


Antinom. Then the great Business of the Covenant of Grace is to save Sinners,
and give them Life, being dead in Sin and Unbelief; and the Gift of God is
eternal Life, begun in Remission of Sins, and Faith in Christ's Blood, which
God gives freely unto those that are altogether incapable to perform any
Conditions for it; he gives these Gifts to unbelieving rebellious ones: And if
Unbelief should hinder these Gifts of God's Grace, there is none could be saved.
And as Unbelief does not hinder Fundamental Covenant Right which they have by
Christ's Imputation, so it hinders not God's Application when he will work; for
then nothing shall hinder. You seem also to hint, as if some Sins were more
venial than others; and some more consistent with your Moral Conditions of the
Covenant of Imperfection; and know that no culpable Cause shall hinder the
Forgiveness of those for whom Christ died.


Neonom. The Gospel-Promise being the way which Christ appoints to dispense
saving Benefits to Believers, must have the same Rules with the Covenant of
Grace.


Antinom. Yea, for the Covenant of Promise and the Covenant of Grace are the
same, and saving Benefits are dispensed only by way of Gift, which is
performance of the Promise, and no other way.


Neonom. The Gospel is his Testament, and a Covenant cannot be a Disposition
contrary to this Gospel.


Antinom. The Covenant of Grace is a Testament, because confirmed by the Death
of Christ; and there is no adding to it, (if it were but a Man's Testament and
last Will, as the Apostle says) and therefore there is no bringing in any
after-terms or conditions of it: And the Gospel is a Declaration of this
Promise and Seal, and adds no further Terms.


Neonom. This Promise tells us, 1. That there is a Promise of the first Grant
made to Christ for the Elect, and by virtue of that Promise the Elect do
consent to the Covenant.


Antinom. Promise and Grant are in a manner one, and this made to Christ for
the Elect, (it is better to the Elect in Christ, but that will do for the
present) and by virtue of that Promise the Elect do consent: I suppose you mean
the first Consent, which you will sometimes have the Condition of their
receiving benefit by the Promise. I hope it is this, a great Benefit and
absolute Gift of the Promise; and of this then there is no Condition but Christ
by your own Consession.


Neonom. 2. That Gospel or Covenant is the means whereby that Faith is wrought.


Antinom. Very good; then the Covenant is the condition of Faith, and not Faith
of the Covenant.


Neonom. This Gospel commands, and by the Power of the Spirit works that Faith
in order to saving Benefits, which Benefits it promises to such as do believe,
and no other. D. W. p. 66.


Antinom. I thought but now you were got above your Covenant of Imperfections,
but I find you are working down again: These Conditions are heavy bulky things,
they will weigh a Man down do what he can. And is Faith wrought only in order
to saving Benefits? How often shall I tell you, it is one of the principal
saving Benefits of any Grace wrought in us? And Faith is promised to
Unbelievers, else they would never have it.


Neonom. This Gospel invests Believers in those saving Benefitt.


Antinom. And it invests Unbelievers in the saving benefit of Faith; and
therefore the Gospel is the condition of Faith.


Neonom. It secures the perseverance of Believers in the true Faith, and the
necessary Effects, and thereby secures those Benefits as unforfeited.


Antinom. Then they are not under an uncertain Trial all this Life, that it is
not determined whether they shall be saved or no, as you suggested.


Neonom. But Christ never bequeathed or promised in the Gospel a Pardon or
Salvation to Unbelievers.


Antinom. That Is a Riddle. Was it not in Christ's Testament to save Sinners, to
justify the Ungodly? Did he not pray for them that should believe? Does not the
Gospel tell us, He came not to save righteous, but to bring Sinners to
repentance; that he came to seek and to save them that are lost? Does not
Christ say, He is the Resurrection and the Life; and that we are quickened, who
were dead in trespasses and sins? etc. The main Tenure of the Gospel. If it be
as you say, there is none should be saved; for if Men are not saved by virtue of
the Promise, they will never be saved. What a miserable Condition are all in,
if believing and promising Mercy be not bestowed upon Unbelieving Sinners.


Neonom. Nor the continuance of that Pardon or Salvation, but upon supposition
that this Faith perseveres: And if the Gospel-promise say no such thing, I am
sure the Covenant did not, p. 66.


Antinom. What Christ bequeathed he purchased; but it seems all was done but
upon condition of perseverance. We must stand upon these uncertain conditions
all our Days; it would be some comfort, if we could come to some certainty of
our Pardon and Salvation after we are over the first brunt; but we cannot be
sure we are pardoned, or that we shall be saved till the last Gasp; and if we
happen to fall in the mean time, our Pardon is gone.


Neonom. The Account of the Covenant, which seems most for it is Absoluteness,
implies this conditional Connection of the required Grace and the promised
Benefits.


Antinom. Now all our Foederal Conditions are dwindled away into conditional
Connexions only. It is well some places seem to be for the Absoluteness of the
Covenant; if there be but one Text that is really for it, I think we are bound
to believe it. But you say, they imply a conditional Connection. God forbid,
that conditional Connexions should he turned out of the World; if they should,
all things must be returned into the first Chaos, and this would be a
conditional Connection; and this Connection is between the required Grace and
promised Benefit. If you had said, Bestowed Grace, it had been more proper: Or
said, Required Duty: There Is no body has so little Sense as to deny Cause and
Effects, Subjects and Adjuncts, Arguments of all sorts in the Covenant of Grace
in that free absolute Covenant; and among the Gifts of it, there is Christ and
all his Effects, the Spirit and its Effects, Faith and it is Effects, Adjuncts
and Contraries. This we call Relative Conditions, or else things must cease to
have a Being. But that which we deny is, Moral Foederal Conditions to be
performed by us: Such as these we say there is none: In the Covenant of Grace
there is no required gracious Act that is such a moral condition of any promised
Benefit.


Neonom. The places that seem to be for an absolute Covenant are, Jer. 31.31,
32, 33. Heb. 8.10, 11, 12. Heb. 10.16, 17. Jer. 32.40. Ezra 11.19, 20. There be
others that relate to the restoration of the Captivity.


Antinom. You name Ezra 11. for one, and Ezra has not so many Chapters. I
suppose it is an Erratum, but I find it not among the Errata's. As for the rest,
you insinuate, as if they referred only to the return of the Captivity.


Neonom. Yes, I Will pitch upon one, Jer. 31.31. etc. This is quoted Heb. 8.10,
12. and chapter 10.16, 17. To understand this, we must consider, 1. Whom is this
Covenant made with. 2. What can be inferred from this Scheme of the Covenant.
(1.) It Is made with the House of Judah and Israel, not the Men in present
being, but Men to be hereafter. It Is after those days I will make it, so that
it was after the Mosaic Covenant was to expire, ver. 32. D. W. p. 67.


Antinom. Hence then you refute your self, in saying, that it referred to the
Restoration of the Captivity; for then the Mosaic Covenant was in it is full
force.


Neonom. And it could not be the only Covenant of Grace, for that had it is
Being from the Fall, and the sincere Israelites lost not the advantage of it,
Gal. 3.17.


Antinom. The Covenant of Grace had it is Being before the Fall, and from the
Fall it had it is Promulgation; then was that first revealed state of it, before
it was the Mystery that lay hid in God. But observe, that as it was then
manifested, it was absolute as to us. The Seed of the Woman shall break the
Serpents Head. There was no condition mentioned, nor rationally supposed to be
implied, but Christ. And it is to be observed that this Covenant-promise was
made before the Sentence was pronounced upon our Fallen Parents, which Blessing
was the Curse of the Serpent denounced. Now as this promulgated Covenant had
it is being from the Fall, so it continued as the Covenant of Grace and
Salvation to all the Faithful under the Old Testament. The Lamb slain from the
Foundations of the World, or before them, was looked upon as the only Foederal
Condition, which was exemplified by Sacrifices, early begun in Adam's Family,
and continued till the Messiah came. Now indeed this Covenant in the Epistle to
the Hebrews is not meant in the Essential Nature of it, but in the veiled state
of it under the Mosaic Administration, which is called by the Apostle, (...),
Graven in stone, 2 Cor. 3.6, 7. and opposed to (...), which is the Gospel
unvailed Ministration, which is said, therefore to be New, because of the full
and clear Discovery that was made by the Revelation of Christ in his Coming and
Ministry, which was not before: And in the same Sense Mount Sinai and Mount
Zion is opposed in Heb. 12. And what was seen by this last Ministration? It
was, that Christ Jesus was the Sum and Substance of the former Ministration.
1. That it was a Covenant of Free Grace, the Promise given upon the condition
of Redemption by the Blood of Christ, which appeared to be the true intent of
all the Sacrifices. 2. That though so much was conditionally required, yet no
Duties could expiate sin, or reconcile us to God: And the Reason of those
Duties are given us as truly, though then not so fully seen, was the
performance of the Covenant-condition vertually in Redemption typified by
Redemption out of Egypt, Exodus 20. In a word, the Covenant of Grace stood
veiled under the Mosaic Pedagogy, which stood in a conditional Command under
the Sanction of Rewards and Punishments mostly Temporal, and under Types and
Figures.

Now this ministration of the Letter stood under a double Faultiness, which
clouded the Glory and Beauty of the Promise. First, A Typical and Shadowy
Administration in Sacrifices, by which the great condition of the Covenant was
pointed at, as being not yet come, and Symbolically only expressed to their
Faith. The other Fault was, the Moral Mount Sinai Vail, which called for Duty
as it were in the way of Foederal Condition, caused them to perform Duty as
under a Spirit of Bondage, and in a mercenary manner, through the Encouragement
of Temporal Rewards, and fear of Temporary Sufferings, and a seeming
Attribution of Demerits to the Performances. And therefore the Apostle shows,
that the Faultiness lay here also, Heb. 8.9. Not according to the Covenant I
made with their Fathers, etc. Because they continued not in my Covenant, they
could not be saved by those Legal conditional Performances, but by an absolute
Covenant couched under that conditional Ministration, being saved even as we;
for the Law and Legal Ministration it was weak through the Flesh, Romans 8.3. And
you speak very truly, that the true Israelites never lost the Spiritual
Advantage of the Covenant of Grace by reason of this veiled Ministration, but
looked thorough the Vail by Faith; for the Law-deliverance at Mount Sinai did
not, or could not disannull it. (...), The Covenant or Testament foreratifyed
by God unto Christ. Thus far we do in some measure agree.


Neonom. But the Point before us is, to know who this Israel and Judah be. 1.
They are either the Natural Jews to be alive in those days, which this Promise
refers to. 2. Or to true Believers, who are inwardly Israel, Romans 9.6. If it
terminate in the Natural Jews, it is a strong Text for the Conversion of the
Jews, for the most part by an immediate Influence.


Antinom. Those days are the days of the Gospel-ministration, and it is plain
the Spirit of God referrs to the Jews that then lived. The Apostle wrote to the
Hebrews, and his Design was to take them from the Mount Sinai Ministration,
which they were most fond of: He tells them, That now the days were come which
the Prophet spoke of; and therefore this is but shuffling with the Texts, as if
the time of fulfilling this Promise was not yet come, when the Spirit of God
gives us so clearly to understand when this Prophecy was accomplished, ver. 6.
having given us an Account of the Ministry of the Old Sanctuary, that then the
Priests did serve the Example and Shadow of Heavenly Things. (...), They do
service, or minister by way of Similitude and Shadow, whereby they understood
that they were not to last but till a better Ministry ensued. And ver. 6. he
says, But now has he obtained a more excellent Ministry, by how much also as
he is the Mediator of a better Covenant. And this is the time, at the
Appearance of this Mediator, and his fulfilling all Righteousness, that there
should be this clear, unvailed Dispensation of the Promise. Not but God did
thus unconditionally save them before; but now they should understand the true
Ground, Principle, and Use, of Gospel-Services and Duties. And here is all
absolute; God forgives their Iniquity, and writes his Law in their Hearts,
where all is absolute and free, without mentioning any condition; though you
would fain hook them in any way by Head and Shoulders, but you labor in vain.


Neonom. If they be true Believers, inward Israel, Romans 2.9. then there is
Faith in such who are the Parties with whom God makes this Covenant, etc. D. W.
p. 68.


Antinom. We showed you, it is meant first of the professed Jews in those days,
out of which God would take a true Israel by virtue of this Promise: And
whenever they that were blinded should be converted, and turn to the Lord, it
should be so; and this way they should come to be Believers; for giving the New
Heart, and writing the Law there, is making them Believers. How absurdly do you
talk of making Believers first, and then taking them into Covenant? As if
making Men Believers, and giving them new Hearts, were not taking them into
Covenant. This is from your Principle, That there is no Promise of giving Pardon
or Salvation to mere Sinners and Unbelievers, which is contrary to the whole
Gospel. I will show you a Promise that declares this absolute Covenant expressly
to the Sinners of the Gentiles, (though the same Promise belongs to both
expressed in either of the places.) Romans 9.23. That God might make known the
Riches of his Glory on the Vessels of mercy, which he had before prepared to
Glory, (...). This fore-preparation was in the Covenant of Grace, even us whom
he has called, not of the Jews only, but of the Gentiles, ver. 25. As he says
in Osce, I will call them my people which were not my people, and her beloved
which was not beloved, etc. See the place: And that this Calling referrs to
more than an outward Profession appears by 1 Pet. 2.9, 10. You will make the
writing of God's Law in the Heart to be the Condition, when it is the very
Promise made. Give me the Condition of this Promise to be found in us before
God's Law is written, or else you do nothing.


Neonom. It cannot be inferred from this Scheme of the New Covenant, that (the
Dr. would have it) God does not require any Duty as the condition of the
Benefits which he promised to give. D. W. p. 68.


Antinom. You say the first Grace is freely given, which in the Promise is a
New Heart. Now what is a greater Benefit than Life from the dead? And what Duty
can be required as a Condition to this Benefit? Here you must fall in with the
Papists, and directly contrary to Article 13. of the Church of England.


Neonom. I talk not of a Condition before a new Heart, but that the New Heart
is the Condition: For God's Law is written in the Heart, before our relation to
him as his People, or the Pardon of Sin.


Antinom. Here you plainly say, there is a real state in Grace, without a
relative: Sanctification, without Justification or Adoption; the Law written in
the Heart, and therefore Good Works. While we are unreconciled to God, it is
before we are his People. Now this Law must be written, 1. In the Heart of the
ungodly Man and Unbeliever; contrary to what you say, That there is no promise
made to such because Unbelievers: Or it must be in the Heart of him, who at
once is made a Believer in the working of a New Heart, in which instant he is
related to God, and has the pardon of Sin. But it is unaccountable Divinity,
That the Law of God is writ in the Heart before our Relation to God as his
People, or the Pardon of Sins.


Neonom. But God requires us to make us new Hearts as a condition of Life,
Ezekiel. 18.31. Jer. 7.23. 2 Cor. 3.6.


Antinom. I suppose, Sir, you your self cannot say, that the first quoted
places are wrote in the New Covenant Dialect, but in that of the Veiled
Covenant, especially that of Ezekiel. 18. the place quoted by you. I suppose you
will not say it is quite contrary to Jer. 31.31. for if so, we may throw away
our Bibles, but that this place is to be taken in some Sense that is not
contrary to the very nature and design of that of Jeremy.

The drift of this Chapter, Ezekiel. 18. is to vindicate the just and righteous
Proceedings of God: For they had charged God with Injustice and Unrighteousness
of his Dealings toward them, That the Son suffered for the Father's Sins, The
Father eat sour Grapes, etc. God Visiting the Iniquities of the Fathers upon
the Children. The Lord tells them, there is no Child suffers for his Fathers
Sins, any farther than he entails the Curse, and as he walks in his Fathers
Sins: and that by personal Repentance of the vilest Person a Man should be
saved, and not suffer for his Parents Sins. And ver. 29. the Prophet says,
notwithstanding you have heard the Justice of God thus vindicated, you will
persist in it, and say, (...), The way of God is not just or right. O house of
Israel, (says the Lord) are not my ways just? Are not yours unjust? For thus
says the Lord, I will judge you; seeing that you stand so upon your own
Justification, and censure my Justice; see now that you repent, and turn you
from your Iniquities, and so Iniquity shall not be your ruin. And if they
plead this, We cannot do it without the Gift of Grace, and thou change our
Hearts. No, faith God, seeing you stand upon such Terms with me, you must do as
you have pretended you could. Ver. 31. Cast away from you all your
Transgressions -- and make you a new Heart: Get up your selves such Faith as
those have, who receive my Grace freely, and I give new Hearts to, and it shall
be well with you: For, says the Lord, my Nature is not to delight in the
Misery of the Creature, (as no just Judge that passes Sentence delights to
afflict or kill the Prisoner at the Bar) I had according to my nature, rather
he should repent and live; but if he does not, Justice requires that he should
die. Now that which seems here to be chiefly aimed at, is, to convince them of
their sinful undone state, that they were never able to perform so much as the
external Commands of the Law of Moses, or any Commands to Repentance or
Obedience in their own strength and power. And seeing you charge me with this,
That I accept not your pretended Repentance, but have carried you away into
Captivity, it is for the Iniquity of our Fathers, they have sinned and we must
suffer. No, says God, do but repent, Sin shall not be your ruin; make you new
Hearts your selves. Seeing you pretend you deserve so much, and have done so
and so, let me now see what you can do without me as to Help and Grace; you
shall see I shall deal with you according to your Good, as well as according to
your Wickedness. The Current of the Old Tkstament is to convince them of the
Faultiness of this Conditional Covenant, and to confirm what the Apostle says,
Heb. 8. Romans 10.31, 32. which is the Sense of that place, Jer. 7.23, 4. This
thing I commanded them, but they hearkened not, etc. That they continued not in
that conditional way of Salvation, nor obtained the Law of Righteousness,
neglecting the true Spiritual meaning of the Sacrifices; but they that were
saved, were saved as we, by Faith in a free and an unconditional Covenant of
Grace.

Calvin says on the place, Non frustra hoc dicit Deus, facite vobis, etc. God
does not speak this in vain. Facite vobis (though they had no Power to do it)
but for this end, that men being convinced of their sins, should blame none but
themselves; and acknowledging their Impotency, should betake themselves to the
help of the holy Spirit as David, Psalm. 51.22. So as also this external
Exhortation is as it were the Instrument God uses to conferr Grace upon them.
And the Apostle acquaints us, 1 Cor. 10. and shows us how the Israelites
failed, and rebelled against this conditional Covenant, and so brought
themselves under the Calamities threatened to their Disobedience, and tells us,
that all these things happened unto them in a Type, (...) [or (...), as another
Reading has it] (...), ver. 11. They were Types, and were written for our
Instruction. Wherein was that? viz. That we should not think as they, to be
saved upon the condition of our Performances, which they did, notwithstanding
they had Christ and the free Promise of Life given to them in the Types of the
Cloud, and the Rock which they made not Improvement of, or regarded, but stood
mostly on their own strength and righteousness. Therefore, says he, ver. 12.
the Instruction lies here, which we are taught, He that thinks that he stands,
let him take heed lest he falls; i. e. let him depend upon the Free Grace of
the Covenant, and not upon his Conditional Performances. I see not to what
purpose you quote 2 Cor. 3.6. and chapter 10.11, 12, 21.
Neonom. I will tell you your Mistakes, you think every thing is a price to buy
a Benefit, which is a compliance with the way God has ordained to be a way to
bestow a Gift. D. W. p. 71.


Antinom. I think God has a way to bestow Grace upon us by Price and Gift too;
the Price is paid by Christ, i. e. the conditional part of the Covenant
performed, and Christ is freely given to us, and this is all the Covenant-way
of Salvation in him. Now if you bring in any other Foederal Condition between
Christ and us, you destroy it as a Gift of Righteousness and Life, and make it
Debt, because that which makes the Benefits promised due by remunerative
Justice, makes them a Debitum; but a previous foederal Condition performed,
makes the Benefits promised due by Remunerative Justice, Ergo. Make them a
Debt, and the Condition a Price; therefore all such Conditions are rejected as
Money and Price, Isa. 55.1.


Neonom. You think because God has promised to Christ, that the Elect shall
believe; therefore God cannot make Faith a Condition of any other Blessing.


Antinom. I think Faith being promised to Christ for us, and to all his Seed in
him, it can never lose the Nature of a Promise to us, and cannot return into the
Nature of a Foederal Condition. That the Promises are bestowed Ordine and
relativa connexione, I deny not, nor no body of Sense; but no Gifts of the
Promise are Foederal Conditions, but Christ himself.


Neonom. He thinks because Christ is given to be a Covenant, i. e. is appoint^d
to be a Surety, to serve the great ends of the Covenant accomplished and
secured, therefore there is nothing required from men as the way of their
Interest in the Benefits of the Covenant, though under the Influence of Christ.


Antinom. It seems you give two things to Christ as Surety only. 1. That he is
the Executor. 2. That he has given Bond and Security that we shall perform the
Conditions of the Covenant: But we say, he was so a Surety, as not only to
undertake, but actually to fulfill all Righteousness for us, and was our
Federal Condition, and was the Testator of the Promise; and it being made unto
him, and us in him, all Power was put into his Hand; he gave it us by Will,
sealed it with his Blood, and now is exalted, and in full Power to give out the
w^ole Covenant-grant himself, and eternal Life in him to Sinners freely that
have no Qualification for it, neither are capable of making or performing any
Foederal Conditions.


Neonom. You think because Christ is appointed to work Faith in Order to Union,
and other Benefits, therefore we must have an actual Interest in Christ and his
Benefits before this Faith is wrought.


Antinom. Faith is the Fruit that grows upon a Branch of the Vine Christ Jesus.
Now tell me how that Fruit shall grow without the Influence of the Root: Unless
you will say, a Branch out of Christ can bring forth Fruit. I will not
undertake to tell how long the Union made by the Spirit is before Faith appear,
but I am sure Faith cannot so much as arise into the first Act, without the
Sinners Union and Spiritual Communion, so far as to have from the Root; but as
to his active and apprehended Union, it cannot be before Faith.


Neonom. You think because all Grace after Union comes from Christ as our
actual Head, therefore Christ by his Spirit can work no Grace in us as our
designed Head.


Antinom. I know not how you put that Paradox upon me, or what you mean by it
very well; I can but guess at it by your other Notions; all that I can say to
it is, that Christ works Grace as our Actual Head. That Christ Works Grace in
us as a designed Head is a Riddle; for so Grace must be wrought in us before we
are in Christ.


Neonom. You think because God Soveraignly decreed what Benefits he would
bestow; therefore he has as our Ruler, stated no rectoral Method of bestowing
those Benefits.


Antinom. I never thought God to be any other than a God of Order, and that he
is wise in all his ways, and holy in all his Works, and always thought that as
God has decreed to us all Covenant-Blessings, so he has provided the best
method and way for bestowing them, most to the Honor and Glory of his
Free Grace.


Neonom. Because the Covenant is everlasting, (as to future) therefore you
judge there can be no Condition on man's part; nor remembering, that the
Covenant secures our perseverance in performing those Conditions.


Antinom. Because the Cnvenant is eternal, before the World began, I judge it
was complete, and that the Condition was as ancient as the Covenant, and the
Security both in Condition and Promise as ancient.


Neonom. Dr. O. in his Treatise of Justification, p. 264. says, That Christ
undertook that those who were to be taken into this Covenant should receive
Grace, enabling them to comply with the Terms of it, fulfill it is Conditions,
and yield Obedience, which God required therein. How frequently does he assert,
That our Interest in the Benefits of the Covenant depends on our Answering the
Terms of the Gospel. -- 270, 30^, 351. And so Mr. Norton.


Calvin. Dr. Owen shows what Christ undertook as Sponsor, Praes. Fidejussor. 1.
To answer for all the Sins of those who are to be, and are made Partakers of
the Benefits of it. 2. That those who are to be taken into Covenant, [by their
Actual embracing it] should receive Grace enabling them; and whatever Christ
undertook, God promised; and this Grace of Compliance is no other than what
Christ procured, undertook, and God promised. To say that the Promises are
Conditions one of another, is to say no more than that they stand in an order
of Application, and i^ a constituted relation one to another. And these are all
the Terms the Doctor means; and that he does mean so, and not in your Sense, is
manifest, by noting other Notions of these things, two of which he rehearses,
wherein I am sure your Notion is comprised at length and breadth, He tells us
what some say we owe to the Death of Christ, the Procuratum of the New
Covenant, and that he suffered what God appointed he should; not that the
Justice of God required any such thing, etc. as in their stead, but what by a
free Constitution of Divine Wisdom and Sovereignty was appointed; and hereon
God remitted the Terms of the Old Covenant, and entered into a New Covenant,
suited unto Reason, etc. These are Faith and sincere Obedience, etc. -- Others
say, The whole Righteousness of Christ is imputed to us so far, as that we are
made Partakers of the Benefits thereof. And that the way of the Communication
of them unto us is by the New Covenant, which by his Death the Lord Christ
procured. For the Conditions of the Covenant are establisted in the Covenant it
self, whereon God will bestow all the Benefits and Effects of it upon us, which
are Faith and Obedience. Wherefore, what the Lord Christ has done for us, is
thus far accepted as our Legal Righteousdess, as that God upon our Faith and
Obedience with respect thereunto, does release and pardon all our Sins. Upon
this Pardon there is no need of any positive perfect Righteousness unto our
Justification or Salvation; but our own personal Righteousness is accepted with
God in the room of it, by virtue of the New Covenant which Christ has
procured: So is the Doctrine hereof stated by Cursellaeus, and those that join
with and follow him, as I take it you do. This Doctrine he refutes.

As for what you quote from Mr. Norton, Orth. Evang. p. 172. it is not to the
purpose. His Design is to prove, the Gospel is preached in an Indefinite
Proposition, which is not to our purpose; you quote Mr. Norton in the wrong
place. Look chapter 10. p. 227. -- The Application both of Grace and Glory, and all
the good of the Covenant of Grace, are free to us, though conditioned unto
Christ. Free Grace excludes not Christ's Merit, but Man's Merit.

Obj. Faith is a Condition, though not of it self, yet of Salvation, and that
in the Elect themselves: Therefore the Application of Salvation seems not to be
free in respect of the Elect.

A. A Condition is either a Condition properly so called, i. e. an Antecedent
Condition, or a Condition improperly so called, i. e. a Consequent Condition. A
Condition properly so called is a Law or Observation, annexed to a business,
the performance whereof lies upon the Covenant, and accordingly the business
becomes valid or null. Such a Condition was Works in the first Covenant. If
Faith were such a Condition, there would soon be an end of the Covenant of
Grace; yea, the Covenant of Grace were indeed no Covenant of Grace. A Condition
improperly so called, or a consequent Condition, is such a Condition, whose
performance by the Covenantee is absolutely undertaken for, and irresistibly
wrought by the Covenanter, and not left in Suspense upon the Covenantee, to be
performed by his own strength. Faith is a consequent Condition, not an
antecedent Condition. So as this Proposition, I will give Eternal Life to the
Elect, if they believe, is equivalent unto this, I will out of my absolute Will
give unto the Elect Eternal Life, because I will out of my absolute Will give
unto the Elect to believe. Particula si, (...), si feceris hoc vives. Particula
si, non est (...) sed (...), in si credideris. Buc. loc. 21. q. 3.

Obj. Repentance and new Obedience are necessary to Salvation, Luke 13.3. Heb.
3.13. Therefore the Application of the good of Election is not to be free in
respect of us.

A. Good Works (which is also true Repentance) are necessary, as the way
appointed of God unto Salvation, but not as the Cause; this were to change the
Covenant of Grace into a Covenant of Works, our good Works are the effects of
Grace, the Reward of good Works are a Reward of Grace; Good Works are necessary
to Salvation as the Way, not as an Instrument or Cause. Faith is necessary to
Salvation as an Instrument. The Active and Passive Obedience of Christ is
necessary as a meritorious Cause.




Calvin. Mr. Antisozzo, I pray do you now speak impartially to this Point.


Antisozzo. I think I have met with his Scheme before now, and as I take it, it
runs thus, and the Question that lies before us is this, What Influence the
Sacrifice of Christ's Death, and the Righteousness of his Life have upon our
acceptance with God? The Gentleman that I once disputed with stated the
Question so, and resolved it as follows. [ Antisozzo, p. 580.] All that I can
find in Scripture about this is, That to this we owe the Covenant of Grace;
That God being well-pleased with the Obedience of Christ's Life, and the
Sacrifice of his Death, for his sake entered into a new Covenant with Mankind,
wherein he promises pardon of Sin and eternal Life to those who believe and
obey the Gospel.

I think this is exactly your Scheme, Mr. Neonomian.


Neonom. Yes, and something more, D. W. p. 8. viz. That the Gospel bars all
Unbelievers and dead Sinners from Pardon and Adoption, and denounces the
continuance of Condemnation against them, limiting it is Benefits to such as
believe.


Antisozzo. This Scheme contains three things. 1. A Description of the Covenant
of Grace. 2. An Assertion that this Covenant of Grace is owing to the Sacrifice
and Righteousness of Christ. 3. A Supposition that this Righteousness and
Sacrifice of Christ has no other Influence upon our acceptance with God, but
that for his sake he enrted into such a Covenant with Mankind.

1. His Description is this: A Promise of the pardon of Sin and Eternal Life to
those who believe and obey the Gospel.


Neonom. You will not, I hope, deny this to be a true Description of the
Covenant of Grace.


Antisozzo. But I will for all your have: It is a Description so liable to
Exceptions, that it describes neither the whole of the Covenant, nor a New
Covenant, nor (upon the matter) any Covenant at all.
Neonom. If you prove what you say, -- Eris mihi magnus Apollo. I Will strike out
your Name from my Book; and if I can be convinced, I must subscribe yours.


Antisozzo. You shall see what I can do presently. 1. This Description gives us
very little of a true Covenant of Grace. For, 1. Tho you think to put us off
with a Promise of Pardon and Life to those that believe and obey; the true
Covenant of Grace has given us a Promise of that Faith whereby we may believe,
and of that New Heart, whereby we are enabled to obey the Gospel. And First, We
have the Promise of the right Faith in the true Covenant, John 6.37. Ephesians. 1.8.
And least it should be said, Faith is a common Gift, as other things are, the
Apostle has his reply ready, Ephesians. 1.19. Secondly, We have a direct and express
Promise too of that New Heart from which we give to God new Obedience, Ezekiel.
36. Ver. 26, 27. etc.

2. This Description gives but very little of the true Covenant of Grace;
there is a Promise of Pardon and Life to them who believe and obey, but
Perseverance in Faith and Obedience is left to the Desultory and Lubricous
Power of Free Will; whereas in the true C^venant of Grace there is an
Undertaking that the Covenant shall be immutable both on God's part, Jer.
32.38, 4. God has said, He will not turn away from doing them good. And 2ly.
He has promised, That they shall not depart from him, etc. p. 583.

2. As it describes not the whole of the Covenant, so it describes not the
Nature of a new Covenant. 1. It describes no New Covenant in opposition to the
Old Covenant of Works: The Covenant with Adam promised Life upon condition of
O^edience, and those Commands as easy as those now given to Mankind, and much
easier too, if we consider Adam's Natural Strength. 2. We are told by you, that
Christ has added to the Moral Law, [ i. e. to the Moral Duties required by the
New Law, Faith and Repentance] which is to lay more Load on those that were
overcharged before. So that as you make Covenants, Adam's was much the better
Covenant of the two; but you have wisely shuffled in a Promise of the Pardon of
Sin, which may seem to give this Covenant a Pre-eminence above that of Adam:
But that will not mend the matter, both because it is better to have no Sin in
our Natures, than such a Remedy; better to have no Wound than such a Plaster;
and also because the Promise of Pardon (as you say) is suspended upon the
condition of Faith and Obedience, which without a Supernatural real Influx of
immediate Divine Power, reduces the Promise to an impossibility of
Performance. 2ly. This Covenant described is no new Covenant in opposition to
the Old Administration of the Covenant of Grace; there were the same Promises
then that we have now, the same Moral Precepts that we have now. Though the
Word Gospel come in for a Blind, yet the Apostle assures us the Gospel was
preached to Abraham.

3. Upon the matter it is no Covenant of Grace at all, p. 584. For, 1. A Promise
of Pardon and Life upon condition of believing and obeying, is neither better
nor worse than a Threatening of Condemnation and Death, to them who believe not
and obey not. It may with equal right be called a Threatening of Death, as a
Promise of Life: It Is no more of Grace than a Covenant of Wrath: And therefore,
2ly. (If it be lawful to consider Man as the Word of God describes him, dead in
Sins and Trespasses) It Is no Covenant at all to him. For what is the nice
difference betwixt the Promise of Life to him that obeys, when it is certain
beforehand he cannot obey, and no Promise at all, etc.


Neonom. Well, Sir, pray let us call another Cause: Do you argue like a Voucher
to my Book. Mr. Calvinist, he is a sharp Man, and he does this only for
Argumentation sake; he is of my mind for all this.


Antisozzo. No, do not you believe that; you wheadled me in to vouch for your
Book I know not how; but I shall stick the closer upon your Skirts for that, I
have not done with you yet.


Calvin. I will then propound one Question to Mr. Antisozzo, Whether the
Covenant of Grace be owing to the Sacrifice of Christ's Death, and so be
distinct from that he calls the Covenant of Redemption? Because our time now is
up, speak only what your Judgment is in this Point.


Antisozzo. Mr. Neonomian, I must tell you I have narrowly pryed into this
Paradox, That the Covenant of Grace is owing to, procured by, and founded on
the Obedience of Christ's Life, and the Sacrifice of his Death, and yet so
unhappy I have been in my search that I cannot find any proof, or any attempt
to prove it; and therefore (till I see evidence to the contrary) I shall take
for granted that the Covenant of Grace is owing to, and founded on, and given
forth by that Free Grace of God from whence its justly denominated a Covenant
of Grace, though the Intervention of a Mediator, such a Mediator was absolutely
necessary to put us into Actual Possession of those Rich Mercies designed to us
by God in that Covenant; which Mediator himself is owing to, and founded on
that Covenant of Grace; and therefore the Covenant of Grace is not founded upon
him, but indeed for that Covenant [which Mr. Neonomian] is pleased to call a
Covenant of Grace, it is no great matter where it is founded; and therefore let
him dispose of his own Creature as he pleases, etc. See p. 581, 586. etc.
Neonom. There are Precepts and Threatenings in the Covenant of Grace; and
therefore those Duties required are Foederal Conditions: For to the performance
of them are annexed Promises, and to the breach of them Threats.


Calvin. I pray, Dr. Witsius, do you speak in Answer to this Argument.

Dr. Witsius. The Covenant of Grace, or Gospel strictly so called, as a
Platform of that Covenant, seeing it consists in mere Promises, properly
prescribes nothing as Duty, it requires or commands nothing, not so much as
Believe, Trust and Hope in the Lord, etc. but it reports, declares and
signifies to us what God in Christ has promised, what he will and is about to
do. All Prescription of Duty belongs to the Law, even as after others venerable
Voetius has pressed again and again. Voet. Disput. Tom. 4. p. 24. and seq. And
this we must firmly hold, if we will constantly defend (with all the Reformed)
the perfection of the Law, containing in it is compass all Virtues, all Duties
of Holiness. But the Law fitted to the Covenant of Grace, and according there
to written in the Heart of the Elect, commands all these things which are
propounded in the Gospel, to embrace it with Faith unfeigned, and to live a
Life of Grace and Glory agreeable thereto. De F^^der. p. 197.

As to Comminations, it cannot be denied but in the Doctrine of Christ and his
Apostles, there are many Comminations, which have a peculiar respect unto the
Covenant of Grace, as, He that believes not shall be condemned, etc. which
Comminations do seem to be distinguished from those that are plainly Legal:
Such as this, Cursed be he that continues not in all things, etc. Yet if we
exactly consider them, the Covenant of Grace has no peculiar Threats, for all
the Threats are from the Law, which Law as to all its parts, does accommodate
and suit it self to the Covenant of Grace; and there are none which cannot be
referred to, or deduced from that mere Legal Commination Cursed is every one
that continues not in all things, etc. De Foed. p. 199.


DEBATE IX. Of the Nature of Saving Faith.
Calvin. AT our last Meeting we finished our Debate about the Covenant of
Grace, and the Conditions of it. What have you further, Mr. Neonomian, to
discourse Mr. Antinomian about.


Neonom. Diverse Points besides that he is erroneous in. The next I would
challenge him upon, is Saving Faith, and the Nature of it: For his Error is
this:

That Saving Faith is nothing but a Persuasion or absolute concluding within
our selves, That our Sins are pardoned, and that Christ is ours. D. W. p. 73.


Calvin. But you do not deny Faith to be a Persuasion, do you? If you do deny
that Persuasion is the Genus of Faith, every common Porter, or Youth in the
Sreet, will contradict you; for they will tell you, that they do believe this
or that to be true. Ask them what they mean by Believing, they will tell you,
They are persuaded of it. They take Faith and Persuasion to be equivalent
Terms, and indeed reciprocal; for that which I am persuaded of I do believe,
and that which I believe I am persuaded of. But go on, let us hear what Mr.
Antinomian says in this Point.


Neonom. Sir, he tells us, that the whole Essence of Faith is nothing else but
the Echo of the Heart answering the foregoing Voice of the Spirit and Word of
Grace. My Sins are forgiven me, says Faith. And the Soul that can assume thus
from the Spirit and Word of Grace, has the whole Essence of believing. D. C.
p. 493.


Antinom. I doubt not, Sir, but to prove that this is a good Account of Saving
Faith. I said, That which has the Whole Essence of Faith, is not a Dead but
Living Faith, ( i. e. which brings forth Fruits. D. C. p. 493. But the
Question was, Whether Faith gives Evidence by it self or no, by it is own direct
Act. Now I said, The whole Essence of Faith is nothing else but the Echo of
the Heart answering the Voice of the Spirit and Word of Grace, etc.

Now I thought I could not give a more lively Account of it; for the Echo is
(...), The Daughter of the Voice; it is begotten by the Voice. So says the
Scripture, Romans 10.16, 17. He quotes Isa. 53.1. Who has believed our Report?
(...): The Word signifies the Voice heard, or that comes to the hearing. And so
does the Hebrew Word import, (...), Who has believed or heard our Voice? i. e.
Who has so heard it, as to make an Impression thereof upon their Hearts
believingly? And the Apostle says, When this heard Voice takes in a due
Impression upon the Heart through the Spirit, it begets Faith, and that Impress
is Faith, Romans 10.17. (...), etc. Faith verily is from hearing, and this
hearing by the Word of God. Hearing, or the Voice that is heard, is by the Word
of God. Hence that Expression of the Apostle, James 1.18. (...), Of his own
Free Will (working effectually by his Spirit in opening and new framing the
Heart, as Lydia's) he begets us by the Word of Truth. The Truth of the Word is
received into the Heart as it were with an Echo, and Formation of the Heart
into it, Progenuit (...) all udit ad nostram adoptionem cujus facti sumus per
fidem participes, John 1.12, 13. Fides autem est ex auditu verbi, Romans 10.17.
Ideo etiam dicuntur ministri filios gignere sed quatenus Dei instrumenta, ^
Cor. 4.15. Phil. 10. Beza.
by an Assent to it as true, and Consent to it as a good Truth. And this is
indeed the Writing the Law of God in the Heart, the Law being taken often for
any Truth declared in the Word. After this manner the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor.
4.15. In Christ Jesus I have begotten you by the Gospel, (...): So that the
Gospel begets Faith, Phil. 10. The Apostle James, chapter 1.15. uses the Word
(...), concerning Sin when it is finished or completed, brings forth Death, i.
e. Sin when it appears as it is, it is Death and Condemnation in the Conscience:
So the Word brought thus by the Spirit into the Heart, the Soul is freed from
Condemnation; it thereby has Life, he believes, to the saving of the Soul. And
can this be denied to be good Faith, and true Faith, and all the Essence of our
Divine Faith, it being the believing of the Word so as to close with it, and
receive it, according to the Nature and End of it. The Apostle, Heb. 11.1.
describes Faith by two Words, Mavelous Significent in our Sense, by (...)
illud quo subsistunt. Beza.

(...), Persuasio, Sir.

It notes Confidence or Presence of Mind without fear. So Polyb.

It Is rendered Confident, or confident Persuasion, 2 Cor. 9.4. chapter 11.17. and
Heb. 3 14. where it signifies, and is rendered Confident Persuasion.


(...), which is a Subsistence: The Word is besides used concerning the Person
of the Father, Heb. 1.3. where Christ is said to be the Character of the
Father's Hypostacy, we read it Personality. So here Faith is said to Personate
the Truth, or to be the Image of it, as it were in the Heart; or rather things
hoped for; it makes them as it were present, ecchoing them in the Heart, the
Echo speaking the same things the Voice does; and he says, (...), the
Evidence, or rather Demonstration of things not seen, it takes up a
Demonstration from God's Authority, not from Sense or Reason. Here Argumentum
Inartific. Divine Testimony is of greater Force than any Artificial Arguments
can be. There is also another Word whereby Faith is expressed, and it is (...),
Romans 4.20. (...), Persuasio, plena certioratio. Stev.
It Is said of Abraham, He was strong in Faith. (...). (...). Persuasae
Intelligentiae. Stev.
And what was his strength of Faith? It was his Fullness of Persuasion or
Confidence, ver. 21. (...), He was fully persuaded of what God had promised.
The Word is used for Faith; Col. 2.2. To all riches of the full assurance of
understanding: Denoting that Faith is primarily an Act of the Understanding;
this Word is often used for it, 1 Thessalonians. 1.5. Heb. 6.11. and 10.22. And (...)
for plenam fidem vel persuasionem habeo, Luke 1.1. Romans 14.5. The very Greek
Word for Persuasion is used, (...), whence (...), 2 Timothy 1.5, 12. (...), I am
persuaded, i. e. Do believe that he is able to keep that which I have committed
to him, Romans 8.38. I am persuaded that neither Death nor Life, etc. i. e. This
was his strong Faith. Romans 14.14. I am persuaded in the Lord Jesus, that
there is nothing unclean of it self. This was his Faith. I will but name one
place more, Heb. 11.13. it is said of those eminent Believers mentioned in that
Chapter, That they received not the Promises in the fulfilling of them by
performance, but saw them afar off, and being persuaded of them, saluted them
in their own Hearts, (...).


Calvin. You must own Saving Faith to be a Saving Persuasion you see, or else
you must deny the Scriptures; and according to the Weakness and Strength of
Persuasion we account our Faith is weaker or stronger, yet has it is Forma and
Differentia from its proper Adjuncts and Object.


Neonom. When he puts a Man to examine his Faith, he has these Words, (D. W.
p. 73.) How do I know I believe in Christ? He answers, Do I rest my Heart upon
his Truth? Do I receive it as a Truth that I do believe? Or do I reject it, and
will not receive it? Then I do not believe it. But if thou sit down and rest
upon this Truth, and receive it, and do in reality believe it, then you may
absolutely conclude Christ is yours. D. C. p. 107.


Antinom. I am sorry to see that you should have such an Aversion to these
things. I was preaching from Isa. 42.6, 7. and showing how Christ receives
Sinners as Sinners, he never shuts out one of those Thousands that come upon
the Tender of the Gospel; Dr. C. p. 107.
and if there be no Example of any shut out in the whole Scripture, from whence
fetch you that bitterness of your own Spirit, that you may not, that you dare
not close with Christ?

But you will say, If this taking Christ be the best Security, how shall I know
whether I believe or no? Or how shall I know that this my taking is not
counterfeit, but solid and real.

Answ. I answer, by the reality of the thing; Do you it indeed? If you do it
indeed, it is a real taking. [Do you not bid Men believe sincerely and indeed?]
If a Man should ask you, How do you know the Sun shines? The light of the Sun
does show it self, and by it is light we know it shines. How shall I know I
believe? There is a light in Faith that does discover it self unto Men. The
Soul that does really close with Christ, may conclude he does so. If you give 6
d. to a poor man, and you say to him, How do you know I have given you 6 d? He
will answer, I have it in my Hand, and feel I have it. So ask your Hearts this
Question, How do I know I believe in Christ? Do I rest my Heart upon this
Truth? Do I receive it as a Truth, etc?




Calvin. What, can you, Mr. Neonomian, with any face except against this
Doctrine? Does not the Apostle say, 1 John 5.10. He that believes on the Son
has a witness in himself? Is there any clearer Evidence of an Action than the
doing it? Ask a Man how he knows he can eat: says he, I do eat, I do taste and
swallow what I eat. So that Instance of the Sun shining, which he gives,
there is no doubt but the first Evidence the Soul has is in Believing it self;
tho he tries his Faith by it is Fruits also, and receives Evidence therefrom. Is
not Faith illustrated in Scripture by all our Senses, Hearing, Tasting,
Smelling, Feeling or Touching, Seeing? And is there not Perception in the
Exercise of all the Senses? And how shall I know better that I do exercise
them, than by perceiving their Objects, which is a Witness, an Evidence, a
Demonstration to my self above all others that it is so. The Natural Man indeed
receives not, (...), the things of the Spirit by Faith, 1 Cor. 2.14. and
therefore they are foolishness to him: But the Spiritual Man does, i. e. by
Faith.


Neonom. He says, If the Lord give to any to believe this Truth, D. W. p. 74.
Dr. C. p. 296.
that it is his Iniquity the Lord has laid on Christ, God himself cannot
charge one Sin on that Man: and he makes a difference between a strong Believer
and a weak, to consist in the degree of his Persuasion. Dr. C. p. 158.


Antinom. This was a Use that I made upon that Point of laying Sin on Christ,
If God have laid our Iniquity upon Christ, then whosoever thou art to whom the
Lord will be pleased to give the believing of this Truth, that the Lord has
laid thine Iniquity on Christ, that laying thine Iniquity upon him is an
absolute and full Discharge to thee, that there neither is nor can be any
Iniquity for the present, nor for hereafter, that can be laid to thy Charge;
and then follows what he has rehearsed.

And if this be not true Doctrine, that every Believer that by the Grace of God
sees his Sins laid on Christ, has a full pardon of all Sins, past, present and
to come; so that Sin shall never be charged on him for Condemnation before God;
I am to seek for the Doctrine of the Gospel. I quote that place, Romans 8.33. to
me a very full Proof.

And I do affirm, that the Degrees of our Faith does stand in the Degrees of
the sight of Christ's Glory, and the Persuasion we have in our Hearts of our
part in him. And I do not say, That he is no Believer that has not this
perfectly; far be it from me to say so; there are that are Believers, that are
weak in the Faith; and there are Believers that are strong in the Faith; the
more the Light and Glory of the Gospel shines in the true Intention of God to
his People, the more shall they return to their rest, the more shall they have
Joy and Gladness. Why may not a Believer then say as David did, The Lord has
been very bountiful to me, that I may return to my rest. God has done every
thing in Christ, and taken away all things that can disturb my Peace and
Comfort. Dr. C. p. 158.


Calvin. I pray, Mr. Neonom. let us have your Description of Saving Faith.


Neonom. I shall express it in the Assemblies Words, chapter 14. A. 2. D. W. p. 72,
73.

By this Grace a Christian believes to be true whatsoever is revealed in the
Word; from the Authority of God himself speaking therein, and acts
differently upon that which each particular Passage thereof contains,
yielding Obedience to the Commands, trembling at the Threatenings, and embracing
the Promises of God for this Life, and that which is to come: But the principal
Acts of Saving Faith are, Accepting, Receiving, and resting upon Christ alone
for Justification, Sanctification and Eternal Life, by virtue of the Covenant
of Grace. Gentlemen, weigh this Account of Faith well; which if it were
regarded, and no essential part excluded, when Faith is considered as a
Condition of any Gospel-benefit. -- One would think no man need prove that it
is not saving Faith when any Essential part of it is wanting; and that it must
be saving Faith, when we mention Faith as a Condition.


Antinom. That Reverend Assembly do here express the Essential Parts of Faith,
and something more as the Effects of it. I take it not to be intended for a
Definition, wherein only Essentials are put, but a Description that takes in
Subjects, Adjuncts, Effects, etc.

The Definition is first given. A. 1. That the Grace of Faith is whereby the
Elect are enabled to believe to the Saving of their Souls. After they proceed
to show the Causes of it, the Word and Spirit, and after that its several ways
of Acting, and it is Effects.

They do in the shorter Catechism give a briefer Account of it, which may be
more properly called a Definition.

Quest. 86. What is Faith in Jesus Christ?

Answ. Faith in Jesus Christ is a Saving Grace, whereby we receive and rest
upon him alone for Salvation, as he is offered to us in the Gospel.

And if you please to turn to Quest. 31. you shall see what they mean by
receiving and resting: There they say, -- Effectual Calling is the work of
God's Spirit, whereby convincing us of our Sin and Misery, enlightening our
Minds in the knowledge of Christ, and renewing our Wills, he does persuade and
enable us to embrace Jesus Christ freely offered to us in the Gospel.

And in the Larger Catechism you have a full Description of Faith as
Justifying, Quest. 72. wherein there is the Genus of it, a saving Grace; the
principal efficient Cause, the Spirit; the Causa ministrant, the subservient
efficient Cause, the Word: Both Causae procreantes. The Subject in whom it is
wrought, a sinful, miserable and lost Creature, really so, and in his own Eyes.
And then you have the Material Cause, the truth of the Promise of the Gospel.
In the Confession (wherein it is more largely expressed) it is whatever is
revealed in the Word, this is the Objective part of it, and Material. The Form
of Saving Faith is an Impression wrought upon the Soul from the proper Efficacy
of the Spirit, by the Word, according to the acceptable Nature and Evidence
thereof. The Truth must have Goodness in it, because we believe many things
that we fear and are averse to. The Word works objectively upon the
Understanding, persuading it to assent and set to it is Seal, that the Word is
Truth, and from the Goodness in that Truth it persuades the Will to embrace,
because Voluntas sequitur ultimum dictamen intellectus; and the consenting of
the Will is an Effect of the assenting of the Understanding; Hence then it is
not barely believing without Ground, but upon some Authority. In the Confession
it is said, For the Authority of God himself speaking in the Word, which is
believing on Christ, believing in God, from whence follows an awful Reverence
and Regard to his Word, as also the resting and depending of the Soul thereon:
And when it is determined to the Grace of Justification, (it is as in the Larger
and Shorter Catechism) it receives Christ and his Righteousness in the
Promise, and rests thereon for Pardon of Sin. Justifying Grace through the
Righteousness of Christ is the Object, and that which it aims at, is the
accepting and accounting of a Man's Person Righteous in the sight of God for
Salvation, which is fuller expressed in the Confession, showing what saving
Faith in the largest Sense designs, viz. accepting, receiving and resting upon
Christ alone (excluding all other Foederal Conditions) for Justification,
Sanctification and Eternal Life, by virtue of the Covenant of Grace. Now you
see how clearly they make Faith a Persuasion, and that it does all objectively,
by taking in the Truth and receiving it; for the Understanding receives and
embraces by being persuaded, it takes in the Light of Truth, and the Will
embraces by being persuaded, and the great procatarctick Cause is the Covenant
of Grace. Now I see you have a clean contrary Notion of making it a Condition
and moral Instrument, i. e. A moral Condition of the Covenant, and so a Work,
and as such to reach the End of the Covenant, which I utterly deny; for that
would destroy it is own Nature and Use, and also the Covenant of Grace it self.


Neonom. The Question is not, whether Assurance be attainable in this Life as
an effect of Faith? D. W. p. 74.


Antinom. A Persuasion of Truth, and certainty thereof, is Assurance, and so
far as I do believe, there is this in the Act of Faith, though a weak Faith
has Doubtings attending, but not therefore commendable: And there can be no
Faith without some degree of Persuasion concerning the Truth of the Object. You
speak here of an Assurance (which must be reckoned of the highest Degree of
Persuasion) and therefore you deal not fairly to change your Terms from
Persuasion to Assurance. There is a twofold Assurance, the Plerophory of
Faith, and an Assurance that I have true Faith, which is Spiritual Sense and
Argumentation from it is Nature and Effects; one is by the proper direct Act of
believing, the other by reflex Acts of the Soul upon it self.


Neonom. Nor whether a Sinner ought to apply, yea, does personally apply the
general Offers of Christ and Life by his own Compliance with the Terms of the
Gospel; for upon a true acceptance of a whole Christ, he is mine in virtue of
the Gospel-promise, which God will perform in giving Christ and Life to all
that accept him as he is proposed for our acceptance.


Antinom. You are very dark and obscure in what you here speak. 1. By Personal
Application I understand particular Application, and so it is your Sense that a
Sinner ought to make a particular Application of the general Offers of Christ
and Life in the very Act of believing; and so far I join with you, and that his
thus believing is his Compliance, the Gospel's Work being persuading, my
Compliance is to be persuaded, and there is nothing else expected, (which you
call Terms; the Terms is that we put in no Terms) but accepting Christ freely
offered. And you say he is yours in virtue of the Gospel-Promise; you must
intend in the virtue of the Gospel-Promise believed, or else you have no right
but as you had before, believing an Intentional Right only; if it be a
claimable Right, it is in a Promise believed; for whatever Right is real in the
Promise, none will plead any but what he believes. And it is in virtue of the
Promise to give Christ and Life to many that do not yet accept of him: For it is
the virtue of the Promise to give Life to dead Sinners, that they may actively
and comfortably receive and accept him.


Neonom. Nor whether a convinced Sinner has a more special Regard at first of
the Priestly Offices and Sufferings, as what are more sensibly fitted to his
guilty state.


Antinom. I understand not what you mean by Priestly Offices, as if Christ had
more Priestly Offices than one: Christ does exercise his Priestly Office in the
state of Humiliation and Exaltation; but I have not seen any before that
ascribes to Christ two Priestly Offices: And if you mean Justifying Faith, it is
Office is to lay hold on and apply the Person of Christ in his Priestly Office.


Neonom. Nor whether every thing recorded in Scripture must be dwelt on with
the same regard, concern and assurance as the Essentials of the Covenant of
Life.


Antinom. You mean here Faith as to the general Nature of it; you do not
distinguish it from Faith in the Justifying Nature all along.


Neonom. Nor whether Faith contain in it a reliance on Christ as our only
Savior, and on his Satisfaction and Merits, as what alone purchased our Pardon
and Acceptance, as well as it includes the realizing Assent to the Truth, and
unfeigned fiducial Consent to acceptance of a whole Christ in all his Offices.
All these I affirm.


Antinom. You acknowledge then that Faith contains in it, 1. A Reliance on
Christ as an only Savior. How can this be without some persuasion? A rational
Man never rests and leans upon a thing that he has not some ground of
Persuasion that it is strong enough to bear him. 2. You own it includes a
realizing Assent to the Truth, and this is a very high Persuasion of a Truth,
with a particular Application of it to a Man's self as belonging to him. 3. You
say there is an unfeigned Fiducial Consent to, and Acceptance of Christ and all
his Offices. This is strong Confidence, when the Soul is so far persuaded of
the reality of the Tender of Christ made in the Promise, that he does not only
take him, but with boldness; questions not but he has the Son, and has Life
in this very Act of Believing. You say we rely on Christ's Satisfaction and
Merits, as what alone purchased our Pardon and Acceptance. This is true in a
true Sense, but we easily see what you mean by what you speak before.


Neonom. The real difference is, whether the whole Essence of Saving Faith
consists in an inward Persuasion or Assurance that our Sins are pardoned, and
Christ is ours. This you affirm and I deny: Yea, I deny that it is at all of
the Essence of Saving Faith. D. W. p. 75.


Antinom. What I said, and you charge for my Error, I stand to it, and have
made it appear to be Truth. I said the whole Essence of Faith is the Echo of
the Heart answering the Voice of the Spirit and Word of Grace, and thereby it is
the Obedience of Faith: The Soul believes and closes with Truth according to
the nature of it, and in such a manner as is required. You wrong me to say, I
used the Words Persuasion or Assurance: I said, If you receive Truth, and in
reality believe it, and rely upon it, you may conclude that Christ is yours;
and this is now a Conclusion made upon my believing too. I pray would you not
say so to a poor Sinner, If thou do believe on the Lord Jesus with all thy
Heart, thou shall be saved; and you ought to conclude you shall be saved? And
this is a persuasion of my state upon believing.


Calvin. Mr. Neonom. It Is indeed a mavelous thing that you should say and
unsay a thing in the same Breath; to own Faith a reliance on Christ, that it
carries a realizing Assent to the Truth, and an unseigned Fiducial Consent, and
now to say Persuasion is not at all of the Essence of Faith.


Neonom. I said it contained, and it included it; I said not they were of the
Essence.


Antinom. This is just like your wonted way of Dodging? How does Faith contain
and include these things? As in a Box, which contains and includes things of a
Specific Nature different from it self. Well, we will attend your Proof.


Neonom. The second thing in difference is, Whether Saving Faith includes not
in it is Nature that powerful efficacious Assent to the Word, and fiducial
consenting to acceptance of Christ as Prophet, Priest and King, with a Reliance
on his Merits, and obediential Regards to God as the Truth abovementioned does
express. This you deny and I affirm.


Antinom. Now we are for filling up the Box; and this Assent, or Persuasion and
Consent or Reliance is put in, but not as the Essence of Faith; and among the
rest there is obediential Regards. And why comes in this, but only because he
would make up Faith into a moral Condition? I speak of the Essence of Faith;
you talk of containing, including, and tell us those things that are contained
and included. I told you not what was necessarily concomitant to Faith; I did
not speak of Love, Sicerity, Hope, etc. which are Concomitants to Faith, and
inseparable from it, but yet be not Faith in the Essential Consideration.


Neonom. I will now confirm the Truth. 1. Faith is not an Assurance or inward
Persuasion, that Christ is ours, and our Sins are pardoned.


Antinom. I say Faith is a Persuasion of Truth propounded unto me upon credible
grounds. You should first state the Question concerning Faith in general,
Whether it be Humane Faith or Divine; and then Divine Faith is that which takes
all Divine things in general for it is Object, or that which has some more
particular Divine Truth for it is Object, as Justifying Faith. There is also a
particular Divine Faith, which is not saving in it is special Nature, as Faith
of Miracles, Historical, etc.


Neonom. That which I will prove is, that Saving Faith is not Persuasion.


Antinom. Very well; i. e. That Persuasion is not the general Nature of Faith.
We are not to meddle here with the distinguishing Specific Form of one Faith
from another. Let us join issue there.


Neonom. Yes; but I will have my Liberty to dispute of what I please, whether
it be the Question or no.

1. Men may have this Faith, though they do not savingly believe, Matthew. 7.22.
Chapter 25.1, 2. Nay, the most profligate Sinners grow secure by it.


Antinom. Your Argument runs two ways, or should. 1. Against Persuasion, as not
being the Genus of Faith; and it stands thus: If they that do not savingly
believe may have Persuasion, then Persuasion is not of the Essence of Faith;
but they that do not savingly believe may have Persuasion, Ergo. Negatur
consequ. Homo est Animal, Ergo Brutum non est Animal. There Is two Species of
Believers, those that have a Faith, not saving, as merely Historical,
Temporary, or Faith of Miracles, and those that have Saving. Faith is the Genus
of both those Species, which is Persuasion. Now you argue, because such as have
not a Saving Faith have Persuasion, therefore they that have Saving Faith, have
not Persuasion. Non sequitur, but rather quite contrary, that they have; for
the Genus communicates it is common Nature to both Species.


Neonom. No, no, I don't mean so; I mean that Faith is not an inward Persuasion
that Christ is ours.


Antinom. I thought so, I was going to speak that. No indeed, it is not a
distinction of Faith, but a particular Instance of one thing believed by us. If
you should ask me, what Faith is? and I should tell you, it is believing Peter
betrayed Christ, or that Paul was converted, you would take me to be very
ridiculous: Or I should say, it is not believing that I am a rich Man: So that
if you will have the Question run in a particular Instance: it is easily
decided; for all true Rules of Art must be (...), true de omni. Therefore I
acknowledge, to say, Faith is a Persuasion that Christ is mine, is no more a
Definition of Faith, than to say Animal est rationalis creatura, is a
Definition of Animals. But this is true, if you affirm the Genus of the
Species, Creatura rationalis est animal, and it holds (...), but not reciproce.
This therefore I affirm, that he that believes that Christ is his, and his Sins
are forgiven, does believe it by a Persuasion. You say, those that said Lord,
Lord, and the Foolish Virgins had a Faith of Persuasion, and many profligate
Sinners have a presumptuous Persuasion, but not true Believers: Therefore, say
you, Faith is not a Persuasion that their Sins are forgiven: You might as well
say, because some have a false Faith, therefore none have a true; because one
Man that trades is persuaded his Stock is good, and deceives himself, and
breaks; does it follow that no Merchant must persuade himself that his Stock is
good. These are mighty Inconsequences.


Neonom. Many true Believers have not this Persuasion.


Antinom. Give an Instance of a Believer that has not a Persuasion of the
thing he professes to believe, and so far as he is not persuaded he does not
believe. Does any one believe the Record that God has given us Eternal Life,
and this Life is in his Son, 1 John 5.11? if he does, he is persuaded of it.
But you will say, He does not believe Christ is his: He ought confidently to
believe there is Pardon and Acceptance from him; and to get this Witness of
Faith in his own Heart. You Will grant he ought to have the Son: How shall he
have him, but by receiving him in the Promise? Believing on him as the Faithful
Witness, depending on the Truth of the Promise, and the reality of the Purpose
and Intention of Christ toward us; and there is not the weakest true Believers
but have a Persuasion, such as their Faith is, though it may not so properly be
called Assurance, because that denotes a strong and high degree of Faith; but
it is a Persuasion accompanied with much doubting, a staggering Faith; Lord,
(...)
I I believe, help my Unbelief: Lord, I am persuaded in some measure, help my
doubting.


Neonom. Such as had assurance do (by this Doctors Opinion) fall into the Sin
of damning Unbelief, whenever they doubt their Interest in Christ, and
especially if they conclude that they have no interest in him.


Antinom. Vix dignus sum hac contumelia, ac tu indignus qui feceris. Do you in
your Conscience judge that I hold falling away from Grace? Is not Unbelief of a
damning Nature of it self, and so far as it prevails, brings the Consciences of
the best under Guilt? And wherein consists the Doubts and Fears of God's
People, but in the prevailing of Unbelief, which shakes their Faith, and
darkens their Persuasion? is my Doctrine the more condemnable, because I hold,
as Experience and God's Word witnesses, that Faith, as other Graces, have
their Ebbings or Flowings? And do not you hold Unbelief to be a damning Sin in
it self? But is there not a great difference between the degrees of Faith, yea,
of Assurance, as you you self grant elsewhere? And what degrees of Unbelief and
doubting a Child of God may fall into, even to the making very dangerous
Conclusions concerning himself, and not fall totally from faith; it is beyond us
to judge: There are great Instances in Scripture, and we have seen some.


Neonom. This Persuasion should suppose an Interest in Christ does not give it;
it is a false Conclusion, that Christ is mine before he is so; and must the
great Terms of Life be a Lie. We are to examine our selves, whether we are in
the Faith or not, 2 Cor. 13.5. Where has God made this Proposition, My sins
are laid on Christ: Unless you are for general Redemption; the Word of Grace
promises Pardon to none but a Believer, and the Spirit speaks to none but a
Believer.


Antinom. In all things we receive of Gift there must be a right of Donation
first; if we take before it is given, it is Theft; and unless I am persuaded that
the giving Hand is reached out, I cannot receive. We have our first Earnest for
Blessedness in the Persuasion of Faith, in the very Act of it; and it is Non
sense to talk any way of partaking of Christ, but by the Spirit and Faith: And
he that in an Act of believing at first finds Christ in the true Persuasion of
Faith, does not, nor cannot say of Christ he is his before he is so. The Soul
cannot be too nimble for Christ; and if he that believes not, makes God a
Liar, what are those that persuade to Unbelief? That Faith in it is very Act is
an Evidence, is no hinderance to the Trial and Examination of our selves by the
Fruit of Faith besides. And though the Proposition in the Gospel be an
indefinite Proposition, yet the Application by Faith in a Sinner, ought to be
particular and fiducial, or else the Faith of Believers will be no more than
that of others that believe only that Christ came to save Sinners; and if the
Promise of Pardon were not to Sinners as such, it were not Pardon; and if a Man
upon Trial must first find by Signs that he does believe, before he lay claim
to Pardon, Sinners would be in a sad condition: But this is the comfort, that
as the Promise of Pardon is the great Encouragement to believing, so believing
it self is the receiving and perceiving of it: And the Soul says, or should by
Faith, He loved me, and gave himself for me. At the sight of Christ it says,
My Lord, and my God. If the Lord speak to a Believer, in believing, by his Word
and Spirit, Thy Sins are forgiven, it is not said so to one that is a Believer
first: Relata are simul natura: The Promise of Paternity is not a Promise or
Gift to one that is a Father first, nor Sonship to one that is a Son first. God
promises himself to be a Father to them that are Loammi: And how gross is that
Assertion, That the Spirit speaks it to none but to a Believer as a Believer.
Does not the Spirit speak Peace, before we receive it by an Act of Faith? Does
not this cause us to believe, it is the Light causes the Eye to see? It Is the
Light shining into the dark Unbelieving Heart, that persuades the Heart; it is
God that says to the Soul, I am thy Salvation, before we can believe it.


Neonom. The Second thing that I will prove is, that Saving Faith has the
Essentials expressed in the abovementioned Truth, as Assent, Trust,
Consenting, Acceptance of Christ, Reliance, etc.


Antinom. You said before, that Inward Persuasion of the Pardon of Sin was no
Part of Saving Faith. And said in the next, that it contained Assent to the
Word, Fiducial Consent and Acceptance of Christ. A Man therefore may understand
you, that tho it contained it, yet it was not of it is Essence. Now you seem to
say, these are Essentials; if you do not, you hide your self again in the Word
Include. If you say, These be Essentials which you name, we say so too, but
allow not yours, etc. and all these Essentials are in the Word Persuasion.
Assent is the Persuasion of the Understanding, Consent the Persuasion of the
Will to the Truths and good things propounded, the Promise whereby the Soul
relies upon Christ therein for himself, particularizeth Christ and all
Blessings to himself as his; and now go on, and prove all that you said before
to be false.


Neonom. You are mistaken, I will prove my Position true, and then see where
your Error will be.

1. Faith can be no less than the Souls Answer to the Call of God, etc.


Antinom. We say it is so, and he bids us believe; but it is not Faith as such;
for all Obedience is an answer to the Call of God.


Neonom. The Scripture describes Saving Faith by all these Acts; it is the
evidence of things not seen, Substance of things hoped for, Heb. 11.1.
Receiving of Christ, John 1.12. Isa. 55.4. Acts 13.26. Romans 15.12. Isa. 44.5.


Antinom. This we say it is, Evidence and Substance of things at a distance, is
a full Persuasion of them according to the Nature of them; such a Persuasion as
carries the whole Soul forth to God to rest and rely upon him, having Union
with Christ thereby, bringing him in all his Excellencies into our Souls, and
taking him for our own. Does a Man believe any good thing promised, and does
not he catch at it for himself, if he have any savor of it? If the Promise of
Pardon present it self to us, does a Man believe till he appropriate it to
himself, saying, It is mine, though an unworthy Sinner? If a condemned Prisoner
hears a Pardon is come out for some, he may believe that; but till he believes
he is one, it is no Comfort to him, tho there may be hopes at least he is in it.


Neonom. Christ cannot be received as a Savior without these.


Antinom. It Is very true, he is never received as such till I receive him as my
Savior, and believe him to be so in some measure; and this I am bound to do,
to receive him by confident Persuasion and resting upon him.


Neonom. A Faith without these Essentials could never produce those great
Effects as are ascribed to Faith, to purify the Heart, Acts 15.9. to be a
shield against Temptations, Ephesians. 6.16. works by Love, Gal. 5.6. sanctifies us,
Acts 26.18. By Faith we are risen with Christ, Col. 2.12.


Antinom. It Is certain that no Faith can do it, but such as makes a particular
Application by a persuasion of the Love of God, or Interest in Christ, Pardon
of Sins, and Reconciliation to God through him, that can produce the Effects
spoken of; this will purify the Heart from an evil guilty Conscience, to serve
the Living God; this will be a Shield against the most Mortal Darts of Satan,
that he shoots at our state by bringing in Law Condemnations. Hereby Love to
God is produced in the Soul, and we Act toward God and our Neighbors in Love,
hereby we are brought to true Obedience, such as the Law required at first for
the Principle, to Love the Lord our God with all our Hearts, Soul and Strength;
and therefore the Apostle says, Love is the Sum of all Obedience, as our
Savior said. It Is the fulfilling of the Law, through this Grace of the Spirit;
for by receiving Forgiveness of Sin, we have an Inheritance among them that are
Sanctified. Pardon believed is the Root of Sanctification, and this cannot be
without it, for by Faith we are risen with Christ, we are planted in the
likeness of his Death and Resurrection; and Faith in this Point of Christ's
Resurrection, is that which sets us above the Charge of Sin and Condemnation.
By the Resurrection of Christ Preached, we are begotten to this lively
believing hope, and we are risen with him through this Faith of the Operation
of God; hence the Body of Sin is destroyed, Death abolished, Life and
Immortality brought to light; Christ by his Resurrection being discharged and
justified from the Iniquities of us all, which were laid upon him, and which he
bore in his Body upon the Tree.


Neonom. An Enlightened Regenerate Soul cannot Act toward Christ, when he is
first presented to its view below these Instances.


Antinom. No, it is the sight of Christ, and taste of Christ that carries him
forth to all Duties of Sanctification, he having Christ in all his fullness; he
has done with all his Conditions, all his Righteousness is filthy Rags. A Soul
truly instated by a lively Faith is far above padling with his own little poor
sinful Duties, as conditions between him and Christ, he can serve Christ, obey
him, and his Commandments are not grievous to him, neither will he think they
have any such Virtue in them as to give him Right to Christ, in any way of
Foederal Conditionality.


Neonom. His mistakes are, because Faith is the Evidence of things unseen, (i.
e. it assents unto unseen realities) therefore he thinks that our Faith is
nothing but our assent.


Antinom. I think I understand the Import of those words, as I have told you;
but I showed you it is such a work of the Spirit and Word, whereby the Heart
Echoes to the Word by such persuasion of the Truth, whereby Christ and the
Truth is as it were formed in us; and your selves can give no account of Faith
that reaches the Essentials thereof, but what we have done from the Word of
God.


Neonom. Because the Word of Grace promises Justification unto all true
Believers, therefore an assurance of my being Justified is believing, whereas I
must first be a Believer in order to Pardon, before I justly can or ought to
believe that I am pardoned.


Antinom. The word Assurance is a word you Impose; it was not in the words you
allege against me; what is it the Gospel would have us believe, if it be not
Forgiveness of Sins? Acts 13.38. Be it known unto you, that through this Man is
preached unto you forgiveness of Sins, and by him all that believe are
justified, etc. What do they believe? It Is Forgiveness of Sins, and in this Act
of Faith is the Justification by Faith, in that they believe forgiveness of
Sins, and as they are weakly or strongly persuaded, through the Spirit of Grace
working the Promise upon their Souls. In Justification by Faith, Faith is not
nor cannot be before it, but they are Relata quae mutua alterius constant
affectione.

Popish School Divines do dream that Faith is a Quality cleaving in the Heart,
Luth. on Gal. c. 3. v. 8.
without Christ. This is a Devilish Error. But Christ should be so set forth,
that thou should see nothing besides him, and should think that nothing
can be more near unto thee, or more present within thy Heart than he is, for he
sits not Idly in Heaven, but is present in us. C. 2. I live, yet not I, but
Christ lives in me. And here likewise you have put on Christ.

Faith therefore is a certain steadfast beholding, which looks upon nothing
else but Christ the Conqueror of Sin and Death, and the Giver of Righteousness,
Salvation and Eternal Life; this is the cause that Paul names Jesus Christ so
often in his Epistles, almost in every Verse; but he sets him forth by the
Word: For otherwise he cannot be comprehended but by the Word. This was lively
and notably set sorth by the Brazen Serpent, for Moses commanded them that were
stung to do nothing else but steadfastly behold the Brazen Serpent, they that
did so were healed.

Read with great vehemence this word, me, and, for me, and so inwardly practice
with thy self, Id. on Gal. 2.20.
that thou with a sure Faith may conceive and print this me in thy Heart, and
apply it unto thy self, not doubting but thou art of the number of those to
whom this (...) belongs: Also that Christ has not only loved Peter and Paul,
and given himself for them, but that the same Grace also which is comprehended
in this me, as well appertains and comes unto us as unto them. -- When I
feel and confess my self a Sinner through Adam's Transgression, why should I
not say that I am made Righteous through the Righteousness of Christ,
especially when I hear that he loved me, and gave himself for me. This did Paul
most steadfastly believe, and therefore he speaks these words with so great
vehemence and full assurance, which God grant unto us in some part at the
least, who has loved us, and given himself for us.

What is Faith? The first part of Religion, whereby from Knowledge I believe in
God. Yates Divin.
The first Act of Faith is passive in receiving what God gives. -- Here may we
justly say, it is a poorer and meaner Act to believe than to love; nay, rather
Passion than Action, for we are first apprehended of God before we apprehend
him again, Phil. 3.12. This Grace is most freely Graced, that it might the more
frankly reflect all on God again -- No doubt Faith receives a full discharge,
makes it not, we rather by Faith receive an Acquittance Sealed in the Blood of
Christ, than the Blood of Christ to make our own Works Meritorious, which we
may offer to God in payment for our selves. Here lies the Error of Papists
even in Faith i^ self, and other Graces; If God will ^^t bear half the Charges
by his Cooperation, Man shall undertake to Merit his own Glory, and fulfill
the Royal Law so abundantly, that he shall have something over and above.

-- Works are the Effects of Sanctification, Sanctification is the Effect of
Justification. P. 23.

The Object of the Understanding is Truth, of the Will Goodness. Temble of
Grace and Faith. P. 111.
Faith is an Assent to the Truth and Goodness of Divine Revelation, wherefore
we affirm that this Faith is an Act of the Understanding, and of the Will, both
together approving and allowing the Truth and Goodness of Divine Things. In
which Asser^ion you are to note that we do not make the habit of Faith to be
inherent in two Faculties, but we affirm the subject is but one and the same,
viz the Intellectual Nature; for I take it with diverse of the Lerrned, that
these Speculations about the real distinction of Faculties in Spiritual
Substances of Angels and Souls of Men, are but mere subtilties in the Schools,
without any true ground in the Nature of it. The Understanding essentially
includes the Will, and the Will the Understanding; wherefore the O^ject of
the Understanding and Will are one and the same, Truth and Goodness are
essentially the same.

Faith is General or Particular. P. 124.

General, that which is Assent to all Divine Revelations, as good and true in
regard of our selves. Here comes in the common Work of the Spirit.

Particular Assent of Faith, is when all things revealed by God are assented to
as most true and excellent in regard of our selves, when they are particularly
applied to our proper occasion, and compared with all Desires and Provocations
whatsoever to the contrary, when we know and believe these things that are
generally delivered, P. 131.
for our selves, in application to our own use and practice, (as Job was
counseled by his Friends,) so that we believe in this particular as well as
that, at this time as well as another.

1. The Root and Fountain of this Blessed Assent, is the Grace of
Sanctification. And, 2. The Object is Twofold. P. 133.

The whole Will of God revealed in his Word, containing all Histories,
Doctrine, Commands, Threatenings, Promises, etc.

2. The particular Promise of Remission of Sin, and everlasting Life by the
Death of Christ, which in one Word we call the Gospel; tho both be one and the
same infused Grace which respects both, yet Faith as it respects these Objects,
the whole Will of God, and a particular Promise of the Gospel, admits of
diverse Considerations, Names, and Use. Faith, as it assents to the whole Will
of God, I call Legal, because it is such a Virtue as is immediately required by
the Moral Law, in the same manner as Duties of the Moral Law are, and as all
other Moral Duties are required of us in their Degrees, as parts of our inward
and outward Sanctity, necessary to Salvation; so is this Faith commanded as a
principal Grace, and prime part of our Obedience to the first Command; so in
this respect it may be saving, namely, as other Graces are.

Faith, as it assents unto the Special Promise of Grace, I call Evangelical,
because it is such an Act as is expressly commanded in the Gospel, not revealed
by the Moral Law. It is called properly Saving and Justifying, in regard of the
Use of it, through God's gracious appointment, to be the only Instrument of our
Justification and Salvation by Christ. He defines it thus:

It is a Grace of Sanctification wrought by the Holy Ghost in every Regenerate
Man, P. 140.
whereby for his own particular he trusts perfectly on the Promise of
Remission of Sins, and Salvation by Christ's Righteousness. The proper Act of
Faith as it justifies, it consists in Trust and Reliance for our own
particular -- To believe the Truth of a particular Promise, is to trust upon
the Performance of it to me; and that assent of Faith which is given to such a
Promise, is properly called Fiducia, or Trust. To assent unto such a Promise,
is not barely to believe that there is such a thing in the World as Remission
of Sins by Christ, to be bestowed upon God knows who; (for this is to believe
the Promise not as a Promise, but a History) but this Assent is of the whole
Heart, in Trust, Reliance, Adherence, etc. That Fiducia is the Essence of
Justifying Faith, 1. From the Phrase of Scripture used in this business, (...),
to believe in, upon, into God, Christ, etc. 2. From the opposition between
Faith and Distrust, Jam. 1.16. Romans 2.20. (...). 3. From that excellent place,
2 Timothy 1.12. I am persuaded he is able to keep, etc.

Wherefore to believe the Promise, is with Confidence and Trust to rely upon
it; P. 140.
which Assent of Faith is wrought in this manner.

1. A Man is enlightened to see his Sin and Misery.

2. The Promise of Grace is proposed and freely offered unto him.

3. Whence the Heart touched by the Spirit of Grace draws near to Christ, casts
himself into his Arms, etc.

It bespeaks Christ in all Terms of Confidence and Affiance, My Lord, my God,
my H^pe.

This Work of Faith, as it does greatly glorify God, in ascribing the whole
Honor of our Salvation only to Free Grace in Christ, so God does highly honor
it above all Fellow-Graces, by making it the blessed Instrument of all the
Comfort we enjoy in this World, thereby giving us assurance of our
Justification in his sight by Christ's Righteousness, and a double Comfort. 1.
Peace of Conscience, resting it self secure upon the Stability of God's
Promise, against the Severities of Justice, the Accusations of the Law; it
has, wherewithal to answer even an All-sufficient, Righteousness in Christ --

2. That kind of Fiducia which we call Assurance of full pardon of our Sins:
This is the fruit of that Fiducia, or trusting unto the Promise it self,
wherein stands the proper Act of Justifying Faith. -- Many do steadfastly
believe, and rest themselves only upon Christ for Salvation, who yet would give
a World to be assured and fully persuaded that their sins are pardoned --
Whereupon they will be apt to fall back and say, They do not, nor cannot believe
at all. A great mistake, and that which casts many a Conscience upon the
Rack. It Is a false Argument; for Justifying Faith is not to be assured of
Pardon, but to trust wholly upon the Promise for Pardon.

What is Essential unto Faith is manifest: That which in order of Nature seems
to have the Precedence, Dr. O. of Justific. p. 135.
is the Assent of the Mind, unto that which the Psalmist betakes himself unto
in the first place, for relief under a sense of Sin and Trouble, Psalm. 130.3,
4. -- It Is declared in the Gospel, that God in his Love and Grace will Pardon
and Justify guilty Sinners, through the Blood and Mediation of Christ, so it is
proposed, Romans 3.23.24. The Assent of the Mind hereunto as proposed in the
Promise of the Gospel, is the Root of Faith, the Foundation of all that the
Soul does in believing; nor is there any Evangelical Faith without it, yet
consider it Abstractedly, as a mere Act of the Mind, the Essence of Justifying
Faith does not consist solely therein.

2. This is accompanied in sincere believing, with an approbation of the way of
Deliverance and Salvation proposed, etc.

This Assent and Approbation causing the Heart to rest upon Divine Grace,
Wisdom and Love, and apply it self thereto according to the Mind of God, is the
Faith whereby we are Justified; and concludes in it Renunciation of all other
Ways and Means of attaining Righteousness, the Consent of the Will,
Acquiescence of the Heart in God, Trust and Confidence, etc.

Peter Martyr says, Faith is an Assent, and that a firm Assent unto the words
of God; obtained not by Reason or Natural Demonstration, but by the Authority
of the Speaker, and by the Power of the Holy Ghost. Com. pl. part. 3. p. 58.

We must now declare what is the chiefest thing to which Faith is directed,
which is the Promise of God whereto by believing we assent; and this Promise is
chiefly that wherein he Promises that he will through Christ be favorable and
merciful to us; and although there be many Promises in Scripture are offered
unto us, yet this one is the chiefest, for whose sake the rest are performed
unto us, unto which all other Promises are to be referred. The common Object of
Faith is the Word of God, but the chiefest Object is as is rehearsed, p. 58. He
proves it to be a firm Assent from Acts 10.20. and Romans 4.10. And yet he says
it Conflicts with many Doubtings.


DEBATE X. Of the Free Offer of Christ to Sinners, and of Preparatory
Qualifications.
Calvin. WE have discoursed several Points in our late Meetings, I suppose you
have had pretty good satisfaction in all material things you have charged Mr.
Antinomian with for Error, I hope you cannot charge him with more Error.


Neonom. But I can; I have a whole Cargo yet behind; and this is one among the
rest that he says.

That Christ is offered to Blasphemers, Murderers, and the worst of Sinners;
that they remaining ignorant, unconvinced, unhumbled, and resolved in their
purpose to continue such, they may be assured they have a full Interest in
Christ, and this by only concluding in their minds upon this Offer, that Christ
is theirs. D. W. p. 81.


Calvin. I hope he offers Christ to them then, in all his Salvation as he is
revealed in the Gospel, that he gave himself for us, to Redeem us from all
Iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar People zealous of good Works, Tit.
2.14. And if he does so, I know not why he may not offer Christ as such to the
worst of Men, I know no other way to make them better. But what were his words?


Neonom. I need give no Proof of it; it is a declared Point, which he often
strives to prove, that all the Elect are actually united to Christ, before they
believe. But of this in our next Discourse. D. W. p. 81. He says,

Is not Unbelief a bar to have a part in Christ? A. It is a Bar to hinder the
manifestation of Christ in the Spirit, but it is not a Bar to hinder one from
having a part in Christ. D. C. p. 110.


Antinom. He leaves out part of the very Sentence I spoke: I said, It is not a
Bar to hinder the manifestation of Christ in the Spirit on whom God does
bestow. [A Sinner being passive in the Work of Grace, God breaks all those
Bars of Brass, when Christ manifests himself in the Spirit by Converting Grace;
mark how my words refer plainly to Gods Act, and not to ours.] I proceeded
thus, It is true, that you nor I can say by Experience that Christ is our
Christ, until we believe, as long as we continue in total unbelief, we cannot
conclude to our own Spirits that Christ is ours: But unbelief [mark my very
words] is not simply a Bar to the bestowing of Christ to such a Person; he
bestows him without any regard to belief or unbelief, [ i. e. as a reason of
bestowing him;] if unbelief should be a Bar to hinder Christ from being
bestowed upon Persons, where is the Person upon whom Christ should be bestowed?
There Is no Person under Heaven considered simply as ungodly, under the Notion
of ungodlidess, but he is considered as an unbeliever.


Calvin. You must needs grant this to be true, that a sinful state is not a Bar
to the power of God in working Grace upon the Heart, he speaks altogether in
respect of the Act of God upon the Soul, where he works, and nothing can let
or hinder.


Neonom. But he seems to insist on Men's coming to Christ, and closing with him.
D. W. p. 82. He says, No consideration in the World can so aggravate a Man's
condition, would he make his condition as bad as the Devils themselves; yet if
there be but a coming, there can be no consideration, in the highest pitch of
sinfulness for Christ to reject him. D. C. p. 206. D. C. 206.



Antinom. I said, Suppose a Person be dead in Trespasses and Sins, Ephesians. 2.2,
etc. The Lewdest Person that can be imagined and continuing so to this very
instant, now, before the Lord, without any change and alteration until now; by
this Text, John 6.37. It appears so manifest, that if the Lord do but grant,
and if the Lord has put a willingness and readiness of Spirit into this M^n
that Christ he would have, if it might appear he might have him: If his Heart
do but say, I would have him; all that sinfulness, though to this instant
continued in, is no Bar in the World; -- and after follows the words mentioned
by him; after which I added, For you must know Christ is well acquainted with
all the Objections the Heart of Man, nay, the Devils can make against the
freeness of his Grace, and Life by him; to save a labor therefore, in this one
passage, I will in no wise cast him out: Christ at once answers all the
Objections that could be made, and I dare be bold to maintain in the Name and
Stead of Christ; let a Person but say and lay down this for granted, Come he
would, Cheist he would have rather than his Life, let this be granted for a
Truth; [mark well these words, I speak not of a Lu^^icrous, Hypocritical say
so,] I will be bold with Christ out of this passage to Answer a Thousand
Objections, I will in no wise cast him out; i. e. I will upon no consideration
that can be imagined or conceived. D. C. p. 207.
I know the Objections are very many and strong in respect of such a Person to
whom the Lord has given a willingness and desire of Spirit to close with
Christ, yet dare not do the thing; but let them be what they will -- let me
tell you, the Lord has sent me at this time to proclaim Liberty to the
Captives, that are in this sad, bitter, and (to your own thinking) desperate
condition; liberty God has given thee, and if thou will come freely, nothing
in the World shall hinder thee.
Calvin. I profess, Mr. Neonomian, I wonder what kind of Gospel you would have,
that you call this Error.


Neonom. He says, Whatever thou art, suppose a Drunkard, a Whore-master, a
Swearer, a Blasphemer, a Madman in Iniquity; could thou but come to Christ,
I say come, only come, it is no matter if there be no alteration in thee when
thou do come to Christ. D. C. p. 202.


Antinom. These words were in the same Sermon, and before I spoke the words
above rehearsed, I only in all supposed that a Sinner saw no alteration in
himself till the time of the Call to come to Christ; the drift of this
Discourse was principally to take off Objections from such as willingly would
come to Christ, and dare not: D. C. 203.
I showed there are two sorts of People that are given by the Father to Christ,
who yet for the present do not actually come to him. 1. There are some Elected
indeed, but for the present are like wild Asses on the Mountains, snuffing up
the Wind; as desperate in Iniquity as the veryest Reprobates under Heaven; and
yet shall there not be rejection for these Persons when they come, though for
the present they scorn the Grace of God.

But there are a second sort given by God to Christ, that have not received
Christ, and are not Actually come to him, and yet for the present are wrought
upon to be a willing people in some sort, i. e. The Lord has dealt thus far
with them, fain they would close with Christ, fain they would conclude an
Interest and Portion in Christ. Oh it would be Welcome and Life to them, etc.
but they dare not set up their rest here, -- there is something or other must
be removed before they can make this certain Conclusion, Christ is their
Christ; my principal Errand at this time is to this people --




Neonom. But coming or believing is no other in your Judgment than an inward
persuasion or concluding that Christ is ours; and this is not in order to an
Interest, but to our Knowing; as it appears by those words.


Antinom. Do I speak any otherwise than concluding this upon their coming; how
often do I say could thou but come to Christ, and so I say again, can but a
Sinner, the vilest, but come to Christ, they may conclude that Christ will not
cast them off? And you say that I intend by this coming nothing but an inward
persuasion that Christ is mine; my words will not bear that sense, for I say
all along, if thou come thou may conclude Christ is thine; is coming merely
persuasion?


Neonom. That is your meaning, you do not distinguish between coming to Christ,
and knowing your Portion in Christ, D. W. p. 82. You say, I must tell you
there is no better way to know your Portion in Christ, than upon the general
tender of the Gospel to conclude absolutely he is yours; say to your selves,
and let not this be contradicted, seeing Christ has reached out himself to
Sinners as Sinners, my part is as good as any Man's: Set down thy Rest here,
question it not, but believe it; venture thy Soul upon it, without seeking for
further Security: But some will say, He does not belong to me; Why not to thee?
He belongs to Sinners as Sinners; and if there be no worse than Sinfulness,
Rebellion, and Enmity in thee, he belongs to thee as well as to any in the
World. D. C. p. 106.


Antinom. You may easily see how he puts upon me his own sense and meaning; you
must know, Gentlemen, that which he rehearses is in another Discourse of mine,
which was from Isa. 42. where I speak to this Enquiry, How shall I come to know
that I am amongst the number of those Sinners that shall not miscarry? A. D. C.
p. 106.
Observe by the way, now we are speaking of knowing, whether Christ be my
Christ or no, not simply of Christ's being ours, [where you have a flat denial
of what he asserts to be my meaning,] but of Christ's manifestation and knowing
him to be ours; and I show the direct way is to make a particular application
of the general tender of the Gospel by believing: I say, not that all believing
and trusting on Christ is full Assurance, but this I say, that the strongest
and best Assurance is confidently venturing all in believing on Christ, and
receiving the Salvation offered and tendered to us by the Free Grace of God in
the Promise: The best way to be sure of a Rich Gift offered me, (suppose by the
King) which I am amazed at, that so great a Person should offer me so great a
Treasure, and question whether he is rear in it; I say, the best way to know
whether he intends it for me or no, is humbly and thankfully to take it, and
not to stand still and scruple whether it belongs to me or no, saying, Surely
he don't mean me, when it is to none but such Persons that he offers it to. But
I no where say, that Murderers, etc. remaining in a purpose to be such, may
conclude their Interest in Christ; this is a false Accusation.


Calvin. Let us hear, Mr. Neonomian, what is the truth in this matter, how you
teach this Doctrine of the offer of Christ.


Neonom. The Truth is this, Christ is freely offered to be Head and Savior to
the vilest Sinners, who will knowingly Assent to the Truth of the Gospel, and
from a Conviction of their Sin and Misery out of Christ, are humbled, and
truly renounce all their Idols and Sins; denying their Carnal Self, and
Merits, and accept of Christ as offered in the Gospel, relying on him alone for
Justification, Sanctification, and Eternal Life. D. W. p. 80.


Antinom. And you should add, When they see they can do all these things, then
they should come to Christ, and not before; you reckon that a Sinner is only
invited to Christ for Remission of Sins, but not for Repentance, and the
sensible Concomitants thereof, whereas his Office is to give Repentance too.
And how do you mean? That Christ is offered to be Head and Savior, do you mean
Mystical Head? Christ makes himself so to every Sinner, he works Faith in them.
If you mean King, as I suppose you do, that the first Notion Christ offers
himself to Sinners under, is as King, and that is the first Notio^ a Sinner is
to reccive him under; it is not true, the whole Current of the Gospel and
common Experience is against it. An Earthly King will not offer himself as
Kings to a Rebel, but under the Notion of Pardon and Forgiveness.

Again, Is not a knowing Assent to the Truth of the Gospel a higher degree of
Persuasion and Assurance than I speak of in coming to Christ? If you intend
Truth of the Gospel as I do, and then it is offering Christ as a Savior to the
vilest of Sinners that will come to him, and saying to the vilest of Sinners,
That they should come to Christ, and he will in no wise cast them off; but if
you look for Sinners truly humbled, and truly renouncing their Sins and
Righteousness, and in a readiness to accept Christ before you offer him, I know
not when you will offer him, and they must cease to be vile Sinners, and become
Holy out of Christ before he be offered.


Neonom. But observe, 1. Christ is freely offered to the vilest of Sinners, for
their Acceptance of him according to the Gospel. D. W. p. 80.


Antinom. So say we.


Neonom. 2. He is not offered so, as if any Sinner might have a Saving Interest
in him, till they are willing to deny themselves, renounce all Sins and Idols,
and do accept of, and rely on him as a full Savior according to the Terms of
the Gospel.


Antinom. And these I suppose are your Terms, your Moral qualifying Conditions,
so that the Work must be pretty well over for Mortification and Vivifaction
before Christ comes in, before a Saving Interest in Christ may be had; a Sinner
must not touch him, or the Preacher so much as offer Christ to teach them the
Doctrine of Self-denial, or to enable them through the Beauty and Excellency of
his Grace and Love to renounce Idols: Did you ever know any Sinner renounce
Idols till he saw a ground and reason in Christ for it, and felt his power in
the Grace of the Gospel? The Spirit says, The Blood of Christ cleanses us
from all Sin; and accordingly the Promise of Christ is, Ezekiel. 36.25. I will
sprinkle clean Water upon you, and you shall be clean from all your filthiness,
and from all your Idols will I cleanse you; and you will have a vile filthy
Sinner to be washed first, and have his Idols removed first, and exercise one
of the highest Virtues in the Christian Religion, to deny himself, before he
dare to come to Christ, or before any one must offer Christ to him; and if he
be offered, it must be upon the condition of these Gigantine performances.


Neonom. There cannot be an Acceptance of Christ, without a renouncing Sin and
Idols, and denying Carnal Self, and our own Merits, as opposite to him: And on
the other hands, to renounce Sin and Idols, and deny our selves, will not avail
us, without an Acceptance of Christ, and reliance on him.


Antinom. This is an old British way of Arguing; because Acceptance of Christ
is accompanied with renouncing Idols, etc. therefore he may not accept Christ
till he has renounced Idols, and denied himself, etc. Because a Man has Arms
and Legs, therefore a thing must have Arms and Legs before it be a Man; or
because a Man is Animal risibile, therefore he must be Animal risibile before
he is a Man, and made a Man afterward: There is one and the same cause of
renouncing Sin and Acceptance of Christ, and Christ is held forth in the Gospel
to turn Men from Darkness to Light, and the power of Satan unto God; and
Sinners are even the worst to be called and invited to him, to come for all
those Ends and Purposes, for Destruction of Sin and Life of Grace; and I tell
you, there cannot be one of these Sins mortified, or Idol renounced, without
Faith in the Blood of Christ, I say, before Faith and Acceptance of Christ.


Neonom. I mention some things as Antecedently necessary to our renouncing Sin
and Idols, etc.


Antinom. This you mean, Antecedently necessary to know the true God, and Jesus
Christ whom he has sent.


Neonom. I mean Knowledge, Assent, Conviction of Sin and Misery, etc. these are
Preparatory Qualifications; not that an Interest in Christ always follows
these, but they dispose the Soul to a hearty acceptance of Christ, in
opposition to all Rival Opposites, and are necessary thereto in some degree.


Antinom. I cannot understand your meaning, unless this be it, that Nature and
Grace differ only gradually, and that some Men do grow up out of a Natural
condition by these degrees, and some do fall off and not come to it; first,
there must be Conviction of Sin, and humbling, and then follows Self-denial,
and renouncing Idols; and then Christ comes in at last when he can be willing,
and these previous Qualifications must dispose the Soul for Christ; this is
Popery.


Neonom. The declared design of the offers of Christ to Sinners, is that they
be thus willing to Accept of Christ, and partake of an Interest in him.


Antinom. The declared design of offering Christ, is not to tell them they must
thus prepare themselves before Christ is of use to them; but that they come to
Christ and receive of his Grace, to furnish them with his Spirit, and all
gracious Effects and Operations. It is the Spirit that convinces of Sin, and
all Saving Convictions and Humiliations, and Renunciation of Idols, are
included in Repentance and Mortification, which are the Effects of the true
Grace of God in the Heart, whereby Faith is wrought; and that Faith in the Lord
Jesus Christ for Righteousness and Life, purifies the Heart, and produces
Repentance, Love, compliance with the Commands of Christ, and they are not
grievous. You propound wrong Methods for the Curing Diseased Souls; this way
will not do.


Neonom. You mistake me still, I will tell you where the difference is not. 1.
It is not whether there is in Christ a sufficiency of Merit and Grace to save
the worst of Sinners?


Antinom. The question is, whether the Grace and Merit of Christ be not
efficient in the Saving the worst of Sinners.


Neonom. 2. Nor whether Christ is offered to the worst of Sinners, if they will
accept him on the Terms of the Gospel?


Antinom. But the Question is, Whether the Sinner can accept of Christ on such
Terms, before Christ has wrought in them to will and do, and made them willing
in the Day of his Power? And whether they ought not to be Invited to Christ,
and to receive him in the Gospel Offers, for the working this willingness by
efficacious Grace.


Neonom. 3. Nor whether Sinners are not often the Objects of Gods Effectual
Calling, in order to an Interest in Christ.


Antinom. God's Effectual Call is an Interest in Christ, and there is no
Effectual Call can be before an Interest in Christ, it is the putting the Soul
in Actual Possession of Christ, and the uniting it to Christ.


Neonom. Nor whether there may not be Knowledge, Assent, Convictions,
Humblings, and feigned Resolves, and yet a Soul fail of an Interest in Christ,
for want of true Conversion, though they are hopeful Signs?


Aninom. But the Question is, Whether you ought to make common Grace the
Foederal Condition of special, and tell Souls that they cannot receive Christ
in a way of special Grace, till they have attained common Grace out of Christ?


Neonom. Nor whether the degrees of Convictions and Humblings are equal in all?
D. W. p. 84.


Antinom. You should have told us whether you mean saving, or common; if they
be saving, they are wrought as an Effect of Union to Christ; if common and out
of Christ, it is no great matter what degree they are of, for there is nothing
in an unregenerate Man, though never so plausible, that gives him a disposition
to a new Heart, no more than one that is stone dead can have in himself a
disposition to Life; they that are in the Graves of Sin hear the voice of the
Son of God and live; he quickens them that are dead. Privantia non habent
media, there is no medium between Death and Life.


Neonom. Nor whether Preparatory Qualifications do Merit true Grace.


Antinom. You should have told us what Merit, ex congruo, or condigno; if you
deny the word, you assert the thing. For a Foederal Condition is a Merit,
Virtute compacti.


Neonom. Yea, or whether Faith or Repentance do Merit an Interest in Christ?
This I deny, and say, That their whole use depends on Gods Ordination.


Antinom. I wonder you will ground your denial upon such a weak Reason; for would
not Adam's Merits have depended on God's Ordination? And does not Christ's
Merits depend on God's Ordination?


Neonom. Nor whether a Soul may neglect to accept of Christ as Prophet, Priest,
and King, because they feel not that degree of these Humblings and Convictions
which they desire and expect.


Antinom. But being you set them a digging in the Rock of their own Hearts for
the Pearl of Great Price, you should tell them how deep it lies, before they
are likely to find it; for all these Convictions and Humblings are before they
come at Christ; you put them upon hard Service, unless you tell them when they
are convinced enough, and humbled enough; and why do you use the word neglect,
for as long as they are upon the work you assign them, they wait for you to
offer Christ to them, and you tell them it is better to stay longer, and there is
reason for it, according to your Hypothesis; if some degrees of Humblings must
be had to fit them for Christ, then more degrees will make them more fit.


Neonom. Nor whether these Preparatory Qualifications be the Work of the Spirit
by common Grace. This I affirm.


Antinom. So then they may dig, and not find the Mine, and spend all their days
in Common Grace, and never find Spiritual Grace; now here you fully declare
your self that Common Grace is the Condition of Special Grace: What a Work is
here with Conditions?


Neonom. Nor whether their immediate Influence [I mean of Preparatory
Qualifications] be to prepare the Soul for a true consenting* Acceptance, which
it is hereby less averse to, and more disposed for. This I affirm.


Antinom. I know not what sense to put upon this but the Papists Congruity; and
that common Grace is a degree, or a qualifying condition of Saving Grace, and
that Common and Special differ not Specifically, but Gradually only, which to
me is gross Divinity.

Sancta Clara tells us thus, De habita prima gratia Actuali, Communis and
recepta Sententia Scholar. est, etc. Certainly it is the common and received
Opinion of the Schools, that with the help of the first preventing Grace, we
may obtain further helps by acting and endeavoring; yea, the first habitual,
justifying Grace, and in some measure deserve it de congruo, i. e. of meetness,
fitness, and aptitude, and it is the common Opinion of all the Doctors, as to
after-helps in respect of the first Grace; and he faith, He takes Scotus's
Judgment instead of all as the best, in that he says, Repentance is a mere
disposition to habitual Grace. And amongst such as he quotes for his Opinion,
he brings the 13th. Article of the Church of England, Artic. 13. Of Works
before Justification.

Works done before the Grace of Christ, and the Inspiration of his Spirit are
not pleasant to God, for as much as they spring not of Faith in Jesus Christ,
neither do they make Men meet to receive Grace, (or as the School Authors say)
deserve Grace of Congruity; yea, rather for that they are not done as God
wills or commanded them to be done; we doubt not but they have the Nature of
Sin.


which he would wrest to his sense; that although Works before the Faith of
Christ, or the first Actual Grace, are excluded as meritum ex congruo by the
said Article, and exceptio firmat regulam in oppositum; yet he says, Other
Works (according to the said Article) done as Fruits of Faith, may in some
measure dispose, and de congruo deserve promereri gratiam Justificationis;
which Opinion he would make Augustine to be of. And whereas it is said in the
said Article, We doubt not but they have the Nature of Sin, he would palliate
it thus, saying, Non dicunt talia simpliciter esse peccata, sed potius
participare, quod sine omni dubio est terminus diminuens; i. e They say not
that such are simply Sins, but do partake of Sin, which without all doubt is a
Term of Diminution, ( i. e. the word rather) or else they would have said that
they were Sins without Restriction. You see what Jesuitical Evasions here are
to establish your Qualifications, which you and the Papists are so fond of;
whereas these first Reforming Protestants say, Non disponunt hominem ad
receptionem gratiae; but the rather we doubt not but they have the Nature of
Sin; yet you will say, they prepare for true Acceptance, and make the Soul less
averse, and more disposed to it; whereas the quite contrary mostly appears,
that those that become merely moral, and leave off the practice of some gross
Sins, and do some good Works, from that Principle are usually the most averse,
and least disposed to the Grace of God of the two.


Neonom. I shall show you wherein the Real difference is,

1. Whether coming to Christ is an inward Persuasion that Christ is mine. This
you affirm, and I deny.


Antinom. You abuse me in charging me with speaking what you would fasten upon
me, for I spoke distinctly of these two things; first of coming to Christ, and
then of knowing that Christ is mine by my being come to him; but yet I say that
this coming to Christ ought to be by a particular persuasion that Christ is
offered to me as a Sinner, freely offered to me without any consideration of
any Qualification, and this persuasion every Believer has less or more. Dr.
Twiss distinguishes between fides in Christum, and fides de Christo, Faith in
Christ, and Faith concerning Christ being ours; the first is this, coming to
Christ for Life, the other, our Persuasion and sweet Sense of the Love of God
in Christ.


Neonom. 2. Whether Christ is offered to Sinners, with a design that they may
conclude they have a Saving Interest in him, before they are Regenerated by the
Spirit, and savingly Believe.


Antinom. The Design of offering Christ to Sinners, is that they may receive
the offer freely and immediately; and that when they are come to Christ, they
should know this Faith was not of themselves, or did spring out of any Natural
or Moral Qualification; but from Christ the Author of it, and from their Union
to Christ Jesus, which I take to be a Saving part in him, and that they cannot
believe without a Saving part in Jesus Christ before they believe. He having
blessed us with all Spiritual Blessings in Christ, of which Faith is none of
the least. And Dr. Twiss says, Faith being one proper Effect only of a Saving
Interest, though not claimable by them till they believe; Justitia Christi,
sicut Christi est, etc. The Righteousness of Christ as it is Christ's, and
performed by him, so it is ours as wrought for us, juris ratione, and before
Faith, as Meritorious of Efficacious Grace for the working of that Faith. Lib.
1. p. 2. 25. For if without Christ they can do nothing, then they cannot
believe without part in him, and the Covenant Promise gives a part before that
receiving him, in giving Christ; for the Gift of Christ must be by nature
before we can receive him.


Neonom. 3. Whether the Soul of a Sinner as to its habitual disposition and
purpose, is under the Reigning Power of Enmity, Rebellion and Filthiness, till
after he has a Saving Interest in Christ. This you affirm, and I deny.


Antinom. I do affirm that a Sinner has no habitual disposition or true
purpose of Heart for God, and is under the power of Enmity, etc. till he has a
Saving Faith. Here you will have a Sinner free from dominion of Sin, before he
is under the dominion of Grace; the Heart changed and Sin mortified without
saving Interest in Christ, he must be sanctified before Christ is Justification
or Sanctification to him. This is strange Doctrine!


Neonom. Whether some degrees of Conviction, and Humiliation of Soul be
necessary Prerequisites to the Souls true Acceptance of Christ for Pardon. I
affirm this, and you deny it.


Antinom. We have told you, what Protestants long since say, That no Antecedent
Qualities before the Grace of Christ, and the Inspiration of his Spirit, are
pleasing to God, or make Men meet to receive Grace; but all such are Sins, the
rather, because they are not done as God wills: for Effectual Vocation is by an
Interest in Christ; therefore it is vain and frivolous to talk that those things
are Prerequisites that are the thing it self.


Neonom. I shall only prove the Truth as contained in the third and fourth
Question.

1. That the Soul of a Sinner, as to its habitual disposition and power, is not
under the Reigning Power of Enmity, Rebellion and Filthiness, till after it
has a Saving Interest in Christ.

2. Effectual Vocation makes this change in the habitual disposition of the
Heart, and this Vocation is necessary to our Interest in Christ.


Antinom. What is it that you would prove? That which you are to prove is this,
That the habitual disposition of the Soul is changed, as to the dominion of
Sin, and as to the filthiness thereof, before a Saving Interest in Christ; and
now you shift the Terms, and after you have been speaking all this while of
Preparatory Works, how we must be humbled, have self-denial, and cast off all
our Idols, before we have an Interest in Christ; now you shuffle your Cards,
and say, The Soul is not continued under the Reigning Power of Enmity, etc.
till after his Interest in Christ. Does not any Man that has half an Eye see
this Juggle? and forsooth you will prove that this disposition of habitual and
reigning Enmity does not remain till after our Interest in Christ; why? Because
it is taken away in our Saving Interest in Christ: Is not this shifting and
shuffling? That all this while you make such a noise and vapor of what we have
before we come to Christ; It Is nothing else but what we have by Virtue of an
Interest in Christ. And your Argument should run thus: If Effectual Calling
makes this change in the habitual disposition of the Heart, and is necessary
antecedaneously to our Interest in Christ, then this Enmity, Rebellion and
Filthiness is taken away before our Interest in Christ; Ergo: We deny the
consequence, for this reason, Because the reigning power of Sin has it is first
blow in our Effectual Calling, and then, and not before, we are beginning to be
made holy, and this Effectual Calling is our Interest in Christ; Sin shall not
have dominion over us, because we are under Grace; Christ is made to us
Sanctification, and we are Sanctified in Christ, etc. And now you shift your
Hands and fay, We do not lie under this Enmity till after our Saving Interest;
and good Reason, because Christ has slain the Enmity upon the Cross, and the
Doctrine of Reconciliation being received by Faith in our Effectual Calling,
the Enmity is slain there also; the New Man put on, we are Created in Christ
Jesus to good Works, and the depraved disposition and habit changed, and now
what you go about to conclude; is so far from the Question, that it is against
you: but you say, P. 85. That this disposition is altered in Effectual
Vocation, and there can be no true coming to Christ for Pardon, and especially
for Sanctification, without that purpose; whence it appears, that Effectual
Vocation must be before Saving Faith in Christ, and that therein the Reigning
Power of Sin must be slain before Justifying Faith, or any Sanctifying Grace,
that is the Fruit of it.


Neonom. The Confessions are for me, for they both say, That this Call lies in
Enlightening the Minds Spiritually -- taking away the Heart of Stone, giving a
Heart of Flesh, etc.


Antinom. I pray take their words together; they say, Confess. chapter 10.
All those whom God has predestined unto Life, and those only [mark the
words, I know you cannot swallow all this Article without kecking,] he is
pleased in his Appointed and Accepted Time, effectually to call by his Word and
Spirit, [Is not this to give them Saving Interest in Christ?] out of that state
of Sin and Death, [Is not this the habitual purpose and disposition of the
Heart under the Reigning Power of Enmity, Rebellion and Filthiness?] in which
they are by Nature, to Grace and Salvation by Jesus Christ, enlightening their
Minds savingly, taking away the Heart of Stone, giving a Heart of Flesh, etc.
Here is terminus a quo and ad quem. And now you would argue, because this
habitual Disposition, Enmity and Reigning Power of Sin is taken away in and by
our Saving Interest in Christ; therefore it is done before our Saving Interest;
and because that would look so grossly absurd, you say therefore, It does not
remain till after our Interest in Christ. I pray Gentlemen judge, whether this
be not either very foul play, or from gross Ignorance of the Rules of Right
Reasoning?


Neonom. 2. How Inconsistent with Vocation, Regeneration and Conversion, are
Hearts of such vile disposition.


Antinom. Death and Life, Darkness and Light are inconsistent; they are
Privantia; a natural Estate and Effectual Calling are such, because this takes
that out of one state into another in an instant, by uniting them to Christ,
they thereby pass from Darkness to Light, from Death to Life; and the Passage
from Death is the Passage into Life; it is our Death unto Sin, and Life unto God
through Jesus Christ, Romans 6.11. And being made free from sin, you became
Servants of Righteousness, Ver. 18, 22.


Neonom. That cannot he a true Faith and Acceptance, that consists with such
vile Dispositions, etc.


Antinom. True, but are not such vile Dispositions changed in the New Creation?
The taking away the Heart of Stone, and giving a Heart of Flesh, is at once;
and generatio unius is corruption alterius, and Faith is now in the New Heart,
yea, the very Essence of it.


Neonom. Can he be said to accept of Christ, who, as you say, has a Knife in
his Hand, and Thoughts in his Heart to murder Christ, and yet without so much
as laying down his Arms? D. W. p. 87.


Antinom. I wish you have not Thoughts in your Heart, and a Knife in your Hand,
not only to wound my Ministry but the Doctrine of Free Grace, you show such an
inveterate Spirit against both. Gentlemen,

Speaking from that Text, John 6.37. and endeavoring to remove Objections from
poor distressed Souls that dare not come to Christ, because of a high deep
Sense of their Filthiness and Loathsomness, and that are always aggravating
their Condition under the saddest and most dreadful Consideration: You will
say, For all this high Aggravation of Loathsomness and Sinfulness, my Case is
worse than all this you speak of; Dr. C. p. 220.
therefore there is something in my Condition, that if I come to Christ he must
cast me off: [Mark, Gentlemen, these are the bitter Complaints of a poor
distressed Soul against himself, set on by Temptation, to keep him from Jesus
Christ.] Besides positive Filthiness, I am a Rebel, a sturdy Enemy; I fight
against God, I quarrel with God, and take up Arms against him.

I endeavor to remove this Objection thus, Imagine your Condition is a
Condition of as great Madness and Enmity against God as you can devise, [as
always it is looked upon to be by one laboring under a wounded Conseience, in
whom Sin is revived by the Law: The Remedy that I advise, is, to bring this
poor brokenhearted Creature to Christ to be bound up, I go on and say] Sure
you will say, If I be such an Enemy, I must lay down my Arms before Christ will
have to do with me, or admit me to come to him. Will a King let a Cutthroat
Traitor, while he has Thoughts in his Heart to murder him; will he let him
come with a naked Knife into his Presence, and graciously embrace him in his
Arms?

For Answer, still see the close of the Text, Observe, that if this be true,
that in respect of this Rebelliousness in thy Spirit against God, thou say, If
I come to Christ, he will cast me off. This word, in no wise, cannot be true --
Do you think it was out of the Thoughts of Christ, viz. our Enmity and
Rebellion? And if he thought of it, do you not think he would not have put it
in to clear up this Truth? Look into Psalm. 68.18. and Romans 5.6, 7, 8.

Now observe what I say, I do not speak this to the intent that any should
conceive, that God leaves Persons rebellious, Dr. C. p. 211.
vile and loathsome as he does find them when he closes with them, but I say
that time when the Lord closes with them, it is a state of Rebellion; and if
thou come to Christ in this Condition, it manifestly shall appear to thee, that
he will open his Bosom for thy Head to rest upon; as well as for the
Righteousest Saint in the World; so Christ invites every one that thirsts to
come and drink of the Water of Life freely.


Calvin. I would fain know, Mr. Neonomian, what you would say to a distressed
Soul in such a condition, that would not only liken himself to a Murderer or a
Cutthroat Traitor, but will give you an Instance that he is so even at this
very time; he has continually horrid blasphemous Thoughts of God, yea,
Atheistical, and such as is a Horror to mention. He will tell you what a sink
of Vileness and Hypocrisy he is in upon all respects, what would you tell him?
indeed here is the Skill of a Divine.


Neonom. Tell him, I would tell him he must be humbled for those Sins, and he
must cast out these filthy Thoughts, and that he must pray and hear the Word,
and watch over his Heart, and resist Satan; and indeed must get rid of this
Enmity that is in his Heart, and this Rebellion, and then he may come to Christ
for Pardon.


Calvin. Ay, but I can do none of these; my proud Heart will not be humbled, my
filthy Thoughts will remain, I cannot love God, nay, I cannot pray, and the
Word of God is a Terror unto me; I fly from the Law; and as for the Gospel I
dare not come at it, God is a Terror to me.


Neonom. I would tell him, such a vile Heart, corrupt Affections, Blasphemous
Thoughts, are inconsistent with Vocation, Regeneration, Conversion: I would
tell him he cannot have true Faith or Acceptance with Christ, which consists
with such vile dispositions, and is void of a purpose to be otherwise.


Calvin. And would you not think meet to invite this poor Soul to come to Jesus
Christ in this sad Condition?


Neonom. No indeed, that I would not, in that miserable pickle.


Calvin. What would you do with him?


Neonom. I would tell him, he has a proud Heart which God is humbling, his
Lusts must be mortified, he must bear the Indignation of the Lord; God will
shine in upon you in his due time when you are fit for it, and your Sins be
purged; in the mean time you must wait.


Calvin. But may not a Man speak to such an one of Help laid upon one that is
mighty to save.


Neonom. Take heed of being too bold there: If Christ be mentioned it must but
be as King and Lawgiver; if you be too busy in talking of Christ as Priest
and Sacrifice, and of laying his Sins on Christ, it may prove such a Narcotick
to him as may cast him into the contrary Extreme of carnal Security, and
Presumption that his condition is better than it is.


Calvin. Do you deal thus always with distressed afflicted Souls, when they
come to you for advice?


Neonom. No, not always in private Conference, but in the Pulpit this way must
be taken, or else you will have a company of vile loathsome Sinners grow too saucy
upon the Doctrine of Grace and the Promise.


Calvin. And yet here your Ministry is very successful; you receive many
Members I suppose, you have to deal with great Variety of Cases.


Neonom. I do not trouble my self with that way of Experiences, I know no Rule
for that: I ask them whether they have been humbled, and whether they are
sincere in taking Christ as their Lord; and I tell them now, God accepts
Sincerity and Imperfect Duties as the Condition of the Covenant of Grace; and I
find this way succeeds very well, and I hope to make it take throughout the
City, and extirpate those Antinomian Principles, and Congregational too.


Calvin. Indeed Mr. Neonomian, I must take my liberty to dissent altogether
from you in your Method with, and Cure of distressed Consciences; it was not
the way formerly. I am for bringing such a poor loathsome polluted Creature to
the Fountain set open for Sin and Uncleanness, etc. and not say he must be
washed first.


Neonom. Can we thus Marry Christ? what a carnal, selfish thing is Believing? A
mere using Christ for our own safety in our Abominations, which we resolve
shall rule over us without one desire to be rid of them. D. W. p. 88.


Calvin. Do you think there will be any Fellowship between Christ and Belial?
One must be gone. When Christ comes in unto the Heart, he binds the strong man
armed, and spoils him of his Goods. I am sorry to hear you banter a poor
Sinner's believing in Christ, under the sense of the Vileness and Sinfulness of
his Disposition, and the Enmity of his Heart; or that you should suppose, or
suggest to the World, that there is any way under Heaven to change the Heart
and Disposition savingly, or heal the Conscience, but by bringing a poor
Creature to Jesus Christ, and him Crucified, and saying to him, Believe on the
Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved. There is Pardon, Forgiveness, Cleansing,
in the Blood of Christ, therefore the Course that I take always, is to
endeavor to set the Lord Jesus Christ in all his fullness before an awakened
Sinner; and if he be yet secure, and going on in his evil ways, I bring him as
near to Christ as I can; I endeavor to convince him that he sins against
Christ as well as the Law, the precicious Blood of Christ that was shed for
Sinners; I do what I can to bring him to Christ to be taught, to be invited,
overcome by the Sweetness and Amiableness of Jesus Christ, and let him know the
danger if he persist obstinate.


Neonom. But some degrees of Convictions and Humiliations of Soul are necessary
prerequisites to the Souls Acceptance of Christ for Pardon, weary and heavy
laden that Christ invites, Mat. 11.28. I came not to call the Righteous, [i. e.
conceited and secure] but Sinners to Repentance. Luke 5.31, 32. They in Acts
2.37. were pricked to the Heart; the Jailer felt some Humbling concern. Acts
16.30. Paul knew what this trembling was; so Zacheus and the Prodigal, Luke
15.14, 15. D. W. p. 87.


Calvin. All his humblings, prickings, weariness, awakenings, were by the Power
of Gospel Grace, and by the preaching of Jesus Christ. Christ's Ministry is
enough with his Power to save Souls; he needs no prerequisites. The Gospel is
the power of God unto Salvation, therewith he wounds, and therewith he makes
whole; Christ makes weary, and gives rest; he convinces Sinners, and gives
Repentance; the preaching Christ Crucified pricked those Converts to the Heart,
and healed those Wounds. It was the same Hand of Grace that awakened the
Jailer, and when he had a Knife in his Hand even to Murder Christ in his
Members; and when he saw that was wrinched out of his Hand, took a Knife to
Murder himself; in the height of that desperate Villainy, he was commanded to
believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and he should be saved. The case plainly is
this, That Jesus Christ himself, the Minister of the true Sanctuary, and the
preaching of him, is the only and sufficient Remedy to change and save the
worst of Sinners through the effectual working of the Spirit; the order and
method is various, it is as the Spirit lists, we are not to prescribe any
methods or measures of Humblings, much less to say such and such Moral Virtues
or Duties are necessary Prerequisites and Qualifications before a Sinner comes
to Christ. The Apostle Paul said, That he determined to know nothing, i. e. (so
as to Preach) among them, but Jesus Christ and him Crucified, 1 Cor. 2.2. I am
for working Humiliations by setting Christ before the most refractory Sinners'
for all Salvation; true Mourning and Humiliation proceeds from looking on him
whom a poor Sinner has pierced: I am for the bringing of the most Leprous
Sinner, (I cannot engage he will come,) to wash in this Spirtiual Jordan,
though I find you are rather for washing off his Leprosy first in the Rivers
of Abana and Pharfar Rivers of Damascus.


Neonom. I am not for bringing such foul filthy Sinners to Jesus Christ, it
sounds very ill in the Ear, to say Christ saves Murderers, Adulterers,
Persecutors, etc. and to invite them to come to Christ reaking in their Sins,
and under the Reigning Enmity of their Hearts; it is fit that they should be
civilized first, and this wicked, profligate disposition removed, and that they
have new Hearts before they come to Christ; for I tell you Christ will not
pardon them else.


Antinom. You mistake the whole sense of the Gospel, or will not understand it,
that you may seem to have a plausible pretense to oppose it: When Sinners are
invited to come to Christ, it is not merely under the Notion of Pardon, but of
all Salvation; he is offered, and the Sinner is invited to come unto him, as
having given himself for us, to redeem us from all Iniquity, and to purify to
himself a peculiar People Zealous of good Works. A Sinner is by the Gospel
called to Christ in all states of his Unregeneracy, whether openly Profane, or
Morally Virtuous; one is as easily saved by Christ as the other; the former
ordinarily sooner, easier converted seemingly than the latter; neither is the
latter better qualified and fitted for the Grace of God than the other. That
place quoted by you, 1 Cor. 14.24, 25. is a clear proof how the Word of God's
Grace works these true Convictions in the Saving Work, and that your Humblings
in the state of Unregeneracy are no necessary Prerequisites to the Grace of God.


Neonom. I will discover your Mistakes in these things. Because they that
truly come to Christ shall have an Interest in Christ, therefore he thinks
whosoever can persuade himself that he has an Interest in Christ does come to
him.


Antinom. It would have been well if it had been my Happiness to have attained
to your degree of Learning, and had so great a Capacity for it as you, that I
might not have fallen under so gross mistakes. I confess it is pity a Doctor
should be so silly a John-an-Oaks as you represent me. But what shall I say to
it? It Is not every Man's Portion to be Learned or Wise, only there is one
Proverb I remember that is some satisfaction to an empty Skull, Non est datum
cuivis Corinthum appellere. But methinks you mistake about my Thoughts, if I
have Wit enough to tell my own Thoughts. It is strange I should be so stupid,
as Credere quod habeo and habeo, as to believe that I have when I have not, and
to call that Persuasion my having: I spoke of having Christ by coming to
Christ, and then of our knowing that we have Christ. If you will examine what I
think, I will tell you, I think coming to Christ is by believing and
appropriating Christ, and what is generally delivered of him and by him unto my
self; if it be by way of Promise, offer, or command; and that this believing is
such persuasion of the Goodness and Truth of Christ and his Gospel Salvation,
that it carries me forth to rest and stay my self confidently thereon, and that
I can persuade my self of the Truth of my Faith from its Act on its proper
Object, and by the several Fruits that it does produce.


Neonom. Because sometimes the worst of Sinners are made Subjects of
Preparatory Work, and of Effectual Calling as God's Act on them, therefore he
thinks, that these Sinners are invited to conclude they have an Interest in
Christ, before they do at all answer that Call. D. W. p. 90.


Antinom. You intimate as if you thought some Sinners were more capable
Subjects of Effectual Calling as to God's Act than others, and that there is a
Preparatory Work distinct from God's Act in Effectual Calling, which I do not
think. Besides, I think God's Act in Effectual Calling upon a Sinner, is more
than a bare Invitation: And I do not think or say, That any Man concludes their
Personal Interest in Christ because they are invited, but because being invited
they did come; therefore not before they answer the Call by coming.


Neonom. But his greatest cause of mistake is, that he thinks the worst of
Sinners, if Elect, have as much Interest in Christ as the greatest Saint.


Antinom. Est Argiva Calumnia; when you make it appear that I think so, by what
I have spoken, I will answer to it, and your Sarcastick Inference therefrom.


Neonom. You may see the large Catechize; Q. What is Justifying Faith? They
tell us, That a Sinner is convinced of Sin and Misery who receives Christ.


Antinom. But they tell us that that Conviction which is Saving comes by Saving
Faith, their words are, Justifying Faith is a Saving Grace wrought in the Heart
of a Sinner by the Spirit and Word of God, whereby he being convinced of his
Sin and Misery, and of disability in himself and other Creatures to recover him
out of his lost Condition, not only assenteth to the Truth of the Promise of
the Gospel, but receives and rests upon Christ and his Righteousness, etc.
And in the Shorter Catechism you may see a more particular account of Saving
Convictions, that they are wrought in Effectual Calling, though they be not so
properly of the Nature of Justifying Faith; for they say, Effectual Calling is
the Work of God's Spirit, whereby convincing us of our Sin and Misery,
enlightening our Minds, etc. He does persuade and enable us to embrace Jesus
Christ freely offered to us in the Gospel. You see Conviction and Illumination
are both the Saving Works of the Spirit. And in the Confession they will tell
you, That Saving Faith is of a larger extent as to the Object it Acts upon,
than merely Justifying, Saving Faith; it convinces, it enlightens, it
justifies, it sanctifies, and in this sense they tell you the Nature of Saving
Faith, Chap. 14. whereby they are enabled to believe to the saving of their
Souls -- and by this Faith a Christian is enabled to believe to be true
whatever is revealed in the Word, and -- from thence comes trembling at the
Word, and embracing the Promises of Life, etc. So that this contradicts not,
but confirms the Doctrine of the 39 Articles, That all Works before Faith, even
Legal Convictions, are no more than Sin; it is but the filthy
Conscience-polluting Guilt of Sin, which Thousands have, and which do not
dispose the Sinner to love God, but to hate him; nor to seek Pardon, but to
seek out a Righteousness of his own.


Neonom. Dr. O. tells us, p. 133. Of Justif. There is nothing in the whole
Doctrine that I will more firmly adhere to, than the necessity of Convictions
previous to true Believing. D. W. p. 89.


Antinom. If he mean saving believing, he must mean previous sine qua non, not
as a Preparatory Virtue, but as Sin is previous to Pardon, and thereby Guilt
also, whereby Sin pollutes the Conscience, and is both sin and misery; and this
may arise from a mere natural stirring of the Law, or by the preaching of it,
which is the Death of Sin, the Wrath and Curse that attends it; and this may
and must arise from a common Faith; for a Man is not convinced of any thing
that he believes not. But if he mean Saving Convictions, they are good Fruits,
and wrought in Saving Faith. This he intends here: For he said just before, Let
no Man think to understand the Gospel, who knows nothing of the Law; God's
Constitution, and the Nature of things themselves, have given the Law the
precedence with respect unto Sinners; for by the Law is the Knowledge of Sin,
and Gospel Faith is the Souls acting according to the Mind of God, for
deliverance from that State and Condition which it is cast under by the Law;
and he supposes the State of a Man under mere Legal Conviction to be a State
of Death and Condemnation.


Neonom. He says, Displicency, Sorrow, Fear, a desire of Deliverance, with
other necessary Effects of true Conviction. P. 102.


Antinom. True Convictions, i. e. Saving, have such Effects; but observe, he is
there distinguishing between common Convictions, which before Faith are the
common Condition of Sinners more or less, which is the Death they lie under. He
says, Temporary Faith and Legal Conviction are the Principles of all Works or
Duties in Religion Antecedent unto Justification, [observe now what he saith]
which therefore we must deny to have in them any Causality thereof; and so he
proceeds to show what Affections and Duties in Religion may follow thence; not
that they are Gospel Virtues, but rather solendida peccata; and they, I say,
are so far from disposing the Natural Man to Justification by Grace, that they
dispose him rather to seek Justification in himself by the Works of the Law,
till the Law comes to be Preached in true Spirituality in the Gospel, and
received by Faith. -- And he says, P. 103. That Reformation of Life -- and
these things are where real Convictions are; but yet it must be said, that they
are neither severally nor jointly, though in the highest degree, either
necessary Dispositions, Preparations previous, Congruities in a way of Merit,
or Conditions of our Justification.

Now is not this a Mavelous measure of Presumption, and palpable Design upon
your Reader to take the Imperfect Sense of a Man's Discourse to justify your
Errors, when you must needs see, the said Discourse is point blank against
you; I Will hear no more therefore of your Allegations in this point out of Dr. O.


Neonom. Mr. Norton speaks of Preparatory Works between the Carnal Rest of the
Soul in a State of Sin and Effectual Vocation.


Antinom. I know of no such middle State, for there is but two States, that of
Death, and that of Life; that of Light, and that of Darkness; but the Works
done before Conversion he tells you are called Preparatory by way of mere
Order, which he says all the Orthodox assert; for that which is plainly first
in Order and Nature must be said to be so; all the Sin and Wickedness, as well
as the common Graces and Religion, performed by an Unregenerate Man, are all
Antecedent to his Regenerate State. But says Mr. Norton, It Is contrary to the
Scriptures to say they are Preparatory, by way of Causation, Merit and
Congruity, [ i. e. by disposing, fitting, and making Men the sitter for
Effectual Grace, as you say] as asserted by the Papists and Arminians.


DEBATE XI. Of Union with Christ before Faith.
Neonom. ANother Error of his is, All the Elect are Actually United to Christ,
before they have the Spirit of Christ, or at all believe in him, even before
they are Born; yea, and against their will. D. W. p. 90.


Antinom. Your Terms are all Ambiguous, you seldom use a word of two or three
Syllables, but you will have him Bifrons like Janus; I pray produce your proof,
and I shall see which way you look most.


Neonom. The Title of a Sermon of yours is, Christ ours before gracious
Qualifications. D. W. p. 91.


Antinom. I own such a Sermon, from Isa. 33.6. and the design of it was to
answer this Query, Dr. C. p. 432.
How I may be assured my part lies here, That my Sins were laid on Christ. The
Apostle speaks of full Assurance of Faith, and of coming to the Throne of Grace
with boldness -- I showed that it may be found out as the Lord has chalked it
out -- in his Grace and Grant; not only when the Lord is pleased to hold out
his Grace and Grant to a Man, but also upon those Terms that he holds it out
on, such as the Terms of God are, or Conditions, if you will call them so. Sure
I am; as the Conditions are, by which they may claim Interest in Christ; those
conditions being granted and found, the Soul may close with the Grace of God;
now all the difficulty lies in this, whether the Lord propounds to Men, that
there shall be no part in Christ, nor Grace by him till they find their
Spirits, Souls and Bodies sanctified throughout, or whether the Lord holds out
the Grant of Pardon of Sin without those previous Qualifications. And I say, D.
C. p. 433.
That the Grace of saying Iniquity upon Christ is applicable by Forgiveness of
Sins to Persons before there be ever the least measure of Sanctification in
Works; and being applied by the Lords own Grant, there may be Safety and
Security in applying the same by Faith, without regard to Sanctification in any
measure. That is, in respect of making Trial thereby, I seeing yet no
Sanctification in Works to try by; it is certain such Pardon is to be had, and
that the Grace of Forgiveness is applicable before Works, or a Person capable
of doing them, as to Elect Infants, and to the Dying Thief, and has the same
place in every Elect Person that does believe, forgiveness is applied to him
before he can exert any of the working Fruits of Faith, and being applied to
him by God's Grant, it may be applied to himself by Believing; but because you
insist on nothing in this Sermon that you particularly express, I say no more
of it now.


Neonom. Sure you intend only to exclude Works, and not Faith. D. W. p. 91.


Antinom. I do not exclude Works from a ground of Assurance, for I own when the
Conditions are granted and found, [ i. e. the Fruits of the Spirit in the
Heart, the Soul may close with the Grace of God by way of Assurance; but I say
also, there may be an Assurance of Faith without particular respect to the said
Works; I say not that Works evidence not, but that there is an evidence besides.


Neonom. No, you tell us of dangerous Consequences that must follow on it if
Persons are not united to Christ, and partake not of Justification before they
believe; and adds, There is not, I say, such a thing as an uniting or
knitting Power in Faith, as that Faith does or should become an Instrument to
unite a Soul to Christ. Dr. C. p. 616.


Antinom. My Discourse was from 1 John 2. 1, 2. The main design of my Discourse
there is to prove, That Faith is the Fruit of our Union to Christ.

I showed that Christ himself frames and creates that very Faith in Persons
that come to him, D. C. p. 614.
uniting them as Members first to him their Head. 2. I showed that a Branch
must have Union with the Root before it can bring forth Fruit. Christ is the
Vine, we the Branches, Faith part of the Fruit. Communion is a Fruit of Union,
Faith is a Grace of Communion. Suppose that the Life spoken of is not in
Persons till they believe it is, Dr. C. p. 615.
but this, That there is no Activeness of the life of Christ in the Person that
is Elected, his Life is in Christ, and was in Christ, and reserved in Christ
till the time of believing, for him; and then does the Elect Person become
Active in Life, when Christ does give him to believe Actually.

But to say that this believing should give the first Being of that Life that
should be in Persons, is to say, There is not that Life of the Elect Persons in
Christ before they do believe; if this be maintained, that there is no
Justification at all belonging to Elect Persons, till they do Actually believe
in Christ, or Faith be the Instrument by which they are first united, dangerous
Consequences must needs follow. 1. That in some respect there will be a
bringing to Life again the Covenant of Works, Do this and live, viz. for
Persons to do that they may live; but the Covenant of Grace, gives Life first,
and from Life comes Doing, etc. But the words you refer to p. 616. For they are
not there, nor do I find them elsewhere.


Neonom. He denies the presence of Faith, to this end he spends much time to
prove that Christ is ours before we come to him, and that our not coming unto
him does not import a state of disunion with Christ. D. W. p. 614.


Antinom. I said, Let us suppose the coming in this place is spoken of
believing, Ye will not come to me that you might have Life; it cannot follow,
that although there be no Life till believing, therefore there can be no Union
till believing: I say, If it possibly might be imagined, that there may not be
Life from Christ till believing, yet it follows not that there must be
believing before this Union; Suppose, I say, that there cannot be Life before
there be believing, yet there must be Union before there can be Life fetched
from Christ, -- Faith being the Fruit born, as aforesaid.


Neonom. He says, You may as soon conceive, that a Man is able to see whilst
he has no Head, as think a Man can have Spiritual Eyes; whether the Eye of
Faith to behold Christ, or the Eye of Mourning to lament ones Wickedness,
before there be Actually the Presence and Conjunction of Christ the Head to
such a Body. Dr. C. p. 104.


Antinom. I say so, and will stand to it.


Calvin. I wonder you should find fault with that Divinity, or note down that
Expression for an Error; you cannot suppose that there can be any living Act
performed without Life, as the cause of it, which Life must be our Union to
Christ, which according to the most Orthodox is, and must be before Faith it
self at least, Natura.


Neonom. He says, We partake of the Spirit by virtue of this Union.


Calvin. Yes, how should Members partake of the Spirit and Life that is in the
Head, but by virtue of this Union, and yet the Spirit unites. A Branch
engrafted partakes of the Spirits of the Root by virtue of an Union, and the
Spirits unite and knit it.


Neonom. He says, God did not only decree to put such Qualifications into
them; but I say farther, That God gives Actual Possession of this Christ, and
that Christ takes Possession of that Person before there be any Qualifications.
P. 618.


Calvin. I doubt not but Christ takes Actual Possession of us saltem natura,
before we have any holy Qualifications, but as to our Actual Possession of
Christ, it is better expressed that we have it by Faith; although where there is
Possession there is relatum and correlatum.


Neonom. The Question is not, Whether God has decreed the Union of the Elect?
Nor whether this Union is agreed in the Covenant of Redemption? D. W. p. 92.


Antinom. But it is, Whether the Elect have not a Union of Federal Relation in
the Covenant, as you call of Redemption, as being a Seed in him, and Covenanted
with in him, and he as a common Person representing them, and undoubtedly is
that Root or Head out of which all his Elect Seed or Members do spring.


Neonom. Nor is it any Question, whether Christ's giving us the Spirit of Grace
do begin this Union, and the Spirit given in order to Saving Operations
produces this Faith whereby the Union is Consummated?


Calvin. Well, well, if you own so much, what do you make a Controversy of
this Point; it seems you acknowledge the Union is begun with Christ giving his
Spirit in order to Saving Operations, only you say it is consummated by our
Active cleaving unto Christ by believing, and he does as good as say as much;
he says, There is no Activeness of this Life of Christ in the Elect, till they
do believe, and in this sense he will say the Elect are not united, viz. by
Faith till they do believe; as for his Notion of the Elect being in Christ
before calling, it has been discoursed already, and let us not fetch things
over again.


Antinom. There is a Passive Recipiency, and there is an Active Recipiency; Dr.
C. p. 98.
there is a Passive receiving of Christ, and that is, so that Christ is
received without any Hands; but in an Active receiving of him, he is not
received without Hands. This passive receiving of Christ, is just such a
receiving of him, as when a froward Patient takes a purge, or some bitter
Physic; he shuts his Teeth against it, but the Physician forces his Mouth
open, and pours it in down his Throat, and so it works against his will by the
overruling power of one over him.


Neonom. For my part I like not such Similitudes, and it insinuates that Men
are said to receive Christ against their Wills. D. W. p. 101. Dr. C. p. 612.
And he said too, That our first coming to Christ, is as a Coach is said to
come to Town, when it is drawn to Town.


Calvin. You know his meaning by those Similes, and they are not to run on four
Feet; it is enough they serve to illustrate that part of Truth which they are
used for. Mr. Antinomian means as you do as to Man's Will. There Is nothing more
contrary to a rebellious carnal Man, than the Graee of God; their Hearts are
full of Enmity and Hatred to God and Truth; but yet he shows you often that God
gives Gifts to the Rebellious. And here you see how he gives it, and what he
gives; it may be he binds them with the cords of afflictions, and opens their
Eyes to see their undone condition, pours into their Consciences whole Potions
of the Guilt of Sin, and the Laws Condemnation, whereby as undone Creatures,
through Grace they become willing and ready to receive Christ, and he becomes
precious to them by the same hand of his Spirit. If you should pick up odd
Similes out of Sermons, which it may be has done good, and God has blessed,
you may expose many a good Man's Labors. See holy Cranmer's, and I think such
were were of famous Mr. Rogers of Dedham; and consider the Spirit of God allows
preaching Christ to be foolishness to the World: Therefore be very wary how you
despise, reproach or redicule in these cases, lest in striking pretendedly at
Men and their weakness, you happen to give a slant Blow at the Spirit of God:
For he tells you there is such a kind of Recipiency of Christ, he instanceth in
Ephraim, Jer. 31.18, 19. And in the like Dialect Elihu speaks to Job, chap.
36.8, 9. If they be bound in Fetters, and held in the Cords of Affliction, then
he shows them their Works and their Transgressions, that they have exceeded.
And in the Metaphor of a Coach or Chariot, the Spirit of God speaks in the
Sacred Scripture; and the Church says to Christ, Draw me, and I shall run
after thee.


Neonom. The real difference is, 1. Whether the Elect are actually united to
Christ before they are born? 2. Whether the Elect are united to Christ till
they are effectually called, and truly believe?


Antinom. That though there be not an active Union on our Parts but by Faith,
so that it cannot be said properly to be a Conjugal Union by mutual consent of
Parties, yet there is a relative Union, such as between Father and Child, where
the Child gives not consent to this relation; he is wholly passive in being
brought into it. God from Eternity constituted and ordained Christ and all the
Elect, to be as it were one Body, one Lump, wherein Christ is the Head, and
they the Members; Christ the Root, and they the Branches: They are given to
Christ, John 17. To be in Christ, Ephesians. 1. Being they are called his Seed,
before they are called, John 10. His Seed, Isa. 53.11, 12. Heb. 2.14. Brethren.
Ver. 11. He that sanctifyeth, and they they that are sanctified, are (...), i.
e. as some add, (...), or (...), of Body or Lump. And by virtue of this Union
it is that the Obedience and Satisfaction of Christ descends particularly unto
them, and not to the rest of Mankind.


Calvin. The Learned Mr. Rutherford, has as follows, The Faith by which as by
an Instrument we are Justified, Rutherford of the Covenant. P. 208.
presupposes three Unions, and makes a fourth Union. It presupposes a
Natural, Legal, Federal Union. 1. Natural, That Christ and we are not only both
Mankind, for Christ, and Pharaoh, and Judas, are one specie and natura, true
Men, but one in Brotherhood, He assuming the Nature of Man with a special Eye
to Abraham, Heb. 2.16. i. e. to the Elect and Believers; for with them he is
Bone of their Bone, and is not ashamed to call them Brethren, Heb. 2.11, 12.
Psalm. 22.22.

2. It presuppones a Legal Union between Christ and them that God made; the
Debtor and Surety one in Law, and the Sum one, so far as he laid our Debts on
Christ, Isa. 53.6. 2 Cor. 6.21.

3. It presuppones an Union Federal, God making Christ our Surety; and to
Assume not only our Nature in a Personal Union, but also our State, Condition,
and made our Cause his Cause, our Sins his Sins; not to defend them -- but to
suffer Punishment for them, and our Faith makes the fourth Union betwixt Christ
and us, whether Natural, as betwixt Head and Members, the Branches and
Vine-tree; or Mystical, as that of the Spouse and Beloved Wife; or Artificial,
[as the Foundation and Building;] or mixed, as that of the Imp and Tree; or
Legal between the Surety and Debtor, Advocate and Client; or rather a Union
above all hard to determine, for these are but Comparisons, and this Christ
prays for, John 2.23. I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect
in one.

And something to this purpose Mr. Norton Norton p. 292.
speaks, The Efficacy of this Relation springs from its Foundation, which is
first by the Absolute Grace of God in Election, and thence flowing down in the
Promise according to the Merit of Christ, by the Effectual Operation of the
Spirit. Needs must the River of Life be full, ever overflowing and quickening
that arises from and is maintained by such Fountains. Norton p. 287.
And he shows the form of this Union, 1. In the Tertium wherein it is. 2. The
Bands on Christ's part and the Believers. 3. The manner as to the Tertium's. 1.
Sameness of Spirit, He that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit, 1 John 4.13.
Romans 8.9. 2 Pet. 1.4. 2. One Mystical Body, 1 Cor. 12.12, 13. The third, A
Spiritual Married Estate, Ephesians. 5.32. Isa. 54.5. Ch 62.4. 4th. A State of Glory,
John 17.22, 23. See more.

But you will see all along how he makes Christ first in this Personal Union to
Christ by the Spirit and Faith.

Dr. Ames. Ames. Med. lib. 1. c. 26.
Receptio respectu hominu^ est vel Passiva vel Activa, Phil. 3.11. The Passive
is the Reception of Christ, whereby the Spiritual Principle of Grace is
Ingenerate in the Will of Man, Ephesians. 2.5. This Grace is the Foundation of that
Relation, whereby a Man is united unto Christ, John 3.5,
Neonom. I Will tell you what I take to be Truth in these Points, Every Man is
without Christ, or not united to Christ until he be Effectually called; but
when by this call the Spirit of God enclineth and enableth him willingly to
accept of Christ as a Head and Savior; a Man becomes united to him, and
partaker of those Influences and Privileges, which are peculiar to the Members
of Jesus Christ. D. W. p. 90.


Antinom. I except against what you have asserted, in these Particulars.

1. You say a Man is not united to Christ before Effectual Calling, thereby I
understand you, that he is not united to Christ in any sense, whereas I affirm
he is united to Christ before Effectual Calling in the Senses which M^^
R^therford does assert, before mentioned.

2. I understand you mean that in Effectual Calling a Man is not united to
Christ till he does Actually accept of Christ the Head by an Act of Faith,
whereas the Head unites the Members to it self before they can reach up to the
Head.

3. You make Union to be the same with Communion, and to consist in a
participation of Privileges.

Now as to the second thing, That in Effectual Calling there is a complete
Union with Christ before the Act of Faith, I do affirm, upon these Reasons.

1. From the utter Impotency of the Soul without and before Union with Christ
to any good Act, for Union stands in indivisibili; it is a conjunction of two
in one, an half one is none: if we put forth an Act of Faith to lay hold on
Christ before we be completely united to him, we put forth a good Act, and
bring forth good Fruit before we be in him, and before we be good Trees; but we
cannot bring forth good Fruit before we be good Trees; and we cannot be good
Trees before we be in Christ, Mat. 7.18. John 15.4, 5. Therefore we do not put
forth an Act of Faith before we be so completely united to Christ, so united to
Christ as to live by him, John 11.26. Whosoever lives and believes in me
shall never dye, etc.


Arg. 2. In our Regeneration we are merely Passive, our Faith is not then
Active, but in our Regeneration we are completely united to Christ; Ergo, we
are completely united to Christ before the Act of Faith. The major is proved
from Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3. Dead Men are Passive to Regeneration, and Dead Men we are
till we are Regenerated. The Minor is proved from the joint concurrence of
Regeneration, Conversion and Union with Christ, which are all wrought together
simul and semel.


Arg. 3. If we be united first to Christ by an Active Faith, then an Active
Faith is the cause of our Union with Christ, but an Active Faith is not the
cause of our Union with Christ, therefore by an Active Faith we are not first
united to Christ.


Min. If Active Faith were not the cause of the Union of the Humane Nature of
Christ with the Divine, then it is not the cause of our Union with Christ; but
Active Faith is not the cause of the Union of the Humane Nature of Christ with
the Divine: Ergo, Maj. No other cause can be assigned of our true Union with
Christ, than of the Union of our Nature with the Second Person, viz. Divine
Assumption, Isa. 42.1, 6. As the Divine Nature assumed ours, John 1. so the
Person of Christ takes us to Mystical Union with him.


Arg. 4. If our Union with Christ be first by an Act of Faith, then it is by a
Work of ours, (though a Work of Grace) but it is not by a Work of ours: Ergo,
Min. If it be by a Work of ours, it is not of Grace, but it is of Grace. Ergo,
Maj. Romans 11.6. These are Mr. Cotton's Arguments.


Neonom. I Will answer your Arguments another time, pray hear mine now to confirm
the Truth.

1. The Scriptures expressly affirm, Uncalled, Unconverted ones to be ununited
to Christ; Ephesians. 2.12. Romans 16.7. Romans 11.17.


Antinom. It Is true in respect of the Union in Effectual Calling, but yet not
in respect of their Hidden, Federal, and Relative Union, which Mr. Rutherford
speaks of.


Neonom. 2. The Spirit of Christ, and Faith in him, are the things whereby God
has ordained us to be United with Christ, 1 Cor. 12.12, 13. Ephesians. 3.17.


Antinom. We grant it in respect of our Union to Christ in Effectual Calling.


Neonom. I see you will throw off all my Arguments by Mr. Rutherford 's unhappy
distinction of Unions; therefore I will name no more of them for the present.


Antinom. The Assembly is full on this Point, that our Union to Christ is
before the Act of Faith. Shorter Catechism.

Q. 29. How are we made Partakers of the Redemption purchased by Christ?

A. By the Effectual Application of it to us by his Holy Spirit.

Q. 30. How does the Spirit apply to us the Redemption purchased by Christ?

A. By working Faith in us, and thereby uniting us to Christ in our Effectual
Calling.

The Spirit first comes as a Bond of Union, and works Faith to Unite by its
Act; in the first Union by the Spirit we are passive, made new Creatures, new
Born, receive Spiritual Life. In the second we are Active, put forth lively
Acts, and lay hold on Jesus Christ, and all Gospel Grace. And if the
Confessions say we are United to Christ by his Spirit, and by Faith, as you
acknowledge, then there is a Union by the Spirit, which is effective of that
which is by Faith.

You say my mistake is, in thinking all Grace is wrought by Christ as an Actual
Head; you mean Grace comes not at first from Christ as our Head, but as a
designed Head; therefore you find fault with my founding our Union on Christ as
our Head. Where I say, P. 104. Christ is the Head of his Church, i. e. the
Fountain of all Spiritual Sense and Motion: A Man cannot have Spiritual Eyes of
Faith, unless he have this Spiritual Head, etc. I am not alone here, for Mr.
Norton and others make Christ as our Head, the Fountain and Spring of all
Spiritual Life and Motion. Evan. P. 249. The Person of Christ Mediator, is the
first Saving Gift actually applied to any Elect Person. -- The motion of the
Spirit upon the Soul is from Christ the Head. See p. 250.


DEBATE XII. Of Justification by Faith.
Neonom. WE having formerly discussed the Doctrine of Justifying
Righteousness, I desire we may now enquire into the Nature of Justification by
Faith; for Mr. Antinomian has this Error among the rest.

That the whole use of Faith in Justification, is only to manifest that we were
Justified before; and Faith is no way necessary to bring a Sinner into a
Justified State, nor at all useful to that end. D. W. p. 103.


Antinom. I must hear your proof, Sir, before I enter upon my defense.


Neonom. You put this Objection, Is not believing required unto the
Justification of the ungodly? Answ. An ungodly Person after he is Justified
does believe; but you will say it is an Act of Christ by Faith. Answ. Then
Christ does not Justify alone, etc. Nay, I say more, Christ does Justify a
Person before he does believe, etc. He cannot believe that which is not, -- but
he is first Justified before he believes, then he believes he is Justified. Dr.
C. p. 85.


Antinom. My words were these, An ungodly Person after he is Justified does
believe: But you must understand it, it is not the Faith of the Person that
does simply and properly Justify; but it is that Christ in whom he does
believe, he believes on him that Justifies the ungodly. It is he that
Justifies, that is Christ. It is not believing that justifies; mark well that
Phrase, he that justifies, Justification is an Act of Christ, not an Act of
Faith. How often is it said, it is God that Justifies? Justification is an Act
of God, and not of ours, Faith is an Act of ours; it is God by his Grace
efficiently Justifies, and imputes the Righteousness of Christ; we are
materially and objectively Justified by the Righteousness of Christ, and by
that alone; and this I say is before a Sinner believes efficiently, because the
Object must be before the Act of the Recipient Organ. A Man sees because there
is Light to see, which illuminates the Organ; especially such a Light as takes
off a privation of sight, and restores the Habit, so that Justification in
regard of Application must be before believing; the first Application in ordine
naturae saltem, is to an ungodly Man, eo nomine, that he may believe, who is
thereby made to believe that he may be Justified, for in Justification we are
both Passive and Active; as Maccovius says.


Calvin. Mr. Norton Norton, p. 214.
has this Objection. If we are Justified by Faith, then Faith is in order
before Justification, and consequently the Act is before the Object, whereas on
the contrary the Act depends on the Object, and not the Object on the Act; to
this Effect Bellarmine.

Answ. 1. We distinguish between the Being of Justification, and our being
Justified, i. e. between Justification as taken in an Abstract Sense, viz.
without the receiving Subject thereof, viz. a Believer, and a Justification
taken in a Concrete Sense, i. e. together with the Believer.

Justification considered in the Actstract Sense, taken simply and in it self,
which signifies Remission of Sins, and Righteousness to Acceptance prepared
for, though not yet conferred upon the Elect, has before Faith a Being not
only in the purpose of God, but also in the Covenant between the Father and
Mediator, and in the purchase of Christ. This Truth held forth in the Gospel
makes the Object of Faith, and thus the Object is before the Act. The Grounds
of this distinction or distinguishing between Justification actually procured,
and actually applied. -- Justification was in God's Decree before Faith, P.
315, 316.
before Sin, yea, from all Eternity, Gal. 3.8. Rom 3.25.

The Actual procuring of Justification as considered in it self, gives a Being
to Justifying Faith: Justification is compared to a Garment, our being
Justified to a Garment put on.

Justification of the Elect is absolutely and actually procured for them by
Christ's Satisfaction before Faith, Col. 2.14. The Hand writing of Ordinances
cannot be limited to the Ceremonial Law only, because it had respect unto the
Gentiles then Living, to whom the Ceremonial Law belonged not, God has
declared his Acceptance of Christ, So Calvin on the place. P. 216.
whereby he has actually procured Justification for the Elect before Faith. It
is no small part of the Ministry of Reconciliation, That God Imputed unto
Christ the Sins of the World of the Elect before they did believe, and will not
impute them unto the Elect, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19.

This great Gospel Truth is of special use to beget Justifying Faith in the
Heart of a Sinner. The same the Apostle confirms concerning their
Reconciliation, Romans 5.10. That it was wrought for them when they were Enemies,
i. e. Unbelievers.

Here is a Twofold Reconciliation mentioned, one at the Death of Christ before
Paul, or the Romans, some of them at least, were Believers, the other at
Conversion.

The first Reconciliation, though it was vertually wrought before by the Lamb
slain (in God's Appointment and Acceptance, togethr with his own consent) from
the beginning of the World, Rev. 13.8. yet it was not Actually wrought until
the Death of Christ; for this Satisfaction sake God Imputes not Sin unto the
Redeemed, (for he cannot Impute Sin to Christ and the Elect both) yea, he
accepts us in the Beloved, Ephesians. 1.6. Loving the Persons of the Elect, Rom
11.28. though hating their Sins, and also their State under the Curse of the
Law, Romans 6.14. Chap. 7.6. Ephesians. 2.3. The second is wrought at our Conversion,
when the Enmity of Nature is slain by the Infusion of Grace.


Neonom. You ask, But what does Faith serve for? D. W. p. 103. Dr. C. p. 85.
You answer, It serves for the manifestation of that Justification which Christ
put upon a Person by himself alone.


Antinom. Adding, that he by believing on him may have a declaration and
manifestation of his Justification. -- Faith is the Evidence of things not
seen, Heb. 11.1. A Man is Justified, and that by Christ alone, but it is not
known to him; it is an unseen thing. Well how shall he see this? The Text
says, Faith is the Evidence; by Faith we apprehend it, and rejoice in it as we
apprehend it to be our own.

-- I tell you in another Discourse, Whatever the Scripture speaks concerning
Faith Justi^ying, Dr. C. p. 596.
it must of necessity be understood objectively or declaratively, one of these
two ways; either Faith is said to be our Righteousness in respect of Christ
only, who is believed on, and so it is not the Righteousness of its own Act of
Believing: Or else you must understand it declaratively, i. e. Whereas all our
Righteousness, and all our Discharge from Sin, flowing only from the
Righteousness of Christ alone, is an hidden thing; that which in it self is hid
to Men, does become evident by believing; and as Faith does make the
Righteousness of Christ evident to a Believer, so it is said to justify by it is
own Act declaratively, and no otherwise.


Neonom. He says, We do not believe that we may be Justified, but because we
are Justified.


Antinom. Yes, we do believe that we may be justified declaratively -- I say
there, Though Faith it self cannot be called our Righteousness, Dr. C. p. 86.
yet in respect of the Glory that God ascribes to it, that it seals to Men's
Souls the fullness of Righteousness; how can you consider a Person, a believing
Person, and withal an ungodly Person? When Persons are Believers, they cease
to be ungodly; but if Men be not justified till they do believe, Christ does
not justify the ungodly, but rather we must believe on him that justifies the
righteous. But as I said, we do not believe that we may be justified; but we do
believe, and truly believe when we are, and because we are Justified. So that
still it stands firm, we are not justified, we are not in Covenant, we partake
not in the Covenant by any Condition we perform, till which Performance the
Covenant cannot be made good unto us; but we are in Covenant, and Christ makes
us to be in Covenant for his own sake, without any Condition in the Creature.
God will have mercy on whom he will, without anything in the Creature to
partake first.


Neonom. He says, God does add never a tittle of Pardon it self more to him
that is a Believer, than to that Person not yet converted to the Faith, etc. D.
W. p. 104.


Antinom. He still gives you but part of my Sense, and Misrepresents it, my
words were these. Beloved, Dr. C. p. 578.
for my own part, I cannot conceive any other considerable difference between
the plea of Christ for a Converted Person, and the unconverted Elect, but this
Circumstantial difference, namely, that the value of his Blood is of equal
force to Believers and Unbelievers being Elected, saving that the Believers
have this privilege, that the Lord Christ pleads for the Manifestation of this
discharge unto this Converted Person, but pleads not for the present
Manifestation thereof unto the Unconverted Elect Person, till such time as he
shall be called to the Faith, and by that Faith that thing be made evident
which before was hid. Now follows what he would blacken me with. I say the
Pardon of Sin by the Blood of Christ, is as full for the Unconverted Elect
Person, as fully passed over in Grant, to that Person as to the Believer
himself; God does add never a Title of Pardon it self more to him that is a
Believer, than to that Person not yet Converted to the Faith, in regard of the
substance of the Pardon it self, and this I clear as a great Truth, if any will
give themselves the trouble of reading it, which I stand to.


Neonom. He says, Faith as it takes hold on Christ's Righteousness, it does
not bring this Righteousness of Christ to the Soul, but does only declare the
presence of that Righteousness, that was there even before Faith was, and there
denies Faith to be so much as an Instrumental cause of our Justification. Dr.
C. p. 597.


Antinom. I added, That I did abhor to walk in the Clouds in a Truth of so high
Concernment, as you too much do Sir, and that I knew I had many very catching
Ears about me, such as you are: I said, That Faith as it lays hold upon the
Righteousness of Christ, etc. as he has told you; and the reason of that
saying, I gave in as plain words, That there is no Person under Heaven,
Reconciled unto God, Justified by God through the Righteousness of Christ, but
this Person is Justified and Rconciled unto God before he does believe; and
therefore Faith is not the Instrument Radically to unite Christ and the Soul
together, but rather is the Fruit which follows and flows from Christ the Root,
being united beforehand to the Persons that do believe. Show me how any Person
ununited to Christ can believe, and how any one that is unjustified can be
actually united to Christ, as he must needs be before he can believe.


Neonom. He tells you that Justification is from Eternity in several places.


Antinom. You know that to be a false charge, for I have told you a Man cannot
be said to be Justified before he has a Being. I have often enough told you in
what Sense I apprehend Justification to be before Faith; but deny no^ the
Justification by Faith spoken of by the Apostles, in the true Sense of it
according to my best understanding, I have told you that Justification is first
in its provision, is fully procured and provided; and it is first in Grant, Gift
and Application, applied unto us before we make Application of it by an Act of
Faith, whereby we do not bring it into the Heart, but the Grace of God does,
which we see, behold, and improve there by Faith manifesting and declaring our
Justified Estate, whereby our Consciences are freed from Guilt and
Condemnation; hence I call it Justification in Conscience, in foro
Conscientiae. Mr. Rutherford Rutherford, Exc. 1. c. 2.
who wrote against the Antinomians says, There is a Justification in the Mind
of God Eternal, and a Justification in time terminated in the Conscience of a
Believer.

Norton, p. 315.
That Justification is Actually and Absolutely procured for the Elect before
Faith, and shall infallibly be applied to them all in time, seems to reach
the Scope intended by the Godly Learned, whose Spirits have more particularly
labored to hold forth the whole Truth in this precious part of
Soul-Reconciling Doctrine, and Soul-Supporting Mystery of the Gospel. To say,
That we are Justified by virtue of a singular Promise in the Court of
Conscience, and in our own Persons, (in which sense the Scripture constantly
says, We are Justified by Faith) is not (that I know of) affirmed by any.

And for this he quotes Chamier, Cham. Tom. 3. lib. 12, 13. Sect. 18.
Nobis persuasissinum est remissa esse peccata antequam Credidimus. We are
verily persuaded that our Sins are forgiven before we believe, for we deny that
Infants do believe. And Perkins, Perkins on Gal. 3.16.
who says, Christ is first Justified, i. e. Acquit of our Sins, and we
Justified in him. And Dr. Ames. says, The Transaction between God and Christ
was a certain previous application of Redemption, and our discharge unto our
Su^ety, Ames. Medul. lib. 1. c. 24. 3.
and unto us in him, which to that secondary Application to be performed in us
has the respect of a kind of Efficacious pattern; so that that [the
Application to him] is the Representation of this [Application to us] and this
is produced by virtue of that.

And he says, 3. Hence our discharge [liberatio nostra] from Sin and Death,
was not only established in God's Decree, but also in Christ, and granted and
communicated to us in him before it could be perceived by us, Romans 5.10, 11.

Hence the Father and the Son are said to send the Spirit to the performing of
this Application, John 14.16. and 16.7. And in the Chapter of Justification,
Am. Med. c. 27.. 9.
He tells us what the sentence of Justification is, 1. It was in the Mind of
God, as it were conceived by him by his Decree of Justifying, Gal. 3.8.

2. It was in the Christ our Head, pronounced when he rose from the Dead, 2
Cor. 5.19.

3. Virtually pronounced in that first relation which arises from Faith
ingenerated in the Heart, Romans 8.1.

4. Expressly pronounced by the Spirit witnessing with our Spirits our
Reconciliation with God, Romans 5.5.

Hence it appears that the Doctrine of our Justification before Faith is not an
Error, but a Great and Glorious Truth, and it is no prejudice to the Doctrine
of Justification by Faith, but the Foundation, Ground and Reason of it; neither
is it any Door opened to Licentiousness, an unbeliever having no more
Confirmation or Encouragement to persist in Sin thereby, than by the Doctrine
of Election, which gives none; but as Mr. Norton says, It Is no small part of
the Ministry of Reconciliation, that God Imputed to Christ the Sins of the
Elect before they did believe, and will never Impute them unto the Elect.

Neither is my speaking of Faith's taking hold of Christ's Righteousness, and
saying, That it brings not Christ's Righteousness to us, but presupposes it
given and granted, such an absurdity as you would make it. For Dr. Ames. says
very distinctly, Justifying Faith precedes Justification it self as a cause of
its Effect, but Faith apprehending Justification, necessarily presupposes and
follows Justification, as the A^^ does the Object about which it is Conversant,
and this I take to be the true Notion of Justification.

That Great Man for Holiness and Learning, Chamier, says, I deny that Faith is
the cause of our Justification, for then our Justification would not be of
Grace, Cham. Parstrat. Tom. 3. l. 13. c. 10. Sect. 18.
but of our selves, but Faith is said to justify, not because it effects
Justification, but because it is effected in the Justified Person; and in
another place he says, Faith does neither merit, obtain or begin our
Justification; Lib. 22. c. 12. Sect. 5. and Sect. 9.
for if it did, then Faith should go before Justification, both in nature and
time, which may in no wise be granted; for Faith it self is a part of
Sanctification; now there is no Sanctification but after Justification, which
really, and in its own nature is before it.

I think, Sir, I have cleared my self sufficiently from the Charge of Error in
this Point, viz. That our Justification is in being before Faith. And now, Sir,
before we proceed to the other part of your Charge concerning the manner of
Faith's Justifying, let us hear your Arguments against Justification in any
sense going before Faith.


Neonom. One Real Difference between us is, Whether we are Justified before we
believe? Which I deny; for, 1. We are Justified by Faith, is the common
Language of the Holy Ghost, Romans 5.1. Gal. 2.16. D. W. p. 105.


Antinom. We own it, and say too that we are Justified by Faith, and this does
not prejudice, but confirm what we assert.


Neon. Faith is enjoined as an effectual means of Justification by Christ.


Antinom. We deny not that Faith required in the Gospel, and wrought by the
Spirit, is as an effectual means of Application of Justification; but therefore
it follows not that it is in being before: That which is not in being cannot be
applied.


Neonom. The Gospel denounces and declares all condemned till they do
believe.


Antinom. The Gospel declares only their state of Condemnation under the Law,
the Gospel properly condemns not; and we own that every one by nature is a
Child of Wrath, and in the sense of the Law is a condemned Person; and every
one is shut up under the Law, as the Apostle says, till Faith comes, his
New Covenant Blessedness belonging to him, is not yet made manifest, nor is his
Nature and State changed.


Neonom. Unbelief is the Cause why men are barred from Justification, and
remain obnoxious to Misery.


Antinom. It is God that justifies, and no Sin can bar God's Act of free Mercy
in pardon of a Sinner, in the Pardon of Unbelief as well as of other Sins, when
God will justify. It Is very absurd to say, Sin bars God's Act of Pardon. It Is
true, Unbelief influenceth a Sinner as to his own Acts, and will be charged
upon him as his Fault, and will aggravate that Condemnation which he has under
the Law, because from his own corrupt Will and Affection he will not receive
Pardon and Life that is offered in the General and Indefinite Tender thereof
made in the Gospel: And therefore Christ says, John 5.40. Ye will not come to
me that you may have Life. Heb. 3.18, 19. They could not enter by reason of
unbelief. Unbelief on our part does keep us from Christ, but hinders not on
God's part, that effectually draws all the Elect, justifying of them, and
working Faith in them, Romans 8.29, 30. Ephesians. 1. The whole Unregenerate state is a
Bar, till God break it by Regeneration, which is a free Work of Grace, as
Justification is an Act of Grace, and must be found wherever a Sinner is
Justified by Faith, and that in order thereunto.


Neonom. The other Question in difference between us is, Whether the Use of
Faith in Justification be only to manifest our Justification, which we
personally had before: This you affirm, and I deny. And add, That Faith
justifies by receiving Christ, and therein answers the Ordination of God, who
has promised to justify the Believer by application of Christ's Righteousness
in this gracious effect of it upon a guilty Soul. D. W. p. 105.


Antinom. You alter the Terms of my Expression, to make for your own turn. My
Words were these, Quest. What does Faith serve for? Dr. C. p. 85.

Answ. It serves for the manifestation of that Justification which Christ puts
upon a Person by himself alone, that you by believing on him may have the
Declaration and Manifestation of your Justification.



And I say, That it is not the Condition without which we receive no benefit
from Christ, but rather a manifestation thereof. My Words are not, That the use
of Faith is only a manifestation, but I say, Rather a manifestation of Benefits
received, than a condition of receiving benefits. And I say, it is a
Declaration and Manifestation. And what is the Promise in the hand of Faith,
but a Declaration of the Grace of God in Justification of a Sinner, and thereby
a manifestation of it unto the Conscience? Whereby Justification comes to be in
foro Conscientiae: For I say, Where the Condemnation of a Sinner is by the Law,
there the Absolution of the Sinner is by the Gospel, but Condemnation of a
Sinner is in Conscience by the Law; therefore there his Absolution is by the
Gospel, and that is by a Gospel-Sentence pronounced and believed, which Sentence
is God's Declaration, and Faith sealing to the Truth of it, applies it, and is
the Echo of the said Declaration in the Soul. And you say Faith justifies as
receiving Christ, and you say well, Christ is received in the believing of the
Gospel-Declaration. The Declaration in the Gospel is, Life by Christ. See 1
John 2.25. This is the Promise that he has promised us, evrn eternal Life. 1
John 5.11. And this is the record, that God has given to us eternal life, and
this life is in his Son; and this is the witness of God which he has testified
of his Son. Ver. 10. He that believes on the Son of God has the witness in
himself: It should be Testimony, (...): This very believing is a Testimony of
the Truth of the Promise, and his part in it, as by the latter part of the 10th
Verse appears, He that believes not makes God a Liar; and as the truth of the
Promise concerns himself, ver. 12. He that has the Son has Life; this
believing he says is having the Son as declared in the Promise and Record,
that takes in the Declaration believingly. And this is apprehending, and
applying, and relying on the Promise, and Christ in it, both as Truth and
Goodness. Believing is our modus recipiendi, or manner of receiving, and we do
believe that we may receive and apprehend him unto Justification.

You add, and say first, Faith justifies by receiving of Christ; but you say,
it is Application of Christ's Righteousness as to gracious Effects you mean
only: You do not deal above-board, you are not for the application of Christ's
Righteousness it self imputed to us, and put on by us in believing: We have
noted your Error in this kind already; you will not have Christ's Righteousness
imputed to us for our Righteousness, according to all the Language of the
Scripture, but only the Effects given us, as effectual Calling, Sanctification
and Glorification: So that the Righteousness of Christ justifies no otherwise
than it sanctifies and glorifies; for it does these as Effects. But I pray
express your self more clearly how Faith Justifies, or what part Faith has in
Justification according to your Sense, without so much ambiguity.


Neonom. The difference is not, Whether Faith or any other Grace be a Jot of
the meriting Righteousness for which we are justified. D.W. p. 104.


Antinom. But it is, whether Faith, or any other Grace be a qualifying
Condition for Justification; if it be so let me alone to prove it a meriting
Righteousness, whether you call it so or no.


Neonom. Nor whether Faith, or any Grace, add any thing to the vain of
Christ's Merits. These I deny. D. W. p. 104.


Antinom. No wonder; for you have rated Christ's Merits, S. Clara dicit, omnes
convenire scientium, de causa efficicate and meritoria Justificationis
efficiens est Deus, meritoria Christus solum ergo controversitur de formuli. De
Justif. Peccatoris.
how much their Value shall be; Valiant quantum valere possunt: But there are
other things quasi merita at least, that must give right to the Benefits
procured by Christ's Merits, which you call your subordinate Righteousness.


Neonom. Yea, I add, that if Christ's Righteousness could be applied for Pardon
to the vilest Sinner before he believes, it would justify him; but God has
declared that it shall not be applied to Unbelievers.


Antinom. That Is not, for God has declared the contrary, that he justifies the
ungodly; and if Justification as God's Act be not applied to us first, before
we are Believers, there would never be any Believers; for Justification is the
cause of Sanctification, and not Vice versa: But Justification by Faith, i. e.
Justification as applied by a sensible gracious Act of ours, is after
Sanctification, and we must distinguish in Application of Righteousness between
Gods Acts and ours, for God must apply Grace before we can partake of it.


Neonom. Nor whether we are Justified the same Moment as we truly believe in
Christ, and the Blessing is not suspended for any time longer. This I affirm,
because God justifies us by the Promise as his Instrument; and this Promise
declares that he will justify him that believes.


Antinom. You Will own then that we shall not stay for the Benefit; if we perform
the Condition, God will pay ready Money; but the Qualification must be first in
us by Nature. But why I pray? Is it not manners at least to give God the Honor
of being first in this Work, and say, We believe in that moment we are
justified?

2. I find now you will not have Faith to be the Instrument of Justification,
but have found out another; whereas you find fault with me, that I will not
have Faith the Instrumental Cause of Justification, in its being no more than a
passive receiving Instrument; and you will have the Promise to be the Instrument
declaring Justification; and what can Faith do, but receive this Declaration,
and thereby declare to the Conscience of the Sinner what the Gospel-Instrument
declares.


Neonom. Nor whether an Elect Person once justified by Christ, shall be kept by
Christ's Care in a justified state.


Antinom. You do not suppose then that Justification is certainly durable in
it is one Nature, that it is an everlasting Righteousness, but that it is
loosable in it is own Nature, and needs a continued flux of Supply as our Graces
in Sanctification. As thus, a Traitor pardoned by the King is not unalterably
pardoned, but shall be kept by the King's Care in a pardoned state.


Neonom. Or whether God has decreed, that the Elect shall certainly believe,
and so be justified?


Antinom. But has he decreed that the Elect shall never be justified in any
Sense before they believe? or that Faith should be wrought as a qualifysng
Condition for Justification?


Neonom. Nor whether true Faith be an infallible sign of Justification.


Antinom. But you make it nothing else to us, if it justifies as a Condition,
if your Condition does not foederally merit the Promise, it is nothing to God,
but an infallible Sign whereby he sees when to justify us, and to us that we
are justified by him. And what is this better than a manifestation, you making
it only a manifesting Condition? You're excellent good to multiply Whethers to
no purpose: You might bring in a 1000 Whethers more, and say, it is not the
Question, Whether it be further to the East or West Indies, nor whether
Britain be an Island or Continent.


Neonom. I Will come to the Point, and tell you the Truth Though Faith be no way a
meritorious Cause of a Sinners Justification, yet God has promised to justify
all such as truly believe.


Antinom. That Is true; so he has promised to Sanctify and glorify them.


Neonom. And requires Faith as an Indispensible Qualification in all whom he
will justify for Christ's merits.


Antinom. This now is to the purpose; now we see how Faith justifies as an
indispensible Qualification; a greater Condition than was laid upon Adam a
thousand-fold.

For a clearer understanding the Justification of a Sinner by Faith, Norton.
Evang. p. 110.
let these Three Acts be considered, (the one looked at to succeed the other in
Order, not in Time.) First, God actually imputes the Active and Passive
Mediatory Obedience of Christ unto a Believer, Romans 4.6. therein God is freely
given. Secondly, The Soul having before in order of Nature, not in Time,
received Christ as its Head and Savior, by the same Faith receives his
Obedience as the matter of it is Righteousness; herein the Soul is taking, Romans
1.17. Chapter 6.11. Gal. 3 13. Thirdly, God hereupon (in the Court of Conscience)
Judicially declares and pronounces the Sinner to be righteous, and to have
right unto Eternal Life by virtue of the Promise, John 5.4. Romans 3.22, 30. By
this Act of Grace the Person of a Sinner is Justified in himself really, yet
not inherently, but imputatively, etc.

Faith acknowledges, 1. That we are Justified for the Righteousness sake of
another, viz. Christ God Man. 2. Acknowledges our Justification is free. 3.
Renounceth our own Righteousness.

You see the Justifying Nature of Faith is Metonimically ascribed to it; as the
Eye is said to be the Light of the Body, because it lets in the Light; so Faith
as the Spiritual Eye sees the glory of Christ, as the Ear lets in the
Justifying Promise declaratory. Hence it is said, this is Life Eternal, to know
thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, which is to
acknowledge him by Faith as he is revealed.

Mr. Norton tells you, We are justified by Faith alone, i. e. Faith as it is
justifying is not a work, Rom: 4.5. Nort. Evang. p. p. 208.
2 Because we are not justified by our own Righteousness, i. e. The
Righteousness whereof we are the Subjects. 3. Because we are justified by the
Righteousness of another, sometimes called God's Righteousness, whereof God is
the Ordainer, and whereof he who is God-Man is both the Worker and Subject. 4.
Because we are justified by a Righteousness that is made ours by Imputation, not
by Infusion, but as Abraham was justified. 5. Because we are justified by a
Righteousness that is actually procured before we believe; our Righteousness is
compared to a Garment which we put on by believing, Rev. 19.8. Romans 13.14. Gal.
3.27. yet Faith never took stitch in it.
Calvin. That Faith justifies not as a Qualifying Condition is manifest.

1. Faith as a Quality is a Work of the Law. The Law commanded Faith a leading
Duty in it: But no Man is justified by the works of the Law, Romans 3.28. So
Wolleb. Willet. This Proposition [we are justified by Faith] understood legally
with the Papists, is not true, but blasphemous; but understood correlatively,
is true. Vosin. Cat. p. 2. Q. 63.

2. That which cannot stand with Grace in Justification, cannot have any
Influence on Justification as such; but for Faith to have any causal Influence
as a Work on Justification, is inconsistent with Grace. The Minor is proved,
Ephesians. 2.8. Ergo.

3. That which gives no more to Faith in the business of our Justification,
than to other Works of Sanctification, cannot be true; but to make Faith to
Justify as a Qualification, gives no more to Faith than to other Works of
Sanctification, Ergo. The reason is, because the Scripture does peculiarly
attribute our Justification unto Faith, and in a way of Opposition to all Works
of Sanctification, Romans 3.28. Gal. 2.16. Chap. 3.11.

4. If you say, That Faith justifies only as an antecedent Condition, not at
all meritorious, Virtute eompacti, then it is no more a Condition than our
coming into the World, or Acts performed by us before Faith; and it gives no
more to Faith than to the Works of Nature, as Worldly carnal Sorrow, Legal
Repentance, and such moral Acts as carnal and unregenerate Men daily perform;
such as you call your Preparatory disposing Conditions, and they are the cause
of Faith, as much as Faith of Justification, and consequently the causes of
Justification, Causa causae est etiam causa causati, and are in in eodem genere
causarum.

5. Whatever justifies as a Foederal Condition is meritorious, but Faith
justifying as a qualifying Condition, upon which Life is promised, justifies as
a Foederal Condition. The Major is true, in the account of all; for the
Condition need not to be adequate to the Reward in Intrinsic Value; though it be
never so small, yet upon Performance of the Condition the Reward is due Debt.
And indeed all Conditions in Contracts and Covenants are proper meritorious
Causes, by virtue of the Compact and Agreement made between the Covenanters.
For the Minor, If it justifies as a qualifying Condition, it must justify as a
Foederal Condition, or mere Antecedent Condition: And if you say as an
antecedent Condition, it is at best but Causa sine qua non, which we call No
Cause.

6. The Scripture does sufficiently explain it self in what it says of
Justification by Faith, when it says we are redeemed, saved, justified by
Christ, by his Blood, by his Death, etc. That the Spirit of God, when it says
we are justified by Faith, intends not any Moral or Physical Causality in Faith
as a Qualification, but only by virtue of it is Object. Mr. Bradford the Holy
Martyr reasons thus -- As the Israeiltes were healed by beholding the Brazen
Serpent, so are we saved by believing in Christ, Fox, p. 1659.
but the Looking up, of it self did not procure Health to the Israelites, but
the Promise made in the Object, which was the Brazen Serpent, therefore in the
same manner are we saved by our Faith and Spiritual looking upon the Body of
Christ Crucified, not that the Action in it self of Believing, as it is a
quality in Man does so deserve, but because it takes that Dignity and Virtue
from the Object Jesus Christ.

Augustine compares our Souls to Lanthorns, that has no Light in them of
themselves till Christ shines there.

The latter Helvetian Confess. says, c. 11. Because Faith does apprehend
Christ our Righteousness, and does attribute all to the praise of God in
Christ, in this respect Justification is attributed to Faith chiefly, because
of Christ whom it receives, and not because it is a work of ours. Belgia,
Artic. 22. We do justly say with St. Paul, We are Justified by Faith without
the Works of the Law, yet to speak properly, we do not mean that Faith by it
self, and of it self does justify us, which is but only as an Instrument
whereby we apprehend Christ who is our Justice. [But if we say it justifies
Conditionally, we must say it justifies of it self.]



What was accounted to Abraham for Righteousness? Zanch. on Phil. 3.
not the Action by which, but that which he did believe; or Faith, not in
respect of it self apprehending, but in respect of the Object apprehended.

Faith taken as a Quality does not Justify us, etc. Rivet. Cathol. Orthod.

Bellarm. l. 1. de Justific. c. 17. Rhem. in Annot. Romans 3.
The Papists tell us, That Faith does not justify as an Instrument in
apprehending the Righteousness of Christ, but as a proper and true cause it
actually justifies, by the Dignity, Worthiness, and Meritorious Work thereof,
and say these words in Scripture, justificari ex fidem, per fide, do betoken an
Actual force and power in Faith to Justification; and then says the Jesuit,
Faith is a Work; we are justified by Faith, Ergo, by a Work.

To this he adds, That Faith is our Justice it self, Ergo, not the Apprehension
only of Righteousness: This he Builds on, Romans 4.5.

They tell us, That Faith justifies us per modum causae efficientis and
Meritoriae, as a Proper, Efficient and Meritorious Cause. And Bellarmine tells
us, That if we could be persuaded that Faith does justify, Impetrando,
promerendo, and suo modo inchoando Justificationem, then we would never deny
that Love, Fear, Hope, and other Virtues did justify as well as Faith.

Now to avoid the Absurditities, they are forced upon by the Protestant
Arguments; they have two shifts.

1. That this Merit is not from us but from God, because Faith is the Gift of
God's Grace, and therefore though we be justified by Merit, we are justified by
Grace too, and that it is of Grace that our Faith Merits.

2. They say, That Faith Merits Justification, non ex condigno, of the
worthiness of it, but de congruo, of the fitness of it; and this is that which
our Neonomians say, That it qualifies and disposes us to Justification, so
that the justifying a Believer is the doing a thing that is fit and meet to be
done, the Person being disposed and qualified thereunto. It Is sad that
Protestants should now come to lick up the Papists Vomit, and re-assert those
gross Errors in Fundamental Truths, that all our Orthodox and Famous Opposers
of the Popish Heresy have refuted and decryed by one Consent.

But that this Error might the better be swallowed by Protestants, the subtle
Enemy of Truth and Mankind forgeth it again, gives it a good heat, and brings
it upon his Anvil, polisheth it, and makes it much more plausible to look upon.

The Arminians say, Faith justifies sensu proprio; the (...) Credere, the very
Act of believing is imputed to us for Righteousness, being accepted of God, and
accounted to us as the whole Righteousness of the Law. So we are justified by
Faith in the sight of God, not by its Merit, for they ascribe all the Merit of
Justification to Christ, but only they ascribe to it a conditional, subordinate
Righteousness by virtue of the Ordination of God. For Arminius says, Armin. in
declar. sentent. ad ordines Holland. and Westfris.
Ipsa fides tanquam Actus juxta Evangelii Mandatum prestitus Imputatus coram
Deo, in, sive ad Justitiam, idque in gratia, cumque non sit ipsamet justitia
legis. i. e. Faith it self as an Act performed according to the command of the
Gospel is Imputed before God, in or unto Righteousness, and that in Grace, when
it is not the very Righteousness of the Law. J. Goodw. Treatise of Justif. p.
22.
I shall give the refined and sublimed Notion of this Arminian Doctrine from a
Man of no small dexterity in pleading for it.

He says, That, that which God precisely requires of Men to their
Justification, instead of the Works of the Law, is Faith; or to believe (in the
proper and formal signification) he does not require of us the Righteousness of
Christ, for our Justification; this he required of Christ himself for it, that
which he requires of us for this purpose, is our Faith in Christ himself, not
in the Righteousness of Christ, i. e. in the Active Obedience of Christ; if
Paul had certified and said to Men, That the Righteousness of Christ should be
Imputed to Men for their Righteousness, it had been quite beside his Scope,
which was plainly to make known the Counsel and Pleasure of God concerning that
which was to be performed by themselves (though not by their own strength) for
their Justification, which he affirms from place to place to be nothing else
but Faith, or Believing. To have said thus unto them, That they must be
justified by Christ, or by Christ's Righteousness, and withal not to have
plainly signified, what it is that God requires of them to give them part in
Christ's Righteousness, without which they could not be justified, had been to
cast a Snare upon them, rather than open a Door of Life and Peace; and hence
proceeds to prove, that Abraham's Faith, or Believing it self, was Imputed unto
him for Righteousness, and he palliates it thus, That he understands it but as
a means of coming at the Righteousness, but he defends this Proposition, That
we are justified by Faith, sensu proprib non Metonymico. Now see what the
Neonomian says expressly of your indispensible Qualification; though you, Sir,
always will look one way while you row another. The Question in one of you is
plainly asked and answered by a great Leader and Guide among you.

Con. 13. When it is said that Faith is Imputed to us for Righteousness, Is it
Faith indeed that is meant, or Christ's Righteousness believed on? Mr. B.
Scripture Gospel Defended, p. 32. Contr. 13.

Answ. A strange and bold Question, if it be not Faith it self that is meant.
The Context is so far from relieving our Understandings, that it contributeth
to our unavoidable Deceit and Ignorance. Read over the Texts, and put but
[Christ's Righteousness every where instead of the word [Faith] and see what a
Scandalous Paraphrase you will make, the Scripture is not so audaciously to be
corrected.


Calvin. Now I shall show you how by the Orthodox Protestants, this Doctrine of
Neonomanism has been opposed as Antichristian and Destructive to the Grace of
God.

Pemble's Treat. of Justif. c. 2. p. 164. fol.
The Learned Mr. Pemble gives the Anatomy of this Doctrine, after that he had
showed that Faustus Socinus, Michael Servetus, Christophorus Ostodorus, and
Arminius, were the Forgers, next to the Jesuits, and Propagators of this
Doctrine.


Armin. says he branches out his Opinion in three distinct Propositions.

1. Justitia Christi Imputata nobis; Christ's Righteousness is Imputed to us.

2. Justitia Christi non Imputata in Justitiam; the Righteousness of Christ is
not Imputed for Righteousness.

3. (...) Credere Imputatur in Justitiam; Believing it self is Imputed for
Righteousness.

We now meddle with the last more roundly expressed, Ipsum fidei Actum (...)
Credere Dito Imputari in Justitiam, Armin. Epist. ad Hippolitum.
idque sensu proprio non Metonymece. The same is the Opinion of his Fellows the
Remonstrants, of Voetius, Peter Bertius, Episcopius, etc. with whom Bellarmine
agrees in the Interp. of Romans 4. de Justific. c. 17. lib. 1. In sum, their
Opinion runs thus.

God in the Legal Covenant required exact Gbedience of his Commandment; but now
in the Covenant of Grace he requires Faith, which in his gracious estimations
stands instead of that Obedience to the Moral Law, which we ought to perform:
Which comes to pass by the Merit of Christ, for whose sake God accounts our
imperfect Faith to be perfect Obedience. This Assertion [exactly Neonomianism]
and in place thereof we defend this Proposition.

God does not Justify a Man by Faith properly, imputing unto him Faith in
Christ for his perfect Obedience to the Law, and therefore accounting him Just
and Innocent in his sight, which we prove by these Reasons; I Will but name them.

1. We are not Justified by any Work of our own, [though given by Grace] but
believing is an act of our own, Ergo, not by believing.

The Major is manifest by Scripture, which teach we are saved by Grace, Ephesians.
2.5. Tit. 3.6. Romans 11.6.

The Minor is evident, that Faith is a Work of ours; for though John 6.29.
Christ says this is the Work of God, etc. yet our Adversaries will not
conclude thence that Faith is God's Work within us, and not our Work by his
help; for they will say, It Is not God believes, and Christ repents, etc.

They have two shifts.

1. We are not Justified by any Work of our own, done by our own strength, but
by the Aid of Grace. A. This distinction of Works done without Grace, and Works
done by Grace was devised by one that had neither Wit nor Grace, being a trick
to elude the force of such Scriptures as exclude them indefinitely to our
Justification, etc. Wherefore, its without all ground in Scripture thus to
Interpret these Propositions: A Man is not Justified by Works, i. e. by Works
done by the Power of Nature before and without Grace.

A Man is Justified by Grace, i. e. by Works done by Aid of Grace.

2. They say, We are not Justified by any Works of our own, i. e. by any Works
of the Law, but by a Work of the Gospel such as Faith is, we may be Justified
by, there is no ground in Scripture for this distinction; nor in reason, for
both tell us that Works commanded in the Law and in the Gospel are one and the
same for the substance of them, Luke 10.27. Deuteronomy. 6.5. What Sin against the
Gospel that is not a Transgression of the Law? Is Charity one, does not the Law
command it? Is Faith one, does not the Law enjoin the same.

Obj. But it commands not Faith in Christ.

A. It does, for that which commands us in general to believe, commands us to
believe whatever God shall make known to us.

Arg. 2. God only accounts that perfect Righteousness of the Law, which is so
in deed and in truth; but Faith is not the perfect fulfilling of the Law, Ergo,

Here our Neonomians will except and say, They differ from the Arminians in
saying, That Christ only has merited that our Imperfect Righteousness shall be
accepted instead of perfect, which has worser absurdity in it, as shall appear.

Arg. 3. We are not Justified by two Righteousnesses, existing in two diverse
Subjects; but if we are Justified by Christ's Righteousness, and the Work of
Faith, we are Justified by two Righteousnesses, existing in two Subjects, Ergo.

I shall only leave with you the Opinion of the Orthodox Protestants concerning
Justification by Faith, who have strenuosly opposed the Papists, Socinians,
Arminians and Neonomians in this Point.

He is Justified by Faith who excludes the Righteousness of Works, Calv.
Instit. lib. 3. c. 111 de Justific. fidei.
and apprehends the Righteousness of Christ, wherewith being clothed in the
sight of God, he appears not as a Sinner but Justified, So that we Interpret
Justification simply an Acceptance whereby God does account us for Righteous
Ones who are received into his Favor; and we say, That it [ i. e. Acceptio,
Acceptance] is placed in the Remission of Sins, and Imputation of the
Righteousness of Christ.

Justification has two parts, Remission of Sins, and Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness. Mr. Perkins in the Order and Causes of Salv. c. 37. p. 81.
Remission of Sins is that part of Justification, whereby he that believes is
freed from the Guilt and Punishment by the Passion of Christ, Colos. 1.21, 22.
1 Pet. 2.24. Imputation of Righteousness is the other part of Justification,
whereby such as believe, having the Guilt of their Sins covered, are accounted
Just in the fight of God through the Righteousness of Christ, 2 Cor. 5.21.
Psalm. 32.1. Romans 4. tot. cap. Phil. 3.8, 9. The form of Justification is as it
were a kind of Translation of the Believers Sins unto Christ; and again,
Christ's Righteousness unto the Believer, by a Reciprocal and Mutual Imputation.

Justification is the Gracious Sentence of God, whereby for the sake of Christ
apprehended by Faith, Ames. Medul. c. 27.
he absolves a Believer from Sin and Death, and counts him Righteous, Romans
3.22, 24.

17, 18.
Christ is the adequate Object of Faith as it justifies. Faith also upon no
other account justifies, but as it apprehends that Righteousness for which we
are justified; and that Righteousness is not in the Truth of any Axiom to which
we give Assent, but in Christ alone who was made Sin for us, that we may be the
Righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. Hence those Sermons in the New
Testament are so often repeated, which show Justification to be sought only in
the Person of Christ, John 1.12. and 3.15, 16. and 6.40, 47. and 14.1, 54. Romans
4.5. and 3.26. Acts 10.43. and 25.18. Romans 3.26.

A Sinner is justified by Faith, not properly as it is a Quality or Action,
Pemble of Justific. chapter 11. 2.
which by its own Dignity and Merit deserves at God's Hands Remission of Sins,
or is by God's favorable Acceptance taken for the whole and perfect
Righteousness of the Law, which is otherwise required of a Sinner, but only in
Relation unto the Object of it, the Righteousness of Christ which it embraces
and rests upon.

Justification is a Gracious Act of God upon a Believer, whereby for the
Righteousness sake of Christ Imputed by God, Nortons Eang. p. 300.
and applied by Faith, he does freely discharge him from Sin and Curse, and
accept him as Righteous in the Righteousness of Christ, and acknowledge him to
have a Right unto Eternal Life.

Q. 73. How does Faith justify a Sinner in the sight of God?

A. Faith justifies a Sinner in the sight of God, not because of those other
Graces that do always accompany it, Assemb. Large Catech.
or of good Works, which are the Fruits thereof; nor as if the Grace of Faith,
or any Act thereof were Imputed to him for Justification, only as it is an
Instrument by which he receives and applies Christ and his Righteousness.

Q. 32. What is Justification?

A. Justification is an Act of God's Free Grace, whereby he pardons all our
Sins, Shorter Catech.
and accepts us as Righteous in his sight, only for the Righteousness of
Christ received by Faith alone.

Whom God effectually calls he freely justifies, not by Infusing
Righteousness into them, but by pardoning their Sins, Confess. c. 11.
and by accounting and accepting their Persons as Righteous; not for any thing
wrought in them, or done by them, but for Christ's sake alone; not by Imputing
Faith it self the Act of Believing, nor any other Evangelical Obedience as
their Righteousness, but by Imputing the Obedience and Satisfaction of Christ
unto them, they receiving and resting on him and his Righteousness by Faith,
which Faith they have not of themselves, it is the Gift of God.

We are accounted Righteous before God only for the Merit of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ by Faith, Artic. 11. of the Church of Engl.
and not for our own Merits and Deservings, wherefore that we are Justified by
Faith only, is a most wholesome Doctrine, and very full of Comfort, etc.

The Righteousness of Christ, as it is Christ's, and performed by him, so it is
ours, as it is Meritorious of Grace Efficacious of Faith it self that is to be
wrought in us; it is ours therefore, I say by way of Right, because by the
Decree of the Father, and Purpose of the Son it is wrought for us, though not in
our Possession, as to Sense and Acknowledgment of so great a Benefit bestowed.
Haec enim agnitio, this Acknowledgment arises from Faith. -- The Righteousness
of Christ is said to be Imputed to us, and his Merits to be applied by Faith,
not before God, but in our Consciences; as there is a Sense of it begotten in
our Hearts by Faith, and an Acknowledgment of the Saving Application from the
Love of God which we taste by Faith, and Spiritually perceive Justifying of us,
and Adopting us to be his Sons; from whence arises Peace of Conscience. --
Whence the Righteousness of Christ is said to be Imputed to us by Faith,
because it is not known but by Faith that it is Imputed to us by God; and then
at length we are said to be Justified by that kind of Justification and
Absolution from our Sins, which begets or produces peace of Conscience. Dr.
Twiss. C. 1. p. 2. de Elect.

He speaks of Justification in a double Acceptance -- 1. As the Righteousness
of Christ is applied to us before Faith and Repentance, by reason of which
Righteousness we obtain Efficacious Grace to believe in Christ and Repent. 2.
He understands Justification to be that Notification that is by Faith made to
our Consciences, or in the Court of Conscience; and this is (says he) that
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, Remission of Sin, Justification and
Absolution, which follows Faith.

There Is none of us (says he) say that wicked vicious Person, allowing
themselves to live in their Sins, are bound to believe Christ dyed for them:
for my part I think otherwise, that whilst all are commanded to believe in
Christ, they are not bid presently to believe that Christ dyed for them, but
rather to rest themselves upon Christ by Faith, to renounce themselves and
their own Works, and cast themselves down at the Feet of Mercy; this is only
properly called Faith on Christ, fides in Christum, the other is only Faith
concerning Christ.



Hence Mr. Norton has these words. Orthod. p. 315.

These are both Truths, 1. Justification has a Being before the Elect do
believe. 2. That the Elect are not Justified before they do believe.
Justification is the Object, Faith is the Act; or being actually Justified is
an Effect; Faith is the Instrumental Cause, the Cause is before the Effect.

Maccovius Disput. XVI. distinguishes Justification into Active and Passive.
Active Justification signifies God's Absolution of a Guilty Person from Guilt
for the sake of Christ's Satisfaction, and accounting him Righteous for his
Righteousness Imputed. The Differences between this and Passive Justification
by Faith, are, 1. This is one undivided Act of God, Absolution by Faith is
repeated. 2. Active precedes Faith, Passive follows, etc.


A Digression concerning the Necessity of Repentance to Forgiveness.
Neonom. GEntlemen, if you please, for a Diversion after this Arduous Attempt
that I have made to bring in the true Doctrine of the Catholic Church, let us
make a little digression for our Recreation, and treat upon a Point that has
not so much difficulty in it; for having got in Faith to justify as a
qualifying Act, I doubt not now but to pleasure some of its Relations, and find
them a place in Justification too.


Antinom. Stay, not so hasty; I do not find you have yet attained your End
about Faith, festina lent; cry not Victoria yet, but however, Gentlemen,
seeing he is for a digression, let him have it, for he has been in digression
from Truth all along. I know not how he can digress from the way he has been
in hitherto, but by coming into Truth.


Neonom. You judging we are justified before we do believe; it is no wonder if
you tell us, We are forgiven before we confess Sin, p. 255. and repent; and
therefore I would enquire of the necessity of Repentance to Forgiveness. D. W.
p. 113.


Antinom. As a Qualifying Condition, Gentlemen, this is no digression, for it is
the Right Line and Method that Bellarmine and all the Papists have taken in
handling the Doctrine of Justification, first to bring in Faith to justify as
a Work, and then to bring in other Graces and Duties in the like manner, only
Faith shall have the honor to lead the way.

Whosoever says, That a Man is justified only by Faith, and that nothing else
is required to our Justification, Trident. Conc. 6. Chap. 2.
let him be Accursed.

Faith is not the only cause of our Justification, but there are others also,
as Hope, Charity, Alms-deeds, etc. Bellarm. de Justific. ib. c. 13. c. 16.
The Apostle excludes not all Works, for then Faith it self should be excluded
from Justification, because it is a Work, and if justifying Faith do except
every Law, then the Law of Faith also should be excepted.

Looky, you see Bellarmine has got your Remedial Law by the End, I thought I
should find indeed all your Doctrine in the Original.


Neonom. But he does not speak fully to the case in hand.


Antinom. But he shall speak fully to your Mind. For, He adds further, Such
Works therefore only are excluded which go before Faith, which are done only by
the Knowledge of the Word, Chap. 19.
and by the Power of Free Will without Grace, not such Works as are of Faith,
and proceed of Grace.

But all I fear is, that you may not allow us so much as Bellarmine; you will
have some Qualifying Condition before Faith to Justify us, whereas he does in
a measure exclude all Works before Faith; and he calls not that a Merit in
plain English, though it is so in some Countries; I cannot tell how your
Language expresses it.


Neonom. You're a Pragmatick, my Business in this Digression is with Men of
more Orthodox Principles, who yet seem too doubtful in this Point. I shall
state the Point between these.


Calvin. Then, Sir, I find the Province will fall upon me wholly to discuss
this Point with you, unless the Board will be pleased to appoint an Abler
Person.


Board: No Sir, by no means.


Neonom. I shall state the Point then, and show you wherein the difference is
not.


Calvin. I pray, Sir, be briefer in stating Points, for I find you bring your
Adversary out of Breath in stating of Points, and when you have stated them, no
body can tell but by Conjecture where you are; in this way of stating Points,
you may run over the Enclycopeidia Artium, in telling us where the Point is
not, for it can be but in one place.


Neonom. But you must look where a thing is not, as well a where it is, before
you find it. I Will tell you, It is not, 1. Whether Faith or Repentance be any
part of the Meriting Righteousness for which we are Justified.


Antinom. True, Bellarmine will not allow Faith and Repentance to be any part
of Christ's Righteousness, for which we are Justified, but only a Meriting
Righteousness by which we are Justified..


Neonom. I told you, Gentlemen, I would have nothing to do with this Heterodox
Fellow.


Calvin. It is a strange thing, Mr. Antinomian, that you cannot leave this
business to me.


Antinom. I am willing to give you ease, that you may keep your Lungs till he
comes to the Question, for he will tire you before you come at it.


Neonom. Nor is the Question, Whether the Habits of Faith and Repentance be
wrought at the same time in the Regenerating Principle. D. W. p. 113.


Antinom. You mean you will not discuss this Point, and therefore tell us not
whether you affirm it, or deny it; and what you mean by the Regenerating
Principle is very doubtful, whether a Principle within us or without us?
Whether a Principle by Nature or by Grace? It Is a new term, to say, We are
Regenerated by a Principle; it must be sure some Principle in our Nature that
Regeneration must spring from.


Neonom. Nor whether Convictions of a lost Estate, and some degree of Humblings
and Sorrow are necessary to drive a Soul to Christ?


Antinom. The Law is a Schoolmaster to bring Men to Christ, to cast them into
a desperate condition, that a Savior may be acceptable to them, that is
Christ's end; but it is no Federal Condition of Justification by Christ, nor the
Effects of it being the Condemnation of a Sinner, which Condemnation, and Sin
it self are alike Conditions, Causae sine qua non, that is none at all in the
sense of Logicians. Convictions, Humblings, Sorrow for Sin before Regeneration
and Justification, are splendida peccata; you have subscribed the Doctrinal
Articles, and Bellarmine excludes such Works which are before Faith, done by
the Knowledge of the Law and the Power of Free Will.


Neonom. Nor whether there be an Assenting Act of Faith, before there be an
Exercise of Repentance, under the Power of the Word, which must be believed in
some degree before it operate such Effects.


Antinom. You should have put in this Question, and said, Nor whether there
should be hearing of the Word before there is Repentance under it? and you
should tell what Faith you mean, whether Historical, or common Credulity, or
Saving Faith, etc. And whether you do not mean that Natural Men do grow up from
a Regenerating Principle under the Word, into Saving Grace by degrees?


Neonom. Nor whether Ingenuous Sorrow for Sin in the sense of Actual Pardon be
after that Pardon?


Antinom. That need not be brought in to prevent our mistaking of the Question,
for none that has any Brains can blunder so as to think a Man can be sorry for
Sin in the sense of Actual Pardon, before it is; it must be after that; this
whether is next akin to a Bull.


Neonom. Nor whether Repentance, as it consists in Fruits meet for it, as
External Reformation, a Fruitful Life, and the like, must follow Pardon; it
being against the Tenor of the Promise that Forgiveness should be suspended so
long after a Man believes and repents in his Heart.


Antinom. You had better have put the Whether thus, Whether Pardon is not to
come in between Repentance and its Fruits? Or whether Repentance with Fruits
appearing, or Repentance without Fruits appearing, be the condition of Pardon?
and to what degrees of growth Repentance ought to arise before a Man is
qualified for Pardon? and how long in an ordinary way a truly Repenting Sinner
must expect to continue unjustified? And what time is limited in the Tenor of
the Promise for suspension of Forgiveness after Faith and Repentance? For
there is some time it seems with you that Forgiveness is suspended after Faith
and Repentance.


Neonom. Nor whether Justification be equally ascribed to Faith and Repentance?
For we are said to be Justified by Faith, which imports that Repentance is but
a disposing Condition, and Faith a receiving Condition: Repentance without
Faith is unavailable, as Faith without Repentance is impossible; Faith seems to
complete all, and in a manner to comprehend all. These things the Orthodox
Divines are agreed on.


Antinom. That is Orthodox Neonomians, of which none are Orthodox in these
Points. But Mr. Calvinist, now he begins to bear up toward the Question, I
will leave him to you.


Calvinist. What do you mean that Orthodox Divines are agreed of in this
Question, that Justification be equally ascribed to Faith and Repentance, or
not equally? Or where is it that Orthodox Divines do ascribe Justification to
Repentance at all? You say that when we are said to be Justified by Faith, it
imports Repentance is a disposing Condition, and Faith a receiving Condition,
i. e. both disposing Conditions: for receiving if it be merely Passive, is a
disposing Condition; your distinction is without difference, disposing and
qualifying is all one; but it seems one cannot do without the other, and they
are both qualifying Federal Conditions of Justification. But your meaning is
plainly this, that Repentance does previously qualify us as a Condition to the
receiving Justification by Faith.


Neonom. The seeming difference is,

Whether a sincere purpose of Heart to turn from Sin and Idols to God, be
absolutely necessary to forgiveness of Sin? D. W. p. 114.


Calvin. It Is not a seeming, it is real: You slip off from the Question now, and
take to other Terms, and ambiguous ones too. 1. Why keep you not to the Word
Repentance as you began. 2. Why use you the Term absolutely necessary? Your
Terms should have been Disposing Condition to Justification. And this is the
Question, if it be truly stated according to your own Sense, Whether Repentance
be a qualifying Condition to Justification?


Neonom. The other parts of Repentance are excluded out of the Question by what
you heard before, and this is that part on which the Word lays a strict stress:
From hence Repentance is called (...), Matthew. 2.8. and Conversion refers to
this as a principal part of it.


Antinom. Then you will have the Question to be, Whether a part of Repentance
be a qualifying Condition to Justification, viz. (...) and not (...)? But let
it be which part you please, the first part or Second, an Inclination or
Resolution to Repent in full purpose of Heart, or Repentance it self:
Repentance in Potentia, or in Actu. The Question is, Whether Repentance under
any Consideration of it, as an Act of ours, graciously bestowed or not, be a
qualifying Condition of Justification? This Question you must hold to, and not
start from the Terms; and I hold it in the Negative: Be sure in all your
Arguments you conclude the Question.


Neonom. I will prove then, as Repentance lies in a sincere purpose of Heart to
turn from Sin and Idols to God, it is necessary to Forgiveness.


Calvin. Is not this base shuffling of the Cards? Will you never lay aside your
double-dealing? Now in stead of Qualifying Condition we must have the Word
Necessary, as equivocal a Word as can be used. Neeessary has as many
Acceptations, as the Word Church has with some Men. A thing may be necessary
antecedently, and necessary consequently: It may be necessary Antecedently many
ways, as remotely and primarily; necessary respectu Ordinis only; as necessary
if you go to France to cross the Sea, but not the Cause of my going to France,
nor the Condition, but as the Way. And there is a necessity in respect of
Causality, as the Causa efficiens materialis are necessary Antecedents to the
Effect. And so there are remote Necessities a great while before you come to
what follows; as a Boy must be an Apprentice before he be a Common-Council-Man
or Alderman. And there are consequent Necessities, Neeessitas dependentiae,
Relationis, Precepti, Officii, etc.


Neonom. I mean, that Repentance is a disposing Condition, but it is not a
Condition as Faith is; for that is the receiving and completing Condition.


Calvin. The Council of Trent tells us, that the Catholic Faith is this, When
the Apostle says, Trident. Sess. 6. c. 8.
A man is justified by Faith and freely, Romans 5. those words are to be
understood in that sense which the Catholic Church has always held and
expressed, that we are therefore said to be justified by Faith, because Faith
is the beginning of man's Salvation, the Foundation and Root of all
Justification, without which it is impossible to please God, and come to the
Fellowship of his Children. And so Bellarmine, Faith does begin Justification,
Bellarm. de Justif. lib. 1. c. 20.
and afterward assumes to it self Hope and Charity, etc. it does perfect it.
And so you talk after them, and much more, in saying that Repentance begins
Justification, and Faith compleats it.

The first Point of Justification I grant to be Faith alone, but the
Accomplishment of it is not without the joint procurement of Obedience, Aphor.
p. 302. In a larger sense, Baxt. Aphor.
as Promise is an Obligation and the thing promised, called a Debt; so the
Performers of the Condition are called Worthy, and the thing promised is called
Debt, These. 26. Yea, in this Meriting the Obligation to Reward is God's
Ordinate Justice, and the Truth of the Promise, and the Worthiness lies in our
performance of the Condition on our part. Aphor. p. 141.


Neonom. That which God commands in order to Forgiveness, can include no less
than that which is necessary to Forgiveness: But God commands Repentance in
Order to Forgiveness; Ergo Repentance is necessary to Forgiveness. Minor
proved, Acts 3.19. Chap. 2.38. D. W. p. 114.


Calvin. I told you Necessary is not to be admitted as the Term of your
Question, because it is Equivocal. We all allow Repentance a necessary
Concomitant or Effect of Forgiveness; and it is necessary necessitate
subsequenti, necessitate officii virtute precepti, necessitate obligationis and
dependentiae: it is necessary by a subsequent necessity, it is necessary by
virtue of Gospel Precept, necessary by virtue of the Relation and Connection
that Gospel-Promises and Precepts have to each other, but not necessary as a
qualifying Condition unto Justification. Let me put your Syllogism into
intelligible Terms.

That which God commands in order to Forgiveness, is a disposing Condition to
Forgiveness; but God commands Repentance in order, etc. Ergo.

And here I deny the Major: For God commands Sinners to hear the Word, in order
to Faith and Repentance; but hearing is not a qualifying Condition. Peter bids
Simon Magus pray, That the Thoughts of his Heart may be forgiven, but not as a
qualifying Condition to Pardon. So the anointing the Blind Man's Eyes with Clay
and Spittle was not a qualifying Condition for Healing antecedently, nor the
touching of Christ by the Woman that had a Bloody Issue. Those things that God
does, or commands us to do in order to receive Blessings, are means chosen by
himself to give us the Blessings in, and both the Means and Blessings are
graciously provided in the Promise, the Fruit whereof is the Gift of both, even
to will and to do.

But Repentance is required in order to Forgiveness: By this you may mean at
least in order thereto by way of meetness to fit a Man for Pardon before he
has it. To this I answer, You fallaciously change the term Justification into
Forgiveness; for though Justification includes Forgiveness, yet Justification
is not always meant by Forgiveness; for Justification is a single Act of God,
and a Person once Justified is always so; but by Forgiveness is meant often,
especially in the Old Testament, a Renewal of the Sense of our Justified
Estate, the shining of God's Face upon us after Falls and Relapses into Sin;
and thence we pray daily for Pardon without a Supposition that when we pray for
Pardon, we are not in a Justified Estate; neither do think when we have prayed
for Pardon, we are ever the whit more disposed and fitted in God's sight to
receive it, but wait upon God for it with a great sense of our Loathsomness and
Unworthiness in our selves, flying to Christ and his Righteousness to be
covered with it in Believing, by which Imputed Righteousness alone we look upon
our selves as disposed for Pardon.

Your places mentioned prove not what you design, viz. that in our first
Forgiveness, which is our Justification, That Repentance is required as a
disposing condition to the receiving it. Acts 3.19. speaks but of the Public
Manifestation of the Righteousness of the Saints at the last day; not that they
stand unjustified till that day, viz. the day of Refreshing, and of Christ's
second Appearing, v. 20.

And as for that place, Acts 2.38. he commands Gospel Duties but to be
performed as Effects of the Promise, in performance of the Mercy promised; the
words of the next Verse show, For the Promise belongs to you, therefore
Repent; and Repentance is there no more a disposition to Forgiveness than
Baptism; and the end of that Ordinance is to show that Forgiveness belongs to
us already, for it is the Seal of the Promise; and to be Baptized into
Forgiveness is no more than to be Baptized into the Seal and Confirmation of
the Covenant of Promise or Forgiveness, which you believe belongs to you, as
the Covenant is called the Covenant of Circumcision, Acts 7.8. And a Seal is
not of a Pardon to be wrote, but of that which is Wrote and Signed already.


Neonom. Repentance is a Grace to which Pardon is promised; and upon the
working of it Forgiveness is given, and Impenitency continues Guilt wherever
it reigns. D. W. p. 115.


Calvin. Forgiveness is promised to Persons, not to Graces and Qualifications.
Forgiveness is given to true Penitents, and those to whom Forgiveness is given
are truly Penitent, and both Repentance and Remission of Sins are given; it
may be we perceive Repentance first, but God gives Remission first; for so long
as there is none of the Grace of Forgiveness bestowed there will never be true
Gospel Repentance, the Grace of the Promise must be bestowed first by Christ
exalted to God's Right Hand. God says, He had pardoned David before he
Repented; and what was it that moved him so kindly to Repentance, as is
mentioned, Psalm. 51. but the sense of Pardon? The Lord had told him by Nathan
that he had put away his Sin.


Neonom. How much of the Bible must I Transcribe, if I quote all places to
prove these? Ezekiel. 18.30. Acts 3.19. Mark 1.4. Luke 13.3. Heb. 6.16.


Calvin. The Papists have quoted as many as you can think on, but could never
yet carry the Point.

As to that place of Ezekiel. 18.30. it has been spoken to already. It supposes
not that they had any Qualification for Remission by Repentance, for they were
to make them a new Heart first; a Condemned Sinner besure can never do that
work, nor work at it. God must perform the Promise of Grace in breaking his
Heart of Stone by the Revelation of Pardoning Mercy, and make him a new Heart
before he can have a Heart to Repent. Acts 26.18. imports no more than that the
Gospel is the Power of God to Salvation, and thereby Sinners are raised from
Darkness to Light, i. e. from the Darkness of a Natural State to the Light of
Grace, thereby in Christ's own Light they see Light; the words are (...), the
Infinitive Mood is here put for the Genitive Case, governed by (...) foregoing;
the Light a Sinner is brought into, is the Light of receiving Remission of
Sins, the Gospel Promise seen and applied by Faith, is that Light in the Soul
wherein it is brought unto God; the first Act of the Soul in Saving Conversion
is believing; for the Soul cannot turn from Sin to God by any Act of Repentance
that is Saving, but by Jesus Christ, and Faith in his Blood; therefore in order
of Nature Forgiveness must be had before there can be coming to God, and
therefore Ephraim cries for turning: the Saints through Grace know they cannot
come at God but by and through Christ, and therefore their Complaints were so
great, and Repentings so heavy, when God hid his Face from them. I need not
treat upon the other places, they are all of the same strain. Acts 5.31. is
against you; Luke 13.3. will not prove the Gospel a Law, as I shall have
occasion to show.


Neonom. The Sin against the Holy Ghost is Unpardonable, because it is
impossible to bring the Committer of it to Repentance, Heb. 6.16.


Calvin. The (...) is not in respect of the power of God, but in regard of the
Will and Pleasure of God, Whom he will he hardneth. When God has left them to
despise Christ, and to Crucify him again, as it were, to put him to open Scorn
and Contempt, not sinning Ignorantly, but Presumptuously; there is no
Repentance: the reason why there is no Repentance, is because there is no
Forgiveness, neither will they seek after it.


Neonom. Are all these things consistent with Pardon before Repentance? Can I
be subject to perish and pardoned at once?


Calvin. Yes, a Traitor may be in the Cart, and have the Halter about his Neck
just when the Pardon comes.


Neonom. Can God command Repentance under a Promise of Pardon, and suppose I
must be pardoned before?


Calvin. Yea, he always does so, he performs the Promise to enable us to obey
the Command, and he annexeth the Promise to encourage us to the Duty: The
performance of the Promise to us is the true necessary condition of our
performing any Duty to God acceptably.


Neonom. And does God do all before, and nothing after?


Calvin. Yea, he does abundantly more than we can ask or think, before and
after too.


Neonom. 13. There Is no Saving Faith that includes not this purpose in it, and
so says Dr. Owen.


Calvin. Whatever you quote out of Dr. Owen, the World knows he was against you
in this Point, his whole Book witnesses that he never said that Faith
justified as a Qualifying Grace, much less Repentance; there may be many things
in Faith that touches not upon that Nature of it, whereby it has more to do
in its peculiar Office in the Justification of a Sinner than any other Grace.


Neonom. Without this purpose we do not accept of Christ as the way to God.


Calvin. A Man does not walk about without his Arms, therefore he goes upon his
Arms and Hands.


Neonom. Arg. 5. We cannot receive Christ as King without this Repentance of
Heart.


Calvin. No, nor without Faith neither, what trifling is here?


Neonom. Without this purpose of Heart no Man accepts of Christ for
Sanctification.


Calvin. Therefore you will say, Christ justifies us by Infusing Righteousness, by
making us Righteous inherently, for which he declares us Righteous; an old
decryed Popish Error.


Neonom. A Resolved purpose to continue in Sin and Rebellion against God is
Damning, let Men pretend what they please.


Calvin. I say more, there is no Venial Sin, every Sin is Damning in its own
Nature, and a Sin repented of without Forgiveness is Damning; and the very
Repentance of a Natural Man which you would have Conditionate him for Grace, is
Damning.


Neonom. It Is not to be allowed that it should not be necessary to renounce our
Sins with our Hearts, in order to Pardon; when it is necessary to renounce our
own Merits or Righteousness.


Calvin. We reckon it our Duty under the highest Obligation of preventing
Grace, and great and precious Promises, and from the greatest Sense of Duty, to
renounce our Sins with all our Hearts, but dare not do it in a way of
Qualification of our selves for Forgiveness, least we should make those
Repentings and Humblings our Merits, as the Papists do, whereby Christ profits
them nothing; and under pretense of Holiness they lose their Righteousness,
pretend to renounce one Idol, and set up another.


Neonom. I will tell you how the Assembly and Dr. O. are of my Mind.


Calvin. You may spare your self the labor, for they are point blank against
you, and so are all Protestants that are not tainted with the Doctrine of the
Jesuits.


Neonom. I think there is never a Barrel the better Herring of you, come let us
be gone.


DEBATE XIII. Of the Necessity, and Benefit of Holiness, Obedience, and Good
Works, with Perseverance therein.
Calvin. HOW do you, Mr. Neonomian, are you well, methinks you look a little
Moody.


Neonom. It would disturb any Orthodox Man's Spirit to see how Error prevails;
I profess I am almost weary of this Club, if this be your Calvinian Club, I do
think I must betake my self to some other, you know, where I shall find more
soundness in Doctrine.


Calvin. O pray, Mr. Neonomian, let not Disputants be angry with one another;
Disputation should be for Information of the Judgment, not for the gratifying
Pride and Passion; put another Question, it may be we may agree in that.


Neonom. I will try you once more, and if you boggle there, Fare you well.

Gentlemen, note that whatever I shall speak now of any Act of Grace, except
Penitent Believing, referrs not to the Forgiveness of Sins, or the Sinners
Admission into a Justified Estate.

The Benefits that I here speak of, are not the Forfeiture of Pardon, the
Possession of Heaven, and some other Particular Blessings, as Increase of
Peace, Returns of Prayer. D. W.


Antinom. I find now you clapped two Conditions into one; why had we not these
Conditions twisted together before? Methinks you incommoded your self in not
doing it yesterday, for vis unita fortior, but you reckon Faith and Repentance,
reach no further than the first Justification, I think the Catholics are of
your Mind for that. 2. You talk of forfeiting Justification, the meaning in
English, is falling away from Grace.


Neonom. Some Men's Brains had need be taken out and washed in Vinegar, for
there is no making them understand; it were well that you were better studied in
Terms of Art.


Calvin. Prithee, Mr. Antinomian, sit down and hold thy Peace a while, you will
never leave till you have put the Gentleman into a Fustion fume, and then we
shall lose his good Company; pray go on, Mr. Neonomian.


Antinom. I smell him where he will be.


Calvin. Nay, not yet neither.


Neonom. I tell you then, if I may be permitted to speak what an Error this
Antinomian holds. He says,

1. Men have nothing to do in order to Salvation. 2. Nor is Sanctification, a
way of any Person to Heaven. 3. Nor can the Graces or Duties of Believers; no,
nor Faith it self do them the least good to prevent the least Evil. 4. Nor are
they of the least use to their Peace or Comfort. 5. Yea, though Christ be
explicitly owned, and they be done in the strength of the Spirit of God. 6.
And a Believer ought not to think he is the more pleasing to God, by any Grace
he Acts, or Good he Does. 7. Nor may Men expect any Good to a Nation by their
Humiliation, Earnest Prayer for Reformation of a People.


Calvin. Now Sir you have a Rowland for your Oliver, here is a long and strong
Indictment laid in against you, I wish you a good delivery, Mr. Antinomian.


Antinom. As I take it, there is about seven things you charge me with, I pray
make your Proofs per parts; I shall be abler to give my Answer.


Neonom. You have told us, seeing all things are settled by Christ for us of
free Gift; I say, all we do is for Christ himself, and not for our selves. --
Christ comes and brings Justification, loving Kindness and Salvation. -- What
needs then all this Travel for Life and Salvation, seeing it is here already?
But seeing we get nothing by it, etc. D. W. from Dr. Cr. p. 41, 42.


Antinom. By this you prove, that Men have nothing to do in order to Salvation.
Gentlemen, I must crave your patience, to hear that part of my Discourse that
you may judge of it. It was upon John 14.16. I was saying, D. Cr. p. 41.
How near has Christ made the way unto the Father? Thus near that he that
believes shall be saved. Let me be bold to tell you, you are in as full a
state of Justification before God. [Now mark, I was speaking of passing from
one state to another in Justification; and do you not remember what he said?
[That whatever he should speak now referring to any Act of Grace, except
believing penitently, referrs not to Forgiveness of Sins,] and now he alleges
what I said upon that account to prove a change about Sanctification.

You are in a true State of Salvation, you that are Believers, are as those
that are already in Heaven, D. Cr. p. 41.
Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shall be saved: Such a near way
Christ is, yet still people will be Cavilling, where are good Works all this
while? What justified by Faith alone! Saved by Christ alone! Let me tell you,
If Christ be the way [of Justification, and only Federal Condition of Eternal
Life, i. e. of all Salvation in Faith and Holiness] then Works are not the way,
except they be Christ, but must we not work? Yea, but for other purposes, the
Lord has propounded other Ends, [not meriting your Salvation] for which you
are to work, ye are bought with a price, that is done; therefore glorify God in
our Bodies, being delivered out of the hands of your Enemies, [our State is
secured, our Safety past] we serve in Holiness and Righteousness, etc. do we
serve toward Deliverance, then it is not past. 1. We are delivered from Wrath
before we step a step in Duties; we do not the Duty to be delivered, but we do
Duty because we are delivered. [And now follows what he charge for such a
fault, and take notice that I speak all along of the change of our state in
Justification by Faith, and that works have nothing to do in, neither are we to
look upon them as such.] All things are settled by Christ for us of free Gift,
all we do is for Christ himself, not for our selves, [ i. e. to put our selves
in Christ's Room, thereby to Rob him of his Glory,] if we do it for our selves,
we do but labor in vain; suppose we compass never so much good by doing,
[thinking thereby to put our selves into a justified Estate] it is but labor
in vain, it was compassed beforehand for us, [in the justifying Righteousness
of Christ. -- Christ brings Salvation, enters into Covenant; what needs all
that Travel for Life and Salvation? i. e. with a design of purchasing it
thereby, for all that is said is spoken to the Price that Christ bought us
with, and I instance in running for Money, that a Man need not run for a price
that he has freely without; so that he that works for Justification works in
vain, for says the Apostle, The Jews that followed after the Law of
Righteousness obtained it not, but ran in vain; and this the Apostle means in
that place, Have ye indeed suffered so much in vain? why? because you obtained
not your end thereby, not likely so to do.


Neonom. But it is not your Intention that nothing we do can Merit, but not that
they are required as the requisite means and way to obtain these Blessings. D.
W. p. 122.

You intend this, p. 45, 46. you say, I will note one thing before I go on to
make clear this thing, etc.


Antinom. I will give you my own words and sense. The words he referrs to are
part of an Answer to an Objection. D. Cr. p. 45.

Obj. Will, but this is a way to lead to a Licentious Life. Answ. I say the
contrary, it is the only way to lead Men into a more enlarged way of Holiness
than any way in the World, which I will declare to you by and by. We have
showed that Christ is a safe way, a lightsome way, a near way; we will make
good now that the consideration that Christ is a free way to all Comers, is the
only way to Build up Men to an enlarged course of Holiness, more than the
greatest Self-denial, frequentest Prayer, greatest Study, bearing down of the
Body, etc. And this will further appear, if we enquire how Christ is such a
way, as there is no way wherein there is a quicker, wherein there is a better
riddance of Businesses and Employments Believers have, than in Christ; [now
comes in what he quotes] I will note one thing by the way, to make clear this
thing; viz. It is a received Conceit of many, that Obedience is the way to
Heaven; and though it be not Causa Regnandi, yet it is Via ad Regnum. Let me
give you a hint or two of another thing, D. Cr. p. 45.
or two, and lay down this Position; There is no Believer under Heaven, that
does come to Heaven before he has served his Generation, there is no Person
that is a Believer and has received Christ, but that after he has received
Christ he is Created in Christ Jesus unto good Works, that he should walk in
them. [Here you may see I am for good Works in a Gospel Way and Sense,] I say,
he that sprinkleth (...) with clean Water, that they may become clean from all
their filthiness, writes his Law in their inward parts, etc. so that I say
[mark well my words] that Sanctification of Life is an inseparable Companion
with the Justification of a Person by the Grace of Christ, but withal I must
tell, that all this Sanctification is not the way of that Justified Person to
Heaven. It is the Business of a Person that he has to do in his way to Christ.
Dr. Cr. p. 46.

Now I show that Christ is the way, and nothing else, [Sanctification is part
of the Salvation wrought in Christ; and the Apostle, Heb. 6. calls the works of
Sanctification things that accompany Salvation,] therefore I say this is no
derogation from works, to say they are not the way to Heaven, but that they are
Concomitant to Heaven unto Persons that shall come thither; [and now comes in
what he rehearses,] The Truth is, since Redemption is managed by Christ, the
Lord has pointed out other Ends and Purposes for our Obedience than our
Salvation, [ i. e. than purchasing or procuring, or qualifying conditionally in
your sense, for Savation,] in this sense, is not the end of any good work we
do, [in plain truth good works are a great part of the Salvation it self that
Christ is the way to.] The Ends of our good works are, Manifestation of our
Obedience and Subjection, the setting forth of the praise of the Glory of the
Grace of God, and as such so actually glorifying him in the World, the doing
good to others; to be profitable to Men, the meeting of the Lord Jesus Christ
in them, where he will be found according to the Promise. These are the special
Ends that Obedience is ordained for Salvation, being settled firm before, to
keep the true Prerogative of Christ alone, that no Righteousness of Man
entrench upon his Privileges. [Now judge you whether I detract from works of
Sanctification, as Mr. Neonomian would make me to do, because I allow them not
that place in Justification and Salvation, which he would have them have, and
that belongs to Christ alone.]


Neonom. He puts this Objection, We had as good sit still. He that works all
day, and gets no more than he had in the Morning, etc.

Answ. Let me tell you, the prevention of evil, if there be reality of evil in
it, obtaining of good, if there be reality of Good, Peace of Conscience, Joy in
the Holy Ghost, Pardon of Sin, the Infallibility of Non-miscarriage, the Light
of God's Countenance, all these you aim at, are abundantly provided for you,
and established firmly on you by the mere Grace of God in you before you
perform any thing whatsoever. D. Cr. p. 151.


Antinom. I intend no more than that we are Blessed with all Spiritual
Blessings in Christ; and we can have no greater Security of all these Benefits,
than in Christ Jesus; and that all performances upon account of our Security is
nothing to Faith in Christ, who is the Yea and Amen of the Promises; -- and
therefore I show the Vanity of proposing that to our selves by our Works which
is done in Christ for us, and can be done by none else, if we have Faith to see
it; and yet I still show how great a thing Salvation is, and good Works in a
due manner of Performance, from true Principles, and a right End.

I showed that our Perseverance depends not on our Works, and that I am ready
to maintain. -- I say, God has settled all things that appertain to Life and
Godliness in his Son Jesus Christ, and upon you for his own sake, and settled
Everlastingly and Unchangeably upon you; -- so that there can be nothing to
make them more secure than the Grant of God himself has made them; -- I
showed, that a good Child knowing he is Heir, and has the Estate settled on
him, does not obey his Parents in order to a better Security for the Estate
than he has; he serves not now to get his Fathers Land, but to Honor and
Glorify his Father, that has so freely settled the Estate upon him. --
Without respect to good or evil the Lord has Everlastingly established all
that ever he meant to do, [ i. e. good or evil of ours, and in us.] The Lord
does nothing upon Conditions in his People, D. Cr. p. 652.
as if he did refer himself still to these Conditions, and did suspend what he
did intend to do to his People till he did perceive how they carry themselves
to him. All that I aim at is this, that it is not a vain thing to yield due
Obedience to any thing that God requires, though the Lord intend not ye shall
by your Obedience gain Life.


Neonom. He says, When you Fast, Pray, Mourn, keep the Sabbath, etc. your Eye
should be simply to the Glory of God, and not to gain that which is already
ours in Christ, etc.


Antinom. All this I say still, If in these Duties we think and propose to our
selves to obtain Life, we are acted by the Righteousness of the Law, which is
opposed to the Righteousness of Faith, etc. D. Cr. 134.


Neonom. He says, let subduing of Sin alone for Peace. D. Cr. p. 13.


Antinom. It is an easy thing to expose Sermons, and any continued Discourses
to Contempt, if Men will pick out here and there an Expression, and not show
the reason and dependence thereof -- My words are, -- How much filthiness is
there in all your wr^stlings? I say, how many defects and infirmities might you
see: Could you choose but fall foul upon your own Spirits for these infirmities
and defects of your best performances, seeing the wages of Sin is Death, what
can you run to then? none but Christ, none but Christ; whilst your acts in
respect of filthiness proclaims nothing but War, Christ alone and his Blood
proclaims nothing but Peace. Therefore I will give you this hint by the way,
when I speak of the power of Christ subduing Sin, because from the power of it
in Man, they are apt to think their peace depends upon their subduing of their
Sin: If their Sins be subdued then they have peace; let subduing of Sin alone
for Peace, let Christ have that which is his due, it is he alone that speaks
peace, [ he is our Peace, I mean not that subduing of Sin should be let alone,
but doing it for such an end that belongs to Christ alone.] -- If you fetch
your peace from any thing in the World but Christ, you will fetch it from
where it is not. Dr. C. p. 13.


Neonom. He says, I must tell you there is not any thing you perform, when you
have attained the highest pitch, that has any prevalency or availableness to
produce or bring forth the least good unto your selves. D. Cr. p. 150.


Antinom. I say there is nothing you can do by which you ought to expect any
Grace to your selves in doing it. My meaning was, that our bare Duties are not
available to good in themselves; Paul may Plant, etc. but God must give the
Increase; we may Eat, Drink and Sleep, but not expect good from the things
themselves, as in Efficacy, so in respect of purchase and procurement; what
does our Righteousness profit God; therefore I add the words of the Apostle;
you are not your own, you are bought with a price; Christ has redeemed us,
that we should not henceforth live to our selves, but unto Christ that died for
us. -- Though some look at this as a discouragement, yet there is a Spirit of
Ingenuity in a Believer, that he will be as Industrious to glorify God, and to
do good to Men, as if he did it for himself.


Neonom. He says, If a Soul get under full-sail, filled with a stiff gale of
the Spirit, when Floods of meltings flow from it, if they can cry mightily,
etc. hereby they think they shall get pardon, settle Spiritual, Civil and
Spiritual Healings, etc. D. W. from D. Cr. p. 235, 236.


Antinom. I was showing how Man's Righteousness is exalted above what is meet
sometimes when Duties are accompanied with Christ's Assistances by his Spirit;
-- and said, to clear it up, That it is true indeed, whilst a Believers Heart is
over-cast with gross Vapors, and is more than ordinary dull in Hearing, flies
low, and slow in Praying, and is somewhat stiff and untoward in Fasting without
measure; such Righteousness goes usually for Loss and Dung. But if a Soul get
under full-sail, filled with a stiff gale of the Spirit, etc. [Then follows
what he rehearses;] and then it follows, such courses some think will turn
away, and reconcile God to a Person of People: But under favor the attributing
of such Efficacy to this Righteousness, though thus assisted by Christ's
Spirit, is more than is mere, though Christ be Explicitly owned as the Author
of such Assistances. [And this is a failing very ordinary among Believers, to
ascribe an Atoning Efficacy to their Duties, especially when performed in the
best manner, when it is hard to keep their Hearts in the right frame; not so
duly considered that their Persons and Services when seemingly best performed
have all their Acceptance in Christ, and they are apt to think that they
procure more at the Hands of God when they seem to be carried forth, more than
when they see as it were a withdrawment of those Assistances, and so spoil
their best Duties for want of due through Renunciation of their own
Righteousness, and that of their best Duties; whereas God never intended that
any of our best Graces or Duties should be of an Atoning Nature, to Rob Christ
of the Glory of his Atonement. It may be, Mr. Neonomian, you never had any such
Experience of the working of Corruption in your best Duties, for the low esteem
you have of Christ's Righteousness, and the high valuation you have of your
own, as appears by these Discourses. But know, that the more we are carried
forth in Duty the greater is our Temptation to Spiritual Pride and Selfulness.


Neonom. His common phrase is, We must not work for Life, but from Life. D. W.
p. 124.


Antinom. Yes, and it is a great Gospel Principle, being rightly understood; we
must not work for Life as a Reward of work, for this was the Tenor of the
Covenant of Works, but from Life received, being dead in our selves by Nature,
and in respect of the Law Condemned Persons; we must work not to obtain Eternal
Life by working, but having received Life from it to work. Christ says, He is
the Life, the Resurrection, and the Life; Where Is the Man that can work without
Life to work from?


Neonom. But he understands this you will say only of External Duties, but not of
the Actings of Grace; no, I could show you how he says the same of all Graces.


Antinom. You need not have troubled your selves with that Objection, for I do
intend all Graces and Duties; for they must all be performed from a Principle
of Life received, and not for Mercenary Designs and Ends, thinking that thereby
we deserve any thing of the Lord, for when we have done all we are unprofitable
Servants.


Neonom. He says, That is the proper Work that God has given to Belleving, D.
W. p. 124. D. Cr. p. 326.
not to effect any thing to the good of Man, but only to be the witness of that
good to the Spirit of Man, and so give light to that which was hidden before.


Antinom. You know my Opinion, and it is with other Divines, That there is
Justification in Heaven and Justification in a Man's Conscience and Spirit. D.
G. ^. 3^^
Justification in Consciences and Spirits of Men is the manifestation of that
Act of God to a Man's own Spirit, by which a Man comes to know, and
consequently to rejoice in the Justification of God; and so you may read the
words, Rom: 5.1. Bring Justified by Faith, i. e. through Faith having the
Justification of God evidenced and manifested to our Spirits, we have peace
with God. I contend not with them that say, It Justifies Virtute objecti, or
Instrumentaliter --

So that I ascribe^ all the Efficacy to Christ's Righteousness, and not to the
Act of Faith, as a Quolifying Condition to Justify sensu proprio, as you and
the Arminian's do, and in that sense I spoke against its doing us good, that is
in your sense of Justification.


Neonom. He says, If you have more Ability than others in doing, let it not
come into your Thoughts, D. W. p. 125. D. C. p. 429.
as an Inducement to think better of your self, as if you were more accepted of
God, or pleasing in his sight.


Antinom. I believe it is, or should be the Spirit of the best of God's
Children, that they prefer others above themselves, Phil. 3. viz. That fear the
Lord; and think not that there is any thing in them that makes them more
accepted than others; but that all that have true Faith are equally accepted in
the Beloved, and that Paul's Usefulness and Apostleship rendered him no more
Justified than the meanest of the Disciples of Christ.


Calvin. You see, Mr. Antinom. as he is for the exalting Christ, so he speaks
highly in the Commendation, yea, and usefulness of Holiness and good Works;
those diminutive Terms that he uses is in respect of Purchase, obtaining
Pardon, or being qualifying Conditions for the bestowing of Benefits: He holds
Christ is the great Condition both of Grace here, and glory hereafter; though I
confess, I wish Mr. Antinom. you had spared many Expressions, for which I fear
the Truth suffers, from the ignorant, and more learned of perverse Minds, that
make it their business to load the Doctrine of Free Grace with all Scorn and
Contempt, and take all occasions to wound the Truth, because of some rash or
over-zealous Expressions used by you and others, which it may be, had you
foreseen, you would have prevented by not using them; or had you printed your
own Sermons, you would not have sent to the Press.


Mr. Neonom. I pray let us have this Doctrine delivered in your own Words and
Expressions.


Neonom. The Truth is this:

That though neither Holiness, sincere Obedience or good Works do make any
Atonement for sin, or are in the least meritorious Righteousness, whereby
Salvation is caused; or for which this or any Blessing becomes due to us by
Debt; yet as the Spirit of God freely works all Holiness, and enableth to
sincere Obedience and good Works; so the Lord Jesus has of his own Grace, and
for his own Merits, promised to bring to Heaven, such as are Partakers of true
Holiness, perform his sincere Obedience, and do those good Works perseveringly.


Antinom. You allow Christ the Honor of Atonement for Sin; but how far I know
not, by what follows; his Atonement reaches not the Breach of the new Law
Conditions, but only so far as refers to Sins against the Old Law, of which you
will not allow, Impenitency and Unbelief be a breach; so that there must be
some way in the new Law found out to expiate and appease God for them without
Christ's Atonement: Beside, the Conditions of it, it being only imperfect
Obedience, there will need nothing but the Performance of the constituted
Condition, which whether perfect or imperfect, being performed as well as is
required, though sinfully imperfect, leaves no place for Sacrifice or Atonement;
hence you allow Christ's Righteousness to have merited Blessings with the same
Reserve, which you are not willing to speak out, viz. That Christ has
purchased and merited, that we shall come under new and milder Terms with God,
or God rather with us: We thank you no more than we do the Papists, for saying,
Christ has merited all, and is a cause, even as the Creation was of the
Covenant of Works. God's the Cause of all, for he made all; so Christ has
merited all that follows, whatever new Laws and Conditions follow, and upon
which Terms Benefits become due to us [you should have said to Mankind] by
Debt. We may challenge the Privileges of compounding with God upon such Terms
as we like better than the former; but our Failure in performing those Terms
that Christ agreed for, will bring us under new Arrearages to God. And for your
saying, the holy Spirit works freely the said conditional Holiness, it helps
not, which notwithstanding your setting aside the Word Merit, is truly fo
virtute compacti, though not valoris intrinseci, as much as Adam's would have
been. And as to the Spirit, you ascribe the free giving and working of it; you
give no more to it than Adam had in the state of Innocence; and not so much;
for God had given and wrought in Adam that Perfection and Strength of Grace,
whereby he might have stood, if he would. You say, There is a Promise made by
Christ of Glory, upon Condition of their good Works and Perseverance. Your
Suggestion to us is of two Covenants of Grace procured by Christ for us: One,
the Promise of the state of Grace and Justification, provided we fulfill the
Conditions of Faith and Repentance, whereby we have the first Justification.
The Second Covenant is of a state of Glory, upon condition of Perseverance in
good Works; which condition if we fail of, we lose all the Blessings of Eternal
Life: So that our Glorification stands upon more hazardous Terms than Eternal
Life did to Adam; for upon one good Work he should have entered into full
Possession of Eternal Life, and a Confirmation therein; whereas we must stand
upon the Test all our days, and may lose all at last; for the Works must be
performed perseveringly, or else no Penny for all the Paternosters.


Neonom. Yea, he must perform this sincere Obedience, and do these good Works
perseveringly; and he appoints these as the way and means of a Believer's
obtaining Salvation, and several other Blessings, requiring these as
Indispensable Duties and Qualifications of all such as he will so save and
bless, and excluding all that want or neglect them, or live under the Power of
what is contrary thereto, viz. As Profaneness, Rebellion, and utter
Vnfruitfulness.


Antinom. Gentlemen, you see how well Truth is stated here. 1. Christ has
promised to bring to Heaven such as are Partakers of Holiness, as a condition
of his second new Law: As if the Promise of Eternal Life were not at once the
Promise of the Life of Grace and Glory. 2. His way and means is a conditional
qualifying means, obtaining the Promise foederally. 3. His means are two,
Sincerity and Perseverance: Sincerity must not be mingled with Hypocrisy; for
tho other Qualifications be imperfect, yet Sincerity must be perfect, and must
give Perfection to all the rest Foederally. But a Man is not confirmed in the
state of Grace, nor is it secured by one, two, or a Hundred sincere Works. His
Sincerity is not a Condition to be depended upon if he persevere not; if he
fall into Evil Works, or perform not good Works sincerely, his Heart has been
Hypocritical, he is gone for the present, he must begin again to be sincere and
persevere, but will lose his Condition and his Hope upon it so often, that he
is persuaded at last to leave tyring himself, to get and keep sincerity, and
perform sincere Works, that he thinks it the best way to give it over till he
is going to die; that he has no more to do than the Thief upon the Cross; for
he reckons he can be sincere there for a spurt to help him at a dead Lift, and
has nothing else to do, and it will be no long work for him. And thus your
Doctrine comes to be the greatest Doctrine of Looseness and Profaneness: Your
unperformable Foederal Conditions, putting Men upon an utter despair of ever
attaining to any true allowable Holiness. And it seems these are undispensible
Qualifications. The meaning of this can be no other, but a falling away from a
state of Grace; for if Indispensable, then a Breach of these Conditions is not
to be dispensed with. Now I say, if sincere Obedience and Perseverance be
indispensible Qualifications, after a Man has begun in sincere Obedience, and
continued some time, and then fall into Hypocrisy, or some such Sin as
David's, which was Profaneness; or some such Sin as Asa's, which was
Persecution; and Peter's, in denial of his Master: These are Sins of Rebellion:
What must such an one conclude? And what else can you now say to him, but that
he is fallen from the Blessing, and promised Heaven? He is in a state of
Damnation: All his former Faith and Obedience is lost. What shall a Minister
say to him now under the deepest Sense of Sin? Says he, I am certainly damned,
I have fallen short of an indispensible Qualification for Heaven. Nay, you tell
me, Christ does exclude those that have any want of Sincerity and Perseverance,
or such as have neglected it.


Neonom. Say to him! I Will tell you what I would say to him; Jesus Christ died
to save Sinners, provided they repent, and believe they shall be justified, and
provided they practice sincere Obedience, and persevere in it, they shall be
saved so as to go to Heaven; but all your Justification signifies nothing,
unless you persevere in Sincerity. I would say to him, Go, and repent, and
believe, and persevere again in sincere Obedience, and they you will see how it
is; but never be so presumptuous as to believe you shall be saved till you have
persevered, and all your Comfort of Heaven lies upon this.


Antinom. Those that know Christ, and have Experienced the Temptations of
Satan, and the workings of Unbelief in themselves, will tell you, that this is
a Soul-destroying Doctrine, such as drives poor Sinners off from God, brings
them out of Love with Christ, carries them back to the Yoke of Bondage, their
own Righteousness, and destroys them by Security or Despair at last.


Neonom. This Antinomian is honestly zealous for the Honor of Free Grace, D.
W. Pref. D. W. p. 125.
but you may see by his discourse, that he has not light sufficient to see how
God has provided for this in his Rectoral distribution of Benefits by a Gospel
Rule; come I Will tell you wherein the difference does not lie between us first.

1. It Is not whether God has decreed that the Elect shall be Holy and
Obedient, and so partake of Saving Blessings.


Antinom. But yet he has not so decreed it as to all the certainty, but that
their Salvation depends on a contingent Proposition, i. e. if they believe
sincerely, work and persevere, they shall be saved, and they are to conclude
nothing as to the goodness and certainty of their Estate from the Doctrine of
Election, Redemption, and the great and precious Promises believed, till they
have sincerely and perseveringly obeyed, and then they may when the Wruttles
are upon them, and Death pangs, if they have their Senses, but never before.


Neonom. Nor is it a question, whether every Work will fail to save a
Christless Unbeliever?


Antinom. What mean you here? one would think you mean that some Works will
fail, and some not fail; but because I find after you affirm the question, I
take it thus, That though a Christless Unbeliever can be saved by no Works, yet
he that believes in Christ is saved by some Works, which is at the best very
roughhewn Divinity, hardly Protestant.


Neonom. Nor is it the differ whether Christ has paid the price of Temporal,
Spiritual and Eter ^ssings.


Antinom. Ay, and to much pose if we must pay upon an after Bargain, and run
the Gant^et in a Covenant of Works, and have no certainty of our Salvation, but
according to the payment that we make; and if we fail to pay Rent duly whether
we have Money or no, we must be turned out of Doors; indeed Friend you sit at a
hard Rack-rent, and you must account for all dilapidatitions too, and its
danger, but that you will be turned out of all at last.


Neonom. Nor whether the Essential Blessings of the Gospel becomes the
Inheritance of a Believer as soon as he is united to Christ?


Antinom. It seems the Circumstantials are not, the Apostle mistook, when he
said, We are blessed with all Spiritual Blessings in Christ Jesus; he should
have excepted some and reserved them for good Works; but as to those Essential,
how comes it that a Man can have no more than is of a contingent Proposition,
the Judgment whereof is Opinion.


Neonom. Nor whether it be the Influence of the Spirit that we are Holy,
Obedient, and enabled to every good Work? D. W. p. 125.


Antinom. Nor would it have been the question, if Adam had persevered in the
performance of the Conditions of the Law Covenant, he would have done all by
the Influence of the Spirit.


Neonom. Nor whether it is for the sake of Christ's Merits and Incense, and of
Free Grace, that any Grace or Duty of ours is rewarded, or becomes the means of
any Benefit; these I affirm.


Antinom. Yes, for it was through these Merits and Grace that God would suffer
us to try for Life in another Covenant of Works, he might have taken the
advantage of our breaking of the first Covenant, as he did upon the Fallen
Angels; but Christ has Merited, and Grace has been so far free as to set up
another Covenant of Works, that we may try for it once more; as for your
affirming or denying it signifies not much, Men that are used to speak always
with Mental Reservation, will resolve Cases of Conscience like the Oracle of
Apollo, that you will come from them as wise as you went.


Neonom. Nor whether any Holiness internal or external, any Obedience, Work or
Duty, do at all Merit the Promise, or is the Meritorious Cause of
Righteousness, for which any promised Mercy is bestowed; this I deny.


Antinom. It seems you abdicate the word Merit, but if it be an Honest Reward
as due Debt, it is as good, the Catholics will bate you the word if you allow
the thing, though you put a Fools Coat upon it.


Neonom. I own that all is of Gift, though given in an Order suitable to our
condition in a state of Trial.


Antinom. So was Creation and Created Holiness in Adam, and God's taking him
into Covenant in an Order suitable to his Condition in a state of Trial, but
you see what his Trial came to. We are miserable if our state in Grace be such
a state of Trial.


Neonom. Nor whether the Law be a Rule of Duty? This I affirm and you too;
though you deny any Threatening or Promise to back God's Law, as to the Elect.
D. W. p. 126.


Antinom. We affirm it to be not only a Rule of Duty, but to stand in full
force, as to all its Promises and Threatenings, that it still promises Life to
perfect Obedience, and threatens Death to the least Disobedience in all without
distinction, therefore we deny not Threatenings and Promises to back God's Law
as to the Elect.


Neonom. Nor whether the Elect ought to be Holy, and will be Holy, this you
own, but you place it wholly on the Decree and Christ's Care.


Antinom. Gentlemen, observe now after all this noise he owns that I say the
Elect ought to be Holy, and will be Holy; but says I place it wrong; can I
place it better than on Christ's Care? I think in all our Fears and Doubtings
we should cast all our Care upon him by believing his Truth and Faithfulness in
the Promise, because he cares for us, and has said, He will never leave nor
forsake us, I desire to have no better Security for Holiness and Perseverance
in it than the Love of God, and the Care of Christ; is this a fault?


Neonom. You deny that God has required as it indispensibly necessary to our
Inheriting any Blessing promised to the Elect.


Antinom. In your sense I do, and if you stand so much on those Terms, I shall
justly call them into question, so far as is necessary in my sense; by works
you here chiefly understand, as I take it, works after Faith and Repentance,
are such Works indispensibly necessary to the Inheriting any Blessing promised
to the Elect? Is not Union with Christ, Faith, etc. Blessings promised to the
Elect? What Works was done before, and after the Saving Union with Christ, if
they were indispensibly necessary, how could Infants be saved? And how do they
Inherit Blessings that Repent and Believe just before they go out of the World?
And how came the Thief upon the Cross to be Saved?


Neonom. You judge Christ has done all for us, and enjoineth nothing for us to
do in order to any good thing.


Antinom. He has done all in the way of Covenant Condition, and does not admit
us to be Rivals or Partners with him in our best Works; and how can I think
that he enjoineth us nothing, when I own we ought to be Holy, and shall be
Holy? From what should it be but from Christ's Commands and Care to furnish us
with Rules, Principles, and Strength to be Holy? Does he not work in us to will
and to do?


Neonom. Nor whether a Penitent Believer shall be saved, if he die before he
has time for further Obedience.


Antinom. Then your indispensible Necessity falls to the ground; and it seems
the first Law of Grace will save a Man, and the second is not indispensibly
necessary; nay, it may be a kindness to die upon the fulfilling the condition
of the first Law by Faith and Repentance, before he comes to run the risk of
fulfilling the Condition of the second Law by persevering Works, lest he lose
all again. I am glad I have done with your Whethers, let us come next to your
Neithers; for we are as wise as we were before about our Question.


Neonom. I Will tell you then the real difference,

Whether Faith and Repentance be indispensibly required that we may be
Justified for the sake of Christ's Righteousness?


Antinom. Gentlemen, do but take notice how fond he is of his first
Justification by Works, which we dispatched the other day, and do declare we are
not Justified by Faith and Repentance in your Sense, and that to be justified
by Faith and Repentance as Conditionating Federal Qualifications, though
Merited by Christ, is downright Popery, whether you call such Conditions Merits
or no; and therefore in affirming it you assert Popish Doctrine, and that will
stand to, though all the Divines in Town affirm it with you; and if what is done
already will not be enough, we'll have the other touch upon that Point when you
please.


Neonom. It Is whether Holiness or sincere Obedience and Perseverance, are the
Way to Heaven, and are required of the Elect as the Conditions of their
obtaining Salvation.


Antinom. You should have told us what you mean by a Way, whether the first way
or second, Remote or next, Antecedent or Consequent Conditions; what Salvation
you mean, whether the Salvation of Justification, Sanctification, or
Glorification; there is as much reason good Works should qualify us for the
Salvation of Sanctification, as for Justification and Glorification; how comes
it to pass that all Salvation is not obtained the same way? If we must obtain
Salvation by good Works, we must do good Works before we are Saved: Do we not
obtain all Salvation in Christ? We are Created in Christ Jesus unto good Works;
but I find you will have nothing to be Salvation but Glorification, and that must
be Earned at our Fingers ends, and we may lose all at last for all Christ, if
we do not look the better to it, to perform sincere persevering Works till the
last Breath; the first Justification though by Works, gives no Evidence for
Heaven, you will be sure to be far enough from the Error (as you call it) of
Faith Justifying Evidentially. We say, Christ is the Way, John 14 6. and
Holiness our business in that way.


Neonom. Or whether Heaven is promised to them if they persevere in Holiness
and sincere Obedience, and the Loss of Heaven threatened, in case they continue
Wicked and Disobedient, or after Grace turn Apostates.


Antinom. Observe what Doctrine here is:

1. Here his Discourse is limited to the Elect.

2. He supposes the Elect may lose Heaven.

3. That their Obedience and Perseverance are the Conditions of their obtaining
Salvation, you take him for any Salvation, for that of the first Justification,
which he makes to be by Works; and Perseverance the obtaining condition of his
Second Justification. But I pray, what is the Condition of Persevering
Sanctification, which is Salvation too?

4. He does not only suggest but express falling away from Grace, for what is
that when he suggests an Elect Person may fall away from Grace, turn Apostate,
and lose Heaven?

5. He suggests that the Elect Person before Faith must perform these Works
before he can be saved by Justification; but this Doctrine is nothing with him;
this Doctrine I deny from the bottom of my Heart, notwithstanding his affirming
of it: Is this right stating of Truth and Error?


Neonom. The Question is, Whether the good Works of a Believer are Rewardable
of Grace for Christ's sake.


Antinom. The Question has been clearer stated to your purpose long ago
between the Papists and we, Whether Christ has Merited that we may Merit?
Whether you will call your Doctrine the Doctrine of Merit or not: We'll call a
Spade a Spade, and Antichrist must not creep in amongst us again with his
Serpentine Tricks to beguile us, as the Devil did into Paradise to Rob us of
our first Righteousness.


Neonom. Whether by the Gospel, as a Rule of Jud^ment, whoever is unholy,
utterly disobedient, altogether wilfully neglectful of good Works, shall be
condemned; this I affirm, and you deny.


Antinom. 1. The Gospel is no Law as it has to do with the Unbelieving, Wicked
World.

2. It is no Rule of Judgment, that is the Law only.

3. The Gospel did never condemn any Elect Person to Eternal Death; neither is
any Elect Person as such under a contingency of Salvation, whether he be holy
or unholy; though as Sinners, unholy and wicked Persons they are, for as such
they may be saved, and they may not, but it is not so with the Elect as such.


Neonom. Whether God has promised several Blessings (distinct from Eternal
Life) to the Exercise of several Graces, and Performances of several Duties, as
to the Improvement of Grace, etc. This you deny, and I affirm.


Antinom. We ask all outward Mercies for the sake of Christ with submission to
his Will; we reckon them not due to us because of our Duties performed, and the
Connection of Blessing (as you say) and Duty, is but the Connexing two Blessings
in the Promise upon the same Condition, for Duty is a Blessing to the Saints,
and part of that Salvation purchased by Christ, and promised in the Covenant. I
divide not what God has joined together, and call Duty not a Condition, and
Outward or Spiritual Good Things the Salvation; for I look upon the Service of
God to be the great Thing we are Redeemed to, the Salvation bestowed on us, and
not the Condition of it.


Neonom. Whether upon the acting such Graces, and upright performing such
Duties, a Christian may not in the virtue of such Promises, expect such
Blessings, and fear the neglect thereof as a Bar thereto: This you deny, and I
affirm.


Antinom. And you affirm and teach a low servile Spirit, and too bold to set
aside Christ out of the Promise, and challenge any Mercy at the Hands of God
upon the account of Duty; I think the best of the Saints have always thought
themselves less than the least of God's Mercies, and all their Righteousness,
i. e. their sincere Obedience and Perseverance to be but filthy Rags; but
that is false Doctrine with you, as I suppose we shall hear of e're long.


Neonom. Yet allowing that God may sometime exert his Sovereignty in giving
some Blessings to a Believer not answering these Rules, and he may exchange a
Blessing of a lower Nature.


Antinom. i. e. Rules of distributive Justice in rewarding him according to his
Works; and if God must do it, he must fly to his Sovereignty for Permission to
go beside this Rule, and no more than in exchanging one good thing for another;
there is no such Dispensation in the Covenant of Grace. What if God should deny
to give the Blessing workt for, and give no Succedaneum?


Neonom. Whether God is not more pleased with a Man in the Exercise of Grace
and Holiness, than when he neglects them, and does the contrary. This I affirm.


Antinom. Let me ask you, Do you mean in a way of Benevolence or Complacency?
in respect of his Person or his Services? And do you mean, He is pleased for
the Duties sake, or for Christ's sake?


Neonom. Now I shall proceed to confirm the Truth, and the Points are too many
to admit Enlargement, and many carry that Evidence, that the whole Scope of the
Bible must be forgone when they are denied. Can two or three wrested Texts
over-turn the constant Language of the Scriptures?


Antinom. You should have first stated the Question in clear Terms, and let it
have been but one, and not reserve to your self your principal Intention, and
give us out 20 Whethers and Neithers, delivered forth in a Heap of
Amphibologies, which having been sufficiently demonstrated to you, it signifies
little for the Discovery of Truth to join issue with you upon such rambling
Discourses as you make; and it is easier to call Scriptures brought against you
wrested Texts, than to prove them so.


Neonom. And it is strange, that all Religion and Humane Nature it self in a
state of Trial should be so fully struck at, from a gross Conceit that the
Infinite God cannot foresee and purpose Events, unless it must null his
Government over reasonable Subjects, and prevent his Distribution of Rewards
and Punishments by a stated Rule. D. W. p. 128.


Antinom. Here is nothing but Huff and Bounce, to talk at this rate, of wrested
Texts, overturning the Language of Scripture and Humane Nature; gross Concel^s
of God, etc.

Now let me tell you, one of the wrested Texts, which in it is plain Literal
Sense must overthrow your whole Scheme of Distribution of Rewards and
Punishments in the way that you propose: Tit. 3.4, 5, 6, 7. After the kindness
and love of God our Savior toward Man appeared, not by Works of Righteousness
which we have done, but according to his mercy has he saved us, etc. I Will tell
you what Mr. Beza says upon the place, -- Certainly not only the Works of the
Ceremonial Law, but all Works are at once excluded, or else the Antithesis of
Mercy would signify nothing here. But some will say, It Is to be understood of
Works preceding Faith, and therefore Omnia opera preparatoria, All preparatory
Works are excluded; and then tell us what it is to save; whether this be
nothing else than to ascribe a Faculty of deserving to a thing; he that says
this, does manifestly wrest the Word of God? For so the Benefit of our
Salvation is taken away from the Righteousness of subsequent Works as well as
of precedent; which appears from the Opposition made between Works and Grace;
as also from our Regeneration and Justification by Grace in the two next Verses.

But you say, the Covenant of Grace is a Rule of Distribution of Rewards and
Punishments according to Works, (which you explain doing, performing Actions on
our parts) which is to make the Covenant of Grace a Covenant of Works. And you
insinuate, that Humane Nature stands in a state of Trial for Salvation, as if
something were to be done, and is expected to be done by the Natural Man, in
order to the obtaining of Grace.


Neonom. What Reflection is it on Divine Wisdom, and the glorious Platform of
the Redeemers Work and Kingdom, that he cannot purchase Benefits for Sinners,
unless he forbear to use them as Motives to Obedience? Yea, the whole of his
serious Pleadings with men must be a Mockery, rather than he must be allowed to
bestow his Benefits in a Rectoral way.


Antinom. What a Reflection is on the Wisdom, Grace and Power of God, that he
cannot bestow his Benefits freely, that he can act no way toward poor sinful
and miserable Creatures, but in a way of Justice, in propounding Rewards to
their Works; and these must be the Motives to Duty, that he will pay them well
for their Duties! And what Reflection on the whole Work of Redemption, that all
that Sinners have got by it, is the Procurement of an Offer of Salvation in a
Covenant of Works, by offering them to live upon the condition of doing; to
allow him to have purchased Benefits, but we must pay for them before we have
them, and not be out of Debt at the first payment neither. Christ indeed,
you will say, gives us the Buying, and says, that he will get little or nothing by
it. He has set a moderate reasonable Price upon them, but we must pay in such
Money as we have; yea, and all that we have: And because we have not the Money
to lay down at once, he admits us to pay by Parts, (which is a Favor;) but if
we make a Failure, that we persevere not in sincere Doing, out of Doors we must
go: Reprobate Silver shall we be called, because the Lord has rejected us.
Your meaning of a Rectoral way I take to be nothing else but in a way of
Distributive Justice, dispensing as King and Lawgiver in the Covenant of
Grace, making and executing this Law, Do and live; for you will not have the
Covenant of Grace to run in this Tenure, Live and do. Therefore he must act no
otherwise, than in a Covenant of Works, Do and live, and accordingly dispense
Rewards and Punishments.


Neonom. That you mistake me not, When I speak of Holiness, I mean all good
Works, internal, external, praying, hearing, exact walking, Alms-deeds, any Act
of Obedience directed by the Word of God: By Doing the same Actions are
intended. Believing in Christ is Doing; it is an Action on our part, etc. D. W.
p. 129.


Antinom. We ken your meaning better than you have declared; and then why did
you not plainly state your Question thus, Whether that Christ offers to save
Sinners, and continue them in a state of Salvation on the Terms or Condition of
Doing? And you might have saved this labor of beating the Hedge to start the
Hare. Believing is Doing, it seems, and so it saves as a Work.


Neonom. My Positions that I will prove then are as follow:

1. Sinners have much to do in order to Salvation: It Is the scope of the Bible
since the Fall. We have nothing to do in a way of Atonement and Purchase, but
in order to our Participation, we must repent, believe. All the Revelations of
God are Descriptions of Duty and Benefits, but an Injunction of Duty in a
Connection with benefits, etc.


Antinom. The whole Scope of the Scriptures is not a Revelation of a Covenant
of Works, or of many Covenants of Works, but of one Law-Covenant of Works, and
of one Covenant of Grace made by way of Promise, and executed by Free-gift; the
Righteousness thereof is the Gift of Righteousness for the Condition; the
Promise is performed in Gift; The Gift of God is eternal life, Romans 5. You say
nothing is required in a way of Purchase and Atonement, i. e. in the way of the
first Purchase: But where Works are a prerequisite Condition, it makes a second
Purchase, if but of Participation. If I purchase a House for a Child or
Relation, and lay down the price of 100 l. and tell him he shall have this
House if he gives me 20 Shillings of his own Earnings, and this Contract
brought into Covenants, this Purchase will put him upon paying this
Contract-Money, and demand his Bargain; and his Money is Purchase Money, though
it be not the first Purchase-money. So that you help not the matter at all, by
saying in order to Participation; and as to Atonement, he needs none, if he
perform the Condition required; no, nor a Mediator; for Christ in your sense
should be only the Mediator of the Old Covenant, but he is ill termed by the
Scripture the Mediator of the New Covenant. You say, Revelations are
Descriptions of Duties and Benefits; I say, Discoveries and Promise of Benefits
and Duties. You say, an Injunction of Duty in a Connection of Benefits; I say,
a Promise of Benefits, rather with Connection of Duties. But indeed, the
Covenant of Grace is an Offer and Gift of Benefits in Service and Enjoyments:
For Duty is one of the great Privileges we are brought into by the Covenant;
and such is the Connection of promised Salvation unto Sinners. There Is the
Salvation of Faith and Holiness, and all the connex Propositions that is made
use of, as that Romans 10.9. and others import nothing, but that he that is saved
by Christ partakes of all his Salvation; if in Justification, then in
Sanctification and Glorification; but Christ never propounds Privileges as
Motives to Duty in your sense, by way of Payment or Reward for the Duty done.


Neonom. 2. There Is no one Saving Benefit granted a Sinner, but upon
Supposition of Duty.


Antinom. What kind of Supposition? Supposition of Duty Antecedaneous to it?
This is false; Faith is a Saving Benefit, and it is not bestowed with a
Supposition that any saving Duty is precedent to it: So our Union to Christ,
Gift of the Spirit, Justification, yea, the Grace of Sanctification it self,
are all Saving Benefits of the highest Nature.


Neonom. 3. The Influences of the Spirit and God's Institutions have no
Causality in our Salvation, if men have nothing to do in order to be saved.


Antinom. That is as much as to say, If we save not our selves, the Spirit
cannot save us. We must be our own Saviors first, or the Spirit must make us
our own Saviors, that we may be saved. I told you Adam had been saved by the
Influences of the Spirit, if he had been saved in his innocent state, and it
had never the less been a Covenant of Works.


Neonom. On what account is it said, That we believe to the saving of our
Souls, Heb. 10.39. And Repentance to Salvation, 2 Cor. 7.10. 1 Timothy 4.16?


Antinom. Those Expressions are Descriptions of true Faith and Repenrance
given, as to that 1 Timothy 4.16. We deny not that the Covenant of Grace has many
Exhortations, Directions, Encouragements to Duty, but not antecedent to the
Promise. The General Promise is first participated of, before any Duty is or
can be performed; and after participation of the Promise, Consequent to it, and
Effects of it, particular Duties and Promises do follow.


Neonom. The Destruction of Sinners under the Gospel is still laid to not
Doing, John 5.40. Their not coming, not turning and repenting.


Antinom. Yea, their blameable moral Inability and Perverseness is that which
they are under the Condemnation for: Falling upon them in their Apostasy, and
so their refusing a Remedy, is part of their Condemnation under the Law. And
therefore our Savior says, such Unbelievers are condemned already, they
remain under the Power and Sentence of the first Condemnation. Neither is the
Destruction of Sinners laid to their not doing, but not believing in Christ.
Believing is opposed to Doing, because God will not have us to be saved by
Doing. And when a Sinner comes, he is not saved by his Act in Coming, but by
Christ to whom he is come. Neither does he come till he is saved by the
Father's drawing him; and Christ finding every Sinner before he comes, shows
that he is a lost Sinner, and never comes to Salvation, till Salvation comes to
him.


Neonom. If men have nothing to do for Salvation, then Christ has no Rule to
judge them that live under the Gospel. -- Christ proceeds on the difference of
Men's Carriage and Tempers at the last Day. Consider any Description of the
last Day, you will find God saves and damns with respect to men's Neglect and
Compliance with the Gospel.


Antinom. Your Argument seems to run thus: Upon the same Terms that Man shall
be judged at the last Day, upon the same shall they be saved now: But Men shall
be judged by their Works at the last Day, Ergo, saved by Works now.

I deny your Major: If that were true, you might have some Pretense, that the
Covenant of Grace was a Covenant of Works. There Is a great deal of difference
between Christ's proceedings in the Covenant of Grace, and the Judgment of the
Last Day. 1. Christ in Covenant of Grace comes not as a Judge to condemn the
World, but to save it. 2. Christ first saves his Church, and exerts his Offices
in that Salvation, first, as Priest, to make Atonement; as Prophet, to teach by
his Word and Spirit; as King, to conquer and subdue their Hearts unto himself,
and all this is done before he rules and governs them. 3. Christ in the
Covenant of Grace acts not in his Regal Power, as King of the World, but as
King to his Church; his Mediatorial Offices are all exerted toward his
Redeemed ones, in order to the saving of them. All final Unbelievers are judged
as such as are under the Condemnation of the Law; and their Sins only judged
the more aggravated, because of their refusal of a Remedy. The Lord Jesus
Christ shall be revealed from Heaven in Plaming Fire, taking Vengeance upon
them that know not God, and those that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ. The slighting and rejecting a Remedy offered, is a ground of more
severe proceeding in the way of Execution of the Sentence which the condemned
Person lay under before. How shall ye escape, that neglect so great Salvation.
The Talents mentioned, Matthew. 25.21, 24, 28. refer only to the distinction that
appears between Professors. Some act from common Grace only, some by special
Grace: Some are carried no further than common Grace will carry them, and
therefore bring not forth real Fruit unto God, and are not in Christ Jesus,
have only common Graces and Gifts.


Neonom. I could easily demostrate, that if men have nothing to do in order to
Salvation, the Ministry of Christ and his Apostles -- is all Vanity and
Falsehood, etc. They are cold Pleadings with Sinners that are not backed with
Life and Death.


Antinom. It Is easy to demostrate that an unsaved Person can do nothing in
order to Salvation; and if they can, the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles is
false. For Christ himself says, Without me ye can do nothing; and we are
sanctified in Christ Jesus, and created in him to good Works, and Christ
works in us to will and to do: All this is Salvation. The first true Motive
to a Sinner is the Salvation wrought by Christ already for Sinners, in his
Death and Satisfaction: The Promise of Heaven is a Secondary Motive; but is not
to be brought as a Primary Motive. The rendering Life and Death to working or
not working is the preaching of the Law, and of the Letter, and makes the
Gospel such a Law as is the Ministration of Condemnation. And to conclude my
Answer to the Proof of that Position,

That Sinners have much to do in order to Salvation: And to prove it in the
Negative, I offer this Argument:

They that can do nothing in order to Salvation till they are saved, have not
much to do in order to Salvation: But Sinners can do nothing in order to
Salvation till they are saved, Ergo, a Sinner has not much to do in order to
Salvation in your Sense. I leave you to consider of it, and the Evidence of it;
for you cannot but apprehend the Demonstration that is therein; for doing must
be here understood effective: Such Works you speak of, as appears by what
follows.


Neonom. True Holiness, sincere Obedience or good Works, and Perseverance, are
the way to Heaven, and so necessary to the Salvation of a Believer, that
without them he cannot be saved, and continuing in them he shall be saved.


Antinom. I find you make Holiness or Sanctification, and Salvation two things,
whereas Sanctification is a part of Salvation. True Holiness is the way to
Heaven, but it is Salvation as well as the Perfection of Heaven. Holiness is the
way to Heaven, as Childhood, and then youthful Age is to Manhood in the full
Stature. Grace, it is a growing unto that Perfection we shall have in Glory, but
it is not part of a conditionating way to Heaven foederally. Heaven is bestowed
on Sanctified ones upon as free a Promise as Justification and Sanctification;
and we say it is our Business in Christ the Way.


Neonom. I shall give you diverse Arguments against your Position. 1. It Is not
saving Faith that is not Operative. D. W. p. 132.


Antinom. The Eye is the most sensible part in the Body as to the Sense of
Feeling, yet does not see conomine. By virtue of Feeling, Faith brings forth
Fruits, but it does not justify by it is Fruits. Faith brings forth Fruits, but
it does not justify as Fruitful; for that would bring us under a Covenant of
Works.


Neonom. Obedience, good Works and Perseverance preserve us from contrary
Evils. Paul kept his Body under, 1 Cor. 9.27.


Antinom. They have their usefulness in their kind; but we are kept from Evils
by the Grace of God, and not by our Works; Grace also preserves us in them, and
not they preserve us. What Paul says he did, he did for the Gospel-sake, 1
Cor. 9.23. from a Gospel-Principle, the Love of God, arising from the sight and
sense of the Grace of God in the Gospel; and for this end, the Glory of God in
the Promise: And he said, By the Grace of God I am what I am; not ascribing
Foederal Efficacy to inherent Graces or Duties.


Neonom. Gospel-Constitutions show that it contains Promises and Threatenings.
2. It shows persevering Holiness, sincere Obedience or good Works as necessary
to Salvation.


Antinom. It is one thing what a thing contains, and another what it is. A
House contains Tables, Libraries, Beadsteds, Men and Women; but a House is not
therefore a Table, Library, Beadstead, a Man or a Woman. The Covenant of Grace
sets up a Government, a Glorious King, has Laws, Directions, Precepts, but it
is not either of them. Whatever the Covenant has, and is inseparable from it,
does not argue the Covenant to be the same. A wise Man is inseparable from
Wisdom as such, yet is not Wisdom. A Rational Man has Reason, yet that Man is
not Reason.


Neonom. Most of the Promises and Threatenings that refer to the state in the
Bible, are Evangelical Promises and Threats. D. W. p. 133.


Antinom. Christ in the Bible speaks two ways, by way of Precept, and backing
them with Threats and Promises. 1. As King of Nations, and Governor of the
World: So he deals with Men as he will deal with them at last in a way of a
Covenant of Works. Christ also governs his Church, where he has his peculiar
Right of Legislation, and his Government is double. 2. As to his Mystical or
Visible Body, his Spiritual Rule is according to the Tenure of the Covenant of
Grace. His Government in respect of the mixed and politic State, must be also
mixed, because of Hypocrisy. Christ's Government of his Churches as Visible
Polities and Societies, is a mixed Government, having in his House Vessels of
Honor and of Dishonor: Many are led to external Conformity by his Precepts
and Commands legally submitted to only, having not received Evangelical
Principles. Quicquid recipitur recipitur ad modum recipientis. Precepts and
Promises of the Gospel work no otherwise with them than by a Spirit of Bondage,
and come to them no otherwise than in the Tenure of the Covenant of Works: And
thence the Lord Jesus Christ speaks in that manner to whole Societies and
Churches, both under the Old Testament, and under the New. As to the Seven
Churches of Asia, where there were many formal outside Professors, that never
received the Truth of the Gospel in the love of it, he tells them what they
must expect in that mercenary and bondage-way of Profession without Life and
Love, wherein they did walk; yet he governs them as Politic Head of his
Church, they having given themselves to his Government, at least in an outward
Profession, according to which he deals with them. And therefore the Apostle
tells us, the Law is not made for the Righteous Man, in respect of it is Threats
and Denunciations, but for the Lawless, Disobedient, Ungodly, etc. or for any
thing contrary to sound Doctrine, which is according to the Glorious Gospel of
the blessed God, 1 Timothy 1.10, 11. The Precepts and Commands of Christ therefore
have a double Aspect, Evangelical and Legal, as they are received by his
Visible Subjects. Some receive them from Law-Principles, some from Evangelical.


Neonom. Gospel-Constitution contains Promises and Threatenings, which affect
all of us as a Rule of Righteousness and Misery, by these God governs; and
Men's Hopes and Fears should be directed by these as a Rule. You not observing
this, have opened a Door to all Licentiousness -- Your whole Scheme implies,
that Christ does not distribute Blessings and Punishments by any Rule that
refers to the actings of Men. D. W. p. 133.


Antinom. This is a round Assertion, That the Gospel-Constitution is a Covenant
of Works: That Constitution that affects all as a Rule of Righteousness and
Misery, is a Covenant of Works of the severest Nature: But you say, the
Gospel-Constitution is such, Ergo, a Covenant of Works: For that which affects
as a Rule of Righteousness and Misery, on the Penalty of non-attainment to that
Rule; and God deals with Men thus by Hopes and Fears, that Men may be governed
by them, as they find their Righteousness, or fall into their Misery, is such
an Account of a Gospel-Constitution, that I question not but to find as good in
Seneca, and among many of the Heathen Moralists: And if that be my mistake,
that I understand not such a Gospel-Constitution, I must declare I know no such
Gospel-Constitution as yet.


Neonom. If that Covenant of Grace be conditional, and Faith and Repentance are
necessary to Forgiveness, the Substance of it must be granted.


Antinom. i. e. If the Covenant of Grace be a Moral Law, and Faith and
Repentance be the Moral Conditions to Forgiveness, the Substance must be
granted; and it will be so indeed, you will still be leaping in and out of
Covenant, from Righteousness to Misery, and from Misery to your miserable
Righteousness, and between your Hopes and Fears, falling short of the
Righteousness of God, you will fall deplorably into eternal Misery.

But in what Body of Ethics do you find a Rule of Misery treated of? I think
it is no where treated of but in the Neonomian Theology, no more than the Rule
of Sin, which is (...).


Neonom. Most Promises and Threatenings in the Bible that referr to the state of
Souls, are Evangelical Promises and Threats, and are not the Sanction of the
Law of Innocence, but of Gospel Grace.


Antinom. The whole Word of God contains but Law and Gospel, and all matters of
Duty commanded referr to the one or to the other; and all Duties enjoined with
a Connection of Promises and Threats, and so performed as such only, are legal,
and must be reckoned as belonging to the Law of Works; but all Evangelical
Duties are performed from a Principle of Grace, and not for Reword or Fear. But
let us hear your Proof.


Neonom. Who can doubt this, if they consider, 1. The Covenant of Innocence
promised to nothing below sinless and perfect Obedience. D. W. p. 104.


Antinom. It promised to Man upon Obedience which God required, and so it is in
every Covenant; the Obedience required is perfect in respect of the Covenant,
let it be more or less that is required. No Covenant admits of any Abatement or
Defect in the Conditions required. 2. If this be a Covenant of Innocence, your
Covenant opposed to it must be a Covenant of Nocency, because, as you say, it
admits of a contrary Condition, viz. A sinful Obedience.


Neonom. The Threatenings of the Covenant of Innocence admitted no Repentance,
or after-relief to the Guilty: They did fix the Curse irrevocable in case of
any Transgression


Antinom. Who told you the Covenant of Works would admit of no Relief for the
Guilty; if not, how came any? How came it to pass that Relief was given before
the Sentence was passed upon Man? Surely if the Covenant could not admit of it
by Virtue of it is Constitution, it could not have been just with God to have
given it. 2. As to Repentance, it did naturally belong to the Breach of God's
Law, and Man's falling into Misery. Indeed it did not admit of Repentance as an
Expiation of the Sin, and a Condition of Life, no more does the Gospel; so that
Law and Gospel are agreed in that. 3. And as to the irrevocable fixing of the
Curse, grant it was so, yet not without admitting a Relief, provided it might
consist with the irrevocable Curse, i. e. That the Law might have it is full
Satisfaction, both to Sufferings and Obedience, as it had in Christ, the
Sentence of the Law is not repealed or revoked in the Covenant of Grace, but
confirmed and fulfilled, whereby the Guilty have their Relief. The Law is not
against the Promise, Gal. 3.21. No, God forbid; it is well pleased with it,
because it has all that it can require. The Law is not dispensed with in
saving Sinners, it has it is Ends, Christ being the end of the Law for
Righteousness to all that believe. The Gospel establishes the Law.


Neonom. 2. No Overture of Life, or door of Hope, or Argument to Conversion,
with Hopes of Acceptance, could be framed out of those Legal Threats and
Promises; Turn ye, Turn ye, was not the Language.


Antinom. Nor from any other upon Terms of the like Nature, viz. Do and Live.
And why was it, that no Door of Hope is open to Man fallen, upon those Terms?
it was because he ^id not do, and now is dead, and he must live now before he
can do; till Grace give Life, it is but a Conviction to him that God faith, Turn
you, Turn you; for till God give him Life, and turn him, Turn you, turn you, is
but the Triumph of the Law; and all the Turnings of a poor Sinner in his
Natural Estate, is no more than the turning of a Dead Carcass; it is dead still,
there is no returning to Life by turning, till the effectual Voice of Christ
prevail, who is the Resurrection and the Life.


Neonom. See any one of the Calls to Faith and Repentance, or Holiness thus
backed with Promises and Threats, be not Evangelical.


Antinom. Calls to Faith and Repentance, as Commands to Sinners to perform the
Acts and Duties thereof upon Threats and Promises; and as those Works that
shall bring us into Covenant, are so far from being Evangelical, as they are
highly Legal, yea, super-legal. 1. Legal; for it makes a Covenant of Works.
What matter if God require not the same Individual Act as a Condition of Life,
if he require another? What, if instead of forbearing to eat an Apple, the
Condition be now to forbear the eating of a Pear? What if perfect Obedience was
then required, and imperfect now? Both were Obedience; only now you will have a
Dispensation for Sin to come into the Condition, which reflects upon the
Holiness and Justice of God, or Power of God, that he did not, nor could give
us Life in a way of perfect Obedience and sinless, but must have Recourse to
sinful. Likewise the only Obligation that lies upon a mere natural Man to obey
God, when he commands Faith and Repentance, is the Law; for he is under no
other Law but that of Works. 2. It is also super-legal, (1.) To bring fallen
Man into Covenant upon working Conditions, is more than was with Adam; he did
not work himself into Covenant; God took him freely into Covenant without
Conditions; all the Condition was Perseverance for keeping him in Covenant, as
yours is. (2.) God here requires Works where there is no Power. God gave Adam
the Power before he required Obedience.


Calvin. In my Approbation, Gentlemen, you do but lose time. Mr. Antinom.
argues at a mighty low rate; I will take his Position and put it into right
Terms, and then see, Mr. Antinom. how you like it.

Salvation by Gospel Grace is so necessary to a Sinner, for the working Faith,
Obedience, Good Works and Perseverance in the way to Heaven, that without it he
cannot perform them, or continue in them.


Antinom. So I like it well.


Neonom. That Is quite contrary to my Sense: For I do not say that Salvation by
Grace is the Cause of sincere Faith, and Obedience, and Perseverance; but that
Sincerity in Performance of Faith and Obedience with Perseverance is necessary
as a Cause of Salvation. I spoke before of coming into Justification by
qualifying Faith and Repentance, by the Government of a Rule of Righteousness
and Misery, our Minds being thereby affected with Hopes and Fears. I will now
show you that by this Gospel-Constitution, Persevering Holiness, sincere
Obedience or good Works are necessary to Salvation. D. W. p. 137.


Antinom. I have told you, that if these be right, i. e. True Gospel-Holiness,
they be a great part of Salvation, and they are no more necessary than a Part
is to the Whole. All Graces and Duties are the necessary parts of a saved
Sinner. And there are two sorts of Necessaries, Essentially necessary, and
Necessary as to well-being; as Anima rationalis is essentially necessary to a
Man: But there are many things as to Integrity, Ornaments and Usefulness.

Now I say, as these things are in Salvation, or belonging to it; for being in
their kind, for well-being, Usefulness, Adorning, etc. so they are necessary:
But if you look upon them and Salvation as two distinct things, they are not
necessary to give you right to any part of Salvation.


Neonom. He that made Faith necessary to Justification, has made Obedience
necessary to Salvation.


Antinom. It seems by you Justification and Salvation are specifically
distinct, which they are not; they differ but as Genus and Spectes; for
Salvation is the Genus both of Justification, Sanctification and Glory: And in
the same kind as you make Faith and Repentance necessary to Justification, so
you may make your Sincerity and Perseverance. You do but tire out your selves
and us in an ambiguous Word, in which you would not have us know your meaning;
but he must and cannot be mistaken in it.


Neonom. He has as well promised Heaven to the Godly Man, as Pardon to the
Believer.


Antinom. As if a Believer were not a Godly Man, and Heaven were not promised
to him. A Believer is a Godly Man, and the Promise of all things that appertain
to Life and Godliness through the Knowledge of him that has called him to
Glory and Virtue, Glory and Virtue are promised to him, 2 Pet. 1.3.


Neonom. And our Perseverance in Holiness and Obedience is as truly our way to
Glory, as the Scriptures can describe.


Antinom. It Is one thing to be a way in the Covenant-state, and another thing
to be a way to it: Salvation has it is ways of Degrees in it, Sanctification is
but a degree of Glorification. When we are changed into the Image of Christ,
it is from Glory to Glory by the Spirit of God, 2 Cor. 3.6.


Neonom. Nothing of these merit Heaven; but he that merited Heaven, has
peremptorily appointed these to bring us thither. Heb. 6.10, 11, 12.


Antinom. He that merited the End, has merited the Means; and the means to
work in such a way as shall not rob him of the Honor of his Merits: He has
not merited, that we should deserve, but he must have the Honor of all our
Salvation. The things spoken of, Heb. 6.10. are (...), comprehended in
Salvation. He spoke of false-hearted Professors before, now he was persuaded
better things of them, that to them true Salvation did belong, and that through
Grace that brings Salvation they had truth of Faith, and Love to his Name,
which they showed in their Love to his Saints; and therefore encourages them
in the Stability of the Promises, from the Truth and Justice of God that made
them, and that they should not fail of all in God's Order; and therefore
exhorts them to full Assurance of Hope; that God who gave Grace, will give
Glory, and will withold no good thing; and therefore encourages to persist
in Faith, and Hope, and the true Fruits thereof from the Grace of God they had
received, and the stability thereof, as he exhorts to the Practice of Christian
Duties, Heb. 13.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. and Ver. 5. For he has said, he will never
leave thee nor forsake thee: So that we may boldly say, The Lord is my helper.
Is not this Salvation? And that there is Rewards in Grace, it is not denied, but
they are all to Christ and his Members, not upon the attaining of
Conditionating Qualifications. And we deny not but the Lord Jesus exhorts to
Labor, and Diligence, and Perseverance, and rebukes Slothfulness; and all
these are Benefits, (for so I call all Covenant Duties that are connext to
Promises) but all within the Covenant: The obtaining a Covenant-state, or
continuance in it, is not to be ascribed to them, but they are to be assigned
to our Salvation, and to the Fullness, Perpetuity and Permanency of the Covenant.


Neonom. Christ declares in the Gospel they shall miss of Heaven, and Eternally
perish who are Apostates, Ungodly, Disobedient, and Unprofitable. This is not
the Doom of the Law. D. W. p. 138.


Antinom. That Is false; does not the Spirit of God say in the Gospel, The Law
is made for the Lawless and Disobedient, 1 Timothy 1.9. and that it dooms whatever
thing is contrary to Sound Doctrine. Denunciations against Sin and Sinners in
the Gospel, is but telling the Sense and Judgment of the Law. The Gospel, qua
talis, cannot doom any to Death, it being only the offer of a Remedy; those
that embrace it not, it leaves them as it found them, it found them dead, and
so it leaves them, and their further penalty is from the Law, of being more
inexcuseable for their rejecting the Remedy; and says to them, How will he
escape that neglects so great Salvation? i. e. How will they escape that
Condemnation that they are under already?


Neonom. It Is not against every imperfect degree of Godliness but Ungodliness.
It Is not every defect of Obedience but Disobedience, not against every neglect
of Fruitfulness, but such as argues a dead and barren State.


Antinom. These are such as are under the Law; and whatever the Word of God
says to them, it is the Law denouncing their Doom, and by your own Doctrine
they are not come into the Bounds of a Gospel Covenant, having not performed
the Conditions of sincere Obedience. On the other hand you own, that these
Dooms and Threatenings do not belong to those in Covenant, though they have Sins,
and Failings, and Falls, yet the Gospel does not doom them, nor the Threats
belong to them, because the Gospel admits imperfect and sinful Obedience. But
the Law condemns the least Sin even in God's Children, and the Gospel admits of
no Sin, nor approves of it, but is to save us from it.


Neonom. Art thou so unskilful in the Word, as not to remember Heb. 10.38, 39?
If any Man draw back? Is this a Threatening or not? Is it not true of all
Persons? Do not say the Elect Believer will not fall away: I think the same:
But yet is it the less true, that even he shall perish if he fall away?


Antinom. I wish you and I were more skilful in the Word than we are. Will you
have such Expressions as these to be part of the Covenant of Grace, which are
Sentences of Death to Hypocrites and Unbelievers? Christ will send away many
such at the last Day, with I know you not, depart from me, etc. Will you say,
that will be preaching the Gospel to them, and giving them a Law of Grace? No,
no; when Christ judges as Judge of all the World, he will judge but by one
Law, under which those will fall who have not obeyed the Gospel; though their
Punishment will be the more higthned, in that they have refused the Remedy.
There are many things in the Scripture, as Declarations of Truths of one kind
or another, Description of Persons, Histories, Miracles, etc. Discriminations
of Persons and Things, which are not to be reckoned the Essentials of the
Covenant of Grace, but for the Been esse of it, the Usefulness and Advantage of
those to whom it does belong. If we make every Work in the Scripture spoken of
to be a Condition of the Covenant of Grace, we shall not tell where to find it.


Neonom. Salvation is promised to Perseverance, Rev. 2.10. 2 Timothy 4.7.


Antinom. Perseverance is Salvation; and in the Promise is an Assurance of the
Connection of all Salvation one part to another; for every one that is saved, is
saved with all Salvation, and it is an Encouragement and Motive to the Saints to
hold on their way in growth of Grace; not that by every Step they gain in
Holiness, the more they shall be qualified for, and deserving what shall
follow; but that still there are greater things behind, and that the Sufferings
of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the Glory that shall be
revealed; that the Covenant of Promise is full of Promises, Gifts and Rewards.
But the Question betwixt us is, upon what account they are made and received?
Some say they describe Men whom God does save by the Effects of his Grace upon
them.


Neonom. Not mere natural Signs, but moral Institutes. They are Qualifications
which God appoints as Prerequisites to Blessings.


Antinom. Prerequisites to Blessings and Moral Qualifications must be such as
are not Blessings of the Covenant; or else all this while you say just nothing,
in saying, God gives Blessings orderly one after another, and we are encouraged
by the Promise to go from one Covenant Gift to another. Hence in Perseverance
and Growth in Grace, the Saints have the clearer Prospect of Heaven, which they
hope e're long to live in as the Crown of Glory, and there to perfect and
complete Happiness and Holiness.


Neonom. They cannot add what is proper to Christ, but they signify more than
Concomitants; they are things without which the Gospel-Rule will exclude Men
from Heaven, and condemn to Hell, let your Pretenses be what they will. Rev.
22.14. D. W. p. 140.


Antinom. They signify so much more than Concomitants, insomach that they are
Blessings promised, Perseverance in Obedience. I will write my Law in their
Heart, and they shall not depart from me. When they come under this Promise, of
doing God's Commandments, they are soon come also to what remains. When they
are most holy, they are no more fit for the Promise by way of moral
Qualification to entitle them to it, than they were at first Conversion. We
perform Duties, walk in God's way, etc. not as entitling Blessings, but as such
which Christ has entitled us to; and so we receive the Promise, not as
entitled to it, but in Christ. In this Sense is that place to be understood,
Rev. 22.14. Blessed are they that do his Commandments, [they have one part of
the Blessing of the Promise in a way of Holiness] they shall also have the
Privilege of the Tree of Life in a state of Glory. I find this Word (...),
used so John 1.12. As many as received him to them was given power or
privilege to become the Sons of God. So that Obedience persevered in, gives
Title to Glory here, no more than the first believing entitles to Adoption, but
that it is in the way to it. Such do enter by the Gates into the City, but
Christ is the Way both of Justification, Sanctification and Glory, both by way
of Condition to entitle us, and Promise to bestow it; and they show such are
entered by the Door Christ Jesus, John 19.


Neonom. Consider they have a relation to each other in Scripture Phrase, as
Seed and Harvest, Work and Waget, they are declared rewardable; For they are
worthy, Rev. 3.4.


Antinom. No Works of the Saints are rewardable of God in themselves, but in
Christ; and as to their Order of bestowing succeeding Covenant-blessings. They
are called Seed, because one good Work grows up through Grace into another, till
we be fruitful in every good Work, the Fruitfulness in more and greater Glory
is the Crop; all which Fruitfulness is in Christ the Vine, the last which are
the best, as well as the first: And for the Worthiness spoken, Rev. 3.4. it is
strange that any Protestant should pretend that it is any other Worthiness than
that of Imputed Righteousness.


Neonom. The Gospel declares no less than a Connection between Good Works and
Glory. P. 140.


Antinom. What then? Are they therefore to be rewarded as meritorious or
deserving? All things connected are not deserving one of another.


Neonom. God declares good Works as rewardable of Grace through Christ.


Antinom. That which is Rewardable of Grace is not of Debt; but for the
Worthiness of another, not for it self: Therefore what you add cuts off all
that you contend for. You say, through Christ is the walking in White, for which
the Saints are said to be Worthy. Is the walking Christ's Righteousness? Rev.
3.4. So all Rewards spoken of as given to the Saints here or hereafter, is for
the Worthiness of Christ: For as all their Duties are performed in and through
Christ, so they are accepted and rewarded in and through Christ; and their
Works are no more rewarded for themselves, than accepted for themselves.


Neonom. By Perseverance we are to work out our Salvation. Phil. 2.12.


Antinom. Working out our Salvation with fear and trembling there, denotes a
continual maintaining a holy Jealousy of our selves, lest we should fail of
the Grace of God by trusting in our selves; for it is immediately added, For
it is God that works in you both to will and to do. All other places mentioned
by you show this, that in the Covenant of Grace there is Holiness here, and
Glory hereafter; it is all Salvation; yea, there are Promises of other things,
Godliness having the Promise of the things of this Life, and that which is to
come. We deny not a Connection of Duties and Promises in abundance, but both
Duties and particular Blessings come in all by way of Promise and Free Grace:
So that Works are not the Condition of coming into Covenant, nor of abiding in
Covenant with God.


Neonom. P. 146. I will sum up all, and appeal to thee, 1. Whether God does
require any more of any Sinners for Salvation, than that they believe in
Christ, repent of Sin, persevere in true Holiness, sincere Obedience or Good
Works internal and external: And if we do so, can we perish? Has not Christ
provided all else? And does not the Promise secure Life upon doing of these?


Antinom. Why do you say, Whether God require any more? As if this was so
little. I tell you, this is more than he required of Adam in Innocence by Faith
and Repentance [according to your self;] he required nothing but Perseverance
in him, when he had Life and Ability to act from and by it; but you will have a
poor impotent dead Sinner do all this for Life. 2. You say, If we do so, i. e.
if we perform this as part of Salvation, we cannot perish, our own Works are
our Security from perishing. And as to other things necessary to Salvation,
Christ has provided them. So that the Work is divided betwixt us, part of it
to us, and part to Christ: But however, if Christ has not made so certain
Provision for us, and made any Default on his part, we are secured of Salvation
by doing of ours: For the Promise secures Life to us upon our doing these. If
this is not to make the Gospel a more overgrown and swinging Covenant of Works
than ever the Old Law was, I have lost all my Theological Measures. And here we
have the main difference between the first and last, that Christ stands by to
see what is wanting: But his great business is to see us saved by our own Works
from first to last. As for Faith, Repentance, Good Works, sincere persevering
Obedience, internal and external, they are our Foederal Conditions, upon the
Performance whereof the Promise of all Salvation in Justification and Adoption
and Glorification is due Debt to us; and if Christ has done any thing for us,
it is due to us upon these Terms, whatever he has provided besides.


Neonom. Well, I will make you one Challenge more, and so leave you. P. 146. If
any Sinner believe not, and repent not, has Christ ever promised to save him?


Antinom. Indeed those Sinners that believe not, nor repent not, he has not
named them by name; but God forbid that he has not promised to save Thousands
that believe not, and repent not; for the Promise is to Christ first to save
his Seed, and this is the Promise, that Christ's Office is to seek and save
them that are lost. And I think all Men are so, till Christ finds any, by
giving Faith and Repentance to them, for which end he is exalted: And these are
the Sheep of his, which he has promised shall hear his Voice, and shall come
into his Fold; these are among the chiefest of Sinners, before they ever have
Faith and Repentance. The Lo-ammi, who shall become the Children of the living
God. Ay, but you say, will any Decree or Merits of Christ secure them? so that
every poor Impenitent Unbelieving Sinner is in a desperate Condition: There Is
no Decree of God, nor Merits of Christ can save them: So that both Decree and
Merits were all conditional, provided he believe, neither Decree or Merits can
secure Salvation to him. And do they not secure Faith and Repentance as part of
their Salvation, and so one part as well as another, and upon the same Terms?


Neonom. Again, if any penitent Believer shall Apostatize, prove ungodly and
unfruitful, hate God, or neglect to love God and his Neighbor wholly, etc.
Shall this Man be saved? Has not Christ determined the contrary? Will his
first Faith save him?


Antinon. I suppose you can mean no other than a True Believer by your Penitent
Believer. One that is Godly, loves God, and is fruitful; if any such an one
should Apostatize, etc. wholly, i. e. fall away from Grace. Here we can
understand your meaning no otherwise, but that such a thing may be, and
sometimes is, or else why do you not make the like Supposition concerning the
good Angels? And what follows? Say you, Shall his First Faith save him? i. e.
Shall Christ that once saved him, save him again? Has not Christ that has
once saved him, determined to save^ him no more? These are pretty Enquiries,
deep School Cases: And wherefore is all this but to show, that our Security of
standing and keeping in Covenant with God, and of all our Salvation, lies not
on Electing Grace, nor on the Merits of Christ, but on our own Works of Faith
and Obedience. The Resolution of these Questions, you say, according to the
Scope of the Word, will decide the Main of this Controversy; and I will tell
you how much they concern the matter in hand. As to the first:

If a Man have a Healthy Body, and strength of Nature to live till Fourscore
Years of Age, he shall not die a young Man. And whether, if he take the Care of
his own Health and Safety, God has not provided every thing else for him? Or
thus: If a Man get a good Estate, and hold it till he dies, whether this Man
can die a poor Man? But our Question rightly put, runs thus, Seeing God has
provided by his Decree or Promise, that this or that Sinner shall have true
Grace, and he that has it, shall never finally lose it; whether his
Perseverance and Security depends upon his Works and Actings, or upon the
Decree and Promise? The Assembly, Chap. 17. of the Perseverance of the Saints,
says, -- They that are effectually called shall not finally fall from the
state of Grace, but certainly persevere; which Perseverance depends not upon
their own Free Will, but upon the Immutability of the Decree of Election -- The
Efficacy of the Merit and Intercession of Christ -- The abiding of the Spirit,
the nature of the Covenant of Grace, from which arises the Certainty and
Infallibility thereof.

As to your second Appeal, it has as much as this in it; If a Man get up to
the top of the Monument, and throw himself down from thence, he will certainly
break his Neck. Or thus; If a good Angel fall into Pride and Sin as Beelzebub
did, he will be laid in Chains of Darkness in the same manner as he. If Abraham
should blaspheme God, he would be tumbled out of Heaven. If a Man wax on Wings
to his Shoulders, and fly toward the Sun like Icharus, the Wax melts, and down
comes he headlong. Such Propositions as these are the Rules of Christ's Rectoral
Distribution with you, and the Decree comes not in opposition; whereas the
Decree spoils the Hypothesis; for do but assume upon the Proposition, and you
will find it so, that the Decree spoils it as to the Event.

God's Rule of Government is not a Proposition founded upon an Impossibility,
Posito Decreto; neither is his Decree as you would make it, subservient to his
Rule of Government, but all his Government and Rules thereof are founded on,
and guided according to his good Will and pleasure in his Decree.

What you quote out of the Assembly's Confession, is nihil ad Rhombum, but all
against you; for none denies God's Approbation of our Obedience, the great Uses
and Ends of it, the acceptance of it, and rewarding it in Christ, etc. ut
supra.

The Ends and Uses which they mention is not amiss to repeat, because you
charge the same Assertion on Dr. Cr. for his great Error.

Assemb. Chapter 16. Good Works done in obedience to God's Commands, are the Fruits
and Evidences of a true and lively Faith, and by them Believers make manifest
their Thankfulness, strengthen their Assurance, edify their Brethren, adorn
the Profession of the Gospel, stop the Mouths of Adversaries, and glorify God,
whose Workmanship they are, created in Christ Jesus thereunto; that having
their Fruit unto Holiness, they may have the end, Eternal Life. And as for Dr.
O. whom you quote from p. 222. Of Justification, he is there disputing against
these Tenants of yours, and grants the like Uses and Ends of our Personal
Righteousness as the Assembly, that it is indispensably required by God, he
approves of it and accepts it in Christ, it evidenceth Faith, it is pleadable
against Satan and the World. And after some explication of his meaning in these
things, he says, -- Hence it appears how little force there is in that
Argument, which some pretend to be of so great weight in this Cause, [among
them you are one.] As every one, say they, shall be judged of God at the last
Day, in the same way and manner, and on the same grounds, is he justified of
God in this Life; but by Works, and not by Faith alone every one shall be
judged at the last Day: Wherefore by Works, and not by Faith alone, every one
is justified before God in this Life.

This he answers, and condemns the following Proposition, or not far from it.

That God pardons Men's Sins, gives them the Adoption of Children, with a right
to an Heavenly Inheritance according to their Works, which (says he) is not
only Foreign to she Gospel, but destructive of it. And you say, that Forgiving,
Adopting and Glorifying, etc. Judicial Acts of God as a Rector, is in a way of
rectoral Distribution of Rewards.

Luth. on Gal. 3.22. says, Works done without Faith are under a Curse, though
they have never so good a show of Holiness: Wherefore so far off is it, that
the Doers thereof deserve Grace, Righteousness and Eternal Life, that rather
they heap Sin upon Sin. After this manner the Pope works, and all Merit-mongers.


DEBATE XIV. Of Intending our Souls Good by Duties we perform.
Neonom. THE next Error that I charge upon this Antinomian is, That he says,
No Man ought to propose to himself any Advantage by any Religious Duty he
performs, nor ought he in the least intend the profit of his own Soul by any
Christian Endeavors, it being vain and unlawful to do any thing with an Eye to
our Spiritual or Eternal Good, though in subordination to God's Glory in
Christ. D. W. p. 152.


Antinom. I suppose you will not only charge but prove the very things you
charge in those words.


Neonom. I will: you say, There is nothing you can do from whence you ought to
expect any gain unto your selves, etc. Christ has redeemed us that we should
not henceforth live to our selves, but to him that died for us, etc. The
Scripture is plentiful in this, That no Believer for whom Christ died, should
have the least thought in his Heart of promoting or advancing himself, to any
end of his own by doing what he does. Dr. C. p. 150.


Antinom. Gentlemen, he deals with me as (you have found upon Examination) he
has done formerly -- I was Preaching upon Romans 10.2, 3, 4. and was showing,
That Zeal of God proves not a Man a Child of God, Dr. C. p. 144, 148.
and I told them, All aim at this, that you Build not upon Foundations that
will fail you, when you come to trial, there is absolutely perfection enough in
the Righteousness of Christ alone for your Rest and Security, that you shall
not need to trust to any thing you do for Life and Peace. This is that which
God calls you to, to go torth from your own Righteousness, to rest solely and
only upon the Righteousness of Christ, if ever you mean to have Comfort in this
World, or in the World to come. I answered this Objection; you will say, This
is the way to destroy all Righteousness and Obedience whatsoever: What a Man
never a jot the better, though never so zealous after God, though his Eye and
aim be after God in his Zeal! A. The World is grown to a miserable pass that
Obedience, Zeal, and seeking after God be of no use at all, except a Man
himself be a Gainer by his Obedience; it is now as it was in the time of the
Psalmist, Psalm. 4. Every one will be ready to cry out, Who will show us any
good? And if any thing be proposed to Men to be done, they answer, But what
shall I get by it? Every one will be ready to shun such an Office or Employment
that carry about with them a great deal of labor and expense of time, and
brings in no profit. -- I must tell you freely, There Is not one Duty you
perform, when you have attained the highest pitch, that has any prevalency and
availableness to produce and to bring forth any, though the least good to your
selves. You ought not to think to seek again to your selves by doing, or bring
Christ to your selves by doing; You are not your own, says the Apostle, but
you are bought with a price, therefore glorify God in your Bodies and Spirits.
Christ has redeemed us that we should not henceforth live to our selves, but
to Christ that died for us.

Now in this Discourse I intend these things.

1. That our Duties ought not to Rob Christ's Righteousness of the procuring
virtue it has of all the Blessings and Good that we have.

2. That we ought not to perform Duties from a Mercenary Principle, thinking
thereby to obtain good things of God.

3. That we rest not in the Duty done.

4. That Duties barely considered in themselves, though of the highest Nature,
are not available to obtain any thing of God, for what will our Righteousness
profit him? And when we have done all we are unprofitable Servants, and have
done less than we ought to do; therefore there is no reason from our best Duties
why God should bestow any good thing upon us.

5. That we should do Duties from a gracious Spirit of Ingenuity, for the Glory
of God, and Free Grace, not from a poor, narrow, and selfish Spirit. Not but
that I am for Duty in a right manner, and for a right end.


Neonom. He intends to forbid our intending our own Good, though in
subordination to God's Glory, and laying no stress of meriting; for (says he)
People may think here is a mavelous discouragement to Persons, to do what God
calls them to do, when they shall have nothing for it. I answer, When there is
a Spirit of Ingenuity they shall be as Industrious to glorify God, to do good
to Men, as if they did it for themselves. They shall do as much for Good
already bestowed, as if they were to procure it by their own doing.


Antinom. Is this not to intend my own Good, whereas it is not only to intend
it, but to attend it, and walk in the highest Comfort and Enjoyment of it? as
when Esau and Jacob passed mutual Complements; Esau says, I have enough; but
Jacob says, I have all. It is as plain as may be made, 1. That we should in
all we do mind and aim at the Glory of God, and Honor of Free Grace. For I
said, Except you mind chiefly, that all the Duties you perform are for other
Ends and Purposes than your Preferment; viz. The setting forth the praise of
the Glory of Free Grace, and the serving the Generation in which you live, and
the study of good Works, because they are profitable to Men. I say, Except you
fall upon the performance of good Duties for the common good and benefit,
without having any such Conceits, as what shall accrue to you thereby; you are
not Persons yet come to have that common Spirit, and dead to the old Spirit, as
becomes Christians.

I say here, chiefly, and therefore am not to be understood, as if I did mean,
as Mr. Neonomian says, to forbid all intending our own good, but rather act as
one that now has nothing to do in comparison; as to the securing of Spiritual
good things to my self, Christ has procured and settled all upon me. I have a
goodly Heritage, Goodness and Mercy shall follow me all my days; and from the
sense of the greatness and fullness of Provision made for me in Christ; I will
glorify him in Soul, and Body, and Spirit, live to him, serve him, and my
Generation, not thinking that I can add any thing by my Duties to what Christ
has procured and obtained for me; and in this sense it is, I say, that it is
no discouragement because you cannot propound to your self any possible Gain, [
i. e. over and above what Christ has procured,] but whatever is the greatest
and truest spur, or encouragement to Duty, is already provided to your Hand
freely and graciously. I illustrate my meaning thus.

There are some Children in the World that are very observant of their Parents;
Dt. C. p. 151.
and their aim is, that by reason of such compliance their Parents may settle
an Estate upon them; but when a Child knows an Estate is already settled upon
him, that it cannot be reversed, and he is not able to add to it, will such a
Child propose to himself in his Obedience and Observance, the obtaining that
Good his Father has already passed? He knows it is passed already, and cannot
be by any thing he does, firmer and stronger. He serves not now to get his
Fathers Land, but he serves to glorify his Father that has so freely settled
his Land upon him. [Hence you see plainly that I mean in respect of Title, not
in respect of Possession and Enjoyment, for] so I say of Believers that have
the temper of Christ's true-bred Children indeed.

They in the Gospel of Christ find all things that do appertain to Life and
Godliness, they find them all so passed over by God's Goodness and Free Grace
to them, Dr. C. p. 152.
That the Lions shall want and suffer hunger, before they shall want any thing
that is good. Must they now labor to gain these things as if they were in
agitation, or as if they were yet referred to their will, or to their good and
evil walking, that as they shall walk so they shall speed? This is to argue.
That God is yet to determine with himself how to dispose of those good things
that he will bestow upon his People, and that he gives good things according to
their good or evil Carriage; and so the goodness of God to his People must
depend upon his Peoples goodness to him [which is as the Morning Cloud;] and as
Men's Works prevail with God, so God will pour out his Bounty upon them.
Calvin. Mr. Antinom. gives us a very good account of his meaning, and I wonder
that Mr. Neonom. you will offer to say he ^orbids the intending our own good,
though in subordination to God's Glory, yea, laying no stress of Meriting,
whereas he is express as to both these. And by procuring and obtaining he
plainly intends procuring or obtaining a Title to Heavenly Things.

But Mr. Antinom. Did not Abraham in his Obedience unto God, Heb. 11.9, 10.
look for a City which has Foundations? And had not Moses, v. 26. in his
Self-denial an Eye to the Recompense of Reward? How is it then that we should
not think to gain or procure any thing by our Duties and Obedience?


Antinom. The great things that the Faithful mentioned in that Chapter did by
Faith in the Promise, surely Entitling them to those great things they looked
for; they did not esteem that their Obedience added one grain to their
Inheritance by Promise, any more than that the very Service of God it self, and
Enjoyment of him was of the Privileges promised, and they walked therein in
Expectation of further performances. Abraham looked for a City; upon what
ground? Not of his Obedience, but as being Heir already of the Promise of it.
Moses had an Eye to the Recompense of Reward, not as procuring it by his
Self-denial, but as being Entitled to it by the Promise believed, as already
bestowed upon him by the Gift and Procurement of Christ, and thence was carried
forth to his Duty in Love to God, and in Honor of his Free Grace, as I have
said; thence it was that no difficulties of Affliction could discourage him,
nor Worldly Preferments and Riches allure him from his Duty.

My whole design in the Expressions mentioned by Mr. Neonom. was to caution
Believers against putting their Duties in the place of Christ in order to Life
and Salvation. And I have Mr. Luther for my President, speaking in the like
Case after the same manner.

The true Christ neither calls thee to reckoning for thy Sins, nor bids
thee trust to thine own good Works, Luth. on Gal. 5.4.
(but the false Christ, i. e. the Devil in the likeness of Christ does;) and
the true Knowledge of Christ or Faith disputes not whether thou have done good
Works to Righteousness, or evil Works to Condemnation, but simply concludes
after this sort: If thou have done good Works, thou art not therefore
Justified; or if thou have done evil Works, thou art not thereby Condemned. And
I neither take from good Works their praise, nor commend evil Works; but in the
matter of Justification, I say, we must look how we may hold Christ, lest while
we seek to be Justified by the Law, we make him unprofitable to us; for it is
Christ alone that Justifies me, both against my evil Deeds, and without my
good Deeds. If I have this persuasion of Christ, I lay hold on the true Christ;
but if I think that he exacteth the Law and Works of me to Salvation, then he
becomes unprofitable to me, and I am utterly separated from him.
Neonom. He says, When you labor by Prayer or seeking to prevail with God to
take away his displeasure, D. W. p. 154. Dr. C. p. 425.
etc. and to procure such good, you serve not God now, you serve your selves.


Antinom. I was speaking against Selfishness in our Performances, and said, if
you suppose you fast, pray, mourn, or do any other Religious Services; if you
apprehend your own turns are not yet served, there will be altogether a
Selfishness in the performance of these Duties; Selfish Ends and Motives will
be your Load-stones, and they shall draw up your Spirits in these Services. As
for Example, when we labor by our Fasting and Prayer, and seeking the Lord, to
prevail with God to take away his Displeasure, etc. and to procure such good
things unto us, do we serve the Lord or no? And do we not serve our selves?
Nay, you serve no God now, you serve your selves, when only your selves put you
upon the performance of the Duty; but you will say, I must Fast and Pray to get
my Sins pardoned. A. It Is true, that as long as Men think their Sins are upon
themselves they cannot be at^est, but still the consideration of these Sins
thus upon them must needs draw them out on these Services, till some way be
sought out to clear themselves of them. Where is now that sincerity and
singleness of Heart that Men ought to have in the Service of the Lord? If he
could be but once resolved of this thing, that ail this Business of his is
already dispatched to his Hands, [ viz. Sin pardoned, and Wrath removed,] then
all this Selfishness would quickly die; -- then you would serve God sincerely,
the End of your Duties would be the glorifying of God; then you would see that
your Prayers, Tears, Fastings and Performances were not appointed to Rob God of
his Service by serving your selves, and Christ of his Glory, by putting your
Services in the place of his Blood, which only takes away Sin.
Calvin. You have now given very good satisfaction of your Intention and
Meaning in those Expressions Mr. Neonomian charge upon you as unsound, tho
some of your Expressions barely taken may give some offense, which I think
might have been spared, and the truth you intend clothed with more
unexceptionable words; and on the other side, Mr. Neonomian, I think you may
expose and banter most Sermons of Orthodox Divines, if you will pick out here
and there a Sentence, and not give an account of the Connection, upon what
account such were spoken. But I pray, Mr. Neonomian let us have the positive
Truth from you in this matter, and the state of the Question.


Neonom. You shall, Sir.

Truth. Though we ought to intend God's Glory as our Supreme End in all our
Duties, and Design therein expressing our Love and Gratitude to God for his
Benefits, with a great regard to public Good: Yet we also lawfully may and
ought to strive after Grace, grow in it, and perform Holy Duties and Services,
with an Eve to, and concern for our own Spiritual and Eternal Advantage. D. W.
p. 152.


Antinom. You have delivered your Opinion: in a discreet Proposition, wherein
you say the same thing as I do in the first part, but yet the second part does
not run full enough, it should run thus; From this Motive of the Love of God,
the Promise of Grace, and the procurement made by Jesus Christ, entitling us to
all the Blessings of the Gospel, we ought to perform Holy Duties and Services,
growing in all Grace, with an Eye to the Enjoyment of that full Inheritance
provided for us in Grace and Glory, ascribing all to the Glory of Free Grace,
and nothing to the procurements of our own Works. And therefore I say, none
ought to propose advantage to himself in respect of Title to the Blessings of
the Covenant by any Duty he performs, being Heir of the Promise by Faith in
Jesus Christ, all the Promises being in him Yea and Amen; neither ought he to
propound profit from any Duty as such only, but in and thorough Christ, and in
whom every Duty is accepted, and from whom we receive the Benefit; for whatever
we ask it is in his Name, and for his sake alone, (not for our Duties sake) we
receive it. And that it is vain and unlawful to do any thing with an Eye to our
Spiritual or Eternal good, as a proper Effect by way of Remuneration of our
Duty performed, for that cannot be in Subordination to God's Glory in Christ,
but a Robbing of him.


Neonom. I will tell you then wherein we differ not.

1. It Is not whether we should principally aim at God's Glory in what we do.


Antinom. Is it not? But I will tell you more; we should not only principally,
but altogether aim at God's Glory in all we do, 1 Cor. 10.31. According to your
Position many Sins will be Justified; as he that does evil that good may come
of it. And Paul's Persecution in his Unregeneracy, wherein he principally aimed
at the Glory of God, thinking that thereby he did God good Service.


Neonom. Nor whether we should aim at Public Good with great concern; nor
whether Gratitude to God deserves our utmost Service, and Love to him should
Influence our Aims and Labors.


Antinom. Gratitude to God should not only Influence, but be the very
procatarctick Moving Cause to us in all.


Neonom. Nor whether we ought to renounce every Thought of purchasing from God
any Benefit for what we do.


Antinom. Therefore not to think to have the Benefit for the Work sake at all,
for if so, it is purchasing in a Law Sense; to have it upon Federal
Condition^lity of the Work done, is to have upon Bargain, and Purchasing Terms,
either in respect of the first right, or as to continuation of right, therefore
we ought not to tertain, but renounce the least thought of this.


Neonom. Nor whether Carnal Selfishness, or seeking of Pleasures, Riches,
Honor, etc. above Spiritual and Eternal good, be the undoing Sin of the World.


Antinom. Nor whether it be not the undoing Sin of Professors, there is no other
to be expected from the World, and there is multitudes of Sins more, of a
grosser Nature, undoing to the World.


Neonom. The real difference is,

1. Whether the Spiritual Improving and Saving our Souls, may be a Motive with
us to our Religious Endeavors? This you deny, and I affirm.


Antinom. Not upon the grounds aforementioned.


Neonom. Whether our Souls advantage be not so joined with God's Glory, that we
ought to intend both as the Scope of our Life and Labors.


Antinom. Our Souls advantage is so provided for in the Promise of Grace, that
we intend it as the great thing bestowed on us for the Glory of God, and not to
be obtained by us, or gained by Works and Services. The true Question betwixt
us is,

Whether we should do Works as entitling us to, and gaining of life and
Salvation in Subordination to the Glory of God; this you and the Papists
affirm, but I deny; because they are inconsistent, and can never be truly so
according to the Gospel, whatever is pretended, or Men may think of themselves,
as Paul did in his Unregenerate State.


Neonom. To confirm the Truth,

1. I have proved before, that God has appointed Graces and Duties for that
end, that we obtain those Benefits; and if so, we then despise God's
Ordination, in not intending our obtaining the Benefits, when we Act those
Graces and Duties, and we obey his Will in doing them for that end. D. W. p.
155.


Antinom. We have showed that you have not proved it yet in your sense, by way
of entitling us to, and continuing us in a Covenant state or standing.

2. We have showed, that you make Graces and Duties nothing but a piece of
Drudgery and Slavery, for a Man to work as for his Wages, and to be paid as he
does his Work, but make them none of the Benefits of the Covenant of Promise,
which they are in an Eminent manner. And therefore,

3. You despise the Ordination of God, and his Constitution of the Covenant of
Grace, who never gave them such a place in the Covenant, nor ordained them to
such an end as you ascribe to them.

4. Lastly, You despise therein the Lord Jesus, in giving that which is his
place alone, to your Graces and Duties.


Neonom. All Promises and Threats in the Word, directed as Motives to Obedience
are foolish, if we must not intend [obtaining] our own good by our Obedience.


Antinom. Are they so? You are not the first that has reckoned the Gospel
Foolishness, and reproached the Grace of God; God has chosen these foolish
things to confound such Wise Men as you are, that can undertake to teach Christ
a better Gospel, etc.


Neonom. How are they Arguments with the Will, if we must not aim at Advantage
in doing Duty?


Antinom. It is one thing to have advantage by Gift, and another thing to have
such an Eye to it as to look upon our selves as Earners of it by our Work. A
Child that knows his Father has settled an Inheritance upon him, and will
provide for him till he is of Age to take Possession; is there no Motive to him
to be dutiful to his Father, but an intending more gain and advantage to
himself? Must his Father pay him for every Errand he runs, and Job of Service
he does? Must he look upon himself as Earning and Deserving his Dinner every
day, and for every Duty and Service his Father must say, Oh! thank thee my Son,
I will remember this Service to give thee advantage for it? Or else this Child
will be sullen and dogged, and say, What p^ofit is there in serving my Father?
Such Christians as these you would make.


Neonom. Christ calls with such Motives, Mat. 11.28. Ezekiel. 18.32. 1 Pet. 5.2, 4.


Antinom. Mat. 11. He Invites Sinners to come to him for rest, he would give it
them; he says not, Go to your Works and Duties for Rest, I am not against your
taking all Motives from Christ and the Riches of his Grace, but I am against
Burning Incense to our own Drags, as you would have us. Tha^ place of Ezekiel
you mention, is nothing to your purpose, for turning and living there is the
same thing: And whereas you say, What influence has such pleas? As 1 Pet. 5.2,
4. 1 Timothy 2.12. Colos. 3.34. Peter calls himself a Partaker, [i. e. by Faith]
of the Glory to be revealed, and he charge other Elders to feed the Flock,
and take the Charge, not by constraint, but freely and willingly; and not
mercenarily, but as he himself was taught by Christ, Love thou me, feed my
Sheep; and he says, When the chief Shepherd shall appear, you shall receive a
Crown of Glory which he has purchased and promised, not which they earned and
gained by their working. So Paul fought and ran, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. not expecting
to receive a Crown as due to him for Fighting and Running, but as by Faith
beholding it purchased for him, and ensured to him in the Promise; therefore he
says, It Is a depositum laid up for him even before his running; and so for all
other Believers as well as he; he expected not to make an additional advantage
to what he saw laid up for him already, or thereby to make it surer than the
Promise had already made it; and as for other places where Duties are called
for, and ensuing Benefits promised; it is but a Connection of the Promised Grace
in the Covenant under something different Notions of particular Commands and
Promises; whereas Duties there are Promises, and Gifts of Grace, and both
together Grace upon Grace from the fullness of Christ; not that one has in it a
virtue to gain the other (which the Spiritual Man understands,) and Christ
dispenses Grace in the Word of his Grace in this manner, more humano, which is
of use to the weak many times, when he teaches them to walk as Ephraim, by the
Conduct of a Spirit of Bondage, whilst they labor under weak and staggering
Faith, but such a frame and weak Understanding of the Truth ought not to be
commended as a Virtue, and such Weaklings are to be brought as soon as may be
to more solid Understanding, and higher Principles to act from, and more Noble
Aims and Designs to the Glory of God in Christ.


Neonom. The Spirit of God approves of Holy Men's regard to their own
advantage.


Antinom. Yes, for the whole Gospel is a Sinners advantage, or else it were
sad, and they must see it, or else they will never embrace it; but they are to
see all this advantage is founded in Christ, and conveyed by Promise and Free
Gift to the Praise and Glory of God, Ephesians. 1.6, 7, 8, 12, 19, 20.


Neonom. Moses Heb. 11.26. had respect to the recompense of reward, and this is
given as the very cause why he esteemed the Reproach of Christ above the
Treasures of Egypt.


Antinom. I have given an account of that place already; it is said by Faith,
Moses did what he did by Faith, refusing the World, choosing and esteeming
Christ his great Treasure, and greater than all Riches and Honors, even the
Reproach and Cross of Christ; for in believing he Eyed Christ himself, who was
his, to be the great recompense of Reward; he had enough to carry him through
all difficulties, having Christ, and God in Christ, and this was the reason of
his Perseverance, for he endured as seeing him that is Invisible; he did not
see him that is Invisible as a Reward of his Perseverance, but he endured
because he saw him.


Neonom. Paul governed himself by these regards, 1 Cor. 9.17, 24. 2 Cor. 4.16,
17.


Antinom. Paul made it his business in preaching the Gospel to obtain the Ends
of the Gospel, but he does anticipate all that you would gather from his
Discourse, 1 Cor. 9.17. for ver. 16. he says, For though I preach the Gospel I
have nothing to glory of; and when he speaks of his Reward, ver. 18. truly it
is as much as to say, I look for none for my Work sake, not so much as from
Men, my Reward is that I make it without Charge, that as it comes freely from
Christ, so also from me; he much less had any Mercenary Expectations of Reward
from God, etc. And ver. 23. and all he does for the Gospel sake, that he might
be (...), his participation of the Grace of the Gospel was as much as he looked
for, therefore he would not run at uncertrinty, (...), but by Faith in the
Promise, as looking unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of his Faith, Heb. 12.2.
As to that place, 2 Cor. 4.16. For which cause we faint not; what is the cause?
It Is in the verse preceding 14, 15. The Spirit of Faith was the cause; Whereby
knowing that he that raised up the Lord Jesus, shall raise us also by Jesus;
for all things are for your selves, that the abundant Grace might through the
Thanksgiving of many redound to the Glory of God, for which cause we faint not;
viz. from the abundant Grace apprehended by the Spirit of Faith, and looking at
things not seen, thence it comes to pass, that the present Afflictions are
light, and shall be succeeded with an Eternal weight of Glory; it is an instance
of the abundant Grace redounding toward him for the inward and outward Man,
for things Temporal and Eternal.


Neonom. Were doing for Life, and an Eye to gain by service such a legal and
wicked thing as some represent it, sure the Blessed Jesus would have admonished
his Disciples, and not answered them as he does, Mat. 19.28, 29.


Antinom. This Arguing would well enough become a Papist, but it is strange at
this time a day from the Mouth of a Protestant, but it is easy to see the Devil
is at work to betray us again into our Spiritual Egypt, our Mouths hang too
generally after the Leeks and Onions of their Corrupt Doctrine. Now we must go
to work upon the Terms of the Old Law, for Life, not Finaliter, as aimed at and
traveled to as terminus ad quem, taken for Glory, but for Life as a Premium of
our Works. That this is intended by you clearly appears by the Application that
you make of this place of Scripture, as if it Justified the Doctrine of Merit.
The Disciples hearing our Saviors discourse concerning a Rich Man, and how
hard it is for him to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, they were amazed, and
said, Who then shall be saved? Peter hence concludes then surely poor Men may
better be saved; we are poor enough, and have lest all for thee; what shall we
have? And there is no doubt but something as yet remained in them of that legal
Spirit as prevailed in and among the Jews, expecting or enquiring after some
proportionable Reward to their Sufferings, which Spirit was not fully removed
from them till after the Resurrection of Christ, and sending down of the
Spirit, when they came clearly to see the Grace of Christ in the Gospel, but it
was not Christ's time yet to remove all Clouds and Obscurities from the
Doctrine of the Gospel; he did it not in his own Ministry, it was to be the
Work of the Comforter, the Spirit, as peculiarly belonging to his Office after
Christ's Ascension. As yet they had not asked any thing in his Name, neither did
Christ in the platform of Prayer teach them so to do; as yet they were
strangers to the Mystery of the Death and Resurrection of Christ; as yet they
looked that the Kingdom of Christ would immediately be a Temporal and External.
Now the answer of our Savior imports these things.

1. That none shall lose any thing by following him, though in parting with
worldly advantages.

2. That those Blessings that he bestows upon his true Followers, are of
another Nature than they expected; they were of an Eternal Nature, ver. 29. and
of a Spiritual Nature, Mark 10.30. For their outward Enjoyments should be with
Persecutions, showing how much the Cross and Reproach of Christ (as in the
Opinion of Moses) is to be preferred before the greatest worldly Emoluments.

3. He shows them, though he abundantly Rewards his Followers, yet they ought
not to serve him as such that were led by that Principle, to serve for Life and
Glory as for Wages; but they must do all for his own Name sake; they must not
act from a principle of intending advantage, but for Christ's sake, for the
Love of his Person, and for the sake of the Love that he has showed us, 1 Cor.
3.20, 21, 22. The Lord knows how vain the Thoughts of his best People is apt to
be, as if they must by their Duties Earn something of God; but there must be no
glorying in Men, and there is no need of it, for all things are yours already,
the Means of Grace, the World, Life, Death, things present, and to come, ye are
Christ's, and Christ God's.


Neonom. Your Argument from the Vanity of proposing our own Gain by Labor and
Duties, because all is fixed and given already, is to make the Decree an
effectual means to overthrow the Government of Christ, and brand all his Offers
to Sinners with Weakness and Falsehood; should not poor Sinners pray as they
can apply the Word with an Eye to Conversion? Should they not Believe and
Repent with an Eye to Forgiveness and Escaping of Wrath? Why else should God
encourage them with an Offer of these upon such Terms. D. W. p. 157.


Antinom. You go upon many Mistakes;

1. You talk absurdly of God's Decree overthrowing his Government, as if the
Decree succeeded God's Government of the Creature; that which overthrows a
thing comes after the thing overthrown; so God's Decree in its proper Nature,
as a Constituting Immanent Act, must succeed his Government.

2. Why should not God's Acting in a way of Free Grace be consistent with his
most right and just way of proceeding in Government, seeing the whole Gospel
Revelation asserts that it is so, and that therein lies a great part of the
Gospel Mystery, which Natural Men and Carnal Reason will not receive.

3. Is it any way absurd to say it is vain to propose our own gain by Labor and
Duties, when the Spirit of God has expunged the Efficacy of Works as to
procurement, out of the Covenant of Grace; Works are our Price and Money. God
says, We are to buy without Price and Money, Isa. 55.1, 2. And says, Why do
you spend Money for that which is not Bread; i. e. Spend your Duties and
Labors, and get nothing by them? Because you make Money of them, and reckon
you make advantage of them, and pay a valuable consideration for the good
expected, and will not receive it as of Free Gift; you will have all for the
Money of your Duties; and hence you labor, and have not that which satisfies;
you ask and labor for things to spend upon your own Lusts, as the proud
Pharisee did.

4. You mistake in judging the Offers of the Gospel is in a way of Government,
it is in order to Christ's gracious Rule and Government under which Unregenerate
Sinners are not, till through Grace they are translated into the Kingdom of
Christ.

5. You wickedly suggest, that unless God intend that poor Sinners in their
Unregenerate Estate should do some Duties whereby they might gain Life and
Salvation; God is chargeable with Weakness and Falsehood; this I take to be an
ill Inference, all the Offers of Grace must be upon Condition of Works, or else
God is chargable with Weakness and Falsehood.

6. You grossly mistake my Discourse, or willingly pervert my Sense and Meaning;
I do not say but poor Sinners at their first believing are very apt to lay too
great a stress upon their Duties, as if thereby they obtained a Title to Life
and Salvation, or m^de a considerable addition to what Christ has done and
procured for them; this legal Spirit I endeavor to take them off from, that
they should serve God more under the Conduct of the Grace of Adoption, Romans
8.14, 15. And therefore say, Except you fall to the performance of Duty without
such Conceits of what shall accrue to you thereby, Dr. Cr. p. 149.
you are not Persons yet come to have that common Spirit, and dead to the old
Spirit, as becomes Christians. Such Believers are acted more by a Spirit of
Bondage than the Spirit of Adoption. The Apostle says, They that are lead by
the Spirit are the Sons of God; and therefore so far as they are lead by the
Spirit act not mercenarily.

7. But to let pass your perverting my Sense, you will have me to intend Works
answering the Call of God to the Unregenerate; and you say to this purpose they
must be encouraged by Rewards of their Works: Were it not rather to charge God
as you say; when he shall offer them upon the account of their Duties, when the
Spirit of God tells us, they can perform none, being Spiritually dead; and that
which they suppose they do cannot please God, Romans 8.8. therefore cannot obtain
any thing from him. You say, must they not strive to Believe and Repent with an
Eye to Forgiveness, and Escaping of Wrath? I say, Not with an Eye to their
Works of Believing and Repentance, but to the receiving of Forgiveness and
Escaping Wrath.


Neonom. By your Scheme the Elect may be idle, and the Non-^lect do best when
they despair; for there is Connection between these Benefits and these Graces
and Duties.


Antinom. I pretend not to the making Schemes of the Gospel-Mysteries,
calculated to carnal Reason, as you do; I leave that to you that pretend to be
so skilful in it. But in answer to what you infer, I say, I preach not to Men
as Elect, or not Elect, but unto Sinners; and I call them to look for the
advantage of Life and Salvation in Christ, and not in their Duties. But yet, as
I told you, I call them to Duty, and to the acting of it from higher and nobler
Principles than you do, not from such a slavish mercenary servile Spirit as you
would have them to act from. And I think the Doctrine of Free Grace is no
ground of Idleness or Despair, but the contrary, the greatest Encouragement to
Service, and preservative against Despair in the World, unless it be to such
Scheme-makers as you be, who charge God with Weakness and Falsehood, unless he
save Sinners in a way of a Covenant of Works. And there is no such Connection
between Graces and Benefits as you plead for.


Neonom. And so the Non-elect are in the same case with Devils, there being no
serious offer to them; nay, their Case is worse than Devils; for these Offers
are made to them with no design but to increase their Condemnation. Nay, every
Sin of theirs is a Sin against the Holy Ghost, i. e. Every Sin is alike that
unpardonable Sin, and not only that Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost.


Antinom. This is the Arminian Plea for Universal Grace, and what is this but
the smoke of the Bottomless Pit? I say, Who art thou, O Man, that reply
against God? You come now to prove your Charge of God for Weakness and Folly.
But if the Non-elect be in as bad a Case as Devils, is God guilty of Weakness
and Falsehood? A wiser Man than you did not think so, when he said, God made all
things for himself, the wicked for the day of evil, Prove. 16.4. Neither was the
Apostle Paul of your mind, as plainly appears by Romans 9.18, 19, 20. But let me
return upon you, Will you say that it was unrighteous with God to leave a part
of Mankind under Non-election to eternal Life and Salvation? What, will you
charge God with for leaving part of the Angelick Nature under it? 2. You talk
of an Offer to the Non-elect, and that Offer, you say, must be serious, and if
it be not offered upon such a Condition as they can perform. But I pray,
where is any Offer of Grace in the Gospel to the Non-elect at all, as such? And
show me any Graces given, or Gospel Duties required of the Non-elect, or
Benefits promised to the Non-elect upon their performance of Graces and Duties?
It would not be serious indeed to call for Graces and Duties, or promise Life
unto them, or saving Benefits upon Performance of the said Duties after the
Non-election was declared to them. Now you will not own there can be any
serious Offer made, unless the Condition be equally performable by Elect and
Non-elect, and both be alike in the next Capacity of Salvation, or else they
are in the same case with the Devils. And what it they be as eventually as
unlikely to believe and be saved as the Devils, why will you be presumptuous to
charge God? May not God have Mercy on whom he will, and harden whom he will,
without giving an Account of any of his matters? And what if the Non-elect be
in as bad a case as the Devils, is God bound to be any better to them than the
Devils. For, say you, God must offer to the Non-elect with the same Mind and
Purpose of saving Non-elect as well as of saving the Elect, or else God is not
serious in his Offers. I deny that Gospel-Offers are made to Elect or
Non-elect, but to Sinners as such; and it is made indefinitely, that the
Election might obtain, and the rest are blinded, Romans 11.5, 6, 7. as it was
with the Elect and Non-elect Jews, so it is with the Elect and Non-elect of all
Mankind. And see there what God says, and that seriously: At this present
time, says God, there is a Remnant [of Jews to be saved,] but according to the
Election of Grace: What will you say but a Remnant? How comes it to pass that
the Offer was made to them that belonged not to the Election? You Will say God
was not serious in his Offer to them, when it was said Acts 3.4. Unto you first
[of the Nation of the Jews] God having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to
bless you, in turning away every one of you from his Iniquities. If the
Non-elect in this Nation cannot perform Works (say you) upon the condition of
which they may have the Promise, God deals falsely with them: Whereas the Spirit
of God gives us another Account of these things, why notwithstanding this
general and indefinite Offer, but a Remnant was saved, viz. The Election had
obtained it, ver. 7. For, says he, if it be by Grace, then it is no more of
Works, [nor of him that wills or runs, but of God that shows mercy]
otherwise Grace is no more Grace; but if it be of Works, then it is no more of
Grace; otherwise Work is no more Works. 7. What then, Israel has not obtained
what he seeks for, [or applying it to many Professors, or others under a
Gospel Ministry, such and such has not obtained what they pretended to seek
after] but the Election has obtained it. [The Grace of God (not Works) became
efficacious through the Election.] And what became of the Non-elect? You Will
say, God mocked them. No, go you on to mock God with your carnal Reason, and
hearken to the Hallow; I will tell you, yea the Spirit tells you, the rest, the
Non-elect Jews were blinded; (...), Those that were saved, the Grace of
Election obtained for them. But as for the rest, they who were not elected,
they were hardened. And when you have done and said all about your Serious
Offers, unless you hold conditional Election, you must still continue to lay,
these foul Charges and Consequences upon God: For whatever Offers are made, the
Non-elect will neither believe or be saved, and in respect of Non-election are
in the same Condition with the Devils.

Now say you, then their Case is worse than Devils, these Offers are made to
them for no other design, but to increase their Condemnation. But I will tell
you, it becomes so to them per accidens; the design of offering Salvation to
the World is that Sinners may believe and be saved, not that Elect Sinners
should be secure, or Non-elect Despair. But what is in God's Mind as his Reason
in making so indefinite an offer and tender of Grace, whose is Election? It is
for the calling and gathering in of the Elect, though an indefinite Invitation
or Command of God makes the answer of it equally the Duty of all that hear it
by the Law; and I will tell you, Ex Hebreae veritatis collatione appareat (...)
respondere vocabulo H^braeo. (...) nemo mirabitur quod maluerim soporem aut
etiam stuporem convertere. Ita n. Hebraei vocant altissimum veternum quod omnem
sensum adimat idque optime convenit ei quod precessit de Callo sive
Obduratione, and quod subjicitur oculis, de oculis ad videndam, and auribus ad
audi^ndum ineptis. Beza, Chr^sost. Theophyl. Oecum. Inte^^r^t. Spiritum
staporis and perti^^^i^^. i. e. animum in malo obstinatum ut neque aut moveri,
quasi clavo affixum. Lee's Crit.
the Truth of God's Word will stand against your Carnal Weapons and Banter,
Romans 11.8, 9. The rest besides the Remnant that were saved, were not only
blinded but hardened Judicially, according to the Word of the Lord by Isaiah,
chap. 29.10. God has given them the Spirit of Slumber, (...), Eyes that they
should not see. The Hebrew word is (...) deep Sleep; but the Apostle takes
(...), from the LXII. which primarily signifies compunction, derived of (...),
compungo, and used Acts 2.37. It signifies a Mind fixed and pertinacious in
evil. God has sent or given them, says Paul; the Hebrew has it, (...), he
has given them to drink down a Spirit of Stupidity; and see what follows, ver.
9.10. Notwithstanding the offer made, the Non-elect fall under this Judicial
proceeding of God, viz. a Spirit of Slumber given them, Eyes given them that
they should not see, Ears that they should not hear; their Table becomes a
Snare, the offer of Grace a stumbling to them. Nay, you say then, every Sin of
theirs is against the Holy Ghost, i. e. every Sin alike the unpardonable Sin.
There is no Sin unpardonable in respect of God, i. e. such that God cannot
pardon; but there are Sins of the same Nature and Kind with them that are
pardoned in some, that will not be pardoned in others. God's not pardoning a
Sin or Person makes not it or him unpardonable, ab actu ad potentiam non valet
consequentiam.

The Sin against the Holy Ghost is not therefore unpardonable, because it
cannot be pardoned; but from the positive and declared will of Christ
concerning it, that it shall not be forgiven in this World, nor in the World to
come; he has made an exception upon this Species of Sin, or Individual Sin,
Matthew. 12.31, 32. but for this reason no other sort or kind of Sin is
unpardonable; Christ that spoke the one spoke the other; All manner of Sin and
Blasphemy shall be forgiven unto Men, ver. 32. Is it not a mavelous piece of
Impudence in you to draw this Inference upon Christ, because Sins in the
Non-elect are not forgiven eventually, therefore now all manner of Sins in them
are as unpardonable, as Sins against the Holy Ghost.


Neonom To say no more, it will follow Christ has no Rule of distributive
Justice, but his own eternal purpose, and Men's Regards to his promised
Benefits, are all forbidden, even when our respect to them, is that which
subserves his Government, and is supposed in all the Methods of it.


Antinom. You need say no more, unless it be to express your Repentance for
what you have spoken. What mean you by Christ's Rule of Distributive Justice?
Does Christ offer Salvation unto Sinners, or dispense Grace to Believers in a
way of Distributive Justice? Is not this to make the Covenant of Grace a Law of
Works with a witness? It Is true, Christ governs the World as King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords; and this Rule of distributive Justice on the Providential
Throne, and at his Second coming, is and shall be the Moral Law. But is this
his Rule of saving Sinners? Does he administer the Covenant of Grace in a way
of Distributive Justice, according to Men's Obedience to Commands, and regard
to Promises made upon such Conditions? If it were so, Sinners uncalled and
called were all in a miserable Condition.


Neonom. And why should we intend the Glory of God, the Service of Christ, or
the good of others? Are not these as determined as our own good? Has not God
fixed and secured his own Glory?


Antinom. He has so; he has fixed it, and all our Duties and Blessings
therein; and because Christ provided for his own Glory, and the Glory of God's
Free Grace in all that he has done, or is doing for us: Therefore we are in a
special manner to beware lest we rob him of his Glory, by giving that which
belongs to him to our own Works, even the best we can do.


Neonom. I could show that we cant't sincerely aim at our own good, but we
therein aim at the Glory of God; nor does God ever require us to intend his
Glory, but in a Concurrence with an Eye to our own Salvation.


Antinom. You should have said, we cannot truly aim at God's Glory, but therein
we aim at our own Good: Men must first aim at God's Glory. But, 1. Men may
sincerely aim at God's Glory, and yet come short of God's Glory and their own
good: For so Paul did in his unregenerate Estate, and so will every
unregenerate Man, Romans 3.22. 2. How many Men sincerely aim at their own Good in
many things, and yet have not a true Aim at the Glory of God? Do not all Men
say, Who will show us any good, Psalm. 4. and seek it in Corn, Wine and Oil? And
did not the Jews aim at their own Good in following after the Law of
Righteousness, Romans 9.31?


Neonom. I will tell you your mistakes.


Antinom. I pray mend and recant your own gross Errors first, before you
undertake to be a Corrector of others; it is not worth our time to attend your
Amendments.


Neonom. Let me only tell you what those Divines in the Preface to Mr. Flavel
's Book against Antinomianism, (which they approve of) inform us: That to say
Salvation is not the end of any good Work we cannot, and we are to act from Life
and not for Life, were to abandon the humane Nature.


Antinom. I suppose you quote your Authority the rather, because that you think
the Preface was drawn up to expiate for a Fault some of them had committed, and
was well schooled for. But I pray let us a little examine whether those
Gentlemen be not mistaken, in denying that Position, That we are not to act for
Life but from Life.

For the first part, I am mistaken if they will deny, That all Gospel-acting is
from Life. In natural things Life is always presupposed to all Motion and
Acting. A dead thing cannot, nor is expected to move and act: As in the natural
Man, so in the Spiritual; and as he must have Life, so he must be alive unto
God in Christ that acts; he must act from him, by virtue of him, through the
Power and Influence of his Grace, through the Operation of his Spirit, from
Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, and knows there is no acceptable Duties or
Graces but to be acted from Life as the Fountain and Spring of them; and indeed
the first Adam acted from Life. I pray make a thing act, if you can, that has
not Life to act from.

2. As for acting for Life, the true meaning ought to be adjusted: That Life
should be our End and Aim is not to be doubted, according to a right
Understanding of it. Christ propounds himself as Life unto poor Sinners, and
says, I am the Resurrection and the Life. And so he is the Life unto a
Believer; He that has the Son has Life. Now it must be understood when we
speak of Working for Life, we speak of a considerate sedate regular Acting and
Working. Not Acting and Working as one that is scared and affrighted with the
danger of Life, death lying inevitably to his Apprehension before him; not as
scrambling to save himself in the Water from drowning. Now a poor Sinner
awakened under the Law, and seeing a little Glimpse of Gospel-hope through
Grace shining into his Heart, it may be bestirs himself with all his might, and
ascribes much to every Duty he does.

But we speak here of what the true Spirit and Disposition of a Christian is,
he ought to arrive at by Faith; the Question is, Whether he works for Life? A.
I say, He does, and he does not. 1. He makes Life his subordinate Aim and End.
But, (1.) He that has Christ by Faith, does not work as if he had not Christ
already: (2.) He does not work for Life, so as to entitle himself unto Life;
some work for this end, as if he had not Life already. He sees by Faith that he
is Christ's, and that all things are his, whether Life, or whether things
present or to come. (3.) He does not work for Life, so far as to think thereby
to keep himself alive, or maintain himself in a Covenant-state, so as by his
Works to continue his Justification any more than to get it at first. (4.) He
does not work for Life in a way of remunerative Justice; no, not for the
continuance of Life in a way of Remuneration: For indeed herein lies only the
difference between a Legal and Gospel Spirit; If the Spirit that acted the
first Adam before the Fall, (I speak not of a Legal Spirit since the Fall) and
the true Spirit of a Believer in Christ be compared together; for Adam then
acted from Life already given; he acted not as having no Life, but acted for
the continuance of Life, upon the account of the working Conditions enjoined,
and expected Life by way of Remuneration, i. e. the continuation of Life. Now
such working for Life as this we must reject, and such is intended, whenever
we say we must not work for Life.

It Is not to be understood, as if the Spiritual Man had not a sanctified
rational End in all his Actings, which we say is for the Glory of God in Free
Grace, for Christ in whom his Life is; he acts from the Life that is in Christ,
and he is carried forth to it, and in it: He is created in Christ Jesus to good
Works, that he should walk in them, looking unto Jesus, Heb. 12. And looking
upon all things as his in Christ, his Business is to live unto Christ. 1 Cor.
1.30, 31. chapter 3.22, 23. To me (says Paul) to live is Christ, and to die is
gain, i. e. I shall come to a further Enjoyment of Christ. Theology is defined
to be the Doctrine of living unto God; so that in living unto God, and to God
in Christ, a Christian has all things that appertain to Life and Godliness,
through the knowledge of God our Savior, 2 Pet. 1.3. Christ is our Alpha and
Omega, of him, and through him, and to him are all things, to him be Glory for
ever and eaer, Romans 11.36.

Now what need all this great ado about working for Life, showing the danger of
this Doctrine, that it teaches to abandon Nature, and supposes us to do no
more than other Men, and it makes all Motives useless, etc. Whereas if Men will
not have perverse Minds, they must own and acknowledge the same things that
they oppose, unless they will deny their own Reason. But when a Spirit of
Contradiction prevails, there is nothing but Quirks, Sophisms and Equivocations
can take place with Men.

And notwithstanding all your Noise and Authority, to work for Life in the true
Sense, it is to act as by and under a Covenant of Works; it is to work for Life
as Wages, and to gain a Right and Title thereby, and such a Principle will
abandon the Grace of the Gospel: It will teach to violate all the Precepts and
Principles of the Gospel, it will elude all the Promises, and lay a Man under
the full Rigor of the Law, and will never be any effective Motive to
acceptable Duty. It is a Fault it self that lies under the blackest Mark, and
of as dangerous Consequence as any the Gospel cautions us against, and warns to
take heed of seeking the establishing our own Righteousness.

That true Gospel Discourse of Worthy Mr. Vink at the Morning-Lecture will tell
you better things, on 2 Timothy 2.19. wherein he shows, That Gospel Grace is the
best Motive to Holiness. He says -- Our business is to enquire after what we
propound in our Obedience. If it be to expiate for my past Offenses, or to
merit undeserved Favors, it must needs be abominable in the sight of God,
being the highest act of Pride or Presumption that can be imagined, let our
Works be what they will (though the best are but filthy Rags) if they be
offered unto God by way of Barter or Exchange; they become most abominable, as
if God stood in need of something that we have -- To depart from Iniquity, or
to labor in Holiness, in order to express our Thankfulness unto God for his
Mercies in Jesus Christ, is most grateful and most forcible.

Again, Love unto God for all his Glorious Excellencies, especially for his
Mercy in Christ Jesus, is the best Principle of Holiness, and our departing
from Iniquity, and this Love is begun and flows from God's Love first.

-- He that Acts according to any of God's Commandments out of hope to Merit by
them, may Act out of Love indeed, but it must be then Self-love, to obtain, as
he vainly thinks, by his Obedience Eternal Happiness. Our Love of God should
exceed Self-love as far as God himself exceeds, which is Infinitely. Our Love
of God is a Virtue, and the Foundation of the rest. Our Love of our selves,
thus taken, is a Sin, a Mother Sin, the cause of all the rest of our Sins, etc.



I am mistaken if I find not this Doctrine of working for Life according to
your sense, exactly in the Council of Trent, Decree XVI.

Grace proposes to the Just the Exercise of Good Works, by which Eternal Life
is gained, as Grace promised by the Mercy of God, and a Reward due to Good
Works by the Divine Promise. And it concludes, This Doctrine does not
establish any Righteousness of our own, refusing the Righteousness of God; but
the same is said to be in us, and of God, being infused by him for the Merit of
Christ.
Calvin. But Mr. Neonomian says in his Reply, It Is vain and false, Mr.
Antinomian, that you say, that you are only against setting Graces and Holiness
in the place of Christ.


Antinom. He that reads my Sermons must needs see the Truth of that Assertion;
I have nothing to say to such as only depend upon Mr. Neonomian's report.


Neonom. He reckons they are put in Christ's place, though they be affirmed but
as Means and Conditions antecedently necessary by Divine Appointment to obtain
any Blessing for the sake of Christ's Merits.


Antinom. And well I may, if Men must be gracious and holy antecedently to any
Blessing, for the sake of Christ's Merits, and by virtue of that Antecedent
Grace and Holiness do obtain Blessings for the sake of Christ's Merits; I think
you outstrip the Papists here in the Doctrine of Merit.


Neonom. His Principles are, That Faith is not so much as an Instrument whereby
we are united to Christ or Justified. P. 616.


Antinom. He speaks not there of Faith as an Instrument, but he does speak of
it as such, P. 597. where he says -- Faith is not the Instrument Radically to
unite Christ and the Soul together, but rather is the Fruit that flows from
Christ the Root, being united beforehand [by the Spirit] to the Persons that
do believe.


Neonom. 2. That Christ brings us all good things when we are ungodly, so it is
in vain to do any thing to obtain these. P. 41.


Antinom. He speaks there of Justification by Faith alone, without Works -- And
we are delivered from Wrath before we step a step into Duties; and we do not
the Duty to be delivered, but we do the Duty because we are delivered; and
seeing all these are settled by Christ for us, of Free Gift; all we do is for
Christ himself; I say, that we do, we do for Christ, and not for our selves.


Neonom. He says, Obedience is not the way to Heaven, and Sanctification is
not the way to a Justified Person.


Antinom. No, Sanctification is not the way of Justification; he speaks of the
way of Justification; we are not according to his Divinity Justified by
Inherent Holiness or Righteousness, though we are according to yours. And he
tells you, Sanctification is our business in Christ the Way; for whatever Duty
is performed acceptably, must be wrought by Faith in Christ Jesus; we are
Sanctified in Christ, Christ is the true way of Sanctification.


Neonom. He says, He should not have the least Thought in his Heart of
promoting or advancing himself, or any end of his own, by doing what he does.


Antinom. You know this thing is no new Doctrine. It use to be one of the signs
and marks of Truth of Grace, when we Act in Duty singly for the Glory of God,
and not for selfish and sinister ends and designs, but this is spoken to
sufficiently before.


DEBATE XV. Of the Way to attain Assurance.
Neonom. THE next Error that I have to charge Mr. Antinomian with, is his
Doctrine of Assurance.


Error. Assurance is not attained by the Evidence of Scripture marks or signs
of Grace; or by the Spirits discovering to us that he has wrought in our
Hearts any Holy Qualifications: But Assurance comes only by an Inward Voice of
the Spirit, saying, Thy Sins are Forgiven thee; and our Believing thereupon
that our Sins are forgiven. D. W. p. 161.


Antinom. What evidence do you bring of your Charge?


Neonom. You say, if you would know that the Lord has laid your Iniquities on
Christ, you must know it thus. 1. Is there a Voice behind thee in thy self, Thy
Sins are forgiven thee? Do thou see this Voice agree with the Word of Grace?
i. e. Do thou see it held out to most vile and wretched Creatures as thou
can be? And upon this Revelation of the Mind of the Lord by his Spirit
according to that Word, does the Lord give to thee to receive that Testimony of
the Spirit, to sit down with it as satisfied, that upon this thou make full
reckoning thou have propriety in this particularly to thy self? If thou do
receive that Testimony according to that Word, here is thy Evidence, thou have
thy Propriety and Portion in this. Dr. Cr. p. 491.


Calvin. And do you Banter this Doctrine as Erroneous Stuff? I would wish you
to have a care, it is a tender Point.


Antinom. I will acquaint you with a little of my foregoing Discourse -- Let us
see what kind of evidencing believing gives, it is not a Revealing Evidence,
Dr. Cr. p. 491.
nor an Effecting Evidence, [these the Word and Spirit are] but it is a
Receiving Evidence; or it is an Evidence as it does receive that Testimony
which the Spirit holds out, applying it to the Heart; [as the Eyes receive the
light, and the Ears the sound, and if we ask a Man how do you know such a
thing, he will say, I saw it with my Eyes, and heard it with mine Ears:] It is
an evidence, as an Officer in Court that speaks nothing of his own knowledge,
but produces Records, and testifies the Authentickness of the Records: The
Life of Evidence is materially in the Records themselves, but the Officer is an
Evidence, as he does assert the Truth of such Records. It is even so with
Faith, The Spirit of the Lord makes the Records, and speaks the Records to the
Heart: Now Faith comes in and receives what the Spirit of the Lord has
written. In brief, Faith is an Evidence as it does take Possession of that
which the Spirit of the Lord reveals, and manifests, and gives to a Person; or
as it does enter upon the Deed of Gift that the Spirit of the Lord does bring
to the Heart. Possession is a good Evidence in Law, [they say it is an eleven
Points;] let a Man prove he has Lawful Possession, and he proves his Title
good. The Spirit indeed makes the Title good, but Faith makes good the Entry
and Possession, so clears the Title to us, though good in it self before: Faith
is nothing else but the receiving of Christ, and that enters upon the
Possession of him, and thus I proceeded to apply this to our purpose, as he
has mentioned.


Calvin. I suppose you refer to what is spoken by the Apostle John, Ep. 1. c.
5. where he tells of God's Records, ver. 11. This is the Record, that God has
given us Eternal Life, and this Life is in his Son. Now our Assurance that this
Life is mine or thine in particular is the Spirits working by Faith, whereby
the Soul of a particular Sinner does appropriate this Record or Deed of Gift to
himself. Faith does two things whereby it arrives at Assurance.

1. It is a Witness of the Truth of God, ver. 10. It Attests the Truth of this
Record and Deed of Gift, 1 John 5.9, 10.

2. It receives and takes Possession of it, and says, I have received the Son,
and I have Life, Faith being a Receiving Act of the Soul, as you your self
acknowledge, Mr. Neonomian. Ver. 12. He that has the Son has Life, etc. This
is so clear and plain from the Word, that he who will deny it must deny the
Scriptures, John 1.12.


Neonom. Your Sermon, p. 15. is to prove that Love to the Brethren, Universal
Obedience, Sincerity, etc. are not signs by which we should judge our State.


Antinom. I say, they are signs that are not sufficiently satisfactory in
themselves to full Assurance, without this that proceeds from Faith; for if you
have never so many Signs,

1. They may be true, or they may not, without a Witness of the Spirit to it,
[though you declaim so much against it;] you cannot come to an Assurance, but
only to a probability, and you have not a certitude of Judgment, only an
Opinion.

2. If they be true, you must believe them to be true, or else you have no
Assurance. A Man has no Assurance of the Truth if he believe it not; and then
how should you believe the Truth of your Signs, but by the Truth of the Word
revealed and believed. The Word tells you your Obedience, Love, Sincerity, must
be so and so; you believe the Word, but in comparing your Qualifications with
the Word, and the descriptions given of them there, you will find them fall so
short, that unless the Spirit assure you there is the Truth of Grace in your
Hearts, you will be as much at a loss as to Assurance as ever.

I propounded this Question, How a Person may know in particular his own
Interest in Christ? Dr. Cr. p. 478, 479.
First I discovered the litigiousness and dubiousness of the way that many
Persons go for the satisfying and resolving of this case. I Instanced in three
marks, Universal Obedience, Sincerity of Heart, and Love of the Brethren; and
some have conceived, that in the Discourse I have directly struck at the Heart
of these particulars, as if I did attempt the overthrow of them: But mistake
not, I spoke only of their Insufficiency, that they are weak through the Flesh,
to give a Satisfactory Resolution of the great case depending, they are of
excellent use in their own kind, Sphere and Orb; but when they are set on work
to do those things that are beyond their power, Men do but entangle themselves
instead of getting themselves loose. I showed, as to Universal Obedience, Dr.
Cr. p. 480, 481.
according to propriety of Speech, there is none of it in the World; and as it
is practiced to this end it leaves the case very doubtful; in respect of many
Imperfections that attend, and in respect of the purposes of the Heart, which
are many times extremely corrupt, and that there is so much in our Obedience
common to Unbelievers and Hypocrites. As for Sincerity, which as the Apostle
describes, is Simplicity and Singleness of Heart toward God, that we find the
Jews that were Enemies to Christ's Righteousness, had a Zeal for God; and you
know what Paul says of himself, what designs he had undoubtedly in singleness
of Heart to do God Service. And besides, I show how false and deceitful we find
our Hearts upon Self-examination.

I spoke also as to Love of the Brethren which the Apostle John speaks so much
of, if we understand how the Apostle describes it, 1 Cor. 13. And if a Man
examine his Heart by these particulars, I know his Heart cannot but tell him he
is exceeding faulty in all these --

But I do not determine peremptorily, that a man cannot by way of Evidence
receive any comfort from his Sanctification; and I will give you somewhat
further for clearing my Judgment to you, which I know is according to Truth;
viz. That the Spirit of the Lord must first reveal the gracious Mind of God to
our Spirits, and give us Faith to receive that Testimony of the Spirit, and to
sit down as satisfied with his Testimony, before ever any Work of
Sanctification can possibly give any Evidence. But when the Testimony of the
Spirit of the Lord is received by Faith, and the Soul sits down satisfied with
that Testimony of the Lord, then also all the Gifts of God's Spirit do bear
witness, together with the Spirit of the Lord, and the Faith of a Believer. So
that I do not deny the use of signs and marks in Sanctification you see, as you
suggest.


Neonom. Sermon 16. He calls it the revealing Evidence of the Spirit, and
endeavors to prove this immediate Revelation.


Antinom. That the Spirit is a Revealing Evidence, and works immediately, as it
is the Spirit or Grace in all God's Children, is not to be denied, and yet
works immediately by the Word and Means of Grace too, and it works immediately
so ordinarily; I do not mean that it works immediately by way of extraordinary
Revelation and Inspiration when it works in this kind. But its way of ordinary
working is mediately by the Word, and immediately in the Word.

I put this Question, Is there any Evidences in the World by which Persons may
comfortably claim their Interest in the Privileges of Christ? Dr. Cr. p. 465.
A. Yes, there are two. 1. The Revealing Evidence. 2. The Receiving Evidence.
The Revealing Evidence is the Voice of the Spirit to a Man's own Spirit,
saying, Son, be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee. -- And this will
overcome all Objections, and till the Spirit of the Lord come immediately
himself, and speak this to the Soul, all the World shall never be able to
satisfy and resolve that Soul, and till then all signs and marks are mere
Darkness and Riddles.

To clear up this, I say, the Spirit of the Lord is mainly sent into the World
by Christ for this very purpose, to speak personally and particularly to the
Hearts of Men, to satisfy them of their Interest in Christ. That this was the
main business of the Spirit, the Scripture shows, and holds out nothing more.

1. It maybe cleared from the very Attribute or Title which our Savior gives
to the Spirit of the Lord, John 14.16. c. 16.7, 8, 9, 14. The Comforter; this
is he by way of Eminency, and the Title imports, That the Satisfaction and
Resolution concerning Interest in Christ is the Work of the Spirit. -- What is
the occasion of all the Trouble of Spirit in tender Hearts? P. 467.
God has forsaken me, says one, My Sins are gone over my Head, says another,
etc. What will now cheer up the Heart of such a Person? It is that God will not
lay thy Sins to thy Charge, etc. If the Comfort of a Person consists in the
Assurance of Pardon, then the Spirit cannot be a Comforter, except it satisfy
as to clearing up this Truth, Thy Sins are forgiven.

2. Besides this bare Title, you shall see the Spirit has this particular
Office, as that, wherefore Christ does testify the Spirit does come. John 14
26. The Comforter which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my
Name, and he shall teach you these things. Chap. 16.13. When the Spirit of
truth is come, he shall guide you into all Truth. Ver. 14. He shall glorify
me, he shall receive of mine, and show it unto you. Mark those words, you see
then wherein the comforting Faculty of the Holy Ghost lies, in receiving of
Christ's, and showing those things to Persons -- which things are the Glorious
Excellency of Christ in Justification and Forgiveness, Acts 13.38, 39. And more
fully of his Office, to convince the World of Sin and Righteousness, John 16.8,
9. -- And a Person is convinced of Righteousness when Christ's Righteousness in
Justification is cleared up unto a Person.

And whereas the Spirit may be conceived to Comfort only in general: Dr. Cr. p.
469.
There is a difference between the Administration of Christ, and that of the
Spirit of Christ. Christ came into the World to Merit Salvation, and Comfort
Men in general; for though he merited Comfort in particular to be applied by
the Spirit, yet still in his Ministration he did run upon general terms for the
most part. But the Spirit is sent in Christ's room to come to every Man's
Spirit particularly by himself, and speak that within a Man's self, that Christ
by the Ministry of the Gospel speaks, but in general to Men; therefore he
says, If I go not away the Comforter cannot come.

And now I shall show that the evidencing particularly unto a Man's Spirit
concerning his Interest in Christ is the proper Work of the Spirit of God, Romans
8.14, 15. and 1 Cor. 2.9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Ephesians. 1.13, 14. These places I
opened, and applied to the matter in hand, clearly proving the Evidencing
Office of the Spirit.

Obj. But suppose I hear such a Voice, here is the Doubt, How shall I know it is
the Voice of the Spirit? Dr. Cr. p. 473.
If the Word did bear witness to this particular Voice of the Spirit, then I
should be satisfied, etc.

Sol. Let me not be mistaken. That it is true the Spirit of the Lord never
speaks to the Heart of any Believer, but he always applies according to the
Word of Grace Revealed, and the Voice of the Spirit, and if the Word of Grace
be in the Soul, (as they go always together in the Faithful,) they will agree
as Face answers Face in a Glass; but yet beware that you make not the Credit of
the Voice of the Spirit depend upon the Word barely considered --

In brief therefore, as it is the Testimony of God's Spirit speaking indeed
according to the Word, Dr. Cr. p. 475.
that must satisfy us that we are the Children of God; so it must be the same
Spirit must assure us, that he is the true Spirit of God, and not of Delusion.
But still I say, this Spirit of the Lord speaks always to Persons concerning
their Interest in Christ, according to the Word of Grace; and it is most
certainly true, that every Voice in Man speaking peace, being contrary to the
Word of Grace, that Voice is not the Voice of the Spirit of the Lord, yet it is
only the Spirit of the Lord can satisfy the Spirit of a Man in this thing,
that it is his own Testimony, and not a Spirit of Delusion:

You may understand the Word in a double sense, either for the Word of the Law,
or else for the Word of Grace in the Gospel. Now mark, when we say it is the
Spirit of God bearing witness with our Spirits, according to the Word, that we
are the Sons of God; it is not the Word of the Law that agrees in this with the
Voice of the Spirit; the Word of the Law speaks nothing but Curses.

-- The Word in which the Spirit of the Lord speaks to his People, is the Word
of Grace, and the Word of Grace is no more but this, [as to the Sum and
Substance of it, in this, or such like Expression thereof.] God was in Christ
Reconciling the World unto himself, not Imputing their Trespasses.


Neonom. You see the Spirits Voice according to the Word is no more than
according to the general account, that Christ came to save Sinners: And also if
any Sinner have this inward Voice, that Voice is according to the Word, whether
he be a Regenerate Person or no. D. W. p. 162.


Antinom. The Gospel Declaration is indefinite, we say it is the peculiar Work
and Office of the Spirit to bring home the Promise in particular; it is not any
thing but the Spirit can appropriate the general Promise particularly to any
one.

I said also, that the Spirit of the Lord does both speak, and likewise give to
Men to Credit and Receive what he speaks. Dr. Cr. p. 477.

All the Righteousness that ever man did (mere man) since the Fall, Dr. Cr. p.
482.
was never able to say upon good grounds, such a Person is a Child of God. Nay,
to go higher, the very Word of Grace is not able to speak peace to a Soul till
the Spirit of the Lord will speak. -- When the Spirit of God will be silent,
the Word of Grace shall not speak any thing; if the Spirit blow, the Trumpet
makes a found, but if it blow not, the Trumpet makes no sound at all. As the
Spirit of the Lord will speak in the Word of Grace, so the Melody of the Word
will Ravish the Ears and Hearts of Believers; but if the Spirit himself will be
silent, there is no Music in the Word of Grace it self. -- No man under Heaven
can say, God is my Father with Propriety, but by the Spirit of Adoption.


Calvin. Mr. Neonom. I know not any just Exception you can have against this
Divinity, there being so clear Evidence for what is here delivered, from the
Word of God.


Neonom. He says, Faith is the Echo of the Heart to the Voice of the Spirit.


Calvin. In the Continuation of Pool 's Annotations, one of your Vouchers has
this on 1 John 5.10. He that truly believes has the effectual Impress of this
Testimony upon his Soul. What is that but the Echo of it, speaking the same
thing.


Neonom. He means that Faith does not evidence our Pardon as it is a Grace
wrought in the Soul by the Spirit, or a holy Qualification, but only as it does
assent to, and rest in this inward Voice. D. W. p. 163.


Antinom. No, he does not place this Evidencing Nature of Faith, which he
speaks of, in it, as an Act or Qualification; for as such it evidenceth no more
than any other Grace; but Faith has a peculiar evidencing Nature in it,
because it is a receiving Grace, (he speaks not now of Assent) it takes
Possession of the Promise: And would not you have Faith to be assenting to and
resting on the Voice of the Spirit in the Word? what would you have it be
nothing at all?


Neonom. He seems to own that Sanctification is some Evidence.


Antinom. He does so, as was observed before.


Calvin. I pray, what is your Sense concerning the way of attaining Assurance?


Neonom. Truth; The ordinary way whereby a Man attaineth a well-grounded
assurance, is not by immediate objective Revelation, or an inward Voice,
saying, Thy Sins are forgiven. D. W. p. 160.


Antinom. I judge by this Negation you set by these things from Assurance, as
having nothing to do ordinarily in it. 1. That no Voice is heard any way by the
Soul, Thy Sins are forgiven, that is not to be believed by a direct Act of
Faith. 2. That Forgiveness of Sin is not revealed to a Believer by the Word of
Promise believed. 3. That the Spirit of God has nothing to do in bringing the
Soul to appropriate and apply the general Promise particularly to his own Soul.
So that here, as to our believing Forgiveness of Sin, neither the Spirit, nor
the Objective Revelation of the Gospel, nor indeed Faith it self in it is
receiving Nature, has any thing to do, but only as a Sign and Mark set upon
the Soul.


Neonom. But when a Believer is examining his Heaert and Life by the Word, the
Holy Spirit enlightens the mind there to discern Faith and Love, and such other
Qualifications, which the Gospel declares to be the infallible Signs of
Regeneration: And he adds such Power to the Testimony of Conscience for the
Truth and In-being of these Graces, as begets in a Soul a joyful sense of it is
comfortable state, and some comfortable Freedom from those Fears which
accompany a doubting Christian: And according to the Evidence of these Graces,
Assurance is ordinarily strong or weak.


Antinom. I observe now, though you would let the Spirit have no hand in the
Evidence of Faith, yet you need its help to enlighten about Signs and
Qualifications. I pray, how does the Spirit enlighten here? Is it by any
objective Revelation, or by any inward Dictate or Intimation? And cannot the
Spirit as well enlighten the Mind to behold Christ in the Promise by an Act of
Faith, as to behold Faith and Love in our selves.

2. You will not admit the Declaration of the Gospel received and embraced by
Faith to evidence, but that it seems the Heart and Life must be examined by the
Word as a Rule: So that Assurance must be wrought by the Word as a Law, not as
a Gospel, so far as you are come up to a Conformity to the Rule, not a
Testimony of your Interest in the Grace of the Gospel.

3. You had need have the Light of the Spirit to find an infallible Sign in you
too, though they be declared in the Gospel. Hypocrites pretend to them, and you
cannot tell whether you are any better than a Hypocrite, without an infallible
Voice of the Spirit, (according to your Doctrine;) for you must know that you
shall persevere in those Qualifications, and it is impossible for a Man to be
assured till Death, or can be assured of his Perseverance till then, (all other
Signs will signify nothing) without an Infallible Witness.

4. You must have a Power added by the Spirit to the Testimony of Conscience,
that it may witness the Truth and In-being of Graces. What Is the Reason it
cannot witness the Truth of our In-being in Christ, and add a Power to our
Faith to believe even unto Assurance?

5. All this Examination, Illumination of the Spirit, Gospel-Declaration, etc.
may at last beget a joyful Sense or a reconciled State, you say; but according
to you it cannot be Assurance, because you cannot yet try by Perseverance; the
Soul is in a little hopes it is in a probable way to Salvation, but cannot be
assured he is in a sure state, or shall certainly be saved, because he must
continue his Justified State by his Works; and therefore it is impossible for
him to try and find so far as to Assurance; because he has not persevered,
you will say, it may be: He must believe his Perseverance, and be assured of it by
Faith; then, I say, there is as much ground to believe and be assured by Faith
of all our Salvation.

6. You speak not of an Assurance in all you have said, but of some comfortable
Freedom from Doubtings, i. e. upon some probable Grounds: This amounts to more
than Opinion at last, the only Judgment of a contingent Axiom; and you tell us
elsewhere our State here is but of Trial not decided, therefore there can be no
Assurance at all in this Life.

7. You do well to add at last, that according to the Evidence of these Graces,
Assurance is ordinarily strong or weak: And may not that Assurance be so, which
we call the Assurance of Faith? May it not be strong or weak, according to the
Evidence that Faith gives in being strong or weak Faith? But now go on to your
Whethers and Neithers.


Neonom. I will show you wherein the difference is not. D.W. p. 164.


Antinom. So you may, and enumerate all things in the World by Sea and by Land
besides. It is not whether the Sun be the Element of Fire, nor how many Regions
in the Air, nor whether Spirits are material, nor whether Anima be ex traduce?
etc.


Neonom. It is not whether the Spirit witnesses by his Miraculous Operations
to Christ, and the Gospel, which is a Truth, and the meaning of many of the
Texts which you quote.


Antinom. I do not know that we were like to stumble there, for we speak only
of the Spirits witnessing in its ordinary way, and so are all the Texts to be
understood, so far as they have been applied to our purpose.


Neonom. Nor whether the Spirit as a Worker of Grace in the Heart be an Earnest
of Glory, and Witness to our state.


Antinom. Very good, then sure if the Spirit be an Earnest of Glory; it is an
Evidence of Glory; for what is a greater Evidence of a state than an Earnest?
Yea, you say it is also a Witness of our state, if it be a Witness it is by a
Testimony, and if it bear Testimony, and such an one as we take to be a Witness
to our state, it is something to this purpose, Christ is thine, thy Sins are
Forgiven; it must witness something that may beget in the Soul a joyful sense
of its reconciled state; there, contrary to you, Assurance must come in the
immediate objective Revelation of the Spirit, by the Spirits speaking in the
Promise believed: God is thy God, Christ is thine, thy Sins are taken away, or
something to this purpose. Neither is this absurd, to say the Spirit speaks
thus ordinarily by a Voice, because it is so interpretatively, the Lord speaks
when he causes his Word to speak effectually unto the Heart; and whatever
Truth of God is made efficacious by the Spirit, the Spirit speaks by it. If any
word of Promise become a truly comforting Word, the Spirit as Comforter speaks
by it; you have granted us here in a manner as much as we can desire in this
Point, excepting an Equivocating Expression, viz. as a Worker of Grace; and
whatever Evasion you have there, this I will say, that you make the Spirit an
Evidence in its Efficiency it self, as an Efficient; whereas Signs and Marks
are but Evidences as Effects. And is not the Spirit received in its first
sensible Efficiency in and by the Promise a great Evidence? Gal. 3.3. 2 Pet.
1.3.


Neonom. Nor whether the Spirit witnesses by and with the Conscience, in the
manifestation of our Graces for Assurance.


Calvin. It is a strange thing that you should make such a loud Cry in the
World against a Man for Error, when you in a manner say the same thing; and
the Word of God asserts it so positively, that the Spirit is the Comforter, and
witnesses with our Spirits that we are his Children; and you say as the Worker
of Grace, i. e. of all Grace, and therefore of this Grace; and if it works, it
must be by some Word of Peace that it speaks and is believed; and you say it
witnesses by and with the Conscience, the Conscience speaking in and by the
Spirit; and how is the Conscience made to speak Peace more than by the
sprinkling of the Blood of Christ, whereby an Evil Condemning Conscience is
taken away? what manifestation of Grace works Peace most, the manifestation of
the Grace of Christ, or of our Graces? And these must appear to be the Graces
of Christ, and slow from him, or else they are no Graces; the Witness of the
Spirit, and the Intelligible believed Voice of the Spirit, particularly
applying the Declaration of the Gospel of Peace must be in all, and is the most
settled ground of all comfortable Assurance.


Neonom. Nor whether the Spirit of God may in some Extraordinary Cases give an
immediate Testimony by a Voice, or some Equivalent Impressions. D. W. p. 164.


Antinom. 1. You grant that sometimes the Spirit may witness by Voice, or
Equivalent Impressions.

2. The Extraordinary Cases you here speak of must be meant of some, not so
usual in an ordinary way.

3. I would know whether then the Spirit is to be believed, and how its Voice
may be distinguished from the Voice of a False Spirit?

4. Whether when you speak of a Voice you mean an Articulate sound, or such a
still Voice as the Spirit speaks by, which is an Impression of Gospel Truth
with a particular application to the Soul; this, as you say, is Equivalent to a
Voice, and it is the Echo of the Word of Promise in the Heart, and this is not
an Extraordinary nor unusual way, bringing Souls to settled Peace and Comfort.


Neonom. But then there was the Truth of Grace, though it was doubted before;
and nothing utterly inconsistent with true Grace, either in the Heart, nor then
appears to the Conscience.


Antinom. So that there is first a Witness from our selves, before there is
Witness from the Spirit; but how comes it that this Witness from our selves
has not Credit enough with it to be believed? For if it has, whence comes
doubting? Here Is truth of Grace, and nothing appears to the contrary, and yet
the Person doubts; Does any Man doubt of any thing, when he apprehends nothing
to the contrary? And you say, there is the Truth of Grace before the Spirit
witnesses who wrought this truth of Grace; do you not say, that it witnesses
to our state as a Worker of Grace?


Neonom. I will tell you where the true difference lies,

1. Whether none attain Assurance but by the Inward Voice of the Spirit,
pronouncing the Actual Forgiveness of Sins, without manifesting their true
Grace and Sanctification. This you affirm, and I deny.


Antinom. You should have made the first Question, whether any Assurance is
attainable till Death, because Perseverance is one of your Infallible Marks,
and all others signify nothing, unless we can take up upon that, and that must
run out to the last moment before we can.

2. We affirm, that there can be no Assurance without knowledge that our Sins
are Forgiven; assign an Assurance without it if you can; and your Assurance
from marks must come to this if it be Assurance.

3. This must be by the Spirits pronouncing of it, or no way; when you have
found all that you can, it is God must speak peace, or else it will never be;
and Peace of Reconciliation, however you Banter God's Reconciling the World,
and the Spirits bringing home the Word of Reconciliation.

4. Who ever spoke of the Spirits manifesting Forgiveness, without
manifestation of the whole Grace of God that brings Salvation, in
Sanctification as well as Justification? both comes under the Witness of the
Spirit, and therefore you are besides the Question, and state it not right.


Neonom. The next Question is, Whether the usual way of attaining Assurance, is
by the Conscience upon Trial discerning and concluding through the help of the
Spirit, that a Man has those Graces or Signs which describe a Man Blessed and
Pardoned according to the Gospel. This I affirm, and you deny.


Antinom. 1. That I deny Sanctification to be a sign of Justification is false,
for that which is an undoubted Effect is a sign of the Cause, and an Argument
of it to conclude it by.

2. It Is not the Question, whether it be not the usual way of attaining
Assurance, de facto; such Gospel Preachers as you are still putting them upon
this way, and telling them there is no other safe way.

3. The Question is, whether this be the only way? Whether another way ought
not to go first?


Neonom. I will now confirm the Truth by some Arguments.

1. This is the way that God appoints to attain Assurance, 2 Cor. 13.5. 2 Pet.
1.10.


Antinom. This is one way, who denies it, and a Duty required to examine our
selves? but where lies the Critical Point? It Is in Christ being in us, (...),
try or see by trial whether Christ be in you; how? look after the true Evidence
of it by finding out the thing it self, i. e. Christ received by Faith, and
witnessed by his Spirit, for Christ is in us these ways.

1. By his Spirit.

2. By Faith.

3. By our Mystical Union, I in them, John 17. Now this Trial is by Faith, for
it is thus: Do we see the things that are Invisible? But suppose you say, the
Trial is by the Fruits of Faith; we deny it not, but we say, they are not only
here, but to be understood; therefore the place concludes not against us, nor
that place, 2 Pet. 1.10. The Apostle there tells us, We have all things that
pertain to Life and Godliness, through the Knowledge of him that has called us
to Glory and Virtue; and if all things, then Assurance too, for it is through
great and precious Promises that we are partakers of the Divine Nature, and
through them, as the Spirit is bestowed, so it Comforts and Ensures Life and
Salvation to us. And as it works many gracious Virtues and Fruits in us, so it
excites and stirs us up to Increase and Growth in Grace, ver. 5, 6, 7. And
where these things are not, it is a sign that a Man has no true savor of
Pardoning Grace, lying under senlesness of the great Reason of Christ's Death
and Satisfaction, ((...),) of Christ, purging away of Sin, i. e. by Sacrifice,
of his bearing of Sin of old, so long ago; and it is no doubt but the real total
absence of the Fruits of Faith, is a sign there is no Faith; if these things be
wanting, such an one is Purblind, (...), or false-sighted, thinks he is
something when there is nothing; but the difficulty is this, a Man says, he
has upon trial, these Virtues, but is short-sighted; he looks close to
himself, and passes a wrong Judgment, how shall he be convinced that he has
them not? or he says, he has them not; how shall he come to be satisfied that
he has them? Who must resolve these difficulties? Is it not the Word and
Spirit that must resolve it in believing? Therefore the rather give all
diligence to make your Calling and Election sure; and how is that done? Why not
in believing? Does not Faith make our Calling sure; Is Election to be known any
way but by believing? And how is our Calling, i. e. Invitation to believe? How
is that made good, but by answering the Call? For he says, doing these things
(...), i. e. making Calling and Election sure, by getting a sure footing and
standing in Christ by Faith, you shall not fall or stumble, so as to fall; and
an entrance shall be abundantly ministered; the words are so, an entrance into
his Eternal Kingdom shall be (...) ministered to you. Now Christ he is the Door,
and a Rich Entrance into his Kingdom, ministered to every one that believes; so
that the Crisis of our State that the Spirit of God puts us upon in both places
is, especially about our Faith in Christ, which Faith is a Witness in our
selves, and the Spirit witnessing with it, and all ways and means causing our
Faith to witness, and giving us Light and Evidence from the Word believed, to
see the Graces of God and Fruits of the Spirit in our Hearts.


Neonom. This is the way whereby the Scripture Saints were assured: They
concluding their Justication by their Sanctification; and a state of Peace by
the Truth of Grace, 1 John 3.14. ver. 9. ver. 18. Thus David, Paul, and other
Saints, concluded the safety of their state. D. W. p. 165.


Antinom. This is one way, but not the only or principal way: The Apostle John
tells often, that Love, if it be true, and from a true Principle, and Root, is
an Argument of our Regenerate state, but that it may be known to be such, it
must be traced to the Head, (it being but a stream) to see how it flows from
the Love of Christ apprehended by Faith, whereby we have our Radical hold and
standing. And as he says, ver. 14. Hereby we know we are passed from Death to
Life, because we love the Brethren. Yet lest he should leave us in the dark,
and we should take false Love for true, he tells us, there is another Judgment
to pass upon our Love before we can argue from it, we must find that it flows
from our perception of the Love of God, in laying down his Life for us; and
from thence should proceed our readiness to lay down our Life for the Brethren;
ver. 16. In this we know, or are assured of God's Love, in that he laid down
his Life for us. The Love of God believed gives the Original Ground of
Assurance, and is the greatest, and the Touchstone to an other. A Witness from
Men, from what is found in us, is something, but the Witness of God is greater,
1 John 5.9. And the witness that he has given to us in the Gospel concerning
his Son testified by the Spirit, and applied by Faith, is that Evidence upon
which all firm Assurance is Radically Built. And you shall plainly see, that
John does not found our Assurance Radically upon Love, but in Justifying Faith;
he says, ver. 18. Let us be sincere in Love; and I will tell you whereby you
shall attain to good Assurance; ver. 19 (...), in this, [i. e. in what follows,
in this, refers not to the foregoing Verse, but to what follows; (...) is often
used as the Causal Particle, for, For in this we shall know, or be assured,
that we are of the Truth, (...),] we shall persuade our Hearts; it is rendered
well, assure our Hearts, bring our Hearts to Assurance, by believing that
whereby Condemnation is removed; for says he, if this be not, whatever
Judgment we have of what is in our selves, it may deceive us; and God knows
enough in us to condemn us, for if our Hearts labor under unbelief, and
condemn us, whatever we find in our selves will not give us peace; and God is
greater than our Hearts, therefore we must assure our Hearts that way which
will hold good in the Eye of God's Justice, i. e. by Faith in Jesus Christ,
ver. 21. and, says he, if our Heart condemn us not, (...), we have
cheerfulness and boldness toward God; and how is it possible that the
Condemnation of our Hearts should be taken off but by believing, and thereby
persuading our Hearts. But you will say, it may be that the word (...), is not
used for to express our believing? But I will show you it is. See Heb. 11.13.
They all died in Faith, having not received the Promises, but saw them afar
off, (...), were persuaded of them, i. e. believed them, so as to be assured of
them.

As for the rest of the Saints you shall find all along that their Triumphant
Assurances was by Faith. Abraham, Romans 4.20, 21. See the various phrases to
express his full Assurance of Faith, (...), he made no dispute or doubt about
the Promise; the English well express, He staggered not at the Promise, or
through unbelief, ver. 19. (...), ver. 19. He was not weak in Faith, but was
strong in Faith, (...), and consulted not with himself, secondary Causes, or
Carnal Reason, but was (...), carried forth with a full gale of Assurance. Job
19.25. Job's Assurance was the Assurance of Faith, I know my Redeemer lives,
etc. David under his greatest Trial of Banishment by his own Son from the House
of God, Psalm. 42.10. when Challenged by his Enemies at the highest rate, at
which he was so disquieted, he calls up his Soul to take up Comfort in
believing, ver. 11. and 45.5. Paul, Romans 7. where he tells how low he was
brought upon Self-examination, as to what he could find in himself, ver. 18. I
know that in me, that is in my Flesh there dwells no good thing. See how he
complains, ver. 24. O wretched Man that I am, etc. as much as to say, I am
wretched in regard of the Evil, Sin, and Corruption that I find abounding in
me; but ver. 25. I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord; there is the Root
of his Comfort, in the Faith that he had in Jesus Christ, tho there was this
little small spark of Holiness in him, a mind at least to serve the Law of God,
yet he trusted not to that: And you see, 2 Cor. 12.7, 8, 9. when he fell into
Temptation and Buffeting, was it his Duties and Services to Christ and his
Churches, that supported him? No, it was an objective manifestation to him
received by Faith, My Grace is sufficient for thee; but you will say, his
rejoicing was in the Testimony of his Conscience, 2 Cor. 1.12. It Is true it
was, and the Testimony of a good Conscience as to our Hearts and Ways is matter
of Rejoicing, but this was in Paul without confidence in the Flesh, or
ascribing any thing to it, but by seeing all in Christ, and that all flowed
down from the Free Grace and Love of God, all his Simplicity and Sincerity of
Heart was seen by Faith to be Gifts of Grace; therefore you see whenever the
Children of God took any Comforts and Rejoicings from the Fruits of the Spirit,
they made not these as the Fundamental ground of their Assurance, but a
confirming and additional ground, and such as was very uncertain, insomuch that
at some times they were at a perfect loss for them, yet was not without their
rooted and grounded Assurances in the darkest Times, and under the obscurest
Providence.


Neonom. The Conscience is bound to condemn every Man in whom the contrary to
these Graces do appear, yea, where it is evident they are wholly wanting. It Is
otherwise a seared Conscience, 1 Timothy 4.2. It Is the Candle of the Lord; now
there can be no Assurance where the Conscience condemns, 1 John 3.19, 20, 21.
D. W. p. 166.


Antinom. There is nothing but the sprinkling of the Blood of Christ applied by
Faith that can take off the Conscience from Condemning, and without this all
the Works and Duties in the World cannot do it; it is the Law that obliges the
Conscience to condemn; and the sense of our Imperfections and Weaknesses, and
remainder of Corruption may be where there is no condemning Conscience; but
wherefore is it? Not because of what they find in themselves, but from what
they find in Christ; and it is a harsh Doctrine that you teach, from 1 Timothy 4.2.
that all that cannot find Works enough in themselves to conclude their state in
Christ from, and hold it merely by Faith in Christ, and thereby freed from
Condemning Consciences, have Seared, Cauterized Consciences, such as the
Apostle Prophesies of, that should abound in the Antichristian Apostasy and
Seduction; and you subvert the Doctrine of the Gospel thereby, helping to
fulfill that Prophecy, by what Doctrine the Text will tell you.


Neonom. The Spirit witnesses with our Spirits, (...), Romans 8.16. It does not
witness before our Spirits does witness: It is not a separate Testimony from
our Spirits, but it concurrs with our Spirit as its Instrument, our Spirit
witnesses in the Light of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 9.1. my Conscience bearing me
witness in the Holy Ghost.


Antinom. What is this Argument brought for, is this to prove that there is no
Assurance by the Voice of the Spirit? And that the only way of Assurance is by
Signs and Marks? But you have brought in this place of Scripture as many Men
retain Council in their Case, they Fee some Council only that they may not be
against them; but the Word of God will not be Bribed, this place is directly
against you. The Apostle here tells us the very Comforting Office of the Holy
Ghost, that it becomes a Spirit of Adoption, this is the Spirit of Christ, Gal.
4.6. And what is it that it does? it teaches us to call God Father; and how
does it do this? A. It Is by witnessing to us our Relation, viz. that we are the
Sons of God; this is that which does assure us of our Inheritance: if Children
then Heirs.

Now I argue, that which witnesses in the Children of God, that they are the
Children of God, insomuch that from thence they can conclude themselves Heirs,
does pronounce the Actual Forgiveness of their Si^s, and is the usual way of
Assurance: but the Spirit witnesses in the Children of God, that they are the
Children of God; Ergo, there is a pronunciation of Actual Forgiveness by the
Voice of the Spirit, etc. For the Major it is proved from Gal. 3.26. The Spirit
bestows Adoption by Faith in Christ Jesus, Ye are all the Children of G^d by
Faith in Christ Jesus; and ver. 29. If ye be Christ's then are you of Abraham's
Seed, and Heirs according to the Promise; you will allow the Spirit to witness,
but not before our Spirit, so that you will have our Spirits to be before the
Spirit, the Senior Evidence. I deny it, for that which causes our Spirits to
give Evidence, is not the younger Evidence, but the Spirit causes our Hearts
to give Evidence, Ergo: Now for the Minor, that the Spirit causes our Hearts
to give Evidence, I prove from your self; you say the Spirit concurrs with our
Spirit as its Instrument; now the Efficient is before the Instrument by which
it works, and Instrumentum is but Causa Ministrans at most, and is res motu
facta, in that respect is effectum efficientis. Now the way of the Spirits
witnessing is by bringing to our Spirit an objective Manifestation of Grace in
the Promise, and causing us by Faith to make a particular application thereof
to our selves, and so we become by the Witness of the Spirit to be the Children
of God by Faith, in the same sense we are Heirs according to the Promise, Gal.
3.29. Now therefore the Spirit must witness first as the Worker of this
Assurance by the Promise, that Faith may witness; and you your self said but
now, that the Spirit witnesses as a Worker of Grace, therefore as the Worker
of the Grace of Assurance. You say it is not a separate Testimony from our
Spirits, I suppose you mean from our Spirits Testimony: your meaning I take to
be, that they both witness one and the same thing; but that they are two
distinct Witnesses, is evident from the Text; that which witnesses with
another is distinct from that other; and you say it concurrs with our Spirit,
i. e. Convenient in uno tertio Testimonio, ergo inter se. And you say our
Spirits witness in the Light of the Spirit, i. e. in the Light of its
Manifestation and Evidence, and therefore the Spirit must witness first, or
else our Spirits must witness without Evidence, which is impossible. So that
all you have been saying in this Argument, is against your self and for us.


Neonom. A Testimony of the Spirit giving an Evidence of Pardon without any
evidence of Grace, is not according to the Word of Grace: for the Word of Grace
never declares any Sinners are pardoned but believing penitent Sinners; it is
not as mere Sinners the Word pardons, but it flatly condemns and leaves
guilt on all Impenitent Unbelievers, as I have proved.


Antinom. I marvel a Divine should speak at such a rate; as if an Evidence of
Pardon were not an Evidence of Grace: Is not Pardon the highest degree of
Grace? is not the Word of Grace therefore so, because it is a Word of Pardon to
Sinners? And if you mean Inherent Grace, why may not the Spirit give evidence
of Pardon to a Sinners evidence of it in an act of Believing, before there can
be any Fruits of Faith? Was it not so with the Thief upon the Cross, and many
that God pardons just upon the last moment of their Lives? And is it not so
with many of Gods Children that can see no Evidences in themselves? the Spirit
strips them of all grounds in themselves, and that gives a full satisfaction in
objective Grace, with the full Assurance of Faith, that the Creature may be
laid low, and Christ may be glorified. I must tell you, that a mere Sinner is
the Object of Pardon, and not a Sinner considered under any holy
Qualifications: The whole need not the Physician: Christ finds and pardons lost
Sinners, and there is no Sinner applies pardon aright but as a mere Sinner, tho
he has Faith: But of this I have spoken before in our Eighth Conference, and
Twelfth.


Neonom. Therefore if there be a Voice, a true Voice of God, carrying its own
evidence, saying, Thy sins are forgiven, it does at the same time and by the
same voice, witness to the truth of our Grace; because he forgives no other
according to the Word of the Gospel.


Antinom. A true Voice witnessing the Forgiveness of sins, does consequently
witness to the truth of Grace in our Hearrs; for the closing with the Evidence
in a way of Comfort, witnessed by the Spirit, does de facto witness to the
truth of our Faith; there is Lord I believe: Likewise it witnesses that Christ
is ours, and we Christ's; and if so, we are New Creatures, and this we may be,
and must be, before we can bring forth any Fruits besides Faith it self. But
it is not for the reason you allege, which is as much as to say, Christ saves
none but them that are saved already.


Neonom. If the Spirit should say to an Impenitent Soul, Thou art pardoned,
while such, it is no Promise in the Gospel, etc.


Antinom. Is there no promise in the Gospel to take away the heart of stone, to
give repentance? and neither of these is found till pardoning mercy make the
way, and are never savingly found, till Forgiveness is given, and in some
measure of Believing closed with; but you rove from the Point of Assurance that
we are upon, go on to your next Argument.


Neonom. To have the Ordinary way of Assurance as it is stated by the opposite
Error, is of dangerous Consequence. D. W. p. 167.


Antinom. i. e. By the Witness of the Spirit, and by the Evidence of Faith. I
pray let us hear those dangerous Consequences what they be.


Neonom. 1. Most Saints must quit their Hopes and Assurances, for they never
had this Voice, tho they have greater stamps of the Spirit, than any I ever
knew pretend to this.


Antinom. If any Saints have Hopes and Assurance that is good in some degree,
they need not quit them in betaking themselves to better, firmer and more
lasting grounds of Hope and Assurance; the Assurance may be the same, tho
better grounded and built: But they never had this Voice, what mean you by
this? Is there any true Believer that never heard what the Spirit says to
Sinners? is there any that hears not what God says in his Word? Do they not
hear that are in their spiritual Graves the Voice of Christ, and live? Do you
so impose as to stretch our meaning to an extraordinary Audible Voice? Then you
do but like your self: But yet you say, they have stamps of the Spirit; I pray
how does the Spirit make a Stamp and Impression upon a Sinners Heart, but by
the Application of the Grace of the Gospel in Believing? Is it not as many as
received Christ, to them is the Privilege of being the Sons of God? And you
say greater Stamps than any you know pretend to this: you speak you know not
what, in a scornful manner, as if you knew little your self what belongs to a
rrue Gospel Spirit; I am sure if you did, you would not run out in this loose
manner as you do, in a way of Contempt of others. See Phil. 2.3, 4.


Neonom. It makes all Examination useless and vain.


Antinom. It makes Examination most useful and necessary, yea hereby becomes
more profitable, advantageous and comfortable, when by sounding we find good
bottom; we find we have not only Life, but have it more abundantly.


Neonom. It overturneth one of the great (...) God has assigned to the work of
all Grace on the Heart.


Antinom. What shall I call this Assertion, Mr. Calvin?


Calvin. For shame, Mr. Neonom. leave off, what will you say, Gods own Spirit
witnessing in our Hearts to the full Assurance of Faith, overturns his work of
Grace in our Hearts? I am sorry to hear this evil Communication come out of
your Mouth.


Neonom. It makes Assurance impossible without this Miraculous Voice.


Antinom. Are you again upon the High Ropes and Tenterhooks? Is this intended
to be any way a miraculous Voice, only the Voice of the Spirit as Comforter in
the Heart according to the Word? Is it a miraculous Voice for God to say unto
the Soul, I am thy Salvaiion? Is it not the ordinary Gospel Voice under the Old
Testament and New.


Neonom. It hardly carries its Evidence to a Soul that has no Grace at all?


Antinom. You say a miraculous Voice can hardly carry its Evidence to a Soul
that has no Grace at all: It is well you put in hardly, for you know it was
carried to Paul in a miraculous Voice; and it is a mavelous audacious
Expression, to say God can hardly carry Grace and Evidence of Grace to a
graceless Soul; no not so much as miraculously: and cannot God give Grace and
evidence in the same moment of time, as to the Thief on the Cross, and
thousands more in the Word.


Neonom. It Is a way too far Enthusiastic to be allowed in so stated a Case.


Antinom. You had best say the Apostle Paul in the whole 8th Chapter to the
Romans, and 1 Cor. 2. and Ephesians. 1. and in diverse other places, was too
Enthusiastic, and therefore those portions of Scripture that speak of the
Revelation and Witness of the Spirit, and the Assurances of Faith, not to be
allowed. I Will assure you, you are mighty Magisterial to take upon you the
decrying the Witness of the Spirit at this presumptuous rate, openly and before
the World: What account can you give of this another day?


Neonom. It gives the Devil a great advantage against Sinners, to live in Sin;
and against honest People, if once they find cause to question this Voice: Yea
it sets up the Spirit against it self, if any can boast of Assurance by this
Voice, when their state is justly challengeable by the Gospel, as wanting all
Sight of Gospel Marks.


Antinom. If the Grace of God that brings Salvation unto Sinners, is the
casting out of the Devil out of the Heart, and the witnessing Spirit a
mortifying Spirit, Teacher of Holiness, and the greatest Enlarger of the Heart
therein, as Romans 8.15. by how much the more it works as a Comsorter, as the
Spirit of Adoption, bringing us into the Liberty of Sons of God, and showing to
us that Christ is ours and we are his, yea by how much the more he makes us to
see by Faith in Christ, and how much the less he makes us to see in our selves;
but still shows us our own Vileness and Ugliness, Corruptions, poorness of
Duties, even to the loathing and abhorring of our selves, if then I say God is
most glorified and his Free Grace, Christ is most advanced and his precious
Blood, and his glorious Spirit to be loved and admired, and we in the best and
most Gospel-frame: Then all that you have here spoken is Burlesque, mingled
with the Enmity of your Heart, vented against the Grace of the Gospel and the
Spirit of God.


Calvin. I must confess I cannot tell what to say of that saying, The Witness of
the Spirit by the Voice of the Gospel, is giving advantage to the Devil; I am
sure it has a dangerous Aspect. But I pray, Mr. Antinomian, do you condemn
Signs and Marks as altogether useless toward the gaining of Assurance, that he
inveighs at so heavy a rate?


Antinom. No, by no means; I allow the Fruits of the Spirit to be of a
mavelous use, as to Confirming and Comforting of our selves, and very
satisfactory to others; that our Savior says, hereby shall all men know that
we are his Disciples; and, as James says, we must be convinced of men's Faith
by their Work, or else we cannot take them to be Believers: Yea we expect of
every one that we admit Church Members, that they should give a Reason of the
Hope that is in them, according to the Rule of the Gospel: This Mr. Neonomian
is against, he will Burlesque upon it, as much as he does now at the Witness of
the Spirit.


Calvin. Why it is not possible, Mr. Neonomian. Sure when you admit Members
into your Congregation, you are very strict in Examining of them upon the
Fruits of Faith, that you and all your Congregation may know, so far as the
Judgment of a rational Charity will go, that they are Disciples of Christ; though
as those Signs may deceive a man's own self, so others may be deceived in those
that make Profession of them.


Neonom. I know no ground to stand so strictly upon my Admission; I think if
men be not grossly Ignorant, or openly Scandalous, they may be admitted to all
Ordinances; I cannot try them for their Perseverance, which is the greatest
Mark.


Calvin. But I read that the Churches in the Primitive Times were made up of
those that were at least to Visible appearance sanctified in Christ Jesus.


Neonom. But the times are altered now, they were Converted out of Heathenism,
we are all Christians.


Calvin. Aye, such as they be, such as your honest People, which the Devil gets
a great advantage against, to persuade to live in sin because of the pardoning
Grace of the Gospel, for whose sake you would have the Doctrine renounced, and
another Gospel preached. I see you do not set so much by Signs and Marks, but
only to set them up in opposition to the Witness of the Spirit.


Antinom. I will give you my full sense of the Doctrine of Assurance. The
certainty of a Thing or Proposition can be founded but upon one of these two
Bottoms, either upon an Artificial or Inartificial Argument (so called in
Logic:) An Argument artificial gives me sensible or rational ground for what I
am assured of, and it argues Things from Causes, Effects, Subjects, Adjuncts,
Dissentaneities, wherein are diversa and opposita, etc. But an inartificial
Argument is founded on Testimony, and according to the faithfulness of him that
brings it, it gives more or less ground of belief: This is reckoned in Logic
the weakest ground of Knowledge, especially being Testimonium humanum that is
brought; it may be a probable ground of believing, but is not an Infallible
one, and therefore the Judgment upon it usually goes no further than Opinion,
that which is of a Contingency. But in Theology, Testimonium Divinum, Divine
Testimony is the greatest ground of Certainty and Assurance in the World;
because he that speaks is unchangeably true, faithful, just and holy, he cannot
ly: Now hence it is, that what Testimony comes from God himself, it is to be
believed, because it is so without reasoning any further, and is the greatest
ground of Assurance in the World; therefore I affirm, that the Witness of God
in his Word, and the Spirit in the Heart, firmly believed, is, and produces
the greatest Assurance for firmness and durability in the World.

This is that which ought to ly in the bottom of all our Assurance, this will
hold above all in the hour of Temptation, when all Signs and Marks sail; tho
our Faith may be sometimes shaken, and our Comforts and Assurances eclipsed, so
that our Faith may hold but as far as a Hoping or Persuasion of a Probability
of our State and Condition; yet, as Mr. Neonomian says, as the Evidence is
strong or weak, so our Assurance is strong or weak. Now that Faith still
carries with it a Hypostasis or Demonstration of the thing believed, grounded
upon the Certainty, Truth and Infallibility of God, I am fully satisfied from
that Portion of Scripture that evinces it undeniably, Heb. 11.1.

And as now for other grounds of Comfort and Assurance which arise from the
Visibility of the Grace of God, and the Fruits of the Spirit in the Heart and
Life, I highly value them, as subordinate grounds of Comfort and Confirmation
in Assurance, these are seen by the reflection of the Soul upon it self, being
able in regenerate man to reason in a spiritual manner from Causes, Effects,
Subjects and Adjuncts, etc. which he finds in himself, according to the Rule of
the Word of God: This I call Experimental Assurance; and this is that which is
so long attaining to, and when it is had, may be lost again in a great measure,
as Comfort therefore. And because many Believers take this to be all the
Assurance they must look for, and their Teachers tell them so, therefore they
go mourning all their days, and are only supported by what degrees of
Assurance is in their Faith, which they take not to be any; and their Teachers
tell them that Faith has nothing of Assurance in it, but, do suggest as if it
were but the roving of the Mind in uncertainties and Probability, and that it
is Presumption for them to believe to Confidence and Assurance, though the
Spirit of God does command and encourage it again and again, and that doubting
is rather their Virtue than Sin; whereas so much as there is of Doubting
mingled with their Faith, so much there is of Sin and Unbelief.

In true Faith there is the Promise more or less believed, i. e. the Truth and
Goodness (because a Promise reached forth a Truth which carries Goodness in it
to usward) is received; the ^eason of which reception is the certain Truth and
Faithfulne^^ of him that promises: Hence there is believing a Word, and
believing a Person. Hence believing has three things in it, according to the
Apostle, Heb. 11. 1. The Object falls not under the measure of Sense and
Reason, therefore called Things not seen, and Things hoped for. 2. There is
(...), i. e. an express Image, Heb. 1. of the things not seen and hoped for,
brought to us in the Promise. 3. There is (...), a Demonstration or Argument of
the Reality and Certainty of those things, and intention of bestowing them,
taken from the Truth and Faithfulness of him that promises: Faithful is he
that has promised. Now that God has promised in general and indefinitely to
save Sinners, and that he is able and willing to perform it in his time, and to
whom he pleases, may be a common Faith only, and such as the Devils have: But
for a Sinner to take up with the Promise for himself, is the work of the Spirit
peculiarly: Because there is no man spoken to by Name in the Promise, which
advantage Abraham had; and the want thereof must be supplied by the Spirit's
^aying to the Soul more or less plainly, This Promise belongs unto thee;
whereby the Soul is enabled to exert fiducially a believing the Promise, and
staying on the Promiser for himself: And here lies the difficulty of Believing,
and the usual workings of Unbelief. It Is a mavelous thing to me, Mr.
Neonomian, that you can have the Impudency to quote the Assembly for your
Assertion, Confess. Chapter 18.
viz. That there is no other grounds of Assurance but Signs and Marks: Whereas
they say so expressly, That a Believer may be assured in this Life that he is
in a State of Grace, and this Certainty is not a bare conjectural and probable
persuasion grounded on a fallible Hope, but an Infallible Assurance of Faith,
founded on the Divine Truth of the Promises of Salvation, the inward evidence
of those Graces unto which those Promises are made, the Testimony of the Spirit
of Adoption witnessing with our Spirits.

So that they make three grounds of Assurance: 1. The infallible Assurance of
Faith. 2. The inward Evidences of Graces. 3. The Witness of the Spirit of
Adoption.

When you quoted this place, you had either forgot what you had wrote, or you
quote it (retaining the Assembly first) least it should be brought against you.

There are three great Graces spoken of by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13.13. Faith,
Hope, Love: Mr. Caryl, on Job 13.13.
And the Scripture holds forth an Assurance in reference to every one of these:

First, The Assurance of Faith, Heb. 10.22. Let us draw near with a true Heart,
in full assurance of Faith. This Assurance of Faith has a double respect: 1.
To our Persons: 2. To our Services, that in both we are pleasing to God.

Secondly, There Is an Assurance of Hope, Heb. 6.11. Faith has an Eye to the
Truth of the Promise, Hope to the Good of the Promise; and the Assurance of
Hope is that we shall certainly receive that Good.

Thirdly, There Is an Assurance of Love, 1 John 4.48. Perfect Love casts out
Fear. How is Love made Perfect, and how does it cast out Fear? v. 17. Herein
(says he) is love made perfect, that we may have boldness in the day of
Judgment, because as he is, so are we in the World: i. e. As his Love is
sincere to us, so is ours to him (according to our measure) even in this life,
and this gives us boldness, our Assurance that all shall go well with us in the
day of Judgment; so this Love casts out all fear of Condemnation in that day,
which Fear where it remains has Torment, than which nothing is more contrary
to Assurance. In perfect Love there is no Torment, because there is no Fear;
and there is no Fear, because there is an Assurance of the Love of God, in this
love the Soul does repose, rest and delight it self. There is a Fourth thing
spoken of, which is a full assurance of Understanding: This is Clearness of our
apprehension about the things which we do believe, and upon which we fasten by
Faith and Love: The Light of the Understanding shining upon the Mysteries of
the Gospel, and mixing with our other Graces, bottoms the Soul upon the
strongest Foundation, and raises it up to the highest Pinnacle of Assurance.

We may say of Assurance in reference to these four Graces, as Philosophers do
of the Heavens, in reference to the four Elements, That they are neither of the
four Elements, but a Quintessence of a fisth Essence: So we may say of
Assurance, it is neither Faith nor Hope, nor Love, nor Knowledge, but it is a
fifth thing, sublimated and raised, either out of, or above all those, i. e.
when Assurance is raised to the highest pitch, that it is a full Assurance,
from whence our Joy is full; all a Christians Sails are filled, being under a
full gale, and having fair weather.

Romans 8.16. The Spirit it self bears witness with our Spirits that we are the
Sons of God: Dr. Owen, of the Spirit, p. 168. Sect. 9.
The witness which our own Spirits do give unto our Adoption, is the work and
Effect of the Holy Spirit in us; if it were not, it would be false, and not
confirmed by the Testimony of the Spirit himself, who is the Spirit of Truth;
and none knows the things of God, but the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2.11. If he
declare not our Sonship in us and to us, we cannot know it. How does he then
bear witness to our Spirits? What is the distinct Testimony? It must be some
such Act of his, as evidenceth it self to be from him Immediately, unto them
that are concerned in it, i. e. those, unto whom it is given.

He that Expounds Romans 8.16. In Pool's Annotations, see the Expos. on Romans 8.16.
I think one of your Vouchers, speaks admirably well to this matter: The Spirit
of Adoption (says he) does not only excite us to call upon God as our Father,
but it does ascertain and assure us (as before) that we are his Children. And
this it does not by an outward Voice, as God the Father to Jesus Christ; nor by
an Angel, as to Daniel and the Virgin Mary; but by an inward and secret
suggestion, whereby he raises our Hearts to this persuasion, That God is our
Father, and we are his Children. This is not the Testimony of the Graces and
Operations of the Spirit, but of the Spirit it self. A man's own Spirit does
witness to his Adoption, he finds in himself, upon diligent search and
Examination, some of the manifest Signs and Tokens thereof. But this Testimony
of it self is weak, and Satan has many ways and wiles to invalidate it;
wherefore, for more assurance it is confirmed by a greater Testimony, i. e. the
Spirit it self, which first works Grace, and then witnesses it; he witnesses
with our spirits, and seals it up to us. This Testimony is not in all Believers
alike, nor in any one at all times, it is better felt than expressed: He
witnesses to our Spirits (so some read it) by a distinct and immediate
Testimony, and he witnesses with our Spirits, (so the word properly signifies)
by a conjunctive and concurrent Testimony.

Intelligit Paulus, etc. Paul means that the Spirit of God bears such a
Testimony to us, Mr. Calvin, on Romans 8.16.
that he being our Guide and Master, our spirit does conclude Gods adoption of
us is sure. For our Spirits would not dictate this Faith to us of our own
accord, unless the Testimony of the Spirit go before; and he shows us how: for
whilst the Spirit does witness to us that we are the Children of God; he does
also put this believing Confidence into our Souls, that we have the boldness to
call God Father. And this is to be held always as a Principle, That we never
pray to God in a right manner, unless as we call him Father with our Lips, so
we are certainly persuaded in our Minds that he is such.

Paraeus also speaks the same, and quotes the words of Chrysostom, Si Homo,
Angelus, Archangelus, etc. If a Man, an Angel, an Archangel, promise any thing,
happily a man may doubt; but if the Spirit of God the Supreme Being, which
causes us to pray, and makes a Promise to them that pray, and gives us a
Promise, bearing Testimony to us within our selves, what room is there for
doubting?

Faith is called an Evidence; hence we learn, that the nature of Faith stands
not in doubting, Mr. Perkins on Heb. 11.1.
but in a Certainty and Assurance. The Romish Doubting of the Essence of Faith,
is as contrary to true Faith as Darkness to Light. Obj. But it seems Doubting
is a part or Companion of Faith, and who doubts not? Ans. We do say so, but
what then? we should not, God commands us to Believe, and not Doubt. Again, If
Faith be the Substance of things hoped for, much more is it a Substance to a
Believer; if it give those things a Being which are out of him, much more does
it give a permanent Being to the Believer himself, strengthening him to stand
and continue in all Assaults. Heb. 3.14.


ERRATA's of the Second Part continued, from page 83.
Page 90. l. 6. r. (...), p. 93. l. 1. r. nakedly, p. 94. l. 18. r. (...), p.
95. l. 10. r. Imputata, ibid. l. 31. r. it is of Infinite, p. 98. l. 3. r. our
Confession, ibid. 29. r. (...), p. 100. l. 24. r. we can never, p. 104. l. 4.
r. Person, p. 107. l. penult. r. (...). p. 109. l. 12. r. one as well as the
other, p. 110. l. 28. del. only, p. 111. l. 23. r. Its the Law, p. 112. l. 14.
dele that for, Ibid. l. 38. r. became, p. 113. l. 15. r. tenure of it. ibid. l.
17. r. is relating, ibid. Marg. r. Pacti. p. 117. l. 33. del. in, ib. l. 38. r.
to Christ by Faith, p. 118. l. 6. r. dependences, p. 124. l. 22. r. parts, p.
125. l. 9. r. Restipulating, p. 130. l. 6. r. given it to me, p. 135. l. 8. r.
prusquam, p. 162. l. 11. for second r. the first Covenant, p. 168. l. 2. r.
promised mercy, p. 169. l. 26. r. on the Serpent, p. 173. l. 16. r. (...), ib.
l. 26. r. get up your selves to such, p. 190. l. 1. r. sincerity, p. 222. l.
ult. r. were some of, p. 223. l. 41. r. the same one, p. 231. l. 6. r. Denied,
p. 232. l. 27. r. its not in being, p. 234. Marg. l. 5. r. forma, p. 235. l. 7.
r. that's not so, p. 237. l. 19. r. Vrsin. Catech. p. 239, l. 1. r. ex fide per
fidem. p. 249. l. 5. r. Causa efficiens and materialis, p. 257. l. 8. r. tell
you, p. 259. l. 37. r. considering, p. 275. l. 37. r. tendering, p. 281. l. 16.
r. Integrality, ib. l. 32. r. but we must not, p. 268. l. 22. r. as he is, p.
293. l. 9. dele was by, p. 296. l. 2. r. Retain, p. 303. l. 38. del. as, ib. l.
ult. then to the. p. 218. l. 9. r. persevered. You Will say (it may be) he must
believe his perseverance, ibid. l. 14. r. to no more, p. 329. l. 23. r. World,
p. 330. l. 21. r. inveighs against you, at.

NEONOMIANISM UNMASKED. PART III.
CHAP. XVI. Of God's seeing Sin in Believers.
Neonom. THere is a Grand Error, Mr. Calvin, which we would now deal with Mr.
Antinomian about, every one talks of it as very Gross and Notorious, and that
is this, That God sees no sin in believers, though he see the fact, neither does
he charge them with sin; nor ought they to charge themselves with any sin, nor
be at all sad for it; nor confess, repent, nor do any thing as a means of
pardon; no nor in order to assuring themselves of pardon, even when they commit
Murder, Adultery, or the grossest Wickedness. D. W. p. 170.


Antinom. Here Is many things put together in this Charge, and by an undue
mixture, and wresting my sense and meaning, he has made it look as he
pleases; but we must hear his Proof, and then I shall be the better able to
make my defense.


Neonom. Note, that he speaks most of this concerning a Person as Elect, though
he uses the word Believer sometimes, because he alone knows he is elect by
believing. D. W. p. 171.


Antinom. Do not you then, in alleging my words, make a confusion in my sense?
for your way is to pick up my Expressions here and there and put them together
to make up that sense which you would put upon them.


Neonom. You say, though such persons do act Rebellion, yet the loathsomness and
abominableness and hatefulness of this Rebellion is laid on the back of Christ,
he bears the sin as well as the blame and shame, etc. and that is the only
reason why God can dwell with those persons that do act the thing, because all
the filthiness of it is transacted from them to the back of Christ. Obj. How
should God know every sin the believer has committed, and yet God not remember
them? Ans. Though he remember the things thou have done, yet he does not remember
them as thine, for he remembers perfectly they are none of thine; when he
passed them over to Christ, they ceased to be thine any longer. D. W. p. 436,
and Dr. C. p. 436.


Antinom. I have vindicated my self already, as to those Expressions in our
Debate concerning God's laying Sin on Christ; but, lest you should have forgot
what was said, I shall speak a little to it.

My design has been in several Discourses, and in that mentioned by you, that
we must have Christ before we can be holy, as the Root of all gracious
Qualifications, and that Christ is bestowed in a way of efficacy before we have
him in a way of evidence; and God tells us whose Iniquities were laid on
Christ, even of them that were gone every one away as lost Sheep, and turned to
their own ways; the same thing that the Apostle speaks, Romans 5.8. God
recommended his love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners [it must be
meant unbeiieving and impenitent sinners] Christ died for us; and he says,
Ver. 10. If when we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his
Son; that must be understood of our being in a state of enmity, before we come
to a state of Grace, this reconciliation is wrought by Jesus Christ. I shall
give you my Discourse as briefly as I may, that you may see my meaning.

-- Faith you know is the first of all Gifts God bestows upon a Soul, Dr. C. p.
334.
and all other Graces they follow that Faith that Christ does give to Men. So
that if there be not a Believing, there can be no Grace of Sanctification at
all, but while persons are departing from the living God, there remains in them
an evil Heart of unbelieving; and yet this is true, that while they are
departing from the living God, and straying as lost Sheep, their Iniquities are
laid on Christ, and the true meaning of the word [turn to our own ways] is,
that Men do what they list, and what is good in their own eyes; and yet it is
the Iniquity of these Men, that have thus turned to their own ways, which the
Lord has laid upon Christ.

From whence I lay down this Conclusion:

That this Grace of the Lords laying Iniquity on Christ, is certainly applied
unto persons, even while they are departing from the living God, while they are
lost Sheep, while they are turned every one to their own way, before they have
amended their ways. And because this Truth is so hardly received, seeming to
give so much way to looseness, as some calumniate, I endeavor to clear it, Dr.
C. p. 435.
and that it is a most fearful Injury unto a Man's self, and a forsaking a
Man's own Mercy, directly for a Man to conclude, that there is no Grace for me,
because I cannot find such and such things in me, as Universal Obedience,
Sanctification, etc. and you shall plainly see where Grace is applied unto
Persons, and to what Condition of Men, Psalm. 68.18.

And then I open that where God is said to give his Gifts to the Rebellious,
and use the said Expressions which he rehearses, which amounts only to thus
much in my sense, that when the Grace of Redemption and the application thereof
is first applied, it finds us lost Creatures, lost Sheep, rebellious ones,
turning every one to his own ways; which I also illustrate from Ezekiel. 16.7, 8,
9.

-- What Qualifications can you find in blind-eyed and shackled Persons, that
are bound up under the Bondage of Satan, Dr. C. p. 439.
even dead in Trespasses? What renewed Qualifications in Sanctification can you
find in such Persons, seeing the first Work that God works upon any Person, is
to open the eyes to see him, and to see themselves. Now Christ must be present,
because he is given to do this thing before it can be done: -- If it be the Eye
of Faith, Christ is said to be the Author and Finisher of it; if it be the the
Eye of God, we must all be taught of God; our Savior speaks plainly, when he
pointed out directly to the Jews, for whom he died and became sin, I came to
save that which was lost; it is by the Eye of Knowledge, we must be taught all
of God. And this is one part of God's Covenant, I will remember their Sins no
more.

-- What is that Covenant? I will be their God, and thy shall be my People; and
your Sins and Iniquities will I remember no more. Dr. C. p. 438.
This is the substance of the Covenant, And Christ himself is given over to
Men; as much as to say, In Christ I will become thy God; In Christ I will
remember thy Sins and Iniquities no more: This is the substance of the
Covenant; Christ is this Covenant, and Christ himself is given over to Men;
quasi dicat, In Christ I will become thy God; In Christ I will remember thy
Sins and Iniquities no more; this have I given in him to you: But when does the
Lord pass over this to persons? When they are first renewed. Have persons the
knowledge of God and of themselves before the Lord makes this Deed of Gift over
to them? Mark what follows, You shall see all the Qualifications of
Sanctification must not only follow Christ given, but they are the very work of
Christ himself after he is given; I will give thee for a Covenant to open blind
eyes. Now although the end of things be first in the Intention, yet it is the
last in Execution: If a Workman be to build an House, the Work must be prepared
before the House can be builded by him.


Calv. I think, Mr. Antinomian, you have said enough to vindicate yourself from
his first Charge, I doubt not but that our Sins were all at once laid on
Christ; Paul's Sins were on Christ in the height of his Rebellion and
Persecution, and Christ came upon him effectually to convert him, as the Fruit
thereof, even in the midst of his Rebellion. He says the grace of laying sin
on Christ, is applied to sinners while they are departed from God, and is the
cause of the gift of Converting-grace; plain Instances whereof were Saul and
the Jailer, whom the Covenant-grace took hold on in the height of their
Rebellion. But all this reaches not the Proof of your Charge, which you call
Error here.


Neonom. But he says, God has not one Sin to charge upon an Elect Person,
from the first moment of Conception to the last moment of Life, no nor Original
Sin is not to be laid upon him, the Lord has laid it on Christ already. D. W.
p. 171. from D. Cr. p. 364.


Antinom. You have been harping on this string already, I shall only repeat my
words as spoken: D. Cr. p. 364.
I said, it is true, an elect person, not called, is never able to know
individually of himself, that he is such an one that God has nothing to charge
upon him, because, till calling, God gives not unto persons to believe, and
it is only believing which evidences to men of things not seen. Things that are
not seen, they are hidden and secret and shall not be known; I mean the things
of God's love to men shall not be known to particular men till they do believe.
But considering their real condition [in foro Dei] the Lord has not one sin to
charge an elect person with; from the first moment of his life, till the last
minute of it, there is not so much as original sin, the ground is, the Lord
has said it on Christ already. See Romans 8 1 John 1.7. Heb. 16.14. Was there by
one act the expiation of sin and all at once that were committed from the
beginning of the World to the end thereof, how comes it to pass, that this or
that sin should be laid upon elect persons, when they were laid upon Christ
long before? I deny not, but, according to the sense of the Law, and in foro
conscientiae, they are charged, and sin is laid to their charge; but I speak of
their real standing in the Eye of God's Justice, their sins were laid on
Christ, and carried away by him.


Neonom. He says, It Is a Voice of a lying Spirit in your Hearts, that says,
that you that are believers, have yet Sin wasting your Consciences and lying as
a Burden too heavy for you to bear, etc. D. W. p. 171. from Dr. C. p. 298.


Antinom. The Voice is not of the true Spirit, and therefore must be of the
lying Spirit. 1. If he lie under Conscience wal^ing Sin, it seems to be a lying
Spirit that tells him he is a believer. 2. If he be a real believer, and sin
lie so heavily upon his Conscience, it is a sign that his Faith is very weak,
that it has not reached the Blood of Christ to the purifying of his
Conscience, and that he lies under the Spirit of Bondage, quite contrary to the
Spirit of Adoption.


Neonom. He says, Was not David a justified Person, and did not he bear his
own Sin? After several things, he answers, I must tell you all that David
speaks here, he speaks from himself, and all that David speaks from himself was
not truth.


Antinom. Why do you not tell those several things? My Answer to the Objection,
as to the sum of it, was this: I know this Objection seems unanswerable, as in
several passages Asaph speaks to that purpose, and in that particularly, where
he says, Has God forgott^n to be gracious? Has he shut up his
loving kindness? And will he be gracious no more? First, I would fain know,
whether now, under the times of the Gospel, there be not many tenderhearted,
religious People, that cry out of their own Sins, and the weight and burden of
their own Sins upon their own Spirits, as well as David? I must tell you, all
that David said from himself was not truth. [And is it truth, when a
sincere-hearted believer, through the power of temptation and infidelity, ^alls
into despairing Expressions?] Did Asaph speak well in these Passages, to charge
God, that he had forsaken him for ever? David might mistake then, that God
should charge sin upon him, and it may be he might charge sin upon himself,
without any Warrant or Commission from God to do it.

And does not Asaph, upon recollecting himself, in that Psalm. 77.10.
acknowledge, that to be his Infirmity, (...) my Sickness or Spiritual Disease,
that I should think or speak at this rate of God? And are you so offended that
I say it was Asaph's mistake? [It was by some mistake, that those words were
said to be David's, when Asaph's.] Does not the Spirit of God in Asaph say,
that it was not only his mistake, but sin of infirmity?


Calv. I think you have given a sufficient Answer to that Allegation of his: I
pray let us hasten as much as may be.


Neonom. I must confess I have not much to say against the Answer: But he
says, Before a believer does confess his sin, he may be as certain of the
pardon of it, as after confession. D. W. p. 172. from Dr. C. p. 213.


Antinom. Speaking of Christ's free welcome to all comers, this Objection, among
others, was spoke to; But must not he confess first, Dr. C. p 213.
and be afflicted in his Soul, before he can think he shall be received if he
come? For answer, I said, 1. I deny not, but acknowledge, when a believer sins,
he must confess his sins; and the greatest end and ground of this confession is
that which Joshua speaks concerning Achan, Josh. 7.19. My Son, confess thy
faults, and give glory to God. A believer, in the confession of sin, gives
glory to the great God of Heaven and Earth, and that must be the glorious end
of confession of his sin, that God may be owned as the sole and only Savior.
Except we do acknowledge Sin, we cannot acknowledge Salvation; we cannot
acknowledge any Virtue in the Works and Sufferings of Christ, Christ might have
saved his labor, and never come into the World; all that Christ did could not
be acknowledged to be of worth to us if there had not been sin, from which
Christ should save us. He that does indeed confess his sin, does indeed confess
he had perished, if Christ had not died for him: nay, he confesses, that
nothing in the World but Christ could save him. 2. I grant that a believer
should be sensible of sin, i e of the nature of sin. [But my main design is to
show you, that Confession of Sin, is not the procuring Cause of the Pardon of
Sin.] A believer [ i. e. a true believer] may certainly conclude, even before
confession of sin, that reconciliation is made between God and him, the
interest he has in Christ, and the love of Christ embracing him; I say, there
is as much ground to be confident of the pardon of sin to a believer, [in
respect of the fullness and freeness of pardoning grace in Christ] as soon as
ever he has committed it, though he has not made a solemn act of confession,
as to believe it after he has performed all the humiliation in the World. [Not
that I say, he ought not to confess sin; I say, he ought, and it is his duty;
but speak of the ground and reason of pardon, quoad Deum, as to God.] What is
the ground of the pardon of sin? I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy
transgressions, for mine own Namesake. Here is Pardon, the Fountain of it is in
God himself. All the Pardon in the World that any person shall enjoy, is
revealed in his Word of Grace, and it is the most absurd thing in the World to
think a Soul should fetch out a Pardon any where but from the Word of Grace.
Calv. I think you have said enough to vindicate yourself, that you are for
Confession of Sin, and it is every Believer's Duty, but that we are not to
understand it, or look upon it as the ground of God's pardoning our Sins.


Neonom. The Sins he speaks of are Adultery and Murder; he brings in an
Objection, you will say this is strange Doctrine, Suppose a Believer commits
Adultery and Murder, must he presently look upon Christ? Dr. C. p. 212.


Antinom. You speak not of my Answer, which is, I confess the Crime is great in
this kind, and it may be for the present, the Crime may silence the Voice of
Truth itself; but whatever becomes of it, that Christ may have the glory of his
Grace, and the glory of that fullness of Redemption wrought all at once, let me
tell you, Believers cannot commit those sins that may give just occasion of
susp^cion to them, that if they come to Christ he would cast them out.
Calv. I think herein you have spoken very safely, according to our Savior's
own words, directed to actual believers, and unbelievers too, John 6.37. All
that the Father gives me, shall come unto me; and him that comes unto me I
will in no wise cast out.


Neonom. But you will say all the Promises of Pardon do run with this Proviso,
In case Men humble themselves; in case Men do this and that, then Pardon is
theirs; but otherwise it is none of theirs. Ans. Take heed of such Doctrine. D.
W. p. 172. from Dr. Cr. p. 215.


Antinom. I answered another Objection before this. Obj. In all this will you
strike at all manner of meeting with God in Humiliation and Prayer, Fasting and
Confession of Sins? I answer, with the Apostle, Do we herein make void the Law?
God forbid; the rather, we establish the Law. May not a person come and
acknowledge his Fault to his Prince, after he has received his Pardon under
the Hand of his Prince, when he is brought from the Place of Execution? Nay,
may he not acknowledge it with melting and extreme bitterness of Spirit,
because he knows he has a Pardon? It is but a sordid and gross Conceit in
the Heart of Persons to think, that there can be no Humiliation for Sin except
Persons be in despair. I say, when Christ does reveal himself to your Spirits,
you shall find your Hearts more wrought upon with sweet Meltings and Relentings
of Heart, and Breathings of Spirit, when you see your Sins pardoned, than in
the most despairing Condition you can be in. Many Malefactors have been
observed to be hard hearted, that they could not shed a Tear at the Place of
Execution, yet when they have heard their Pardon read, have melted into a Flood
of Tears: And so, I say, that Heart that could not relent to see the filthy
loathsomness of Sin, before he saw his Pardon, after the knowledge of it, does
melt into Tears, and has such relenting, that none in the World has, but he
that knows it: I say, the Grace of God does teach Men more Duty than any
thing else in the World, Tit. 2.11, 12, 13. We must walk in all ways God has
chalked out to us, but if we think our Righteousness and our deep Humiliation
and large Talents of the Spirit, and Sorrow for Sin and our Confession thereof,
must make our way to the Bowels of Christ, take heed lest you set up a false
Christ -- Then I bring in the Objection and Answer which you rehearsed, and go
on thus: We have heard Arminianism exceedingly exploded; but if we conceive,
that God in pardoning Sin, has an Eye to Confession of Sin, how is that doing
of Works for Pardon of Sin? And how far short this comes of Arminianism, let
the World judge.
Calvin I think none that understands the Gospel, though he takes Confession of
Sin to be a great Duty, but thinks as you do, that none is pardoned for the
sake of Confession, and that if a believer sins, he has an Advocate with
the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, who is a Propitiation for all Sin; and
in the faith of this he ought to go to the Throne of Grace with Confession and
Humiliation, though it is not so easy to perform a Duty in Faith after relapses
into Sin; yet whatever Duty we perform ought to be done in Faith, and we ought
to go to beg pardon in the Faith of it, Jam. 1.6, 7.


Neonom. He says, There is nothing but Joy and Gladness, D. W. p. 172. Obj.
But some will say, Believers find it otherwise; there is no such Joy and
Gladness, they are often oppressed with Sadness and Heaviness of Spirit. Answ.
There is not one Fit of Sadness in any Believer whatsoever, but he is out of
the way of Christ, etc. I say, The Soul is first satisfied of Forgiveness of
Sins, before there is that real kindly Mourning in those that are Believers.
Dr. C. p. 52.


Antinom. I was speaking upon Christ being the only way, and, among other
Commendations of Christ as a Way, one was, Dr. C. p. 52.
That he is a pleasant Way. To illustrate which, I alleged Isa. 35.8. A
highway shall be there, viz. in the Wilderness and Desert, that should rejoice
and blossom as a Rose; v. 10. And the ransomed of the Lord shall return and
come to Zion with songs, and everlasting joy upon their heads. Nothing but
Pleasure; it is compared to Lebanon, the sweetest place in the World; to Carmel
and Sharon, places of great delight: Look into the last Verse, and see what a
Way of Pleasure Christ is unto all those that receive him, And the ransomed of
the Lord shall return and come to Zion with songs, and everlasting joy upon
their heads; they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall
flee away. [Then follows what he charge me with.] Behold the Mirth that is in
the Way of Christ; there is nothing but Joy and Gladness. Object. But some will
say, But Believers find it otherwise, etc. Answ. There is not one Fit of
Sadness in any Believer whatsoever, but he is out of the way of Christ; (to
which I add as follows, which he mentions not) I mean, in his Fits of Sadness,
in respect of his jealousness of his present and future State, he is out of the
way of Christ; he enjoys not him as he ought, while he is in such fits,
therefore the Apostle puts Believers upon rejoicing always, Phil. 4.4. There is
matter of nothing but joy in him; while the^e is mournings in Believers, there
is meltings in those mournings, and more joy in mourning of a Believer, than in
all the mirth of a wicked Man. -- Believers weep for joy, (according to the
Proverb) and never mourn more kindly, than when they see the joy of the Holy
Ghost, in the freeness and fullness of the Lord Christ, poured out upon them;
there is never any more kindly mourning for sin, than that mourning when the
Soul is satisfied of forgiveness of sins: I say, the Soul is first sati^fied
with forgiveness of sins, [ i. e. it ought to mourn in the faith of
forgiveness, if the mourning be kindly and of a Gospel-nature] before there is
that real, kindly mouring in those that are Believers. Gentlemen, I crave your
Pardon, that I give you the trouble of hearing me repeat so much of my former
Discourses; but I am fain to do it for my vindication, he having so rent and
tore my Sermons in sunder, on purpose to expose them, and my Name; yea, I wish
that were all, that it be not the very Gospel Grace itself, that he bears such
a spleen to, else sure he would never make such a scorn of solemn and serious
Truths of Christ.


Neonom. I shall not spare you for your Whining; you say, God does no longer
stand offended nor displeased, though a Believer, after he is a Believer sin
often. Dr. C. p. 15.


Antinom. I was showing, from John 14.6. that Christ is the way, the only and
effectual and infallible way, from all the wrath of God to all that do receive
him. 1. From the affection of Wrath; Let me tell you, (would to God you could
receive it, according to the manifest evidence of Scripture) God does no longer
stand offended with a Believer, though a Believer, after he be a Believer, does
sin often, [And where is the Believer that does not sin often?] when he has
once received Christ; and unto them God says, Anger is not in me, Isa. 47.4.
and Isa. 53. He shall see of the travel of his soul, and he shall be satisfied;
i. e. pacified. The travel of the Soul of Christ makes God such amends for the
sinfulness of all Believers, that he can no longer stand offended and
displeased with them; if God remain offended with them, there is yet some of
their sinfulness to be taken away. Except God will be offended where there is
no cause to be offended, (which is Blasphemy to spe^k) he will not be offended
with Believers; for, I say, he has no cause to be offended with a Believer,
[You must understand always quoad Deum, as to God, he being satisfied] because
he does not find the sin of a Believer, to be the Believer's own sin, but he
finds it the sin of Christ [ i. e. by way of Imputation; so I always mean] He
was made Sin for us; he laid the Iniquities of us all upon him; the Blood of
Christ cleanses us from all Sin; he bear our Sins in his own Body on the Tree:
but if he bear our Sins, he must bear the displeasure for them; nay, he did
bear the Displeasure, the Indignation of the Lord; and if he did bear the
Indignation of the Lord, either he did bear all, or but a part; if he did not
bear all the Indignation of the Lord, then he does not save to the uttermost
those that come to God by him, Heb. 4. I say, not to the uttermost, because
here is some offense, some indignation left behind; and for lack of taking of
this indignation upon himself, it lights and falls upon Believers; so that you
must say, Christ is an imperfect Savior, and has left some scattering Wrath
behind, that will light on the head of a Believer, etc.
Calvin. I pray, Mr. Neonomian, what is the Truth in this Point? It is you must
set us right, and show us all our Mistakes.


Neonom. Truth: The Sins of Believers have the loathsomness of Sin adhering to
them, which God sees and accounts the committers guilty thereby. D. W. p. 170.


Antinom. What do you mean by the loathsomness of Sin? Is not Sin in all its
respects loathsome; and is it not loathsome, as it is contrary to the preceptive
part of the Holy Law? Is there any fine, sweet, precious part of Sin? Did not
Christ bear Sin of the deepest die, most loathsome Sins? Is it any otherwise
loathsome, than as a Transgression of the Law, (...). And this was that (...)
which Christ took away, 1 John 3. But how? not that they were subjectively
removed from us, but that the inherency of them in great measure remains in us,
and God knows it; but before the eye of Justice, all sin of a Believer, as he
stands under the Sanction of the Law, is taken away, i. e. as to the
Condemnation and Wrath that belongs unto him, he is freed from it by the Blood
and Satisfaction of Christ.


Neonom. And they ought to charge themselves with it, so as to stir up
themselves to repentance, and renew their actings of Faith on Christ for
forgiveness.


Antinom. They ought to be always sensible of, and humbled for the constant
indwelling, and frequent breaking forth of their Sins and Corruptions, but
always beginning in the Faith of the Blood and Satisfaction of Christ, and
therefrom exercise Repentance and Humiliation, or else their Humiliation and
Repentance will not be of a right nature, nor attain a right end; and we own
such Actings of Faith and Repentance ought often to be renewed by the best of
God's Children.


Neonom. Nevertheless they ought not thereby to fear their being out of a
justified state.


Antinom. Therefore to believe they are in a justified estate, and not to cast
off the spirit of adoption, and betake themselves to a spirit of bondage; and
if they ought to believe their justified state, then they ought to believe
their freedom from condemnation; for a justified state, and a state of
condemnation, are the highest in opposition, indeed privantia, the one totally
expels the other.


Neonom. They must not fear their justification further than their faults give
them just cause of suspecting that sin has dominion over them, and that their
first believing on Christ was not sincere.


Antinom. As to suspicion of the truth of believing, our way is not to charge
sin upon ourselves, as lying under the Wrath of God for it; this will work in
us the highest despair, or such degrees of unbelief as tend thereto; but in
case of such suspicion, upon reflecting on our former acts of Faith, we must
believe; we are to amend weak Faith, or Faith suspected not to be true, by
believing firmly and confidently on the Pardon of God and Blood of Christ; the
way to believe, is not to charge the Wrath of God upon ourselves, and to put
ourselves under the Law, but to flee for refuge to the hope set before us.


Neonom. But I will show you wherein the difference is not.

1. The Question is not whether a Believer does by new sins fall from a
justified estate. D. W. p. 173.


Antinom. Therefore a Believer ought not upon his new sins, to look upon
himself to be under the Wrath of God; for a state of Justification, is a state
of freedom from Wrath.


Neonom. Nor whether God does, upon new Crimes, judicially charge the Christian
with those sins he had pardoned before, though he may present to his view some
former sins for his further humblings.


Antinom. You here grant, 1. That a Believer, upon falling into relapses or
sin, is not bound to disbelieve the pardon of former sins. 2. The reason is,
That God does not judicially charge former sins already pardoned; and if so, he
is bound to believe God does not. And has he ground to believe God will not
charge judicially sins formerly pardoned? has he not then abundant ground to
believe, and the same ground to believe God will pardon this sin also? and is
there a foundation in the Gospel to believe the pardon of some sins, and not of
all? 3. You own, That God may present sins to a Believer's view for his
humbling, where he does not judicially charge; and so do I: and you shall see
this one Concession will cut down all your design in this Chapter.


Neonom. Nor whether a Believer ought to question his justified estate, upon
any sins that do not give just suspicion that sin has dominion over him or his
faith, was not true.


Antinom. Hence then so long as a Believer's state of grace holds, he is not to
question his justification, upon any sin; and he is no further to question the
pardon of his sins, or ought to charge wrath upon himself: and I would ask,
whether upon any such just suspicion, he ought not now to believe on the Lord
Jesus Christ, and lay hold on the pardoning grace and mercy of God in Christ
for Life and Salvation?


Neonom. Nor whether any sins past and sins present at his first believing be
unpardoned.


Antinom. If so, why should he not believe that all sins future are forgiven?
for there is the same reason of the forgiving all as one; Christ bore all his
sins at once; and he can believe on Christ for pardon of one sin, but he
believes the pardon of all, if the faith be good. 2. If upon the first
believing, of all sins past, and present are forgiven, why not upon an after
act of faith, after a Believer has sinned, for the pardon he then looks for is
of a sin past or present? and do you think any Man can truly believe any one
sin is forgiven, and not all?


Neonom. Nor whether our renewed acts of Faith, Humiliation, Repentance,
Fasting, or Reformation, do merit pardon.


Antinom. No; but if it tantamount to it, it is as bad; it is no matter what you
call it, if the thing be the same; a federal Condition of Works upon which the
Covenant-Promise becomes due, is a Merit.


Neonom. Nor whether a principle of life given at our first conversion, will
finally fail to exert itself in due humblings for repeated enormities and in
holy resolves.


Antinom. But it is a question, Whether there may not be repeated humblings for
repeated enormities, and such as you call holy resolves, without a principle of
life? 2. Whether you can make up such an evangelical, imperfect, sincere,
persevering Obedience, for a Condition of the Covenant to a Man that falls into
repeated enormous Crimes? 3. Whether that principle of life will not produce as
well repeated acts of faith, as humblings and resolves? 4. Whether those
humblings and resolves be worth a rush without faith? 5. What you will call due
acts of humblings and resolves? what measure they must reach to produce a
pardon? 6. What you mean by a principle of life?


Neonom. Nor whether the same degrees of humblings be necessary for all crimes,
and in all persons, and in all times.


Antinom. Then there are Pardons at several rates, and it will be difficult to
adjust the several degrees of Penance, according to those varieties of respect;
it will be hard to know how far a Believer must go, before he may dare to
believe he is pardoned; and it is hard that a Believer must pass through so many
humblings and resolves before he may believe his Pardon, whereas at his
conversion on one act of faith all his sins past and present were forgiven.


Neonom. Nor whether any gross miscarriage should cause a Saint to condemn all
past experience, and conclude his graces to be counterfeit: Each of these I
deny.


Antinom. You need not have brought in one gross Miscarriage here in question,
when you past before repeated Enormities. 2. I would enquire whether a gross
miscarriage or an enormity be perseverance; if it be relapse and
non-perseverance, he has reason upon your Hypothesis to conclude his Graces
counterfeit; for having cut off that Sign and distinguishing Character of true
Grace; he must begin again to try for that Mark which may hold a while till the
next gross Miscarriage; and where is his true Grace then? must not all
precedent Experiences be condemned?


Neonom. Nor whether a sense of Pardon ought not to effect and melt the Heart?
D. W. p. 174.


Antinom. But it is whether a sense of Pardon does not affect and melt the
Heart, as the Natural, Gospel, and Effectual Means? and all other humblings,
without Faith of Pardon, are not merely legal, generating to bondage, and
ineffectual to reach the end?


Neonom. Nor whether some true Penitents may not sometimes be too much dejected
and overwhelmed with sorrow for sin.


Antinom. But it is a question, Whether true godly Sorrow, such as is produced
by Faith in the Blood of Christ, can be too much, or overwhelm any true
Believer? 2. Whether, if it be too much, it will obtain pardon, and not lose
its end, as well as when it is too little? 3. Whether, when it is too much, it
be not a work of supererogation, and may not have the pardon of some other sin
yet to be committed cast into boot?


Neonom. Nor whether a general Exercise of Faith and Repentance do not answer
the Gospel rule of Forgiveness, as to Sins of Ignorance and Surprise? These
three last I affirm.


Antinom. It seems you allow there is a general Pardon, that will serve to
Believers for some sins; those, I suppose, you will call Venial: I would fain
know, Whether, in the justification of a sinner, there be any sins particularly
excepted, that are not pardoned in the first Grant? and whether he must have a
new justification upon the commitment of some sins, which the first did not
reach? 2. Whether the general Exercise of Faith and Repentance, so far as to
answer the Gospel-rule, be a sufficient Condition for Justification from some
Sins, and not from all?


Calvin. Well now, Gentlemen, we have danced pretty fairly about this Point,
with your Whethers; let us dance back again, or else we shall be giddy, and the
World turn round with us.


Neonom. My Brains are more settled than so; I will lead him another dance yet:
Mr. Antinomian, come dance with me again; you know little of my mind yet, I
will tell you the real differences.

1. Whether an elect sinner be at any time a guilty person in God's esteem?
This you deny, and I affirm: I have proved it in our Debate, 1, 3, 7, 12. D. W.
p. 174.


Antinom. This is not fair; you have taken a great leap back to begin with,
from a Believer, to an Elect Person; which you say you have proved in former
Debates, we have answered; and therefore need not harp always on one string.


Neonom. Whether the Remains of Sin defile us: This I affirm, and the Doctor
denies, against all Protestants, who prove it of Original Sin against the
Papists.


Antinom. If you understand defilement, as to our Justification, I say, the
remains of Sin do not defile us; if it be understood in respect of
Sanctification, you will see, Gentlemen, that I shall assert Sin's defilement of
the best of our Duties so much, that it makes them as Dung; and yet this
Neonomian is so audacious, as to say, this he affirms, and the Doctor denies,
and that he goes with the Protestants, when every ordinary Christian may see
that he goes with the Papists in every thing, and opposes me in this point of
the Saints defilement by sin.


Neonom. Whether a justified person, falling into gross Enormities, is defiled
thereby, and contracts guilt upon himself thereby: This the Doctor denies, and
I do affirm.


Antinom. You have not proved one word that was said of the guilt of a
justified person; i. e. it is one thing to contract guilt of Conscience, and
another thing to be judicially condemned: Said you not, but just now, that God
may present to a Christian's view former sins, for further humblings, where he
does not judicially charge sin? a Believer may have guilt then upon his
Conscience, and not be guilty before God. 2. Do you not say, a Believer ought
not to question his Justification, but upon such causes as make him question
his state and truth of Faith? 3. Where is it that I say, any sin does not
defile, especially gross Enormities? if they need the fresh applications of the
Blood of Christ by Faith, they do defile, and defile Conscience too; but the
Blood of Christ reaching the Conscience in believing, washes away this guilt
and defilement, where your humblings and resolves will not


Neonom. Whether God esteems the repeated Abominations of Believers not to be
their own Crimes, and they not to be sinners, but they are Christ's sins? This
the Doctor affirms, and I deny.


Antinom. Your affirmation and negation is not worth troubling ourselves about,
were it not to undeceive such as are deluded by you; we have told you our minds
already sufficiently about that we do affirm, That all Sins and Abomination of
every Elect Person was laid on Christ by God, and accounted his Judicially; and
that in justification, the Justified Person has not his sins, not one from the
first moment of his justification, imputed unto him before God; whatsoever
contracted guilt he may have upon his Conscience at any time, by reason of
relapses, is but God's presenting former or present sins to his view for his
humbling, without judicial charging of him in the Court of Heaven.


Neonom. Whether a justified person, upon new Provocations, is charged by God,
and ought to charge himself as guilty and defiled, so as in God's appointed way
to repent, believe and renew his Covenant, and be earnest with God for
forgiveness? This the Doctor denies, and I affirm.


Antinom. In part I deny it, and in part I do not. 1. A justified Person, upon
new Provocations, is not charged by God, as under, and liable to the
condemnation of the Law, under Wrath and Curse. 2. It Is one thing to confess
guilty to the Fact, and confess a Man's self under the Sentence; the former
ought to be, but the other ought not: A Man that is a Felon may come to the Bar,
and confess himself guilty, when he has the Pardon in his Pocket. Do we not
assert, that it is our duty to confess sin, repent, etc. but these things must
flow from Faith, fixed on the pardoning Mercy of God in Christ, or else all our
Humblings and Resolves what do they signify? Do we not assert Faith and
Repentance? renewing our Covenant is exerted in God's way, and not yours.


Neonom. Whether all Sins past, present, and to come, are actually pardoned at
once? This you affirm, and I deny.


Antinom. Among all these Enquiries about the state of the Question, I think
you are nearest to it now, for now you speak plainest; and I shall speak my
mind as plainly, that all a justified Persons sins are pardoned at once, as
well those that are to be committed, as they that are committed already.


Neonom. Whether God has required new Exercises of Faith and Repentance for
their actual Pardon? This you deny, and I affirm.


Antinom. He requires not new Exercises of Faith and Repentance as federal
Conditions of actual Pardon, it is always in and through and for the sake of
Christ at first and afterward; and by Faith renewed, this Grace is manifested
anew unto the Soul, and Repentance follows thereupon, as a Fruit thereof;
Pardon renewed to justified ones, is but in taking of the present view of their
sins (as you say) that God has set before them, he makes them to hear joy and
gladness, Psalm. 5.8. i. e. a repeated manifestation of their Pardon in
believing.


Neonom. Whether a Believer ought to be assured of the Forgiveness of his
repeated Provocations, just when he has committed them, and before he has
humbled himself, renewed actings of Faith on Christ, repeated his Covenant,
prayed for Pardon for Christ's sake, as after he has thus done? This you
affirm, and I deny.


Antinom. This that I affirm is, That there is the same ground of believing
Pardon in Christ to a justified one, before his Confessions and Humblings, as
after. 2. That his assurance of Pardon after these Humblings, is not grounded
upon them, but the Promise and his free and full Justification. 3. That he is
to betake himself to these Humblings in Faith of the Promise of Pardon, or else
all the rest will leave him as they find him. 4. And after you have muddied and
confounded the clear Gospel as much as you can, you tell us there must be a
renewing our actings of Faith in Christ, and praying for Pardon for Christ's
sake; which is as much as to say, all is in Christ, and must come from him, and
that a justified one is Christ's, and therefore is emboldned to draw nigh to
him in full assurance of Faith, as a merciful and faithful High Priest; and
this Faith carries him forth to true Sorrow for Sin, Repentance, Humiliation,
to exalting Free Grace and Joy in the Holy Ghost.


Neonom. Now you shall see the Truth confirmed, and I have said so much before
to clear this Point, that I shall only speak now the substance of it. D. W. p.
175.


Antinom. All you have said has tended to darken any Truth of the Gospel you
have taken in hand.


Neonom. God does see and charge a Believer with his new Enormities as his
sins, and not Christ's, 2 Samuel 12.9. David 's sin is an evil; it was in God's
sight; it is charged by God on David.


Antinom. I have always told you, that imputation of sin, in the Gospel sense,
does suppose the sin imputed is not his to whom it is imputed by commission;
David committed it, though Christ bore it. 2. The Lord so far charge the best
of his People as to reprove them for sin; this is an Act of Grace in order to
recover them. 3. Sin is sin in its true nature still; Christ died not to save
sin, but the sinner, that sin should not be judicially charged on him: You say,
God does not judicially charge a Christian with some sins, though he may present
them to his view for his humbling; if God should judicially charge any sin,
there must be a new sacrifice of atonement before it could be forgiven: when
the Apostle says, who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's Elect;
there is no doubt but there is enough to lay to the charge of the Elect, even
before and after Faith, both by the word of God, and their own Consciences, and
by Satan and wicked Men; but there is nothing shall be charged upon them so as
to affect them, in a way of Judicial Proceeding against them; nay, God is in
Christ reconciled to their Persons, notwithstanding all his Rebukes in his Word
and Providence: God's seeing is in a way of Omnisciency, so he knows and sees
all things; his Eyes run through the whole Earth, beholding the evil and the
good: He sees in a way of Grace, The Eyes of the Lord are upon the Righteous,
Psalm. 34.15. He sees in a way of Justice and Judicial Proceeding; and in this
sense, Seeing and charging Sin are understood by us, as opposed to not Seeing.


Neonom. Psalm. 90.8. Thou have set our Iniquities before thee: I hope Moses was
not mistaken.


Antinom. Moses speaks of Man in general in that Chapter, in respect of his
Fall, and the Effects of it, in God's Execution of the Sentence of the Law upon
him, v. 6, 7, 8. (We question not but it is that Scripture's-sense) wherein all
the World is become guilty before God. And that God, in a way of Displeasure,
does hide his Face, or set Men's Sins in the Light of his Countenance,
especially in his dealing with a Nation or Church, or any mixed People. God's
management of general Government being according to the Law, and not according
to the Gospel. Hence all Gods Rebukes in a way of Anger, are vastly different
from such as are in a way of Love and Fatherly Affection. But all Threats and
Denunciation of Judgment, Wrath and Indignation, belongs to the Law and its
Sanction, and not to the Gospel, though it be upon the account of the neglect and
despising of it.


Neonom. A Believer ought to charge himself with his own Sin; God commands
this, when he calls to Confession and Humiliation.


Antinom. A Man ought so far to charge himself, as to acknowledge his Sin and
see his Misery, or else he will never prize Mercy; and so did David, Psalm.
51.4. But David fled from the Judicial Charge of Sin, from the sight or
apprehension of God's displeasure, he got from that Charge as soon as he could.
God never made Despair a way of Salvation; Confession of Sin, and charging a
man's self with Sin, is marvelously different; for the first may be from the
Spirit of Grace, but the other is from a Spirit bound under the Law: Those
despairing Fits that Job and Heman sometimes fell into, I look upon them to be
Instances of the Saints Infirmities, the weakness of their Faith, and God's
dealing with them in a way of Trial and Humiliation, in withdrawment of the
usual Light of his Countenance and Favor from them; besides, that the Saints
under the old Testament, in regard of the Darkness and Legality of that
Dispensation, might be said to be charged with Sin in a more seeming judicial
way than Gospel Grace does admit: God in a sense might be said to remember Sin,
in regard of the repeated Sacrifices, and Execution frequently of external and
temporal Calamities, modo paenarum, of the manner of Punishments for Sin after
the tenor of a Law or Covenant of Works.


Neonom. New Transgressions need renewed Pardon; all Sins are not pardoned at
once: To say nothing how impossible it is: Christ would never teach his own
People to pray daily for Pardon, if it did not need it, and it could not be
repeated, Mat. 6.12. D. W. p. 176.


Antinom. If Pardon of all Sins be not at once, then no Man is justified at
once; for he that is not pardoned for all Sins, is not justified, but lies
under Condemnation; besides, so often as he Sins he is unjustified, and if
unjustified, fallen from Grace; for where there is no Justification there is no
Sanctification.

And as to our Savior's Teaching his Disciples to pray for Pardon daily, it is
easily answered, That Pardon of Sin in Scripture-sense, is to be understood of
God's manifesting Pardon and Forgiveness to justified ones; its of the Grace
that we receive in Christ from day to day, it is the lifting up of the Light of
God's Countenance upon us, and the Sun of Righteousness shining with healing in
his Wings or Rays of Grace: How many other Benefits that a Believer has in
Christ, does he daily pray for? As for the Spirit of Adoption, Sanctification
in Christ Jesus, who is as surely made to us Sanctification as Justification:
All the Blessings that we have in Christ, we pray for; and its needful that we
have them in Christ, or else we cannot pray in Faith for them. You say, it is
impossible God should pardon all Sins at once: And God says, His Covenant is
Heb. 10.16, 17. As for their Sins and Iniquities I will remember them no more.
Does he say that he will remember (against a justified one) only his Sins past
and present no more? What Comfort then is it to a justified one? He may say,
according to you, it is true I am justified till to day, but to morrow God will
remember my Sins against me; I cannot live in the comfort of Forgiveness for
any Sins, but past and present. What you allege of David, Lamentations and
Job, are nothing to the purpose; you have answered it all yourself in your
second, Whether, viz. That God does not, upon new Crimes, judicially charge the
Christian with those Sins he had pardoned before, though he may present to his
view some former Sins for his further Humblings. And so he does those new
Crimes you speak of, God presents them to this view, for his further Humblings:
And I will add, in order to the quickening his Addresses to the Throne of Grace,
in the Faith of Forgiveness, and drawing forth and enlarging his Heart in the
Love of the Lord Jesus in sense of his Love, seeing much is forgiven him.


Neonom. Humiliation, Confession, Sorrow for Sin, new Resolutions, and looking
to Christ for Healing, are the Duties of Saints upon new Faults, in order to
repeated Acts of Forgiveness, etc.


Antinom. That these are our Duties at all times, even when we fall not into
notorious Relapses, we deny not, even when and whilst we live in the Faith of
our present Pardon and Forgiveness; and upon our Relapses, our Recovery is by
the same Faith which carries us forth to performance of these Duties, in order
to the mortifying Corruption, and giving glory to God in all his Attributes,
for strengthening Power against Sin, and Joy in the Holy Ghost; which comfort in
believing, in restoring of Joy and Gladness, in the sense of our Justification
and Salvation by Christ, is the Forgiveness intended.


Neonom. If a Man were thrice stung; must he not thrice look to the brazen
Serpent? D. W. p. 176.


Antinom. No doubt of it; the brazen Serpent was a Type of Christ, and looking
to it was the Type of a Sinner's Faith: When a Sinner has Christ in
Justification, his Life is in him, and he must live by the Faith of the Son of
God; God renews the Expressions and Manifestations of his free Pardon, unto
Believers, from time to time; accordingly it is received by Faith, to our daily
healing and comfort, the virtue of Christ remains the same, it is our Faith is
repeated.


Neonom. Believers ought to be more assured of Pardon, and joyful after the
renewed Acts of Repentance and Faith, D. W. p. 177.


Antinom. They ought not to take up their assurance from their own
Performances, but from the free Grace in the Promise received by Faith, and
ought not to suspend Faith, till they have repented and humbled themselves;
this were to pray and repent in Unbelief, which makes it all vain and void.


Neonom. It Is otherwise against that wise Order which God has stated for a due
Reverence to him, Numb. 12.14.


Antinom. God has no Order of due Reverence to him, established in the
Covenant of Grace, but Paternal; and that is by a Spirit of Adoption, as a Son
honors his Father; and there is none of this without Faith in the Fatherly
Love and Compassion of the Father; God has nowhere ordered that his Children
should put themselves into the Hands of his severe Justice when they have
sinned, and conclude themselves unjustified for a considerable time, before
they look to Christ for healing; they that were stung in the Wilderness, did
not go to use a great many Medicines first, but were immediately to apply
themselves to the brazen Serpent for healing: So should Believers upon all
their falls. Miriams being shut out of the Camp seven days, was no Argument
that God had not forgotten her before the seven days were up. God makes some of
his People, in their falls, Examples to others, as to outward Afflictions, of
which they had, in the days of the old Testament, a more penal Aspect and more
Judicial, than we ought to make them to have in the days of clearer
Gospel Grace, as I can make appear diverse ways.


Neonom. The People of God have had those sad Fits which you condemn, when Sin
greatly breaks out, they do well become them; Paul calls a contrary frame,
under Guilt, a being puffed up, 1 Cor. 5.2.


Antinom. You basely slander the Doctor in making as if he were an Enemy to the
serious Gospel remorse of God's Children, from a right Principle and due Frame,
as we have made appear. 2 Paul nowhere calls Faith, in pardoning Mercy, a
puffing up; that is from a Spirit of Security and Insensibleness which we have
in the Acts of Sin and after, till the renewing our Acts of Faith. 3. Paul
nowhere commends a guilty Frame or Sadness merely from Guilt. But 2 Cor. 7.10.
in the Case you mention, absolutely condemns such sadness and sorrow as you
commend, as such which is contrary to true godly Sorrow; Sorrow from Guilt only
is according to the World, and works Death.


Neonom. Consider God remits or binds in Heaven, according to what his Church
does justly on Earth; either the Pardon of the Non-repenting Offender is
suspended, or Censures are vain. D. W. p. 178.


Antinom. God's remitting or binding in Heaven is variously understood; not to
enlarge now upon it. I do not apprehend that a justified Person, falling into
Sin and censured justly by a Church, is therefore unjustified before God; if
so, he is fallen from Grace in the highest sense. Nor if he be a Hypocrite, and
in his Hypocrisy be reconciled to the Church in his Hypocrisy, that therefore
he is justified in Heaven, or in foro Dei; no, I distinguish between forum Dei,
and Ecclesia, a Man may be righteous before God, and not before the Church, and
vice versa; but I apprehend, to bind in Heaven, what the Church does justly on
Earth, is to confirm and bless his own Ordinances to their designed end and
purpose, either to the bringing home a lapsed justified Person, or to discover
him to be a Hypocrite, and therefore they shall not be in vain.


Neonom. Need I give you David 's experience, Psalm. 32.3, 5. When I keep
silence, my bones waxed old.


Antinom. That place is impertinently quoted; if you read the whole Psalm, you
will find that it begins with the true Gospel-blessedness of a Believer, and
after tells you what a miserable condition he was in, when he fell under guilt,
and acted not faith concerning his justified and pardoned state; the frame he
speaks of, as contrary to his sadness, was a frame of Faith and Prayer; and
what was his faith acted upon, but on the forgiveness of his sins, as Ver. 1, 2.


Neonom. The Assembly and Congregational Elders, do both declare God does
continue to forgive the sins of those that are justified. D. W. p. 178.


Antinom. The Assembly says, Christ, by his Obedience and Death, Assemb
Confess. c. 11. s. 3.
did fully discharge the Debt of all those that are thus justified, and did
make a proper, real and full satisfaction to his Father's Justice on their
behalf. And they say, in Answer to that Question, Larger Catech. Q. 70.
What is Justification? A. Justification is an Act of God's free Grace unto
sinners, in which he pardons all their sins [therefore them that shall be
committed, as well as those that are committed already] accepts their persons
righteous in his sight, not for any thing wrought in them, or done by them,
[therefore not for their act of Faith, or their sincere Obedience] but only for
the perfect Obedience and full Satisfaction of Christ, etc. Therefore he never
forgives for the Humiliations or Sorrow for Sin, which they exert; and whereas
they say God does continue to forgive, it is as much as to say, God continues
them justified from all their Sins; which Justification falls in by way of
application to their Souls and Consciences, in manifestation of pardon, as
their sins are committed; and in saying, that they never fall from their
justified estate, they do as much as say, that there is not a moment of time
wherein their persons are not justified before God; and to say any man is in a
justified estate, and not in a pardoned estate at the same time, is a
contradiction and nonsense; it is one thing to be pardoned and free of
condemnation in respect of a Man's person, and another thing not to have the
sense and comfort of it: and after this manner only any sin of a Believer is
unpardoned, when his heart is overwhelmed with darkness and unbelief from the
deceitfulness of sin; besides, God hides his face and the light of his
countenance from him in fatherly displeasure, [ i. e. in tender love, it is
called displeasure, but by a Catechresis, a Father corrects his Son in great
love] and Believers may not have the light of his countenance restored unto
them [they say not their justification restored] until they humble themselves
and confess their sins [in faith, for without faith, i. e. without Christ
apprehended by faith, their humblings and confessions cannot please God] and
renew their faith and repentance. And they say, The justification of Believers
under the Old Testament, was in all those respects one and the same with the
justification of Believers under the New.

As for your quoting Authority for Praying for Pardon, I think you might have
spared yourself the pains, if you understand Pardon in this case as it ought to
be understood.


Neonom. I will tell you your Mistakes, D. W. p. 179.


Antinom. Your Charge of Mistakes are as little to be valued as your Charge of
Error. Come, Gentlemen, let us adjourn for this time.


Calv. The Scripture is most express in this Point, that God sees no sin in
justified ones, i. e. so as to set their persons in the eye of his Justice, and
to deal with them as such who are under his vindicative Wrath.

1. The Psalmist says, he is a blessed Man whose Iniquity is forgiven, whose
Sin is covered, and to whom the Lord imputes not Iniquity, Psalm. 32.1, 2. What
can be meant by covering here, but hiding our sins from the eye of God's
Justice by the impuputed righteousness of Christ, in the same sense as David
prays, Hide thy face from my sins? There Is the Face of God in his Justice, as
well as in his Mercy; nay, when Moses speaks of the Wrath of God, against
Persons or People, Psalm. 90.8. he calls it, setting their Iniquities before
him, and their secret Sins in the light of his Countenance, of such as are
consumed by God's Anger, and God's Wrath troubles them.

What is the meaning of that famous place, Mich. 7.18, 19, 20. is it not, that
God sees no sin in justified ones, where the Prophet says, Who is a God, like
unto thee, that pardons iniquity, transgression and sin, and passes by the
transgression of the remnant of his heritage? He retains not his Anger for
every, because he delights in Mercy.

Now, when he has pardoned Iniquity, will he charge it again? No, he will cast
all the Sins [of justified ones, such as he has pardoned] into the depths of
the Sea.

How shall their Sins then be found any more in the deep fathomless Ocean? They
shall not be found: The iniquity of Israel [i. e. the true spiritual Israel]
shall be sought for, and there shall be none; and the sins of Judah, and they
shall not be found, for I will pardon whom I reserve, Jer. 50.20. And those
days are there spoken of when the clear discovery of Grace of the New Covenant
shall be made, which the same Prophet foretells, Jer. 31.32, 33. and the
Apostle to the Hebrews quotes, chapter 8.12. chapter 10.17. I will be merciful to their
unrighteousness, and for their sins and iniquities I will remember them no
more. And what means that of good Hezekiah, when he speaks of himself, Isaiah
38.17. For peace I had great bitterness, [in respect of Temptations, Darkness
and Afflictions] but what was his comfort and support, thou have in love to my
soul delivered it from the pit of corruption, [God had added some Years to his
life] for thou have cast all my sins behind thy back.

And what was the great intention of the living Sacrifice of the Scapegoat, in
the day of atonement, and after the Highpriests charging all the Sins of the
Congregation solemnly upon him? He was sent into the Land of Forgetfulness,
Lev. 16. Was it not to point out God's non-remembrance of the sins of justified
ones? that as Christ died and answered the Type of the Slain goat, in
satisfying for sin, so he carried away the remembrance of our sins from before
the Lord; he was delivered for our Offenses, and rose for our Justification;
and the Apostle lays the stress of carrying away of sin upon his Resurrection
and Life, Romans 8.34, 35. and 1 John 3.5. He was manifested to take away sin, to
carry it quite away from before God, into forgetfulness, as the true Scapegoat.

Neither will we part with that famous Portion of Scripture, as an unmovable
bottom for this Truth, if there were no more, notwithstanding all the false
glosses that have been put upon it by such as would curse where God will bless,
I mean Numb. 23.21. He has not beheld Iniquity in Jacob, nor seen Perverseness
in Israel. Which is plainly to be understood of Spiritual Jacob and Israel,
under the Old and New Testament; such God has commanded to bless, and they
shall not be cursed, but blessed; there is the shout of a King amongst them:
Therefore as there is no Enchantment or Divination, so no new-coin'd Divinity
can be against them, to bring them under God's Wrath and Curse. I add what
follows:

Because I hear a certain Minister in Town has lately charged this publicly
as an Error, to say, God sees no Sin in his People; he should have first
charged the Scripture with Error, and refuted it; and then he should have
charged that Divine with Error, who commented on the Epistle to the Romans, in
continuation of Mr. Pool's Annotations: See what he says on Romans 8.1.

No condemnation, or no one condemnation; he does not say, there is no matter
of condemnation, or nothing damnable in them that are in Christ, there is
enough and enough of that; but he says, there is no actual condemnation: See
Joh. 3.18. and 5.24. There is a Meiosis in the words, more is understood than
expressed; he means, that Justification and Eternal Salvation is the Portion of
such; the positive is included in the negative; it is God's condemnation only,
from which such as are in Christ are exempted; they are nevertheless condemned
and censured by Men, and sometimes by their own Consciences.

And on Ver. 33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's elect? etc. Who
can implead such, or put in an accusation against them? There is nothing to
accuse them of, they are justified.

And there is none to Accuse them, it is God that has Justified them; the
Supreme Judge has Absolved them: This seems to be taken out of Isai. 50.8, 9.
they were Christ's words there, and spoken of God's justifying him; and they
are every Believer's words here, intended of God's justifying them; and seems
to be from two reasons; one implied, i. e. God's electing them, the other
expressed God's justifying and acquitting them.

And on Ver. 34. Who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died, etc. His
Death frees them from condemnation; thereby he has made a sufficient
atonement and satisfaction for all their sins; and which has long ago
satisfied in Heaven for the sins of all the Elect, may very well serve to
satisfy the Heart and Conscience of a believing sinner here on Earth; such an
one may throw down the Gantlet, as the Apostle does, and challenge all the
World; let Conscience, Carnal Reason, Law, Sin, Hell, and Devils, let them all
bring forth what they can, it will not be sufficient for condemnation, and that
because of Christ's Death and Satisfaction.

Dr. Jacomb, on Romans 8.1. says, we read it [no condemnation] the Original will
bear it, if we read it [not one condemnation] (...), is as much as (...); such
is the Grace of God to Believers, and such is their safety in their justified
estate, that there is not so much as one condemnation to be passed upon them;
suppose a condemnatory Sentence for every Sin, (I Am sure every Sin deserves
such a Sentence, and in point of merit, it is so many Sins, so many
Condemnations) yet the Pardon being plenary and full, every way adequate to the
sinner's guilt, the exemption of the pardoned person from condemnation must be
plenary and full too; so that if there be not one sin unpardoned, there is not
one condemnation to be feared, [This now is dreadful Antinomianism with some
Men] Jer. 50.20. In those days the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and
there shall be none. It Is an Allusion to a Man that turns over all his Bonds;
searches into all the Debt-books, to see if he can find any Debt due to him
from such and such a Person; but upon all his searching he cannot find so much
as one Debt to charge upon him; so it is with a Pardoned and Justified Sinner.
Imagine that God should be inquisitive to find out some guilt as lying upon
him, he might indeed find out enough, (as he is in himself,) but as in Christ
he is Pardoned and Justified; there is nothing to be found against him, therefore
no Condemnation.

What do you think now, is it an Error to say, God sees no Iniquity in his
People? How can any dare to Curse where God Blesses? This is to do worse than
Balaam.


DEBATE. XVII. Of the Hurt that Sin may do to Believers.
Neonom. I call to mind a most dangerous and dicentious Position of this
Antinomian, and that is, that Sin can do no hurt to Believers. D. W. p. 181.
His Error is this,


Error. The grossest Sins that Believers can commit, cannot do them the least
harm, neither ought they to fear the least hurt by their own Sins; nor by
National Sins; yea, though themselves have had a hand therein.


Antinom. It is strange you should charge this is an Error upon me, when as
its your own Assertion; but you know the old Proverb, The Thief cries Cutpurse
first. In the very Second Conference he had this Assertion.

He is there showing that there was no need that Christ should bear any more
than the Punishment of Sin, saying, all that endangered us was the Threatening
of the Law, and this upon Agreement, that upon his Atonement we should be
released; where is the need of more?

The Obliquity of the Fact, as against the Precept, shall not hurt, when the
Sanction of the Law is answered, and therefore he that suffers as a Sponsor for
another, need not sustain in himself the filthiness of the Crime, to make him
capable of giving satisfaction, Chap. 2. p. 11. But go on to your Proof.


Neonom. He says, they need not be afraid of their Sins; they that have God
for their God, there is no Sin that ever they commit can possibly do them hurt:
Therefore as their Sins cannot hurt them, so there is no cause of fear in their
Sins committed, etc. there is not one Sin, nor all the Sins together, of any
Believer, that can possibly do that Believer any real hurt: This he attempts to
prove from Romans 7. D. W. p. 181. from Dr. Cr. p. 510.


Antinom. He has left out my true sense and meaning in these words, on purpose
as he uses to do, to render my Assertions unsound.

Having been saying, that a Believer's Sins cannot hurt them, I raised this
Objection. Some will be ready to say, This is strange, Dr. C. p. 510.
all the Evils in the World that come they grow up from the sinfulness of Men.
If Man be afraid of any thing, he should be afraid of Sin, from whence all
Evils do flow. A. I Answered, Beloved it is true, Sin naturally is a Root of
all manner of Evil Fruit, (observe Gentlemen,) the wages of Sin is Death: but
yet, (I say) whatever Sin in its own nature brings forth, yet the Sins of God s
peculiar People, they that have God for their own God, their Sins can do them
no hurt at all, and in that regard, there is no cause of fear of any of their
Sins that ever they have committed. This may seem harsh to some Spirits that
misconceive my drift that I aim at, which is not to encourage any one to Sin,
but to ease the Consciences of the distressed, -- there is not one Sin, nor all
their Sins, can do them hurt, real hurt, I mean [they may do them supposed
hurt.] And -- I suppose the Apostle, Romans 7. does personate a scrupulous
Spirit; Dr. C. p. 511.
that a Believer under the multitude and prevalency of Corruption, who was
ready to Cry out, O Wretched Man that I am who shall deliver me from the Body
of this Death, -- but, says he, I thank God through Jesus Christ, q. d. till a
Man look to Christ there is nothing but matter of bitterness to be seen as the
certain fruits of Sin, and there can be nothing but bitterness in Sin, in
regard of the Evil that is like to follow it, but when persons can once look to
Christ, the case is altered. What does he thank God for? He thanks God, though
naturally a Body of Death grew up by Sin, yet there is no prejudice can come to
him through Christ, Chapter 8. 1. There is no Condemnation to them that are in
Christ, etc. No, you will say, no Condemnation in Hell, but yet there is the
remainder of Sin in God's own people; so there will some Evil or other fall
upon the Commission of Sin. But mark what the Apostle says, Verse. 3, 4. The
Law of the Spirit of Life which is in Christ Jesus, has freed me from the Law
of Sin and Death, etc. Here Christ stands for the deliverance of his People
from Condemnation, from Eternal Wrath, say some: Yea, but says the Apostle, We
are delivered from the Law of Sin and Death; what is the Law of Sin, but what
the Law may do to persons for those Sins which are committed by them? Now what
can Sin do when it is Condemned, etc.

It Is true indeed, every Sin is a great Debt, and we commit Sins daily and
hourly against the Lord, Dr. C. p. 512.
and the Torments of Hell are the merit of the least Sin in the World; for I
speak not this to Ext^nuate any Sin, but to show the greatness of God's Grace,
and to ease upon good grounds distressed Consciences. Therefore such as look
upon these Sins as uncancelled, and these Debts as true Debts, it is true, so
long the^e Sins may work a Horror and Trembling in Persons; but for Believers
that are Members of Christ, they may Read fairly all the Sins that ever they
have committed, they may Read also the desert of these Transgressions which
should be executed and inflicted on them, if they were not cancelled and
blotted out, Isa. 43. I even I am he, etc. It is true, our Sins themselves do
not speak Peace, but Christ bearing the Sin and Wrath that these Sins do
deserve, speaks Peace to every Believer; Dr. C. p. 513.
see 1 Cor. 15.56, 57. Though naturally Sin has a Sting, yet there is a Victory
over this Sting, Christ is the death of it, and he took away the Sting of it.
It is true, before Men come to see the light of the Gospel of Christ, their
Sins stare in their Faces, seeming to Spit Fire at them; but as Children will
put one of their Company into a hideous posture, causing every one that knows
it not to run from him, so Sin is set up by Satan with a terrible Visage, as it
were to Spit Fire in the Faces of the Godly and Faithful, and seems very
threatening and dreadful, but they are to know, there is no fear from the Sins
of Believers, all the terror and fearfulness of Sin Christ has drunk it, and
in the drinking of it Christ himself was Crucified, and in that regard, I say,
all the terror, and ghastliness, and hideousness, as it is represented by
Satan, is spent, and Sin it self is dead. It is true indeed, a living Roaring
Lion is a Terrible Creature, but in a dead Lion there is no more fear, than
there is in a stick or stone, to him that knows he is dead. While Sin is alive
it is fearful, and terrible, and deadly, but when Sin it self is dead, then
there is no more terror in it than there is in a dead Lion.

Thus I speak of Sin, not as it smiles upon a Man with a promising Countenance,
Dr. C. p. 513.
before it be committed, for so it is most dreadful and odious to the Faithful,
as that which Crucified their sweetest Lord: But as committed, and lying upon
the Conscience of a Believer, endeavoring to drive him to deny the free Grace
and Love of God, and the Alsufficiency of Christ, for in this regard it is
Crucified by Christ, and so a Believer need not be afraid of Sin, the
Handwriting of Ordinances is taken away, and they that are Christ's have
Crucified the Flesh with the Affections and Lusts.

Calvin, Mr. Antinom. has sufficiently cleared himself in this point, for he
has told us of the odious nature of Sin it self, the natural hurt and evil
effects of it; he has abundantly showed the hurt he means and speaks of, is
the penal effects of Sin in its condemning power, which condemning nature is
taken away in the Atonement made by Christ; he speaks of Sins past, that lie
upon Conscience, so as to drive Men from Christ, and the free pardoning Grace
of God; he speaks not of Sin, as it comes with alluring smiles to tempt us to
the committing of them, for so he says, they are most dreadful and odious to
the Faithful, as that which Crucified our dearest Lord. Besides all this, he
has made it appear, that you your self have made an Assertion, which no way
falls short, nay, to me it is far more Condemnable than any Expression that you
have charged him with under this Head.

For he speaks only of the effects of Sin, which, he says, are taken away, (as
you do there,) in our Sponsor's Answering the Penal Sanction; so far you
Justify all he says, but you say, that the Obliquity of the Fact, as against
the Precept, which is (...), and (...), Sin it self shall not hurt; so that it
must needs follow, that all the hurt of Sin is only in the Punishment, nay that
Sin in its proper nature and filthiness has no hurt in it, and that we need
not the Blood of Christ in Justification to take it away: Now how comes Sin as
Sin and Fault to be pardoned, for there is no more of Sin pardoned than Christ
bore? but you say, there was no need of his bearing it, no more then as to the
punishment, and then the Obliquity and Fault will do no hurt, Turpe est
Doctori, cum culpa redarguit ipsum. I think Gentlemen we may dismiss this
Point; the matter of Charge proving so false an Accusation, I shall not have
patience to hear him any further upon it, and I think, Gentlemen, you are
ashamed of it as well as I.


Antinom. Pray Mr. Calvinist have a little Patience, and hear what he says to
this Point, how and in what sense he understands the hurt of Sin.


Calvin. Well, I will do what I can with my self, but you must Whip the Top
with him, he will put me out of Breath in Answering his Impertinences. I pray
then go on, and tell us what you call truth in your usual Dogmatizing way.


Neonom. Truth; its true of Believers, that if Sin should have dominion over
them, they would thereby come to Condemnation, D. W. p. 180.


Antinom. How can you make a Truth upon Supposition of that which will never
be? I can call that nothing but a Rule of Falsehood in Logic, though there is a
Connection of Antecedent and Consequence, Si homo sit Leo est etiam Quadrupes,
such Propositions are Childish, When the Sky falls we shall catch Larks, throw
the Peth of a Quill over the House, and it will be a Silver Spoon. But it may
be you mean, by the dominion of Sin, the prevailing of Sin; this I deny to be
dominion in a Justified One. You should have made this Proposition, if a true
Believer be not in Christ, he shall come into Condemnation: Would not this look
Ridiculous?


Neonom. And though the Grace of God will prevent the dominion of Sin in every
Elect Believer, and so keep them from Eternal Death; yet true Believers may by
Sin bring very great hurt to themselves in Soul and Body, which they ought to
fear, and they may expect a share in National Judgments, according as they have
contributed to the common guilt.


Antinom. Here now you add a preservation from another hurt; and it is certain,
that as Sin shall not hurt them, as to the wages of Sin, and penal effects,
answering the Sanction of the Law, so it shall not have dominion over them,
which you say well in, Grace has secured them from, Romans 6. and yet you begin
with a bounce in your proposition, made up of impossibilities by your own
concession. 2. You say, the grace of God prevents the dominion of Sin, and so
keeps them from Eternal Death, as if you thought the grace of God made no use
of Christ in preserving Men from Eternal Death: Has Christ not delivered us
from the dominion of Sin and Eternal Death too? but I find you will have as little
to do with Christ in the Salvation of Sinners or Believers as you can. 3.
Notwithstanding Sin cannot bring them under Condemnation, nor under its
dominion, the Two great real hurts of Sin, yet you would seem to say something
contrary to me, and that is it does do them hurt in Soul and Body, which they
ought to fear; we tell you, 1. It can do them no real hurt, it may do them
supposed. 2. It does them no hurt directly, as to punishment or dominion, it
may by accident, i. e. through the weakness of their Faith lie upon their
Consciences, defile them, and drive them to warp from the free love and grace
of God, this you would call good, and not hurt, for you would have them put
themselves under Wrath. 3. We speak of Sins past yet lying upon Conscience, and
driving the Soul from Christ; we speak not of Sins not committed, those we
should fear with a fear of watchfulness, and dependence on grace, for strength
against them, and we say they are odious to the Faithful. 4. We say true
Believers shall have a share in National Calamities, which shall not be
Judicial Punishments to them, but sanctified afflictions, and therefore no real
hurts, though seeming ones.


Neonom. But I will tell you wherein the difference is not.


Antinom. What then? I must run the Gantlet for my Error forward and backward,
with whether and neither.


Neonom. Yes, if you will know the Truth rightly stated, you must know it when
it is not, as well as when it is; as they that look for that which is lost.

1. It is not whether God will preserve Elect Believers from Eternal
Condemnation, by keeping them from the Dominion of Sin.


Antinom. But it is whether keeping Men from the Dominion of Sin is the proper
Reason of their being kept from Condemnation; Does Mortification of Sin save
Men from Condemnation or the strictest degree of Holiness? It Is true, that the
Will of God is our Sanctification; but our Sanctification did not die for us,
and has no more to do in taking off Condemnation, than Paul in taking off
Condemnation from the Corinthians; it peculiarly belongs to Christ to deliver
from the Wrath to come, and from all Condemnation.


Neonom. Nor whether a justified Person be freed from the Curse of the Law, or
the Sanction of the Law of Works.


Antinom. But it is whether he be free from the Sanction of your new Law, which
is a Law of Works too.


Neonom. Nor whether a Believer should fear his Eternal Condemnation, no
further than his Sins bring his Sincerity in question, or lead to Security or
Apostasy.


Antinom. But it is out of question Hypocrites and Apostates were never
Believers. 2 Whatever a Believer does do, yet you own he ought upon some
Grounds or other, to be delivered from the fear of Condemnation. We say it
ought to be grounded on the Faith of his full deliverance from Condemnation, by
the atonement and satisfaction of Christ. You say it ought to be founded upon
his Sincerity and Perseverance, that when he is rid of all his Hypocrisy, and
has persevered to the end of his Life, he may be free from fear of
Condemnation; but not before. 3. Where Is the true Believer but is daily
complaining, and not without cause enough, of his Unbelief, Hypocrisy,
Security, Backsliding? And if he should have no better assurance of the safety
of his State, and freedom from Condemnation, than his own Sincerity and
Perseverance, he could not be freed from the fear of Condemnation in this Life,
nor walk comfortably an hour.


Neonom. Nor whether God may, in sovereign Mercy, spare to execute those
Rebukes, National or Personal, which a godly Man's Sins may expose him to.


Antinom. You love to dance about in Ambiguities: There is a great deal of
difference between sovereign sparing Mercy, and Covenant-Mercy; God exercises
sparing Mercy and long Suffering toward the worst of Men, but deals with a
true Believer always in a way of Covenant-mercy; and whether he rebukes him or
not, it is all from his Fatherly Love and Wisdom; God cannot deal with him but
according to his Covenant relation. God indeed deals with Nations, and mixed
Societies of Men, according to his Sovereignty; but the same visible
Dispensations are made Covenant-mercies to all true Believers, within the
compass of such Providence.


Neonom. Nor whether God may or can overruled the Sin of a Believer afterward
to his Benefit; these I affirm.


Antinom. It Is not only out of question that he may or can overrule the Sin of
a Believer, for his Benefit, but that he always does do it, if he is truly
belonging to God.


Neonom. Nor whether the Afflictions of the Godly be the execution of the
damnatory Curse of the Law, or any satisfaction or atonement for Sins: This I
deny, and add, That Christ alone satisfied Justice.


Antinom. But it is a question, what you mean by the damnatory Curse of the Law?
Is then one Curse damnatory, and another not damnatory? You mean Afflictions
are an Execution of the Curse of the Law, but are not of eternal Damnation. 2.
You say, They are not any satisfaction and atonement; but if they be execution
of a Curse, if but temporary, it cannot be avoided but they must be satisfying
and attoning in one kind or another, in whole or in part. 3. You add, That
Christ alone satisfied Justice; if so, then he suffered the whole penal part of
Sin, and (this is all the Doctor says) that there remains none of it for a
true believing Member of Christ, to bear; and what is the reason you make such a
noise, when here you yield all the Doctor intends, unless you equivocate, as
you are want to do?


Neonom. You do not understand me, I perceive; I will tell you the real
difference. 1. It Is whether, according to the Gospel-rule, if a Believer should
yield up himself to the dominion of Sin, he should perish? This I affirm, and
the Doctor denies, against plain Texts, directed to Believers.


Antinom. 1. A denunciation of Death and Damnation is neither a Rule nor
Gospel; it is very absurd to say that is a Rule, if you live after the Flesh;
it is but a condemnation of what is contrary to the Rule, and a denunciation upon
a supposing of that Abberration from the Rule: Suppositions are not always
Positions, that the thing supposed is ever in being, and they are used by way
of Argumentation; because the Antecedent cannot be, therefore the Consequent
cannot be; or because the Consequent cannot be, therefore the Antecedent cannot
be, and vice versa. There Is in this kind of Arguing, A Ponere or Tollere, in
respect of one part of the Proposition, to take away or establish the other, as
now in the Proposition you boast of. If a true Believer (for so you should say)
yield up himself to the dominion of Sin, he shall Perish; but a true Believer
shall not yield up himself to the Dominion of Sin; therefore, he shall not
perish. Make but the Proposition into a Syllogism, that it may argue, and it
will prove, that a true Believer shall not Perish, because he shall not yield
up himself to the dominion of Sin, Romans 6.12.14. 2. I deny that the Apostle
there speaks, Chap. 8.13. of true Believers, but uses an Argument to unhinge
and loose Professors from vain hopes, and to show that they are not in Christ.
For verse. 8. he says, They that are in the Flesh cannot please God; to such as
are in the Flesh, he opposes them that are in the Spirit, and having the
Spirit of Christ are his: Therefore, he says, All such are Debtors to live
after the Spirit, and not after the Flesh; for if ye that are Professors to
live after the Spirit, do really live after the Flesh, you are in a perishing
state, you are in the Flesh. Now the Apostle's arguing looks two ways, 1. To
prove they that are in Christ shall not die; they that shall not live after the
Flesh, shall not die; but a Believer in Christ, shall not live after the Flesh.
Ergo, he shall not die. 2. by way of discovery, He that lives after the Flesh,
is in the Flesh, and cannot please God, and therefore must die in that state, if
it continue: But you or I live so; therefore, the Apostle speaks it by way of
trial of the Truth of our state, and in-being in Christ. 3. Where is it that
the Doctor speaks so favorably, as you would have him, of the dominion of Sin?
You have not referred to the place: The nearest is page 429. where he has
these words, Forget every thing that seems worthy in you or done by you, and
let all your triumphing and glorying be in the free Grace of God, in Christ;
and look upon yourself only in that, and nothing else; as the Martyr did, None
but Christ, none but Christ. If you have more ability than others, in doing,
let it not come into your Thoughts, as an inducement to think better of
yourself; as if you were more accepted of God, or pleasing in his sight. Are
you sinful in respect of the prevalency of Corruption? Are the Temptations of
Satan mighty? Let it not come into your Thoughts that you are worse or less
than others; for Iniquity shall not part Christ and thee, if thou be once
joined to him.

Where is here the saying, that if Sin has dominion over a Believer, he shall
not perish? But this is all along your way, to forge the Horse-shooe first, and
then nail it to what Foot you please.


Neonom. Whether a Believer falling into such Sins, as Idolatry, Murder, etc.
ought not to aw his Soul against Security, with lively Thoughts of Damnation;
and if he continue long herein; ought not he to suspect the state of his Soul,
as in danger? This I affirm, and the Doctor denies. Thereby he renders the
Gospel-threatnings, as urged by the Spirit on the hearts of Believers, to be
all foolish.


Antinom. Where does the Doctor lay down this Position, by way of affirming or
denying? It Is only a Chimera of your own. We leave such Believers to your
management, till the Grace of God change their Hearts, and teach them better
things.

1. It Is very rare to find such true Believers that fall into such Sins, and
live securely in them.

2. If nothing but lively thoughts of Damnation will keep him from such Sins
and Security in them, I shall leave him under the Sanction of your Gospel, till
it shall please God to call him into his Grace. And surely he ought to suspect
his state, if nothing rowseth him but lively Thoughts of Damnation [I should
rather have said, killing Thoughts of Damnation] for when the Law comes, Sin
revives, and the Sinner dies in the thoughts of Damnation. But this is one of
your new Terms of Art, the lively Thoughts of Damnation, it is like your Rule of
Sin, etc. And such stuff is your speaking of the urging of Gospel threatenings
by the Spirit, on the hearts of Believers; as if Threatenings were Gospel, or
the Spirit of Grace and Adoption did work that way upon the hearts of
Believers, to produce Holiness, viz. by urging Gospel-threatnings. I am sure
your Positions are exceeding foolish and absurd.


Neonom. Whether Christ is at liberty sharply to afflict a justified Person for
provoking Sins, though he be secured against Soul-destroying Judgments. This I
affirm, and the Doctor denies.


Antinom. You affirm, That Christ satisfied Justice; therefore, as your
Afflictions are not expiatory in whole or part, therefore they are not for Sin
in that sense that you urge for Sin. And who is it that says, Christ is not at
liberty to afflict them for Sin in another sense, Sin being the cause and the
root of all evil Fruits that spring up in the Faithful? Therefore, there must
be mortifying of it, as well as satisfying for it: God does not afflict his
Children for Sin, by way of satisfaction, but for the mortifying of it; and who
says Christ is not at liberty so to do? And thus you go on, imposing upon us
what you please.


Neonom. Whether a Believer, falling into great Sins, ought to fear God's
present Rebukes for such Sins. This I affirm, and the Doctor denies.


Antinom. He ought patiently to bear present Rebukes, it is not proper to say he
should fear them; yea, he ought always to maintain a filial fear of God and his
Goodness, not to live in a slavish fear and avoid Sin, for fear of the lash; he
ought always to have a due Gospel fear to preserve him from Sin, even when he
does not fall into great Sins; and if its only the fear of punishment that
keeps Men from Sin, or reforms them, when fall^n into it, there is no true grace
of God in the Heart; David says, God's Rod and Staff comforted him.


Neonom. Whether great Offenses be a real hurt to a Believer, and brings on him
much present harm. This I affirm, and the Doctor denies: The Case of National
Sins is concluded in these.


Antinom. Here how you come to fight with a Man of Clouts; which you yourself
have made; for we said not that Sin is no hurt; for if so, why should our whole
Doctrine be to show that it needs healing? It Is the hurt of the Daughter of
Zion; why is it said that we are healed by the stripes of Christ? And that Sin,
even remaining in God's People, makes the best of God's Peoples Services and
Duties as Dross and Dung, by reason of its mixture with them, which you condemn
for an Error? We say, page 509. let us not be mistaken: We do not say we must
not be afraid to Sin; but that they that have God for their God, need not be
afraid of the Sins they have committed, in regard of the penal Effects. But
that Sin naturally is a Root, bringing forth all manner of evil Fruit; The
Wages of Sin is Death. We distinguish of fear, a natural fear, an affection in
Men by Nature, that they cannot be freed from; there is a religious and godly
fear, which is an awful reverence of the Majesty of God, and keeping a
convenient distance, such as the Creature ought to keep, it is opposed to
Sauciness. And there is a turbulent fear, a fear of disquietness, that which the
Lord endeavors to take off from his People.

All such fear, the Apostle says, has Bondage, and perfect Love casts it out:
And the same Apostle says, as I say. These things I write unto you, that ye
sin not. But if any Man sin (i. e. has committed Sin) we have an Advocate with
the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous, and he is a propitiation for our Sins,
1 John 2.1, 2. Therefore you charge us falsely to say our meaning is, That Sin,
in it self, is no hurt, and in its Nature does no hurt: But we say as you, That
Christ satisfied Justice for Sin, and overrules the hurt of it for our good,
so that through Grace it does us no real hurt; Christ has taken away the sting
of Sin, and the Condemnation of Sin. The real hurt of Sin lies in the dominion
of Sin, and in the penal effects of it, they that have God for their God cannot
give up themselves to the dominion of Sin; they cannot have a love for it,
because they are under grace; and as to the penal Effects, they are taken away
by Christ, or else his satisfaction to Justice was imperfect. Now all other
Effects of sin, as hiding God's Face, his paternal Chastisements, in outward
Afflictions, ecclipsing our graces and duties, come under a Promise, that though
they are not joyous, but grievous to a gracious Mind, yet they shall, through
God's grace disposing them, tend to our good, in making us the more Partakers
of God's Holiness, to mortify sin, to humble us and empty us of our selves, and
to bring us to an higher exaltation of Christ and dependence upon him, yea, to
more watchfulness, carefulness and circumspection in our ways. Hence God's
People have their frequent complaints against Sin, as to its indwelling and
hindering them from doing the good they would, groan under the body of Sin, and
desire Heaven to be altogether rid of it, etc.

But when we say, sin cannot do us real hurt, and we should not be afraid of
it, we mean only of sins already fallen into, that the disturbing, disquieting
guilt of them should not lie upon our Consciences to obstruct our Comforts, and
rejoicing in Christ; they should not drive us from Christ, to deny the love and
free grace of God and the alsufficiency of Christ; for if he that has God for
his God lies continually under an embondaging fear of sins past, he would
always labor under a servile, slavish frame of spirit, without comfort all his
days: We need not repeat what has been said to vindicate ourselves from this
unjust Charge.


Neonom. I Will tell you your Mistakes: Because there is no Eternal Condemnation
lies against a Believer, therefore there is no penal present Affliction, D. W.
p. 189.


Antinom. It Is all condemnation; Christ has taken away its condemnation that
makes Hell, and if God's People be under it here, they must have a degree of
it; Christ died in vain, as to our present state, if it were not to take away
condemnation from us here; we cannot be justified before God and lie under
condemnation too. Is a Believer only justified from future condemnation, and
not present? And it is no mistake, to say, Because a Man is freed from Eternal
Condemnation, therefore present Afflictions are not penal; but it is a necessary
consequence, Why did Christ bear our Sorrows, and carry our Griefs, but that
our Afflictions should not be penal?


Neonom. Whereas there is much hurt below Hell, and that it is not Hell that
follows the Sin of a Believer, is not from the Innocence of Sin, but the Grace
of God that brings him to repentance, and faith in Christ for remission.


Antinom. I thought there had been no hurt lower than Hell; I suppose you mean,
there is much hurt on this side Hell; but Improprieties are natural to you;
Condemnation for Sin in this Life, is much hurt, and a degree of Hell, and is
the same in kind; and therefore if God's People be not freed from it here, they
cannot expect to be freed from the lower Hell. 2. The reason why Hell (you say)
follows not the Sin of a Believer, is not the innocence of Sin; this is one of
the black-mouthed Charges you lay upon us, that we make Sin innocent, because
we say, Sin was laid on Christ, and he has born all the Penal Effects of Sin.
Why say you not the same of the Apostle, who says the strength of Sin is taken
away, and the sting of Death, (whereby it or lesser afflictions cannot hurt) is
taken away? These abominable Reproaches fall not on Man, so much as upon the
Truths of the Gospel, which Christ has a Controversy with you for. And that
Hell follows not the Sin of a Believer, you say, is from the grace God; and why
may it not be from the grace of God, that no Penal Effects follow the Sin of a
Believer? That grace that prevents or delivers from the greater evil will also
from the lesser.


Neonom. Because all Sufferings for Christ work for good, therefore all Sins
against Christ can do no harm.


Antinom. All Sufferings of a Believer, from the Hand of Christ, as well as
such as are in a way of Persecution for Christ, shall work for their good; and
therefore whatever befalls them by reason of sin, shall be for their good; and
whatever is for our good, according to the wise disposing of God, is not for
our harm, though it be so for the present in our own apprehension.


Neonom. Because God can and does overruled these to some good at last,
therefore they do no harm in the mean while nor in any degree.


Antinom. We speak not against the hurt of sin in its nature and natural
effects, nor the seeming hurt of sin and the effects of it; but how evil soever
it be, through the grace of God overruling it, all the seeming, yea, real hurt
that it does at present, shall be for good, and is good in the wise way and end
of God, though not apparently so, yet the Promise is to be believed.


Neonom. Because a Believer is freed from the Curse of the Law, therefore no
Gospel threatening of Christ can reach him.


Antinom. Where no Curse of the Law can reach, there nothing you call a Gospel
threat can do a real hurt; for that is not what we call so, but what the wise
God does make so.


Neonom. Because some good Men are sometimes humbled and awakened by sin, as
it is an evil, therefore to them it is not evil.


Antinom. Whatever is for humbling and awakening of a sinner, is good to that
sinner, and no real hurt; that that is malum simpliciter, either natural or
contristativum may be good, in ordine ad finem, and secundum quid; as to cut
off a Leg or Arm is malum natural and contristativum, but in order to the
saving the whole Body, it is bonum necessarium; many causes act not sua
facultate, sed externa, and that is when a thing produces an effect by an
external direction and gubernation, that it has no internal disposition to,
nor it may be an immediate agent might not intend or design, Vt Phereo Jasoni
profuit hostis qui gladio vomicam ejus aperuit quam sanare Medici non poterant:
The Enemy did Jason a kindness, when, by a thrust of a Sword, he opened an
Imposthumation that the Physicians could not cure. So Commission of Sin,
through Divine Disposal and the Promise of Grace, serves to lay open some
latent Corruption or other in the Children of God, which becomes of great
benefit and advantage to them.


Neonom. The Assembly is of my mind, they say the Threatenings of the Law are of
use, etc.


Antinom. But you leave out what you please; c. 19. they say, Although a true
Believer be not under the Law as a Covenant of Works, to be thereby justified
or condemned, yet it is of great use to them to inform them of the Will of God,
-- and the Threatenings to show what Sin deserves -- Who denies all they say?
But observe, They say a Believer is not under the Law for Condemnation.


Neonom. But they say, c. 17. Saints may, through Temptation and the prevalency
of Corruption, fall into grievous Sins, and continue therein for a time, and
incur God's Displeasure, and grieve his Spirit, and come to be deprived in some
measure of their Graces and Comforts, have their Hearts hardened, their
Consciences wounded, hurt and scandalize others, and bring temporal Judgments
upon themselves.


Antinom. All this is granted, and yet we are not affected by it; in our true
sense and meaning, we say Sin is hurtful, and bears all manner of evil Fruits;
but, through the Victory that we have in Christ, Sin shall not bring upon us
the Curse of the Law, nor condemning Penal Effects; Castigations, proceeding
from a fatherly hand, are the Privileges of his adopted Children, whether it
be exercised in outward Afflictions, or inward Withdrawings. And this is the
Hurt that is all along spoken of; we intend not Sin in its own Nature, and
those Effects that naturally proceed from it, nor the Aspect it has upon
ourselves or others, in all which it carries odium and mischief with it: The
sole reason why it hurts not in a way of condemnation, is from the
Propitiation and Advocateship of Jesus Christ, in whom, and by whom, that hurt
is taken away which we speak of.


Calvin, But Mr. Neonomian says, he has not wronged the Doctor in this
Charge, nor mis represented him, Repl. p. 47.


Neonom. I say, he does very often say and frequently attempt to prove, that Sin
can do no hurt.


Antinom. In what sense does he speak it? does he intend Sin in its own nature
has no hurt in it? or that it can do no hurt in its Penal Effects? hurt must
be understood in one of these senses.


Neonom. I never designed to charge him with it in the first sense, for he
says Sin is a Lion, there is its nature; and a dead Lion, there is its calmness;
and, because it is dead, it is not to be feared; it is a Traitor, that is its
nature; and bound hand and foot, that is its inability to harm.


Antinom. But you say, he makes Sin innocent to the Elect; that is to change the
Nature of it, not to remove the Effects; a Traitor may be bound and be a
Traitor still, though not to be feared.


Neonom. He has said too much to make it harmless to the Elect.


Antinom. It must be harmless to the Elect, so far as Christ bore Sin for them,
or else he bore it in vain; but if the Doctor had thought Sin had no hurt in
it, he need not have insisted so much upon Christ's bearing Sin for us, that
Sin might not wound us to death.


Neonom. I tell you, I do not charge him for saying Sin, as to its own Nature,
has no hurt in it.


Antinom Where lies the fault then? is it in saying Sin, as to its Penal
Effects, can do them that are in Christ no harm?


Neonom. He says not so, and yet those are most of the hurts that come for Sin.


Antinom. Mark, Gentlemen, he denies, that this is his meaning, he says not
those very Words and Syllables, but what is it that he proves his Position by,
viz. There Is not one Sin, or all the Sins together, of a Believer can do him
the least real hurt; he proves it from Romans 7. l. c. 8.1. After complaint
against the remaining of Corruption in him, he thanks God, through Christ, and
says, there is no Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, page 511. and
from Isaiah 43. ( p. 512.) I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy
transgression, etc. where he says, What prejudice can that do that is blotted
out? Every Debt of a Believer is a cancelled Debt; so that the Lord himself
has nothing to lay to a Believer's charge, it is Christ was wounded for his
Peoples sins, Isaiah 53. It Is true, our sins themselves do not speak Peace, but
Christ, bearing sin and the wrath that these sins do deserve -- And again,
"Though naturally sin has a sting, yet there is a victory over this sting;
Christ is the death of it, as he took away the sting of it.

Now let any impartial Person judge, whether this be not the Hurt of Sin which
the Doctor intends; and, besides, that you judge it to be his meaning, appears,

1. Because you say, he means not this Hurt in respect of the Nature of Sin;
and if so, it must be in respect of the real pernicious Effects of Sin; for a
Believer sees Hurt in Sin, and complains of it, but as to its Nature, which is
odious in itself, or to its Effects.

2. It appears, that you judge his meaning is such, because you say, that by
his Doctrine of Christ, bea^ing Sin, he makes Sin innocent to the Elect;
Whereby, 1. You make the nocency of Sin to lie in the punishment of it, and
thereby justify Dr. Crisp's Expression, how unproper soever it be or
erroneous. 2. You say, totidem verbis, that Penal Effects of Sin are most of
the hurt that comes by it, according to what Doctrine we have already charged
you with supra. The great sign of the truth of Grace, that is usually given, is
the fear and hatred of Sin, from the very nature of it, its contrariety to God
and his Law; and that its the greatest sign of an Hypocrite to abstain from it,
only for fear of Wrath and Hell.

And, 3. You tell us upon what Principles he goes, 1. That God has no Sin to
charge upon an Elect Person; though a Man sins, God reckons not his Sin to him,
etc. Whereby you show where your grudge is; it is against the Doctrine of
Imputation more than against the Doctor, for any thing he has said.

As for your Instance about poisoned Wine, you say yourself, he speaks not by
way of Exhortation, but Doctrinally; therefore exhorts none to take poisoned
Wine, but cautions them against it, again and again; and as for any that have,
through weakness and inadvertency, he tells them their Antidote, as the Apostle
John, 1st Epist. c. 2. 1. My little children, these things I write unto you,
that you sin not; and if any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father,
Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is a propitiation for our sins.


DEBATE XVIII. Of God's Displeasure for Sin in the Afflictions of his People.
Neonom. THE next great Antinomian Error, is, That none of the Afflictions of
Believers have in them the least of God's displeasure against their Persons,
for their Sins, D. W. p. 190, 191.


Antinom. We must proceed in our ordinary Method, let us know what you ground
your Charge upon?


Neonom. He affirms, p. 15. Except God will be offended, when there is no
cause to be offended, he will not be offended with Believers, because he does
not find the Sin of a Believer to be his own Sin, but the Sin of Christ.


Antinom. But he in the next words quotes places of Scripture to prove what he
says, He has made him Sin for us, he has laid upon him the Iniquities of us
all; the Blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all Sin; he bare our Sins in
his Body, etc. and from these he Argues thus, If he bear our Sins, he must bear
the displeasure for them; and he did bear the Indignation of the Lord; and if
so, he did bear it all, or but part. If he did not bear all the Indignation of
the Lord, then he does not save to the uttermost all that come unto God by him,
as Heb. 4. I say not to the uttermost, because here is some Indignation and
Displeasure left behind, and for lack of taking this Indignation upon himself,
it lights and falls upon Believers. So that either you must say, Christ is an
imperfect Savior, having left some scattering of Wrath behind, that will fall
on the head of a Believer: Or else you will say, he is a perfect Savior, and
takes away all God's displeasure; then there remains none of it upon the person
of a Believer.

Now why had you not Answered his Argument for what he said? yea, why had you
not brought in the next Objection made, to clear up his meaning, but quote only
so much as may leave your Reader under Prejudice?

Object. Yet you will say, Is not God displeased and offended at the Sins of
Believers, when they do commit them? Has Christ taken away the offense of Sin
by his Death?

Answ. No, therefore do not mistake your self, there may be easily a mistake
for lack of serious pondering the words I speak; I have not said, God is not
offended with the Sins a Believer does commit, but that God stands not offended
with the Persons of Believers for the Sins committed by them; he has that
everlasting Indignation against Sin as ever. And as there is the same
contrariety in Sin against his nature, so there is the same contrariety in
God's nature unto Sin. All contrarieties have a mutual contrariety against each
other, as Water and Fire, etc. As Sin is contrary to the nature of God, so
there is an Abhorrency of God to that Sinfulness, [here see with what ground
you could say, that Dr. C. makes Sin Innocent,] but there is no Offense of God
to the Person that commits that Sin, because the Offense of God for that Sin
has spent it self upon the Person of Christ, there remains none of it to light
upon the person of a Believer, Christ having born all this Offense for Sin. --
Though in our Natures, and in the Sinfulness of them, there is matter of
displeasure, yet in Christ, for all this, God is well pleased with us. And yet
there is none of God's Indignation against Sin lost in all this, for he is
satisfied for this his Offense in his Son, more than in our own Persons.


Neonom. And he says, p. 18. But are not the Afflictions for their Sins?


Antinom. Come, I will tell you, he Answers that Objection. He says, I Answer,
No, Afflictions are unto Believers from Sin, but not for Sin. What is the
meaning of that will you say? This, God in Afflicting Believers does not intend
to punish them, as now laying on them the desert of their Sin; for that is laid
upon Christ, but he does Afflict them in part, to be a help to preserve them
from Sin. I say, all Afflictions to Believers are to keep them from Sin, rather
than Punishment unto them for Sin.


Neonom. P. 170. He says, That at that Instant when God brings Afflictions
upon them, he does not remember any Sins of theirs, they are not in his
Thoughts.


Antinom. That which he Asserts is from plain Texts of Scripture, how dare you
Banter and Expose so great a Truth as this? it is in that great place, Jer.
31.33. declared to be the great promise of the Gospel, by the Spirit of God,
Heb. 10.16, 17. God says, He remembers our Sins no more; you say, he does; who
are we to believe, God, or you?


Neonom. He says, Christ being Chastened for our our Sins, there is nothing but
Peace belongs to us, P. 170.


Antinom. The Words were thus, I see the Scripture runs wholly in this strain,
and is so full in nothing as in this, that he has generally discharged the
Sins of Believers. Oh then take heed of falling into the Error of the Papists,
that say, that God has taken away the Sin, but not the Wrath of God due to
Sin, but that he has forgiven our Sins, but not the Punishment of Sin; but
consider, that as our Sins were then upon Christ, he was so Bruised for our
Iniquities, as that by his Stripes we are healed, and the Chastisement of our
Peace was so upon him, that he being Chastised for our Sins, there is nothing
but Peace belongs to us. And can you deny the Truth of a plain place of
Scripture, The Chastisement of our Peace was upon him? Does it plainly appear
that this is true meaning, that our Peace was fully made by Christ, and
accordingly he is called our Peace? Christ says, in the World we shall have
Trouble, yet this full and complete Peace of Reconciliation is made, and Christ
promises the Comforts of it in Believing, Peace I give unto you, etc.


Neonom. He says, If we tell Believers, etc. Except they perform such and such
Duties, D. W. p. 191.
except they walk thus and thus Holily, and do these and these good Works, they
shall come under Wrath, at least God will be Angry with them. What do we in
this but Abuse the Scriptures? we undo all that Christ has done, we injure
Believers, we tell God Lies to his Face, Dr. C. p. 170.


Antinom. It is not for you to Expose a Man's Words, when they are proved from
Scripture and sound Reason, why had you not taken his Argument he brings, to
prove that God will not be Angry and be Wroth with his People that are true
Believers, Isa. 54.

God, says he, has made such an Oath, that the Earth shall be drowned with
Water before it be broken, Dr. C. p. 160.
that he will not be Wroth with his People, nor Rebuke them any more; and upon
this account, it is he says, that such as tell Believers, Except they do this
or that, etc. they will come under Wrath and Condemnation, do abuse the
Scriptures, and give God the Lie; nay, he says, we do not only, so much as
lies in us, to make God a Liar, [the Scripture says Unbelief does so, 1 John
5.] but we offer an insufferable Affront unto Jesus Christ, and strike at the
very heart of the Office of Christ's Mediatorship. If we say, God is Wroth with
Believers for whom Christ died, for what end did Christ suffer Death? I say,
that if this Principle be truth, that God will be Wroth with his People, then
Christ died in vain, for God could have been but Wroth and Angry with his
People if Christ had not died; to bring the People of God under Wrath and
Vengeance again, is to take away all the Virtue of the Death of Christ, and to
make it of none effect. Now why do you not Answer this Argument? this is the
Childishest thing in the World, to say, he says so, and he says so, why do
you not tell People why he says so, and Confute his Reasons? but you think you
have done enough, if you have Exposed a Doctrine, by saying, this or that Man
that professes to hold it, says so and so; therefore what if a Man speak
truth never so weakly, and absurdly, must the truth be reckoned error
therefore?


Calv. Mr. Neonom. you have sixth your Anathema upon Mr. Antinomian's Opinion in
this Point, viz. For holding that the Afflictions of Believers do not proceed
from the judicial or vindictive Displeasure of God against their Persons, for
their sins. You hear he says, God is displeased with their sins, and does
afflict them, to purge out sin from them, that they may be Partakers of his
Holiness, etc. which seems to me to be very sound and orthodox Doctrine,
agreeable to the Scripture, and the Analogy of Faith.


Neonom. Truth: Though God is not so angry with his People for their sins, as to
cast them out of his Covenant-favour; yet by their sins he is so displeased, as
for them to correct his Children, though he speak Instructions by his Rebukes, D.
W. 190.


Antinom. You say, Though he be not so angry, you make degrees of Anger in God
thereby, as if God were partly pleased, and partly displeased with his
Children; and if so at one time, then at another (we speak of the Persons of
Believers) there being always sin in them for a reason here; and if so, Christ
was not our full Peace, he did not reconcile God fully to us, therefore made
imperfect satisfaction; for if there remains some part of the Debt yet unpaid,
Christ did not pay all. Again, to be under the Penalty of the Law for sin, and
the execution thereof, though but in part, is so far to be under the Curse; but
there is no Believers in whole or in part, under the Curse. Again, God, you say,
is not so displeased with them as to cast them out of Covenant; if not, then
they continue in Covenant with God; if in Covenant, then he has always a
Covenant-love toward them, then he always acts in a way of Covenant-love
toward them, even for their amendment and not destruction, when he afflicts
them not in a way of wrathful displeasure for their sins: But if you say,
against their sins, we allow it, and God is always angry with sin; sin itself
was never pleasing to God, and therefore he purges it out in Sanctification
every day; and hence spends many a Rod upon them for their Profit, as a good
Father upon a Child that he dearly loves: Some earthly Fathers may correct for
their pleasure, that is, to vent their Anger and Passion; but God, the Apostle
says, Corrects for our Profit, Heb. 12.10. And he says, Whom he loves he
chastneth, v. 6. i. e. loves at the very same time. God's divine love to the
Persons of Believers cannot be abated in the least: It Is true, God may alter
his Carriage toward them, and deal so with them, as to make them consider
their ways, and to humble them, or to point out some Corruption God will have
mortifyed; this is all love in God, and not displeasure: God's seeming
displeasure is a fruit of his unchangeable loving kindness toward them; and
whatever you say, if I stand secured of God's Covenant favor, I am sure God
cannot be angry with me, whatever his sensible Carriages are. God's People,
whatever God's dealings are with them, they do not take any thing to be done in
displeasure, till through Temptation they begin to suspect their
Covenant-state: Do but clear up to an afflicted Person God's Covenant-favour,
and I Will warrant you he will not say God has afflicted him in his displeasure;
and therefore you will say God is displeased with their Persons, for their
sins, i. e. punishes them for their sins to satisfy his displeasure thereby,
i. e. his Justice; if so, it is clear the consequence is unavoidable, as to so
much of my punishment for sin that I bear, Christ did not bear, besides it must
be in its degree expiatory and satisfactory to God.


Neonom. You mistake my meaning still; I will tell you where the difference is
not. 1. It is not whether God cease to love a Believer when he sins.


Antinom. That is the thing which we say, That God has an unchangeable love to
the Persons of Believers, and cannot love and hate at the same time; and to
ascribe changeable Passions or Affections unto God, is a kin to the Heresy of
Anthropomorphites.


Neonom. Nor whether the Afflictions that befall a Believer proceed from the
vindicative Justice of God as an Enemy.


Antinom. We agree, with you, in it; why do you condemn us as erroneous? This
is the great thing we plead for.


Neonom. Nor whether God can bless the sorest Judgments for Sins, to the future
good of a Believer. This I affirm.


Antinom. I do not only say he can, but that he does so always, and not only
for his future but present good, though the Believer may not yet know it for the
present.


Neonom. Though were it not for our sins, God would effect that good a milder
way.


Antinom. This is strange talk; for the good is the taking away, or rooting up
of our sins, if you understand by, and for sin, from sin, we differ not; as I
weed my Garden, why for the Weeds, i. e. from the Weeds, to pluck them out;
were it not for Weeds it would not weed it; but if you say its revenge upon the
good Herbs, it is false, it is for their good.


Neonom. And I doubt whether every good Man may be said to get profit by all
sorts of Afflictions, for every degree of Good is not equivalent to the hurt;
and sometimes God punishes sin with sin. D. W. p. 191.


Antinom. Now instead of a Believer, its a good Man; some of your good Men that
have as much Faith as they brought into the World with them; nor by all sorts
of Afflictions, it seems there is some cannot have good in them toward God's
Children, and every degree of good may not be equivalent in the same kind, as
the gaining a greater measure of Contentment, Weanedness from the World,
submission to the will of God, you say it is not equivalent to the losing my
House and all my Goods, by Fire, in an instant. And what if God suffers his
People to fall a first, and second time, and third too; how can you dare to
say, that the hurt it does them is greater than the good? It Is enough that
God's rectoral Rule of Government of them, is, that all things shall work
together for their good; and though Sin has no good in it self, yet through Gods
wise disposal it shall work for good.


Neonom. Nor whether some sensible Calamities may fall on a good Man, not so
much in a way of Rebuke for Sin, as to try his Graces, prevent Sin, or bring
glory to God, by a Testimony of Truth.


Antinom. These are very good Reasons you have added; let me add, For his
increase and growth in grace.


Neonom. Yet I believe the very Martyrs did not so glory in the joyful cause of
their Sufferings, as always to neglect an humble Reflection on what sin of
theirs might justify God, as a hidden cause of their hardship.


Antinom. There Is none of God's Children, but as they own themselves less than
the least of his Mercies, so own, that by the Last of their sins, they have
deserved the greatest Calamities; but truly a Martyr could never go joyfully to
Sufferings, if he thought God called him to it to punish him for his sins, to
expiate some hidden sins; this would be sad Martyrdom. No, the Apostles
rejoiced that they were counted worthy to suffer for the Name of Christ; they
had no suspicion, it was a punishment of them for their Sins. As to a humble
reflection upon sin, and what it deserves in it self, yea and we for it, if God
should deal with us according to our sinful Deserts: I think others of God's
professed Children, as well as Martyrs, have it, or else they have little grace
in their Hearts, and little Acquaintance with the pardoning grace and mercy of
God.


Neonom. I will show you the real difference, whether God be at all displeased
with Believers for their Abominations. This I affirm, and the Doctor denies. D.
W. p. 192.


Antinom. You should have told us what you mean by God's being displeased,
whether you mean an immanent displeasure of his divine Justice, or a
providential Carriage toward them, which they are apt to call God's
displeasure through Temptation. 2. When you speak of God's displeasure toward
Believers, whether you mean their Persons, or their Sins; we say, God is never
displeased with their Persons, they being reconciled unto God by the death of
his Son; and in Christ, God is fully and everlastingly well pleased with them.
Indeed in the way of your Scheme, there is something in what you say, the
righteousness of the new Law being imperfect; and therefore there is room left
to expiate our Sins and Imperfections, in obedience by our Sufferings. 3. You
make strange kind of Believers, such, it seems, as fall ordinarily into great
Abominations, act and live in, I suppose, sins of the greatest magnitude; the
Doctor means a better sort of Believers.


Neonom. Whether God at any time, or by any Afflictions, expresses his
displeasure against his People for their sins. This I affirm, and the Doctor
denies.


Antinom. You need have made but one Whether of both these, unless you
distinguish between God's displeasure, and expressing his displeasure, as
between immanent and transient Acts; and what signifies your affirming or
denying, when there is no consistency in yourself, and all your Affirmations and
Denyals are in equivocal Expressions?

For you grant, God casts not Believers out of Covenant favor; he cease not
to love them when they Sin. Nor do Afflictions proceed from his vindicative
Justice. That he can make Afflictions for their future good. We say he does do
it, and for their present good too. And that they may fall upon a Believer to
prevent Sin and try his Graces, we say they do so always more or less. Let all
this be told a Believer in an Affliction, and he will say, Blessed be God, I
find all this that befalls me is from a gracious God in Covenant: God is not
displeased, but deals with me as a tender Father.


Neonom. I will confirm the Truth: You must know that there is none of all this
but Dr. C. means it of the unconverted Elect, for their Sins are off from
themselves as much as Believers; their Sins do them no hurt, nor is God angry
with them, though God says, He is angry with the Wicked every day.


Antinom. Solomon says, Prove. 14.22. Do they not err that devise evil? And
that Violence covers the Mouth of the Wicked, Chapter 10.11? And that he that
hides Hatred, with lying Lips, and he that utters a Slander, is a Fool,
verse. 18? You thought by that time all your Concessions were put together, that
the Error you charged the Doctor with was dwindled away, and it would not
blacken him enough, according to your Intention; and therefore now you will
accuse him for his meaning, that all that he speaks of Believers, refers as
well to the unconverted, as the Elect.

Now to show the World how little like a Gentleman, Scholar or Christian you
carry your self, see D. Crisp, page 15. out of which you take your Charge
against him, in the very entrance of his Discourse, what is said.

He shows from John 14.6. That Christ is the way from all the Wrath of God to
all that do receive him. 1. From the Affection itself, of Wrath; let me tell
you, God does, no longer stand offended or displeased, though a Believer, after
he be a Believer, do Sin often; yet, I say, God no longer stands offended or
displeased with them, when he has once received Christ; and unto them God
says, Anger is not in me, Isa. 27.4. And does he not expressly mention
Believers in these very places you quote out of him? Now I see it is impossible
to escape your Accusations, for you have so addicted yourself to say one thing
and mean another, that whatever any says, though never so plainly, whom you are
minded to accuse, you will say he meant another; and so you run on with your
Cuckow's Note. He says that Sin will do them no hurt, and God is not angry with
them, etc.


Neonom. I affirm God is displeased with Believers for their Abominations.


Antinom. Some abominable Believers out of doubt, some that you will have
called Believers, when as they themselves know in their Consciences that you
slander them.


Neonom. If he be displeased, it must be for their Sins; he often affirms it, and
he forces his People to own it, Psalm 60.1, 3. Isa. 5.25.


Antinom. There is nothing to be concluded, that God is angry with the Persons
of true Believers, from those Expressions that refer to a National Church, when
there is a mixture of Believers and Unbelievers; God always when he speaks to
such, in a way of Anger, has respect to the generality or prevailing Party,
according to which he does in external ways of his Providence carry himself
toward the whole.


Neonom. God was angry with Moses, Exodus 4.14. Deuteronomy. 4.21. Chap. 9.21.


Antinom. No Man of sense would bring that of Exodus 4.14. to prove God was
angry with Moses in your sense; for Moses was then in Converse with God, who
was calling him to a great Undertaking, whereat Moses was surprised and pleaded
his own Insufficiency; which Plea of his, when it savoured of Unbelief, God
rebuked; not that there was in God penal Anger against his Person; but he
rebukes his Sin that he might not go on in the same Sin and Unbelief, and its
spoken after the manner of Men; and so often in Scripture God's Rebukes of Sin
in his Children by Word or Providence, is termed his Anger, because its so
against Sin, and seems to be so with their Persons, by God's carriage to them
many times in their Apprehensions; and yet for all that, whom he loves he loves
to the end. And so God loved the Persons of Moses and David, even when they
sinned, as you say yourself, that God cease not to love a Believer when he
sins; if not, then he is reconciled to their persons, however his sensible
dealing may be with them, and all proceeds from that love: And therefore why do
you blame Dr. Cr. for saying, that at that Instant, when God brings Afflictions
on Believers, he does not remember any one of their sins? It must be understood
thus, as he explains it, that God remembers not their sins in a way of judicial
proceeding; marking Iniquity, it is called therefore God's dealings in this
kind with his Children, and are called in the Gospel-language, Corrections and
Chastisements; not for Destruction or Hurt, as all Penal Evils be, but for
Reformation and Amendments, etc.

Does he not speak as plainly and distinctly as may be, that he does not say,
God is not angry with the sins of a Believer, but that he is not wroth with
their Persons?


Neonom. That place, Psalm. 81.30, 31, etc. proves what I say.


Antinom. That place is on the Doctor's side, and against you; for it only
holds forth thus much, that God corrects his People from Sin, not for Sin in a
way of vindicative Wrath; for its a Promise to Christ, and the Seed there
spoken of, who are redeemed ones and believers; God says, in case of Sin, he
will visit their Iniquities with a Rod, to kill and destroy Sin in them; but as
for his loving kindness, it shall never depart from them: You could not have
mentioned a place of Scripture more directly against you.


Neonom. There is that place, 1 Cor. 11.30. and Rev. 3.19.


Antinom. The Church Members of the Corinthians might not be true Believers,
for ought you know; for they were of those that eat and drunk unworthily, and
accordingly, in the Apostle's phrase, did eat and drink damnation: But what
hinders, but a Child of God may die under an Affliction, which is laid upon him
to cure some Corruption or other? it is not too late to partake of God's
holiness upon a Deathbed in a higher measure than before. And as for those
that were sick and weak, but recovered, there is no doubt, if they were true
Believers, but it tended to the curing their spiritual sickness. It is a
strange thing that a Surgeon must act always as an Executioner, have his
Commission from Justice-Hall still, when he comes to a Patient to open an
Ulcer, or to cut off a mortified Hand or Leg; and he cannot do this in love,
and all tenderness and compassion to his Patient, but in anger and wrath, and
to punish and torment the poor creature for his faults. As to what is said by
Christ to the Churches, Rev. 2. and 3. Christ speaks to Body-Politicks, to mix
Congregations that had many corrupt Professors among them; and he speaks to
them as such as were for the greatest part of many of them overrun with
Hypocrisy and Formality: And what is it he calls them to, but Reformation? So
is that place, Amos 3.2. it is spoken to a professing apostatizing People.


Neonom. The Assembly at the Savoy assert this; and in the Assembly's large
Catechism. How does Christ execute the Office of a King? in rewarding their
Obedience, and correcting them for their Sins?


Antinom. But what follows? preserving and supporting them under all their
Temptations and Sufferings, is that in a way of Wrath and Indignation? They
say, for their Sins; so say we too, in their sense, if for denote the end of
the chastisement, causa medendi, for healing; but it is not causa vindicandi,
for punishing in a way of vindictive Justice; which is your sense, or else you
would never make this sputter, whatever pretense to the contrary you make.
God's displeasure is with the Sins of Believers, not with their Persons; and
this is Paternal Displeasure, because there is love to their Persons, as the
cause of dealing with them in the way of any seeming displeasure.


Neonom. I will tell you the Doctor's mistake: Because God laid our Sins on
Christ to make Atonement for forgiveness of the Elect, therefore God cannot be
offended with the Elect for them, before they repent.


Antinom. Your Mistakes are wilful, and foul ones too, or else you would not
act so dishonestly.

1. This Doctrine, of laying Sin on Christ, you are always bantering; take heed
it prove not of dangerous consequence to you.

2. Has the Doctor spoken one word of the unconverted Elect in this matter, or
of the Elect before they repent? But your spleen is moved, because he founds
the security of Believers from the Wrath of God toward them for Sin, upon
Christ bearing Sin, and making full satisfaction for it; you cannot brook it,
that Christ's Righteousness should have this honor. I will tell you one thing,
If you have no better security from Wrath, than the Evangelical Righteousness
you show in this Book, I can say, without a Spirit of Prophecy, The Wrath of
God abides on you.


Neonom. Because God does not hate the Believer, as an unreconciled God when he
sins, therefore he is not at all displeased with him because of the
Gospel-sins.


Antinom. Because God manifests displeasure against the Sins of his People,
therefore, say you, God is displeased with their Persons; that is your mistake,
it is not in the nature of God to love and hate the same Object; neither has
God such affections as we have: If God hate not as an unreconciled God, he can
do nothing toward that person, but what are the effects of love; there is few
earthly Parents can correct a Child, but it is in their mind wholly to do them
good, and to free them of some ill habit or corruption; the Child calls the
Father's carriage Anger, and it looks so to him, in a wise Father; but all this
while his Heart earns toward the Child, and longs to be Kissing it.


Neonom. He thinks, because a Refiner is not angry with his Gold, therefore a
Holy God is not angry with Rational Offenders.


Antinom. The Persons of true Believers are precious and honourab^e in the
sight of God, 10000 times more than Gold can be, and securer from the anger of
God than any Gold can be from the Refiner's anger. I suppose your Rational
Offenders are your Abominable Believers.


Neonom. Because God will not hate a Believer so as to damn him, therefore he
cannot be angry with his People so as fatherly to chastize them.


Antinom. If God cannot hate a Believer so as to damn him, then he cannot
punish or afflict him in this World with the same affection wherewith he does
damn any one; but all that befalls him in this World proceeds from the same
affection of love that saves them from damnation, as to God, there is the same
cause of the afflictions and chastisements of Believers, as there is of their
glorification; they all proceed from his Eternal and Unchangeable Love, from
the sure Mercies of the Covenant of Promise, and therefore are all in a way of
benefit and advantage toward them; God loves a Child of his as much in its
infancy and nonage, as in its grown state, though his carriage is different, the
diversity of state requiring it. And as to Fatherly Chastisement, if you
understand it aright, we deny not but such are those of God's Children; but you
must know the Spirit of God, Heb. 12. tells us, the comparison will not hold
but as a small illustration of it; for God's thoughts, affections, designs, are
not as Man's; a Father may correct a Child in anger and passion, and so for his
pleasure, as the Apostle says, but God never does so; a Woman may lay aside
natural affections, and forget her sucking Babe, yea, murder it; but as God
cannot lay aside his innate love, so he cannot forget to exercise it in all
things.


Neonom. Because God afflicts from Sin, therefore he does not afflict for Sin.


Antinom. If you mean from Sin and for Sin in the same sense, that Sin is a
reason of affliction in some sense or other, we deny it not; but if you mean it
be a judicial cause of affliction, as it is in a wicked Man, we utterly deny
it; for such must be attoning to the Law, transgressed in part or in whole; the
Law designs not the salvation of the sinner in any of its executions, but its
own satisfaction in his destruction, it looks not at his amendment, but ruin:
And therefore if you mean, that God, as a Father, does so afflict, we deny it;
for to say so, were to make him change, to invalidate the satisfaction of
Christ, and make him worse than an earthly Father.


Neonom. As if he could not rebuke for what is past, if he resolve not against
their amendment for time to God.


Antinom. God resolves their Amendment, and therefore chastises; and God
rebukes their Sins, and shows Man that he has transgressed, that Faith be
exercised the more lively on the propitiation of Jesus Christ, who satisfied
God for Sin, and that they may the more admire the free and pardoning Love of
God, and that his dealings are so favorable, it is the Lord's Mercy we are not
consumed, because his Compassions fail not, and that Sin may be made more
sinful and hateful to them.


Neonom. The Doctor was led into this Opinion, by not considering that Anger
and Displeasure be not Passions in God, but a Will of Correcting, and are
denominated from the kinds and degrees of Correction.


Antinom. Quite contrary; he took up his Opinion, because he believed they were
not so; and that God's correcting his Children, is from his Love and Good Will;
and that, whatever the Degrees are, the Specific Nature is, toto genere,
distinct from Punishments in anger.


Calv. 1. There is no reason why God should exact the Debt of Sin, in the
suffering of Believers, because Christ has fully satisfied his Father's
Justice for their Sins.

2. Their Sorrows and Afflictions cannot carry a Curse in them, and therefore
not the Wrath and Displeasure of God; for he has born their Sorrows, and
carried their Grief; not that they should not have Sorrow, but that their
Sorrows should have nothing of the Sting of Sin, the Curse of the Law in them.

3. They are under the Grace of Adoption, therefore Chastening is the Fruit of
Adopting-love, Heb. 12.6. And it is one of the good things God has allotted to
them as Children, and that for many great Ends: 1. To be Partakers more and
more of his Holiness in general, Ver. 10. for their Profit and Advantage. 2. To
be conformed unto Christ therein, who learned Obedience by suffering, Heb. 5.8.
3. To fill up that which is behind of the Afflictions of Christ in his Mystical
Body, Col. 1.24. 4. That we may have fellowship with Christ in his Sufferings,
and therein be conformable to his Death, Phil. 3.10. 5. That as the Sufferings
of Christ abound in us, so our Consolations may abound by Christ, 2 Cor. 1.5.
6. That we may learn Patience, that excellent Grace, Romans 5. Tribulation
works Patience. 7. That Faith may be tried, the trial whereof is better than
Gold, Jam. 1. 8. That we may be weaned from the World, prize and long for
Heaven more; therefore through many Tribulations we must enter into Heaven,
Acts 14.22.

These and many more great Reasons may be assigned for the Afflictions of God's
Children, and not to be reckoned to be for Sin in your sense.

Mr. Calvin, in his institutions, is very large on these things, and says, l.
3. c. 8. s. 6. In ipsa tribulationum acerbitate Patris nostri Clementiam erga
nos and benignitatem recognoscere convenit, quando ne tum quidem desinit
salutem nostram promovere, affligit nos, non ut perdat aut perimat, sed potius
ut a mundi damnatione liberet. In the very bitterness of Affliction, it is our
Duty to own and recognize the tenderness and bounty of our Father, because then
he cease not to promote our Salvation; for he afflicts not that he may kill
or destroy us, but rather to deliver us from the condemnation of the World.

From the Doctrine of Justification by Christ's Righteousness, we gather, 1. To
condemn the proud Papists, Dr. Usher. Theol. p. 195.
that seek Justification by their own Works and Righteousness inherent in
themselves. 2. There Is no comfort to a Christian's Soul like this. 1. The
Assurance of the Sufficiency of our Redemption, Romans 8.33. God having accepted
his Son's Righteousness for us, will not hold us any longer trespassers, but he
disables his own Justice from making any further demand. 2. Hence there is
nothing comes upon the Saints from God's Revenging Justice, but all our
Corrections are Medicinal from God's fatherly love, to purge out that Sin out
of our Nature which he has already pardoned to our Person.


DEBATE XIX. Of the Beauty of Sincere Holiness.
Neonom. I Am now come with a Charge of a Monstrous Error upon Mr. Antimonian;
I believe it will stink in your Nostrils as soon as I name it; it is this, That
the greatest Holiness in Believers, though wrought in them by the Holy Ghost, is
mere dung, rottenness and filthiness, as in them. D. W. p. 196.


Calv. I pray let us hear his own words, for the Apostle Paul speaks to that
purpose, Phil. 3.9.


Neonom. Aye, but the Apostle Paul does not mean as he does, he has perverted
the Apostle's words to a wrong sense:

He says, Know, that the Motions and Assistance of the Spirit, be Pure, Holy
and without Scum in the Spring, to wit, itself; yet by that time these Motions
and Assistances have passed the Channels of our Hearts, and been mixed with
manifold Corruptions, even the whole Work becomes polluted and filthy, and
filthiness alters the property of the pure Motions of Christ's Spirit, etc. Dr.
C. p. 232.


Calv. Do you charge this for Error?


Antinom. If you please, Sir, you shall have my whole sense, the sum briefly of
what I spoke.

I was preaching from Phil. 3.8, 9. I opened that Text according to the sense
of the best Interpreters; and I showed, that the Apostle, 1. demolisheth all
glittering and rotten Materials, wherewith he had, and others still do, erect a
fortress of security and a place of delight, Dr. C. p. 226. 2. He declares his
end in so doing, that he might lay a sure Foundation, and build upon it with
other Materials than Hay and Stubble, p. 227. Now I showed, that which he cast
away, was all things, not only what he was or could do before he received
Christ, but even all things whatever also he has been able to do since he
received Christ, though assisted thereto by the Spirit of Christ, as Beza well
observes. As concerning the Apostle's end, for stripping himself naked of his
most specious Works in general, it is to be clothed with white Robes, even the
Garment of Salvation; but more especially he declares his end, 1. It Is for the
Excellency of the Knowledge of Christ, i. e. of Christ's Excellencies known; to
the knowledge of which I could never come, till all I was, and am, plainly
appeared loss and dung; my own Righteousness was a thick Film over my Eyes,
that I could not see Christ's Worth. 2. A gaining and winning Christ, is a
second end, (...), as long as his own Obedience was in request with him, and
seemed any thing better than dung in his eye, he could never get Christ. 3.
That he might be found in him, i. e. at the great day of appearance. That this
is the meaning, is plain by the Apostle's own expounding himself, not having
mine own Righteousness, and my Doctrine.

That things, even the most blameless walking according to God's Law, not only
before, but after conversion, or receiving Christ, is truly counted loss and
dung, by a Paul's Eye; and such an one will be willing to suffer the loss
thereof as dung.

Those places were brought in proof, Isai. 64.6. Luke 17.10.

And I showed this determination was not to be of some things only, but of all;
not only things directly against the Precept, but all Civility, Morality, the
exactest obedience, with the highest assistance of the Spirit, and straightest
aim at a right end, etc. must be counted and sentenced but as loss and dung.

But let me not he mistaken; here I do not say, that the Motions themselves of
the Spirit, as his, nor the Ends and Enlargements of the Heart, as his, or the
Ends aimed at, as prescribed, must be thus accounted or sentenced; but the
whole Work as done, and when done by a sanctified person thus assisted and
qualified: when such a person looks at the Work so done by him, he must see
nothing but mere loss* and dung. 1. Loss, because that he forfeits Life and
Bliss on Earth and Heaven; there is sin enough in it, if God had nothing else
but what he could pick out of the best Work to lay to his charge; I mean, in
regard of the desert of such a Work in itself considered; under the notion of
such loss must it be looked on: And as Dung also, which comprehends the
causality of such loss in these Works. All things of ours, even the best, are
of this nature; I say, therefore all our Righteousness, at best, is such a
menstruous Cloth in Go^'s eye, and so certainly in it self.

Let us consider what it is to suffer the loss of all things:

1. There is a Passive Suffering, the loss of all things, when a person is
violently bereft of all. 2. There is an Active or Voluntary Suffering, the loss
of all, i. e. he was contented to take shame to himself for his best Actions,
and account himself worthy to be cast out and destroyed, and to be his own
Judge, to pass not only the Sentence of Confiscation of all, but of
Condemnation on his Person, saying, O wretched Man, that I am, etc. and so to
stand stripped stark naked of all things, and all Pleas they can afford him, so
that not to have a word to speak for himself, that his Mouth should be stopped,
except it be in impleading all that ever he had done, as making against him far
more than for him. And I came to the third thing, to show how all things, even
the most blameless Works after renovation, are loss and dung: For illustration
sake, You must distinguish between that which is the Spirits in Works after
renovation, and the whole Work after we have done it; and now followed what he
rehearsed, etc. Where I showed, that though the Motions and Assistances of the
Spirit be pure and holy without Scum in the Spring, yet by that time they are
mixed with our manifold Corruptions in doing, and have passed through the
Channels of our corrupt Hearts, the whole Work becomes polluted and filthy, as
pure Water passing through a Dunghill, etc.

And this I evinced from James, who says, that whosoever fulfills the whole
Law of God, and yet offends in one point, is guilty of all: And Paul says,
Romans 7. When I would do good, evil is present with me; and complains thus, O
wretched Man, that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? and he
does not fly to his good Works, but to Christ, a Refuge against all, I thank
God, through Jesus Christ.

Object. But ought we to refrain therefore from doing righteousness? Answ. It
follows not; but therefore we must refrain from glorying in it, or stroaking
ourselves for our righteous doings; rather take shame to ourselves when done,
and so glory only in the Lord: And though good Works, as done by us, are but dung
in themselves and in God's eye, yet must we be careful to maintain them, Tit.
3.6. and David, Psalm. 16.2, 3. confesses, that his goodness extends not to
God, but to the Saints. It Is no good plea, that because a Man cannot be wholly
clean, therefore he will be more filthy than needs; because your Child will be
dirty, do what you can, yet shall be therefore go and ^owl in the Gutter like a
Swine.


Calv. I perceive the sense of Mr. Antinomian fully, for he says, 1. That the
Graces of the Spirit come clean from the Fountain. 2. That when they come into
the Channels of our corrupt Hearts, they become mixed with the dirt and filth of
them. 3. That thence our best Duties and Services become polluted. 4. That
thereby they are not pleadable for righteousness before God. 5. We have no
cause to boast ourselves, after Duties to stroke and commend ourselves as if we
had done a great matter, but to go off from Duty with humiliation and shame. 6.
That all or any compared with the Holiness and Purity of God, in respect of our
coming short of what is required, the mixture of sin working in us, makes this
Duty and Work done, as it is in it self considered, to be but dung.

Now, Mr. Neonomian, what do you think or say of your Duties when they are
done? when you have spent a day in Fasting and Prayer, would you not at the end
of the day, desire the Lord to pardon the Iniquity of your Holy Things, your
Wanderings, Vain Thoughts stirring of manifold Corruptions, would you not say
as Daniel, chapter 9.18. We do not present our Supplications before thee for our
Righteousness, but for thy great Mercies? Ought we not to abhor Ourselves and
Duties in Dust and Ashes, and say, Lord, if thou mark the Iniquities of our
best Duties, they are enough to condemn us for ever to Eternal Wrath? How often
is this spoken and thought by the best of God's Children? Or would you go off
the Duty like the proud Pharisee, commending and stroaking yourself for what
you had done, saying at last in your Heart, I have Prayed well this day,
Preached well; though there was some Imperfections, yet there was as much as God
requires of me to the fulfilling the New Law; I have performed the Condition,
and God must accept it for the sake of my Evangelical Righteousness?


Antinom. I answer an Objection. Some will say, That God often shows his
Approbation of good Works, which he could not do if they were all Dung. Dr. C.
p. 232.
Sol. I Answer, whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin, but to a Believer all things
are clean: So through this Faith in Christ, the whole Filth and Dung of our Works
is extracted by Christ, and he presenting the same purged by himself alone,
they become accepted with God, Rev. 3.4. but simply the Works themselves as
done, though never so well, are abhorred of God, and Christ never takes them to
purge them, till we our selves wholly renounce them, by counting them Loss and
Dung; and that Acceptance procured by Christ, imports only a liking that God
takes to them, no Efficacy in themselves.
Calvin. You see Mr. Antinom. says, That though simply and in themselves as
works performed by us, they are by reason of Imperfection, and mixture of
Corruption, to be accounted Loss and Dung; but yet as we are in Christ, and
perform them in Christ by Faith, they have acceptance with God through his
Merits, Satisfaction, and Intercession; it is in him alone that both our
Persons and Services are accepted with God; our Spiritual Sacrifices, which are
our Duties, we be here speaking of, are said to be acceptable to God, but how?
By Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2.5. and certainly in themselves, and out of Christ,
they are no better than Dung; we are made accepted both to Persons and Services
only in Jesus Christ.


Antinom. Object. Its granted Originally and per se, the best Righteousness
obtains nothing, but rather charges with a new account, yet Instrumentally it
obtains what is desired, being well qualified as before mentioned. Answ. If it
be no more, then I heartily desire that we should heartily say and express as
much, that the people may clearly understand and remember so much, and be
guided Explicitly to the Fountain it self Christ alone, for certainly whilst
Christ is suppressed, and these Instruments are reached out, without relation to
Christ, who only fills them with all that runs through them, they are but mere
empty Pipes, and dry Channels, though never so curiously cut out. Dr. C. p 236.
Calvin. And is not this great Truth, and Gospel, Mr. Neonom? Your carping at
this Doctrine plainly shows, that you set forth for another Gospel. I perceive,
wherever any thing exalts the grace of God, and the Righteousness of Christ,
you strike at it as standing in your way, and this under a pretense of
advancing Holiness in the way of Legal Worthiness.

You also deal most unjustly and disingenuously with this good Man, in falsely
representing him, and in not acquainting us with these things, whereby he fully
declares his meaning, and adjusts it agreeable to the Analogy of Faith.

Now because you Expose the Doctor so much for what he says of the graces of
the Spirit of God being once mixed with our Corruptions in a Duty; This Duty in
it self at best is as Dung, cease to be the Spirits, and becomes our own, our
Flesh being like the Viper's Stomach, that turns the wholsomest Food into
Poison.

See what Excellent Mr. Beza says in his Confess. Chap. 4. Art. 19. It is not
to be allowed, that Works are a cause of Salvation, in the whole, or any part,
for if it were so, certainly there would be but a Crazy Foundation of our
Salvation. We must of necessity acknowledge; that the Water and Foundation from
which it flows are akin, because the most thick Darkness yet remains in our
Understandings; it would come to pass, if God should in his strict Justice
enquire into the best Works of a Man, there could be no other thing determined
of them, but that they be the mere pollutions of God's gifts; as it often falls
out, that a River, otherwise clear and limpid, is infected with the Filth of a
Jaques through which it runs, Romans 7.15, 23. Psalm. 142.2. Now what think you of
this? For my part I verily believe, that Doctor C. took his very way of
Expressing and Illustrating these things from this very place of Mr. Beza. Now
unless you will condemn this Learned and Approved Divine for Error in this
point, I see not that you can accuse this Antinomian, as you call him.

I will show you the Opinions of a Divine, who I hope you dare not call
unstudied and unlearned, it is of the famous Doctor Tuckney in his Sermons upon
this Text of Phil. 3.8.

He says, (...), all things, which includes more than all, that was before
mentioned. If you ask what I Answer, according to our Divines, whom I am not
ashamed of, or of their Judgment, All his own Inherent Righteousness, and best
Works, after Conversion, his laboring more abundantly than they all, his
Conversion of many Souls, his holy and unblameable Conversation, Omnia quae and
hunc Christianus and Apostolus ago and habeo, as Zanchy upon the Text, which he
sufficiently makes out to be here included, both from the Universal (...), as
being intended to Express more than was before Expresses of his Morals and Zeal
before Conversion, and from the Present Tense, (...), now that he is Converted,
he Judges so of all that he was and is, (...), as Chrysostom, and by what he
says, Verse. 9. etc. And to throw you quite on your Back, I will show you a
passage in the Assembly's Confession, which you would not see, Chap. XVI. of
Good Works, Sect. V.

When we have done all we can, we have done but our Duty, and are unprofitable
Servants; and because as they are good, they proceed from the Spirit, and as
they are wrought by us, they are defiled and mixed with so much Weakness and
Imperfection, that they cannot endure the Severity of God's Judgment. Yet
notwithstanding the Persons of Believers are accepted through Christ, and their
Good Works also are accepted in him, etc. Now, Sir, Seeing the Doctrine which
you so Peremptorily call Error, is so clearly proved to be Truth, let us hear
what you have to say, in stating and defending your Judgment; and I pray Mr.
Antinom. do you Whip the Top with him.


Neonom. Truth, Though the present sincere Holiness of Believers be not perfect,
according to the Precepts of the Word; nor valuable by the Sanction of the Law
of Innocence, nor any Atonement for our defects; and ^e still need
Forgiveness, and the Merits of Christ, for acceptance thereof, yet as far as it
prevails, it is Lovely in it self, and pleasing to God, and is not Dung or
Filth.


Antinom. We shall divide your Canon into Two parts, the Negative and Positive;
you tell us what it is not, and first Note, That you change the Terms; for the
Doctor speaks of Works performed by us, when a Duty is performed, and becomes a
Compositum of the pure Graces of the Spirit mixed with the Corrupt indwelling
Motions of our own Hearts; and hence he distinguishes between Grace flowing
from the Spirit, which is purely Holy, and Grace acted and performed by us
through the assistance of the Spirit, therefore we must keep you to the
Doctor's Terms, viz. to our sincere Works, or sincere Holiness, taken in that
sense. This being premised,

1. You tell us these Works are imperfect, and not according to the Word,
therefore so far sinful; for whosoever keeps the whole Law, and offends in
one point, is guilty of all, James 2.10. And so I say of any Duty, if it fail
in one point, it is chargeable with breach of the whole Law, so the Duty is
(...), and all (...) is Dung and Filth.

2. You say it is not valuable by the Law of Innocence; that is said before, for
what is not according to God's Precept, is Condemned by God's Law, by every Law
of God; it is so far from Valuableness, it stands under a Sentence of
Condemnation: God never accepted or owned Imperfect Obedience as such, and in
it self; neither is it consistent with his pure Nature so to do.

3. You say it cannot make Atonement; If it stand for Acceptable
Righteouseness and Holiness, it must make Atonement for its Defects and sinful
Pollutions; the High Priest was to make Atonement for his own Sins before he
could be accepted, so in this Case, that Righteousness that cannot Atone for
its own Sins, if there be any, cannot be Acceptable to God; but you say, this
Righteousness cannot make Atonement for its Sins, therefore in it self can
never be Acceptable to God.


Posit. 1. You say, we still need Forgiveness, and the Merits of Christ, for
Acceptance of these Works. 1. Then I say they are Sinful, or else would not
need Forgiveness. 2. They need the Merits of Christ, and therefore not
Acceptable Righteousness in themselves, they are as Dung and Stink in the
Nostrils of God, the best Works in themselves are such; whatever is not capable
in it self, to make it self Acceptable in the sight of God, if it have no
relation to another Righteousness, it Stinks, and is Abominable in the Nostrils
of God.

3. You say, so far as it prevails its lovely, i. e. not at all of it self.
Observe still what we say, No good Work of a Believer prevails to Acceptance
of us; and if not, it prevails not at all, and that which prevails not to
Acceptance, is not lovely in it self, for nothing is lovely to God but what he
Accepts; and hence you conclude, it is not Dung or Filth; but from what you
your self have said, it can be no other than Dung; whatever cannot be Accepted
of God without Forgiveness, and the Righteousness of Christ, to make it
Acceptable, is in it self and out of Christ Dung. But I perceive what you aim
at, that it is a Righteousness that comes in for a share with Christ, and in
part it prevails to Acceptance, though not altogether, and here you fall in with
the Council of Trent, as in all your Doctrine, That the Grace of Justification
and Acceptance is not only the favor of God, and by the Merit of Christ, but
that our Works prevail in some degree.


Neonom. I will tell you wherein the difference lies, 1. It is not whether
Holiness, or the best Acts of a Saint, be such, or so perfect, as to Atone for
his Sin, or procure a State of Pardon.


Antinom. This is a strange kind of talking about a Saint's good Works,
Attoning or Procuring a State of Pardon, as if there could be a Saint before he
is in a State of Pardon. And as for those Works that need Atonement, and
cannot make Atonement for themselves, they are in themselves but pitiful
Menstruous Rags, Dross, and Dung, for Non Acceptance with God makes all Works
such, though seemingly never so good.


Neonom. Nor whether our Holiness can make us Accepted with God without Christ.


Antinom. Then it is not worth a Pin in it self without Christ.


Neonom. Nor whether the Holiest Action of the Holiest Saint is such, as not to
need Forgiveness.


Antinom. That which needs Forgiveness is Sin, and therefore Filth, but
according to you, The Holiest Action of a Holiest Saint is such, according to
your self: Ergo.


Neonom. Nor whether by the Sanction of the Law of Innocence, Sincere Holiness
could be accounted Holiness. All this I deny.


Antinom. There could be no other Holiness counted Holiness by the old Law, but
Sincere Holiness; but imperfect Sincere Holiness was not accepted there, nor in
and by it self, in any other Law, or Gospel; as such.


Neonom. Nothing under that Law but perfect Conformity to the Precept was
Holiness, whereas Gospel Grace makes a great difference between true Holiness,
though imperfect, and wha't formally Wickedness, between Sincere Love and Enmity,
Sincere Faith and Utter Unbelief.


Antinom. If perfect Conformity was the Holiness of the old Law required, it is
an Argument that nothing will serve the grace of the Gospel but a Holiness
answerable to it in perfection; and whatever difference you make to be between
imperfect true Holiness, and formal Wickedness, I tell you, the formal
difference between perfect Holiness and imperfect, is Sin, for this
Imperfection lies in Sin, a coming short of Moral Perfection can lie in
nothing but in some degree or other of Sin. But is it the Gospel makes the
difference between Virtue and Vice? Sure its the Law does that.


Neonom. The real difference lies here, whether the sincere Holiness of a
Believer's Heart and Actions be really Dung and Rotteness? This the Doctor
affirms, and I deny, D. W. p. 198.


Antinom. The Doctor affirms, That the Works, Services, or Performances of a
Believer being full of Imperfection, and mingled with Sin, are not acceptable
to God, but through Faith in Jesus Christ, and compared with the pure Holiness
and Justice of God, and the Righteousness of Christ and his Holiness in which
he stands, are and ought to be accounted by him as Loss and Dung.


Neonom. Whether sincere Holiness, so far as it prevails in our Hearts and
Actings, be truly lovely in it self, and pleasing to God, according to the
grace of the Gospel, and is not Dung. This I affirm, and the Doctor denies.


Antinom. The Question is, Whether Holy Works performed by the best Men, be not
Polluted with Sin, and whether they can be truly lovely, and pleasing to God in
themselves out of Christ, according to any grace of the Gospel, and therefore
are not as Dung? This I deny, though you affirm, and a Thousand more.


Neonom. What is spoken of Holiness of any mere Man on Earth since the fall, is
spoken of sincere Holiness for perfect Holiness none had.


Antinom. What has been spoken of Holiness that God has accepted, is of true
Holiness, i. e. Sanctification in Christ Jesus. Sincerity may be where there is
no true Holiness; Paul had Sincerity in his supposed Holiness, he verily
thought he did God good Service in persecuting the Churches; good ends and
meanings which a Carnal Man may have in his Mind, are not enough to make an
Action good.


Neonom. I have room but to Expostulate.


Antinom. Because you cannot find a good Argument to bring in; you might have
had more room if you would, and it would have been more for your Honor, so as
you had served Truth in it; but go on with your Expostulation.


Neonom. Is that Dung which is the effect of Regeneration in the Soul and
Actings?


Antinom. You should have said, the Effect of the Spirit; for Regeneration it
self is not an Efficient, but an Effect, and that which is the Efficient of
Regeneration is so also of all the Vital Acts in a Regenerate Person; now we
have told you before, that the pure graces of the Spirit passing through the
Corrupt Channel of Man's Heart, becomes in a Duty like defiled Pudled Water,
and such Duty in it self only considered, is as Dung in the sight of God, and
ought to be accounted so by us.


Neonom. Is that Dung which is so often honored with the Name of the Spirit it
self, and called the Spirit of Love, Prayer, etc.


Antinom. You should have named the places where our Works are called by the
Name of the Holy Spirit of God; as for the Spirit of Love, that is the
disposition of Love, and as to the Spirit of Prayer, where it is taken for the
Spirit's helping our Infirmities, it is spoken of as distinct from our Prayers
themselves.


Neonom. Is not that more Lovely which is called the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4.


Antinom. The Divine Nature there, is the Spirit of Christ received by Faith,
for it is given in many great and precious Promises, and whatever of Divine
Nature we receive, it is of God, and in conformity to and participation of
Christ, all which is pure, as flowing from the Spring, but when it comes to be
Exerted and put forth by us in our Duties, becomes impure, and mixed with the
Corruptions, so the whole Duty in it self is but an Unclean thing.


Neonom. How Amiable must that be which is the New Man after God's Image, Ephesians.
4.24.


Antinom. Take the New Man Created after God, distinctly considered, as it
comes from God, it is a pure Creature; but this hinders not, but the Regenerat
Man is made up of the Old and New Man, and all his Actions and Duties partake
of both, and therefore polluted; for Paul said, the Old Man hindered him from
doing good when he would, for then Evil was present with him; the same may be
said of the New Heart, Ezekiel. 18.31. The Law in the Members is warring against
the Law of the Mind in every part and faculty of Soul and Body.


Neonom. Are those Works Dung to which we are Created in Christ Jesus, Ephesians.
2.10.


Antinom. We are created in Christ Jesus unto good Works, to be performed in
Christ Jesus; so far as we are in Christ Jesus, and our Works in Christ Jesus,
they are not Dung; neither does the Doctor say they be, but when performed out
of Christ in ourselves, and in themselves, they are but as Dung: Christ is made
our Sanctification, and all that Holiness in us that is accepted, it is not only
in and for his Righteousness, but it is performed in the Life and Power of
Christ our Sanctification; therefore he says, 1 Cor. 1.30. that what we are we
are in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification, etc.


Neonom. Or is that filthiness which renders Saints the excellent of the Earth,
Psalm. 16 2.


Antinom. Does not David say, ver. 2. My goodness extends not to thee? the
original words (if you understood them) is fuller, as to the sense intended,
though shorter than the Translation, (...) My Goodness is not to thee, or nothing
to thee, and the LXX have it, (...), thou have no need of my Goodness. Do you
say, Is that Filthiness which renders the Saints Excellent? I had thought it
was the Grace of God, Christ's Righteousness, and the Inbeing in Christ, that
had rendered them Excellent, not their own Works.


Neonom. The Imitators of Christ?


Antinom. Scholars that Write after another, may make very sorry work mere
Scribbling, that the Master, though he finds reason in himself to accept, would,
if he did not, tear it all to pieces.


Neonom. Was not this it for which Caleb was said to have another Spirit, and
upon account whereof we must love the Godly, as begotten of God?


Antinom. Was Caleb's Works his Spirit, or his Works flow from his singular
Spirit; his Spirit was a Spirit of Faith, through which he did so great things in
Christ Jesus, and so the Works were accepted, Heb. 11. The Foundation Reason of
our Love to the Saints, is Christ loving them, and their Relation to Christ;
every one that loves him that begat, loves him that is begotten of him, and
by this we know we love the Children of God, when we love God, 1 John 5.1, 2.


Neonom. Is it not pleasing to God, to which he has made so many promises, and
for which he commends Moses, David, etc.


Antinom. As God is not pleased with any Persons, so with no Works, out of
Christ, neither has made any promises to any such out of Christ, all the best
Works are cast forth as Filth, and Odious, if done out of Christ.


Neonom. Calling them a peculiar People, its no small thing that Christ is so
pleased with his Spouse.


Antinom. They are peculiar, because purchased, and have peculiar Blessings and
Privileges, and bring forth peculiar Fruits, in Christ Jesus, John 15.5, 6.
without me ye can do nothing, and if a Man abide not in me he is cast forth as
a Branch that is withered, and any Work that is done out of Christ, is but
Dung, as 1 Cor. 3.12, 13. If a Man in Christ build Hay, Stubble, his Works will
be burnt, and he suffer loss, though he may be saved. Christ is pleased with his
Spouse his Church, because he has loved it, and washed it in his own Blood,
and therefore she is Comely; but as for what she is in her self, and as to her
Works in themselves, and done out of Christ, she is but Black, as the Tents of
Kedar, etc. Sol. 1.5.


Neonom. Can that be Dung which is a Meetness for Glory, an Honor to God, and
Credit to Religion?


Antinom. Our Meetness for Glory is all from Grace, there is nothing that flows
from our selves, no Work done out of Christ, can contribute to any Meetness,
all our Meetness is in Christ Jesus as made unto us Righteousness, and
Sanctification, and we grow up in him in all things; as for our relation unto
Men, we say with the Apostle, they are profitable to Men, and be a means that
they Glorify God on our behalf, but God has no direct Honor by them, if not
performed by Faith in Christ.


Neonom. How can that be Acceptable to God in Christ, if it be Filthiness?


Antinom. Good Works are good in their kind, but comparatively, and in
themselves, because of the mixture of Sin and Corruption, they are in the sense
of the Spirit of God but Filth; you may as well say, how can Paul be Acceptable
to God through Christ, who says, In me dwells no good thing? Must Persons and
Actions be free from all adhering Corruption, by reason whereof they in
themselves are Abominable to the pure Eye of God, before they be made
Acceptable to God through Jesus Christ? This is like your constant Doctrins;
Persons, and Actions, must be good first, before they have benefit by Jesus
Christ.


Neonom. Wickedness will never be Accepted with God for Christ sake, though
imperfect Goodness shall.


Antinom. No imperfect Goodness can be Accepted as Righteousness with God for
Christ sake: Christ never so much as purchased, that any of our best Graces or
Works should be Accepted as our Righteousness, and it cannot be Accepted unto
Holiness out of Christ; and the Doctor never said, our good Works wrought by
Faith in Christ are Dung, so as not through Christ to be Accepted unto Holiness;
but imperfect Works are no more our Righteousness for Acceptance with God,
than Wickedness, neither in their Nature, for Christ's sake.


Neonom. Read what is spoken of Sincerity and Vprightness, will it agree with
what is Mortal Poison?


Antinom. Moral Sincerity and Uprightness may, and so is all out of Christ.


Neonom. What a Reproach is it to Christ, to call his Life in us, and the
beginning of Glory by this Title?


Antinom. The Life of Christ in us, is by the Faith of the Son of God, and we
are Crucified with Christ to all that is done by us, and therefore account it
Dung and Dross in comparison of all done by us; and Works give us not Title to
Glory, though Grace begins it.


Neonom. Nay, to make his Triumphs in us so low, as that all he has improved
his Members to, is mere Filthiness.


Antinom. The Triumph of Christ in us, is the casting down Imaginations, and
every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and
bringing into Captivity every Thought to the Obedience of Christ.


Neonom. It Is well if the Scriptures can escape clean, if all the Works of the
Spirit are thus debased when they pass through Men.


Antinom. The Scriptures are clean in themselves as from the Spirit, but the
Works done by us are not Scripture, though they be in some measure conformed
thereto.


Neonom. But I less wonder that Doctor Crisp should speak thus of the
Righteousness of the Saints, as in them, when he says, the Enemies of Christ
may have Sincerity and singleness of Heart toward God, P. 450, 451, 452.


Antinom. Does not he prove that Paul in his Unregenerate Estate was blameless
as to the Law's Righteousness, Phil. 3.6. and what Paul did against the
Churches, he verily thought that he ought to do it, Acts 26.9. Was not this
Sincerity at least in his apprehension, had he not an Eye in what he did to the
Glory of God? The Jews also had a Zeal for God, Romans 10. but you wrong him in
charging him for saying, That singleness of Heart may be in the Enemies of
Christ; for he acquaints us what it is from Ephesians. 5, 6. Singleness of Heart is a
doing what he does as unto Christ, and for the Lord's sake. And he says, The
best shall find it difficult to find it in all they do.


Neonom. I will show you the grounds of the mistake, because our Goodness
extends not to God for his profit, therefore he regards it not no more than
Dung and Filthiness.


Antinom. Notably hit, you should have said, because he chargeeth his Angels
with Folly, therefore he will admire the Righteousness of them that dwell in
Houses of Clay, Job 4.18, 19. An Holier Man than you could say, If I Justify
my self, mine own Mouth shall Condemn me, Verse. 21. If I were perfect, yet
would I not know my Soul, I would despise my Life, Job 9.21. Prove. 20.9. Who
can say, I have made my Heart clean, I am pure from my Sin? And who can say,
this or that Duty is or will commend him to God?


Neonom. Object. Does not Israel say, Isa. 64.6. All our Righteousness is as
Filthy Rags? Answ. But that is spoken of Persons, and not of real Holiness;
it is the same as Micah 7.4. and Isa. 1.6. Corruption had invaded the very
Priests, and the generality of the best Professors, etc.


Antinom. But where have you this Notion upon the place? I Will tell you where
you had it, viz. in the Assembly's Annotations on the place.

The Annotator takes notice of variety of Opinions about the meaning of this
place, and to increase the number, he brings in his singular Opinion that has
less ground than all the rest. He tells us, By Righteousness some understand
Legal Rites and Sacrifices, but so performed by them, that they found no Grace
or Acceptance, but were abominable in God's sight; and the Jews extend it
further to their Good Works, which were so ill done out of Vainglory, or by
Corrupt Grounds and Ends, that they were as Filthy Rags in God's sight, such
were the Pharisees, etc. Lastly, Many of ours draw it in further, and take in
all the best Works and Actions even of the best performed, in the best manner,
as not free from some default or defilement. And thus both diverse of the
Ancients, and very many not Protestants only, but Popish Writers also, and not
a few, do both expound and apply the place, and these latter, [ viz. the Popish
Writers] with those Ancients, giving Testimony thereby unto the Truth herein
maintained by us against those of their side, that do herein Control and
Oppose us. Is this Interpretation so generally received by Learned
Interpreters, Ancient and Latter, both Papists and Protestants, by the
Annotator's own Confession, and so Eminent a Truth which the Papists oppose,
maintained against them by it? And shall we desert so plain, natural, and
useful an Interpretation, and one so generally agreed on by Learned Protestant
Interpreters, to embrace one single Man's Opinion that sets by the Text as
altogether useless to those great purposes for which the Protestants have used
and refuted the Papists by their own Authorities, as the Annotator himself
acknowledges? And for what Sense and Interpretation must we part with it? the
received Sense. Our Annotator's design is to wave that received Sense upon any
terms, though he will not flatly deny it, but tells us of a more Genuine Sense,
and what is that? 1. It Is that which is not commonly received, and therefore he
is single in it. 2. It Is a Tropical Sense, he makes the Abstract put for the
Concrete, and what need of such a Sense, when there is no reason to suppose such
a Trope in the Words? And that is against the general Rules of Interpretation.

He says, That which induced those both Ancienter and later Writers to bring
within compass of this Doom, in this place, those defects and defaults adhering
to, and alloying the purest Practices of the most Sincere, seems to have been,
because the Prophet says, Our Righteousnesses, as speaking in his own Person,
etc. He says, The Words may well be understood, with those Jewish Doctors, for
those Semblances of Holiness and Righteousness that was among them, [so that by
our Righteousness may well be understood, our Hypocrisies,] but he rather
recommends his Genuine Sense, and what is that? The Prophet has a very remote
meaning, viz. He speaks of our Righteousnesses, and he means Righteous Men, and
not Righteous Men neither, but Wicked and Corrupt Men, Briars and Thorns, such
as the Prophet Micah speaks of, Mic. 7.4. plain Briars and Thorns; and now
here is a plain Text of Scripture merely shamed off, and delivered up into the
hands of the Papists, and so we shall trick off one Text after another, till
they have got them all.

I acknowledge that which the Jewish Interpreters say, the Prophet Personates
the Church in this Prayer; but then he Personates the very best of them, as
well as the very corrupt and degenerate part, for after the Churches desire,
that God would wonderfully appear for her Deliverance and Reformation, as
formerly he had done, Chapter 64.1, 2, 3. she lays the Case of Two sorts that were
among them before the Lord; the Holy and Sincere, and the Corrupt and Apostate
part, the Basket of Good Figs, and of Rotten Figs; for the best part, (they
were not Profane, nor Hypocrites,) but are Characterized, as waiters upon God,
partakers of special Grace, as appears by the Application the Apostle makes of
Verse. 4. 1 Cor. 2.9. The Prophet insists upon the description of them, that we
might not be mistaken; and suppose that he meant the Profane or Hypocritical
part, they are such as work Righteousness, and God meets, that Rejoice in God's
ways; and though they are under the National Wrathful Calamities, yet such as
should be saved; which must be understood of Spiritual Salvation, for they were
to take their share with others in the Captivity, and External Calamities in
them were continuance; hence the Holiest and Best prostrate themselves, and
acknowledge their Faith of Salvation was not built upon any Righteousness or
Worthiness of their own. For the Nation had not only sinned, but they had
sinned and fallen short of their Duty in their best performances, and we are so
far from pleading or rejoicing in our own Righteousness, or Holiness, (for in
the Old Testament Dialect, Personal Holiness is often called Righteousness,)
that we are all as an Unclean Thing, we are Polluted with so much Sin and
Corruption, and our very Righteousness and Holiness are as Filthy Rags, our
Goodness is as the Morning-Dew, we fade as a Leaf toward Autumn, and our
Iniquities have withered us. We see, the whole Nation, under the Bliting Winds
of thy Displeasure for its Iniquities: And then he proceeds to show how great a
scarcity there was of those that were Sincere, for there is few that call upon
God, there is none, i. e. but a very few comparatively, [there was never so an
Apostate time but there is some, as in Elijah's time,] that calls upon thy
Name, i. e. sincerely and earnestly, so as to stir up themselves to call upon
God; then she proceeds to confess Sin, and bemoan her self in regard of
desolating Calamities, acknowledging God's Justice and Sovereignty, but
Appealing to his Mercy, and their Interest in God as a Father, O Lord thou art
our Father. Its most evident then the Prophet mostly personates the choicest,
though the least part of the Church, who is set forth here, flying to the Throne
of Grace, and renouncing her own Righteousness, even her best Duties,
accounting them as Filthy Rags. We are, says she, all of us, even the holiest
among us, (...) i. e. (...), he does not say, we are absolutely an unclean
thing, as all Wicked Men and Hypocrites are, but that we are, as if it were so,
in respect of the prevalency of Corruption, and present decay, and thy dealing
with us as if thou would cast us off, and all our Righteousness as a Filthy
Garment, (...) i. e. (...) all our Righteousness, of what sort soever it is, as
Pannus sedentis, the Peraphrasis of the Syriac and Arabic calls it, Panniculus
menstruata, and the Chaldeac Paraphrase, (...) Sicut Vestamentum Abjectum,
(...) signifies things removed as unclean and polluted, Res Inquinatae and
Abominabiles quae removentur and abjiciuntur; The Import is, that God's
Children see so much Corruption and Pollution in their best Duties, that they
dare not plead them for acceptance before the Lord. And how many Ten Thousand
times has this place of Scripture been thus applied by the Saints and Churches
of the New Testament? What Expression is more frequent in their Prayers, and
more Eminently Exalting the Grace of God, and the Righteousness of Christ? It Is
not only the Gospel Spirit of Ministers, but of all true Christians, that leads
them to the Practical Improvement of this portion of Scripture; and shall the
Universal Spirit and Sense of all Believers in all Ages be Condemned by One or
Two singular Men, that are for crying up their own Righteousness, and will not
have it to be Filthy Rags, or Dung? I apprehend, there is not a little also in
putting the Plural Number, which the Seventy Two Explain universally with
(...), there is no Righteousness of ours, inward, or outward, before
Regeneration, or after, that hold the Test before God in it self for
Acceptance, much less render us Acceptable to God. I Will set against your
Annotator the Dutch Annotations, who upon this place say, All our
Righteousness, all our best Works, or whatever Good we might have done, are as
a cast Garment, if they should be examined according to their own Nature,
according to the Rigor of the Law, out of Christ, Phil. 3.8. See on the
contrary what we are in Christ Jesus, Rev. 19.8.


Neonom. Object. The Apostle says, Phil. 3.8.

Answ. If this place speaks of Gospel Righteousness, as his own things which he
counted Dung, it does not prove that Holiness is Dung.


Antinom. Did I not speak of Holiness abstractly considered, and of Duties and
Services performed by us, and mingled with Sin, are reckoned Dung because they
cannot render us Acceptable to God, for Imperfect Righteousness cannot.
Holiness entire without defect and failure is one thing, and Holiness mixed
with so much Sin and Corruption, as is in our Hearts and Duties, is another.


Neonom. All that it can infer, is, that in comparison with winning Christ, it
was esteemed as Dung.


Antinom. That is as much as to say, that your own Righteousness is but as Dung
in comparison of what you shall gain by it; your Bargain will be so good, your
Money bears not proportion to the Estate that you have bought with your Money.


Neonom. And who must not own, that compared with gaining Christ, the best
thing in us is Vile, compared with his Righteousness, yet it must not be Vile
in it self?


Antinom. So far as any thing is Sinful its Vile, and so far its unprofitable
to the end that I employ it; its Vile in both those cases; our Duties are Vile,
because its impossible they should be a Justifying Righteousness, or recommend
us to God, therefore a Christian looks upon them Vile upon this account; we
speak not against Duties, but for them, but they must not presume to be our
Righteousness for Justification: Upon this account they must be reckoned Dung,
it is not enough to say, compared with Christ's Righteousness, as if Christ's
Righteousness were better, and had a pre-eminence in Justification, and ours
next to it, but that our Righteousness has no share at all in that matter, for
God never intended that the most Eminent Graces and Virtues of God's People
should ever be a Righteousness to Justify them, because they are upon this
account Rejectamenta, as Bricks are to the making a Brass Kettle, Ex quovis
ligno non fit Mercurius, a Man cannot cut out the Wheels of a Watch with a
Broad Ax out of a Rock.


Neonom. As Rivals with Christ we must hate Father and Mother.


Antinom. Yea, and if they go to set themselves instead of Christ, or to claim
an inferior degree of share in being a Righteousness, or patching up a
Righteousness for us.


Neonom. Though I own the Imputed Righteousness of Christ for our Justification,
yet I think to ground it on this place, is a damage to the Truth, and therefore
I add, 2. A Gospel Holiness, or Righteousness, is not here intended by Dung.


Antinom. How you own Imputed Righteousness, has been already made manifest,
and that you do not own it in other sense than in that which is no owning of
it, but denying of it, has appeared: But it seems you are now such a Friend to
that Doctrine, that you would not have Scripture to damage it, and that
grounding it here on this place has been a damage to it. The Assembly at
Westminster has done damage to the Doctrine of Imputation, in grounding it on
this place, Large Catechism, Quest. 72. Shorter Catechism, Quest. 33. and Dr.
Ames. in his Medulla, C. 27. S. 12. And Dr. Owen you also have done damage to
this Doctrine of Imputation, by grounding it on this Text, Treat. of Justific.
p. 526. Mr. Calvin, Mr. Beza, Mr. Zanchy, and all you Reformed Protestants, you
have thought you had a mighty place to ground the Doctrine of Imputation upon,
and now our Divines, especially this Gentleman, and a great Train at his Heels,
bear Witness against you, and say, you have done a great damage to the Doctrine
of Imputation, by making use of this place of Scripture to prove it. Now I see
others are mistaken as well as I.


Calvin. I Observe Gentlemen, That you all sit Astonished to see that at such a
time of Day, here should be so bold an Assertion made, to overthrow the Doctrine
of the Gospel, and to make this Text of Scripture no better than Dung, because
it asserts all our own Righteousness to be Dung in the point of Justification.
I think Bellarmine, or Socinus, could not have made a more gross Assertion.

There is a Gentleman, whose Face I think I see among you, whom I would request
to undertake Mr. Neonom. in the Opposition that he makes against this Portion
of Scripture; I think I remember where and against whom he once made a
Strenuous Defense of it. Gentlemen its Mr. Antisozzo I speak to, I pray, Mr.
Antisozzo be pleased to appear in this great Debate that lies before us.


Antisozzo. I pray Sir Excuse me, here are more Ancient Divines, Mr. Zuinglius,
and Mr. Musculus, etc. and later Dr. Owen, whose Judgment Mr. Neonomian
ascribes much to.


Calvin. Indeed Sir you cannot be Excused; at which all Cried, Mr. Antisozzo.


Antisozzo. Gentlemen, I Will assure you, it is not convenient by any means that
I should appear in this Cause now against Mr. Neonom. he is my special Friend,
one whose Learning and Judgment I will as soon subscribe to, by an Implicit
Faith, as any Man I know, besides there is a particular reason that is not
convenient to Publish.


Calv. Sir, those things are but your Modest Evasions, the Society will not be
satisfied, unless you undertake Mr. Neonom. in this point.


Antisozzo. If it must be so, it must be so, Mr. Neonomian look to your hits,
for I Will assure you I will not spare you; I will have none of your shifts and
tricks, none of your whethers nor neithers; I Will have the Question fairly
stated; the main Question will be, What was that Righteousness which the
Apostle renounces, from having any place in his Justification before God? Upon
this one hinge turns all the Controversy betwixt us, Antisozzo. P. 547.


Neonom. I answer, the things which he renounceth were Jewish Privileges, and
that conceited Christless Righteousness which he once valued as those Dogs at
present did, but it was not that Gospel Holiness which by the Grace of Christ
he was now Partaker of. There Is an Objection I know lies against this
Assertion, and it is this; how does both these appear? I answer, from the whole
Scope of the Chapter, D. W. p. 203


Antisozzo. I suppose then we shall join issue, and your Objection which you
make was but a Question, which you ask your self and answer.

We say and affirm, That the Righteousness which the Apostle renounces, is
whatever inherent Righteousness he had attained or could attain, whatever
Obedience he has performed or could perform to the Commands of God.

That which he calls his own Righteousness, he tells in the next words, (...).


Neonom. Thereby he intends not sinless Obedience nor Gospel Sincerity, but a
Life not to be blamed by the rule of the Jewish Pedagogy, that is his
Righteousness (...). D. W. p. 204.


Antisozzo. It was that which is from Law, from a Law, from any Law
indefinitely; now a Righteousness which is from a Law, is such an one as the
Law urges, and presses upon and prescribes to the Conscience; but that,
without question, is an internal Conformity of the Soul to the Holiness of the
Law; but this the Apostle rejects, therefore he rejects internal and inherent
Righteousness. 2. Who doubts but when he says his own Righteousness, it is his
own Righteousness; and this is not to be fetched from some sorry Conjectures
which Men (when they are in streights) invent to avoid present ruin, but from
stable, fixed, constant use in Scripture; my own Righteousness is as my own or
your own Works taken for real sincere conformity of Heart and Life to a Law;
and this is the fixed use in Scripture, Genesis 30.33. My Righteousness shall
answer for me. You Mr. Neonomian would Paraphrase upon it thus, My Roguery
shall answer for me, Job 27.6. My Righteousness I hold fast, i. e. you would
say, My Hypocrisy I hold fast, Mat. 5.16. That Men may see your good Works, i.
e. in the new Glossary. Your Complement, Dan. 9.18. we present not our
Supplications before thee for our Righteousness; the Church must not mean real
Righteousness, but the Sceleton of Obedience. Now if the Apostle designed only
to reject his own Hypocrisy, he was not so barren in Expression, but he could
have fitted it with its proper Name. 3. The Apostle expressly renounceth
whatever he had attained before and after his Conversion, v. 7. The things that
were Gain, these I accounted Loss for Christ; but is that all? No! Yea,
doubtless, I do account all things but Loss, (...), I do now account, I have
accounted, (...), all things in Judaism Loss when I was first convinced; and I
do now account all things, even mine own Righteousness, Loss and Dung for
Christ; and there n. b. the Apostle rises higher in his earnestness, v. 8.
Yea, doubtless, q. d. did I say that I once looked upon all as Loss for Christ?
I will speak a bolder word than that, I count all but Loss, Dung and Filth,
that I may win Christ, and be found in him, not having mine own Righteousness;
and the little value he had for his own Righteousness further appears, that it
was in reference to the day of Judgment, Antis. p. 550.
Neonom. My own Righteousness can signify no more than my Pharisaical
Righteousness, or that wherein I placed my Righteousness.


Antisozzo. I beg your pardon, Sir, it signifies more than that wherein he
placed his Righteousness, whilst a Pharisee; and a great deal less than that
wherein he placed his Righteousness after Conversion, in order to
Justification; but if the Apostle renounced whatever he placed his
Righteousness in, then either he placed it in inherent Righteousness, or not;
if not, how dare you place it where he durst not? If he ever did place his
Righteousness in it, then he here openly declares to the World that he
renounces it.
Neonom. But there is no necessity to understand this of inherent
Gospel-Holiness, for that is not his own Righteousness which is of the Law,
which is opposed to that which is by the Faith of Christ; an external
Righteousness serves most Men's turns very well; and this is that whereby the
Pharisees expected to be justified.


Antisozzo. The Pharisees were generally bad enough, and you need not make them
worse: It Is a Sin, we say, to belie the Devil; it does not appear that the
Pharisees expected to be justified before God by an external Obedience only,
without Sincerity. -- As to Paul, whilst he was a Pharisee he was no Hypocrite,
he every where vindicates himself, Act. 25.8, 9. 1 Timothy 1.13. Act. 23.1. and
others of the Pharisees were sober, conscientious Men. And the Discourse of
Paul's Master Gamaliel, Act 5. shows, he had a great deal more Religion in him,
than most of those who carry on a design to rail at them for Hypocrisy.
Neonom. But I Will tell you what his Righteousness was, Circumcised the eighth
day, of the Seed of Abraham, and it consisted only in some external Rites,
Sacrifices, Privileges, etc.


Antisozzo. This proceeds upon a double false Supposition. 1. That the Apostle
renounceth nothing but what he retained while a Pharisee. 2. Whatever he
renounced did constitute his Pharisaical Righteousness. 1. I must cut him off
from Circumcision, that was no part of his own Righteousness, unless you have a
spice of the Doctrine of imputing the Righteousness of another Person for
Justification. 2. For Sacrifices, the Apostle mentions them not, knowing they
were the visible Gospel of the Jewish Church, and did lead to Christ. As to his
being of the Stock of Israel, of the Seed of Abraham, etc. they might expect
some favors thence; but that any were so far bewitched as to believe, that all
the Stock of Israel and the Nation of Abraham should be justified, cannot be
proved. 4. For civility and blamelesness of Conversation, it may be it may go a
great way in your Account. But I find you take but little notice of it here,
but place Paul's Righteousness, which he renounced, with that of Baal's
Priests, the Concision, his rejection of Christ, Opinion of Jewish Observation,
and abuse of the Mosaic frame, a fine Parcel of Righteousness; he surely
misnamed it; he should have called that his Wickedness and Villainy.

But whatever Paul was or was not, whilst a Pharisee, it makes no great matter
to the Business in Hand, seeing he has so freely and openly disowned whatever
was his own Righteousness after Conversion, in the matter of Justification
before God, Antisozzo. p. 554.
Neonom. But Righteousness by the Faith of Christ is internal Righteousness,
Gospel-Holiness, this is not Dung; and this was not of the Law opposed to the
Faith of Christ; nay, this is by the Faith of Christ, Act 15.9. And we are
created in Christ to this Holiness, etc.


Antisezzo. Ay, but Proof, Proof, is wanting; it is called being born again,
rising again with Christ, etc. but Proof, Proof, is wanting; for we think that
those Expressions do not denote that Righteousness whereby we are constituted
just in the sight of God, but Holiness and Sanctification of Nature, which the
Gospel evidently distinguishes from that Righteousness whereby we are
justified, p. 559. Paul who rejects the Righteousness of the Law in the matter
of Justification, before God, rejects also inward Purity and Holiness of Mind
for that purpose. Does the Righteousness of the Law, signify one thing in the
New Testament, and another in the old? Does it signify real, substantial,
internal Righteousness in the old, and external ritual Righteousness in the
new? Sincerity in the one, and Hipocrisy and Ceremony in the other? This is
very unaccountable.
Neonom. But the Apostle tells us, That by his own Righteousness, he means the
Righteousness of the Law; and by the Righteousness of God, the Righteousness of
Faith.


Antisozzo. I see you are for finding out Antitheses in the words, as some Body
else was.

The Apostle's words are very clear, but you find it necessary to obscure them,
and deprave the Truth. -- But thus far we are secure, that the Apostle has
repuditated his own Righteousness from Justification; and that we may not doubt
what that was, he tells us, it was that of the Law; the Righteousness of the
Law is what it commands and prescribes, viz. an exact conformity to the Law of
God, in Spirit, Soul and Body, so far as is attainable. He assures us in the
next place what he owns and adheres to, viz. the Righteousness of Christ, which
is called the Righteousness of God. He further acquaints us how we come to be
interested in this Righteousness, it is by Faith; and that we do not wilfully
and ignorantly mistake this Faith, for the Doctrine of Faith he assures us, it
is believing, by which we obtain this Righteousness, Romans 3.24. See more, 563,
564, 565, etc.
Neonom. I will set a Cross upon you the next time I Print my Book, Mr.
Antisozzo; and, if you please, let us hear what Dr. Owen says; I wish he had
undertaken the point in Mr. Antisozzo 's room, he would have been more
favorable to my Opinion; for I prove my whole Scheme out of him, especially my
Conceptions about the Doctrine of Imputation.


Calvin, I pray Dr. Owen let us bear your Sentiments in this great Point, and
with as much softness as may be; for Mr. Neonom. thinks Mr. Antisozzo. was too
hard and sharp upon him.


Dr. Owen, I shall reduce what I have to say to that admirable Text, Phil. 3.8,
9. to the ensuing Heads, which deserves to be wrote in every Bible in Letters
of Gold, though Mr. Neonom. with some others, lay it so low.

1. That which the Apostle designs in this Chapter is to declare what it is on
the account whereof we are accepted with God, and have cause to rejoice; and
this he fixes on in general, viz. an interest in and participation of Christ
by Faith, in opposition to all legal Privileges and Advantages wherein the
Jews boasted, verse. 3.

2. He supposes that unto our acceptance before God, wherein we are to
rejoice, there is a Righteousness necessary, and whatever it be, is the sole
ground of that Acceptance.

3. He declares, There is a twofold Righteousness that may be pleaded and
trusted unto to this purpose. 1. Our own Righteousness, which is of the Law. 2.
That which is through the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by
Faith, these he asserts as opposite and inconsistent, as unto the end of our
Justification before God.

4. Placing the Instance in himself, he declares which of them it was he
adhered unto, and placed his confidence in. And in handling this Subject, some
things engaged his holy Mind into an earnestness of Expression in the
exaltation of one of these, viz. the Righteousness which is of God by Faith. 1.
This was the turning Point whereon he and others had forsaken their Judaism;
this therefore was to be secured: See Gal. 2.15, 16. 2. Hereupon there was a
great opposition made to this Doctrine in all places by the Jews. 3. The weight
of the Doctrine itself.

5. Hence in many other places of his Writings, but especially in this he
treats of these things with a greater earnestness and vehemence of Spirit than
ordinary; thus. 1. He speaks of the (...), the Excellency of the Knowledge of
Christ. 2. In his Expression of all other things that are our own, that are not
Christ's, whether Privileges or Duties, however good, useful, excellent, they
may be in themselves; yet in comparison of Christ and his Righteousness, and
with respect unto the end of our standing before God and Acceptance with him,
with the same vehemence of Spirit he casts Contempt upon them, calling them
(...), Dog's Meat.


Neonom. Pray, Sir, does the Apostle with vehemence renounce Works wrought in
Faith, Evangelical Works?

Dr. O. Answ. In the Matter of Justification, the Apostle opposes Evangelical
Works, not only unto the Grace of God, but unto the Faith of Believers. 2. He
makes no distinction that Works are of two sorts, some excluded from
Justification, and not others; but he expressly rejects his own Righteousness,
i. e. his personal inherent Righteousness, whatever it be and however it be
wrought. 3. He makes a plain distinction of his twofold Estate: 1. That of
Judaism before Conversion. 2. He proceeds to give an account of himself and
Estate after Conversion. The words of Davenant on this Passage, in my Judgment,
are sober and weighty. The Apostle here teaches what that Righteousness is
whereby we are accepted before God, viz. which is apprehended by Faith: He
shows the cause why it is ours by right, ( i. e. the Apostle shows it in this
place) because we are inserted into his Body, and coalesce with him into one
Person; therefore his Righteousness is reputed ours, De Justisic. hab. c. 38.
For whereas some begin to interpret our being in Christ, and being found in
him, so as to intend no more but our Profession of the Faith of the Gospel; the
Faith of the Catholic Church in all Ages, concerning the Mystical Union of
Christ and Believers, is not to be blown away with a few empty Words and
unproved Assertions.

The Answer then is full and clear unto the general Exception, viz. That the
Apostle rejects our Legal, but not our Evangelical Righteousness; For, 1. The
Apostle rejects neither absolutely, but in comparison of Christ, and with
respect to the special end of Justification before God or a Righteousness in
his sight. 2. In that sense he rejects all our own Righteousness, but our
Evangelical Righteousness, in the sense pleaded for, is our own inherent in us,
performed by us. 3. Our Legal and Evangelical, in the sense pleaded for, is the
same -- 4. The Apostle rejects, in this case, all the Works of Righteousness
that we have done, Tit. 3.5. but our Evangelical Righteousness consists in the
Works of Righteousness, which we do. 5. He disclaims all that is our own. --

See more in the Treatise of Justification, 535.

Here the Society was adjourning, but that a worthy Divine acquaints Mr.
Calvinist, that he saw the Reverend Mr. Richard Vines in a corner, whereupon
Mr. Calvinist returned. There is none here but has a venerable Esteem for that
famous Divine, unless Mr. Neonomian, who will however (if he finds he is
against him) be so ingenuous as to knock under the Table.

Sir, we beseech you lend us your help here against this confident Neonomian,
and New Divinity, and in defense of the Apostle Paul, whose Doctrine he is
making Dung of, trampling it down as Mire in the Streets.

Mr. Rich. Vines, Phil. 3.7, 8, 9, 10.

After the Apostle had in the beginning of this Church fortified the Christian
Philippians with a Caveat against such as did yet stand upon and pretend their
Circumcision, Christ a Christian's only Gain, by Rich. Vines, sometime Master
of Pembrook-hall, Cambridge.
and their Jewish Prerogatives, in opposition to Christ: after this, he gives a
threefold account of himself, 1. He shows what account he had of himself in
respect of those Privileges that others did insist upon, etc. V. 4. p. 1. 2.
He shows what account he had of himself, when Christ was discovered to him,
etc. 3. He shows what account he had of himself, in respect of perfection, V.
12, etc. p. 4, 5, 6.

V. 8. p. 19. You have heard what reckoning the Apostle had of his own
Righteousness in his unregenerate state, and upon the discovery of Christ unto
him, he came to a loss of all that which before he counted gain: Now, in this
Verse, he goes on to show you what account he had still of Christ, and of all
things besides Christ, after some strength, and experience he had of Christ;
yea, doubtless, any more than so? Yea, and more than that, I account them
still; it is a rhetorical Speech, wherein the Apostle rises higher in his
expression with greater overflow of affection, verifying all things besides
Christ as loss and dung; he repeats it three times over, (a note of affection)
I count all things loss, I have suffered the loss, I account them but dung, and
then it is for Christ, and that Christ who is my Lord. Suppose the Apostle had
been thus spoken to; it is true, you forsook all your former Gains, and you
professed all should go for Christ; your self, your Wealth, your Zeal, your
Righteousness in the Law, you valued all as nothing, while Christ was new and
fresh in your memory, and before you had tasted of his Yoke and Cross. But what
say you now, Paul? now you have been beaten with Rods, stoned, Shipwrackt, etc.
2 Cor. 11.15. What now Paul, are you of the same mind still? is not your
Courage cooled? Nay, doubless, (says Paul) I did, and I do, I am not changed,
I do account all things, I reserve not one thing to lie between me and Christ;
not my good Works, not any thing within me, nor without me, that I value or
esteem; my Righteousness, my Obedience to the Law, my Fasting, my Scourging, I
count them but Loss and Dung for Christ, etc. -- p. 19, 20.

Doct. 4. That gracious Duties and Performances of a Man in the state of Grace,
are to be disclaimed in the matter of his Justification, or his Righteousness
before God -- p. 44. --

V. 1. The Papists will not hear this Doctrine; for though, with much ado, they
will quit their good Works, that are done in an unregenerate state without and
before Faith; yet those Works of a regenerate Man, that are besprinkled with
the Blood of Christ, [Here's your Doctrine, Mr. Neonomian] they will have them
come in for their Justification: for thus they say Christ merits for us, that
we may merit for ourselves; that Christ is our Savior, by making us our own
Saviors; Christ is our justifier, by making us justify ourselves; he gives
us Money, and we lay it down, what is this? It is to keep up good Duties, (say
they and you) which otherwise would fall to the ground; whereas the true Spring
and Whetstone of Obedience to God, is Faith and Love, and Thankfulness upon the
apprehension of the Pardon of our Sins: let a Man have Christ for his
Righteousness, and let a Man be ungodly if he can; the love of Christ
constrains us, etc. -- p. 44, 45, 46.

-- This Phrase of Speech, All things Loss and but Dung; mine own Righteousness
both before and after Grace; I count all to be but Dung, that I may win Christ
-- There is the Faith of Adventure, and the Faith of Assurance -- p. 129.

Proof of Doctrine. It Is for the gaining of Christ, that a Christian counts
all things in the World as Dung, and suffers the loss of all things.

It Is a strange trade, that a Man must lose to gain; he must be a Beggar and
Bankrupt, that he may be rich; he must be nothing, that he may have Christ --
Yea, his Works after Grace received; all that I did know, and all that I do
know still, I do count them but as Dung, that I may win Christ -- p. 126.

-- There is nothing can be done in a Man, that proves him to be out of Wrath
any farther than it proves him to be in Christ. In this Argument lies all the
strength that Christ is yours, and that you are Christ's; what other Arguments
otherwise you have, that will not prove this Point, are all but Fallacies, and
your Hopes are but Ropes of Sand. Dress up yourselves in the best Attire you
have -- Virtue, Civility, Learning, Excellent Parts, let them paint over the
rotten Face of corrupt Nature never so curiously, will all this prove, that you
shall be saved? -- The Apostle counts all this but Stuff and Lumber, Trash,
Loss and Dung for Christ: Can you climb Heaven by any Ladder of Nature's
erecting? What Ladder reaches to Heaven, but Jacob's Ladder? which was a Type
of Christ? p. 147.

Let me come to the Graces of God's Spirit: They prove, that you are out of the
state of Wrath, that you shall be saved; but how do they prove it? Not as the
causes thereof: does your Grace, that is in you, satisfy the Justice of God,
and redeem you from the Curse, and pay the Ransom? Is it your Title for
Salvation? Do you pretend to have him upon the Worth of your Graces? Like a Man
that is questioned about his Land, goes about to prove the worth of the Land by
the wax with which [his Deeds] are sealed, -- the Seal is more than the Wax --
therefore the Apostle says, not only we are translated, but hereby we know we
are translated. Now how does Grace signify to you, that you are out of Wrath?
As it evidences you to be in Christ, and so the Sign brings you to the Cause.
-- If they prove but unto you the Work of Grace in your Heart, and that you are
in Christ, you need ask them no more, they have done enough, they have settled
you upon a sure ground -- The least Dram of Grace is worth a 1000 Tun of such
kind of stuff of Moral Righteousness, which may be in you and not prove you to
be in Christ: A little Seal is worth a Cart-load of Wax, because it seals
more to me than the Wax is worth; so the least Dram of Grace, wrought in a Man
that is in Jesus Christ, is worth a World of Moral Duties, because it seals
Evidences, Pardon of Sin, Favor with God; therefore examine yourselves that
you take not a Human-Faith for a Saving-Faith, etc. -- p. 148, 149, 150.

V. 8, 9. That I may be s^und in him, that I may know him. In these two
Expressions is comprised that which he calls the gaining of Christ: To be found
in Christ, that he refers to Justification, or the making a Sinner righteous
before God; therefore he says, not having mine own Righteousness, but the
Righteousness of God, which is the Faith of Christ. To know Christ, refers
to Sanctification, as it is expressed in three things; The Power of his
Resurrection, the Fellowship of his Sufferings, Conformity to his Death, -- p.
151, 152.

-- That I may be found in him, etc.

In this Verse you have two great things expressed; Union with Christ, that I
may be found in him; Righteousness with God, having the Righteousness of God.
There is a distribution of Righteousness into two sorts, Legal, Evangelical.

These two sorts are first described what they are; Legal, mine own
Righteousness, which is of the Law; Evangelical, the Righteousness of God,
which is by the Faith of Christ. 2. Being described, they are opposed the one
to the other; the one is of the Law, the other is by the Faith of Christ; they
are set contrary, because they cannot be had together. 3. There is a disclaim
of the one, not having my own righteousness, which is of the Law; and an
adherence to the other, the righteousness of God by Faith in Christ.

Doct. 1. In the gaining or having of Christ, the first thing is Union; this
word in Christ notes Union, as 2 Pet. 3.14. Be diligent, that ye may be found
in him, p. 156, 157. -- Union must be before Communion; Christ is a great
Mystery; Christ and his People are all like one great Tree, he is the Stock and
Root, and they are the Twigs, planted in that great Stock; and they two live
like one great Body, as the Head and Members; they are alike, as Man and Wife
are one flesh, so Christ and his People are one Spirit; as Man and Wife are one
Person in Law, so are Christ and all that are in him; they cannot be cast into
Hell, because the Sentence must light upon Christ, before it falls upon them.


Antinom. How does this agree with your Doctrine, That the state of Men in this
Life is not eternally decided, but they are in a State-Tryal, as Subjects in
Trial for Eternity? p. 55. of your First Book. The grossest Divinity that ever
Protestant delivered; before which both the true Protestant Doctrine of Election
and Redemption and Union to Christ must fall to the ground, if it be true.

R. Vines, I come to the 2d thing in the words, the distribution of
Righteousness into Legal and Evangelical.

Doct. There are two sorts of Righteousness, Legal and Evangelical, the one of
the Law, the other of the Gospel; for that which we call Righteousness with
God, is the same which we call Gospel or Evangelical Righteousness, which is
plain, Romans 1.17.

Now do not stumble at this, do not think I mean (as you do Mr. Neonom.) that
there are two sorts of Righteousnesses which a Sinner may be justified by, For
by one Righteousness we are justified with God, Romans 5.18. But when I say there
are two sorts, it is to be understood thus; there are but two sorts of
Righteousnesses by which Life at any time has been attained, there never was a
third Righteousness whereby a Man should be Righteous with God, ever propounded
to Man standing or falling: (Where Is your subordinate Righteousness now?) There
are, there have been, there can be no more; the own is his own, the other is
that which is called the Righteousness of God.

Now to describe these two sorts of Righteousness, see Romans 1.17. Romans 10.10,
11.

These two, doing and believing, are the Characteristical Words that describe
these two sorts of Righteousnesses, of the Law and of the Gospel. The
Righteousness of the Law is only for the perfect Man that never sinned, because
it must be doing.


Neonom. I could show there is no one saving Benefit granted to a Sinner, but
upon Supposition of his doing, D. W. p. 230.

Mr. R. Vines, But I tell you, the Righteousness of the Gospel is for a Sinner,
a Sinner overwhelmed and overspread with Sins.
Neonom. But I say throughout my Divinity, That the Gospel excludes Sinners;
and that the Righteousness of Christ belongs to none but those that are first
meet for it.

Mr. R. V. The Righteousness of the Law is an exact compliance with the Law of
God in every Tittle; the Righteousness of the Gospel, is the Righteousness of
another, the Righteousness of God in him; of another, in another, 2 Cor. 5.
last.

Now take this for a Rule, What Righteousness soever it be that justifies a
Man with God it must be perfect, whether it be a Righteousness of the Law or
the Gospel: Again, it must be his own. Now that it is our own, it is not meant
as if the Gospel Righteousness was not ours; though it be not our own originally,
yet it must be ours derivatively from Christ; it is not our own, being in us,
but it is ours by Imputation, imputed or accounted to us; it is not our own by
Works, but it is ours by Faith; it is not our own of our selves, but its ours
of God.


Neonom. Hold, not too much of that Doctrine; you make us to be as Righteous as
Christ: This Doctrine of imputing the very Righteousness of Christ to us, I
cannot down with; it is Christ's Righteousness, but it cannot become ours but in
the effect.

Mr. R. V. But I say the Righteousness we stand upon must be perfect, and it
must be ours; legal Righteousness is perfect, if a Man fall by one Sin, whether
in doing or misdoing the Ladder is broken. -- On the other side, the
Righteousness of Christ, it is perfect; if it be not perfect, it cannot be
Righteousness; it is made a Sinners by Imputation, by Faith in Christ, p. 162,
163.
Neonom. My whole Book is to prove this Man's Doctrine to be false.

Mr. R. V. Come on then Mr. Reonom. I will come to the Demonstration, That
there are but two sorts of Righteousnesses, and by this Point I must drive you
and every Man up into a corner; for a Man must be brought to a choice of one of
them, and if he stands upon one of them, which is by the Law he falls, the
Point will drive you to a necessity of Christ and Faith. Now that there are but
two, will appear thus; The Righteousness of the Law, and the Righteousness of
God, are described, named, distinguished, Romans 10.6, 7, 8, 9. and Chap. 11.3.
Now, mark, in Scripture you find these Phrases and Expressions; Grace, free
Grace, Christ or Redemption of Christ, the Promise or the Gospel, Faith, the
Righteousness of God: you may find all these upon one File ranked together.


Neonom. Ay, but I value one, if joined with a Duty and Benefit, before all
those, according to my Logic.

Mr. R. V. On the other side you shall find the Law, Works, our own
Righteousness, Debt, our Wages by Debt, Boasting and Glorying; these make
another File. There Is no third, all must come under one of these Files; if it
be one, it is the Righteousness of God by Faith of Christ; if it be the other,
it is the Righteousness of the Law by our own Works: By this it is plain that
there are but two sorts of Righteousness. And, consider, the two Adams were
certainly but two common Roots, and the foundation of two Covenants, the
Covenant of Works, and the Covenant of Grace.


Neonom. Stay there, I deny all that Doctrine.

Mr. R. Vines, But I Will go on; The Adams being two, consequently the Covenants
are two, and consequently the Righteousnesses are of two sorts, and no more, p.
164, 165, 166. You confound Law and Gospel; learn the difference between Law
and Gospel (it is of the greatest Consequence) most useful to the Conscience of
Man in the World, to the settlement of an Estate in regard of Life and
Salvation to his Soul; Law promises Life and Salvation to the Doer, upon
condition of perfect and perpetual Obedience. -- The Gospel freely promises
Justification to every one that believes in Christ.
Neonom. But this believing is doing.

Mr. R. V. This Gospel Righteousness excludes Works as any cause in the World,
by which you should be justified with God. -- Many will be looking for good
Tidings from the Law, which is only brought to you, as the Olive-leaf in the
Mouth of the Gospel, p. 167, 168.

Doct. These two sorts of Righteousnesses are inconsistent and opposite the one
to the other, not having mine own, but having the Righteousness of God. -- The
Scripture is full of their Oppositions and Contrarieties; for if you mark, it is
said to be of the obedience of one by which we are made Righteous, not the
obedience of two, viz. mine own and Christ's together, but one directly; see
Romans 5.21. And do you see every where a plain Opposition between Faith and
Works, the Law and Faith, Works and Grace? Does there not come a But, Romans
10.5. Gal. 3.12, 16. chap. 5.4. Romans 9.31, 32. See how they are opposed.

1. It is excluded as Matter of our Righteousness with God; for that which is
the Matter of our Righteousness with God is the Obedience of Christ: Now to
bring your own Righteousness into this place, as the Matter of your
Righteousness with God, is to mingle your Obedience with Christ's: So it is not
the Obedience of one but the Obedience of two.

2. It Is excluded as the Motive to move God; if you bring your own
Righteousness into this place, you mingle it with free Grace, Romans 3.24. if you
make it any Motive you must bring it into the place of Jesus Christ.

3. It Is excluded as the Instrument which should receive the Righteousness of
God; if you bring it into this, then you bring it into the place of Faith; for
Faith is only the Hand that takes hold of the Gospel Righteousness; therefore,
he says, the Righteousness of God which is by the Faith of Jesus Christ: Now
if there be no room for these three, it follows it is thrust out a Doors, page
171, 172.


Neonom. Then you may thrust me and my Book both out of Doors, for it has been
my Design wholly throughout my Book to establish this Righteousness of our own
these three ways.

1. To join it with the Righteousness of Christ in Justification, under the
Name of subordinate Righteousness, and a Condition, etc.

2. To foist it into the Grace of God as a Motive under the Name of Meetness.

3. To give it the same place and nature in Justification, as Faith, in that I
make Faith to justify as its doing, and as a working Condition.

Mr. R. V. Out of this Description we shall take up four Points.

1. They that are in Christ have Righteousness with God; there is an Emphasis in
the words, they that are in Christ have the Righteousness, the only
Righteousness, etc. The Papists say, We have Righteousness by Works; we say we
have it by Imputation, yet they that have this Righteousness by Imputation,
have it truly, and they are made Righteous by it, page 176. They have this
Righteousness with God; mark, they have that which sets them right with God,
into a state of favor and acceptance, that which discharges all Guilt and
Condemnation: They have that which freeth them from every Charge, every
Endictment, every Sentence of the Law of God; they have that which sets them
into Friendship and Peace with God, that which entitleth them to Eternal Life
and Heaven: They have that, which although it does not take away the being of
Sin, yet it sets them as free from Hell as Adam in Innocence, and sets
them upon a sure Center; that Faith wherein we stand, outspeaks Adam, even Adam
in his first Integrity, p. 176.

2dly, This Righteousness which they have in Christ is the Righteousness of
God; this is a Phrase frequent with the Apostle Paul, and is almost peculiar to
him. Now, mark, that Righteousness whereby a poor Sinner is made Righteous with
God is the Righteousness of God, i. e. of a Person who is God, Jer. 33.16. Not
his essential Righteousness, it is only that Righteousness which is from God;
that which God imputes to us, that which he has provided, appointed and
approved to be a satisfaction to his Justice; that is the Righteousness of God
which God has made to be so to us, and that is Christ, 1 Cor. 1.30. p. 180

3dly, This Righteousness of God is by Faith; God has appointed this humble
Grace of Faith to be in the hand of the Receiver, which takes hold of this
Righteousness of God. But now you must consider this Faith not [as Mr.
Neonomian doth] as a Habit or Quality, but consider it in the Office it has,
as it is an Instrument taking hold of Jesus Christ: Not, I say, as a habit for
the worthiness of Faith it self; for though it be said, by Faith, it is not said,
for Faith; by it as an Instrument of God, for hereby you come to the Promises,
and to Christ; closing with Christ by Faith you are made the Righteousness of
God in him. It is a selfdenying Faith that casts out Pride, and Self, and
Works, and comes naked and poor to the rich Promises of Christ, and there
hanged, takes hold and claspeth fast.

4. This Faith by which you have the Righteousness of God is the Faith of
Christ, or (which is all one) of the which Promises hold forth Christ, they are
the object of this Faith by which you have the Righteousness of God; it is true,
the object of Faith is the whole Word of God, and that does not justify
because it works Faith: the Eye sees other things besides the brazen Serpent,
but as it heals it looks to the brazen Serpent only, etc. p. 185.

Now I come to the description of the other sort of Righteousness.

1. There is a Righteousness called our own, which is of the Law. 2. Our own
Righteousness which is of the Law is to be utterly disclaimed, our own in
opposition to the Righteousness of God which is by Faith in Christ: As the
Righteousness of God is the very same with that which is by the Faith of
Christ, for they are all one; so our own Righteousness is that which is of the
Law. Now that there is a Righteousness which is called our own, is evident from
Romans 10.3. to open the Righteousness of the Law.

1. The Righteousness of the Law is nothing else but a conformity to the Law.
See Ezekiel. 18.5. Gal. 3.12. Romans 2.17. the Duties which is the Matter must be
done with all the Mind and Strength, and all the Soul. --

2. What is meant by our own Righteousness? It is that whereby we walk in some
conformity to the Law of God; and if you will have Works done from a natural
Principle or Power by the strength of moral Virtues, by Men out of Christ, this
is indeed within ourselves, and this is our own Righteousness, like that the
Apostle calls his Gain before he knew Christ.

But then for holy Duties or Works that are performed, which flow from a
Principle of renewing Grace, this (say the Papists) is not our own
Righteousness. For the clearing this Point: All your Works that flow from
sanctifying Graces, in conformity to the Law of God, all these come under the
Name of our own Righteousness, not because it is of our selves efficiently, but
it is ours subjectively inherent in us. As Adam's Righteousness, his own,
though it came from an inward Holiness and Righteousness given him of God. --
Are not the Fruits of the Spirit, as Love, Joy, Temperance, are they not our
own? They are our own or Gods; if our own, then I have the Point; if the
Righteousness of God, then you are justified by the Fruits of the Spirit, and
not by the Righteousness of Christ imputed, which is the greatest Error in
Divinity. If the Apostle in this Text had said, Not my own Righteousness, but
the Righteousness of God which is by Repentance, Love, Hope, the fear of God,
holy Duties, then the Apostle had carried it clear against us; but he brings
nothing that we have to join in concurrence to the Righteousness of God and
Christ, but only Faith; therefore, the Apostle leaves all our inherent Graces
and the Works that issued from them in this Text, to come under the Name of our
own Righteousness. As the Sin of the first Adam that was personally in Guilt
was likewise ours, so the Righteousness of God is subjectively in Christ, and
by Imputation ours. Consider, then, all those Works that proceed from
sanctifying Grace in you in order to conformity to the Law of God, they may all
come under this Name and Notion of my own Righteousness, p. 190, 191, 192.

Doct. 2. Our own Righteousness is utterly to be disclaimed, that we may be
justified by the Righteousness of God. Mark the Scripture, Romans 3.21. chapter 4.6.
Christ pulls down the Righteousness of your selves, which had the Chair
before; the Servant must not sit in the King's Chair: So Grace, though it be that
whereby you may walk serviceable to God, yet you must not set it in the place
of Jesus Christ. -- Yet the Apostle would not be without Holiness,
Sanctification and Obedience. One in Christ has Virtue, Holiness, etc. but
how? as serviceable Graces to walk with God, not as his Righteousness with God;
when the Sun shines the Moon is put out, not out of her Orb or Course, but (as
I may say) from her Rul. So the Righteousness of God when you come to be
justified by Faith, does not abolish Holiness and Sanctification (for they are
and must be there together) but the setting up Obedience in the place of
Christ's Righteousness, as a Cipher, is pulled down from the place of Pounds.
How does that Apostle say, Not having mine own Righteousness? I answer, not
having it as my Righteousness with God, then I should put mine own in the place
of Christ, not having it as concurrent with Christ. -- That would make my
Righteousness Co-partner with him, not having it as a Motive to move him, then
I should put my Righteousness in the place of free Grace; not having it as the
Instrument whereby I take Christ; no, for then I should put other Graces in the
place of Faith. -- Well then, in a word, having Holiness or Righteousness as a
stock to trade with in the way of service to God, not having it as a means to
buy my Soul out of Hell: So you see the difference, that still we have it, and
yet we have it not.

But why is our own Righteousness, that is inherent in us, to be disclaimed?

1. Because it is a way impossible for a Sinner to go to Heaven by, or to be
Righteous by; that Ladder is too short, though it seem long enough to you that
have some Fragments of the Law.

2. Not having it, why? Because there is another Righteousness (and not this)
which is called the Righteousness of God: There is another Adam, and that Adam
has another Righteousness for all to believe in, a Gospel Righteousness which
is not of the Law. There is another Covenant God has appointed whereby a
Sinner must be just; now because there is another, not this.

3. Because one of these voids the other; if I have the Righteousness of God,
then mine own is void; if mine own, then the Righteousness of God is void: As
the Apostle says of Grace, if Works, not Grace; and if Grace, not Works p.
192, 193, 194, 195.


Calvin. Reverend Sir, we must from the bottom of Hearts most sincerely
acknowledge, That it is a great piece of Service that you have done to Christ,
his Gospel, Church, and poor lost Sinners, in this ample and distinct Testimony
which you have born to the Truth; not only in plainly discovering Mr.
Neonomian's corrupt and illiterate Interpretation of this great Portion of
Scripture, and vindicating of it, but also in that you have subverted his whole
Scheme, laid open the rottenness of the Principles he has so boldly asserted
in his Book, and showed the dangerous tendency of them.


Neonom. This Gentleman is much mistaken, and I could show where his Mistakes
lies.


Antinom. You show his Mistakes!

-- Quid? Rectum dignoscere curbo?
Neonom. I believe him an able Man, and that sometimes he was of my Judgment,
because Mr. B. dedicated his Aphorisms to him, and acknowledged that he was a
fit Censor of his Doctrine.


Antinom. It Is true, one would think that piece of Flattery and many others,
had been enough to engage Mr. R. Vines to subscribe to Mr. B.'s Opinion; but it
was sufficiently known that instead of so doing, Mr. Vines seldom preached a
Sermon, wherein he did not make a strict Inquisition after the Neonomianism
that lay in his way, and cracked it as a Man will crack a Louse.


DEBATE XX. Of Gospel and Legal Preaching.
Neonom. I Have this Error further to charge upon Mr. Antinom. viz. Gospel
Preaching (he says) Is to teach Men that they were as much pardoned and as
acceptable to God always, as when they were Regenerate; and while they are
Ungodly they had the same Interest in God and Christ, as when they believe;
neither can Sin any way hinder their Salvation or their Peacc; nor have they
any thing to do further either of them, Christ having done all for them, before
any holy qualification or endeavor. D. W. p. 208.


Antinom. Here is a long Charge, whether it be true or no, in part or whole, it
will appear by the Proof.


Neonom. Page 159. he says, The more Light and Glory of the Gospel shines in
the true Intention of God to his People, the more should they have Joy and
Gladness; why may not then a Believer say, The Lord has been bountiful to me,
God has done every thing in Christ, and taken away all things that can disturb
my Peace and Comfort?


Antinom. What is this to prove your Charge? What is this to prove that I say,
a Man is as much pardoned and as acceptable to God always as when Regenerate,
while he is Ungodly, etc? There Is not any part of your Charge here proved; for
I speak of a Believer, and that God has done all for him in Christ; and dare
you say otherwise? But hear what I said, which you hide, lest your Charge
should appear false, at the first sight; you take only the concluding Words of
my Sermon, on Romans x. 2, 3, 4. just before that p. 158.

Object. You will say, you know many of the People of the Lord Jesus, that walk
sadly and disconsolately, not having this joy and gladness. I answer, There is
nothing hinders the Joy of God's People, but their Sins: those, as they
conceive, stand as a separation betwixt God and them: Oh they stand as a
cooling Card in all their Joys and Mirth. But when they return to Zion, they
shall rejoice, in that they see that the Blood of Jesus Christ, the Son of God,
has taken away all their Sins, the Scapegoat having carried them away into
the Land of Forgetfulness, in that they see that all their Transgressions are
blotted out as a Cloud, etc. When they shall come by the sight of the Glory of
the Gospel, and the Light thereof, to behold this state, that Christ has
brought them into, then all matter of Sorrow and Sighing shall fly away, and
the bitterness of it shall be taken away; and then that which was the occasion
of that bitterness shall vanish too.

I do not say, that he is no Believer, that has not this perfectly; far be it
from me, so to say; there are, that are Believers, that are weak in Faith, and
there are Believers strong in Faith; the more the Light of the glorious Gospel
shines, etc.


Calvin. Mr. Neonomian, I wonder what a Gospel you Preach, or would have others
Preach; Is not Sin the Hindering-Cause of Spiritual Joy? Is it not God that
blots out our Sins, and remembers them no more? Is not the Faith of this, the
Groundwork of all true Joy? Have not some Believers less, and some more,
according as their Faith is, and the Light of the Gospel shines into their
Hearts? And do they not, by virtue of this Joy and Peace in believing, return
to their rest? And may they not say, The Lord has dealt bountifully with me,
as David did? May they not return to their rest, and sit down in the Comforts
of the Holy Ghost? The Lord has done all for me in Christ; who has made him
Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption. Is there any thing you
can rejoice in, but what is done for us, or wrought in us by Christ? That Sin
is taken away in the atonement and satisfaction of Christ, the great cause of
my disturbance.


Neonom. He says, p. 186. Here is first Deliverance, and then Service is the
Fruit of this Deliverance, not Deliverance the Fruit of Service: The Tenor of
the Law runs thus, First do, and then live: The Gospel says, First live, and
then do; do not think God gives Christ upon condition.


Antinom. What Is all this to the proving of your Charge of Error? 1. It
reaches not the Terms of your Charge, if it were Error. But, 2dly, Where is
the Error? Does he not clear it from plain Scripture, which you take no notice
of, viz. Zacharias's Song, Luke 1.74, 75? Do we serve God acceptably, before we
are delivered from Sin and Satan, through Redemption and Application? Can we
serve God in Holiness and Righteousness, before we be delivered from our
Enemies? Will you run at all Scripture and Experience? Is it not true, that the
Law said to Man, that had Life and Power concreated with him, Do, and thou
shall live? And can this be the Tenor of the Gospel, to say to a dead Sinner,
Do, and thou shall live? Can a Man, dead in Trespasses, do any thing? Were it
not madness to say to a dead Corpse, Walk, and thou shall live? Does not Christ
first come as the Resurrection and Life to a Sinner, before he can do any
thing? Do you think, that Christ comes to a Sinner upon condition of any thing
he can do in his natural Estate? What is more plain, than that Life is the
Principle and Cause of Action, and not Action of Life? Christ himself says, a
Man must have Life before he can Believe; it is first in Nature. Joh. 11.26.
Whoever lives and believes in me, shall never die. Now is the giving of
Christ for Life, the condition of our having Life? Or our doing before we have
Christ or Life, the condition on which we have Christ and Life?


Calvin. I think you have gained nothing, nor yet made any proof of your
Charge, unless you think it be in this, that the Doctor says we must live,
before we can do. If you take that for an Error, I pray do you try your Skill
the other way, to make Men do before they live; and if you can attain to that
Art, either in Naturals or Spirituals, you will be the Wonder of the World.


Neonom. He says, p. 124. The Freeman of Christ has this freedom, Christ does
all his Work for him, as well as in him, etc. Christ does all for them, that
God requires to be done.


Antinom. You must know it is this I said: A Freeman of Christ has this
freedom, Christ does all his Work for him, as well as in him. He that is in
bondage under the Law, must do every thing himself, and that he does, he must
do perfectly; that is an unsupportable thing and heavy bondage, for a Man to
have more laid upon him than he can bear. The Freeman of Christ, considering
that he is weak, poor and unable to work, Christ does all his Work for him,
Isa. 26.12. The Holy Ghost tells us, he has done all our Works in us; and in
the Margin it is rendered, for us: See Romans 5.19. Their freedom is, that they
stand righteous in the sight of God by that which Christ has done for us; that
they are as righteous as if they had done it in their own persons, etc.

Thus I treat concerning the Obedience of Christ unto a Satisfactory
Righteousness on our behalf.

But, Obj. Does not this take off Men from all manner of Obedience, and all
manner of Holiness? A. It takes them off from those ends that they aim at in
their Obedience, viz. the end for which Christ's Obedience served, viz. our
standing Righteousness; as it concerns us in point of Justification,
Consolation and Salvation. We have our Peace, we have our Salvation only by the
Righteousness Christ has done for us; but this does hot take away our
Obedience nor Services in respect of those ends for which such Services are
required of Believers, to glorify God, to evidence our thankfulness, to profit
Men, as Ordinances to meet God in, to make good what he has promised; so far
we are called out to Services, and walking uprightly, exactly, strictly,
according to the good pleasure of God; and in regard of such ends of Services,
there is a gracious Freedom that the Freemen of Christ have by Christ, i. e. so
far forth as Services and Obedience are expected at a Freeman's hands, there is
Christ by his Spirit, present with such persons, to help them in all such kind
of Services; so that they become strong in the Lord, and the Power of his
Might, to do the Will of God. Mark what the Apostle speaks, I am able to do all
things through Christ strengthening me: of my self I am able to do nothing, but
in Christ, and through Christ, that strengthens me, I am able to do all
things, etc. There Is much more to this purpose. Now judge whether here is any
ground for his Accusation. Dr. C. p. 126. He slanders me to the World, as if I
taught a Doctrine of Licentiousness, and were against all Duty; but it will
appear otherwise plainly enough, if an impartial Man reads my Sermons,
especially that Sermon on 1 John 2.1, 2. Sermon III. p. 548.


Neonom. He says, p. 554. Man will be mincing of this Truth, and tell you, if
you walk close to God, and if you refrain from sin, especially from gross sins,
God will love you, and then you may apply these and these Promises unto your
self: but God speaks plainly, before they had done good or evil, Jacob have I
loved; the Grace of God is passed over to Men, as they are ungodly, etc. This
is the Grace of God revealed; he has exhibited it freely to Men: Has the Lord
given us Commission to Preach this Gosp^l?


Antinom. In my Discourse from 1 John 2.1, 2. this Objection is answered, p.
557. viz. There are many admire and adore the Doctrine of the Free Grace of God;
and yet are notoriously known to live in all manner of Lewdness and
Licentiousness, and upon this ground, Because their Sins are laid on Christ.
The Sum of the answer is, I confess I never knew any such Monsters, etc. There
are many taxed for such; but I cannot say any thing to the truth of this Charge
by mine own experience, etc. But it may be there are such, and Paul speaks of
such in his time, etc. But if there be such, I must tell you they are the
greatest Monsters upon the face of the Earth, etc. And I dare boldly say they
are the greatest enemies to Free Grace, and that open Drunkards, Harlots, and
Murderers, come infinitely short of them in Abominations, etc. But admit this,
that the Grace of God has been abused; has not the whole Scripture been
abused, Law and Gospel? Is not Christ set for the fall and rising of many in
Israel? Is he not a Rock of Offense? But in the mean time shall the Children
want their Bread, because the Dogs catch at it, etc? Shall not the Gospel be
preached, because some abuse it?

Obj. But you will say, it may be done with caution and limitation. A. But let
us not be more wary and cautions than God would have us to be, to put mixtures
of Men's doings to the obtaining the Grace of God, while the Lord himself does
pour out his Grace to Men simply for his own sake, without consideration of any
thing in them -- Men will be mincing this Truth, etc. Then follows what you
rehearse.

And what does all this amount to, but what the Apostle John expressly speaks,
1 John 4.10. and the Apostle Paul, Phil. 2.13. Ephesians. 2.23. That God's Love and
Grace is the cause of all that which we do to his praise, and not our doing the
cause of God's Grace and Love to us? Where Grace first prevails, it finds a Man
a dead sinner, and raises him to newness of life; and such an one will not,
nor shall abuse the Grace of God to licentiousness.

Now let all Men judge how you have proved your Charge, by what you have
alleged from my Sermons: Where is it that I say, Christ believes for us, or
repents for us? All that I say, is the words of the Prophet, He works all our
Works for us in respect of Mediation, and all our Works in us in respect of
Application; he works us to believe and repent, etc.


Neonom. Page 223. He talks of Justification and Union to Christ before Faith,
page 616.


Antinom. You fetch the same things over and over; these Doctrins have been
spoken to already, under the Heads of Justification by Faith, and Union.


Neonom. But he tells us, Ministers ought not to preach Damnation, p. 56, 562.
He says this likewise batters to the ground that way of urging Men to
Holiness, which some hold forth; that if Men do not these and these good Works,
and leave these and these Sins, then they must come under the Wrath of God,
etc. The Love of God constrains the Faithful, and not the Fear of Wrath.


Antinom. And is not that good Doctrine, that the Grace of God only teaches
Holiness; and that a Believer is not under the Law, or the Terrors thereof, for
the learning of Holiness, but under Grace; and are not they the words of the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 5.14? And does he not lay the constraining force of the love of
God on our delivery from Wrath, and tells us, that this is one great end of
Christ's dying for us, that Men henceforce should not live unto themselves, but
unto him that died for them? It Is a most grievous thing to see how you fly in
the face of plain places of Scripture, with no small scorn and contempt.

And these are my words concerning such Preachers: They ought rather, after the
Example of the Apostle, to excite them to these good Works, because they are
already freed from Wrath. Certainly this that I have delivered proves this
sufficiently, that the appearing of the Grace of God does teach Men to do the
Will of God effectually; the Love of God constrains the Faithful, and not the
Fear of Wrath. But to conclude, Do not mistake me, in the mean while, I have no
thoughts as if Wrath and Vengeance were not to be preached and made known even
to Believers; yea, Beloved, Wrath and Vengeance is to be made known to them,
and that as the deserts of Sin, and as the means to keep Men from Sin; but not
in that way Men do ordinarily think, I mean thus, Wrath and Vengeance are not
to be revealed as if Believers were to fear them, or as if Believers should
come under them. -- But as Believers are secured and freed from them, that so
they should fear to commit and fall into Sin, and not for fear of coming under
Wrath, but out of Love, because God has been so gracious to them, as to
deliver them from the weight of so heavy Wrath and Displeasure, etc.
Calv. Have you no greater Error remaining to charge Mr. Antinomian with?
Methinks it seems as if you had pretty well spent your Powder and Ball, and we
have spent a great deal of time in these Debates which you have caused, and it
will be time now (as most of the Society have told me) to put an end to them.


Antinom. With all my Heart, Sir, and I reckon my self obliged to render my
thankful Acknowledgments, that you have heard us with so much Candor and
Patience.


Neonom. I cannot be Vngentele neither, Mr. Calvin, you know me better than to
think so; but I have one only humble Request to make to you and this Society,
that before we finally part, you will hear me instruct Mr. Antinomian in the
right way of Preaching, and show him the true difference between Gospel and
Legal Preaching.


Antinom. Sir, I doubt not but we shall differ as much about Gospel and Legal
Preaching, as we have done about the Doctrine to be preached; for if we cannot
agree about the Doctrine that is to be preached, and that which is most for the
exaltation of Christ and good of Souls, it is not likely we should agree about
Preaching; therefore for that, as I conceive, it is a needless Point (Mr.
Calvin) for us to enter upon, because we must be necessitated to speak over the
same things again in handling of it; however, if Mr. Neonomian be fond of such
a Discourse, I shall take the pains to give him my Sentiments, and show how
greatly he is mistaken; but for the present, I think we have proceeded as far
as is needful in the foregoing Debates; in which Truth and Error is so fully
argued and cleared, that any unprejudiced Person, that has a competent measure
of Understanding in the things of God, may easily thereby judge and conclude,
what is Gospel, and what is legal Preaching, and what exalts Christ most, and
what least.


Calvin. Sir I think you have spoken much Reason in what you have said; and I
am of your mind that it would be impertinent, and but Actum Agere, to enter
upon a Debate about Preaching; and I shall add, that its not so proper for this
Society as for the other yonder; and, besides, our Amanuenses complain of the
dearness of Paper. I must tell you, the Calvinian Society is reduced to a small
number, and are at a low Ebb in the World at this day. But, I hope, the time is
at hand, when the Smoke that now fills the Temple will be scattered, and the
Temple of God opened again, and the Ark of his Testament shall be seen. As for
you Mr. Antinomian, you may now depart in Peace, and rest in your Grave till
the Resurrection.


Antinom. Yes, Sir, with all my Heart, if Mr. Neonomian gives me no further
disturbance; if he does, I shall soon be raised without conjuring, for I shall
not lie very deep in the Earth: However, if I do not, Christ lives, and shall
triumph in his glorious Gospel over all Opposers; and I find that there are not
a few that will appear faithful Assertors and Defenders of these Truths
(against the most vigorous Adversaries) through the assistance of God's grace,
which are awakened thereto by this Attempt that has been made to set up
another Gospel, and to feed us with the Leeks and Onions of spiritual Egypt.
But before I depart, I would do one thing, i. e. I would make my Will, if you
think I am capable of it, and it is this, That a great Grave be dug, and that
Antinomianism, Neonomianism, Pelagianism, Popery, Socianism and Arminianism be
buried therein, 50 Cubits deep.


Calvin. Who would make you Executor?


Antinom. I have such a respect for Mr. Neonomian, notwithstanding the Pick he
has had at me, that I would constitute him my Executor, and this Society the
Overseers of my Will; with this Proviso, That if Mr. Neonomian do refuse, or do
not well and truly execute this my last Will and Testament, in the agreed
Judgment of this Society, that then the whole Trust shall devolve upon the said
Society, which I doubt not but they will endeavor faithfully to perform.


Calv. Mr. Neonom. Will you accept of this Executorship?


Neonom. I do not know what Power he has to dispose of the Goods of other Men;
I take it to be great presumption in him, if not dishonesty, to dispose of
other Men's Proprieties, seeing he renounceth them all.


Antinom. Sir, I crave your Pardon; I must confess, Mr. Calvin, he has given
me a just Rebuke; for when we met in the Eutopian Fields, finding me Anonymus,
he was so courteous as to lend me, or rather impose upon me, the Name of Mr.
Antinomian during my short Converse here; he having two Names himself he could
lend me one for a little while, which as you see for Conversation sake I have
made use of, with an Intention to return it; yea, in the mean time did declare,
and did plead it against all Men, that it was Mr. Neonomian's Propriety, and,
therefore, I now return it to him accordingly.


Neonom. No, no, Sir, I gave you that Name as your Propriety, it best
expressing your Opinions.


Antinom. Then, Sir, you will grant I have Power to bequeath it in my last Will,
and I bequeath it to you.


Calv. But by your favor, Sir, it is a judged Case, and therefore you have not
Power to bequeath it; if you borrowed it, it is Honesty to return it before you
depart.


Neonom. What do you mean by a judged Case?


Calv. I mean that Mr. Neonomian has before this Society sufficiently given us
to understand that his Opinion is, that the moral Law is vacated, and a new Law
brought into the room of it.


Antinom. And more than that, there are certain Divines in this City, great
Friends to this Society, that have excepted against his Principles as highly
Antinomian. Therefore, take it as your own by Law. Vale. Antinomus Exit
Anonymus.


Calv. Now, Sir, your great Antagonist is withdrawn, I shall deal plainly with
you, and briefly sum up the Heads of these things wherein it has manifestly
appeared, by the foregoing Debates, that you have given abundant cause of just
offense by your late Writings.


1. That you have unjustly charged and misrepresented Dr. Crisp, by your self,
owned to have been a holy Man.

2. That you have falsely stated those things which you call Truths and Errors.

3. That you have vented your own erroneous Tenants, and endeavored to prove
them agreeable to the Articles, Confessions and our Orthodox Protestant
Writers, by perverting their Sense, or misapplying what they say, when as they
are most repugnant to you.

1. As to the said Doctor, you charge him unjustly with those things which are
directly false; I shall give an Instance or two of it.

You say, this is one of his Errors, chap. 1. that he says, That if the Elect
should die before they believe, yea, when they are under the Dominion of Sin,
and in the Practice of the grossest Villainies, they are as much the Sons of
God, and justified, as the Saints in Glory.

Whereas he expressly denies the truth of this Charge in his Vindication he
makes of himself against some, who in his Lifetime, had reproached his Doctrine
and Ministry as you do now, p. 637.

They say, that I should affirm, that if an elect Person should die a
Whoremonger and Adulterer, etc. in all kind of Profaneness, he shall be saved.
-- He appeals to his Hearers, whether ever they heard him Preach any such
Doctrine; and declares it a gross, notorious and groundless Slander. -- And his
following words are, I said before, and say again, That there is no elect
Person, suppose him to be capable and come to years, shall die before he is
called, i. e. before the Lord give Faith to this Person to believe, and in some
measure frame him to walk by the Spirit according to the Rule of the Gospel.
The second false Charge is, Chap. 2. Err. 2.

That he should make Christ the real Blasphemer, Murderer, etc. and that he was
so accounted of the Father. Whereas he asserts and vindicates the Innocence of
Christ's Person; he says only that Christ was accounted a Transgressor from a
real Transaction or Imputation of our Sins to him, in which Doctrine the
Scriptures are most full and express.

3. You charge this Error upon him, Chap. 10.

That Christ is offered to Blasphemers, Murderers, and the worst of Sinners,
that they remaining ignorant, unconvinced and resolved in their purpose to
continue such, they may be assured they have a full Interest in Christ; and
this only by concluding in their own minds upon this offer that Christ is
theirs. That Christ ought to be offered to the vilest of Sinners, and they
invited to come unto him, is sound Gospel Truth, though you condemn it for an
Error.

And is it possible a Man of Conscience can slander a Man (whom he owneth to be
holy) with such a notorious Falsehood? That he should assert that Christ is
offered to Men, that they remaining ignorant, unconvinced and resolved in their
purpose to continue such, might be assured of their Interest in Christ,
concluding only in their minds that Christ is theirs; this we have proved to be
a notorious Slander.

Many other Falsehoods have been proved.

2. As for Misrepresentations they run through the whole Book. 1. Of Dr. C. that
you may abuse and expose him. 2. Of other noted Writers and Confessions, you
have horridly misrepresented them to serve your turn, in asserting Error and
condemning of Truth.

In misrepresenting Dr. Crisp, you have either perverted his meaning, and
partially rehearsed his Expressions, or else condemned what Truth he asserts,
and defends as great Errors.

As to the first, we have sufficiently made it manifest in some Instances in
the first part, and it has abundantly been proved in the whole progress of our
Debates.

And here it is not amiss to add a word or two to what is said to your Error in
the sixth Debate, that you make a great Cry and Noise about, viz. That Dr. C.
should say, That Christ, while he bore Sin and was under the Punishment
thereof, was the Object of God's abhorrence. The Doctor's words are, p. 180.
All that hatefulness and loathsomness of Sin is put upon Christ, that he stands
as it were the abhorred of the Father for a time. 1. You leave out [as it
were.] 2. You improve this to a hatred of the Person of Christ, and a
separation of his Natures, upon his using the word Separation, as Exegetick of
forsaking, both Scripture Expressions concerning Sin and Christ. 3. You hereby
manage your design of beating down the Doctrine of Christ's bearing God's Wrath
and Curse for us, as you do the Doctrine of his bearing Sin. 4. As to the word
abhorred, upon a diligent Enquiry we find it to be a Scripture Expression
concerning Christ, yea, and of Christ, under his Sufferings of Wrath and Curse
for Sin; for though God never hated his Person in the highest of his Suffering
(neither is it necessary any Judge passing Sentence on the worst Criminal
should hate his Person) yet his Father dealing with him in a judicial way by
the eye and hand of Justice, in this present state, and standing under the
Charge of Sin, and thereby clothed, as it were, with filthy Garments, is said
to be as it were abhorred of God; and its not only included in the word
forsaken, the Syriack word Sabactani, and taken from Psalm. 22. where the word
(...) is used, signifying dereliquit, deseruit, and so rendered by the LXXII and
the Evangelist; Abhorrere being used by Classick Authors in the sense of being
averse to a state or condition, Cic. Abborret ab auribus vulgi, its not
agreeable to the Peoples Ear, abhorrere a nuptiis, to be averse to Marriage.
and from that aversion to turn away from it or a Person in it; so God having
purer Eyes than, in his Justice, to behold or endure Iniquity, forsook and
turned away, as it were abhorring his Son, standing under the charge of Sin in
that state and condition. And accordingly, as Christ considered in this respect
and state of Guilt and Condemnation, is brought in prophetically by the
Prophet, speaking those words, Psalm. 22. and are actually applied to himself,
by himself on the Cross, Mat. 27.46. So we see in another famous Prophecy of
this same state of his Suffering, this word Abhor is used by our Interpreters
most properly, Psalm. 89.38. Thou have cast off, thou have abhorred, thou have
been wrath with thine Anointed. The Hebrew has it with thy Messiah, and the
72. has it, (...), the word (...) rendered abhorred, Sign sprevit, reprobavit,
aspernatus est; and by the 72. (...), thou have contemned or despised: (...)
dereliquit, absecit, deseruit, (...) sprevit, Res^^nt, reprobavit, aspernatus,
aversatus est, abhoruit, (...) Exconduit Furere percitus.
And it is observable, that three such highly significant words should he here
used in one Verse, as expressive of the unspeakable weight of God's Wrath and
Curse that lay upon him; Thou have deserted, thou have abhorred, thou have
dealt in fury of wrath with thy Messiah

In Dr. Abbot's Defense of the Reformed Catholic, p. 428. we have the
following Passages: The Prophet says, The Lord did lay upon him our
Iniquities; the Lord would break him, and make him Subject to Infirmities, that
we may understand that God did not only leave him to the hands of Men, but
himself counted him with sinners, by the bearing of our sins, and therefore
dealt with him himself accordingly. So that he had cause to cry out. Thine
Indignation lies bor^ upon me, and thou have vexed me with all thy storms.
Lord, why abhorrest thou my Soul, and hidest thy Face from me? thy wrathful
Displeasure goes over me, and the Fear of thee has undone me. Yet as touching
the Person of Christ, we acknowledge, that he was excepted from Sin. In the
Margin, he qoutes Psalm. 89.38. applied to Christ by Athenas. Interp. Psalm. by
Arnob. and Hierom. on Psalm. 87.

As to the rest of the Mis-representations of the said Doctor, (which w^^^ take
up too much Time and Paper to rehearse) I refer you to the particular Debates.
And as to your charging the Truths, that he affirms and insists on for Error, I
shall mention briefly some principal ones under the next Head.

As to the second thing in which just Exceptions lie against your Book, we have
this to charge, That you have not in all that is material, fully and rightly
stated Truths and Errors: For,

1. You have not rightly divided Truth from Error, but confounded them one with
another.

2. You have condemned Truth for Error, and asserted Error to be Truth.

3. You have stuffed your Positions with ambiguous Words and Terms, that
instead of stating, you have perplexed them; and so that when you seem to speak
one thing, it is most apparent you mean another.

Let me but give a few Instances of many, that are more largely and
particularly demonstrated in the Debates.

1. According to this threefold falseness, you state Truth and Error in your 1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6 Chapters, in the Doctrins of Christ's bearing our Sins, and
Punishment for them.

2. In the Doctrine of Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, you plainly deny it
to be any other than as to Effects; which is no Imputation at all. That there
was no change of Person betwixt Christ and us; That he suffered not in our
stead; That Spots remain in justified ones, as they stand justified before God,
and therefore not perfectly justified; and then imputed Righteousness must be
imperfect, C. 7.

3. You condemn it for an Error, to say, The Covenant of Grace, as to us, is
not conditional; and that Faith is not a Federal Condition of it: And to say,
The Covenant of Grace was made between the Father and Son, as the second Adam,
and with the Elect in him: Or that this Covenant-Transaction is pleadable by
us: If all this be Error, what Truth is there in the Scripture and the
Assembly? C. 8. p. 53, 58.

4. You condemn this for an Error, to say, Christ is to be offered to the worst
of sinners, before they are willing to deny themselves, and renounce all their
Sins and Idols, C. 10. p. 81.

5. You insinuate a Condemnation of all Union to Christ before an Act of Faith,
C. 11. p. 91.

6. You insinuate Persuasion not to belong to the Nature of Faith, C. 9. p. 73.
and make Faith and Repentance to justify, as qualifying Conditions, C. 12. p.
102, 114.

7. You insinuate a Condemnation of this great Truth, asserted by our Lord
Jesus Christ himself, That he is the Way, Truth, and Life, in Justification,
Sanctification, and Glory, Joh. 14.6. C. 13. p. 121.

8. The Sum of what you design, in C. 14. is, to condemn this great
Gospel Truth for Error; that a Believer is not to work from Life, but for Life,
p. 153.

9. You condemn all Ways of Assurance, besides By-Signs and Marks found in us,
among which Perseverance is the greatest. Here you condemn Assurance, arising
from the direct Act of Faith and immediate Witness of the Spirit, by it self,
or in and by the Word, C. 15 160, 161.

10. You charge that great Truth to be an Error, That God sees no Sin in
justified ones, C. 16. p. 170. And to say that Sin cannot hurt them in a way of
condemnation, C. 17. p. 181. And that the Afflictions of God's People are
Effects of God's Vindicative-Justice, and his Displeasure against their
Persons, C. 18. p. 150.

11. You condemn the Protestant true Acceptance and Interpretation of Phil.
3.8, 9. C. 19. p. 196.

3. To these I shall name these admired Principles of yours, famous at Rome, as
some Instances of the third thing.

1. That every Sin is not Damnable, Pref. p. 6.

2. That the Moral Law is vacated, its Sanction being changed, ibid.

3. That the Eternal Condition of Men is not eternally decided in this Life,
but they are in a state of trial here for Eternity, p. 55.

See to reconcile these three Heads of Doctrine to the Assembly, and reconcile
the first to the larger Catechism.

Q. 152. What does every Sin deserve at God's hands?

A. 1. Every Sin, even the least, being against the Sovereignty, Goodness and
Holiness of God, and against his righteous Law, deserves his Wrath and Curse,
both in this Life, and that which is to come, and cannot be expiated, but by
the Blood of Christ.

2. Reconcile the second to Confess. c. 19. 5. The Moral-Law does for ever bind
all [therefore its Sanction remains, if you know what Sancire is] as well
justified persons as others to the obedience thereof, and that not only in
regard of the Matter contained in it, but also in respect of the Authority of
God the Creator, who gave it; neither does God in the Gospel any way dissolve,
but much strengthen this Obligation. Who is the Antinomian now?

3. Reconcile the third, rotten, ill-worded Principle to the Assemb. c. 17.. 2.
The Perseverance of the Saints depends not upon their own Free Will, but upon
the Immutability of the Decree of Election, flowing from the free and
unchangeable Love of God the Father, upon the efficacy of the Merit and
Intercession of Jesus Christ, the abiding of the Spirit, the Seed of God within
them, and the Nature of the Covenant of Grace; from all which, arises the
certainty and infallibility thereof.

With what Conscience can a Man solemnly subscribe these Articles, Confessions
and Catechisms, and yet assert these Principles? But you ascertain our Estate
here, only by doing; you say you can show, that there is no one Saving benefit
granted a sinner, but upon supposition of doing, ( p. 230.) It Is not given him
to will or do, but upon supposition of doing; nor to be justified or persevere,
but upon supposition of doing: So the Whole, and the Certainty of a Believer's
State, depends wholly upon doing; he is under a perfect Covenant of Works, and
his State is a State of Trial for Life, upon his doing, as Adam's was; but a
worse, and has more to do, and is less able.

Lastly, As to the great fundamental Principle on which your New Scheme is
founded, viz. That the Gospel is a New Law with Sanction, though, I hope, I have
spoken enough to convince you of the Unsoundness of it, yet because I would not
be wanting in any thing wherein I may contribute to your further Illumination,
I will only present you with one remarkable Piece of Protestant Antiquity in
this Point: And it is

An Article in the Confession of the Holy Doctrine, which was proposed to the
Assembly of the Council of Trent, in the Name of the Illustrious Prince L. D.
Christopher Duke of Wirtenberg, and Count Montbelgard, Jan. 24. Anno Dom. 1552.
Concerning the Gospel of Christ.
Although many Precepts of the Law of God are contained in the Writings of the
Evangelists and the Apostles, and Christ himself teaches, that we are not to
render Evil for Evil, nor to look upon a Woman to lust after her; and many
other Precepts of the like nature. Yet we must not think, that the Gospel of
Christ is a New Law, whereby, as the Fathers of old under the Old Testament,
were saved by an Old Law, so Men, now under the New Testament, are saved by a
New Law.

For unless thou understand the word Law, generally for Doctrine, as the
Prophets several times are wont to use the word Law; certainly the Gospel of
Christ, properly, is no Law, as Paul is wont to use the word Law, but is good
and joyful Tidings concerning the Son of God, our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the
only Expiator of our Sins and Appeaser of the Wrath of God, our Redeemer and
Savior. Neither are the Precepts of the Law, which are contained in the
Apostolic Writings, a New Law, but an Explication of the Old Law, according to
the mind of the Holy Ghost, which are not darkly contained before in the
Writings of the Prophets, but are repeated in the Ministry of the Gospel of
Christ, that the Severity of God's Law, and the Corruption of our Nature, being
plainly laid open, we might be excited to enquire after and embrace Christ,
revealed in his Gospel; and that we should be acquainted by what Rule our Life
of Faith in Christ should be directed. Wherefore, if we ought to speak properly
concerning the Law of God and the Gospel of Christ, even as we are not to make
Christ a New Lawgiver, seeing he has not made a New Law, nor erected a New
Politic Kingdom on Earth; so neither is the Gospel to be turned into a New
Law, which offer Eternal Salvation to the performers thereof. But we think,
that it is most certain, that there is one and the same Natural and Moral Law,
both of the Old and New Testament; and Eternal Salvation is not to be had by
Men under the Old or New Testament for the Merits of the Works of the Law, but
only for the sake of the Merits of our Lord Jesus by Faith.

Christ rehearses out of Isaiah, his Office, Luke 4. for which he was sent
into this World, saying, The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, in that he has
anointed me; he has sent me to Preach the Gospel to the Poor, etc. Here Christ
teaches, that it is not his proper Office to give a New Law which might
terrify and slay miserable sinners, but to Preach the Gospel, that might
quicken and comfort them: See Gal. 4.4, 5. Acts 15.10, 11. [They quote Austin]
That People who received the Old Testament, Augustinus contra Adimantum
Manichei discipulum, c. 3.
was held under certain shadows and figures of things before the coming of our
Lord, according to that wonderful and most exactly ordered distribution of
times: Yet in it there was so great a Predication and Fore-publication of the
New Testament, that no things may be found in the Evangelick or Apostolic
Discipline, although lofty and Divine Precepts and Promises, which were wanting
to those ancient Books.

I here conclude, only adding the Exceptions of some Ministers against your
Doctrine and Principles.

The Substance of some Exceptions made by diverse London Ministers against Mr.
Dan. Williams's Book, Entitled, Gospel Truth stated and vindicated.
1. WE find Truth and Error is not rightly stated in several Particulars, chap.
2. c. 5. c. 7. c. 8. c. 12. c. 16. c. 18. c. 19. and in other places.

2. Under a color of opposing some old Antinomian Errors (which we from our
Hearts abhor) he falls in with them in their main Principle of vacating the
Sanction of the moral Law, as appears, Pref. p 6, 7. and Lib. p. 131, 135. and
in other Places, contrary to Artic. 7. of the Church of England, Assemb.
Confess. c. 19. Larg. Catech. Q. 97.

3. That to supply the room of the moral Law, vacated by him, he turns the
Gospel into a new Law, in keeping of which we shall be justified for the sake
of Christ's Righteousness, whereby he boldly strikes both at Law and Gospel, p.
44, 126, 139, 210. making Qualifications and Acts of ours, a disposing,
subordinate Righteousness, whereby we become capable of being justified by
Christ's Righteousness, p. 54, 55, 62, 68, 98, 103, 113, 114, 130, 143, 146.
Pref. p. 5, 6, 7. Contrary to Artic. of the Church of England, 11, 12, 13. To
the Assemb. Confess. c. 11. c. 16. Large Catech. Q. 70, 71. Short Catech. Q. 33.

4. He denies the Covenant of Grace to be made with Christ as the second Adam,
and in him, with all the Elect as his Seed, p. 53. Contrary to the Assemb.
large Catech. Q. 31. Short Chatech. Q. 29. and that the Covenant is pleadable
by us as its made with Christ, Pref. p. 6.

5. He teaches, That the Righteousness of Christ is imputed only as to
Effects, with a Purchase of a conditional Grant, viz. this Proposition, He that
believes shall be saved, p. 39. 51. Contrary to the Doctrine of Imputation and
Redemption, Artic. 11, 17. Confess. 11. Large Catech. Q. 68, 70, 72. 73. Short
Catech. Q. 29.

6. He asserts, That forgiving, adopting, glorifying, and conveyance of every
promised Benefit, on God's Terms are judicial Acts, as a Rector in a way of
distribution of Rewards, Pref. p. 8, 9. Lib. p. 130, 136. Contrary to Artic.
11, 12. to Assemb. large Catech. Q. 70, 72, 73. Short Catech. Q. 29.

7. He perverts and wrests many eminent Portions of Scripture from their plain
and received Sense, which has been given by the best Protestant Interpreters,
in particular those that follow, Phil. 3.8, 9. Jer. 31.31, 32, 33. Heb. 8.10,
11. Isa. 64.6. with diverse others.

And they further add, These are a few Exceptions against the abovesaid Book of
Mr. Williams's, among many more, of the like nature, which may be made appear.

In this Undertaking Mr. Williams does, as a seeming Antagonist to the
Antinomians, and the many that he does call so, broach his Anti-vangelical
Principles, endeavoring to hide them as much as may be under ambiguous Terms,
perverting and undermining the whole Protestant Doctrine in the main fundamental
Points of it, as they have been truly stated and hitherto maintained in the 39
Articles, Westminster and Savoy Confessions, the Assemblies larger and shorter
Catechism, and by our best Divines, ancient and modern, since the Reformation
hitherto. As if his own Name, and the Names of some others, obtained by his Art
and Industry, were enough to weigh down all other Authorities whatsoever, and
to set up his new Scheme as the Standard and true Measure of all Protestant
Doctrine. Therefore, we thought ourselves bound in Conscience to declare our
Judgment herein, as a timely Caution to all that shall read the aforesaid Book
of Mr. Williams's, etc.

This Paper of Exceptions, drawn up and subscribed by several Divines, was
delivered in to a full Assembly of Ministers, by the Hand of Doctor Isaac
Chauncy, October. 17. 1692.
A POSTSCRIPT.
READER, having finished my Dialogue, I am necessitated to add a word or two by
way of Apology.

1. To clear my self of an Imputation of concurring with certain Ministers in
exerting a Synodical Jurisdiction, etc. I must acquaint thee, that I have never
been accessory to any such Proceedings, they being utterly contrary to my
Judgment; what they have done since October. 17. I am a Stranger to, and know not
but by hearsay.

2. Whereas it has been reported, that Matters were so adjusted, as that an
end was to be put to all Writing in this Controversy; I must say, I know of no
such Agreement; something there was which might give some ground to such a
Report, the History whereof I shall for some Reasons, forbear now to relate.

3. Whereas some have been offended that I have continued to write Book after
Book, etc. all is no more than the Answer of one Book sent forth and
recommended to the World; and therein I challenge the common Privilege of all
Men, to reply to any published Book that I think meet, and its not in the due
power of any Men, or Society of Men, to abridge me of it, how much soever they
disapprove thereof; and I am so far from loving Contention, that if Mr.
Williams has done, I have done opposing him; but (notwithstanding all
Subscriptions to Orthodox Articles, formerly or lately) if he continue to
maintain his Doctrine, as agreeable to Scripture and the Articles of the Church
of England, and the Confessions and Catechisms, he must expect to meet with
Opposition, maugre all the premeditated fury and rage that has been from time
to time expressed by the Assertors and Defenders of the said Doctrins, both in
Pulpit and Press, with all the ignominious marks of Reproach and Contempt,
which they have branded their Opposers with.

4. I cannot, but in honor to a Reverend Brother, make a particular remark
upon the great Pains he has taken in his Sermons, (to expose one upon this
account, in the height of Bitterness) and to print them for his cognizance. Not
to say any thing now of his Invective Reflections on the congregational
Practice, or the wrong representation which he has given of the Matters at
present in Debate (as another reverend Divine has also lately) but only to
admire that a Minister of Christ can appear solemnly in the Presence of God, to
vent so much of his own Spirit. I understand one Sermon to be wholly taken up
in setting all the black Characters upon one Man, as he could gather together,
(who he means, all the Town, that has heard or read the Sermon, has judged)
portraiting a Person to be an airy, imagined Piece of Spirituality, drawn over
corrupt, rotten, putrid Flesh, an angry, tumified Piece of proud Flesh, with
many such Characters; which they that are desirous to know more of, may see in
the Original.

This ignominious Usage I shall say no more to, but only, That though I have a
sinful, deceitful Heart, and know my self to be worse than any Man knows me to
be, and shall always, I trust, abhor my self before the Lord; yet if this be to
be vile in the Eyes of Men (bad or good) to defend the Truth according to my
Conscience, and the Talent God has or shall give me (as he calls me to it) I
shall be yet more Vile; but still looking upon what I do to be mixed with so
much of human Frailty, Hypocrisy, and all Corruption lurking in my naughty
Heart, mingling itself with the best of my Duties and Services, That I count
them all but Loss and Dung for Christ, as the Apostle, Phil. 3. I could give
many convincing Reasons why, (among many others,) it did least become this
Reverend Person to launch forth into these Waters of Marah, with a pretense to
a sweetning Spirit of Meekness, from the Temper which he has manifested
formerly, as well as now; and why he is a most incompetent Judge to pass
Sentence upon my Procedure about Matters in Controversy (as I do declare all
the Subscribers to be, and he in a more especial manner) not only because he is
of the Party engaged in this carnal Contention about words only (as he would
have the World to understand it to be, since it could not be made an Imposition
as at first designed) but also because he always, as it were has asserted,
that he never heard one side nor would, saying, That he never read Mr.
Williams's Book (though he has subscribed to it) and therefore always refused to
hear or argue any Allegations against the Doctrins contained in it. Now is it
possible that such an one should give a true Verdict concerning Matter of Fact,
or pass a just Judgment upon either Party, who is declaredly so biased*

I could say much more of this Nature, should I proceed to give a true
Narrative of Behaviors and Passages that have attended the Carnality of
recommending Mr. Williams his Book to the World by Subscriptions, which I shall
forbear to do, unless I see I am provoked to it. In the mean time I commend
this Cause, and the weak management of it on my side, to the God of Truth, that
weighs the Spirits and judges righteously. And in Honor to that Reverend
Divine, I say no more to what he has so angrily preached and wrote, but am
ready, notwithstanding, to ascribe it to that Infirmity, wherein (it is
possible) some Men think we are too much alike, and to bear a due reverend
respect to him. But if, upon further provocations, I find I am forced to
vindicate my self from these Abuses, and that in so doing, some Men find Quod
me non impune lacessunt, let them thank themselves for it, as they may for all
that they would make me so blameworthy in.

A brief Reply to what Mr. Daniel Williams has charged Mr. J. N. with, in the
Preface to his Reply to Dr. C.
FInding my self traduced by such as seem never to live so pleasantly as in the
Fire of Contention, who are ambitious to expire in the Arms of Fame, and this
wholly owing to what Mr. Daniel Williams has published in the Preface to his
late Book, called, A Defense, etc. It Is but needful I give the Reader a true
and impartial Account of my Concern in those Matters, for which I am quoted and
thus treated.

The first Particular for which I am charged is in reference to Dr. Crisp's
Works, viz. Mr. Nesbit, from credible Hands, informs me, the Assembly of
Divines, desired to have them burnt. In answer to this, I shall give the
Impartial Account of this Story, with the Circumstances that accompany it, and
then leave my Censors to be Judges, how unfairly I am treated in this matter.
Soon after this Reverend Author had appeared by the Press, in the present
Controversy, I told him, I had been in some Company, where his Opposition to
Dr. C.'s Works was occasionally mentioned: To which one (naming to him both
Place and Person) replied, They had been sufficiently answered by the Assembly,
for they burnt them. The same Passage being repeated, where he and several
other Ministers were present, it was moved, That one should Write, to know of
Dr. W. at Oxford, who was able to give a full Account of the Truth or Falsehood
of this Report; which was accordingly done: And the Answer returned and made
known to this Author before his Printing, was in Sum thus: Though many of the
Assembly did not approve of them, yet there was no such thing as a Vote against
them, that ever he heard of, or remembered. Now why this Account (from a Person
that Mr. Williams was satisfied knew the whole of the Affair,) should be
omitted, and the other occasional Report printed, is not easily conceivable,
except we knew the meaning of the Reason I had from him (when expostulating his
unkindness in this Action) viz. the Doctor's Answer was not so much to the
purpose, therefore omitted. But they that know nothing of this, are prone to
conjecture it seemed designed to make my Name loathsome to them, by whom, he
cannot but know, I desire to be approved: However, I hope my Soul has been
better dieted, than to improve for just Reflection what is here offered by him

The next Passage is in reference to his own Book, viz. Mr. N. (though I never
requested it) in my House declared, if Mr. M. and three more had subscribed, he
would not have been unwilling to do it; and he desired me to add
(Congregational) to the Divines in and about this City, who forbear to
subscribe only for prudential Considerations, which I refused. I must
acknowledge the freedom and familiarity I had, for some time (through our near
Neighborhood) in this Author's Company, encouraged me often to speak my
Thoughts without being requested to it, and that without the least Jealousy of
having what I discoursed with him in private, made public by the Press, and I
not once acquainted with it; and I see had I come to act the part of a Plotter
I had been discovered by an unsuspected Informer. As to the whole of what past
in this private Conference, it was with me of so little moment, that in a few
days it was buried in forgetfulness: So that when, by a Friend, these Passages
were queried of me, I remembered neither, but denied both; till some time after,
seriously revewing what Discourse I had with him about this Concern, I
remembered, that at my parting from him, I desired the word (Congregational)
might be added, he having before told me the Names of several of that
Persuasion that were, to his knowledge, Cordial for what he had done.

As for the other Passage, I have not once, or twice, but often solemnly
protested to him, I did not remember any Particular so much as like it; which
Answer I thought the most becoming Denial to a Man of his Character, but it
seems it was not to the purpose, and therefore omitted: Sure I am,
Gospel Truth, when truly stated, carries more Demonstration in it, than to need
such undue Methods and unmanly Weapons for the defense of it.

The last Passage is, He told Mr. Hume that if one or two Passages were
rectified he would subscribe my Book. To which Report I shall only make this
short return, That I may be a Stranger to my self, through the deceitfulness of
my own Heart; but if my Heart does not deceive me, I never had such a Thought,
nor uttered such a Word, nor is it easy to conceive the thing so much as
probable; for the only time I discourst with Mr. Hume of this Subject, was
before this Author's Defense, etc. was published: And at that time I did
expostulate with him, why he would be a Subscriber to the former? To which he
replied, What should I do, when followed daily, and pressed to it? But seeing
that after all hopeful endeavors, yea Articles and Subscriptions for Truth and
Peace, our Debates, by these Methods, are revived and condemned to be continued
(nam pro supplicio est non potuisse mori.) I shall conclude, concerning this
Book of Strife (finding my Sense must be known of it) and that middle way
Hypothesis (if any) advanced by it, as the judicious and learned Turretine,
after long trial of it and the consequences that followed it, has published.
We don't think a a different mode of Expression should be cause of litigation
with any Person, Turret. Theol. part 1. p. 438, 439.
provided the sound Doctrine be preserved; but if this Matter be a little more
seriously weighed, it will easily appear, it is not a Controversy about Method,
but under the Pretext of a new Method, a new Doctrine is introduced. -- Although
this new invented Method would appear most accommodated to the Ears and Humors
of them that hear it, etc. yet there are many Absurdities in it, and
inextricable Difficulties, etc. therefore long ago condemned and rejected by
the Churches; which was not done without weighty Reasons, as he there shows: To
whose Judgment, in this Matter, I subscribe

John Nesbit.

The Heads of Debate contained in the second and third Parts of the foregoing
Treatise.
I. OF the State of the Elect before effectual Calling. II. Of God's laying Sin
on Christ. III. Of the discharge of the Elect from Sins, upon their being laid
on Christ. IV. Of the Elects ceasing to be Sinners, from the time their Sins
were laid on Christ. V. Of the time when our Sins were laid on Christ. VI. Of
Separation from, and Abhorrence of Christ, while our Sins lay upon him. VII. Of
the change of Person between Christ and the Elect, and of imputed
Righteousness. VIII. Of the conditionality of the Covenant of Grace. IX. Of the
nature of saving Faith. X. Of the free Offer of Christ to Sinners, and of
preparatory Qualifications. XI. Of Union with Christ before Faith. XII. Of
Justification by Faith, with a digression about Repentance. XIII. Of the
necessity and benefit of Holiness. XIV. Of intending our Souls good by Duties
we perform. XV. Of the way to attain Assurance. XVI. Of God's seeing Sin in
Believers, and their Guilt by it. XVII. Of the hurt that Sin may do to
Believers. XVIII. Of God's Displeasure for Sin in the Afflictions of his
People. XIX. Of the Beauty of Sincere Holiness. XX. Of Gospel and Legal
Preaching.
To these are Annexed, The Substance of certain Minister's Exceptions against
Mr. Daniel Williams's Book. Mr. J. Nesbit's Reply to what Mr. Dan. Williams
charged him with, in his Preface to his Reply to Dr. C.


N. B. That the first Edition only of Mr. D. Williams his Book, was made use of
in the foregoing Treatise.

Books written by Dr. Isaac Chauncy, de Col. Med. Lon.
1. THE Catholic Hierarchy, or the divine right of a sacred Dominion in Church
and Conscience, truly stated, asserted and pleaded. London, Printed for the
Author, sold by S. Crouch at the Princes Arms in Popes head-alley in Cornhill,
and Tho. Fox at the Angel in Westminster Hall, A. D. 1681.

2. A Theological Dialogue, containing the Defense and Justification of Dr. J.
Owen, from the 42 Errors charged upon him by Mr. Rich. Baxter. Printed for the
Author, 1684.

3. The second part of the Theological Dialogue, being a Rejoinder to Mr. Rich.
Baxter. Printed for Edward Reyner, 1684.

4. The unreasonableness of compelling Men to the Holy Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper; wherein it is showed, that such compulsion is contrary to the whole
Tenor of the Gospel, the Common Prayer, Articles of the Church of England, and
the Homily concerning the Sacrament, in which is answered a Pamphlet,
Entitled, The Case of compelling to the Holy Sacrament of the Lord's Supper,
etc. vindicated by the Rules of the Gospel. Printed for the Author.

5. Ecclesia Enucleata, The Temple opened, or a clear Demonstration of the true
Gospel Church, in it is Nature and Constitution, according to the Doctrine and
Practice of Christ and his Apostles. Printed for the Author, 1684.

6. The Interest of Churches, or a Scripture plea for Stedfastness in Gospel
order. Printed for the Author, 1690.

7. Ecclesiasticum, or a plain and familiar Christian Conference concerning
Gospel Churches and Order. Sold by W. Marshall at the Bible in Newgate-street,
1690.

8. The first, second and third Parts of Neonomianism unmaskt, in Answer to Mr.
Williams's Gospel Truth stated and vindicated.

A Rejoinder to Mr. Williams's Reply to this first Part.

9. Examen Confectionis Pacificae, or Examination of the Pacifick Paper. The
three last sold by H. Barnard at the Bible in the Poultry, 1693.

FINIS.
Errata's in the third Part.
PAge 10. Line 29. r. or his Faith was not true. p. 13. l. 4. r. you need not.
p. 19. l. 13. f. forgotten r. pardoned. p. 24. l. 19. r. as a sin. p. 28. l.
27. r. where it is not as well as where it is. p. 45. l. 38. r. as they are
Elect. p. 48. l. 4. r. or many of them. p. 57. l. 32. f. Posit. 1. r. 4. p. 58.
l. 3. f. 3. r. 5. p. 59. l. 5. dele of. p. 73. l. 32. r. (...). p. 76. l. 15.
r. in that he. p. 79. l. 39. dele in and. r. to be the hand. p. 80. l. 4^ r. of
the Promises which. p. 81. l. ult. r. curvo. p. 83. l. 30. r. we can rejoice. p
90. l. 40. r. defend^. ^^ p. 92. l. 2^. r. insi^^^ o^, f. (...). p. 93. l. 37.
r. and you say, that the (...) etc.

Errata's in the Rejoinder.
PAge 6. Line 20. read non-elect. p. 7. l. 29. r. their congruity. p. 12. l.
14. r. the Letter deny. p. 15. l. 50. r. Impurity. p. 16. l. 47. dele Comma,
and r. of Christ imputed. p. 17. l. 32. dele do. p. 30. marg. r. (...). p. 30.
l. 44. r. tribuere. p. 33. marg. r. Judicial^ p. 34. l. 7. r. Te^^^e state sine
Com. p. 35. marg. l. 3. cord elect. p. 36. marg. l. 10. (...) natura. ibid 13.
l. r. adjunctis, efficacia. p. 33. l. 3. r. Is it reaso^^ble. p. 38. marg. l.
2. r. manifest. p. 39. l. 11. dele now. p. 43. l. 17. r. this name. ibid l.
35. r. Therefore, etc. The. p. 46. l. 31. r. He has these. p. 47. l. 8. and
became and Assertor. ibid. l. 22. r. The Arminians.


