TWO DISCOURSES. I. Concerning the Different WITS of MEN: II. OF THE MYSTERY
OF VINTNERS.



LONDON, Printed by R. W. for William Whitwood at the Sign of the Golden-Lion
in Duck-Lane, near Smithfield, 1669.

A Brief DISCOURSE Concerning the Different WITS of MEN: Written At the Request
of a Gentleman, Eminent in Virtue, Learning, Fortune. In the Year 1664.

And now Published with Consent of the Author.



LONDON, Printed by R. W. for William Whitwood at the Sign of the Golden-Lion
in Duck-Lane, near Smithfield, 1669.

THE CONTENTS.
SECT. I.
ARticle 1. The Occasion of this Discourse. 2. The Difficulty, and 3.
Usefulness of the Argument. page 1.
SECT. II.
Art. 1. What is meant by Ingenium. 2. What by Docility, and the three Parts
thereof. 3. The Difference betwixt Docility and Wit. 4. The Ambiguous
signification of our English Word Wit. 8
SECT. III.
Art. 1. The Faculty of the Mind named Judgment, and its proper Act described.
2. Of Imagination, and its difference in respect of Celerity and Tardity. 3.
The different proportions of Judgment and Imagination required in Poets, in
Historians, in Panegyrists and Satyrists, in Orators, in Philosophers and
Counselors. 4 A constant Prosecution of their End or Scope, required in all,
for prevention of Extravagancy. 5. Wherein Prudence consists. 6. And wherein
Cunning and Evasion. 7. The Difference betwixt Natural and Acquired Wit. 18
SECT. IV.
Art. 1. The Authors conjecture concerning the Final Cause of the great
diversity of Wit observed in Men. 2. The great obscurity of the Natural Causes
of that diversity, in respect of our Ignorance of the Economy of the Brain,
and of the nature of the Mind. 3. Men of Sanguine and hot constitutions
generally Acute, and those of the contrary Temperament, Dull; upon the
auctority of Hippocrates, and of Reason. 35
SECT. V.
Art. 1. Why the Author here attempts to describe only the most remarkable
Differences of Wit, as the Sources of many Virtues and Vices. 2. The First
General difference, or Ready Wit characterised. 3. A subdivision of the same.
4. And its Defects. 52
SECT. VI.
Art. 1. The Character of the Ranging Wit, its Vanity and Levity. 2. With
their proper Remedies. 62
SECT. VII.
Art. 1. The Third general Difference, or Slow but Sure Wit, and its
Character. 2. The Obscurity to which it is subject. 3. And the way to overcome
that obscurity. 74
SECT. VIII.
Art. 1. The Fourth general difference, or Ample Wit. 2. And its distinction
from the Narrow Wit. 3. The use of that Distinction. 4. An Error of some
Learned men, who hold, that no Wit can be great and of Public use, without
the help of Scholastic Erudition. 5. The Refutation of that Error. 6. The
Advantages arising to the Ample wit from solid Learning. 7. Self-confidence an
impediment to the Best-tempered Wit. 8. And Study a help even to Barren ones.
9. The Finest wits most impatient of Study, and why. 10. The Cure of that
impatience. 79
SECT. IX.
Art. 1. A character of the sixth general difference, or Malignant Wit, with
some of its disingenuous Artifices. 2. Three eminent examples of this Malignant
Wit, viz. Cratinus, 3. Aristophanes, 4. And Tacitus. 5. Whence it comes, that
the most abject Spirits are most prone to Malign worthy Men. 6. Malignity of
wit derived from Ill Nature or Perversity of Disposition. 7. The difference
betwixt Malignity and Festivity; with a justification of innocen^ Jests. 8. The
Conclusion.. 112
OF THE DIFFERENT WITS OF MEN.
SECT. 1.
ARTICLE 1.
Noble Sir,
IF I have taken a whole Month to answer your last Letter, it has been only
because I could not so much as show my willingness to do it in less time: the
Command You were pleased therein to send me, being of so abstruse and difficult
a nature, that to perform it with accurateness in any proportion correspendent
to either its own dignity, or Your Curiosity, would require not one, but many
Months, yea Years, though my Abilities were much greater than even the Ignorant
and Envious believe them to be. You have, therefore, more of reason to blame me
for Haste, than for Delay; in that I now render You so negligent an account of
my diligence in managing the Province You assigned me: and if this Paper bring
rather an end to Your Expectation, than satisfaction to Your Judgment; You are
obliged in Equity to look upon on it as a Specimen rather of my Obedience, than
of my Learning. For, had I not preferred the suggestions of my Duty, as a
friend, to the counsel of my Reason, as an Inquirer into Nature; You may assure
Your self, it would have been very long, before I should have been brought thus
freely to expose my Weakness to You, who are so well able to discern it. But my
comfort is, though You are sharp-sighted, You are also Good-natured: not more
apt to discover than to conceal men's infirmities and failings. Having then the
same excuse both for my Tardity and for my Haste; and confiding entirely in
Your Candor: behold, I put into Your hands the following Discourse, to which
Your Command gave the first and sole Occasion, and in which I have plainly and
briefly delivered both my thin Collections, and present Thoughts, concerning
the Different Wits of Men.

ART. 2.
For, though Wit, or Natural Capacity of Understanding, seems to be the only
thing wherein Nature has been equally bountiful to all Mankind; every one
thinking he has enough, and even those who in their Appetites and Desires of
other things are insatiable, seldom wishing for more of that excellent
Endowment: Yet nothing is more evident than this, that some have more Wit than
others, and tha^ Men are thereby no less distinguishable each from other, than
by their several Faces and Tempers.

ART. 3.
To enumerate, then, all these Differences, would be a work almost infinite; to
define wherein they generally consist, extremely hard; to select and describe
the most remarkable of them, highly useful. For, when Men should by the help
of such Descriptions be brought to see the Principal and Ruling Inclinations
(for the most part the inseparable Concomitants of their Wits) that advance or
depress their Estimation and Fortunes in the World, reduced to a few Heads or
Kinds: it would be no hard matter for them to find out the several Advantages
deducible from thence. First, every one might contemplate, as in a Mirror,
some part at least of his own Image, and know in what Classis to rank himself.
Then, by observing what is beautiful or deform in the picture of another, he
might the better judge of what himself either desires or fears to be. Again,
since Virtues and Vices mutually incroach upon each others confines, and that
no Ingeny is so propense to Vices, but that it retains a capacity of being kept
from Exorbitancy, and by the strict rains of Prudence inflected to their
neighboring Virtues* and on the other side, none is so nearly allied to this
or that Virtue, but may by imprudence be corrupted, so as to swerve toward some
bordering Vice: it could not be unprofitable to view the Copies of such
Inclinations, attended by their good or evil Consequents, and from thence to
collect how far they might benefit or hurt, if followed. In fine, by such
general Characters, we might learn how to moderate our Praises of some Persons,
and our causeless Aversation from others; than which nothing is more necessary
in Conversation, especially in election of a Friend.

But, alas! Sir, such a Work as this does yet remain among the Desiderata in
Philosophy, and so is likely ever to do for me, who am so conscious of the many
Herculean Difficulties therein to be encountered and overcome; that I find my
self more inclined to wish, than capable to perform it. You ought not,
therefore, to wonder, if instead thereof I adventure to present You this rude
Essay.

SECT. II.
ART. 1.
THat Faculty of the Mind, which is commonly understood by the word WIT, being
a thing whereof Men have formed to themselves various Conceptions, and for
which they have accordingly invented various Names; it must needs be difficult
to determine what is thereby meant, and what denomination is most agreeable and
proper thereunto. Nor is it less difficult to investigate the Nature thereof,
and wherein it does chiefly consist: the Economy of the Brain of Man being one
of those Arcana of Nature, whose knowledge the wise Creator seems to have
reserved to Himself.

As for the several Names or Words by which it is most usually expressed; I am
obliged to recount and explain them to you briefly, that so being delivered
from Ambiguity (one of the greatest impediments to Science) you may soon be
able to judge which of them is Equivocal, which Adaequate and proper.

The Latin word, Ingenium, though sometimes used even by the best and most
accurate Writers, and who lived in the Golden Age of that Language, to signify
the power of Understanding proper to Mankind; as may be instanced in that
memorable sentence of Sallust, (in initio Belli Catilinarii) Mihi rectius esse
videtur, ingenij, quam virium opibus gloriam quaerere: Yet we find it most
frequently used to denote a man's natural Inclination or Propension to some
things or actions more than to others, whether virtuous or vicious; as may
appear, among a thousand other instances, from that saying of the same
judicious Historian, in his Character of Catiline; Fuit magna vi and animi and
corporis, sed ingenio malo, and pravo; and from that of Suetonius, relating
that Tiberius connived at some youthful debaucheries of Caligula, Si per has
mansuefieri posset ^erum ejus ingenium.

ART. 2.
Sometimes by Wit is understood Aptness to Discipline, or Promptitude to learn:
which the ancient Graecians, both Philosophers and Orators, called (...); the
Latins, Docilitas, and bona indoles, to which our Language has no word
answerable, but Towardliness, now almost obsolete. If you enquire wherein this
happy Faculty does consist, they tell you, that it is not simple, but composed
of three others.

The First of which is named (...), Acumen, and ((...)) celeritas discendi, or,
as Xenophon, (...), a quick or nimble apprehension of what is taught: though I
remember the word (...) to be not seldom applied to Acerbity and Cruelty of
disposition; as by Arrianus in that phrase, (...).

The Second, (...) (ab (...), prope, and (...), animad verto, cogito, inspicio)
which is defined to be (...), a Faculty whereby a man, from what he has
learned, hunts after what he has not learned: the same with that the Romans
termed Sagacitas, and our incomparable Mr. Hobbs renders Ranging.

The Third, (...), Memoria; (...), Retention of what is learned.

ART. 3.
Here, Sir, You have both the true Notion and Parts of Docility conveniently
expressed; but yet you are to seek, whether Wit and Docility be always one and
the same thing. For, Docility, if restrained only to Arts and Sciences, though
it necessarily implies a good capacity of understanding in the Person, by the
bounty of Nature, therewith enriched: yet can it not be thence inferred, that
all men who want this Docility, want also wit; because then none could have
wit, but Scholars alone, and because Experience sufficiently demonstrates that
many laudable Wits are naturally averse from the study of Letters, and in that
respect perhaps also incapable of proficiency in them. So that what Anatomists
generally say of the signs of Virginity, namely that the appearance of them is
a certain evidence of the Brides Chastity; but the nonappearance, no proof of
her deflowerment before Marriage; may with equal truth be said of this
Docility; it cannot be without a good Wit, but a good Wit may sometimes be
without that. Learning, You know, is but Wit cultivated; the seeds thereof are
Natural, and grow up of themselves, and many times bring forth fruits both
pleasant and useful, without the help of Art, especially where their Luxuriancy
is prevented by virtuous education, and their maturity promoted by ingenious
conversation. If wit, then, may subsist without Learning, certainly it may
subsist without Docility, i.e. a facility of learning Arts and Sciences.

Besides, if we divide Docility into its three parts newly described, and
distribute them among three Men, allowing to one quickness of Apprehension, to
the second Sagacity in hunting after consequences, and strength of Memory to
the third: this will not be sufficient to direct us to make a judgment, which
of the three ought to have the praise of the best Wit: because therein they may
all be Equal. For, we want not the testimony of daily observation, that many
excellent Wits have but weak Memories; and as many of admirable Memories are
yet dull of Apprehension; and again many, who are good at Ranging after
Co^sequences, though it be necessary that they remember well (because it is
from the reminiscence of what they have known, that they infer what they seek)
are yet but slow of Conception Hereupon I am of opinion, that Wit and Docility,
though frequently Concomitant, are yet distinct Faculties, and therefore
require both Names and Notions distinct.

Many other words there are used also by the Romans to signify Wit; as
perspicacia, solertia, subtilitas, dexteritas, felicitas ingenij, etc. but
these being all Metaphorical, are therefore Ambiguous, nor worthy a particular
examination.

ART. 4.
Nor is our English word, Wit, (which some of our Glossaries derive from the
Teutonic Witz, to understand; and others from the Latin Videlicet contracted
into viz. because instead thereof we say to wit) altogether exempt from
Ambiguity: as being indifferently used to signify either the Faculty of
understanding it self, or the Act or Effect of that Faculty, in the former
sense, when we say, such a man has a great Wit: in the latter, when we give
the name of Wit to a jest, pleasant conceit, or facete expression, such as the
Latins call sales, lepores, facetiae; the Italians, Scherzo, giuoco, burla; and
the French, raillerie and gaudisserie.

SECT. III.
ART. 1.
FRom the recital of the Names, we pass to the consideration of the Nature of
Wit.

The Understanding of a Man (You know, Sir) is commonly measured either by the
rectitud^ of his Judgment, or the celerity of his Imagination.

By Judgment, we distinguish subtilty in objects nearly resembling each other,
and discerning the real dissimilitude betwixt them, prevent delusion by their
apparent similitude. This Act of the Mind the Grecians term (...), the Latins,
Iudicium and Dignotio; and we, Discretion. The Faculty it self, Aristotle
(Ethic. 6. c. 7.) names '(...), the Latins, subtilitas ingenij; from them the
Italians, sottigliezza, and sottilita; the French, subtilite; and we, subtilty,
which is no other but a certain perspicacity of the Mind, whereby it is able to
compare things one with another,' and discern the difference betwixt them,
notwithstanding they appear very much alike. Herein Old men (caeteris paribus)
usually excel Young; because by long Experience (which is nothing else but
Remembrance of what Antecedents have been followed by what Consequents) they
have learned the Marks or sings, by which things are to be compared and
distinguished: and Men of nimble Apprehension (caeteris paribus) have the
advantage of those who are of slow; because they observe more signs of
difference in less time.

ART. 2.
By Imagination, on the contrary, we conceive some certain similitude in
objects really unlike and pleasantly confound them in discourse: Which by its
unexpected Fineness and allusion, surprising the Hearer, renders him less
curious of the truth of what is said. This is very evident in the use of
Simile's, Metaphors, Allegories and other Tropes and Figures of Rhetoric;
which are therefore called the Ornaments of speech, serving rather for
plausibility, than for demonstration. And, indeed, their power over the
Affections of the greatest part of Mankind, whether by the word Affection we
understand what the Grecians call (...) Passion, or what they term (...) Mores,
Manners; is so great, that the whole Art of Oratory is grounded thereupon, and
he is the most Excellent in that Art, who by the help of those (...) or Images,
of things absent formed in his Imagination, does represent them in so lively
colors, that they appear present. Hereupon doubtless it was, that Quintilian
(institut. Orator. lib. 6. cap. 11.) says, a good Orator must be (...) qui
sibires, voces, actus, secundum verum optime fingat.

Now the Imagination be in common to all Men (yea and to Brute Animals also)
yet is it not equal in all Men. Some are naturally endowed Celeritate
imaginandi, with a quickness of imagination, that is, an easy succession of
one thought upon another others are but slow of imagination, which defect of
the Mind is called Tarditas ingenij, dullness and if great, stupor, stupidity or
sottishness.

From Celerity of Imagination there arises a twofold difference of Wit. Some
are naturally inclined to indulge their thoughts the liberty of Ranging, and
love not to confine them: Others delight in fixing their mind upon one object,
and narrowly examining it. The former sort are allowed to have Laudabilem
Phantasiam; and have a Genius disposed to Poesy and Invention: unless their
Fancy be immoderately quick and ranging; for then it passes into Folly, such
as theirs, who are not able to finish the discourse they have begun, being
suddenly taken off and carried away by new thoughts altogether impertinent.
Which undecent shifting of thoughts is properly named Extra vagancy. The Latter
are said to have Iudicium probabile; and therefore are fit to study Philosophy,
Civil Law, and Controversies.

ART. 3.
For the most part both these Virtues of the Mind are indeed conjoined in the
same Persons; but seldom equally eminent and the several degrees of
pre-dominion of the one over the other, constitute the chief differences of
Men, as to Wit or Understanding. Fancy without moderation of Judgment,
seldom attains to commendation but judgment or Discretion though unassisted by
Fancy, always deserves praise.

In Poets, both Fancy and Judgment are required; but Fancy ought to have
the upper hand, because all Poems, of what sort soever, please chiefly by
Novelty.

In Historians, Judgment ought to have the chair; because the Virtue of
History consists in Method, Truth, and Election of things worthy narration:
nor is there need of more Fancy, than what may serve to adorn the style with
elegant language.

In Panegyries, and Invectives, Fancy ought to take place; because they have
for their end not truth, but praise or dispraise which are effected by
comparisons illustrious, or vile or ridiculous: and Judgment does only suggest
Circumstances, by which the action is rendered laudable o^ blameable.

In Hortatives and Pleadings of Causes, according as verity or simulation does
principally conduce to the advantage of the Argument; so Judgment, o^ Fancy
is to have pre-eminence.

In Demonstration, in Counsel, and in all severe investigation of Truth, only
Judgment is required; unless perhaps sometimes there be occasion for some
convenient similitude, to illustrate what is alleged. But as for Metaphors,
they are wholly to be excluded, as equivocal and ^ntroductory to fallacy: and
herefore to admit them in grave Counsel, or strict Ratiocination, is no less
than manifest folly and impertinency. In all serious discourse, if there appear
want of Discretion, however pleasant Fancy shall show it self, yet Wit will
be defective: but if Judgment be manifest, though the Fancy be but vulgar,
the Wit shall be commended.

ART. 4.
But in all, besides that discretion of times, places and persons, which
renders Fancy commendable, and wherein Civil prudence and the good Menage o^
affairs does principally consist^ there is required also Constant Pr^secution
of the Scope or End pr^posed, that is frequent applica^^on of our thoughts to
the subje^^ about which we are conversa^^ For, so there will occur to us a^
similitudes, such as will not on^ illustrate, but also adorn o^ discourse, and
excite pleasure (...) the hea^ers by the rarity of the invention. Whereas if
there (...) not a constant regulation (...) thoughts to some certain En^ the
more we are conducted (...) heat of Fancy, the nearer (...) come to
Extravagancy, which is degree of Madness; such as is o^served in those Rambling
(...) who (as we said even now) h^ving entered into discourse of o^ thing, are
by every new hint, however remote and impertinent, transported from their
subject into so many digressions and Parentheses, that not recovering what at
first they intended to speak, they lose themselves, as in a Labyrinth. The
Reason of which Error seems to be grounded upon defect of Experience, which
makes them imagine that to be new and remarkable, which to more knowing heads
is really stale and trivial; and that to be great and considerable, which to
others of more observation is not so. For, whatever is new, great and
memorable, if it occurr to the Mind of one speaking of another subject, is wont
to seduce him from his purpose.

ART. 5.
When a man, therefore, hav^ing proposed to himself some certain End, and in
his thought running over a multitude o^ things, as means conducibl^ thereunto,
does quickly perceiv^^ which of them is most probable and how it may be brought
to effect his design: this man is said to have a good Wit, and the Habi^ hereof
is called (...) and (...) Prudence. Which depends upon Experience and
Remembrance of many the like Antecedents, with the like Consequents. But herein
men differ not one from another so much as in Judgment and Phansy; because men
of equal age, may not be very unequal in Experience, as to the quantity, though
one has more of experience in some things, and another in others; since every
one has his particular affairs, concernments and ways of managing them: and a
Husbandman, though rude and illiterate, is yet wiser in his own business, than
a Philosopher in another man's. Whence that rule, Cuique in sua art credendum.

ART. 6.
To this Prudence if there be conjoined the use of Means unjust, or dishonest,
such as Fear, or Poverty does too often suggest: then it degenerates into that
si^istre Prudence, which is called Astutia, Craft or Cunning; which is for the
most part a sign of Pusillanimity or poorness of Spirit* For, a great Mind
scorns unjust and dishonest helps to bring him to his aims. There is also
another sort of Cunning, called Versutia, Evasion; which is deferring or
putting off for a little time some danger o^ incommodity impendent, by running
into worse: and the word seems a derivative from Versura, which signifies
borrowing of one, to pay another.

Having given You, Noble Sir this short and imperfect accoun^^ of what I have
collected concerning the Nature and diver^ Notions of those Intellectual
Faculties, which are vulgarly comprehended under the name of Wit; and deduced,
according to probability, the principal Differences thereof from the various
degrees of Eminency of Judgment and Phansy: the remaining part of the Task You
have been pleased to assign me, is to enquire briefly into the Causes of those
Differences, as well Final as Efficient; and then describe each of them singly
with as much truth and evidence, as my small observation, and less Learning
shall enable me to do.

ART. 7.
But, to prevent mistake, I am obliged first to advertise You (what I had
almost forgotten) that by the Wit I have hitherto spoken of, I mean that which
is Natural, or which grows up together with us, accrewing only from Use and
Experience, without the help of Method, culture or Doctrine. For, as to that
which they call Ingenium Acquisitum, acquired by study of Learning and polite
Education; I conceive i^ to be no other but Reason, which arising from the
right use o^ speech, produces Arts and Sciences; and seems to be only an Effect
or Product of the forme^ cultivated by industry.

SECT. IV.
THus freed from all Ambiguity of Words and Notions commonly applied to Wit,
which otherwise might perhaps have led us out of our right way, or at least
darkened the prospect of our Reason; let us proceed in our Disquisition softly
and fairly to prevent stumbling: following the conduct of the Method newly
proposed. Which brings us in the next place to consider the Final Cause of the
great Diversity of Wits observed in Men.

ART. 1.
What was the End, which the Omniscient Creator designed to Himself, when He
was pleased to constitute this so great and admirable variety; You, Sir, (I
know) are too wise, too conscious of the immense disparity betwixt a Finite
Nature and an Infinite, to expect I should be able to determine: all His
Counsels being to us, poor ignorant things, impervestigable, as Hi^ Perfections
are incomprehensible. However, since we are not forbidden with due reverence to
conjecture; You (I hope) will not refuse to hear my foolish sentiments
concerning this problem: especially while I offe^ them rather to Your
Examination, than to Your belief.

When, therefore, I observe that Men are no less discriminable each from other
by the various Inclinations, Affections and Capacities of their Minds, than by
the dissenting features, lines and aires of their Faces; I am apt to persuade
my self, that God Almighty, in making so vast dissimilitude, and in that
distribution of His several Donatives among Individuals of the same Species,
intended thereby to accommodate Mankind to a Civil life: it being no more
possible for a Society of Men, or Commonwealth, to be composed of Members all
of the like endowments of Mind; than it is for an Animal to exercise various
Functions with many Organs all of the same parts, shape and fabric; or for
Musical Harmony to result from a multitude of Unisons. I am not ignorant, that
even the best Philosophers, when they contemplate the diversity of Natures
Endowments, and the most probable Reason thereof modestly bound their Curiosity
with this clause, that Nature delights her self in variety, as well i^ this as
in all other kinds. Nor do deny what they here say to b^ thus far true, that
Nature, as being the Art of God, can have no other perfection, but what is
derived from her Author and Governor, whose Goodness cannon be terminated but
in it self; and consequently all Emanation and Effects of that Goodnes^ must
redound to the delight o^ their first Fountain. Yet th^^ (methinks) does not
oblige (...) to acquiesce in that consideration alone, without all reflection
upon our selves; there being perhaps some other Reason or End of such Variety,
wherein Mankind may be highly concerned. I conceive, then, that the Creator
having one Eye directed to the pleasure redounding to Him from the
manifestation of His Power and Goodness; aimed with the other at some general
benefit and favor to Man, to whom He purposed to be singularly indulgent and
gracious in all things: and that foreseeing how much more securely,
commodiously and happily Men might live in Societies, than single and
dispersed, as wild Beasts; He ordained this great diversity of Ingenies among
them, as a means to accommodate them to mutual assistance and association. But
this I deliver as only probable, not definitive: and leaving it to Your better
judgment to be approved or rejected, I pass on to the Natural Causes of the
diversity under enquiry.

ART. 2.
Wherein I meet with no less obscurity, than in the former. For, though it be
sufficiently evident, especially to Physicians conversant about diseases of the
Head, that the Seat and principal Organ of the Intellectual Faculties is the
Brain; and that they are more or less perfect in their Operations, according to
the diverse temperament, magnitude, figure and schematism of that noblest Organ;
and to the greater or less Mobility of the Animal spirits (if any such there
be) contained and exercised therein: though thus much (I say) be sufficiently
manifest, yet what temperament, what magnitude, figure and Schematisme of the
Brain produces Acuteness of Wit, and what causes Dullness, is hitherto
unknown. Nor have Anatomists, even in this dissecting and most curious Age,
been yet able certainly to inform themselves, in what part of the Brain that
Celestial Guest, the reasonable Soul, keeps her Court of Judicature; what part
she makes use of in Sensation, what in Imagination, what for Memory, or what
for Ratiocination. Vesalius (I remember) the Prince of Anatomists in the last
Age, expressly nor without derision of those who believed and taught the
contrary, affirms, that the Fabric of Man's Brain is not in the least different
from that of the Brains of Brutes. The Tex^ is remarkable, the great Authority
of the Man considered and therefore I will here transcribe it. (de Corpor.
Human. fabric. lib. 7. cap. 1.)

Qui in Imaginatione, Ratiocinal^one, Cogitatione, Memoria, Cerebru^^ suo
fungatur munere; haudquaqua^ ex sententia apprehendo: neque qu^ quam insuper ab
Anatomico, (...) Theologorum omnem rationis vim, ^ totam fere Principis nobis
voca^ Animae facultatem, Brutis Anima^^bus adimentium occasion, indag^dum
puto. Quum Cerebri nimirum constructione Simia, Canis, Equus, Felis and
Quadrupeda quae hactenus vidi omnia, and Aves etiam universae, plurimaque
Piscium genera, omni propemodum ex part Homini correspondeant: neque ullum
secanti occurrat discrimen, quod secus de Hominis quam de illorum Animalium
functionibus statuendum esse praescribat.

To this You Will answer perhaps, that such indeed was the judgment of Vesalius;
but You are not obliged to acquiesce therein, because You have lately not only
read a certain Book, de Proprietatibus Cerebri Humani, wherein the Author
observes many considerable Differences betwixt the Humane Brain, and those of
all other Animals; but also with Your own eyes behold those Differences
demonstrated by the same Author, in some Dissections for that end made by him
at the command of the Royal Society: and that therefore You hope, if Anatomists
proceed in their discoveries, with the same accurate scrutiny, and the like
happy success, as of late Years they have done; some one of them may at length
be so fortunate, as to find out the true uses of all the several parts of the
Brain of Man, and so solve all the difficulties that now amuse those, who
profoundly consider the wonderful Economy thereof.

I reply, therefore; that granting Vesalius to have been much mistaken in that
his Opinion concerning the Brain; and that there really are those Differences
betwixt Man and all other Animals, which the Book you mention declares: Yet
(Sir) what I have here said concerning the abstrusity of the Nature, immediate
Instruments, and ways of operation of the Intellectual Faculties, is
nevertheless too true. For, You cannot but remember, that even the Author of
that Treatise himself does in the end of it ingenuously confess, that
notwithstanding his frequent observation of those Differences, he was still as
ignorant of the principal seat of the soul, and what parts she made use of in
her several Functions, as before he first entered into the Anatomick Theater.
And were it not a Parergon, I could collect, and here recount many
observations, recorded by Eminent Physicians, of such, who retained the use of
their Senses, Imagination, Memory and Reason, without any the least defect,
even to the last minute of life; and yet in their Heads opened after death,
ther^ was found (as in most Fishes) but very little of Brain, and tha^ little
altogether confounded and dissolved in Water. For a memorable Example of this
astonishing Phenomenon, I take liberty to refer You to lib. 1. cap. 24. of the
Medical observations of Nich^ Tulpius, a late learned and judicious Physician,
and Senator o^ Amsterdam: who relating the various Conjectures of some of his
Colleagues thereupon, gravely concludes with this free confession of his
ignorance; Quan^um est, quod nescimus! Velut namque ^n aliis, sic certe
credibile est, potissi^num nos coecutire in genuino Cerebri ^egimine: c^jus
opera multo fortassis ^unt diviniora, quam quispiam hacte^us suo comprehendit
captu. As for Your expectation of further discoveries from Anatomy, that may
afford more light to direct ^he Virtuosi in their researches unto this dark
Argument; I cannot indeed divine what time may ^ring forth: but am of Opinion,
that there is less reason for Your Hope, than for Your Wish ^or any such
discovery; the nature of Man's Mind being such, that it cannot understand it
self. Adeo Animo non potest liquere de ca^teris rebus, ut adhuc ipse se
quaerat^ Senec. Nature. Quaest. lib. 7. cap. 24.

ART. 3.
You are not then to wonder, i^ I acknowledge my self unable t^ define from
what various Constitutions of the Brain the Differences of Wit arise, as from
their proxime Causes. All I dare observe to You, concerning tha^ Aenigma, is
only this; that for the most part Men of hot and san^^guine Constitutions,
caeteris par^^bus, are more ingenious an^ acute; and those of cold, gros^ and
Phlegmatic, are more dul^ and slow of Imagination. (...) for this You require
Authority, can allege that of Hippocrat^ himself, who has two texts expressly
favorable and pertinent to the same: one concerning the Sanguine; the other,
the Phlegmatic Temperament. The first is this; (...) quod humidissi^num est in
igne, and siccissimum in a^ua, si in corpore temperamentum ^cceperint,
sapientissima sunt. (...) lib. 1. sect. 29. The other, this, (...) porro si in
aliqua Ani^ia defectuosiorem vim ignis accipiat ^uam aqua, eamtardiorem esse
necesse ^st, and appellantur tales Stolidi. Ibi^em Sect. 32. If Reason; it is
^bvious, that the Blood being ^he fountain of Natural Heat, and in truth the
only Calidum innatum, by which all parts of the body are perpetually warmed
enlivened and invigorated; and out of whose purest and agile^ parts the Animal
Spirits are supposed to be extracted: by ho^ much more copious and pu^^ the
Blood is, by so much more of heat is thence communicated to the Brain and its
Appendix of Nerves (thereby man more firm and apt both to receiv^ and retain
the Images or impressions of external Objects; an^ more pervious to the Anim^^
spirits) and a greater supply (...) Spirits generated out of it, for the uses
of the Animal Faculti^^ therein residing, and thereon d^pending, and e contra.
Hen^^ doubtless it was, that Empedo^^ held the Blood to be both the seat and
cause of Sapience: and that Dr. Har^vey, somewhere in his Book of the
Generation of Animals, affirms it to be of no small advantage to the Brain,
that Students and contemplative Men preserve their mass of Blood pure and
incorrupt.

But I remember that my present task belongs rather to Morals than to Physic,
and therefore superseding all further enquiry concerning the diversity of
constitutions from whence the diversity of Wits may arise; and remitting You to
the serious consideration of what that Excellent Man, Mr. Hobbes has delivered
(lib. de Homine, cap. 13.) concerning the Mutation of Men's Ingenies by
Passions, Custom, Experience, the goods of Fortune, Opinion of ones self, etc.
I pas^ to the principal Differences themselves, and their Descriptions; which
animated by Your Command, I proposed to my self chiefly to handle in this hasty
exercise of my blunt and unequal Pen.

SECT. V.
ART. 1.
TO go about to describe the great variety of Ingen^^^ among Men, though of b^^
one and the same Nation^ were an attempt equally vai^ with his, who should
endeavo^^ to number the Sands; nor (...) impossible than for a Painter (...)
pourtrey all the several faces in an Army upon one table. As it is sufficient,
therefore, to a welldrawn Landscape, to contain the most eminent hills,
buildings, trees and other objects situate in the prospect of the Eye within
that Horizon: so may it be some satisfaction to You, if among a vast number of
different Wits I select the most Eminent, such as appear to be the springs or
Sources of many Virtues, and not fewer Vices; and then represent them in
Colors so suitable to their several Natures, that You may be able to discern
and distinguish each from the rest, notwithstanding the near affinity and
resemblance, which some of them have with others. I call them the Sources of
many Virtues and Vices; because this may pass for a Maxim, Ingenia quando
assuescendo it^ confirmata sunt, ut facile, nec reluctant^ ratione, suas edant
actiones, dicuntu^ Mores: qui si boni sunt, Virtutes sin mali, Vitia
appellantur.

ART. 2.
To address then to their Descriptions. That which occu^ in the first place is
the READY (...) nimble Wit. Wherewith su^^ as are endowed have a certai^
Extemporary acuteness of co^ceipt, accompanied with a qui^ delivery of their
thoughts, so (...) they can at pleasure entertai^ their Auditors with facetious
pa^sages, and fluent discourses ev^^ upon very light occasions. The^ have
indeed much of that (...) Spve habilitas in promptu excogitandi quid dicto sit
opus, formerly described; and are therefore excellent at sudden Repartes: but
being generally impatient of second thoughts and Deliberation, they seem fitter
for pleasant Colloquies and Drollery, than for Counsel and Design. Like
Fly-boats, good only in fair weather and shallow waters: and then too more for
pleasure, than traffic. If they be, as for the most part they are, narrow in
the Hold, and destitute of Ballast sufficient to counterpoize their large
Sails; they ^eel with every blast of Argument, and are often driven upon the
sands of a Nonplus: but where favored with the breath of common Applause,
they sail smoothly and proudly, and, like the City Pageants, discharg^ whole
Volleys of Squibbs and Crackers, and skirmish most furiously.

ART. 3.
Of these You meet with tw^ sorts. Some carry away the bel^ in Table-talk and
familiar conversation, with short, but pi^^quant touches of Fancy, such a^
plays chiefly upon the defect^ or misfortunes of others in the company, yet
without gall^ their teeth are sharp, but not ve^nemous: and they rather
nib^ble, than bite. Others, approaching nearer to the dignity of Elo^quence,
are provided, whenever they please to employ the^^ talent, either in public or
pri^vate, to speak volubly, and to the purpose; yet not so much from solidity
of Judgment; as strength of Memory, which instantly supplies them with
whatever they have heard or read agreeable to their Theme. The fine descants
and poinant remarks of both sorts are commonly admired not only by ignorant
Ears, but also by some of Scholastic Erudition; who observing the facility of
their vein in breaking sharp jests, and pouring forth a torrent of not undecent
expressions, are apt to grow out of love with themselves, and to be offended
with their own flowness of Conception, which permits them not to do the like
without premeditation and pumping. And they have reason. For, what can You
imagine more speciously resembling true industry, and graceful Elocution, than
the opportune and pertinent. Hitts of these facetious Spirits? what more
Elegant, than to make acute reflections upon every occurrent; and to give
hometouches with gentleness; which are the less resented, because they appear
sudden and jocular. I^ to this Promptness and Iocundity o^ Wit, either Nature
has been so^ liberal as to add comeliness o^ Person, or Fortune so propitious
as to conjoyn dignity of Condition; especially if it be animated by great and
secure Confidence: then^ is their liberty of jesting as it^ were authorized in
all places, nor ungrateful to those whom it provokes: yea oftentimes, by its
very Galliardise, it wins the Palm from solid and exact Prudence, if lodged in
Men of excellent abilities, but slow Expression. Of the advantages redounding
to a ready Wit from that Gracefulness of Person, which the Grecians termed To
(...), and the Latins, dignitas oris; You have an eminent Example in Dion the
Syracusan, who thereby much ingratiating himself to the people, was so
prosperous in his ambition, that he ruined Dionysius, and succeeded him in the
Soveraignyy of Sicily: and Corn. Nepos puts the same in his Character; where
among his natural Endowments he reckons as chief, ingenium docile and come;
magnamque corporis dignitatem, quae non minimum commendatur.

ART. 4.
But this so charming swiftness of both Fancy and Tongue i^ not exempt from
its Failings, and those shameful ones too sometimes. For, take them from their
familiar and private conversation, into grave and severe Assemblies, whence all
extemporary flashes of Wit, all Fantastic allusions, all Personal reflections
are excluded; and there engage them in an Encountre^ with solid Wisdom, not in
light skirmishes, but a pitched field of long and serious debate concerning any
important question: and then You shall soon discover their weakness, and
contemn that barrenness of understanding which is incapable of struggling with
the difficulties of Apodictical knowledge, and the deduction of truth from a
long series of Reasons. Again, if those very concise sayings, and lucky
Repartes (for the Court has now naturalized that Word) wherein they are so
happy, and which at first hearing were entertained with so much of pleasure and
admiration; be written down, and brought to a strict examination of their
Pertinency, Coherence and Verity: how shallow, how frothy, how forced will they
be found! how much will they lose of that Applause, which their tickling of the
ear, and present flight through the Imagination had gained! In the greatest
part therefore of such Men You ought to expect no deep and continued River of
Wit; but only ^ few Plashes, and those too not altogether free from mudd an^
putrefaction.

SECT. VI.
ART. 1.
IN the second place comes the RANGING Wit, whose Pregnancy is so diffused,
that it flie^ at all things; and commonly assisted with prolix Eloquenc^^
discourses copiously rather tha^ closely; without premeditatio^ supplying it
self with words an^ sentences, as out of a treasury in^ exhaustible. Men of
this Talent are usually in high esteem with the People, if of such Professions
as give them opportunities to show their Copiousness in public Assemblies or
Councils: nor ungrateful in private Conversation, at least when once they have
learned as well to be silent at some times, as to speak profusely at others.
Which they cannot easily do. For, as all Brute Animals know, by natural
instinct, in what part their chief power lies, and delight in the frequent use
of that part above all the rest of their members: so these Men, highly
delighted with their faculty of Eloquence, wherein alone they excel, are
hardly brought to observe Decorum, and opportunities when to contract or
expa^iate, when to speak or hold their peace; but carried violently o^ by an
itch of declaiming on every subject, how trivial or impertinent soever, often
entangle themselves in Arguments above their understanding, and so satiate, but
not satisfy their Hearers. So that even a Wise man may justly wonder, their
imprudence considered, how they ar^ able to speak so much and so little at
once, so well and to s^ little purpose. Having at length ended (not finished)
their fin^ Harangues, they scarcely refrai^ from openly applauding themselves:
and if their Auditor^^ show any signs of Complacenc^ and good Humor, they are
ap^ to refer it only to a satisfaction of judgment resulting from the Elegancy
of their discourses, though the same arises rather from Joy that they are at
length delivered from the importunity of them. Notwithstanding this Vanity it
must be confessed, these Wits have long wings, and in^cited by a secret impetus
of Nature, delight to fly abroad, and range over the whole field of Sciences:
but then again such is their speed and praecipitancy, they stay no where long
enough ^o examine, select and gather; like Bees in a windy day, they take only
a superficial taste of vari^us flowers, and return to their ^ives unloaded.
Whence it comes, that while they are discoursing of one part of Learning, ^f a
new hint chance to arise and ^ntrude it self into their Imagination, instantly
quitting their former Theme, they as ardently pursue the new one; and so often
divert to fresh Arguments* till they have wholly forgotten the question first
started; as unstanch Hounds, meeting with (...) new scent, follow it with ful^
cry, and lose the Beast first cha^sed. And this is that Defect o^ Mind, which
is commonly called Levity: arising perhaps chiefly from an excessive Mobility
of the Animal spirits in the seat o^ Imagination.

No wonder, then, if these Rambling Heads be so far from attaining to sublime
and extra^ordinary Wisdom, that for the most part they come short (...) even
Vulgar ones in orderin^ their affairs according to the rules of Domestic
Prudence. Some of them becloud themselves with the Vapors of Philauty,
self-love, and over-valuation of their own Opinions, and hunting after Praise:
Others lose their credit by too-visible Affectation: Others attempt things
above their reach, and sink themselves by aspiring: and Most prove wanting to
themselves and Friends in such offices, where constant sedulity, and steady
adherence to one purpose is required. For, they are naturally light, unconstant
even to their own Hopes, variable in their Designs, fixed to nothing but their
own Opinions, in which they so absolutely confide, that they look not into the
advantages of others proposals and counsels. And yet for all this some of them
so dazel weaker Eyes with the polish and luster of their superficial Parts,
that they pass for Accomplished Persons, and are at length admitted to reap
that harvest of Fame and Wealth* which ought to be the reward of solid and
profound Abilities (...) especially when they have acquired the Art of
understanding as well how to conceal their Defects, as how to set forth their
good Qualities.

ART. 2.
This Art consists principally in moderating their fervency of speaking; in
frequent chang^ of Arguments; and alwaye^ choosing such, in which they may most
easily impose upon their Hearers. For instance; among Military men, let them
discourse of matters of Religion, of the rites and customs of the Ancients, of
the Origines and Migrations of Nations, and such like Themes, wherein Soldiers
generally have but little knowledge, among men bred up in the shades of the
Schools, and unconversant in Polities; let them discourse of the foundations
and periods of Empires, of the Fates of Kingdoms, of the revolutions in
Commonwealths, of the Virtues and great actions of particular Princes, of State
Maxims, etc. In a word, Let them provoke none in his own Way or Art. For, in
familiar conferences, and sociable Colloquies, it is not ungrateful, so it be
dexterously done, to divert to things of which the Company is ignorant: both
because Errors then escape discovery, and because Novelty begets pleasure, and
by how much more we esteem things of which we never heard before, by s^ much
more do we admire him who delivered them. But abov^ all let them take heed of
Writing* which to Roving and Superfici^al Wits is as difficult, as their Gift
of speaking fluently is easie^ and for the most part proves n^ less destructive
to their Fame than their ex tempore Oratory hat^ been favorable. For, tha^
which gives due sharpness an^ grace to the Style of a Writter, an^ recommends
it to the present and succeeding Ages, is exquisite and elaborate Judgment;
which is very rarely conjoined with natural fluency of speech. The Reason may
be this; that a prompt, but turbulent Mind, when in retirement (which all know
to be necessary to a Writer) it comes once to reflect upon it self, and examine
its own strength; burdened with multiplicity of things together offering
themselves, and confounded with variety of thoughts, soon faints under the
weight: and having neither judgment to select, nor patience to digest, falls
at length into Distraction, or Despondency. In fine, the Faculty of writing
well is so different from that of talking volubly, and requires so much more of
both Attention and Deliberation; that most of your Fine Speakers, when once
they find the wings of their Fancy clipped, and their understanding entangled
in strong and knotty Reasonings, are miserably at a loss how to extricate
themselves, and despairing of success, return to their former liberty. Yet some
of this Classis, either blinded with self-conceit, or deluded by adulation of
their Admirers, have adventured to publish Books; and out of vain Ambition to
enlarge and eternize their Reputation by their Pen, have utterly ruined what
they had acquired by the nimbleness of their Tongue. My advice, therefore, to
such shall be this; that they raise ^n the World an Expectation of some
considerable Volume from them, and keep that expectation alive as long as they
can: but be so wise as never to satisfy it with so much as a single Sheet. But
Wits of this temper are commonly too Hot to moderate their Efforts; too
opinionated to take caution from the Counsel of even their truest Friends: and
therefore I leave them to please themselves.

SECT. VII.
ART. 1.
YOu have beheld the Ready, and the Roving Wits, together with their Advantages
and Defects; be pleased now to remove Your eye to the Image of a Third sort,
which seeming contrary to both, and yet more useful than either, may therefore
not unfitly be called the SLOW, but SURE Wit. Some Heads there are of a certain
close and reserved Constitution, which makes them at first sight to promise as
little of the Virtue^ wherewith they are endowed* as the former appear to be
above the Imperfections to which they are subject. Somewhat Slo^ they are
indeed of both Conception and Expression; yet no which the less comparated to
solid Prudence. When they are engaged to speak, their Tongue does not readily
interpret the dictates o^ their Mind; so that their Language comes as it were
dropping from their lips, even where they are encouraged by familiar
entreaties, or provoked by the smartness of jests, which sudden and nimble
Wits have newly darted at them. Costive they are also in their Invention; so
that when they would deliver somewhat solid and remarkable, they are long in
seeking what is fit, and as long in determining in what manner and words to
utter it. But, after a little consideration, they penetrate deeply into the
substance of things, and marrow of business, and conceive proper and Emphatick
words, by which to express their Sentiments. Barren they are not, but a little
Heavy and Retentive. Their Gifts lie deep and concealed; being furnished with
Notions, not aerie and umbratil ones, borrowed from the Pedantism of the
Schools, but true and useful: and if they have been manured with good
Learning, and the habit of exercising their Pen; oftentimes they produce many
excellent Conceptions worthy to be transmitted to Posterity.

ART. 2.
Though they have no reason to accuse Nature of any unkindness to them; yet
they have just cause to complain of the iniquity of Fortune, in this respect;
that having an Aspect very like to narrow and dull Capacities, at first sight
most Men take them to be really such, and strangers look upon them with the
eyes of neglect and contempt. Hence it comes, that Excellent Parts remaining
unknown, often want the favor and patronage of Great Persons, whereby
otherwise they might be redeemed from obscurity, and raised to employments
answerable to their Faculties, and crowned with honors proportionate to their
Merits: as the most precious wares seldom invite buyers, if kept in darksome
corners, nor decently exposed, and adorned with splendid titles.

ART. 3.
The best course^, therefore, for these to overcome that E^clipse, which
prejudice usually brings upon them, is to conten^ against their own Modesty,
and ei^ther by frequent converse wit^ noble and discerning spirits, (...)
enlarge the Windows of their Minds, and dispel those cloud^ of Reservedness,
that darken the luster of their Faculties: or b^ Writing on some new and
useful^ subject, to lay open their Ta^lent, that so the World man be convinced
of their intrinsic^ value.

SECT. VIII.
ART. 1.
IN the middle betwixt the two Opposites, too much Heaviness, and too much
Lightness, Nature seems to have placed the most happy Indoles or AMPLE Wit:
which is seldom out of love with it self, yet never too indulgent to it self,
and often advances its possessors to the highest honors and dignities, of
which Subjects are capable. This usually is attended with no more of Eloquence
than decency allows, or occasion requires; and that, if cultivated by
Erudition, or matured by Time, is always neat and graceful even in familiar
Conversation; neither precipitate, nor slow^ in delivery: as guided by (...)
Judgment, though not sharp o^ the sudden, yet strong and solid^ after a
little recollection. I^ fine, this is the Man most fit to harbor all Virtues;
as by Natures benignity comparated to great Prudence, as well Public a^
Private: and if touched with a Temperamental Propensity to some certain Vice,
yet seldom tainted with any evil Habit.

ART. 2.
Betwixt these Ample Wits and the Narrow ones, Nature her sel^ has a certain
Criterion or Character of Distinction, easily discernable: and it is this. The
Former, being duly conscious of their own dignity, do all things with a Bon
Mine or good Grace, and becoming Freedom, far from the vices of Affectation and
Constrained. Formality: as being actuated by Spirits not bold, but Generous and
Erect, always addressed to noble Ends, and contemplating somewhat diffusive
and above vulgar aims. And this is that Semi-divine Temper of the Mind, which
Aristotle calls (...), the Latins, Felicitas inge^ii; and we, an Universal
Capa^ity. On the contrary, Narrow and Grovelling Wits condemn themselves to
abject Cogitations and low Counsels, never ^aring to aspire above the common
suggestions of their pusilla^imous Humility: yet in little matters, and such as
transcend not the Sphere of their Capacity, they often proceed with exact
diligence, and sometimes also with good success; there being annexed to them a
certain Astutia, sinistre or spurious Wisdom called Cunning an^ Wisdom for
ones self, such as i^ common also to weak and timorous Animals, which keeps
their intent wholly upon their ow^ safety, and (as we have before deduced it)
arises only from diffidence of sufficiency in themselves than which there can
be n^ greater Enemy to noble and generous Undertakings. Beside^ if they at any
time (as sometimes, puffed up with prosperity (...) their Crafty and underminin^
designs, they will) offer at ingenuity; it is with so much constraint,
formality and starch'dness, that they expose themselves to the smiles and
contempt of Judicious Men.

ART. 3.
This Thau or Mark of difference is well worthy Your observation, because these
Half-witted or Cunning Men for the most part make advantage of even their
Inability, building rather upon deceiving others, who confide in them, than
upon any soundness of their own proceedings: and because (as ^he Lord
Chancellor Bacon most ^udiciously observes) nothing does more harm in a State,
than that Cunning men pass for Wise men; like Empiricks in Physic, they may
indeed have a great Collection of Experiments, but not knowing the right and
seasonable use of them, pervert them to base and sinister Ends.

Leaving them therefore as unworthy further consideration* let us return to our
Bon. Esprit* and for a few minutes entertai^ our selves with contemplatin^ the
excellency thereof.

ART. 4.
There are among the Literat^ who misled either by too much favor to their own
Disciplines, (...) by an immoderate esteem of the advantages of Scholastic
Sciences (which were never denied to be very great by any but the Barbarous)
allow no Wit to be Happy and of Public use, but that which is not only capable
of, but also naturally addicted to Letters; none to have attained to the just
height of Prudence, that was not advanced thereto by the Scale of various
Learning. Thus Men eminently fruitful in Public Virtues, and as it were
constellated for Polity or the great Art of Governing the Multitude, they
exclude from the Senate, and from true Greatness, by a Prejudice more allied to
Envy than to Discretion. For,

ART. 5.
On the contrary, it is much more reasonable to hold, tha^^ none are so fit for
affairs of State, as those blessed Favorites of Nature, upon whom she has
accumulated her noblest and riche^^ Donatives: Since that Sagaci^^ of Spirit
which enableth a Man not only to know the Resor^^ and Opportunities of Business
but also to sink into the Main o^ it; and then to form Counse^^ both for
Conduct and Dispat^^ (the two Principal Virtues in (...) Statesman) is rather
the fre^^ Gift of Heaven, than the pu^^chase of Labor and Stu^^y Which seems
to be no more tha^^ what the great Roman Orat^^ averrs, upon his own
observation. Ego multos homines (says he) in Orat. pro Archia Poeta)
excellenti animo ac virtute fuisse, and sine doctrina, naturae ipsius habitu
prope divino, per seipsos and moderatos and graves extitisse fateor: and illud
adiungam, soepius ad laudem, atque Virtutem naturam sine doctrina, quam sine
natura valuisse doctrinam. Again, Time has furnished us with Examples of some,
who had acquired high estimation in the Schools by extraordinary acuteness in
sundry kinds of Learning, and yet proved very weak, when they were transplanted
into the more subtle and fine region of Princes Courts and Councils: their
Reason then confessing it self too dullsighted to discern the Finesses of Civil
Prudence, to which all other Learning must give place.

You will not, Sir, I presume, be long in determining which is the truer
Wisdom, his, who can foresee discontents and Motions of a Nation, and provide
seasonable and safe Remedies for them, or his, who, after long contemplation,
is able to predict Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, and to calculate the journeys
and returns of all the Planets; but cannot presage what dangers threaten the
Commonwealth, what Changes and Revolutions are impendent over the State.

Besides, those very Men, who thus cry up the usefulness of Languages and
Sciences, restrain not ^he title of Learned and Polite to him alone, who has
with equal felicity run through the whole Encyclopedic or Round of Arts and
Sciences: but think it sufficient, if a Man acquire excellency in any one of
them: for instance, if an Orator singularly dextrous in managing Arguments, and
happy in all the Exornations of speech, be yet dull and heavy in comprehending
the secrets of Natural Philosophy; or if a profound Philosopher be yet
destitute of Eloquence, or unconversant in History, and Politics and other
parts of Learning; they nevertheless deny him not the Honor of an Eminent Wit.
That Pre-eminence therefore, which is due from any one part of Learning, why
are they so partial, so unjust, as to detract from that Science, which is
conversant in the regulation of whole Societies of Men, and which in that very
respect ought to be preferred to all other Human Knowledge? Think they, that
Wisdom speaks to her Disciples only in Greek, or Latin, or Hebrew; and not
rather in a secret Vivacity of Spirit, and a piercing Judgment or Reason that
understands all Languages* To be born with a pregnant Wit, is no such high
indulgence of Nature, if no more be required therein, than a Propension to, and
Capacity of Erudition Scholastic. Those of the Ancients, whom we acknowledge
to have been the Patriarchs of Sciences, and great Examples of Wisdom, never
consumed much of oil and sweat in the shades of the Shools: and yet certainly
they were born under Stars highly propitious. To found Republics, to make
wholesome Laws for conservation of public Peace, to support their Country by
wise Counsels, to observe the Constitutions, Rites and Customs of other
Nations, and transferr into their own whatever they found worthy imitation; so
far to note and register the motions of Celestial Bodies, as to keep a a true
account of Time, and accommodate their negotiations both at home and abroad to
the most convenient seasons of the year, and benefit of the People: This, this
was chiefly called Science in those elder and purer Times.

To be a little more particular; while those Primitive Sage^^ labored to
reclaim savage and rude Multitudes, and mollifie^^ their iron Minds by
mansuetud^^ and other Virtues necessary to common safety and the maintenance of
Right in Civil Societies; by little and little the^^ grew up that Knowledge,
which is called Moral Philosophy. And while, being disjoined by mutual
emulation and contention, they endeavored to persuade the People to favor and
adhere to one or the other side, they made speeches to them to move their
Affections accordingly; that gave the first beginning and credit to Eloquence
or Oratory. In a word, the Monuments of History have conveyed down to us the
Prudence and Artifices of those Ancients, so as to be Precedents to our Modern
Literati; at least if they be able to bear the like weight of cares: if not,
the best use their weaker Heads can make of such Monuments, will be only to
boast of their Reading, by showing them to others; as Priests show Relics of
Saints, but want the power of working Miracles; or as keepers of antic and
magnificent Structures can perhaps name the Founders and Architects, but
imitate neither. For, to read History only for Contemplation, is a vain and
idle pleasure, that leaves no fruit behind: but to imitate the glorious actions
and achievements of such worthy Patriots, that is true and noble Erudition.
This wa^ the use Cicero made of his vas^ readings, as appears by that
profession of his (in Orat. pro Archi^^ Poeta.) Quam multas nobis imagines non
solum ad intuendum, veru^ eti^ am ad imitandum, fortissimoru^ ho^^minum
expressas Scriptores and Grae^^ and Latini reliquerunt? quas Ego mi^^ semper in
administranda Rep. pr^^pones, Animum and mentem mea^ ipsa cogitatione Viroum
excellentiu^^ conformabam, etc.

ART. 6.
Nevertheless it is not to be doubted, but the most Absolu^^ Wit is that, which
(like the First Matter of the Aristoteleans) is capable of any Form, and can
with equal facility employ it self in all kinds of Studies; having an Universal
Acuteness, and strength as well to grasp the difficult and ^lippery Mysteries
of State, as to unravel the knotty Methods of Arts and Sciences professed in
Universities. For, Studies perfect Nature; and both are perfected by
Experience: natural Abilities being like Fruit Trees, that need proyning and
culture by learning; and Studies themselves giving forth directions too much at
large, except they be bounded by Experience. All together make the happiest
conjunction, and by mutual assistance advance their Owner to the pinnacle of
Humane Wisdom and Honor: that sublime Sagaicty of judgment requisite in a
Statesman, and conformed to the Genius of the present Age, an^ comporting with
the constitution of Affairs, so governin^^ Learning, as that it can neithe^^
degenerate into Pedantism, no^^ rust in vain and solitary Specula^^on: and
Learning, on the oth^^ side, so supporting and enrichin^^ the Judgment, as
that it nee^^ not rely only upon single Experience and Observation of i^^ own
time, but may have recourse also to the Oracles of al^^ former Ages, and
furnish it sel^^ with Examples out of the treasury of Antiquity.

Yet if any Man (as many such there are) naturally addicted to Public
business, and fit to serve his Prince and Country in quality of a Counselor,
be not equally in favor with the Muses, nor prosperous in Scholastic
speculations; I hope, Sir, You will not stick to allow him to be a Person of a
more erect Mind, and nobler Parts, than a mere Contemplative Book-man; who
^^hough perhaps skillful in Languages, and Logician enough to ^^nriddle and
impose Sophisms, ^^nd to dispute long and formally about Non-entities, is yet
too narrow of understanding to measure the vastness of Civil Prudence, which is
founded upon mature observation, and built up of so^^id Experiences, squared by
exact Judgment, and adjusted to pre^ent Emergencies in State. So that I am apt
to believe, that Favorinus was in very good ear^est, though he seemed to jest,
when he measured the Knowledge of Adrian the Emperor by the greatness of his
Power. The Story is in short this. Adrian, not a little ambitious of the fame
of extraordinary Learning, accidentally meeting Favorinus, an eminent
Philosopher, fell instantly upon him with a whole Volley of Syllogisms, and
presse^^ him with Sophistical Arguments: to which the war^ Philosopher made but
sparing and modest answers, such as intimated his being overcome, an^^ left the
Emperor to please himself with his imaginary victory* Soon after, to his
Friends reprehending him for making so wea^ defense, he returned this
vindication: I were to blame (said he if I should not grant him to be t^^ most
learned, who has daily twenty Legions at his command. Which I understand to be
more than a Complement; the Regiment of so many Millions being a piece of
greater skill, and sublimer Science, than to manage a disputation with
Dialectical subtlety, and argue in Mode and Figure.

Having thus in a short digression, endeavored to refute the Error of such who
hold, that no Wit, however Ample and Happy in its native capacity, can yet
attain to solid Prudence, without the improvement of Scholastic Erudition: it
follows, that we observe briefly both the Vice, to which even the Best tempered
Wits sometimes are prone; and the principal Remedy thereof.

ART. 7.
As Pusillanimity or Self-diffidence makes of Narrow Wits Cunning men: so
self-confidence, if immoderate, often checks the growth, and hinders the
fertility of even the Best Wits. For, some of greatest hopes, too soon trusting
to the native pregnancy of their Mind, and desisting from Lecture, Meditation
and all other labor of the Brain, as not only unnecessary, but also
burdensome, and expensive o^ time: thereby clipp their own wings, render
themselves unfi^ for any generous flight, and eve^ after flagg; so far from
aspiring above others, that they com^ short even of themselves, an^ suffering
those igniculi aetherei or Celestial sparks of Wit, by which they were in
their Youth actuated, to languish and go out for want of industry to fan them,
degenerate into a barren dullness, so much the more difficult to be overcome, by
how much the longer ere acknowledged. Whereas Others, conscious of their native
imbecility, endeavor with labor and sweat to acquire what the austerity of
Nature denied them; and by continual culture of Study, and ^^ds of good
Discipline, so en^^ch the field of their Understanding, that at length they
exceed in fertility of Science not only their former selves, but others also to
whom Nature has been much more bountiful. By which it is manifest, that,

ART. 8.
The proper Remedy for this Obstruction, that not seldom brings an Atrophy or
defect of nourishment upon the best tempered Wit, can be no other but constant
Study and Meditation, by which the Faculties of the Mind are exercised and kept
in vigor. Not that it is requisite Men of this order should over-curiously
search into each punctilio or nicety of the thing they contemplate: for, though
that be the way to attain exactness in some Particulars; yet it would at the
same time greatly retard their progres^ in the Main, and make it long before
they advance so far, as to make a liberal and genuine inspection into the whole
of that very Science, which they so ambitiously affect. Besides the sam^ would
habituate them to confine their Cogitations within too narrow a compass; by
impaling their Curiosity upon Notions, though perhaps of great subtlety in
speculation, yet of little use in the occurrents of life: nor could they easily
let loose their thoughts to other things, which though sometimes of an
inferior nature, yet may be more necessary to be looked into. To these
therefore I am bold to prescribe Study as a daily Exercise, not as their sole
employment.

ART. 9.
Nor do I condemn those Fine Wits, that spend most upon the Stock of Nature;
because they have this for excuse, That all Heads are not equally disposed to
patience in Study, and diuturnity of labor. For, the finer and acuter the Wit
is, by so much the more easily indeed does it penetrate into things difficult,
and divide things involved; but then again it grows the sooner blunt with
length of labor and intention. The Reason perhaps is this; that Nature does
rarely commit such Fine Wits to the custody of gross and robust Bodies; but for
the most part chooses to lodge them in delicate and tender Constitutions, such
as produce the purest and sublimest spirits: which as by their greater Mobility
they conduce to quickness of Apprehension; so are they for the same cause more
prone to Expense or Exhaustion, upon continued intention of the Mind, nor
capable of reparation unless after due repose and pleasant divertisement.
Again, not only the Labor of these Ethereal Wits, ^ut even their Relaxation
and Leisure is therefore precious; because no sooner are their Brains at
liberty, but they acquire new Vigor, and their Acuteness spontaneously ranging
abroad, brings in fresh Hints, and reple^ishes them with serious reflections,
and useful cogitations: as ^ich ground, when left a while fallow, of its own
accord puts forth abundance of Excellent Plants, in nothing inferior to the
best cultivated Gardens. This seems pathetically expressed in that Apothegm of
Cosmus de Medicis, the Politic Founder of the flourishing Dukedom of
Florence. When in a morning he had lain long in bed, as wholly resigned up to
an incurious repose, one of his Favorites coming into his Bedchamber, salutes
him with this Complement; Sir (said he) where is Cosmus the Great, to whose
Vigilance, as to a P^^lot, we have all entrusted the conduc^ of our State? are
not his eyes open (...) high noon? I have been abroad so^ hours since, and
dispatched much b^siness. The Duke smartly returns boast not Your diligence
thus, Sir; (...) very Repose is more profitable, than all Your pains and
industry.

ART. 10.
Nor is this Delicacy of Constitution, which hinders the Choicest Wits from
undergoing the hardship of constant Study and long watchings, so Universal, but
that some are exempted from it. But these are, I confess, very rare, and as the
noblest Presents Nature can make to Kingdoms and States, seldom produced by
her: being of that most happy temper, that they can stoop their lofty Parts to
the anxiety of tedious Meditations, and drudgery of vast Readings and
Collections. To this they bring themselves chiefly by Resolution and Custom:
whose Effects are no less admirable in the Faculties of the Mind, than in those
of the Body. Hence our incomparable Mr. Hobbes (who was pleased not long since
to tell me, that he was in the fortieth Year of his age, when he first began to
study with due intention of Mind) speaking of the power of Custom upon the
various Ingenies of Men, has this remarkable sentence: Quae nova offendunt,
eadem saepius iterata nature am^subigunt; and primo quidem far se* mox autem
amare cogit. Id quod in regimine corporis maxim, deinde etiam in operationibus
Animi perspicuu^est. de nature. Homin. cap. 13. sect. 3. When they have thus
conquered themselves, then it is they make the truly Brave Men. When Time,
Perseverance in Study, and Experience have brought them to Maturity; You may
worthily call them Living Libraries, walking Epitomes of all Sciences, and
Magazins of Knowledge. For, in them may be found the Piety of Divines, the
Wisdom of Histories, the Wit of Poets, the Solidity of the Mathematics, the
depth of Natural Philosophy, the Gravity and Uprightness of Moral, the wariness
of Logic, the strength and sweetness of Rhetoric, the distinguishing subtlety
of the Schoolmen, the Exactness of Critics, and the right Use of all. And
when they are fixed in Public employments, abeunt Studia in mores, they become
fit to bare a continual load of cares; not prone to be confounded with
Multiplicity of affairs, no^ discomposed with the diverse aspects of Occurrents,
no^ startled at unexpected and cross Events; but constantly calm, and equally
sedulous, and what more can be expected from Humane frailty?

In this rude Draught of the charming Beauties of the Amp^ and Studious Wit,
more of an^ might have been shown, and better Colors used. But, considering
that it contains, tanquam (...) compendio, all the several Virtu^ that lie
dispersed and single in the precedent sorts; and tha^ You (Noble Sir,) are so
happy as to need no more lively Image thereof, than what You may daily
contemplate (the curtai^ of Your great Modesty withdrawn) by reflecting upon
Your Own: I thought my self at liberty to run the same over only with light
touches, and a hasty Pencil. Which I now remove to a work much less grateful
both to Your Genius and my own, namely the Character of the Malignant Wit:
which I therefore reserved for the last place, that the Deformity thereof might
set off the Beauties of those already described; as Satyrs and Negro's painted
by fair Ladies make them appear more amiable.

SECT. IX.
ART. 1.
BY the MALIGNANT Wit, then, I understand that which is indeed quick of
Apprehension, but void of Humanity: being prone to exercise it self chiefly in
re-searching into the Defects, Errors, and even the Infortunes of Others, such
especially who by their Virtues have rendered themselves Conspicuous; and to
delight in both aggravating and publishing them to their dishonor. Wits of
this evi^ temper may not unfitly be resembled to Chemical Spirits, which are
subtle and penetrating, but they also corrode: and the Spirits by which they
are actuated, seem to be extracted, not out of the purest parts of their Blood
(as other Men's are) but from their Gall; as if they desired to verify the new
opinion of Sylvius de la Boe, that that bitter and acrimonious Excrement is the
Natural Ferment of the Blood, and necessary to not only the Vital, but also the
Animal actions, in all living Creatures, in which it is found. Out of
Self-conceit, they affect to be thought highly Ingenious; because nothing is
more nearly allied to Reason, the proper good of man, than Ingenie: whence that
of the Poet, Qui velit ingenio cedere rarus erit. Whereupon Claud. Donatus,
relating how one Filistus, a Favorite to Augustus, used to cast reproaches
upon Virgil, and carp at all he said, even in the Emperors presence; adds that
he did it, non ut verum dignoseeret, quod Socrates facere cons^^evit; sed ut
eruditior videretur. But conscious of their own Vices, and studious to conceal
them; they endeavor by detraction to make it appear, that others also of
greater Estimation in the World, are tainted with the same or greater: as
infamous Wo^^^ generally excuse their personal debaucheries, by incriminating
upon their whole Sex, calumniating the most chaste and virtuous, to palliate
their own dishonor. To this base end, they rejoice to expose the secret faults
of men any way renowned: which being no otherwise so easily effected as by the
Pen, they addict themselves mostly to Writing, among all Sects choosing that of
Critics, that so under the innocent liberty of judging, they may usurp the
most pernicious license of Censuring. In which inhumane practice they are sure
to make use of one, or more of these cunning artifices. Having found an
opportunity to mention some evil, whether true or only suspected, in the
Person, whose Merits they intend to disparage; either they industriously
pretermit what they know, and ought to conjoyn toward the excuse thereof; or
they pretend (forsooth) not to believe it, when yet they revive the memory of
it for no other end, but that it may be more firmly believed by others. Where
they meet with notorious failings, there they seem to extenuate, and as it were
to compensate them with slight Commendations, only to disguise their
detraction: as I have heard of a certain Courtier, who desirous to obstruct the
preferment of a poor Country Vicar, and yet not daring to oppose his Master,
King James his charitable inclination thereunto; said to the King, Your Majesty
may do well to give him a better Living, for though he has not much of
Learning, he is a very good Fellow, too hard for all his Parishioners at
Cudgels, and has a singular knack in catching Dotrells* Another of their
tricks is this; where they cannot blame the Fact it self, they suggest sinistre
Motives or inducements to the doing of it, and deprave the Course and
intention. To these may be added one more, no less detestable; where rumor
has dispersed various conjectures concerning one and the same action of some
Eminent Man, omitting or suppressing the more benign and favorable, they
select the worse and more derogatory, and largely comment thereupon; with
design to pervert the belief of their Hearers, or Readers, in deteriorem
partem. Thus drawing suspicions from the crooked rule of their own insincere
Mind and depraved inclinations; they labor to persuade themselves and others,
that there is among Men no such thing as true Virtue, but only a Shadow or
artificial representation of it: thereby vainly promising to themselves the
reputation of singular acuteness of judgment, and more than vulgar Wisdom. If
they can Eclipse the glory of Worthy Men, by fomenting obscure and uncertain
rumors concerning their Achievements, or by maliciously ascribing the same,
not to prudent Counsels and honorable Motives, but to Ambition, or Avarice, or
Hypocrisy, or Simulation; or Captation of popular favor, or any the like
sinistre aims: they then imagine they have raised to themselves a Monument of
Honor out of the ruins of theirs, whom they that inhumanly calumniate.

ART. 2.
To this Classis may be referred all the ill-natured Disciples of Momus,
Derisores, Scoffers, such who, like Beetles, seem hatched in dung, or Vermin
bred out of Ulcers; perpetually feeding upon the frailties and imperfections of
Human nature. Nor will it be easy for Satyrists and Comical Poets, those
especially of the more licentious and railing sort, to exempt themselves from
the same Tribe. This Sir, perhaps You Will think to be a little severe: but it is
not my judgment alone; for among the ancient Comical Wits of Greece, You may
find more than one deservedly accused, and clearly convicted of uncivil
obtrectation. In one or two of the most famous I shall instance, for
justification of what I here say.

Cratinus, one of the Trium^virate, which first reformed Comedy from its
primitive rudeness, and began to purge the Stage from obscenity and personal
invectives; is nevertheless noted by the Great Scaliger (Poetices lib. 1. cap.
7.) to have been not only sharply censorious, but bitterly Malignant also, and
grossly inurbane: insomuch that at last in cost him his life. For, having in one
of his Comedies, entitled (...) (unduly ascribed to Eu^polis, by Politian,
Miscellan. cap. 10.) too palpably inveighed against and personated some of
eminent Quality, and exposed them to the derision of their Fellow-citizens, the
Athenians (described by Aelian (2. variar. Historiar. cap. 13.) to have been
natura in vidiosi, and ad detractandum optimis quibusque proclives) he thereby
so far provoked them, that in revenge they bound him hand and foot, and cast
him into the Sea, in the manner of his Death alluding to the Title of his Play,
which signifies one drencht or dipped in water. An Example well worthy to be
remembered by his Sectators in this uncharitable Age.

ART. 3.
To this Cratinus I take liberty to conjoyn another of the same Triumvirate,
his Equal, the so much celebrated Aristophanes ^ and this I do, as well because
of his most inhuman persecution of the Divine Socrates, both (...) that Fable,
which he called (...), the Clouds, and which he invented only to render that
best and wisest of Mortals odious to the base Vulgar; as because he wa^ one of
the Conspirators against his life: being thereto suborned partly by private
Hate (because Socrates frequented and applaued the Tragoedies of Euripides, but
would hardly be brought to honor with his presence any one of Aristophanes his
Satirical Comedies) partly by Anitus and Melitus, who not long after by false
accusations robbed the innocent Philosopher of his life and the world of its
richest Treasure. Again, all the rest of Aristophanes Comedies are more or less
besprinkled with the venom of Detraction and Dicacity. It was not then without
just cause, that Plutarch, a most grave and judicious Philosopher, in his
Comparation of Aristophanes with Menander, among many other Criminations of the
former, gives him this Character: Aristophanis Sales amari sunt and asperi;
acrem and mordentem, adeoque exulcer antem vim habent. -- Nulli enim moderato
videtur is homo su^um poema scripsisse, sed turpia and libidinos a intemper
antibus, maledica and acerba in vidis atque malignis hominibus, etc. Nor does
that most Learned Man, Nicodemus Frischlinus, who wrote his Life, together with
a defense of him against the faults objected by Plutarch* vindicate him from
inhonest Acerbity and Malignity; otherwise than by transferring it upon the
licentiousness of the Time^ in which he wrote, and use of ancient Comedy: his
words are these, Equidem non inficior, re^^^ita esse, ut ille [Plutarchus]
dicit Sed vitio temporum illorum potiu^ quam Poetae hoc, quicquid
reprehensionis est, ascribi debet; and ita fereb^^ Comoediae veteris
consuetudo, ut omi^^ argumenta essent salsa, festiva, mordacia, maledica; nec
quicquam diceretur a quoquam, quod non ad perniciem alicujus accommodaretur.
Which You have the more reason to believe, because in Your travell^ You have
sometimes resided in a certain City, much more populous, under a better
Government and more civilized than ever Athens was, yea more inhabited by such
as make profession of Christianity; in which notwithstanding that scandalous
License of exposing well-deserving and honorable Men upon the public Stage,
and dashing even Virtue it self out of Countenance, by the scurrilous
reproaches and mimical actions of Comedians, seems to be revived; so many Ages
after it has been condemned by Wise Princes, po^ite Nations, and by the best
of Modern Comical Poets themselves, as a thing not only inconsistent with
Humanity and Christian Charity, but pernicious to ^he public peace of
Societies, by raising discontent, animosi^ies, quarrels and factions. But being
long since returned into your own native Country, You are here out of danger
of suffering by any such undecent license our Theaters being regulated by
stricter Laws, and our Poets for the most part Gentlemen of liberal Education.

In this short reflection upon the Malevolence of some Mode^^ Poets, I have
rather stood still ^ while, than gone out of my way^ their Example serving no
less to justify my ascribing Wits immoderately Satirical to this Order^
whereof I am now treating, than those of the Grecians I have named However,
that I may hasten to the end of our walk, especially now You are tired with the
unevenes^ of the way, and my dull company; I proceed.

This virulent Humor of disgracing the Merits of Others, seems to have
poisoned the Pens, not only of some Poets, but many also of other sorts of
Writers, who yet had not so specious a pretext for the liberty they therein
took; and who undertook by their Works to teach Men good Manners and Civility.
So that I might, without much exercise of my Memory, call to mind Examples
^hereof among Authors of no obscure fame in all Arts and Scien^es; not
excepting the graver, even Historians, Philosophers and Divines. But left, by
making a Catalogue of such, I should bring my self also under the same
condemnation; I leave them to Your own Collection.

ART. 4.
Only I think it no offense briefly to observe, that even Tacitus himself,
esteemed the Prince^ of Latin Historians, and the Orac^ of Politicians, has
been accused of Malignity, in not only censuring the Counsels and Affections of
all Great Men, whose most memorable Actions, together with their several
Successes and Events, he records in his Histories; but also in interpreting
the same according to his private Conjectures, and wresting them for the most
part to sinistre an^ ungenerous ends or intentions thereby depriving those
Heroes o^ the best part of their Glory Virtue; and leaving to Posterit^ both
Maxims and Precedents rather of Cunning and Violence, than of true Wisdom and
sound Policy. Whether this Venerable Author, to whom the World is in other
things so highly obliged, has deserved this accusation, or not; I leave to
Your judgment, who are sufficiently conversant in his Writings to direct mine.
In the mean time, I am obliged, in my own defense, to produce one of his
Accusers at least. Permit me, then, to referr You to that famous Critic, and
excellent Grammarian, Gaspar Scioppius, who in many parts of his Writings, but
more expressly in his Dissertation de Historici Officio, delivers a charge
against Tacitus of this among other faults. You Will object perhaps, that
Scioppius himself is generally condemned for the same Vice of Malignity: and I
think not without desert; but yet you cannot deny him to have been a man of
admirable acuteness in discerning the faults, errors and lapses of other
Writers* nor have I any where observe^ him to want reason for hi^
Animadversions. So that though I am always offended at his bitter invectives,
yet I confess, I am often pleased with the Sagacity of his Criticisms.

ART. 5.
Now if such Men, who ha^ ground enough within the compass of their own great
Part whereon to build to themselves perpetual Monuments of Fame were not
altogether free from this malignant Humor; what may we think of those poorer
Spirits, those Sons of Earth, who dream of erecting Obelisks to their own
obscure Names, only out of the ruins of others? and like the Soldier Crabb,
which Aldrovand calls (...), and Eremita, have no Mansion for their credit, but
that from whence they have extruded the right owner? These certainly have the
Cancer of Envy rooted in their very breast: it being an Aphorism of daily
Experience; that the more imperfect men are in themselves, the more prone they
are to defame and scoff at others. The Reason of which, because I know You to
be a great lover of the Philosophy of Monsieur Des Carts, Lib. de Passion.
part. 3. art. 199.
I shall give You in his Words quia cupiunt caetoros omnes in pa^^ secumgradu
videre; since they all unable to raise themselves to the height of their
Superiors in Virtue and honor, they endeavor by calumny and derision, to
bring them down to the same ignoble level with themselves.

ART. 6.
This disease, therefore, of the Mind being almost Epidemick; an^ the Cause
thereof consisting in a certain Perversity of disposition whereby the Patient
is strongly inclined to be inwardly vexed and troubled at the Virtues o^
Felicities of others, and to do al^ he can to diminish their credi^ and
estimation: the Cure o^ it, I fear, is above the Art which I profess.

ART. 7.
By this, Sir, You plainly discern the great Difference betwixt Malignity, and
Festivity of Wit. For, as to this latter, which the Greeks name (...), the
French, Raillerie, and we Jesting; whereby a Man modestly and gently touches
upon the Errors, Indecencies, or Infirmities of another, without any suspicion
of hate or contempt of his Person, pleasantly representing them as only
ridiculous, not odious: I do not think it ought to be condemned as a vice of
the Mind, but allowed as a Quality consistent both with Honesty and good
Manners, as denoting the Alacrity of his Disposition, and Tranquillity of his
Spirit (both signs of Virtue) and often also the Dexterity of his Wit, in that
he is able to give a delightful and new color to the absurdity at which he
moves his company to smile. Nor is it disingenuous to laugh, when we hear the
Jests of others* nay some jests are so facete and abstracted from Persons, that
it would savor of too much dullness or Morosity, not to be affected with their
elegancy. But when we our selves break a jest it is more decent to abstain from
Laughter, as well lest what we say seem to occurr to our imagination
unexpectedly, and by chance rather than choice; a^ lest we be thought to admire
the felicity of our own Wit, in finding out that allusion, which had escaped
the notice of others present: both which are obnoxious to dispraise; the
former, as a mark of slowness of Conception; the latter, as an evidence of
Self-love. To which may be added two other Reasons. First, whoever ^aughs at
his own jest spoils it, by rendering it less apt to surprise the Hearers. Then
again he puts all the company into jealousy and examination of themselves.
Besides all this (as Mr. Hobbes excellently observes, in his Book of Humane
Nature) it is Vainglory, and an argument of little worth, to think the
infirmity of another sufficient matter for his Triumph.

ART. 8.
But I have too long detained Your curious Eyes upon an object, in which You
can take no other delight, but what must redound to You from Your observation
of the vast disparity betwixt the Deformities of it, and the charming beauties
of Your own Candid and sweet Disposition. And being ashamed, that ^ have led
you all this while in a path so much trodden by others; I wish, the Province
You were pleased to assign me, had lain somewhat farther from the road, wherein
most Philosophers have traveled before me, that I might have entertained You
with remarks less obvious and common; whereas now I have been rather Your
Remembrancer than Guide. Having at length waited on You to the End of it, good
Manners oblige me, without desiring You to turn about and review the little
things observed as You passed along (for that were to disparage Your excellent
Memory, as well as to abuse Your Patience) to resign You up to Your own more
useful speculations, and the pursuit of that Generous Emulation, which incites
You to Studies worthy Your choice, native Endowments, the Eminency of Your
Condition, and the Place to which not Fortune, nor popular Favor, but Your own
great Merits have raised You in the grand Council of this Kingdom.

THE END.
THE MYSTERY OF VINTNERS. OR A Brief Discourse concerning the various
Sicknesses of WINES, and their respective Remedies, at this Day commonly used.

Delivered to the ROYAL SOCIETY, Assembled in Gresham-Colledge on the 26 of
November, Anno Dom. 1662.

LONDON, Printed for William Whitwood at the Sign of the Golden-Lion in
Duck-Lane, near Smithfield, 1669.

THE MYSTERY OF VINTNERS.
EVidence (You all know) is the life of Truth, and Method the life of
Discourse: the former being requisite to convince the Understanding; the
latter, to facilitate the searches of it. In this short account, therefore, of
my Collections and Observations concerning Alterations of WINES, both Natural
and Artificial, which according to Your command I now bring to You; I am
obliged to use Plainness and Order: this, to avoid confusion; that, left I
increase the obscurity of my Subject.

My Argument, then, I divide into Four Parts, to which as to Generals or Heads,
all considerables thereunto belonging seem naturally to referr themselves Of
these,

The First, is the Natural Purification or Clarification of Wines, whereby of
themselves they pass from the state of Crudity and turbulency, to that of
Maturity; by degrees growing clear, fine and portable.

The Second, the unseasonable Workings, Frettings and other Sicknesses, to
which, from either internal or external Accidents, they are afterward subject.

The Third, their state of Declination or decay, wherein they degenerate from
their goodness and pleasantness, becoming palled, or turning into Vinegar.

The last, the several Artifices used to them, in each of these States or
conditions.

In the FIRST of these Heads, viz. the Natural Clarification of new Wines, two
things occurr, not unworthy consideration; the Manner how, and the Cause by
which the same is effected.

As for the Manner; give (...) leave to observe, that Win^^ while yet in the
Must, is usually put into open vessels; the abundance and force of the Spirits
i. e. the more subtle and acti^^ parts therein contained, being then so great,
as not to end^^ imprisonment in close ones, (...) which time it appears
trouble^ thick and feculent: all parts o^ Elements of it being violentl^
commoved and agitated, so th^^ the whole mass of liquor seen^ to boil, like
water in a Cauldro^ over the fire. This tumult be^ing in ^ome degree composed
and the Gas Sylvestre (as Helin^^ barbarously calls it) or wilder Spirit
sufficiently evaporated; they then pour the Must into close vessels, there to
be farther defecated, by continuance of the same motion of Fermentation:
reserving the Froth or Flower of it, and putting the same into small ^asks,
hooped with iron, lest otherwise the force of it might break them. This Flower
thus ^^parated, is what they name STUM, either by transposition of the letters
into the word ^ust, or from the word Stum, which in High Dutch signifies Mute,
because this liquor (forsooth) is hindered from that Ma^urity, by which it
should speak ^s goodness and wholesomness. This done, they leave the rest of
^he Wine to finish its Fermentation; during which it is probable, that the
spiritual parts impell and diffuse the grosser and feculent up and down, in a
confused and tumultuous manner, until all being disposed into their proper
regions, the liquor beomes more pure in substance, more transparent to the eye,
more piquant and gustful to the Palate, more agreeable to the Stomach, more
nutritive to the Body.

The Impurities thus separated from the Liquor, are, upon Chemical
examinations, found to consist of Salt, Sulphur (each o^ which is impregnate
with some Spirits) and much Earth. Which being now dissociated from the purer
Spirits, either mutually cohaere, coagulate and affix themselves to the sides
of the Vessel, in form of a stony Crust, which is called Tartar and Argol; or
sink to the bottom in a muddy substance, like the Grounds of Ale or Beer, which
is called the Lees of Wine. And this in short I conceive to be the process of
Nature in the Clarification of all Wines, by an orderly Fermentation.

As for the Principal Agent, or Efficient Cause of this operation; I persuade
my self, You will easily admit it to be no other but the Spirit of the Wine it
self. Which, according to the Mobility of its nature, seeking after liberty,
restlesly moving every way in the mass of liquor, thereby dissolves that common
tie of mixture, whereby all the Heterogeneous parts thereof were combined and
blended together; and having gotten it self free, at length abandons them to
the tendency of their gravity and other proprieties. Which they soon obeying,
each kind consorts with their like, and betaking themselves to their several
places or regions, leave the liquor to the possession and government of its
noblest principle, the spirit. For, this spirit, as it is the life of the Wine,
so doubtless it is also the cause of i^ Purity and Vigor, in which the
perfection of that life seems to consist..

From the natural Fermentation of Wines we pass to the Accidental; from their
state of Soundness, to that of their Sickness: which is our SECOND General
Head. We have the testimony of daily Experience, that many times even good and
generous Wines are invaded by unnatural and sickly commotions, or (to speak in
the dialect of Wine-coopers) Workings; during which they are turbulent in
motion, thick of consistence, unsavory in taste, unwholesome in use; and after
which they undergo sundry Alterations to the worse.

The Causes hereof may be either Internal, or External.

Among the Internal, I should assign the chief place to the excessive quantity
of Tartar, or of Lees; which contains much of Salt and Sulphur (as has
already been hinted) continually send forth into the liquor abundance of quick
and active particles, that, like Stum or other adventitious Ferment, put it
into a fresh tumult or confusion. Which if not in time allayed, the wine either
grows Rank o^ Pricking, or else turns Sour: by reason that the Sulphur, being
overmuch exalted over the rest of the Elements or ingredients, predominates
over the pure Spirits, and infects the whole mass of liquor with Sharpness o^
Acidity: or else it comes to pass, that the Spirits being spent and flown away,
in the commotion; and the Salt dissolved and set afloat, obtains the mastery
over the other similar parts, and introduces Rankness or Ropiness. Yea, though
these Commotions chance to be suppressed before the Wine is thereby much
depraved: yet do they always ^eave such evil impressions, as more or less
alienate the Wine from the goodness of its former ^tate, in color, consistence
and ^aste. For hereby all Wines ac^uire a deeper tincture, i. e. a ^hicker body
or consistence; Sacks and White-Wines changing from a clear White to a cloudy
Yellow; and Claret losing its ^right red for a duskish Orange-^olour, and
sometimes for a Tawny. In like manner they degenerate also in Taste, and affect
the palate with foulness, roughness, and raucidity very unpleasant.

Among the External; are commonly reckoned the too frequent, or violent motion
of Wines, after their settlement in their vessels; immoderate Heat, Thunder or
the report of Canons, and the admixture of any exotic body, which will not
symbolize or agree, and incorporate with them, especially the flesh of Vipers.
Which I have frequently observed to induce a very great Acidity upon even the
sweetest and fullest-bodied Malago and Canary Wines. Yet, under favor, I
should think all these foreign Accidents to be rather Occasions than Causes of
the evil Events that follow upon them; because these Events seem to arise
immediately and principally from the commotion and diffusion of the
Sulphurous, or Saline impurities formerly separated from the liquor, and kept
in due subjection by the genuine and benign Spirits. But this is no place, nor
is it my inclination, to insist upon nicety of Terms, which might indeed start
matter of subtle speculations, but can afford little or nothing of profit to
our present Enquiry. Which brings us in the next place to our,

THIRD praevious Considerable, viz. the Palling or Flatting of Wines, and their
declination toward Vinegar, before they have attained to the State of Maturity
and perfection. Of this the grand and proxime Cause seems to be their jejuness
and poverty of spirits, either native, or adventitious.

Native, when the Grapes themselves are of a poor and hungry kind, or gathered
unripe, or nipt by early Frosts, or half-starved in their growth, by a dry and
unkindly season, etc.

Adventitious, when the liquor, rich perhaps and generous enough at first,
comes afterward to be impoverished by loss of Spirits, either by oppression, or
by exhaustion.

The Spirits of Wine may be ^ppressed, when the quantity of ^mpurities, or
dreggs, with which they are combined, is so great, and their crudity, viscosity
and ^enacity so contumacious, that they can neither overcome them, ^or deliver
themselves from their ^dhaesion; but are forced to ^ield to the obstinacy of
the matter on which they should operate, and so to remain unactive and clogged.
As may be exemplified in the course Wines of Moravia; which by reason of their
great austerity and roughness, seldom attain to a due exaltation of their
Spirits, but still remain turbulent, thick, and in the state of Crudity, and
therefore easily pall, in which respect they are condemned by some German
Physicians, and more expressly by Sennertus (lib. de Scorbut. cap. 2.) as
infamous for generating the Scorbute, and administering matter for the Stone and
Gout: they yielding more of Tartar than any other Wines.

The Spirits of Wine may be Exhausted or consumed either suddenly, or by
degrees. Suddenly by Lightning; which does spoi^ wine (as I conceive, at
least) not by Congelation or Fixation of its Spirits; for, then such wine^
might be capable of restoration by such means as are apt to reinforce and
volatilize the Spirit^ again, contrary to what has been found by Experience:
bu^ perhaps by Disgregation and putting them to flight, so as to leave the
liquor dead, palled, and never to be revived by any new supply. By Degrees, two
ways; viz. by unnatural Fermentation, of whose evil effects something has
already been said: or by Heat from without; of which we have an instance in the
making of Vinegar. Which commonly is done by setting the vessels of Wine
against the hot Sun; which beating upon the mass of liquor, and rarefying the
finer parts thereof, gives wings to the fugitive Spirits to fly away, together
with the purer and more volatile Sulphur; leaving the remainder to the dominion
of the Salt, which soon debaseth and infecteth it with Sourness. This being the
common manner of turning Wine into Vinegar, and practiced (for ought I could
ever learn to the contrary) in all Ages, and all Countries; I make a doubt,
whether Spirit of wine may be drawn out of Vinegar, notwithstanding it has
been delivered as practicable, even by the grave and learned Sennertus himself,
in. lib. de consens. Chymicor. cum* Galen. and heartily wish You would be
pleased to resolve tha^ my doubt, by some Experimen^ of Your own.

The times of the Year when wine^ are observed to be most pro^ to ferment and
fret, and the^ to grow Qually (as they call it that is turbulent and foul, an^
Midsummer and Alhallontide: when our Vintners use to rack them from their gross
Lees, especially Renish, which commonly grows sick in June, if not racked; and
they choose to do it in the wane of the Moon, and fair weather, the wind being
Northerly..

Having thus succinctly recounted the most remarkable Distempers of Wines,
guessed at their respective Causes, and touched upon the times: it is
seasonable for me to proceed to their usual Remedies, such at least as I have
been able to collect from Wine-coopers and Vintners; which is the Fourth and
last part of my Argment.

To begin therefore with some of the Artifices used to Wines when yet in the
Must; it is observable, that although to the raising a Fermentation in them, at
that time, there be not so much need of any additional Ferment, as there is in
the woo^^ of Ale, Beer, Hydromel, Metheglin, and other sorts of drinks familiar
to us in England; because the juice of the Grape is replenished with generous
Spirits sufficient of themselves to begin th^^ work: yet it is usual in some
Countries to put quick Lime either upon the Grapes, when they are pressing, or
into the Must, to the end that by the force and quickness of its Saline and
fiery particles, the liquor may be both accelerated and assisted in working.
For the same reason perhaps it is, that the Spaniards mix with their Wines,
while they are yet flowing from the Press, a certain thing they call Giesso,
which I guess to be a kind of Gypsum or Plaistre; whereby the Wines are made
more durable, of a paler color, and more pleasant taste. Others put into the
Cask shavings of Firr, Oak or Beech, for the same purpose; and others Vinegar.

Again, though the first Fermentation succeeds generally well, so that the
whole mass of liquor is thereby delivered from the gross Lee; yet sometimes it
happens, either through scarcity of Spirits at first, or through immoderate
cold, that some part of those impurities remain confused and floating therein.
Now in this case, Wine-coopers put into the Wine certain things to hasten and
help its Clarification; such as being of gross and viscous part, may adhere to
the floating Lee, and sinking carry it with them to the bottom; of which sort
are Isinglass and the Whites of Eggs: or such as meeting with the grosser and
earthly particles of the Lee, both dissociate, and sink them by their gravity;
of which kind are the powders of Alabast^^ calcined Flints, white Marble, Ro^^
Alum, etc.

The Clarification of Ippocras usually expedited by putting in to it new Milk,
which after short space of time separates an^ sinks of it self, carrying with
it the powders of the spices and gross^^ parts of the Wine; after the manner of
things that clarify liquors by way of Adhaesion.

The Graecians at this day have a peculiar way of spurring Nature, and causing
her to mend her pace, in fining and ripening their strongest and most generous
Wines: and it is by adding to them, when they begin to work, a proportionate
quantity of Sulphur and Alum; not (as I think) to prevent their suming up to
the head and inebriating, according to the conjecture of that great Man, the
Lord St. Albans, in his Not. Hist. For, notwithstanding this mixture, they
cause drunkenness as soon, if not sooner than other Wines, nor are men
intoxicated by the vapors of Wine flying up immediately from the stomach into
the Brain: but only to excite and promote their Fermentation, and hasten their
Clarification ensuing thereupon; the Sulphur perhaps helping to attenuate and
divide those gross and viscid parts, wherewith Greek wines abound; and the Alum
conducing to the speedier praecipitation of them afterward. And it is reported
by a learned Traveller (Zimar. in Antr. Magic. Medic. T. 1. lib. 7. page 510.)
that some Merchants put into every Pipe of their Greek Wine, a Gill or
thereabouts of the Chemical Oil of Sulphur, in order to the longer preservation
of it clear and sound Which though I easily believ^ because the Acid spirit of
Sulph^^ is known to resist putrefaction i^ liquors: yet I should decline the
use of Wines so preserved, unless in time of Pestilential infection; remembering
that old distich;

Qui bibit ingrato foedatum Sulphur Bacchum,
Praeparet ad diri se Phlegetontis aquam.
But of all ways of hastening ^he Clarification and Ripening of new Wine, none
seems to me ^o be either more easy, or more ^nnoxious, than that borrowed from
one of the Ancients by the Lord Chancellor Bacon, and mentioned in his Sylva
Sylvarum. cen^ur. 7. Experim. 679. which is by putting the wine into vessels
well ^topped, and letting it down into ^he Sea. Hence I am apt to derive the
use of that antique Epither given to wine thus ripened, Vinum Thalassites.

But how shall we reconcile this Experiment to that common practice of both the
Ancients and Moderns, of keeping Wine in the Must a whole Year about, only by
sinking the Cask, for 30. or 40. days, in a well or deep river? That the use
hereof is very Ancient, is manifest from that discourse of Plutarch (quaestion.
nature. 27.) about the efficacy of Cold upon Must, whereof he gives thi^ reason;
that Cold not suffering the Must to ferment, by suppressing the activity of the
Spirit therein contained, conserveth the sweetness thereof a long tim^ Which is
not improbable, because Experience teaches, that such who make their Vintage
in a rainy season, cannot get their Must to ferment well in a Vault, unless
they cause great fires to be made near the Casks; the rain mixed with the Must,
together with the ambient cold, impeding the motion of Fermentation, which
arises chiefly from Heat.

That the same is frequent at this day also, may be collected from what Noble
Mr. Boil has been pleased to observe in his incomparable History of Cold, on
the relation of a French man: viz. that the way to keep wine long in the Must
(in which state the sweetness makes many to desire it) is to tunn it up
immediately from the Press, and before it begins to work, to let down the
Vessels, closely and firmly stopped, into a Well or deep River, there to remain
for 6. or 8. weeks. During which time, the liquor will be so confirmed in its
state of Crudity, as to retain the same, together with its sweetness, for many
months after, without any sensible Fermentation.

But (as I said) how can these two so different Effects, the Clarification of
new Wine, and the conservation of Wine in the Must, be derived from one and the
same Cause, the Cold of the Water? without much difficulty, as I conjecture.
For, it seems not unreasonable, that the same Cold, which hinders Must from
fermenting, should yet accelerate and promote the Clarification of Wine after
fermentation: in the first, by giving checque to the spirit before it begins to
move and act upon the crude mass of liquor, so that it cannot in a long time
after recover strength enough to work; in the Latter, by keeping in the pure
and genuine spirit, otherwise apt to exhale, and rendering the flying lee more
prone to subside, and so making the wine much sooner clear, fine and potable.
And thus much concerning the Helps of New wine.

For the Praeternatural, or sickly commotions incident to wines after their
first Clarification, and tending to their impoverishment or decay; the general
and principal Remedy is Racking, i. e. drawing them from their Lees into fresh
vessels. Which yet being sometimes insufficient to preserve them, Vintners find
it necessary to pour into them a large quantity of new Milk, as well to blunt
the sharpness of the Sulphurous parts now set afloat and exalted, as to
precipitate them and other impurities to the bottom, by adhesion. But taught by
experience, that by this means, the Genuine Spirits of the Wine also are much
flatted and impaired (for, the Lee, though it makes the liquor turbid, does yet
keep the wine in heart, and conduce to it^ duration) therefore, lest such wines
should pall and dye upon their hands, as of necessity they must, they draw them
forth for sale as fast as they can vent them.

For the same disease they have diverse other Remedies, particularly
accommodated to the nature of the Wine that needs them; to instance in a few,

For Spanish Wines disturbed by a Flying Lee; they have this receipt. Make a
Parell (give me leave to use their Phrase) of the Whites of Eggs, bay Salt,
Milk and conduit Water; beat them well together in a convenient Vessel; then
pour them into the Pipe of wine (having first drawn out a gallon or two, to
make room) and blow off the froth very clean. Hereby the tumult will in 2. or
3. days be recomposed, the liquor refined, and the Wine drink pleasantly, but
will not continue to do so long; and therefore they counsel to rack it from the
Milky bottom, after a weeks settlement, lest otherwise it should drink foul,
and change color. And this,

If Your Sacks or Canary Wines chance to boil over, draw off 4. or 5. Gallons;
then putting into the Wine 2. Gallons of Milk from which the Cream has been
skimm'd, beat them till they be thoroughly commix'd; adding a pennyworth of Roch
Alum, dried in a fire-shovel, and beaten to powder, and as much of white
starch: after this, take the whit^^ of 8. or 10. Eggs, a handful of bay salt,
and having beaten them together in a Tray, put them also into the Wine, filling
up the Pipe again, and letting the wine stand 2 or 3 days; in which time, the
wine will recover to be fine and bright to the Eye, and quick to the taste: but
be sure You draw it off that bottom soon, and spend it as fast as you can.

For Claret in like manner distempered with a Flying Lee, they have this
artifice.

They take two pound of the powder of Pebble-stones, baked ^n an Oven, the
whites of ten or ^welve Eggs, a handful of bay^^lt; and having beaten them
well together in two gallons of ^he Wine, they mix them with that in the Cask;
and after two or three days draw off the wine from that bottom.

The same Parell serves also for White Wines upon the Frett, by the turbulency
and rising of their Lee.

To cure Rhenish of its Fretting (to which it is most prone a little after
Midsummer, as was before observed) they seldom use any other art, but giving it
vent, an^ covering the open Bung with (...) Tile or Slate; from which the^ are
careful to wipe off the filt purged from the wine by exhalation: and after the
Commotio^ is by this means composed, a^ much of the fretting matter ca^ forth,
they observe to let it remain quiet for a fortnight or thereabout, and then
rack it into a fresh Cask, newly fumed with a Sulphurate Match, called in
Latin tela Sulphurata, in High Dutch Einschlag..

As for the various Accidents, that frequently ensue and vitiate Wines after
those forementioned Reboylings, notwithstanding their suppression before they
were incurable; You may please to remember, I referred them all to such as
alter and deprave Wines either in Color, or Consistence, or Taste, or Smell.
Now for each of these Maladies our Vintners are provided of a Cure. ^n
particular,

To restore Spanish and Austrian wines grown Yellow or Brownish, they add to
them sometimes Milk alone, sometimes Milk and Isinglass well dissolved therein,
sometimes Milk and White Starch: by which they force the exalted Sulphur to
separate from the liquor, and sink to the bottom; so reducing the wine to its
former clearness and whiteness. The same Effect they produce with a composition
of Flower-^eluce roots, and Saltpeter, ana. 4^ or 5 ounces; the whites of 8 or
10 Eggs, and a competent quantity of common Salt; mixed and beaten in the wine.

To amend Claret decayed i^ Color, first they rack it upon (...) fresh Lee
either of Alicant, or R^ Bordeaux wine; then the^ take 3 pound of Turnsol,
steep it in all night in two or three gallons of the same wine, and having
strained the infusion through a bagg, pour the tincture into the Hoggshead
(sometimes they suffer it first to fine of it self in a Rundler) and then cover
the bung-hole with a tile, and so let it stand for 2 or 3 days; in which time
the wine usually becomes well-colored and bright.

Some use only the tincture of Turnsol.

Others take half a bushel of full-ripe Elder-berries, pick them from their
stalks, bruise them, and put the strained juice into a hoggs-head of
discolored Claret; and so make it drink brisk, and appear bright.

Others, if the Claret be otherwise sound, and the Lee good, overdraw 3 or 4
gallons; then replenish the vessel with as much good Red Wine, and roll him
upon his bed, leaving him reversed all night: next morning turn him again so as
the bung-hole may be uppermost, which stopped, they leave the wine to fine. But
in all these cases they observe to set such newly recovered wines abroach, the
very next day after they are fined, and to draw them for sale speedily.

To correct wines faulty in Consistence, i. e. such as are lumpish, foul, or
Ropy; they generally make use of the powders of burnt Alum, Line, Chalk,
Plaistre, Spanish White, Calcined Marble, bay Salt, and other the like bodies,
which cause a precipitation of the gross and viscid parts of the wine then
afloat. For Example,

For the Attenuation of Spanish Wines, that are foul and lumpish; having first
racked them into a newly scented Cask, they make a Parell of burned Alum, bay
Salt, and conduit Water: then they add thereto a quart of Bean-Flower, or
powder of Rice (and if the wine be also brown and dusky, Milk, otherwise not)
and beating all these well together with the wine, blow off the froth, and
cover the bung with a clean ^ile-stone. Lastly, they again rack the wine after
a few days, and put it into a Cask well Scented.

Here perhaps some, not well understanding what is meant by this Scenting of
Casks, will pardon me if I make a short stand to explain it.

They take of Brimstone 4 ounces, of burned Alum 1 ounce, of Aqua vitae, 2
ounces; these they put together in an earthen pan, or pipkin; and hold them
over a a Chausing dish of glowing coals* till the Brimstone is melted and runs,
then they dipp therein a little piece of new Canvas, and instantly sprinkle
thereon the powders of Nutmeggs, Cloves, Coriandre and Anise seeds. This Canvas
they fire, and let it burn out in the bung-hole, so as the fume may be received
into the vessel; And this, as I have been credibly informed, is the best scent
for all Wines. Nor is it a Modern invention; both Canterarius (cap. 8. membr.
sect. 23.) and Levinus Lemnius (Occult. lib. 2. cap. 48.) taking notice of the
like use among the Ancients, of fuming their Casks with Sulphur, Ut vasa a
putredine defenderentur, vinum* ipsum majorem calorem, aut Spiritus acriores
acquireret.

To prevent the foulness and ropiness of Wines, the old Roman Vindemiatores
used to mix Seawater with the Must, Ut suo calore, ne Vina lentescerent,
pendulaque fierent, conservaret, and dum pondere suo in vase subsideret, faeces
secum ad fundum deferret. Cato de R. R. cap. 104. and Langius 2. Epist. 32.

To cure the Ropiness of Claret, the Vintners as well French as English have
many Remedies, among which I have selected two or three, as most memorable,
because most usual.

One is this, First, they give the Wine a Parell, then draw it from the Lee,
after the clarification by that Parell; this done, they infuse 2 pound of
Turnsol in good Sack all night, and the next day putting the strained infusion
into a hoggshead of the Wine, with a spring funnel, leave it to fine, and after
draw it for excellent Wine.

Another this, They make a Lee of the ashes of Vine-branches, or of Oaken
leaves, and pour it into the wine hot, and after stirring leave it to settle.
The quantity, a quart of Lee, to a Pipe of Wine.

A third is only Spirit of Wine, which put into muddy Claret, serves to the
refining it effectually and speedily: the proportion being a pint of Spirit to
a hoggs-head. But this is not to be used in sharp and eagre Wines.

When White wines grow foul and tawny, they only rack them on a fresh Lee, and
give them time to fine.

For the Emendation of Wines offending in Taste, Vintners have few other
Correctives, but what conduce to Clarification. Nor do they indeed much need
variety in the case; seeing all Unsavouriness of Wines whatever seems to
proceed from their impurities set afloat, and the dominion of either their
Sulphurous, or Saline parts over the finer and sweeter; which causes are
removed chiefly by Precipitation. For, all Clarification of liquors may be
referred to one of these three causes: (1.) Separation of the grosser parts of
the liquor from the finer; (2.) The equal distribution of the Spirits of the
liquor, which always renders bodies clear and untroubled; (3.) The refining
of the Spirit it self. And the two latter are consequents of the first, which
is effected chiefly by Precipitation, the instruments whereof are weight and
viscosity of the body admixt, the one causing it to cleave to the gross parts
of the liquor flying up and down in it, the other sinking them to the bottom.
But this being more than Vintners commonly understand, they rest not in
Clarification alone; having found out certain Specifics as it were, to palliate
the several Vices of Wines of all sorts, which make them disgustfull. Of these
likewise I shall recite two or three, of greatest use and esteem among them.

To correct Rankness, Eagerness and Pricking of Sacks and other sweet Wines,
they take 20 or 30 of the whitest Lime-stones, and slack them in a gallon of
the wine; then they add more wine, and stir them together in a Half-tubb, with
a Parelling-staff; next they pour this mixture into the Hoggshead, and having
again used the Parelling instrument, leave the Wine to settle, and then rack
it. This Wine I should guess to be no ill drink for gross bodies and rheumatick
Brains; but hurtful to Good Fellows of hot and dry constitutions, and meagre
habits.

Against the Pricking of French Wines, they prescribe this easy and cheap
composition. Take of the powder of Flanders Tile 1 pound, of Roch Alum half a
pound, mix them and beat them well with a convenient quantity of the Wine, then
put them into the hoggshead, as the former.

When their Rhenish Wines prick, they first rack them into a clean and
strongly-scented Cask or Vate; then add to the wine 8 or 10 gallons of
clarified Honey, with a gallon or two of skim- milk, and beating all together,
leave them to settle.

Sometimes it happens, that Claret loses much of its briskness and
Picquantness; and in such case they rack it upon a good Lee of Red Wine, and
put into it a gallon of the juice of Slows or Bullies, which, after a little
fermentation and rest, makes the wine drink brisk and rough. The like has been
sometimes done, as I have been told by a Drawer, with Virginian Pears, called
Metaguesunaux. Which seems highly probable, because that Fruit is of color
deeply sanguine, and very austere and rough of taste, as I observed in some
that were given me some years since.

To meliorate the taste of Hungry and too Eagre White-Wines, they draw off 3 or
4 gallons of the Wine, and infusing therein as many pounds of Malago Raisins,
stoned and bruised in a stone Mortar, till the Wine has sufficiently imbibed
their sweetness and tincture (which it will do in a days time) they run it
through an Hippocras bagg, then put it into a fresh Cask, well scented,
together with the whole remainder of the wine in the hoggshead, and so leave it
to fine.

To help Stinking wines, the general Remedy is Racking them from their old and
corrupt Lee. Besides which, some give them a fragrant smell or Flavor, by
hanging in them little baggs of spices, such as Ginger, Zed^^ry, Cloves,
Cinnamon, Orras roots, Cubebs, Grains of Paradise, Spiknard, etc. Aromaticks.
Others boil some of these Spices in a Pottle of good sound wine of the same
sort, and turn up the dec^tion hot. Others correct the ill savor of rank-leed
French wine with only a few Cinnamon canes hung in them. Others again for the
same end use Elder Flowers, and topps of Lavender..

Having thus run over three parts of the Vintners Dispensatory, and transcribed
many of their principal Secrets for the cure of the Acute diseases of wines; we
are arrived now at the FOURTH, which contains Medicaments proper for their
Chronic distempers, viz. loss of Spirits, and decay of Strength.

Concerning these, therefore it is observable, that as when Wines are in
praeternatural Commotions, from an excess and predomination of their
Sulphurous parts, the grand Medicine is to Rack them from their Lee: so, on
the contrary, when they decline and tend toward Palling, by reason of the
scarcity of their Spirits and Sulphur; the most effectual Preservative is to
rack them upon other Lees, richer and stronger than their own; that being from
thence supplied with new Spirits, they may acquire somewhat more of vigor and
quickness. I say Preservative; because there is, in truth, no Restoring of
wines after they are perfectly palled and dead, for nothing that is past
perfection, and has run its natural race once, can receive much amendment.

But besides reinforcing of impoverished wines by new and more generous Lees,
there are sundry Confections, by which also, as by Cordials, the languishing
spirits of them may be sustained, and to some degree recruited* Of which I here
bring two or three particular examples.

When Sacks begin to languish (which does not often happen, especially in this
City, where are so many Sack-drinkers) they refresh them with a Cordial syrup*
made of most generous Wine, of Sugar and Spices.

For Rhenish and White wines, a simple decoction of Raisins of the Sun, and a
strong-scented Cask, usually serve the turn.

For Claret inclining to a Consumption; they prescribe a new and richer Lee,
and the shaving^ of Firr wood; that he Spirits being recruited by the
additional Lee, may be kept from exhaling, by the unctuous substance of the
Turpentine. Which artifice I have often observed, at the time of my being at
Paris, to be used in the most delicate and thin-bodied Wines of France: and
seems to me, no improbable cause of that exceeding dullness and pain of the
head, which always attends upon Debauches made with such Wines.

Nor is it a Modern invention, but well known to, and frequently put in use by
the old Romans, in times of their greatest wealth and luxury. For, Pliny (Hist.
not. lib. 14. cap. 2.) takes singular notice of the custom of the Italian
Vintners, in mixing with their Wines Turpentine of several sorts. Some of his
words are these, Ratio autem condiendi Musta, in primo fervore, qui novem
diebus cumplurimum peragitur, aspersu Picis; ut odor vino contingat, and
saporis quaedam acumina. Vehementius id fieri arbitrantur, crudo flore Resinae,
excitarique lenitatem, etc. Yea, the Graecians long before had their Vina Picata
and Resinata; as is evident from the commendation of such wines by Plutarch (5.
Sympos. probl. 3.) and the prescription of them to women, in some cases, by our
great Master, Hippocrates (1. de Morb. Mulier.): and were so much delighted
with their Vinum Pissites, that they consecrated the Pich tree to Bacchus.

You have heard the sum of what I have my self observed, and what I have
transcribed from the Manuscripts of some very skillful Vintners, which I had
the good luck to peruse; concerning the Remedies of the various sicknesses, to
which Wines are obnoxious.

It remains only, that I entertain Your patience, a minute or two longer, with
a taste of the more disingenuous practices of Vintners, in the Transmutation or
Sophistication of Wines, which they call Trickings or Compassings.

They transform poor Rochel and Cogniak White wines into Rhenish; Rhenish into
Sack; the Laggs of Sacks and Malmsies into Muskadels. The counterfeit
Raspic-wine, with Flower de Luce roots; verdea, with decoctions of Raisins;
they sell decayed Xeres, vulgarly Sherry, for Lusenna wine: in all these
impostures deluding the palate so neatly, that few are able to discern the
fraud; and keeping these Arcana Lucrifera so close, that fewer can come to the
knowledge of them. So that we may say, as Pliny did, in the close of his
chapter touching the Sophistication of wines, in his days; tot veneficiis
placere cogitur, and miramur noxium esse vinum?

As for their metamorphosis of White into Claret, by dashing it with Red;
nothing is more commonly either done or known.

For their conversion of White into Rhenish; they have several artifices to
effect it, among which this is most usual.

They take a hogshead of Rochel, or Cogniak, or Nants White wine; rack it into
a fresh Cask, strongly scented; then give the white Parell: put into it 8 or 10
gallons of clarified Honey, or 40 pounds of course Sugar, and beating it well,
leave it to clarify. To give this mixture the delicate Flavor, they sometimes
add a Decoction of Clary seeds, or Gallitricum; of which Druggs there is an
incredible quantity used yearly at Dort, where now is the Staple of Rhenish
wines. And this is that Drink, wherewith our English Ladies are so much
delighted, under the specious name of Rhenish in the Must.

The manner of making adulterate Bastard, is this.

Recipe, Four gallons of White wine, three gallons of old Canary, five pounds
of Bastard Syrup, beat them well together; put them into a clean Rundlet, well
scented; and give them time to fine.

Sack is made of Rhenish, either by strong Decoctions of Malago Raisins, or by
a Syrup of Sack, Sugar and Spices.

Muskadel is sophisticated with the Laggs of Sack, or Malmsey thus.

They dissolve in a convenient quantity of Rose Water, of Musk 2 ounces, of
Calamus Aromaticus powdered 1 ounce, of Coriander seed beaten half an ounce;
and while this infusion is yet warm, they put it into a Rundlet of old Sack, or
Malmsey; and this they call, a Flavor for Muskadel.

Many other ways there are of Adulterating Wines, daily practiced even in this
our (otherwise well governed) City: but in respect they all tend to the
abovementioned Alterations, and are less General; therefore I pass them over in
silence..

Nor have I at present any thing more to add to this Essay toward a History of
Wines, but my humble request to Your Lordship, and the honored Fellows of this
ROYAL SOCIETY, that You would be pleased to pardon the many defects of it; and
that if the Enquiries therein made come short of your expectation* You would
suspend Your Curiosity until my Copartner in this Province, the Learned Dr.
Merret, shall have brought in his Observations concerning the same subject.
For, I doubt not but the fullness of his Papers will supply the emptiness of
mine..

THE END.
SOME OBSERVATIONS Concerning the ORDERING OF WINES.
By Dr. Merret.
THe Mystery of Wines consists in the making and meliorating of Natural Wines.
Melioration is either of sound or vicious Wines. Sound Wines are bettered, 1.
By preserving. 2. Timely fining. 3. by mending Color, Smell or Taste.

To preserve Wines, care must be taken, that, after the Pressing, they may
ferment well: for without good Fermentation, they become qually (i. e.) cloudy,
thick and dusky, and will never fine of themselves as other Wines do: and when
they are fined by Art, they must be speedily spent, or else they will become
qually again, and then by no Art recoverable.

The Principal Impediments of the Fermentation of Wines, after pressing the
Grapes, are either their Unripeness when gathered, or the mixture of Rain water
with them, as in wet Vintages; or else through the addition of Water to rich
Grapes. The Spaniards use Giesso to help the Fermentation of their Canary Wines.

To preserve Spanish Wines, and chiefly Canary, and thereof principally that
which is Razie, which will not keep so long; they make a Layer of Grapes and
Giesso, whereby it acquires a better durance and taste, and a whiter Color,
most pleasing to the English.

Razie wine, is so called, because it comes from Rhenishwine slips, sometimes
renewed. The Grape of this Wine is fleshy, yielding but a little juice.

French and Rhenish wines are chiefly and commonly preserved by the Match,
thus, used at Dort in Holland: Take Brimstone 20 or 30 pounds, rack, into it
melted, Spices, as Cloves, Cinnamon, Mace, Ginger and Coriander-seeds and some
to save charges use the relics of the Hippocras bag; and having mixed these
well with the Brimstone they draw through this Mixture, long, square, narrow
pieces of Canvas, which pieces thus drawn through the said mixture, they light
and put into the Vessel at the Bung-hole, and presently stop it close: Great
care is to be had in proportioning the Brimstone to the quantity and quality of
the wine; for too much makes it rough; this smoking keeps the wine long,
white, and good, and gives it a pleasant taste.

There Is another way for French and Rhenish wines, viz. Firing it: it is done in
a stove, or else a good fire made round about the Vessel, which will gape wide,
yet the wine runs not out; 'twill boil, and afterward may soon be racked.

Secondly, For timely fining of wines. All Wines in the Must are more opacous
and cloudy. Good wine soon fines, and the gross Lees settle quickly and also
the flying Lee in time. When the grosser Lees are settled, they draw off the
Wine, called Racking. The usual times for Racking, are Midsommer and
Alhallontide.

The practice of the Dutch and English to rid the wine of the flying Lees
speedily, and serves most for French and Spanish wine, is thus performed: Take
of Isinglass half a pound, stop it in half a pint of the hardest French wine
that can be got, so that the wine may fully cover it. Let them then stand 24
hours, then pull and beat the Isinglass to pieces, and add more wine, and 4
times a day squeez it to a gelly, and as it thickens add more wine. When it is
fully and perfectly gellyed, Take a Pint or Quart to a Hogshead and so
proportionably: then overdraw 3 or 4 Gallons of that wine you intend to fine,
which mix well with the said quantity of gelly, then put this mixture to the
piece of wine and beat it with a staff, and fill it top-full. Note that
French-wines must be bunged up very close, but not the Spanish; and that
Isinglass raises the Lees to the top of strong wines, but in weaker
precipitateth it to the bottom.

They mend the Color of sound Clarets by adding thereto Red-wine, Tent or
Alicant, or by an infusion of Turnsole made in 2 or 3 Gallons of wine, and then
putting it into the Vessel, to be then (being well stopped) rolled for a quarter
of an hour. This infusion is sometimes twice or thrice repeated according as
more Color is to be added to the wine; some 3 hours infusion of the Turnsole
is sufficient, but then it must be rubbed and wringed. What Turnsole is, see
the Notes on the Art of Glass.

Claret over-red, is amended with the Addition of White-wines.

White wines coming over sound but brown, thus remedied: Take of
Alablaster-powder, over-draw the Hogshead 3 or 4 Gallons, then put this powder
into the Bung, and stir and beat it with a staff, and fill it top-full. The
more the wine is stirred, the finer it will come upon the Lee, that is, the
finer it will be.

To color Sack white; Take of white Starch 2 pounds, of Milk 2 Gallons, boil
them together 2 hours, when cold beat them well with a handful of white Salt,
and then put them into a clean and sweet Butt, beating them with a staff, and
the wine will be pure and white.

One pound of the aforementioned gelly of Isinglass takes away the browness of
French and Spanish wines, mixed with 2 or 3 gallons of wine, accoriding as it is
brown and strong, more or less to be used. Then overdraw the piece of wine
about 8 gallons, and use the Rod, and then fill the Vessel full, and in a day
or two 'twill fine and be white, and mend if qualley.

The first Buds of Ribes nigra infused in wines, especially Rhenish, makes it
diuretic and more fragrant in Smell and Taste, and so does Clary. The
inconvenience is, that the Wine becomes more heady: a Remedy whereof is
Elder-flowers added to the Clary; which also betters the fragrancy thereof, as
it is manifest in Elder-vinegar. But these flowers are apt to make the wine Ropy.

To help brown Malago's and Spanish wines; Take powder of Orras-roots and
Saltpeter of each 4 ounces, the whites of 8 eggs, whereto add as much Salt as
will make a brine, put this mixture into the Wine, and mix them with a Staff.

To meliorate Muddy and Tauny Clarets; Take of Rainwater 2 pints, the Yelks of
8 Eggs, Salt an handful, beat them well, let them stand 6 hours before you put
them into the Cask, then use the Rod, and in 3 days it will come to it self.

To amend the Taste and Smell of Malago. Take of the best Almonds 4 pounds,
make therewith, and with sufficient quantity of the wine to be cured, an
Emulsion; then take the whites and yelks of 12 Eggs, beat them together with
Salt an handful, put them into the Pipe, using the Rod.

To amend the smell and taste of French and Rhenish which are foul. Take, to an
Auln of the Wine, of honey one pound, of Elder-flowers a handful, Orras powder
an ounce, one Nutmeg, a few Cloves, boil them in sufficient quantity of the
wine to be cured, to the consumption of half, when it is cold, strain and use it
with the Rod: some add a little Salt. If the wine be sweet enough, add of
spirits of Wine one pound to a hoggshead, and give the Cask a strong scent.
Spirit of Wine makes any wine brisk, and fines it without the former mixture.

A lee of the Ashes of Vinebranches, viz. a quart to a Pipe, being beaten into
the wine, cures the ropiness of it; and so infallibly does a Lee of Oaken
Ashes. For Spanish ropy wine, rack it from its Lees into a new scented Cask,
then take of Alum one pound, Orras roots powdered half a pound, beat them well
into the wine with a staff. Some add fine and well-dryed sand, put warm to the
wine. If the wine besides prove brown, add 3 pottles of Milk to a Pipe. Alias,
the Spaen cures ropy wine, used before it begins to fret.

Herrings Roes preserve any Stum wines.

To order Rhenish wines when fretting. Commonly in June that Wines begin to
ferment and grow sick, then have a special care not to disturb it, either by
removing, filling the Vessel, or giving it Vent, only open the Bung, which
cover with a slate, and as often as the slate is foul, cleanse it and the bung
from their filth, and when the fermentation is past, which you shall know by
applying your Ear to the Vessel, then give it rest 10 or 12 days that the
grosser Lees may settle, then rack it into a fresh scented Cask.

This mixture meliorates vicious wines both in smell and taste; especially
French. Take of the best honey one part, of Rainwater two parts and one third
of sound old wine of the same kind; boil them on a gentle fire to a third
part, scumming them often with a clean Scummer (to which purpose they have a
payle of fair water standing by to rince it in) then put this mixture hot into
a Vessel of fit capacity, and let it stand unbunged till cool. Some, to better
this, put in a bag of Spices. This mixture, called by the Dutch Soet, will
serve also to fine any Wine new or old. 2. 'Twill mend the hard taste of wine
(i. e.) putting a gallon thereof to a hogshead, and using the Rod, and then let
it rest 5 or 6 days at the least, but if mild enough, add white mustardseed
bruised.

To mend and preserve the Color of Clarets. Take red Beet-roots q. s. scrape
them clean and cut them into small pieces, then boil them in q. s. of the same
wine, to the consumption of a third part, scum it well, and when cool, decant
off what is clear, and use the Rod.

Alias, Take of the wine and honey of each 2 pounds, Rainwater a pottle. 12.
Beet-roots, ripe Mulberries 4 or 5 handfulls, boil them to half, and when cool
decant, etc. ut supra.

To preserve Claret racked from its Lees. Take to a Tierce 10 Eggs, make a
small hole in the top of the shells, then put them into the wine, and all will
be consumed.

To prevent souring of French wines. Take Grains of Paradise q. s. beat them in
a pan, and hang them or put them loose into a vessel. Some use Lavender tops.

To help sour French wine. Take of the best wheat 4 ounces boiled in fair water
till it break, and when cold put it into a Vat in a bag, and use the Rod.
Alias, Take 5 or 6 Cinnamon canes, bung them up well.

To help Spanish sour wines. First rack the wine into a clean Cask, and fill it
up with two or three Gallons of water, and add thereto of burnt Chalk 4 ounces,
and after 3 or 4 days it must be rackt and filled up again with rain water, if
the first time does not do it. Some use Loam or Plastering. If these
Ingredients make the Wine bitter, correct the fault with Nutmegs and Cloves.

To help stinking wines. Take Ginger half an ounce, Zedoary 2 drachms, powder
and boil them in a pottle of good wine, which put scalding hot into the Vat:
bung it up and let it lie; the species of Diambrae and Diamoscu Dulc do the
same; and so Nutmegs and Cloves which also give a kind of Raziness.

To help Wine that has an ill savor from the Lees. First, rack it into a
clean Cask, and if Red or Claret, give him a fresh Lee of the same kind: Then
take of Cloves, Ginger and Cinnamon 2 ounces, Orras-root 4 ounces; powder them
grossly, hang them in a bag, and taste the wine once in 3 days, and when it is
amended take out the bagg. Some do it thus, Take of Cloves half a pound,
Mastick, Ginger, Cubebs, of each 2 ounces, Spica nardi 3 drachms, Orras root
half a pound, make thereof a fine powder, which put loose into the Vat, and use
the Rod, then make a good fire before it.

Firing of Wines in Germany is thus performed: they have in some Vaults 3 or 4
Stoves, which they heat very hot; others make fires almost before every Vat; by
this means the Must fermenteth with that Vehemence, that the wine appears
between the staves; when this Ebullition, fermentation and working cease, let
the Wine stand some days, and then rack it. This firing is only used in cold
years, when the wine falls out green.

Stum is nothing else but pure wine kept from fretting by often racking and
matching it in clean Vessels and strongly scented (i. e.) new matched, by means
whereof it becomes as clear or clearer than any other Wine, preserving it self
from both its Lees by precipitation of them: But if through neglect it once
fret, it becomes good Wine. The Bung of the Vessel must be continually stopped,
and the Vessels strong left they break. A little Stum put to Wine decayed,
makes it ferment afresh, and gives life and sweetness thereto, but offends the
head and stomach, torments the guts, and is apt to cause loosnesses, and some
say Barrenness in Women.

To Fine Wine presently* Fill a Cask with shavings or chips of Beech or Oak
(which are best) this is to be done with much art, or else it seldom hits
right, but lasts long: put these chips into a Cask which is called by the
Dutch even Spaen (i. e.) a Chip, into which they pour in as much Wine as the
Cask will hold, and in 24 hours the wine will be fine. Or a quart of Vinegar in
three days will fine a hogshead of Wine.

To set old Wine a fretting being deadish and dull in taste. Take of Stum 2
Gallons, to a hogshead, put it hot upon the wine, then set a pan of fire before
the hogshead, which will then ferment till all the sweetness of the Stum is
communicated to the wine, which thereby becomes brisk and pleasant. Some use
this Stumming at any time, some in August only, when the wine has a
Disposition to fret of it self, more or less Stum to be added, as the wine
requires.

The best time to rack wine is the decrease of the Moon, and when the wine is
free from fretting; the wind being at North-east or North-west, and not at
South, the Sky serene, free from Thunder and Lightning.

Another Match for French Clarets and Spanish wines. Take Orras-roots, Mastick
and Brimstone, of each 4 ounces, Cloves 2 ounces; ordering it ut supra in
Matching wines. This will serve for all wines, adding if you please Nutmegs,
Ginger, Cinnamon and other Spices. Double the quantity of Orras root is to be
used for Spanish wines.

To help Malago's which will not fine. Take of crude Tartar powdered, sifted
and dried, 2 pounds, mix it with the whites of 6 Eggs: dry, powder and sift
them again, then overdraw the Pipe as much as will serve to mix with this
powder, and fill the Pipe therewith, beating it with a Staff as before, and
this wine will be Fine in ten days.

Another speedy way to fine French wines. Hang a piece of scent in the Cask,
and when it is burnt out, put in a pint of the best Spirit of Wine, and stir it
about. Some add, a little salt well dried. This fines the wine in 24 hours.

To keep Must a Year. Take Must, put it into a Cask pitched within and without,
half full, stop the bung close with mortar. Others few the Cask in Skins, and
sink it for 30 days into a Well or River. Or else a Garland of Polium Montanum
hung in the Vessel. Or rub the inside of the Vessel with Cheese: all these
preserve Rhenish Must, As the Scholiast on Dodonaus in Dutch.

Alum put into a hogs-bladder, keeps wine from turning flat, faint or brown and
beaten with the whites of Eggs removes its ropiness.

Flat Wines recovered with spirit of Wine, Raisins and Sugar or Melosses; and
Sacks, by drawing them on fresh Lees.

Our Wine-Coopers of latter times use vast quantities of Sugar and Melosses to
all sorts of Wines, to make them drink brisk and sparkling, and to give them
Spirits, as also to mend their bad tastes, all which Raisins and Cute and Stum
perform.

Country Vintners feed their fretting Wines with raw Beef; and here, their
Canaries with Malago, which is added more or less to all Canaries.

The Composition of Wines is manifold, the Vintners usually drawing out of 2 or
3 Casks, for one Pint, to accommodate it to the Palate of those that drink it.
Most of the Canary is made with Malago and Zerez Sack.

I shall conclude with two common compunded Wines, Muscaden and Hippocrass: the
former usually made with 30 Gallons of Cute (which is Wine boiled to the
consumption of half) to a Butt of Wine. Or the Lees and droppings boiled and
clarified; its Flavor is made of Coriander seeds prepared and shavings of
Cyprus wood. Some instead of Cute, make it of Sugar, Melosses and Honey, or mix
them with the Cute. This following is an Hypocrass of my own making, and the
best I have tasted.

Take of Cardamoms, Carpobalsamus of each half an ounce, Coriander seeds
prepared, Nutmegs, Ginger, of each 2 ounces, Cloves 2 drachms; bruise and
infuse them 48 hours in Zerez and White wine, of each a Gallon, often stirring
them; then add thereto of Milk 3 pints, strain through an Hippocrass bag, and
sweeten it with a pound of Sugarcandy.

THE END.

