DEATH Compared to a SLEEP, IN A SERMON, Preached upon the occasion of the
Funeral of Mrs. MARY ALLEN, Who died Feb. 18. Anno Dom. 1695.

By Thomas Cheesman, M.A. and formerly of Pem. Coll. Oxon. Minister of the
Gospel in East-Ilsly. Barks.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns, the lower
end of Cheapside, near Mercers Chapel. 1695.

Luke 8.52. Weep not, she is not dead, but sleeps.


AT the 41th verse of this Chapter, Jairus, a Ruler of a Synagogue amongst the
Jews; having an only Daughter, which lay sick of a dangerous Disease, and at
the point of death; falling down at the feet of Jesus, besought him that he
would come and heal hear; but while Jesus was in his passage toward the house,
the Maid gave up the Ghost; at the sight of which, her Parents were filled with
perplexing grief and sorrow; and perhaps the rather, because they thought this
great Prophet came too late to do their Child good; she was already become
Death's Prisoner, and what power can rescue a Captive out of the hand of
all-conquering Death? our Savior being compassionate and tenderhearted,
applies suitable comfort to them in the words of my Text; wherein you may
observe;

1. Seasonable Counsel to restrain immoderate grief and sorrow; Weep not.

2. The hopeful state and condition of the Person deceased; she is not dead,
but sleeps.

I shall raise three Points of Doctrine from the words.

1. We are very prone to excess in giving vent to our Passions: We are seldom
angry, but our anger is over-hot, bitter and violent: Seldom fear, but we are
overwhelmed with amazing discouragement; seldom rejoice in any
creature-comfort, but our Joy does overflow the banks of moderation; we seldom
love any thing in the World, but we love it too much: And when we grieve for
any Affliction, we grieve too much: Therefore we should watch over our hearts
in this case, and strive to keep Reason in the Throne; and let no Passion
exercise dominion over us.

2. It Is a fault, when we grieve too much at the death of pious Friends and
Relations: Though we may shed some tears as a testimony of our natural Affection;
yet we must not weep as if we were without hope; but consider, that though such
fall under the stroke of Death; yet they are delivered from the sting of Death;
and when they are carried to the Grave, they rest there as in a Bed of rich
Persumes, till they are awakened by the voice of their blessed Bridegroom in
the Morning of the Resurrection.

3. Death may fitly be compared to a sleep: It Is, according to one of the
Poets, Imago morti^, the Image of Death; and another styles it, consanguineus
Laethi Sopor, Death's Cousin-germane; they are near of kin one to the other:
Sleep is a kind of short Death, and Death is a long continued Sleep: This
expression is familiar, both in the Old and New Testament. In the 11th of John
Christ says to his Disciples, Lazarus our friend sleeps. In 1 Cor. 15.6.
speaking concerning what clear evidence was given touching the Resurrection of
Christ, it is said, He was seen of more than five hundred Brethren at once, of
which the greatest part remain to this present, and some are fallen asleep,
that is, dead. And in the 11th Chapter of the same Epistle, declaring what
remarkable Judgments the great King of Saints had executed upon the Corinthian
Church, for their unworthy receiving the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper; he
says at the 30th verse; For this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and
many sleep, that is, were cur off by death, for that bold presumptuous sin,
however many make so slight of it in our days. Stephen that first Martyr, which
carries a Crown in the very signification of his Name, while the malicious Jews
were casting a shower of Stones to destroy him; you may find it in Acts 7. ult.
He kneeled down, and cried with a loud voice, Lord, lay not this sin to their
charge; and when he had said this, he fell asleep; that is, he laid down his
life for the defense of Gospel Truth. Likewise amongst those Miracles which
were wrote when the Lord of Glory was crucified, this is one, recorded by the
Evangelist St. Matthew, c. 27. v. 52. The Graves were opened, and many bodies
of Saints which slept arose, not to lead an Animal life, or that they should
again return to their Graves; but as Diodate speaks upon the place, that they
might accompany Christ when he ascended up to Heaven.

I shall show what resemblance there is between Sleep and Death, in these
following particulars.

1. Sleep seizes upon all sorts of men; high and low, rich and poor, learned
and unlearned: A man may possibly continue without Meat and Drink longer than
without Sleep: Within a few hours, the indispensible necessities of Nature
still calling for it; thus it is appointed for all men once to die, and after
death the Judgment: Though the Body of Adam was at first composed of jarring
Elements; yet if he had never lost his Original Righteousness, by the merciful
gift and appointment of God, he had still been preserved; (whatever Socinians
dream to the contrary) in a state of Immortality; but since the Fall, sin
entering into the World, made way for the universal Monarchy of Death; so that
now, it is not the dazzling Wedge of Gold, nor swelling Titles of Honor, not an
Eloquent Tongue, nor a beautiful Face, nor a valiant Hand, nor a subtle Brain;
that can privilege any from the stroke of Death; Death goes as boldly into the
Palace of a King, as into the Cottage of a Shepherd, nor does it make any
difference between the Judge upon the Bench, and the Prisoner at the Bar; the
greatest eminency of Grace and Holiness, cannot keep off the Assaults of Death.
Enoch and Elias, though they were bodily translated into Heaven, yet we may
suppose in their passage thither, they did undergo some change equivolent to
Death; the same which shall befall those Saints that are found alive at the
second coming of Christ.

2. When men desire to sleep, they go naked into their Beds; laying aside all
Ornaments and costly Attire: Thus we shall be as naked in our Burial, as at our
Birth; and as we brought nothing into the World, so it is certain we can carry
nothing out: Houses and Lands, Flocks and Fields, Corn and Cattle, will not go
down with any into the Grave; therefore they that have Riches should be ready
to distribute, willing to communicate and relieve the necessities of others;
for with such Sacrifices God is well pleased; and let all be stirred up to get
the Wedding Garment of Christ's Imputed Righteousness, get the Testimony of
good Conscience, which is sweeter than Music at a Banquet of Wine; get an
assurance of God's favor, and adorn your Souls with the Jewels of the New
Covenant, which can never be lost or taken away.

3. Sleep can only seize on the Body, but it has no power over the Soul; the
spirit of a man can both hope and fear, rejoice or grieve, discourse and
deliberate about things when the Body is captivated in the deepest slumber.
Tertullian uses it as an Argument to prove the Souls Immortality; How can that
be subject to real Death, which is not subject so much as to the least shadow,
likeness, or similitude of it? Whether that Reason be cogent or not, to be
sure, Temporal Death can exercise no Jurisdiction over the Soul; that is near
akin to the Angels, and shall live for ever. Some men of corrupt minds have
thought that the Soul of Man sleeps with his Body in the Grave, till the
Resurrection; there it lies senseless and sluggish, not capable of joy or
sorrow. Pope John the 22. to give the Christian World a proof of his Papal
Infallibility, declared himself the Patron of this Opinion; being so hot and
vigorous in the maintaining of it, that he suffered none to take their Degrees
in the University of Paris, unless they did first subscribe this brutish
Doctrine; but by the Pope's leave, let the Holy Ghost decide the Controversy.
Paul says expressly, that when Believers are absent from the body, they are
present with the Lord. And Christ tells the good Thief upon the Cross, This day
shall thou be with me in Paradise: His Body was to lie it may be in the same
Grave with the other Malefactors, but his Soul had this privilege, to go with
Christ himself into Paradise, a place of unspeakable delight and pleasure. When
Christ and some of his Disciples was upon the Mount of Transfiguration, the
Souls of Moses and Elias appeared, discoursing with him about the sufferings
which he was to accomplish at Jerusalem: Likewise when Christ would stop the
mouth of the Sadduces, who denied the Resurrection, he quotes that place out of
Exodus; I am the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; presently from thence
inferring, he is the God of the living, and not of the dead; so that the Souls
of those Renowned Patriarchs, were at that time living, though their Bodies for
many hundred years had lain rotting in the Grave, Rev. 6.9, 10. When he had
opened the fifth Seal, I saw under the Altar, the Souls of them that were slain
for the Word of God, and for the Testimony which they held, and they cried with
a loud voice, saying, How long, O Lord, holy and true, do thou not judge and
avenge our blood on them that dwell on the Earth? These Scriptures sufficiently
prove that the Soul of Man is never subject to the sleep of Death.

4. Though men sleep in the night, they commonly awake in the morning. Thus, though
the People of God fall asleep during the long Night of Death, yet they shall be
awakened in the Morning of the Resurrection: When Christ shall descend from
Heaven with a mighty shout, the voice of an Archangel, and the Trumpet of God,
all both good and bad shall appear with the same numerical Bodies which they
had when they lay down in the Graves; both the Justice and Mercy of God require
this: For, if the Body have joined with the Soul to carry on a Trade of
Rebellion against God; if it has been a slave to Sin and Satan, and a servant
to fulfill unrighteousness; what can be more just, than that the same Body
should be joined again to the Soul, to be its Companion in a state of
everlasting Misery and Torment? and on the other side, if the Body have been
possessed in sanctification and honor; if it has been a living Temple of the
Holy Ghost, if it have joined with the Soul to serve and worship God; the Mercy
of God requires that the same Body be united to such a Soul, and be its
Companion in a state of everlasting Bliss and Happiness. Job was very confident
of this, chap. 19.25, 26. I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall
stand in the latter days upon the Earth; and though after my skin Worms destroy
this Body; yet in my flesh shall I see God. If Job's Faith concerning the
Resurrection were so strong, ours may well be stronger, all circumstances of it
being made known to us, by New Testament Revelations; and we need not question
but that the same Almighty Power which fashioned our Body in our Mothers Womb,
can as easily give it us again, and restore it to us, though it has been consumed
in the Grave; for what can be difficult to him whose will is his work? as
Cyprian speaks, Deo voluisse est fecisse.

5. Men after sleep oftentimes have greater comfort and refreshment. Sleep is
one of Nature's best Physicians; it recruits our spirits that are spent, and
restores our strength that was decayed. Thus the Bodies of God's People, when
they are awakened after the long sleep of Death, shall be in a better condition
than ever; for though they shall be the same for substance, yet their qualities
shall have a wonderful change; they shall be raised strong and powerful, swift
and speedy in their motion, it may be beyond any Bird that flies in the Air, or
any Star that moves in the Heavens; they shall then have no defect or blemish;
they shall be raised spiritual bodies, supported by the immediate influence of
the Soul, without Meat, Drink, or Physic, and other natural helps which now
they stand in need of; for they shall be like the glorified Body of Christ.

6. Men go to sleep that they may take their rest: Thus, the People of God,
when they sleep in their death, shall rest from all sin and suffering, from the
Persecutions of wicked men; from being buffeted by Satan's Temptations: They
shall no more stand in fear of his fiery Darts; they shall rest from all
trouble and disturbance, all pain and labor, Rev. 14.13. Blessed are the dead
that die in the Lord, that they may rest from their labor, and their works
shall follow them.

7. The more pains men take, and the harder they work all the day long, the
better they sleep at night. Solomon tells us, The sleep of a laboring man is
sweet: Thus, the harder men work for God, the more they work for their Souls,
and make provision for Eternity, during the time of life, the more refreshing
will their sleep be when the night of Death comes; therefore Christians, shake
off sloth and negligence; do all the good you can; the remembrance of any one
good work, when you come to die, will comfort you more than thousands of Gold
and Silver: Fill up your time with good and gracious actions, bestir your
selves, as it becomes those which believe that future Glory, though it be not
dispensed according to the merit, yet according to the measure of good works;
they shall sit upon the highest Thrones of Celestial Honor, and wear the
brightest Crowns when they come to possess the promised Kingdom, which have
done most for God in their present Generation.

8. If a man over-charge himself with eating and drinking just as he goes to
sleep, that will make his sleep very uncomfortable, and full of disturbance:
Thus, if we make too large a Meal of Creature Comforts, and get a surfeit by
feeding immoderately upon the profits and pleasures of this World, it will make
the sleep of Death uncomfortable to us: An inordinate Affection to any earthly
Treasure, will as certainly kill and destroy the Soul, as the practice of
Adultery, Murder, Witchcraft, or any the most heinous Abomination that can be
named; therefore Christians, though the World come into your Houses, yet keep it
out of your Heart; make use of it, only as a Servant; let it not exercise any
commanding power over your spirit, or bring you into bondage.

Now to apply what has been spoken.

1. Let me persuade you to look upon Death, not as it is presented in the Glass
of Nature, but as it is presented in the Glass of Scripture; in the Glass of
Nature, the Picture of Death is drawn with a grim countenance; it is the King of
Terrors, it comes as a fiery hissing Serpent, carrying the Sting of Divine
Vengeance in its mouth; but as presented in the Glass of Scripture, it comes to
the People of God as a Messenger of glad Tidings; it calls them from dwelling
in a strange Country, that they may go to live in their Fathers House; where
the Tongue of an Angel cannot express what magnificent preparation is made for
their Entertainment; it comes to turn their Water into Wine, all their Sorrow
into Joy; and wipe all Tears from their Eyes; it will take a heavy Cross from
off their back, and set upon their head a flourishing Garland made of the
Flowers of Paradise, which shall never fade, nor wither away.

2. Let me speak something in relation to our dear Sister, the Solemnity of
whose Funeral, is the occasion of our present meeting together; she was a
fruitful Mother in Israel, which brought up many Children in the fear of God;
her great care was to season their tender Years with Religious Education; she
was eminent for Humility and Patience, and for wearing the Ornament of a meek
and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of great price: She had a love
to God, a love to his Ways, Word and Worship, a love to his People, to all that
had the Image of Christ shining forth upon them; and we have reason to conclude
that Grace was rooted in her heart, which did so sweetly blossom at her Lips in
holy religious discourse; she is now landed upon the Shore of a happy Eternity,
never to meet with Storms, or go to Sea any more: Weep not for her, but rather
for your selves, and for those Calamities which the sins of the Nation may
bring upon us, unless almost a Miracle of Divine goodness prevent it.

3. The sleep of Death is common both to good and bad. You read that Jeroboam
that Idolatrous King of Israel, slept with his Fathers. The like is affirmed of
Baasha, and Omri, and other wicked Princes; so that the body of the most
ungodly person may be said to sleep in the Grave, but how? just as a condemned
Malefactor may fall asleep in his Prison the night before his Execution; which
though he seem never so safe and secure in his own thoughts, and hug many golden
Dreams in his sick deluded fancy; yet as soon as ever he awakes in the morning,
he must be drawn to the place where he shall endure some cruel tormenting
Death: Thus, though the Bodies of wicked men sleep in the Grave for a while, yet
at the day of general Judgment, they must be raised only that they may be
capable to endure the Torments of Eternal Damnation. That therefore Death may
prove a happy sleep to you,

First; Make great preparation for it, because there is a great God to whom you
must be reconciled; you have committed great sins, which must be pardoned and
forgiven; great temptations, that must be resisted; great difficulties lying in
your way to Eternal Happiness, that must be passed through: Besides, Death will
bring a great change upon you, then you must change Time for Eternity, Earth
for Heaven or Hell, where glorious Angels, or black deformed Devils must be
your Companions for ever: Much true Wisdom lies in the consideration of your
latter end; ut Mortem nunquam timeas, semper cogita; that you may never fear
Death, make it familiar to your thoughts.

Secondly; Be sure to sleep in Jesus; that expression you have, 1 These. 4.14.
If we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so them also which sleep in
Jesus, will God bring with him. And now to sleep in Jesus, briefly, is to have
an experimental knowledge of him, to love him sincerely, and believe on him:
Receive this Pearl of price with an empty hand, joining none of your good works
with his Merits in the matter of Justification: Receive him, not only as a
Savior, to deliver you from the Wrath of God, and the Curse of the Law, but as
a Supreme Lord and Governor, that you may yield unfeigned Obedience to his
Commands: And be persuaded of this, that none shall be admitted to Reign with
Christ in Heaven, which do not set up a Throne for him to Reign in their hearts
while they are here upon Earth.

FINIS.

