A DISCOURSE OF THE Original, Country, Manners, Government and Religion OF THE
COSSACKS, With another of the Precopian TARTARS, And the HISTORY of the WARS of
the COSSACKS AGAINST POLAND.

London, Printed by T. N. for Hobart Kemp, at the Sign of the Ship in the Upper
Walk of the New Exchange. 1672.

THE PREFACE.
ALthough Vkraine be one of the most remote Regions of Europe, and the
Cossackian name very Modern; yet has that Country been of late the Stage of
Glorious Actions, and the Inhabitants have acquitted themselves with as great
Valor in Martial Affairs, as any Nation whatsoever; so that this, and other
Motives have made me earnest to put this account of it into English, where it
cannot be otherwise then acceptable, since the Description of a Country little
written of, and the atchievments of a daring People, must needs be grateful to
those, who of all the World, are the most curious and inquisitive, and the
greatest lovers of bold Attempts and Bravery. The Ocean is our delight, and our
Engagements upon the Seas, have rendered us considerable to the World. The
Cossacks do in some measure imitate us, who took their rise from their
Victories upon the Euxine, and settled themselves by incountring the Tartars in
those Desert Plains, which do so far resemble the Sea, that the Mariners
Compass may be useful for Direction in the one, as well as the other. Nor can
this short Treatise be unseasonable, since most have their eyes upon this
Country at present; and it is already feared, that the Turks or Tartars should
make their Inroads this Summer into Poland through Vkraine, scarce a Gazette
without mentioning something of it; and our preparations in the Western Parts,
will probably, at the same time, be accompanied with great attempts upon the
most Eastern Frontiers of Europe.

Michael Koributh, Duke of Wisnowitz performed great Services for his Country,
during the former Rebellions; since which it has pleased Providence to raise
up another Mich. Wisnowitski, and place the Crown of Poland on His Head, after
an extraordinary and unexpected manner. A Reward, I hope, for their Families
former Faithfulness, and a Terror to the greatest Enemy of Christendom.

If this Great Prince therefore shall try his Fortune of Arms against Sultan
Mahomet Han, or the Cham, or by reducing the Cossacks to their obedience, make
the World have as great an esteem of him, as the States of Poland who elected
him, the Plains, Woods, Rivers, Rocks, near which, these Battles shall be
decided, will be worth the considering, for the better understanding of their
History, and the Description of the Country, Manners, Customs, and Religion,
of the Cossacks and Tartars, will much inform us in the Affairs of those
Eastern Parts.

The Author of this Work was a Commander, and employed his Sword in Foreign
Countries, as well as his Pen, and his living long in Poland, gave him
sufficient opportunity to make these observations which he has transmitted to
us, and which are the more considerable, because they Treat of many places not
Conquered by the Romans, nor described, but by few. Ovids banishment was
Neighboring, but not full so Remote, Desert, and Melancholy, as some of these
parts; and yet so considerable a Passage have they always been, That the
greatest Incursions into Europe have been in all times through these Countries,
and whole Nations have come in upon us this way, to the destruction of our
chiefest States and Empires.

The Actions of Kmielniski, General of the Cossacks, are very remarkable; and
how he raised himself to that greatness, as to be feared by a Nation, which
neither the Power of Christendom, nor the Turks could shake. Most of whose
Performances are d^scoursed of in this small Treatise; and whatsoever is
wanting of his life, or to make this a more accurate Description of those
Countries, must be imputed to the slender Traffic or Commerce they maintain
with other Nations, and the little regard they have themselves to commit their
own Actions to Posterity. And, I hope, it will be thought more strange, that
there is any thing at all said of them, then that there is so little. The long
unusual Names of Persons and Places may be also pardoned, seeing they are not
to be altered; and what is amiss in the Translation, I hope, may be passed
over, since the whole is presented you with no other design, but to serve you.

Edw. Brown.

A DISCOURSE OF THE Country, Manners, Government, Original and Religion, OF
THE COSSACKS.
THe name of Cossacks was given them by reason of their Address and Agility in
penetrating even in the most difficult and dangerous places such as the mouth
of the Boristhenes, whereby they made War with the Turks and Tartars. Cosa
signifying in Polish, a Goat.

Long ago from the time of Sigismund the I. there were Volunteers from the
frontiers of Russia, Wolhinia, Podolia, and other Provinces of Poland, which
met together to practice their Pyracies upon the Black Sea where they
ordinarily met with considerable advantages, and brought away rich booty both
from the Turkish Galleys and from the places where they often landed in
Natolia, where they pillaged and sacked whole Towns, as that of Trebisonde and
Synopa, having the boldness sometimes to come within two Leagues of
Constantinople, and carry away prisoners and plunder: at the latter end of the
year these adventurers retired home, appointing first their Rendezvous where
they were to meet in the Spring in some of the Islands or Rocks of the
Boristhenes, from thence again to make their excursions.

King Stephen Batory, to whom Poland is beholden for many good Rules,
considering the service which he might draw from these Rovers, toward the
defense of the frontiers of Russia and Podolia, which lay always exposed to the
incursions of the Tartars, formed a Militia out of them, and gave them the Town
of Trethymirow upon the Boristhenes for a Garrison, made a General over them,
and gave him power to make Underofficers, granting them besides their pay,
diverse privileges and immunities, and joined to this Infantry of the Cossacks
two thousand Horse, for the subsistence of which he designed the fourth part of
his Crown Lands whence they were called Quartani, and by corruption Quartiani.

These forces thus established for the guard of the frontiers, did so secure it
against the irruptions of the Tartars that all the desert Country, beyond the
Towns of Bracklaw, Bar, and Kiovia, began to be peopled, and many Towns and
Fortresses were built there, every one bringing in Colonies from the
neighboring Provinces.

This Militia thus regulated; sustained it self and rendered good service to the
Crown of Poland, without comparison, more profitably then before, when being
dispersed and scattered about, they could not act together in company. Yet as
this union was so advantageous for the making head against the Tartars, and for
defending of the Frontiers, so in short time it became prejudicial and
destructive to the Poles, against whom they many times rebelled; for the
Cossacks finding themselves to be of such importance, would scarce receive any
Orders from their Superiors, nor acknowledge their Masters upon whom they
depended. Their first Rebellion was in 1587. under John Podkowa, their General,
who was overthrown, and in the end lost his head.

In the year 1596. King Sigismund the III. having prohibited their Pyracies on
the Black Sea, upon the complaints which he received from the Grand Signior;
they did indeed give them over, but it was, that they might fall upon Russia
and Lythuania with the greater force, where they committed unheard of violences
under the Conduct of Naleuaiko their General. In vain were Orders sent for
their disarming and returning home, they despised all, and united themselves
more strictly under their head, to resist the Polish Army, which General
Zolkiewski was forced to bring against them, him therefore they expected with a
firm resolution near the City of Bialicerkiew and fought the Polanders, and at
first got the better, but Zolkiewski, who was a great Warrier, having at length
shut them in, and forced them into disadvantagious stations, obliged them to
deliver up Nalevaiko, who had the same end with his Predecessor.

In 1637. the Cossacks revolted again, but with as bad success as before, the
cause of their Revolt was, That diverse of the Polish Nobility having obtained
by gift some Lands upon those frontiers, and in those places designed for the
quartering of this Militia, the more to augment their Revenues they were
desirous to bring their new Subjects to the same days works as those of the
other Provinces of Poland are bound to; and therefore they persuaded King
Vladeslaus and the States, that it was necessary to chastise the insolency of
the Cossacks, they being able most of all to cross this design, as being a
free people, and causing by their example the other Contrymen to bear their
yoke more impatiently. So that it was resolved that a Fort should be built in a
place called Kudak, upon the Boristhenes, a situation very proper for the
brideling of the Cossacks, it being near the Porohi or Rocks of the River which
they made use of for their most secure Retreat, and because they did
immediately mistrust Colonel Marion a Frenchman, whom the General Koniespolski
had left with two hundred men to build this Fort, he caused part of his Troops
to winter there till it might be fit for defense. The Cossacks understanding
well upon what design this Fort was built, took the Alarm at the first, and
gathered themselves together in the greatest number that they could, but
entering at that very time when they had most need of union, into discord and
distrust of their General Sawakonowicz, after they had massacred him they chose
one Paulucus in his place, a man of small Conduct and Experience, and soon
after paid for the folly of their choice, being met withal by Marshal Potosky
about Korsun, and having but few Horse with them were easily defeated, those
who fled, cast themselves into Borowits, which Potoski immediately besieged,
and seeing that the place was not furnished with any manner of provisions, they
were forced to deliver into his hands their General Paulucus and four other of
their principal Officers, who had their Heads cut off at Warsaw while the Diet
was held there the year following, notwithstanding that they had had their
lives promised them, which the States would not then allow of.

The loss of their Generals was seconded by the loss of their privileges and
the Town of Trethymirow granted to them formerly by King Stephen, and at ength
also by the suppression of their Militia, which the King of Poland Commanded
his Officers to change into a new form, such an one as might be more fit for
obedience.

Notwithstanding these disgraces they lost not their courage at all, but did
their utmost to maintain their liberty.

After they had tried again the fortune of the war against General Potoski, and
found themselves considerably weakened by diverse encounters, they entrenched
themselves beyond the Boristhenes, upon the River Starcza, and for more then
two Months sustained many assaults from the Poles, who after having lost many
of their own men, were constrained to capitulate with these desperate people,
and to promise them that they should be reestablished in their Privileges and
their Militia of six thousand men set on foot again as before, under the
Command of a General appointed by the King, but these Articles were not better
kept with them then the former, and the most part of their men upon their going
off, were either slain or plundered by the soldiers of the Polish Army; neither
was their Militia reestablished, but a new one was set up, their General being
changed, and the true Cossacks themselves excluded.

The Damage which ensued upon this change was soon after very sensible, for
the Tartars made an inroad two years after, entered a great way into the Vkrain,
and destroyed the Territories about Pereaslaw, Corsun and Wisnowitz, whither
before this disbanding of the Cossacks they were not wont to approach. They
were therefore some time after set up again, and King Vladislaus, who made
great account of this Militia in the war, which he intended to make against the
Turks and Tartars, was no small contributor to their total reestablishment,
making Bogdan Kmielniski, one of their own body, General over them, and withal
increasing their number.

From all this discourse we may at present infer, that the Cossacks are rather
a Militia then a Nation, as most have thought, and we cannot better compare
them then to the free Archers formerly established in France by Charles the
VII. who were persons fit for Arms chosen out of all the Towns of his Dominion,
and who upon the first Orders from the King, were bound to meet at a general
Rendezvous, and to serve in the wars; by which they were exempted from all
Taxes and Imposts. The Cossacks are the same, chosen and listed in Russia,
Volhinia and Podolia, and who enjoying many exemptions and privileges, are in
like manner bound to march wheresoever they are commanded; formerly they had no
more then one only Town for their retreat, as has been already observed, and
the Porohi of the Boristhenes, from whence they were called Zaporouski
Cossacks, and are hereby distinguished from the Cossacks in Moscovia and from
those upon the River Don or Tanais.

Porohi, is a Russian term, signifying a rocky Stone; this River at fifty
Leagues from the mouth of it, is crossed with a ridge of Rocks, which makes a
kind of damme or cataract, and by this means renders the Navigation in those
parts impossible, and takes away from Vkrain the means of enriching it self by
the Traffic which it might otherwise have with Constantinople for Corn and
other Merchandises in which it abounds as much as any other Country in the
world; some of these Rocks are even with the water, others are above the water,
the height of six, eight, and ten feet, and from this inequality there are in
the River diverse cascades or falls which the Cossacks themselves do not pass
but with a great deal of danger; there are thirteen of these falls, some of
which are fourteen or fifteen foot high, when the water is low, and it is as
necessary for a true Zaporouski Cossack to have passed these falls, and to have
made a voyage upon the Black Sea, as for a Knight of Maltha before he come to
the dignity of that Order, to have been in a Summers Expedition against the
Turks.

Below the Porohi there are diverse Islands in the River Boristhenes, and
amongst others there is one very remarkable, somewhat lower then the entrance
of the River Czertomelik, compassed about with thousands of other little Isles,
some of which are dry, others marshy, and all of them covered with Reeds, in
such manner as it is hard to perceive the Channels which separate them; into
this place, and into these windings and turnings the Cossacks make their
retreat, which they call their Skarbnisa, Woyskowa, that is to say, the
Treasure of their Army, and here they shut up their booty which they have taken
in their Pyracies upon the Black Sea, the acccess to this place is so difficult
and dangerous, that many Turkish Galleys in pursuing them thither, have been
lost, and it is here that the Cossacks hold their Rendezvous before they put
out to sea.

After their arrival they choose a General to Conduct and Command them in their
Expedition, and then fall to work about their Boats, which are about threescore
foot long, and eleven or twelve foot broad, they have no Keel, but are built
only upon a bottom of Willow or Limetree, sided or raised with plancks, which
they pin one into another; the better to steer them when they are forced to
fly, they have two Oars or Skulls on purpose, their sides are strengthened
with Roaps of Reeds, as thick as a Barrel, to sustain these Boats against the
fury of the waves, they have ordinarily ten or twelve Oars on each side, and
row swifter then the Turkish Galleys; they have but a bad sail, and make use
of it only in fair weather, and choose rather to row when the wind is high;
for their provisions in their voyage they take with them Biscuit, put up in a
Tunn, and as they have use for it, take it out at the bung: besides this, they
have a Barrel of boiled Millet, and another of Paste mingled with water which
they eat with the Millet, and it serves them both for meat and drink, and is
counted by them a delitious dish; they carry no Aqua-vitae nor other
Strong Water, for although they be as subject to drunkenness as any other
Northern Nation, yet they are wonderfully sober in War.

They meet ordinarily to the number of five or six thousand men; about
threescore of them are employed to the making of one Boat, and in three weeks
time the whole company makes ready about fourscore or an hundred; fifty or
threescore men go in each Boat, armed with five or six Faulcons, and every one
with two Harquebuses, and Powder and Ball sufficient. Their Admiral has a Flag
upon his Mast to distinguish him from the rest, they row altogether and so
close, that their Oars touch one another, they wait till the latter quarter of
the Moon, to get out of the River Boristenes, that they may by the help of the
obscurity of some dark night, not be eyed by the Turkish Galleys who wait
ordinarily at Oczakow, a Town of the Turks at the mouth of the River on purpose
to observe them; so soon as they are discovered, all the Country is in Alarm
as far as Constantinople, from whence they dispatch Couriers to all the coasts
of Natolia, Romelia and Bulgaria, that all may stand upon their guard, but such
is the diligence and swiftness of the Cossacks, that they ordinarily prevent
and outgoe the Couriers who are to bring news of their coming, knowing so well
to take their opportunity by the time and season, that they often get into
Natolia in the space of forty hours.

When they meet with any Galley or Vessel (which they discover better, and at a
greater distance then they can be discovered) their Boats being but two foot
and an half above water) they approach toward them till night, keeping at
about a Leagues distance, and then well observing the place where they saw the
vessel, they begin to row about midnight with all their force, and
encompassing it about, take it at unawares, it being impossible for a Vessel
beset with such a number of Boats all at once, to disingage or defend itself;
they take out the Money, Guns, and all the Merchandise which they can
conveniently carry away, and afterward sink the ship, they being not dextrous
enough to carry her off, but as they have this advantage by night over ships
and Galleys, so they are at great disadvantage by day, for these with their
great Cannon shot scatter them, and kill many of their men, and then especially
when they do most vigorously prosecute their fight; from whence they often bring
back but half their equipage, though true it is, that they are seldom taken,
by reason when they are pursued, they can retire into the Reeds or near the
shoares, where the Galleys cannot come. The Grand Signior has often complained
of their Pyracies to the King of Poland, who never yet gave him any greater
satisfaction for his Damages, then he has received from him, for the inroads
of the Tartars, to whom there could never be raised up a more suitable Enemy
then these Cossacks.

As to their manner of making war by Land, they are better Footmen then Horse,
they are patient, and laborious, obedient to their Commanders, and extremely
dextrous at casting up earth, and intrenching; and not only so, but also at
another kind of ambulatory way of intrenching, which they perform by an
handsome and orderly manner of disposing their This is called their Tabor.
Chariots, which is absolutely necessary when they march through those great
desert Plains, where the Tartars run about continually: a thousand Cossacks
thus defended with their Chariots, will make head against six thousand of those
Infidels, who seldom alight from their Horses, so that a Ditch or a small
baricado is able to stop them, it would be very difficult in any other Country
to make an Army march thus in the middle of Chariots, there being few Countries
in the world so flat and even as that.

The Country inhabited by the Cossacks is called Vkrain, which signifies the
Frontier, it extends it self beyond Volhinia and Podolia, and makes a part of
the Palatinates of Kiovia and Braclaw, some years since they made themselves
Masters of these Provinces, and of a part of black Russia, which they have been
forced since to quit: this Country lies between the 51 and 48 degree of
Latitude, below which there is nothing but desert Plains as fa^ as the Black
Sea, which on one hand ar^ extended to the Danube, and on the other to Palus
Maeotis, the Grass of which Country grows to an incredible length.

Vkrain is very fruitful, and so is Russi^ and Podolia, and if the Earth be
never so little cultivated, it produces all sor^ of Grain so plentifully, that
the inhabitants know not for the most part what to do with it; their Rivers
not being navigable, whereby to transport it; they have all sorts of Cattle,
and of Game, and Fish in abundance, Honey, and Wax in great quantity, Wood
which serves them to build their Houses, they want nothing but Wine and Salt,
the former they have out of Hungary, Transylvania, Walachia, and Moldavia,
which their Beer and Mead and Aquavitae, made out of Corn, and much loved by
them, does supply them with; for their Salt, they are supplied with that from
the Salt-works of Viclictza near Cracow, or from Pokutia, which is a Country
of Poland, joining to Transylvania and Moldavia, where the water of most of the
Wells is salt, and being boiled, as they do the white Salt in France, it is
made up into little Cakes; this Salt is very grateful to the taste, but it
salteth not so well as the Salt of Brouage in France. All the Houses in this
Country are of Wood, the same as in Moscovy and in Poland, the Walls of the
Towns are of Earth, kept up by Stakes or Piles with Planks cross them, such as
damms are made with, they are subject to fire, but resist Cannon shot better
than plaistered Walls.

The principal Rivers are the Nieper or Boristhenes, the Bog, the Niester or
Tyras, which bounds Walachia, the Dezna, the Ros, the Horin, the Slucz, the
Ster, and many other lesser Rivers and Streams, by the number of which we may
judge of the goodness of the Soil.

The most considerable Towns and Fortresses possessed by the Cossacks are
Kiovia, where there is a Palatinate and a Metropolitan Greek Church,
Bialacerkiew, Korsun, Constantinow, Bar, Czarkassi, Czehrin, Kudak, Jampol, at
a passage over the Niester, Braclaw upon the Bog, a Palatinacy, Winnicza,
Human, Czernihow, Pereaslaw, Lubnie, Pawoloiz, Chwastow, all these places have
been fortified within these few years; and the Sieur de Beauplan, a French
Ingenier in the service of the Great General Koniespolki, and to whom the
public is obliged for two exact Maps which he has made of the Vkrain, has
delineated and traced the Fortifications of the most part of these places,
besides which, there is not a Town or Habitation which has not a Rampant, or
is not at least defended with a Ditch to secure it self against the assaults of
the Tartars, who come often to visit these Countries.

The Peasants in Vkrain, and the neighboring Provinces are like Slaves, the
same as they are in almost all places of Poland, being forced to work three or
four days in the week for their Landlords, and are charged besides with many
other duties, as of Corn and Fowl, for the Lands which they hold, and to pay
the Tenth of Sheep and Hogs, and all Fruit, and to carry Wood and do diverse
other days works; add to this the ill treatment which they receive from the
Jews, who are Farmers of the Noblemens Lands, and who before the wars did exact
all these Duties with a great deal of rigor; and besides that had Farmed out
the Brewing of Beer, and the making of Strong Water, so that we need not
wonder so much at their frequent revolting, and that in these last wars they
disputed and defended their liberty with so much obstinacy; for this severe
servitude has disclosed all these brave Zaporowski Cossacks, whose number is
much increased of late years, through the despair into which, the severity of
the Gentlemen and the Jews, cast the people of this Frontier, which has
constrained them to seek their Liberties, or the end of their Miseries among
the rest.

The inhabitants of Vkrain, who are all at present called Cossacks, and glory
in carrying that name, are of a good stature, active, strong, and dextrous in
what they do, liberal, and little caring to gather Riches, great lovers of
Liberty, and that cannot suffer any yoke; unwearied, bold and brave, but very
great drunkards; perfidious and treacherous; they delight in Hunting and
Fishing, and in all Arts necessary to a Countrey-life, and to war, they have
also this peculiar Art, that they understand best how to prepare Saltpeter
with which their Country abounds, and from whence great quantity is
transported into diverse places of Europe; they carry much of it to Dantzick
where the Hollanders and other Nations receive it.

This Country is very much incommodated with Flies, which sting so fiercely in
Summer, as to make their faces all swelled, who do not lie under a kind of Net
made like a soldiers Hut, covered with a cotton Cloth tucked in on the sides,
and hanging down half a foot below the Bed, so that there may be left no place
open: but they are much more infested with Locusts which come in some years,
especially in very dry seasons; they are brought by an East or Southeast wind
out of Tartary, Carcassia, and Mengrelia, which Countries are scarce ever free
from them; they come in clouds of five or six Leagues long, and three or four
Leagues broad, and darken the Air in such sort, that the most clear weather
becomes dusky; wheresoever they stay, they reap all the Corn in less then two
hours time, though it be but green: these Insects live but six months; in the
places where they stay; in Autumn they lay their Eggs, every one about three
hundred, and in the following spring they are hatched, and if the weather be
dry, turn into so many Locusts, the great Rains kill them, and by this means
this Country is delivered from that scourge, or else by the North and
Northwest winds, which drive them into the Black sea, when they are newly
hatched, and are not yet turned into Flies, they creep into Houses, into Beds,
upon the Tables, and upon the Meat, so that they cannot eat without swallowing
some of them: in the night they fall down into the highways and fields, which
are sometimes covered with them, and when a Chariot comes to pass over them,
they send forth an intolerable ill smell.

The Russians and Cossacks are afflicted with a disease called by the
Physicians, Plica, and in the language of the Country Goschest, they who are
seized with it, loose the use of their Limbs, as Paralitical persons do,
feeling great pains in their Nerves; this is followed by a great sweat in their
Head, and after that, their Hair is all glued together, at which time the
palsy leaves them, but their Hair remains wreathed and in Elves-locks; this
disease which is incident to Horses as well as Men, is thought incurable in
that Country, but the Sieur de Beauplan assures us he has cured many, by
treating them in the same manner as those who are infected with the Lues
Venerea, and some have been insensibly delivered from it by the change of Air
in passing from one Country to another; this disease proceeds according to
the common opinion from the crudity or some other bad quality of their waters;
and this is remarkable in it, that it is communicated by Coition, as the French
Pox: Some Children bring it with them into the world, and are cured as they
grow up.

The language of the Cossacks is a dialect of the Polonian, as that is of the
Slavonian; it is very delicate, and abounds in Diminitives and pretty
Fashions, and Manners, of elegant Speech.

As to their Religion, they make profession of the Greek, received in this
Country in the year 942. in the Reign of Wlodomir Prince of Russia, the
greater part of the Gentlemen profess either the Catholic, Lutheran, or
Calvinist.

The Principal points in the Greek Religion wherein they differ from the Latin
are, That they do not admit of the proceeding of the Holy Ghost from the
Father and the Son, but from the Father only, thinking that if they should
believe him to proceed from both, it would suppose in him a double
Understanding, and a double Will.

The Greeks also deny Purgatory, saying, That every one after this life
according to his actions in it, is to expect the day of judgment; the good in
pleasant and delicious places with the good spirits, and the evil in frightful
and terrible habitations in company of the bad: founding this their belief upon
that passage of Scripture, Venite benedicti patris mei possidere regnum
coelorum, etc. and ite maledicti in ignem aeternum; from whence they pretend to
prove that there is no other judgment but that of the end of the world, it
seeming to them incongruous that this sentence should be pronounced against
those who are already judged.

They do not admit of the single lives of Priests, and receive none to that
function but such as are married, believing that the Roman Priests are
anathematized by the Council held at Gangra in the fourth Canon of which it is
said, Qui spernit sacerdotem secundum legem uxorem habentem, dicens quod non
liceat de manibus ejus Sacramentum sumere anathema sit: and in another place,
omnis sacerdos and diaconus propriam uxorem dimittens, sacerdotio privetur, so
that they hold Marriage to be so Essential to the priesthood that a Priest when
he burieth his Wife can no longer exercise his sacerdotal Functions; these
Priests are ordinarily taken out of Colleges or Monasteries, where they choose
those of longest standing and greatest abilities.

They refuse all Councels, since the seventh Ecumenical Assembled under Pope
Adrian, in which they say it was determined, that all things decided and
resolved of in the preceding Council, till that time, should remain firm and
stable for ever, but that whosoever for the future should assemble any other
Council, or meet at it, should be an Anathema, so that they count all what has
been determined of in the Church since that time to be Heretical and corrupted.
The Fathers which they follow, are S. Bazile, S. Gregory Nazianzen, S.
Chrysostom; they read also the Morals of S. Gregory the Great, and having a
great opinion of their Sanctity, they hold in great Veneration all the Popes
who were before the Seventh Council. They celebrate their Liturgy in Greece,
and in Natolia in the ancient Greek Language, but the Muscovites and Russians
have it in their own, yet they also mix some Greek Hymns with it, they
consecrate with leavened Bread, and think it strange that the Roman Priests
should make use of unleavened, and should imitate the Jews in this, and yet not
retain their Sabbath or Circumcision: besides, they say it is expressly set down
in the Gospel, That our Savior at the last Supper took Bread, which cannot be
taken for unleavened Bread, for the Jews eat not of that but at the Passover,
and standing, when on the contrary, Our Lord at the institution of the last
Supper, sat down, or rather laid down with the Apostles, recumbentibus
duodecem, etc. and whence they conclude that he did not then keep the Passover,
but that it was some other repast. They invoke Saints and Angels as those of
the Roman Church do, and the blessed Virgin and the Apostles, whose Festivals
they solemnize; and the Russians, principally that of S. Nicholas of Myrea,
whom they particularly adore.

Their Baptism, Confession, Marriage, Ordination of their Priests, and their
extreme Unction, differ little from the Latins, the difference which there is
in the Eucharist is, that the people communicate in both kinds, and that the
Sacrament is administered to Children of three years old, they have their
Hostia's apart for the sick, which they consecrate in the Holy week.

Their Fasts are more frequent and more austere then ours, they abstain not
only from Flesh, but from Butter, Milk, Cheese, Eggs, and Fish also, living
only upon Cabbage, parsnips, Mushrooms, and Pulse; there are some also so
devout that they content themselves with Bread and Water, excepting Saturdays
and Sundays, yet for all this the Muscovites are often drunk in their Lents,
and do not believe any more then the Polanders, that excessive drinking does
any way break their Fasts; they have four Fasts in the year, the first
answers to our Lent, and lasts seven weeks; the second begins from the
Octave after Whitsuntide, and ends at the Vigils of S. Peter and S. Paul; the
third from the first of August to the Assumption of the blessed Virgin; and the
last is during the Advent, which begins fifteen days sooner then that of the
Church of Rome, they observe the same abstinence on Wednesdays and Fridays;
there are very few points in which the Russian and Greek Church differ, they
holding the same Communion and fourscore years since did acknowledge the
Patriarch of Constantinople, since which time the Great Duke of Muscovy has
thought fit to nominate the Archbishop of Mosco, upon which nomination he is
consecrated by two or three of his Suffragans. The Bishops of Black Russia or
Southern Russia did since that set up a Church apart, and seeing the progress
of the divisions which Luther and Calvin had made in their respective
Countries, they determined in a Synod which they held for the sustaining of
themselves, to re-establish the union of their Church with the Roman Catholic,
and to this intent, in the year 1595. they deputed two, and sent them to Rome,
who in the name of the Churches of Black Russia, presented in writing a
confession of Faith conformable to the belief of the Council of Trent, after
that they had stipulated that they should retain the Ceremonies of the Greek
Church used when the union was made with the Latin at the Council of Florence,
but they are since fallen off.

A DISCOURSE OF THE PRAECOPIAN TARTARS.
THere are two great Nations in the world, who live very much after the same
manner, are of the same Religion, and pretend to the same original; these are
the Arabs and the Tartars, the first living in part of Asia and of Africa, and
the latter possessing all the Northern Regions of Asia, and extending their
Territories into Europe: some of these are more civilized then the others, have
Towns and Literature, and improve their knowledge in Arts and Sciences, but the
most part of them live a wandering life up and down in the Fields and Plains, in
Tents or Sheds, or else contended to have no other covering but the Heaven, not
addicting themselves to Agriculture, but delight in Hunting, Fighting, Robbing,
and have little other Riches then their Herds and Flocks.

All these Tartars are divided into Hordes, Horde signifies a Congregation.
and the Arabs into Heyles or Cobeyles, and almost all these people, make no
alliance out of their own Lineage and Blood, from whence apparently proceeds,
that great resemblance which they have to one another; and some peculiar
Features which do easily distinguish them from other Nations.

The Tartars have not been known by this name, but for about four hundred
years, and are properly the Scythians; some Authors, as Leunclave and others,
derive this name from the River Tartar, in the Country where they did inhabit.

There are some who say that the name of Tartar is improper and corrupted, and
that they ought to be called Tatares or Totares, a word which in the Syriack
Language signifies a Remnant, supposing that these people are the remnant of
the Ten Tribes which Salmanazar and his predecessors led away captive into
Assyria, and who afterward resolved to separate themselves from the Gentiles,
and passed into a Country not inhabited, there to exercise their Religion, and
to observe the laws which they had formerly neglected.

Tartary is divided into five parts, the first is the lesser Tartary, or
Tartary of Prezecop, called also Crim Tartary. The second is Sarmatia,
Asiatica, which contains many Hordes of the Tartars subject to the Great Duke
of Moscovia, as the Czeremisses, the Nagais, Zauolhaus, and those of Cazan and
Astracan. The Third is Zagatay, or the Country of Vzbek, otherwise called
Scythia beyond the Mount Imaus, which extends it self between the Rivers of
Chesel, otherwise Jaxarte, and Gehon, or Ox, and comprehends Bactriana, and
Sogdiana; and in this Tartary Reigned the famous Tamberlane. The Fourth is
Cathay or great Tartary. And the Fifth is, That Tartary which was unknown to
Ptolomy and lies most remote in the North-east part of Asia.

The lesser Tartary formerly called Taurica Chersonesus, has received the name
of Praecopensis, from a Town called Przecop, situated in the Istmus of the
Peninsula. Przecop in the Sclavovian Language, signifying a place ditched or
dug; there being a Ditch which cutteth through this neck of Land; it is
called also Crim, from one of its principal Towns of that name.

The Tauri were the ancient inhabitants, and gave name to this Country, many
Greek Colonies came thither afterward, and then some Hordes of the Tartars who
came out from about the Caspian Sea, and after they had harrased a part of Asia
and passed the Volga, did at length fall into this Country, and take
possession of it all, about 460. years since, except Caffa and some other Ports
which remained in the hands of the Genoeses from the year one thousand two
hundred and sixty six, till one thousand four hundred and seventy four, when
Mahomet the second Emperor of the Turks took it from them.

Taurica Chersonesus is about fifty Leagues long, and in some parts thirty
Leagues broad, in others less; but the lesser Tartary is of a greater extent,
comeprehending Budziak, which is a Country lying between the Niester and the
Boristhenes, as far as the Don or Tanais, and all along the Sea of Elle
Zabacche, or Palus Maeotis.

There are no Towns nor yet Villages, but in the Chersonesus, the rest being
only incultivated Plains, yet of themselves very fruitful, and the Tartars
encamp up and down in them as they find more or less forage, and make use of
their Huts, and their traveling sheds, only in the winter to defend
themselves against the great cold and snow, which we mean also of those only
who are left to keep the Herds and Flocks; as for the rest they are ordinarily
employed about this time, when the Rivers and Marshes are frozen up, to make
their inroads, and plunder in Vkrain, and upon the frontiers of Moscovy.

The Towns of this Peninsula are first Przecop, called Or by the Tartars, where
there are about four hundred Houses; it is situated upon the Eastern part of
the Istmus, being half a League about: Coslow, seated on one of the Capes of
the Peninsula upon the Black Sea, having about two thousand Houses, and is a
Town of Trade belonging to the Cham: Crim, another Town of the Cham's,
situated upon a Bay which the Palus Maeotis makes, and is inhabited by few
else but by the Tartars. Baciasary where the Cham ordinarily keeps his Court
of about two thousand Houses. Almasaray, another Palace belonging to the Cham,
whither he often goes, but the Town by it has not above three or fourscore
Houses.

The places possessed by the Turk, are the Port of Baluelawa, very much
esteemed, where the Ships and Galleys are made for him, but there are not there
above two hundred Houses at most. Ingermen, and Mancup, Castles with ruined
Towns, but the most considerable place is Caffa, formerly called Theodosia,
when the Genoeses were Masters of it, it was one of the most trading Towns of
the Levant, but it is since fallen from its Grandeur, and has run the same
fortune with most of those Towns, which have fallen under the Ottoman Dominion;
yet there are still remaining about five or six thousand Houses: the
Inhabitants are Greeks, Italians; the remainder of the Genoeses, Armenians,
Jews, Turks and Tartars, but the most part of them are Christians, who have had
to the number of five and forty Churches there, either Greek, Arminian, or
Latin.

Taurica Chersonesus consists partly of fruitful Plains, and partly of Woods
and Hills, it produces all sort of Grain and excellent Fruit and Wine. The
Christians and Jews Till the Ground; the Tartars employ their Slaves in the
same labor, esteeming it an employment below them, but the Tartars without,
despise it more, and choose rather to be Shepherds and Robbers: Their Horses
and Cattle are their Riches, with the Booty and Slaves of both Sexes, which
they take in their incursions and sell to the Merchants of Caffa, after they
have provided for themselves, and furnished the Cham, who has the privilege
to take first what Men and Women he pleases; these Slaves are afterward
carried away by the Merchants of Constantinople, Synopa and Trebisonde, and
other places of the East, especially the Women and Maids of Poland, who are
carried away sometimes as far as Persia and India, to furnish the Serraglio's
of those Countries where they are much esteemed; formerly the Soldans of Egypt
did furnish themselves with Soldiers out of Taurica Chersonesus, composing
their Militia of Slaves taken by the Tartars in Russia, Podolia, Moscovia, and
Circassia. But since the ruin of that Military Empire by Selim, that Commerce
with Egypt has ceased. The Tartars receive from the Christian and Jewish
Merchants in exchange for their Slaves and Cattle which they bring them,
Turkish Horses, Arms, Stuffs for clothing and other Commodities.

The Praecopian Tartars are most of them of a middle stature, strong, and thick
Limbs, short Neck, broad Face, their Eyes small, but very black, and opening
wide, their complexion Tawny, and other particular Lineaments they have which
do easily distinguish them from among many other men, hardened to all sort of
Labor and Pains from their very infancy. Their Mothers has them almost every
day in water, in which Salt is dissolved, to make their bodies more strong, and
less apt to be penetrated by the injuries of the Air, which I have seen also
practiced by the Polish Women, but these are contented to prepare this Lie
only once a week, their Fathers teach them very early to draw the bow, and
from the age of twelve or fifteen years they carry them with them to the wars.

The Tartars who live abroad, are habited in Sheepskins with a Cap of the same
Stuff; their Arms are ordinarily a Cimeter, a Bow and a Quiver, with about
twenty Arrows; they make themselves these Arms, thus, their Bows out of Horses
Pizzels, their Quiver, out of his skin, and tie the heads of their Arrows with
little Thongs cut out of the same skin of the same Animal, of which also they
make their Whips so neatly, by a particular Art which they have, that our
Sadlers in France and Germany, have not yet been able to imitate them; they
begin to use Firearms, and all of them are furnished with Knives and
Instruments to mend their Bridles and Saddles, which they also make themselves;
they carry with them a Steel to strike fire, and a Mariners Compass, a Sun-dyal
to guide them through the desert Plains where there is no beaten way or path.
The chief among them wear Cloth of diverse colors, have Linen made of Cotton,
Coats of Mail, Turkish Saddles, and are in an handsome equipage, purchased
either of the Armenian Merchants, or taken in War; all ride very short, and
carry their Legs bended and high, after the manner of the Poles, Turks, Arabs,
and of all the Eastern Nations, and the Africans. Their Horses which they call
Bacmates, are long, ugly, and lean, have the Hair of their Neck thick, and
great Tayls which hang down to the ground; but Nature has very well repaired
their ugliness by their swiftness, and their incomparable and indefatigable
service they perform in traveling, being able to carry their Riders whole days
journeys without drawing Bit; they feed at all times, and when in winter the
Earth is covered with Snow, and the Tartars make their incursions, they live
either upon what is under the Snow, or upon the Branches or sprouts of Trees,
Pine tops, Straw, or any thing they can find; the chief of the Tartars have
Turkish and Arabian Horses, and their Cham very good Race-horses.

The traveling Tartars scarce eat any bread coming seldom into places, where
it is to be had, but they make use of Millet, which is very common amongst
them, with which they make their Drink and Pottage; and eat ordinarily
Horseflesh which they boil when they are at leisure, either alone or with their
Millet, but when they go to war and are upon their March, they make it ready,
or rather mortify, or just heat it, under their Saddles* and eat it afterward
in this condition without any other sauce then the froth upon the Flesh, made
by the sweating of the Horse; neither do they choose the most fat or the most
sound and wholesome Horses to make their Provision of, but they take such as are
spent with their long marches, or are sick and lame, and I have seen at my
being in Poland, diverse Tartar prisoners come and take away dead Horses out of
the Stables to feast one another with, so that there is no fear in those
Countries that the carcasses of dead Beasts should infect the Air, they will
take an order for that, and not fail to carry them away, as soon as they know
where they are; the use of Wine being forbidden them by the Law of Mahomet,
their drink is ordinarily clear water, and in winter snow, when the Brooks and
Rivers are frozen over, and sometimes the broth made with their Horseflesh, and
the Skumme, or else Breha, which is a drink made with boiled Millet, but those
who are better accommodated, and more delicate, drink Mares milk, Mead, and
Strong waters, and eat Lamb, Kid, Fowls, and all sort of Game which they take;
they delighting much in Hunting and Fowling; but all abstain from Swines-flesh,
and one may say this of them in general, that they are sober and continent; as
for the Cham himself he keeps a better Table, and fares more deliciously, is
nobly lodged, and lives magnificently, and as becomes one of his Quality.

Their Language is much like the Turkish, both of them having the same
original, only the Turkish is more mixed with Persian and Arabic words; their
Religion is the Mahumetan.

As to their Morals, there are very few Nations to be found less vicious, for
besides their continence, they are extremely sincere, and faithful, they have
no Thieves or false witnesses amongst them, little injustice or violence, and
live in Union and great tranquillity; as to their harasing the Christian
Countries, they do not think they commit any fault or injustice in doing it,
seeing that they are esteemed by them as people that are Infidels and
abominable.

The mavelous fidelity of the Captive Tartars in Poland is every day to be
observed, who never fail to return at the time appointed, when they are let
loose upon their word to go and procure their Liberties by the exchange of
Polish prisoners, which they execute punctually, or return themselves not
failing a minute; and I have observed that the Polish Gentlemen do rather
trust the young Tartars, which are in their service, with the keys of their
Money and Jewels, then any other of their Household.

These People obey one Prince whom they call their Cham or King; the Polanders
name him the Czar or Caesar, he is much respected by his own People and
Reigns despotically, as almost all other Mahumetan Princes do; the Cham has
power of nominating his successor, who is ordinarily his Son or one of his
Brothers, he that is to succeed, is called the Galga; the Nobles or most
considerable of his Subjects are named Murzas. Since that Selim, Emperor of the
Turks brought a part of Taurica Chersonesus under his obedience; the Chams are
not become Tributaries, as some say, but Vassals to the Grand Signior, in such
sort, as for a mark of his Sovereignty over them, they receive a Standard from
him at the change or installation of every Cham. The first King or Cham of
these People was one Vlan, whose birth they report to be miraculous; his
Successors were supplanted about two hundred years ago by the Geereys, a
Family which at this day sits upon the Throne, yet their are some left of the
former, still called Vlans, and are to succeed in the Government when the House
of the Geereys shall be extinct.

The Religion of the Praecopian Tartars being Mahumetan, and their Language the
Turkish, together with their nearness to Constantinople; the Government also is
very like to that of the Turks; the Cham's first Minister of State is called
the Vizier, the same as the Grand Signior's; they have also Priests and
Caditi's to do justice, for the administration of which they have no other
Code but the Alcoran, and no other interpreter of that but their own common
Sense; the parties plead their own Cases, which are briefly and readily
dispatched; the Cham himself does Justice, and determines Controversies,
especially when he goes forth in public, without acception of persons,
hearing the poor as well as the rich. Drunkenness, Murder, Adultery, and Theft
are most rigorously punished, and though they be much accustomed to rob in War,
yet they totally abstain from it in their own Country, where wearing of any
Arms is prohibited them, even in the Cham's Court.

The forces of this Prince are very numerous, for gathering together all the
hords, of the Tartars, who do either obey him or are his Allies, he is able to
bring into the field many thousand Horse; they have no Foot but some Janisaries
which they receive from the Turk upon any expedition which they make by his
Order or Agreement; there are some few Garrisons in the Castles and strong
places of Taurica Chersonesus, the most considerable is in the Fortress of
Przecop, or Or, which has notwithstanding but a bad Ditch four or five fathoms
over, and a Rampart of seven or eight foot high, and two fathoms and half over;
here lies always a strong Guard to defend the entrance of the Peninsula, and
he that is Governor is Commander of all the Hordes of the Tartars, as far as
the Boristhenes.

The wars which the Tartars ordinarily make, are rather an inroad then any
thing else.

How strict peace soever they have with the Christians their neighbors, they
do not fail to visit them often, either upon their inclination, or upon the
Command of the Cham, who always pretends to a Tribute from the Moscovites and
Polanders, which they have paid sometimes when necessity has forced them, and
refused at others, as not being willing to subject themselves to these
acknowledgements toward Infidels, and those whom they despise.

When the Tartars would make any great inroad either into Poland or Moscovy;
they choose ordinarily the full Moon of January, all the Rivers, Lakes and
Marshes, being then frozen, and the Earth, especially in the plain Deserts
covered with Snow, which is very commodious for their Horses which are not
shod; every Tartar carries two with him, either for change, or to carry his
booty and provision; neither is his provision very weighty, consisting only of
a little Millet, dried Flesh powdered after the manner of the Turks, and some
Garlic, which they hold very proper to digest so many crude Meats as they eat,
and many times they carry nothing, feeding only upon the flesh of their Horses
which perish in their march; they take their way through the Valleys and most
obscure passages, that they may not be discovered by the Cossacks, who always
keep Centry and Watch, and are out upon parties to hear news of them, and so to
allarm the Country. That which is most surprising is, That in the middle of
winter they incamp without fire, for fear of being discovered, and eat little
but Horseflesh stewed under their Saddles; when they are arrived at those
places where they intended, whither it be in Vkrain or elsewhere, their
Generals let loose one third part of their Army, which is divided into diverse
Troops, and these overrun and pillage all the Country five or six Leagues
about the wings of their Army; their main body in the mean time keeping close
together, to be in a posture to fight their Enemies, if their should be
occasion; afterward this party being returned, they let loose another in its
turn, observing always this Order, That all their Troops which run up and down,
may in a few hours return to the body of their Army: after they have pillaged
and harrased the Country five or six days, they return as fast as they can,
that they may not be set upon in their retreat, and having regained the open
desert Plains, where their Body consisting of Horse, they have great advantage
in fight; they make a halt to refresh themselves awhile, and to share the Booty
and Prisoners. They make their incursions also in Summer, but not in such great
numbers, seldom so many as ten thousand together, and these are the Tartars of
Budziak, who at that season lead their Horses and Cattle into the Plains to
feed, and so getting ground, they of a sudden run out and take away all they
meet; nor is it easy to stop them but with a thousand men, marching always in
Tabor.

The Tartars fight not but in great Troops of two, three, or four thousand
Horse, and seldom give battle but when they are much the stronger, and when
their Army is forced and broken up by the enemy, they scatter and disperse
themselves into so many little Troops, that the Polanders and Germans, who
march close and by squadrons, know not which to set upon in their retreat; they
shoot their Arrows from behind them, with such exactness as to hit those who
pursue them at two hundred paces distance, and at a quarter of a League from
thence rally their forces again and return presently to charge; this they
repeat often, it being their manner of fighting, but it is only thus, when
they are the greatest number, for otherwise when they once run, it is full
speed, and not to return again, and it is difficult to surprise them, they
keeping strict watch all night, not easy to defeat them, unless it be in some
straight, or upon some pass of a River.

The prisoners which they take, they make Slaves and sell them to the Merchants
of Constantinople and Caffa, and other places of the East, who either keep them
to wait upon themselves, or to look after their Cattle, or till the Ground,
entertaining with the same face as we have formerly spoken of, as diverse Polish
and French Officers have related unto me; amongst others, Lieutenant-Collonel
Nicolai, and Captain Croustade, who most unfortunately fell into their hands;
but the Poles are even with them, for except those Children whom they choose to
wait upon them, and Baptize and instruct in the Christian Religion, or some
Murza which they shut up and treat well enough, and hope to exchange for some
Polish Nobleman, prisoner in Tartary; the rest are kept as Slaves, having
always Irons upon their feet, and are made use of as Beasts to carry all manner
of burdens, Lime, Brick, and all other materials for building, Wood for their
Kitchins and Chambers, and to make clean their Houses, and Plough, and other
labors, being always followed by one who keeps them to their work, yet these
poor people get some time to make Whips, which they sell and buy provisions
with the Money, their ordinary allowance being only Bread and Water, unless
when they get a dead Horse; when I was at Warsaw, I had opportunity to take
notice of two or three hundred of them, who lived after this manner, either
under the King, or some great Polish Nobleman.

THE HISTORY OF THE WAR OF THE COSSACKS AGAINST POLAND.
POland has had often very powerful Enemies to deal with, as the German
Empire, the Knights of the Teutonick Order, since their establishment in
Prussia, often backed by German Forces; the Tartars who have made frequent
incursions, and sometimes traversed the Country from one end to the other. The
Turks who came in the year 1621. to Choczin upon the Niestre with an Army of
four hundred thousand men, and seemed to swallow up the Kingdom, and the
rather, because at the same time the King of Sweden, Gustavus Adolphus entered
into Liefland with a considerable force, yet have the Poles made head against
all these Enemies, though never so redoubtable, and those Wars never appeared
so dangerous to them, as that which insued upon the defection of the Cossacks
in the year 1648. almost at the very moment of the death of their King, for
these Rebels did not only engage all those of Black Russia to rise with them,
but at once laying off all that mortal and irreconcilable hatred which they
have always had for the Tartars, they made a League with them, and did proceed
further to implore the assistance of the Turk toward the total ruin and
destruction of Poland.

Having therefore joined their forces with those of the Infidels, they made in
less then four years time, four great irruptions into this Kingdom with Armies
of two or three hundred thousand fighting men, who were the more formidable, by
reason that their Infantry, hardened to all labor and injuries of the weather,
and sufficiently warlike by their frequent incountring the Tartars invasions,
were now sustained and backed by the Tartar Cavalry, which without
contradiction would be the best in the world if it were exercised with the same
Martial Discipline as that of Christendom.

Bogdan Kmielniski was the first spark which kindled this fire, and the hinge
upon whom this war moved, he was born a Gentleman, son to the Podstarroste of a
Polish General, being enrolled young in the Cossackian Militia; from a private
soldier he attained by degrees to the charge of a Captain, and was deputed from
this Militia to the Diets of Poland, was afterward made Commissary-General,
and in the end General, having besides this some tincture of literature, a
thing very rare in any of those people; King Vladislaus being weary of
languishing in a slothful quietness, while that most part of the other Kings
and Princes of Christendom were in action, in the year 1646. designed a war
against the Praecopian Tartars, whom he pretended to drive out of Crimea, and
judged Kmielniski, worthy to Command the Cossackian Army, of which he made very
great account, especially in this expedition; but the Kings design not being
seconded by the Christian Princes, who were employed otherwise, nor by the
Venetians themselves, upon whose assistance he did very much depend, and on the
other side the States of Poland being jealous of his raising forces, he was
obliged to disband and pay off his Troops with a good part of his Queens Dowry.
Kmielniski was by this means out of service, yet soon found occasion of
employing himself upon a dispute which happened about his Estate, between him
and Czapliniski, Lieutenant to Konielpolski, Great ensign of the Crown, and
was the more exasperated by the ill treatment which his own Wife and Son
received, who in the strife happened to be struck with a Cudgel: he was not
long before he returned the injury, for discovering that the Russes were
disposed to set themselves free, and could no longer relish that peace, which
instead of procuring them repose, gave a greater opportunity to their Noblemen
to keep them in servitude and oppression; he very well managed their
discontents, and assured himself of the Cossacks, retiring himself about the
beginning of the year 1648. toward the Porohi, or Isles of the Boristhenes,
there to fortify and put himself in defense against any assault of the
Polanders.

Some thought, and with great probability, that King Vladislaus, being willing
to take in hand again the design of his expedition against the Tartars,
entertained a private correspondence with him, and was the cause underhand
that the Cossacks revolted, to the end that the States of Poland furnishing him
with an Army to suppress them, when they came to meet, they might join their
forces, and the greatest part being strangers, and Commanded by those who are
intimate with them, they would little have regarded the Orders of the States,
but followed this Prince against the Tartars and against the Turks also, with
whom they would necessarily have been engaged, having attacqued the former; but
howsoever it was, Kmielniski seeing that the Letters which he sent into Poland
to complain of the injuries done to the Cossacks, and to him in particular,
although full of submission and protestations of Obedience, were of no effect;
but on the contrary, the Great General Potoski was preparing to come against
him; and distrusting his own strength, he called for assistance from the
Tartars, who passed the winter in the desert Plains, seeking their opportunity
to make their ordinary inroads, and plunder in Vkrain, conducted by Tohaibeg,
one of their Captains, a brave Commander, but often mutinous, and refractory to
the Orders of the Cham.

The great distance of places was favorable to Kmielniski, and kept the Polish
Generals some time from the knowledge of his private Treaties, but so soon as
they had certain advice thereof, they resolved to march with all diligence
toward the Zaporovian Islands, and to stifle this revolt in its Cradle, they
dispatched therefore on that side, a part of the Polish Army designed for the
Guard of the frontiers, and particularly the body of Cossacks entertained in
the service of the States under the conduct of Schomberg their Commissary.
Stephen Potoski, Son to the General Sapiha Czarnecki, and some other Officers.
Part of the Cossackian Militia which was embarked upon the Boristhenes, being
arrived at the Porohi, went immediately over to Kmielniski, violating in favor
of their Contrymen, their Oath of Allegiance to the Polanders, which they
had so lately taken. Kmielniski marching with this recruit against the rest of
the Cossacks, easily obliged them to follow the example of the former. among
these latter, there were some Troops of Dragoons which did excellent service in
this war against the Polish Nobility, who to save the charges of a German
Guard, which the Gentlemen of that Country used to have about their persons,
had Armed and Habited many of those Contrymen after the fashion of the
German Dragoons, renewing thus their courage by the change of their condition,
and bringing them out of the baseness of slavery. Kmielniski fortified with
these revolting Cossacks, found no great difficulty to overcome the rest of the
Polish Troops, who were not in all above fifteen hundred men; the Poles
defended themselves some days in the middle of their Tabor, A certain
intrenchment made with their Chariots
but having lost their Canon, and not being able to resist so great a number
which encompassed them on all sides, they were all either slain or made slaves
by the Tartars; Sapitza was one of these, Schomberg was mortally wounded, and
Potoski not being able to be carried away, died in the field. Kmielniski
carefully managing this advantage, had the Glory which ordinarily accompanies
the first victory, made head against the rest of the Polish Army, which
consisted of about five thousand men, and whose Commanders having long expected
the news of their first Troops ordered toward the Boristhenes, and now being
certainly informed of their defeat, as that also the Cossacks had deserted
them, and that the Tartars were joined with the Rebels, thought it necessary to
retreat, for the preservation of the forces of the Kingdom, but it was now too
late, for the Bacmates So they call the Tartarian Horses.
overtaking them, began to skirmish with them, and some Tartars being taken
prisoners, did confess upon the Rack, that their Army consisted of forty
thousand men, besides seven thousand Cossacks, and the Countrymen of the
adjacent Colonies who came in hourly to them. The Polish Council of War
deliberating therefore what was to be done, found no expedient better then that
of continuing their retreat in the middle of their Chariots, neither was this
sufficient, for they had scarce marched half a League before they entered into
a thick Forest, whose bottom was Marshy and full of Boggs, and to make them
still more exquisitely unhappy, the Cossacks who remained with them, to the
number of eighteen hundred, did then forsake them, so that after four hours
striving, as well against the bad ways as their enemies, and their Tabor being
broken up, and they set upon on all sides, most of them were either killed upon
the place, or choked in the Mudd.

This misfortune which happened about Korsun, became more sensible to Poland by
reason of the death of King Vladislaus the IV who died at this time at Mereche
in Lithuania in the two and fiftieth year of his age, no man doubting but this
Prince by his valor joined with all those other great perfections which he was
endowed with, and which made him venerable and beloved by his own, as well as
esteemed and feared by his enemies, would by his Authority and great name, have
quickly suppressed this new rising, and but yet Infant Rebellion of the
Cossacks.

The Kings death was not presently known to Kmielniski, who, if he had been
informed of it, would not have failed to have shown more fierceness then he did
after the defeat of the Polish Army; upon which he wrote a very submissive
Letter to the King, in which he laid all that was passed upon the insolence of
the Governors, and upon the Rapines and insupportable Exactions of the Jews,
who for Farmers of the Kings Land, and of many Gentlemen's Estates, he asked
pardon for what he was constrained to do in his own defencc, promised to send
back the Tartars, and to live in obedience to his Majesty, if he would be
pleased to maintain him and his Cossacks in their liberty and privileges
granted them by the former Kings his predecessors, but a while after he
understood the King was dead, by a Letter sent him from Adam Kisiel Palatine of
Braclaw by the hands of a Greek Monk: this Palatine who was also a Greek, used
very mild and obliging expressions to bring back the head of the Cossacks to
his obedience, setting forth to him the ancient fidelity of the Zaporowski
Cossacks, who though they were very jealous of their Liberty, were always very
constant, and lived in a State where all persons, but chiefly Men of War, had
always free access to make good their interests, and to complain of their
injuries which they received; that he, being the only Senator of the Greek
Religion, and Protector of their Rites and Churches, which he did always most
heartily defend: did conjure him by the Saintity of the same Religion, and the
Honor of the Russian Nation, that he would send home the Tartars, and lead the
Cossacks back into their ordinary stations, and that in the mean time he would
depute some persons to make known the injuries which they and he in particular
had received, and to desire some redress, offering his own care and services to
help them to all the satisfaction they could pretend to, and withal, he was a
person of that rank and quality in the State, that no Determinations or Orders
could be given either for peace or war, without his being advertised of it; but
he assured them, he should always be inclined to have these disorders
terminated in a peaceable way, rather then to have them entertained by the
continuation of a Civil war; and that their Arms at present employed in their
mutual Ruin, might be more profitably, and gloriously made use of against the
enemies of Christendom. The Tartars were apt upon the least occasion to take
up Arms, but their first heat and choler being past, they returned of
themselves, and were reconciled without any Mediation, they should therefore
take their leaves of them, and retain nothing but this laudable custom of
theirs. The Monk who carried this Letter was in great danger of falling into
the hands of the Tartars, but escaping with much difficulty, he arrived at the
Camp of Kmielniski, which he found confused enough; the General called the
soldiery together in a tumultuous way, had the Letter read before them, and was
the first himself who approved the Council of the Palatine of Braclaw; and
being backed by the Plurality of voices, it was determined that all acts of
hostility should cease, and that they should wait for an answer from the Court
of Poland; that the Tartars should be sent back into the desert Plains, with
Orders there to keep themselves ready upon all occasions, and that the Palatine
should be invited to come to the Camp. This moderation of Kmielniski, when his
affairs were at that height, surprised all the world, although it were not
void of artifice, for as on one side it appeared that he had put a stop to the
course of his victories, to hinder any further bloodshed, and to obtain pardon
more easily, so on the other, he made this ostentation of his power to the
Polanders, to extort from them, what he could not perhaps have obtained only
by his submission. Retiring therefore into the Town of Bialacerkiew, he kept
himself quiet, while that Crzivonos, another Commander of the Cossacks, a
person of little worth, but bold and horribly cruel, harrassed Black Russia and
Podolia, Kmielniski pretended to disallow of these violences, and promised to
put this Crzivonos and five other Commanders of the Peasants in Rebellion into
the hands of the Polanders, but this was all to amuse them, that he might at
the same time the better seize upon the fortress of Bar.

Jeremiah Michael Duke of Wisnowitz arriving on the borders of Russia with some
Troops, to whom were joined those of Janus Tiskewitz, Palatine of Kiovia, and
the Kings Regiment of Guards, Commanded by Ossinski, Lieutenant General of
Lithuania, opposed these incursions of Crzivonos, and stopped his progress who
would otherwise have overrun the Kingdom with those great numbers with him.
Many other Troops and the Rear made up of the Nobility of the Frontiers, making
a new Army, they marched against the Cossacks, and the rebellious Peasants,
after they had endeavored a second time, but all in vain, to make an
accommodation with their Commanders.

The State of Poland was made more sensible upon this occasion then ever before
of the greatness of that loss which it sustained by the death of their King;
there being now no person of Authority enough to Command so many Great men as
were at that time in the Army, who would by no means give place to one another
and their dissentions and disorders at length grew so high, that the most
judicious, considering in what condition affairs were, thought it absolutely
necessary to avoid fighting; in pursuance of which Council, it was resolved
that they should retreat in good order in the middle of their Tabor toward
Constantinow; but these Orders were so ill understood then, when some Troops
about Pilaucze began to move; others not waiting their times, marched away
before the rest, and began a confusion, which being increased by the obscurity
of the night, and communicated to all that followed, it struck such a panick
fear into the whole Army, that even the most brave were not exempt from it, who
could not be so soon informed of the cause of this general flight and
consternation: This would have secured an entire victory to Kmielniski, if he
had not been involved in the same ignorance, but he knew so little of what
passed, that he took this flight of the Polanders for a stratagem, nor could he
believe the truth of the report, and instead of pursuing them with all
diligence, he contented himself to follow them slowly, and with all
circumspection, till at length being undeceived, with a sad heart he turned his
forces against Leopold, a Town very considerable for its Trade, especially into
the East, and indifferently strong, but at that time not furnished with Forces
or Provisions, fit for its defense. Arcissenski an old Officer who had a long
time served abroad, and been a Commander under the Hollanders in Brasil, was
left therein, and put in hopes of being speedily relieved from the Lesser
Poland. The Inhabitants Commanded by this Officer made a strong resistance for
some days, but the Castle forsaken by those who defended it, being taken by the
besiegers, and there being little hope left of holding out long against so
numerous an Army as lay before the Town, and the want of Provisions being
afflicting already, they redeemed themselves and bought off the Enemy from the
Walls with a considerable sum.

The Cossacks having quitted Leopold, came before Zamoscie, a Town fortified
after the modern way by John Zamoski, Great General, and Great Chancellor of
Poland in the time of King Sigismund, Father to the two last Kings.

This place was at that time the only Asylum for the Nobility of Russia, who
had been driven from their Estates by the revolted Peasants, and there being a
good party in the Town from the Palatinates of Belz, and Sendomir, and fifteen
hundred men which Louis Weiher Palatine of Pomerania had brought thither out of
Prussia; all the attempts which the Cossacks and rebellious Peasants made for a
months time, were all in vain, so that after they had lost many men, they
retreated to the bottom of Russia.

We must not pass over in silence the assistance which the Poles received from
his most Christian Majesty, who although the fire of Civil war began already to
be kindled in France, permitted that the eight hundred Auxiliaries raised at
his expense by Colonel Christopher Przemski, who Commanded a Polish Regiment in
Flanders should be joined to the Poles Army under the same Colonel, who out of
this recruit formed one good Regiment. Kmielniski being retired with his Forces
into their Winter Quarters; some great persons on the behalf of Poland begun to
treat with him of Peace, but they received very haughty answers, all the
advantages of the last Campaign having rendered him more insolent then before,
so that it was as much as they could do to prevail with him to consent to a
truce for some months.

The Praeludes of a new war began on both sides before the time was expired;
the Rebels forces provoked the Polish in diverse places, but bore away the marks
of their fool-hardiness having been worsted almost every where by Andrew
Firley, Governor of Belz, and Stanislaus Landskoroniski, Governor of
Camieneche, between whom the new King John Casimir, presently after his
election, divided the Command of his forces, they received amongst others, very
notable shocks at Zwiehal, Ostropol, Bar, and other places, which were retaken,
with great destruction of the Rebels, and rich booty to the Polanders.

Kmielniski seeing that the Spring approached, which he expected with
impatience after that he had called in the Tartars again, took the field to
make a new inroad into Poland: the Poles also gathered together to cross his
design, and their Commanders having deliberated in what place they ought to
stay, till the rest of the Forces of the Kingdom were come up to them; amongst
many advices, of which, one amongst others was to lodge under the Cannon of
Camienesche, the importance of which Fortress being a bar against the Turks was
such, that the preservation of it deserved that it should be preferred before
any other consideration whatsoever; the advice of Firley prevailed, who judging
it not fit to draw off the Army from the frontiers, lest they should be exposed
to the irruption of the Enemy, made choice of the Town of Zbaras, belonging to
the Duke Wisnowitski, as a place most convenient for his design, and for the
reception of those recruits which they expected, he had no more then nine
thousand men with him, taking in those Troops which some Noblemen had raised
at their own expenses, he had with him amongst other Commanders, Landskoronski,
the Count of Ostorog, Great Cup Bearer to the Crown, joined with him as
Colleagues; Duke Demetrius, Jeremiah Michael Wisnowitski, and Alexander
Koniespolski, Great Ensign to the Crown, Son of the defunct Great General of
the same name. General Firley foreseeing that he should soon be environed with
an Army almost innumerable, did presently furnish himself with provisions, and
repaired the old Fortifications as well of the Town as of the Castle of Zbaras,
and secured his Camp by a good intrenchment flancked with Forts and Redoubts,
and taking a particular care of a certain Lake which furnished him abundantly
with water, that it might by no means be turned away by the enemy. He was no
sooner entrenched, but the Army of the Tartars and Cossacks came and
encompassed them in on all sides in such numbers, that there have been seldom
seen the like forces together, since those of Attila and Tamberlan; and that
which was never known before, the Cham himself was there in person, thinking to
swallow up the Kingdom of Poland as a prey, which could not escape him, and
which Kmielniski did not fail to make him believe infallibly his own; so that
he made so little esteem of this handful of Polish Soldiers, which were the
only forces which appeared then to defend the Frontiers; that he resolved not
to take them by Famine, but to force their Camp, which he thought he might so
much the more easily execute by reason that the number of his Army was such,
that he had no need to be sparing of his Men.

He made a General Assault upon the 13 of July, 1649. which was very furious,
and he himself at the Head of his Forces; who not understanding well the
danger, and unacquainted with the Polish valor, rushed on desperately to this
Attack; the chief assault was made upon the Quarters of General Firley, as most
of all exposed. Those that assaulted them, were under covert by the convenience
of a Neighboring Valley: So that some of them, who had already forced the
intrenchment, were beaten off with great difficulty. Firley and Prince
Wisnowitski defended themselves valiantly; the latter seeing his Men begin to
give way. prohibited them by his command shooting any longer against the
Tartars, whom he gave out to have promised Peace and Friendship to their
Generals; and by this Artifice, encouraged and persuaded his Soldiers so far,
that they supposing now they had only the Cossacks to deal withal, had new
vigor infused into them, and after having slain a great number, repulsed the
rest astonished at their desperate bravery, having now sustained that same day
seventeen assaults.

The Cossacks renewed them again the following days, but still with less
success, although they joined stratagems to force, for to make the Polanders
think that they had received new Forces from the Turks, they habited diverse of
their own after the Turkish manner, who conducted a Party of Horse the same way
habited, but were really only Turkish Vests stuffed with Straw, and set on
Horsback. But the manner of this deceit was easily discovered to the Polanders
by their Perspective Glasses.

Kmielniski sent in Letters often, in some of which he exhorted Firley to an
accommodation; in others, he solicited the German Troops to desert them; but
finding that he prevailed nothing, either by force or art, he thought upon
attacking the Polish Camp by approaches, and employed the revolted Peasants who
were in great number in his Army, to work in them day and night; so that in few
days he advanced them to the very foot of their Intrenchment.

This new attempt of the Cossacks, troubled the Poles more then the former, and
seeing that they were now shut up closer, and that it would be difficult for
them to maintain their first intrenchment, they made others nearer to the Town:
Into which, they retired themselves as soon as they were perfected, and diverse,
even of the Officers themselves, were of opinion, that they should quit all
that was without, and shut themselves up into the place; but this advice
appearing very dangerous, was not followed. But besides the extremity they were
reduced to, in having scarce any space left them to stir in, their Provision
began to be scarce, and their Provender for their Horses; So that they dying
every day in heaps, caused an unsupportable stink in the Camp. A morsel of
Bread was sold for Ten Poltoracks, and a Tun of Beer for Fifty Florins
Poltoracks is about Twopence English. A Florin Twenty Poltoracks.
. The Soldiers lived upon no other Provision, then the Flesh of Dogs and
Horses. Kmielniski knowing in what condition the besieged were, became more
insolent, and would grant them no terms but what were very hard. The Cham
showed himself more courteous, yet having demanded that Wisnowitski and
Koniespolski should come and confer with him. And the Polandders refusing that
these great persons should put themselves into his hands, he was very much
offended. The Polish Generals might well send Messengers to the King of Poland,
to let him know in what extremity they were, and to desire a speedy relief; for
most of them fell into the hands of the Cossacks or Tartars; and if any one
escaped in their going out, yet they received no answer, they being either
killed or taken prisoners in their return. Howsoever the Generals pretended,
that from time to time they received news from His Majesty of Poland; and that
he would speedily come to relieve them; and that it might be the more firmly
believed, they affixed the Kings Seal to the Letters which they feigned, having
taken it off from other Letters which they had formerly received. Thus they
encouraged the besieged Army, and induced them to have Patience, both by the
artifice and sweetness of their Discourse.

Some, even of the Principal Officers, who had provisions sufficient for
themselves, left their good Meals which they might have made, and betook
themselves to eat stinking Horseflesh and Dogs-flesh, to make these unsavory
Dishes be better relished by their Soldiers. Firley, although he were infirm,
by reason of his years and maladies, would have made use of the same fare, had
he not been often hindered by those who were about him. Wisnowitski and
Koniespolski neglected not in the mean time, frequently to sally out upon the
besiegers, to put them out of hopes of any speedy victory over people, who
still preserved so much vigor and resolution, in the middle of those miseries,
which they suffered; but besides, the scarcity of Victuals, their want of
Ammunition hindered them from shooting so frequently as before. And the Cossacks
were no ways negligent on their part; for besides their continual shooting
against the Polish Camp, and their frequent assaults, they made approaches
against the Town; and attempted to cut off the Water from the besieged. But
these designs not succeeding, they contrived to set the Town of Zbaras on fire,
and chiefly one of its Gates, which did very much incommodate them, it being
higher then the rest, and the best marks-men of the Poles shot from thence
without ceasing; amongst whom Captain Butler did mavelous execution, and
Father Muchaveski, a Jesuit, no less; who from the Gate of the Castle killed
no less then two hundred Cossacks for his part.

A great company of the Rebels came up to the Gate with Firebrands in their
Hands, ready to set it on fire: Having obtained which, it was very probable
they would gain the rest; but the besieged being advertised of their design,
prepared themselves to render it ineffectual, received them briskly, and made a
great slaughter. Things were in this posture, when an Arrow shot into the Town,
brought with it most fortunately a Letter tied to it; by which he who wrote it,
although his name were never known, gave them to understand he was a Gentleman;
and first excused himself, for serving under the Cossacks; to which he was
induced by the outrages which he had received from a certain great person; and
by the turn of the Fortune of the Poles the year before, but yet that he had
not for all that, lost his love and zeal for his Country, as he had testified
to them in three other Letters, which he had sent to them in the same manner;
and did now give them notice, that the King was certainly coming to their
relief, and already arrived at Zborow, that the Cossacks being informed of his
coming, would not fail to redouble their assaults against them; but for the
same reason they ought to redouble their courage, and prepare themselves to
repulse them with their utmost vigor.

The most part of the besieged could not put any confidence in this Letter,
supposing it to be a new invention of the Generals: But soon after it was found
to be true, and that the King was advanced as far as Zborow to deliver his
besieged Forces, having surmounted all those obstacles which might retard his
preparations, and his march. True it is, that his Army was thought by the most
intelligent, not only insufficient to confront that terrible number of enemies
which he went against, but even to sustain the least Onset from them, it
consisting in all, but of Fifteen thousand Soldiers in pay, and Five thousand
others raised by the Nobility at their own charge, the rest not being able to
come so soon, having been too slow in their Levies; notwithstanding the
continual instances of the King, and his earnest diligence in this affair.

Kmielniski and the Cham understanding of the march of the King of Poland,
divided their Forces, and leaving Forty thousand Tartars; with a great number
of the Cossacks, and revolted Peasants before Zbaras; with the rest of their
forces marched toward Zborow, and were not discovered by the Kings forces,
either by reason that the King had sent none out to inform himself, or that the
Countrymen thereabouts, more inclined to favor the Cossacks, as being of the
same Religion with them, had not faithfully reported what they knew of it;
insomuch, that the Cossacks and Tartars arrived at the Kings Camp without being
any ways discovered, being assisted therein by the Woods, the thick Mists, and
the negligence of their enemy. Nay, Kmielniski himself found means to enter
into the Town of Zborow, and there to consider at his leisure the posture of
the Polish Army. And no sooner were the Poles gotten over the Causeys and
Bridges, which are in the Marshes about the Town, and began to put themselves
in order, but they found that they were on a sudden charged by the Cossacks and
Tartars.

The fight began about the Baggage, the Tartars came soon after and fell upon
the back of the Kings Forces, having crossed a Water; where the Peasants by a
remarkable Treachery, had broken down a Causey which kept it up, and so rendered
it fordable to the Infidels. The Nobility of Premislie, and the Cavalry of the
Duke of Ostrog sustained the first Onset; but being not able to resist the
great numbers of their enemies, many of that Nobility were lost, and all their
Baggage.

Stanislaus Wituski and Leon Sapicha Vice Chancellor of Lithuania, coming to
their relief, repulsed the Tartars for a time; but these returning with more
impetuosity against the Troops of the Vice Chancellor, they must now have been
suppressed after a contest of six hours, if that the Governor of Sendomire, and
Baldovin Ossolinski Starroste of Stabnitz, had not given the Infidels a
diversion. In which, Ossolinski and diverse Gentlemen of the Palatinate of
Russia were slain; while this passed in the Rear and Flanks of the Polish Army,
Kmielniski with his Cossacks, and a Party of Tartars attacked the Front. The
King who at the first noise, of their arrival, had put his Forces into Batalia,
gave the Leading of the Right Wing to the Great Chancellor Ossolinski. This
Wing was composed of the Cavalry of the King; and of that of the Palatines of
Podolia, Beltz, and Enhoff Scarroste of Sokal, and other Regiments: And ordered
the Left Wing to be commanded by George Lubomirski, starroste of Cracovia, and
the Duke Coreski; where besides the Regiments of Horse were diverse Companies of
Volunteers.

The Main Battle made up of the Infantry, and where the King himself was in
Person, was commanded by Major General Hubald of Misnia, who had served a long
time in the German Wars, and had afterward commanded the Militia of Dantzick;
and by one Wolff a Gentleman of Liefland, Governor of Cracovia; both which had
their German Regiments with them.

The Tartars extending themselves wide before the Vant-guard, as if they came
only to observe them, after they had closed of a sudden after their manner of
fighting, threw themselves upon the right wing, where they were received
bravely, and finding that the Foot were defended with their Pikes, and not in a
condition to be broken up, they passed to the left wing, which they were able
to shake more then the other, Coreski who was at the head of them, had his
Horse shot from under him. Ruzouski was wounded with an Arrow through the
Cheeks, yet did not neglect with the Arrow sticking still in the wound, to go
and advertise the King of the danger wherein the left wing was, his Majesty of
Poland not regarding the Dignity of his person, ran in all haste to encourage
his soldiers by his presence, bringing them on again which were flying away,
and complaining that he had no more Officers to Command them; yet
notwithstanding he himself would take their place, and he had been insenbly
engaged in the hottest of the battle, if those about him had not detained him.
The presence of the King who exposed himself in this manner for their safety,
did reanimate his soldiers as much as the dreadful number of their enemies had
discouraged and astonished them, and afterward they fought with more heat, nor
would be forced to give ground.

Some Tartars having broken in on one side were repulsed again by the discharge
of their Cannon, and by two Companies of Foot Commanded by Ghiza, Captain in
the Kings Guards, and in the end the Enemy not being able to get any advantage
over them answerable to those great endeavors against the Polish Army, the
night coming on, terminated that days engagement, in which in all likelihood
they were to have been cut in pieces; most of the night was spent in consulting
and giving Order how to receive the Enemy the next day, they made some
intrenchments in haste to defend themselves by, and in others they placed their
Baggage, but while the King was consulting with the principal Commanders and
Nobility, a report was spread through the Camp, that his Majesty had a design
to retreat that night with most part of his.

The extreme danger into which affairs were brought, rendered the report of
this Retreat more probable, and it wanted little, but the same consternation
had happened there as before at Pilaucze. The King who was just retired to
repose himself a little being informed of it, got presently on horseback, and
riding up and down through the Camp, undeceived them, and by his presence
showed how vain the impression was, they had received of his retreat, of which
he did declare he never so much as thought of, but was resolved to stand it out
against the Enemy, putting them in hopes of a favorable success in the next
days undertaking. Amongst the proposals at the Council of War upon the present
conjuncture of affairs, that of attempting to disingage Kmielniski from the
Cham, was most approved of, and therefore a Tartar prisoner was sent with a
Letter from his Majesty, in which he gave him to understand, that he could not
believe that he had lost all sense and memory of those favors which he had
received from King Vladislaus, from whom when he was formerly taken prisoner in
Poland, he had received so favorable an entertainment and his liberty, and to
whose bounty he was beholden for his present Dignity, and that after this it
was strange he should associate himself with Rebels and Slaves, but that he
ought not to promise himself any great advantages from so unjust a
confederation. Since God would give no blessing on such designs; in the mean
time his Majesty thought it convenient to put him in mind of the obligation
which he had to the King his predecessor, and withal to offer him his own
friendship, if so be that he esteemed that more then an Alliance with Rebels;
the answer of this Letter was not so suddenly received, and the next day
morning, so soon as it was day, the Army of the Cossacks and Tartars appeared
in Batalia, the first against the City of Zborow, and the latter fell upon the
Baggage.

Four hundred light Horse were able for some time to amuse the Cossacks with
diverse skirmishes. and afterward being sustained by a greater number, they
drove them off beyond the Town, and those who did attend the baggage having
taken Arms, preserved it against the Tartars.

The enemies afterward divided themselves into three bodies, and at as many
places attacked the Kings Camp, after having first of all seized upon a Church
which did Command it, where having planted a Battery by their continual
shooting from which they had forced many who defended it to retire; they had
almost made themselves Masters of it, and one of their most resolute soldiers
had already planted Colors upon the Works, when that a great body of the Kings
party running together, made so brave a resistance, that the enemy did not
only give over the assault but the fight, the servants sallied out to pursue
them, and showed such courage upon this occasion, that some proposed they
should have Horses given them, and be ordered into Troops to increase the
number of their forces, and being reinforced with this supply drawn from the
Army it self, they might then hazard a Battle, others were of the opinion, that
it could not be expedient to venture so far, seeing that after a defeat they
would necessarily be reduced to the same extremity as those at Zbaras, out of
this diversity and incertainty of Council, wherein the Poles then floated,
knowing not which way to steer, it pleased providence to conduct them happily
to their Port. The Cham who before all these assaults upon both the Polish
Armies, had promised himself a speedy and certain victory, and now finding to
the contrary, so much fearless resolution among them, began to be weary of this
war, and to show himself more inclined toward an accommodation, wrote a civil
answer to the Kings Letter, in which he acknowledged himself obliged to the
Crown of Poland; and that if his Majesty after his Election had applied himself
to him, he would have set a greater value on his friendship, and embraced it
sooner then the interest of the Cossacks, but they had neglected it so much,
that they scarce considered him as an ordinary man, although they might well
perceive how advantageous his friendship might be, and now seeing there was an
occasion of renewing their ancient Alliance, he would not be backward on his
side, but promised to oblige the Cossacks to lay down their Arms and to return
to their obedience, provided that the Articles of the former Treaties were
observed; and that if his Majesty desired to name a place to confer in, and
send his Chancellor thither, he would send his Vizier. This Letter was also
accompanied with one from Kmielniski, full of respect, and in which he assured
the King of his fidelity and future services.

The Conference being accepted of by his Majesty of Poland, and the place
appointed between both the Armies, The Vizier and the Great Chancellor
Ossolinski, met according to appointment. The Vizier demanded that they should
pay the pension which they were accustomed to give the Cham for the services
which he was bound to render to Poland, which King Vladislaus had refused to
pay; that they should satisfy the Zaporouski Cossacks, and for the damages and
expenses which the Tartars had been at in this expedition, and the blood they
had lost, it should be permitted them to make their excursions and plunder the
Country in their return, in the mean time there was a suspension of Arms
granted though interrupted by some hostilities; the next day which was the
seventeenth of August the Plenipotentiaries returned to the same place of
Conference, each accompanied with two others. The Chancellor of Poland took
with him the Palatine of Kiovia, and the Vice Chancellor of Lithuania. The
Vizier brought Sieferkaz and Sulimaz Aga, to whom Kmielniski was joined, to
desire a Bill of Oblivion for himself. His Cossacks, and the revolted Peasants,
and that they should provide for the maintenance of their Liberty, and the
Greek Religion; and after diverse contests, the Peace was concluded the same day
with the Cossacks and Tartars, upon these Conditions.

I. THat there should be Peace and Brotherly friendship for the future between
John Casimir, King of Poland; as also the Kings His Successors, and Islan
Gierey, Cham of Tartary, and the whole Family of the Giereys.

II. That the King should freely pay the ordinary Pension of the Tartars,
sending it to Camienesche, by Deputies appointed thereto.

III. That in consideration of this, the Cham should be bound to assist the
King with all his Forces against any Enemy, as often as it should be required.

IV. That the Cham should secure the Frontiers of Poland, from the Incursions
and Robberies of his Subjects.

V. That the rest of his Forces before Zbaras should immediately dislodge, and
let the Polish Army, which was there, march with all liberty to any place where
it should please His Majesty of Poland to command them.

VI. That the Cham should without any delay, leave the Countries and Dominions
belonging to the King; and all his Forces the same, and those Turks which he
had with him.

VII. That the King, in consideration of the Cham, would grant a General Pardon
to Kmielniski and his Army, and re-establish the Cossackian Militia in its
ancient Form, Number, and Liberty.

VIII. Besides these Conditions, Three hundred thousand Florins were promised
to the Cham, of which, he received an Hundred thousand in ready Money.

The Articles agreed on with Kmielniski imported thus much, that

I. FIrst, the King should grant a General Bill of Oblivion to all the
Cossacks, and Rebellious Peasants; and that what was passed should be no more
looked after, then as if it had not been done.

II. That Kmielniski should fall down and ask Pardon of His Majesty upon his
knees.

III. That he should be continued General of the Cossacks; of which, the number
should be increased to Forty thousand; and and in which quality, he should
depend on none but the King, after he had made his acknowledgment as a Polish
Gentleman in regard of the States.

IV. That His Majesty should have a List of the Names and Habitations of the
said Forty thousand Cossacks, and that upon the death of Kmielniski they should
be commanded by one of their own Officers of the Greek Religion.

V. That the Army besieged at Zbaras should be set at liberty.

VI. That the exercise of the Greek Religion should be permitted throughout the
Kingdom, even in Cracovia it self; and that its Union with the Roman Church
should cease.

VII. That the Palatinate of Kiovia should be always given to a Greek.

VIII. That the Metropolitan of the Greeks should have his Seat in the Senate
among the Bishops, and should have the nineth place.

IX. That the Cossacks should be permitted to make Strong Water for their own
use, but not for sale.

X. That they should be furnished with Cloth to cloth them; and Ten Florins a
Man to arm them.

XI. That the Nobility coming again into the possession of their Estates,
should not enquire after, or trouble their Subjects for the damages which they
might have received during the War.

XII. That those Noblemen, whether Catholics or Greeks, who had taken part with
the General of the Cossacks should not be at all molested, but discharged from
all what had passed in the last Wars.

In execution of which Articles, the General coming before the King fell upon
his knees, and with tears in his eyes, made a long discourse, expressing
himself how he had much rather appeared in his presence, to receive his
approbation for some considerable service done to his Majesty, and the State,
then thus stained with so much Blood. But since that the destinies had disposed
it otherwise, he came to implore his clemency; and in all humility, the
forgiveness of his faults, promising to repair them by his future conduct. The
King answered him by the Vice Chancellor of Lithuania, That the Repentance of
his Subjects was more acceptable to him, then their punishment; and that he did
heartily forgive what was passed, if he would efface the crime which he had
committed by his future Zeal and Fidelity to his Country.

After this action, Kmielniski and the Cham caused their Forces to retire, and
the King extremely happy in escaping so great a danger, at so easy a rate,
went with the Polish Army to Gliniani, and afterward to Leopold.

Those Forces entrenched at Zbaras, reduced to those extremities which you have
already heard of, maintained themselves all along, rather by rage and despair,
then any hope of help.

The Inhabitants of that Town, not being able to suffer the utmost extremity of
Famine, were ready either to burn the Town, or deliver it up to the enemy; but
the vigilance of the Polanders having hindered the execution of this tragic
design, they much solicited to be let out, which was only granted to their
Wives and Children; neither were they able to keep their retreat undiscovered,
but fell first into the hands of the Polish Soldiers, who abused them as they
pleased, and afterward of the Tartars, who led this unfortunate Troop into
captivity together with some Servants of the Army who had followed them.

The One and twentieth of August, the Cossacks sent the first news to the
besieged of the Peace concluded at Zborow, which was believed by some, but
called in question by most, who feared they might not be comprehended in that
Treaty; they were confirmed in this opinion by a Trumpet, who had the boldness
to proclaim the same upon his own accord; and it had cost him his life, if one
of the Generals had not interceded for him: Afterward there came a Letter from
Kmielniski, in which, he assured the besieged of their Deliverance upon the
payment of a certain sum to the Tartars; but the Generals would not accept of
this condition, and openly declared, that since Kmielniski was obliged to draw
off his Forces, he ought to do it; and for the Tartars, if they would remain
where they were, they might do so if they pleased. In the end, a more faithful
and joyful Message was brought them, with a Letter by Colonel Minor from the
King, to assure them of their Liberties without any conditions, together with
the disposal of the Palatinate of Seudomire, vacant by the Death of the Duke of
Zaslaw, with which his Majesty would gratify the services of General Firley.
The Prince Wisnowitskie was presented with the Starrosty of Premisli, the Duke
of Ostrog with that of Nessewitz, Landskoronski with that of Stobnitz, and the
Palatinate of Braclaw.

All these recompenses, although very considerable, yet were they inferior to
that valor and heroical Constancy; of which, all these great persons had given
such fair proofs, during those two Months which they were besieged, and
continually assaulted in Zbaras.

Neither was Providence less favorable to the Polanders in Lithuania, then in
Russia, where two of their Armies were, as it were, led by the hand out of a
danger; wherein according to all humane appearance, they must have perished.

The Rebellion of the Cossacks and Peasants spread it self in the beginning of
the War, with so much more ease into Lithuania, by reason that the Inhabitants
of that Country, are more conformable in their Manners and Religion with the
Russes.

The Cossacks, entering at two places, had made their inrodes into Polesia, a
Country full of Woods and Bogs, and which makes a part of the Palatinates of
Kiovia and Volhinia, and by treachery had seized upon the Inhabitants of
Starodub and Homel, people who had favored their irruption. Colonel Patz and
Volowitz, and afterward Prince Janus Radzevil, General of Samogitia, and
Field-Marshal of Lithuania, opposed their designs as well as they could, with
the Nobility of Orsa; the Garrison of Bichova, and some other Forces gathered
together; but the assistance of the State came very slowly, and Prince Radzevil
being sent for to the Diet. The Rebels made use of this occasion of his
absence, and set upon Sluczk, a Town belonging to Prince Bogislaus Radzevil,
Great Master of the Horse of Lithuania. Sosnowski, who was Governor of it,
defended it bravely against them; and Horsch, Governor of Orsa, defeated
Fifteen hundred Men at Czeresko, and Mirski, Major General of the Lithuanian
Army, retook from them Prinsko, a populous Town, and the Seat of a Greek
Bishop, which they had made themselves Masters of, by the treachery of the
Inhabitants. Hladki one of the Principal Commanders of the Cossacks, who was
within to defend it, was slain; and because this place was one of their
principal retreats, it was sacked and burnt to ashes to serve for an example.

Prince Radzevil returning from the Election of the King of Poland, although
the season of the year was very unfit for War; after that he had reduced only
by the fame of his approach, the Towns of Turow and Grodek, went and laid down
before Mozyr, which being defended for some days very obstinately, was taken by
storm by Ganskowski, Lieutenant Colonel in Radzevil's Regiment, and Michnenko,
one of the chief of the Rebels, being taken therein, the Prince commanded he
should be beheaded by the Common Hangman, and his Head set upon the top of the
Castle.

From thence he marched with his Forces toward the River Berezina, where he
attacked Bobroisko; the Inhabitants were received into grace, upon condition,
That they would deliver up their Arms; and those among them, who had been the
Authors of this Insurrection, or who had made a League with the Cossacks; which
coming to the knowledge of those who were to be delivered up, they retreated
into a Tower, and set it on fire, preferring this voluntary death, before that
with which the Conqueror threatened them. Produbitz who commanded them, received
with the rest the punishment of his Rebellion.

The Winter and the Truce put a stop to the War in Lithuania, as well as in
Poland for some Months; but in the Spring, Kmielniski entering into the Kingdom
again, sent into this Province Helia Holota to renew the War with Ten thousand
Men, to whom many Rebellious Peasants were to join themselves. This General
thought to surprise part of the Lithuanian Army in their Winter Quarters at
Zahal, upon the River of Pripecz; but Radzevil's Forces gathering together in
haste put them to flight, and drove them into a Marsh, where he and his Army
perished. Stephen Podobaylo was substituted in his place by Kmielniski, who
gave him order to entrench himself between the Boristhenes, and the River of
Zula, which he did, and set fire on Loiowogrod, least it should serve for a
place of retreat to the Lithuanians: Yet Gozieuski setting forward with some
Troops to oppose his designs, having sent some Foot down the Boristhenes,
seized on a place capable of incommodating him very much. After this Kmielniski
sent again into Lithuania Thirty thousand Men, under the Command of
Crziezeuski, a Polish Gentleman.

This Commander had procured Kmielniski liberty, when he had been taken by the
Poles, and had received the same favor from him again; the last year, after the
defeat of the Polish Army at Carsun, and the favorable entertainment he
received, together with the fortunate posture of Kmielniski's affairs, engaged
him in his service. Being therefore entered into Lithuania, after he had passed
the Pripecz, he made as if he would besiege Rzeczicza, a Town very
advantagiously seated; but marched directly against Prince Radzevil's Army,
imaging upon the advice that was given him, That this Prince had sent out some
Regiments, he might easily force the rest, and came very near before they had
news of his march. But Chodorkowitz went out with some Horse, at the first
noise of them, and being backed with Four hundred Foot, commanded by Podlek and
Juskiewitz, he opposed himself against the first Onset of the Cossacks; and
receiving diverse charges from them, the rest of the Troops had leisure to put
themselves in Bataglia: And at length Gonzieuski and Niewarowitz, with the
Hussars forced the Left-wing of the Enemy into a Wood, where at first they made
a great firing, and overthrew diverse who advanced too far; but at last, being
constrained to retreat farther in, they were not in condition to fight any
longer.

In the mean time, some Squadrons, which the heat of the engagement had drawn
out too far, were encompassed in by the Cossacks, and ready to be cut in
pieces, if that Komorouski, whom Prince Radzevil had sent before with a
thousand Men to discover and take prisoners, had not happily come in and
disingaged them. He that commanded the Right-wing of the Cossacks, seeing this
Recruit, and apprehending that it might be followed by a greater, and that some
Ambush was preparing for him retreated also into the Wood, and wherein he
thought himself not secure enough, till he had entrenched himself. While these
things were doing, the Cossackian General Podobailo, who was coming to the
relief of Crziezeuski with Twelve thousand Men, passed the Boristhenes in
Boats: And it is certain, if he had arrived a little sooner, and before the
other Troops had been broken, the Lithuanian Army had been in extreme danger;
but the Forces of Podobailo were scarce half passed over, and had begun to
entrench themselves, when Prince Radzevil marched directly toward them, and
after a fierce charge, put them to the rout, and drove them into the River. So
that besides Three or four hundred which saved themselves by swimming, Four
thousand five hundred of them were either killed or drowned. Colonel
Tisenhausen, Nold, and Fechtman, with their Germans, fell upon the rest of
Podobailo's Forces, who with their Tabor went to join themselves to Crziezeuski.

This General coming out of the Wood, wherein he had retreated to receive them,
was presently wedged in again by the Hussars, and forced to entrench in haste
with Arms of Trees broken off, or any thing that came to hand; even with dead
bodies. And having understood that night by his Spies, that Prince Radzevil
prepared for a new attack the next morning, he retreated in all haste; leaving
the heaviest of his Baggage behind him, and he himself being wounded in many
places, was left by the way, and fell into the hands of the Lithuanians, and
died some time after in their Camp. Notwithstanding this shock, the War was
kindled still more fiercely, and many thousand Cossacks had passed the Pripecz
at Babica, to make a new irruption into Lithuania, and to reinforce their party
when the peace at Zborow was concluded. In execution of which Treaty, the
Cossacks were called back out of this Country as well as out of Poland.

THE SECOND WAR OF THE COSSACKS AGAINST POLAND.
THe King of Poland returning to Warsaw, in the midst of the Acclamations of
his People, who could not sufficiently express their joy and acknowledgments to
him, for what he had done for the preservation of the Kingdom; applied himself
with all diligence in the Diet, which he held toward the end of the year, to
the establishment of the Peace lately concluded with the Tartars and Cossacks.
The result of this Diet, which ended the Twelfth of January, One thousand six
hundred and fifty, was, That all the Polish Soldiers should be immediately
satisfied: That the Army which had been shut up at Zbaras, in consideration of
their great services, should receive three payments extraordinary, there should
be Twelve thousand Men in continual pay for the Guard of the Frontiers: That
the Articles concluded on, between the King, and the Cossacks and Tartars at
Zborow, should be confirmed: That three of the Cossackian Gentlemen should be
admitted to Public Offices: And that for the supply of these great expenses,
there should be a new Impost laid upon all Poland and Lithuania; and Customs
upon Merchandises granted to his Majesty, for his Signal Exploits in the last
Campagnia.

It was also thought fit to establish a Senator at Kiovia, to be vigilant, near
at hand, over the Actions of the Cossacks, and to decide the differences which
might arise in performance of the Treaty. Adam Kisiel, appointed a while after,
to be Governor of that Town, was thought to be a person most able to acquit
himself worthily in that charge, and to register the Forty thousand Men, of
which the Cossackian Army was to consist, according to the last Treaty, and to
give them their necessary instructions.

Kmielniski observed this Peace almost a year, and testified in all appearance
his good intentions; but apprehending least the Polanders whom he had forced,
in the unhappy conjuncture of their affairs, to grant him extraordinary
conditions, should now repent of it, and search out ways to elude the
performance of them; he thought that he could not do better then by powerful
Alliances, to secure to himself these advantages which had been conceded.

And to this intent, he applied himself to the Grand Signior, and the Great
Duke of Muscovy; but especially to the first, by whose favor he hoped to render
himself considerable to all the World. He pretended also to desire the
Friendship of the Hospodar or Prince of Moldavia; but it was only to amuse
him, that he might the better surprise him, and force his Country: For in the
mean time he made an ill impression of him upon the minds of the Grand
Signiors Officers, to whom he represented him as a secret enemy to the Turks,
and an intimate Friend of the Polanders; and that by his means, the Poles had
hitherto received continual intelligence of theirs, and the Tartars designs.
They assured therefore Kmielniski of the Protection of the Grand Signior, and
that he should be invested with Black Russia, to hold it in Fee of the Ottoman
Empire; they received the acknowledgments of his dependence on them, and his
promises of fidelity in their service, and permitted him to execute his designs
against the Prince of Moldavia, which he did with great dissimulation, and made
use of the Tartars in it; to whom he joined only Four thousand Cossacks, and
the better to keep secret his intentions. The Cham sent to him to thank him for
his assistance against the Circassians, and desired further, that he would lend
him his Forces to go against Moscovy, to revenge the injuries which he had
received from the Great Duke: So that while the Neighboring Princes persuaded
themselves, that the Tartars were going to War in Moscovia, the Hospodar of
Moldavia, who was one of this number, and lived in the ordinary careless
security of a high Peace, found himself encompassed in with a numerous Army of
Tartars, and the Four thousand Auxiliary Cossacks. All that could be done upon
so sudden and unexpected an accident, was to run into the Woods near Jasz, his
principal City. In the thickest of which, the Hospodar, with his family, and as
many as he could get together in haste, entrenched themselves with Trees cut
down; and afterward drew himself out of this danger, upon the payment of
Twenty thousand Ducats to the Tartars, and the promise of his Daughter in
marriage to Timotheus Kmielniski his Son: Upon which condition Kmielniski did
recede from many hard terms which he had put upon the Hospodar.

In the mean time, the Peace with the Poles was every day violated by the
Cossacks; their numerous Army was extended much beyond their quarters. The
Peasants who were not enrolled, sustained by them, would not receive those
Gentlemen, their Landlords, who were to enter upon possession of their Estates
again, but treated them ill, and massacred diverse. This deportment of theirs,
and the expedition against Moldavia, obliged Potoski, the Generalissimo, who
was newly returned out of his prison in Tartary, to march with the Polish Army,
and incamp near Camienesche.

Kmielniski was much surprised at the first news of this march; and there being
with him at that time diverse who were deputed from the Nobility, to complain of
the Rebellion, in the which the Peasants persisted, and their refusal to
acknowledge them; he commanded, that all those who were sent to him, should be
drowned the night following. But these Orders being given when he was in drink,
filled with Wine and Strong Water, after he had digested his debauch, and been
informed by his Wife of what he had done, he presently revoked his sentence
just when they who had the charge of it, were ready to execute it. Afterward
he sent Craucenski, one of his Officers, to the General Potoski, to give him to
understand, That he could not but be astonished at the approach of the Polish
Forces, in such a time, when they had Peace with all the World, and a powerful
Army of Cossacks at their disposal for the security of the Frontiers.

The General in answer reproached him for their daily breach of Peace, and the
ill Treatment which the Nobility received from their Subjects; and for the War
which Kmielniski had undertaken without their knowledge against the Prince of
Moldavia; and that although he were Great General to the States of Poland, yet
he ought to have advertised them of it; he added, that he could not leave that
station wherein he was by the Kings Order, without express command from his
Majesty.

This Answer was no way pleasing to the Envoy from Kmielniski, who declared how
much his Master would be ill satisfied with it, and mingled threatenings of War
with his discourse; but proceeded not to breach of Peace, either by reason of
the nearness of the Polish Army, and the Great General, whose admired desert or
redoubted courage, might turn him from it; or because, that the designs he laid
of raising a Principality for himself, were not yet mature enough to disclose
this ambitious project; or, that he was willing to set down contented with his
expedition into Moldavia, and with having made a new Alliance, although by
force of Arms.

In the mean time the Nobility in Vkraine were as ill treated, as if it had
been in time of War; so that many were obliged every day to retire. Those
persons who had great estates, and the Duke of Wisnowitz, in particular,
received scarce any Rents; the continual complaints of which to the King,
induced him to write to Kmielniski, and to reproach him for the War which he
had undertaken, contrary to his order, against the Hospodar of Moldavia, and
for the injuries which the Nobility received, injoyning him to draw back the
Zapoovian Army into their quarters, and to chastise the Peasants who had taken
Arms against their Lords.

This Letter was received with great respect in appearance, but he proceeded
with much slowness, to execute what the King required of him; and on the
contrary, was very industrious at the same time, to make a strict League with
the Turk, and Great Duke of Moscovy, whose friendship he desired with the more
importunity, by reason that he promised himself more security and advantage in
his Alliance, then in the others, because of the Conformity of the Religion of
the Muscovites with the Cossacks. The Great Duke approved not of this
Rebellion, yet desired to make his advantage by it.

The great success which Kmielniski had had against the Poles, made him esteem
them as a defeated and depressed people, and to begin a causless quarrel with
them, in hopes to obtain from them, during the bad condition of their affairs,
a revocation of the Treaty, which he had been forced to make with King
Vladislaus before Smolenko, when his whole Army was disarmed and taken which
besieged that Fortress: He demanded also, in satisfaction for the affronts done
him by some of the Polish Nobility, and among others, by Prince Witnowitski and
Koniespolski; who had not only neglected to give him all his titles, but had
also written in terms injurious to the reputation of the Moscovite Nation; that
the States of Poland should give up to him the City of Smolensko with its
dependances, and should pay him the sum of an Hundred and fourscore thousand
Ducats. VVhereupon his Majesty of Poland having sent a Gentleman, named
Barlinski, to the Great Duke, to be more clearly informed concerning the
insolent demands of his Ambassador; upon whom, in the mean time, he had set a
Guard. This Envoy brought back an Answer, which testified rather the
inclination the Moscovite had to observe the former Treaties with Poland, then
to come to a breach; and in effect, although the Great Duke would with much joy
have seen the increase of the Greek Religion, yet he could not look with a good
eye upon the growing greatness of Kmielniski, nor be without some apprehension,
that the Rebellion of the Cossacks and Peasants, might also spread it self into
his own Country, whither already some sparks had flown of that fire which had
burned Poland. So that the Moscovite Ambassador was forced to declare in the
presence of the King, and the Senators, That he, of his own head, had prepared
those Propositions which he had delivered, and the Peace was confirmed between
the Poles, and the Great Duke.

The continual correspondence which Kmielniski held with the Turks, of which,
the King of Poland was advertised by the Neighboring Princes, and his insolent
carriage toward the State, obliged his Majesty to call a General Diet of the
Kingdom, in the end of the year One thousand six hundred and fifty; in which,
this Prince represented the insupportable behavior of the General of the
Cossacks; the contempt he had both of the King and State; the injuries which
many of the Nobility had received; the loss of their Estates, and their not
being able to be restored against Kmielniski his great forces, which he strove
to increase by the addition of Tartars and Turks; so that he was in a condition
to gather together on the sudden, an Army of more then Fourscore thousand Men,
every Cossack enrolled, of which, the number by the last Treaty, amounted to
Forty thousand; had a servant on Horsback, and another on Foot, besides a
Laborer to Till the Grounds; that their design was to shake off utterly all
obedience, and to set up a new Government under the Protection of the Grand
Signior: So that they would be capable of performing any thing, if that they
did not soon put a stop to the course of their pernicious designs.

There were some in the Assembly, who calling to mind the evils, caused by the
last War, were of opinion, That Peace at any rate was to be preferred before
it; and alleged, that the Forces of the Kingdom were now notably decreased,
whereas those of the Cossacks were very powerful, both of themselves, and by
the assistance of the Ottoman family which protected them; so that it would be
much better to keep close to the Treaty of Zborow: But the greater number
making reflections upon what was passed, and what was to be expected,
considered that there were but two ways to be taken; the one to ruin the
Cossacks, or, the other to let the Kingdom perish miserably; that the King had
only a title and precarious authority over them, no more then they pleased
themselves; that they were now upon the design of forming a Principality, from
whence they were to expect most dismal events, if they gave them time to
increase and establish themselves; that they interpreted the Treaty after their
own manner, and gave it what sense they pleased; that the State had yet
considerable Forces, if they were well employed; and that as affairs then
stood, they were better able to give a stop to their new and rising power, then
they could afterward resist them, when they were raised, fortified, and
established by time; that the King was brave and active, and with small Armies
having done great exploits, he would obtain more signal advantages over his
enemies, when the States should proceed to a more vigorous and powerful
undertaking.

These Reasons, but much more the new demands of the Cossacks at the same time,
caused all the rest of the Diet to be of this opinion, and unanimously to
resolve of a War against them.

The Cossacks Demands were these, That according to the Articles of the Peace
at Zborow, the Union of the Greeks and Roman Catholics should be abolished;
that Kmielniski should remain Sovereign beyond the Boristhenes; that none of
the Nobility or Gentry of Poland should for the future, have any power over the
Peasants of that Province; that if the Gentlemen would live there, they should
be obliged to work as well as the Peasants; that Nine Bishops should swear in
full Senate to see all this observed; that for Hostages they should give up
four Palatines to Kmielniski which he should choose, in consideration of which
Articles he promised to pay to the King of Poland yearly a Million of Florins,
and afterward they reduced their Demands to Four.

1. THat they might be put in possession of a Country, wherein they might live
without any Communication with the Poles.

2. That His Majesty and Twelve of the Principal Senators of the Kingdom should
bind themselves by Oath always to observe the Peace of Zborow.

3. That for their greater security, three of these Senators should remain with
their General.

4. That their should be no further Union of the Roman and Greek Churches.

But all there Demands being very exorbitant, and no body willing to trust to
the Faith of a Man, who was not contented with the promise which the King and
State had given him, by their Confirmation of the Treaty of Zborow, at the last
Diet; they had no other thoughts but of making War. To perform which the more
advantagiously, they resolved to raise Fifty thousand Soldiers, to whom were to
be joined the Auxiliaries of the Noblemen and their Attendants, in case of
need; and many thought it fit, that the Auxiliaries should be spared, as a
party reserved against the last extremities; and that it were better to augment
the number of the Soldiers to be raised. It was proposed also, that the War
should be begun before the Spring, to hinder the Cossacks from making their due
preparations, and to come at them with the more facility, while the Rivers and
Marshes were yet frozen; in which, they ordinarily secure themselves in their
Marches, and in their Incampings. Besides which, they could not, but with great
difficulty be assisted either by the Turks or Tartars; the former not being
accustomed to so rigorous a cold, and the latter would scarce find Forage in
this season for their Horses. But this project could not immediately be put in
execution, the Forces which were ordered by the Diet, could not so soon be
raised; so that the King sent only the Field Marshal Calinouski to cover and
defend the Frontiers from the assault of the Cossacks, if they should resolve
upon War, rather then Peace; which was also to be once again offered them, upon
the same terms as at the Treaty of Zborow. The intentions of Kmielniski quite
contrary to Peace, were soon made known by the Hostilities which he began to
commit upon the Frontiers. Nieczai, one of his Major Generals, put all the
Country to Fire and Sword, and massacred those who were deputed to him from
the Palatine of Braclaw, in the presence of a Turkish Envoy; but by the Forces
of the same Palatine, and those of Kalinouski, he was driven into the City of
Crasna; and part of his Men were cut in pieces in their retreat, after they had
forsaken the Castle, which they could no longer hold; and amongst others,
Nieczai himself, whom a Gentleman named Baibuza, killed with his own hand, the
rest were driven into a Village where they were together with it, either
plundered or reduced to Ashes. Bohun, another General of the Cossacks, in the
place of Nieczai, made head against Kalinouski, and seized upon the City of
Winnicza seated upon the River Bog; but the Poles having crossed the River,
with great pains took the Castle by assault, in which they slew a number of
their enemies, who had been assisted by Gluki, one of their Colonels. At last
Bohun being reinforced by the Cossackian Regiments of Czherin, Prziluka,
Lubiecz, and Braclaw, each consisting of Two thousand Men, Kalinouski was
obliged to go out of the Town, after that he had left a Guard therein of Foot,
and some Servants with the Baggage belonging to his Army, and to draw up his
Forces in Bataglia in the Fields adjoining, but some sudden fear possessing
those who were left in Winnicza, they forsook the Town, and the Cossacks
encompassing the Polish Forces, constrained them to retreat in disorder under
the Cannon of Bar, with the loss of Four thousand five hundred Footmen and
their Artillery.

This shock obliged the King of Poland, who was gone on Pilgrimage to Zurowitz,
a place of Devotion in Lithuania, to take his journey in all haste toward the
Frontiers, where the great General Potoski was gathering together his Forces
about Sokal. This Prince being arrived at Lublin, was informed of the irruption
of the Cossacks into Podolia, and the Confederation between the Grand Seignior
and Kmielniski, and that the Emperor had sent an Ambassador to Constantinople;
so that he saw himself obliged to use his utmost endeavors, and to Summon all
his Auxiliaries together.

Kalinouski who was retreated from Bar to Kamienecz, having received orders to
come with all diligence toward the Army. After that he had lest a sufficient
garrison for the defense of that Fortress, which was a place of so great
importance to Poland, and all Christendom, was followed in his march by
Eighteen thousand Cossacks and Two thousand Tartars; while the rest of their
Forces which amounted to more then Threescore and ten thousand Men, resolved to
attack Kamienecz, without the order or knowledge of their General. And having
taken the Castle of Panocze near to it, by composition, where they got
considerable booty. They made many assaults upon this Fortress, but all in
vain, being continually repulsed with so great a loss, that they were ready to
cut their Officers in pieces, who had exposed them to so dangerous an
enterprise, without acquainting Kmielniski with it; who so soon as he knew it,
sent them orders to remove. Those who were bent upon the pursuit of the Forces
of Kalinouski, had not much better success in setting upon them, sometimes in
the Front, sometimes in the Flank, and sometimes in the Rear; being always
repulsed with great valor by the General, although with the loss of many of his
own. Upon the Fourteenth of May, 1651. they set upon Zobieski his Regiment, but
were so received, that they left many behind them; and amongst others
Canowiecz, one of their Colonels, and a Tartarian Murza. At length Kalinouski
was constrained by reason of the difficult Passages, and the bad ways, to leave
his Carriages. To repair which loss, and to make his Army appear more numerous
to the enemy, he set the Servants upon those Horses which drew the Baggage; and
after having sustained many assaults, and escaped the many difficulties and
inconveniences of the March, he arrived most fortunately at the Camp Royal, in
the end of May.

The Forces raised at the expense of the States, and by the Noblemen came in
daily from all parts, there were reckoned Ten thousand of these latter; and the
whole Army, together with the Nobility, made up an Hundred thousand fighting
Men, besides the Servants, who were very numerous, and most of them furnished
with Horse and Arms. This great Army not being able to subsist long in one
place, without suffering the want of Provisions; after that all care possible
was taken to furnish them, it was resolved, they should be employed as soon as
could be. In a great Council of War, which was held thereupon, and lasted a
whole night; some proposed to divide the Army into two Bodies, and to send the
first, consisting of the Common Soldiers, against the enemies, while his
Majesty might attend the success of the War at Sokallo, with the Volunteers and
Auxiliaries, for a reserve against the greatest extremity: But this advise was
not approved by the King, nor by many of the Principal Officers, who
remonstrated that if the Army were thus divided, it might be more easily
encountered and defeated by the enemies; but being all in one Body, they would
not only be in a condition to oppose, but also to overcome them. They
concluded therefore to march directly toward them, by the most short and easy
way, which was, that by Berestesko. The King set forward with all his Forces
upon the Fifteenth of June, and sent out diverse parties to hear news of the
Cossacks. The Marshy, Moorish places which he was to travel through, and the
great number of Carriages caused his Forces to march scatteringly. So that he
thought it necessary to divide them into Ten Brigades, if we may so name a Body
of Ten or twelve thousand men, of which number each was composed; he reserved
the first for himself, gave the command of the second to the great General
Potoski; the third to the General of the Campaign Kalinouski, Palatine of
Czernihovia; the fourth to John Simon Szcavinski, Palatine of Brestch; the
fifth to the Duke of Wisnowitz, Palatine of Russia; the sixth to Stanislaus
Potoski, Palatine of Podolia; the seventh to the Grand Marshal of the Kingdom
Lubomirski; the eighth to Stanislaus Landskoronski, Palatine of Braclaw; the
nineth to the Vice Chancellor of Lithuania, Sapieha; the tenth to Koniespolski,
the Great Ensign to the Crown. The Polish Army came the next day, being the
Sixteenth, to Wygnanka, a place abounding in Water, and good Pasture Grounds;
where they understood by a Soldier, who had left the Cossacks Army, that
Kmielniski was gone from his Camp, which lay between Zbaras and Wisnowitz, to
go meet the Cham, whom he expected with impatience; having called for his
assistance, not trusting enough in his own Forces, although he had a prodigious
multitude of revolted Peasants joined with his Cossacks, but had as yet but Six
thousand Tartars with him.

The King arriving at Berestesko, of which Town, the Count of Lesno, under
Chamberlain of Brzestia is Lord; he encamped near it, all along the River of
Ster, which washes this place on all sides, and then sent out Three thousand
Horse under the command of Stemkouski and Czarneski, to be certainly informed
of the enemies march, and understood by some prisoners whom they took, that the
Cham was come to Kmielniski with a numerous Army, and that he had sent out
parties to learn in what place and condition the Polish Army was. Upon this
news, it was resolved of in a Council of War, to dislodge from Berestesko, and
to place themselves at Dubno, a Town belonging to the Palatine of Cracovia. The
Baggage began to move, and the Army was about to march with a resolution to
encounter the Cossacks wheresoever they should oppose them, when the Duke of
Wisnowitz, who was of the Guard, sent to advertise the King, that Kmielniski
and the Cham were coming in all haste toward him. And the Grand General
understanding by a Peasant, that the enemies promised themselves assured
victory, if they could fall upon the Polish Army, entangled in the way,
resolved to stay at Berestesko, and the Baggage was ordered to be brought back,
which was upon the way. Scarce were they returned into the Camp, but the Scouts
brought word, that the whole Army of the Cossacks and Tartars were near to
Pereatin, a Village within five hundred paces; so that the Generals presently
drew up the Polish Army, left the River Ster on one side of them, and lined all
the Wooded places near, with diverse Companies of Foot, for fear of an Ambush.

The Twenty seventh of June, about night, Ten thousand Tartars drawn out from
the rest, came near to the Polish Army, to take a view of it, making, as if
they came to provoke them to fight. The Grand Marshal, and Grand Ensign, not
being able to suffer their insolence, went out with their Regiments, by the
permission of the Great General, and the assistance also of Wisnowitski his
Regiment, and engaged them a long while, repulsed them, and drove them back
half a League. Upon the Eight and twentieth, there was another more fierce
skirmish; the Cham placed himself and his whole Army upon certain Eminencies in
sight of the Poles, strengthened with some of the choice Forces of the Cossacks.
The Polish Army being also drawn up in order, the Regiments of the Palatine of
Brzestia and Pomerania, of the Duke Bogislaus Radzevil, and the Palatine of
Witebsko with the Horse of Przemislia and Volhynia, went to set upon the
Tartars, who to revenge the defeat they received the day before, seeing that
the Horse was backed but with a small number of Foot, they poured in upon them
great numbers of Men. Landskoronski was the first who could put a stop to this
torrent, neither was it done without the loss of many of his own Men, and of
his Brother; and he himself was so encompassed by a great number of those
Infidels, that to disingage him, there were sent out the Regiments of the Great
General, of the General of the Campaign, of the Palatine of Russia, of the
Grand Marshal and of Sapieha. The fight grew hot upon the arrival of this
reinforcement, and many were slain on both sides; the Tartars lost about a
Thousand Men, and diverse prisoners of considerable note were taken, amongst
others, the Secretary to the Cham. The Poles had Three hundred of theirs slain,
and amongst them Casanouski, Governor of Halicz, Ossolinski, Starroste of
Lublin, Nephew to the Great Chancellor deceased, Stadniski Under-Chamberlain of
Sanoc, Ligeza Sword Bearer of Przemislia, Rrecziski, Captain Jourdan and diverse
Gentlemen of the Palatinate of Lencincia; and so ended the Engagement of the
Eight and twentieth of June. The Night following, having considered in their
Council of War, that the Enemies design was to delay time; and to reduce the
Polanders to extremities for want of Provision in a Country too far distant
from any place whence they might draw their subsistence, they thought it better
to employ their Army, while it was in its strength and vigor, and determined to
give Battle the next day: The King spent most of the night at his devotions,
and in ordering his affairs; so soon as it was day, he drew up his Army,
without the enemies perceiving it in the least, by favor of a great Mist, which
continued till Nine in the Morning. The Right Wing of the First Line was
commanded by the Grand General Potoski, and under him by Landskoronski,
Palatine of Braclaw, Opalinski Palatine of Posnania, Lubomirski Grand Marshal
of the Kingdom, Sapieha Vice Chancellor of Lithuania, Koniespolski Grand Ensign
to the Crown, the Count Vladislaus of Leszno, Under-Chamberlain of Posnania,
the two Zobieski's Sons to the Governor of Cracovia deceased; and some other
great Persons who had raised Forces at their own expenses. The Conduct of the
Left Wing was committed to Kalinouski General of the Campaign, to the Dukes of
Ostrog and Zaslaw, to the Palatine of Brzestya, the Duke of Wisnowitz Palatine
of Russia, to Stanislaus Potoski Palatine of Podolia, to John Zamoiski, and to
Colonel Enhoff of Liefland; many of which had joined the Forces which they had
raised in their own Countries to those of the States. The King took charge of
the main Body of the Army, composed of the German and Polish Foot; at the Head
of which, stood the Artillery, commanded by Sigismond Priemski, who was General
of it, and had been a long time Major General under the Swedes in Germany. The
Second Line, in the middle of which, his Majesty of Poland took his place,
consisted of Horse, and was commanded amongst other Officers, by Tyskewitz,
Great Cup Bearer of Lithuania. The Body of Reserve, was commanded by Colonel
Meydel, Great Master of the Game, and by Colonel Enhoff, Starroste of Sokal,
and was composed of the Horse of Grudzinski and Rozraceuski; and of the Foot of
Prince Charles, Brother to the King, and of Koniespolski's, and Colonel Du
Plessis, a Frenchman. The Baggage and Ammunition was left in the Camp, which
was entrenched on one side, and defended on the other by the Town and the
River. The King had left some Companies of Foot therein for a Guard, who
appeared afar of much more numerous then they were, by reason of their Lances,
which by the Kings Orders, the Huzzars had left to them; every one of which had
a Red Penon or Little Streamer at the end; and when they were all drawn up in
order, made a very fair show. The Sun dispersing the Mist, which till that
time, had covered the Army, it appeared to the Enemy like a beautiful
perspective on a Theater, when the Curtain is drawing up, who were surprised at
their number and good order; notwithstanding their Army was more numerous, and
covered all the Country as far as could be seen. The Tartars possessed
themselves of diverse little Hills, from whence there was an easy descent, and
filled up all the space in form of an Half Moon: They had the Cossacks on their
Right Hand, opposite to the Left Wing of the Polish Army, with whom were also
joined some Squadrons of Tartars; and near to them was the Tabor of the
Cossacks, composed of diverse Ranks of Chariots; in the middle of which, were
part of their Forces able to sustain all assaults whatsoever.

The two Armies being thus placed all the morning was spent in light
skirmishes, but the King doubting lest that the intention of the enemies was to
amuse them with these small combats and to set upon them the night following,
when by reason of the darkness they might the better surprise them, he
prohibited all his Soldiers upon pain of death from stirring out of their
places without order, and commanded all the Bridges to be broken down which
were built over the Ster, that they might not be set upon behind, and by this
means to engage his own Soldiers to perform their utmost, all hopes of escaping
being cut off, and that the rest of the day might not be spent unprofitably,
which was scarce sufficient for a general Battle between two such numerous
Armies, he began to salute the Enemies with the Cannon at the head of his Army,
and so from time to time to discharge against them as they drew nearer to those
Eminencies whereon the Tartars were placed. Diverse seeing the day so far spent,
were of opinion that the Fight should be deferred till the next morning, but
others insisted much upon the contrary, fearing lest the Cossacks might fall
upon the Polish Army in the night with their Tabor, which they had
extraordinarily reinforced, and might therewithal constrain them to quit their
Camp. His Majesty therefore caused the Duke of Wisnowitz to begin the charge
with twelve Troops of old Soldiers, backed by the Palatine of Podolia, with the
Auxiliaries of the Palatinates of Cracovia, Sendomir, Lencicia, and Przemistia,
the Cossacks received them briskly, and the conflict lasted near an hour, all
which time the smoke and dust made them invisible to the rest of the Army; and
as the Poles began to give way, they were timely assisted by fresh Forces,
which the King sent them; upon whose arrival, the Cossacks were driven into
their Tabor, together with the Tartars, who engaged them upon a rising Ground.
In the mean time, the King marched against the great Body of the Tartars, the
Right Wing staying near a Wood side, to hinder the design of many of their
enemies who were in Ambush, with intention to compass in the Polish Army in the
heat of the Battle. The King kept the Artillery still before him, which
Priemski caused to be discharged very opportunely, and with great success. So
that they obliged the Tartars to leave the foot of the Hill, and by degrees
made themselves masters also of the top; after they had sustained the
discharges of the Janissaries Carbines, who accompanied them.

In this place His Majesty of Poland was in great danger of his life, having
four Bullets shot from some pieces which the Tartars had by a Wood side,
passing very near him, and one of them falling at his feet; but the Poles soon
returned them the like: For Otuinouski, Interpreter to his Majesty of Poland
for the Turkish and Tartar Languages assuring them, that the Cham was there in
person where they saw the great White Standard. The King ordered a piece of
Cannon to be so levelled, that the first shot took one of the Principal
Officers, who stood near the Cham; which disturbed and frighted him so much,
that he thought not farther of any thing but retreating; that part of his Army
which had been driven from the Hill, followed him also, having left some
Squadrons behind to disguise his retreat, and amuse the Polanders for some
time: But they were soon put to their shifts, and the Poles pursued them a
League and a half, till the Night and the swiftness of their Bacmates or Tartar
Horses secured them; yet they left many in their retreat, wounded and slain,
which they were used to carry off, and to burn in their march when they had
leisure; esteeming it abominable to leave the dead Bodies of their Friends in
the hands of Christians: They left also much of their equipage, as Vestes,
Saddles, Cimitars, Chariots, and the Tent and Standard of their Cham, and his
little Silver Drum, gilded over and covered with a Skin, which serves him for
a Bell.

Diverse Polanders who had been Slaves to those Infidels, did here recover their
Liberty, but many others were killed by them, when they saw they could not
carry them away with them in their retreat, which was so hasty, that they
traveled Ten French Leagues the same day. The King after he had sent out
diverse Troops of Horse in pursuit of the Tartars, went with the rest of his
Army against the Tabor of the Cossacks, where they were still in great numbers,
and had Forty pieces of Ordnance which played continually. Kmielniski was
retreated with the Tartars in hopes to engage them again to fight, but he could
by no means persuade them to it; but on the contrary, was very ill treated by
the Cham, and reproached as one that had cheated him, and not made known the
true state of the Polish Army, but had made him believe they were not above
Twenty thousand; and therefore he threatened to send him to the King of Poland,
in exchange for those Murza's which were Prisoners there, and would not let him
go free, till he had sent order to Czeherin to deliver up a considerable sum of
Money, and part of the Booty which he had formerly taken in Poland.

The night following the King ordered there should be a Public Thanksgiving in
the Camp, for this Victory, which cost him but Twelve hundred Men, his enemies
having lost Six times as many; he passed the night in his Coach: And although
it was very Rainy, he neglected not to cause the Cannon to be mounted upon the
Hill, which was forsaken by the Tartars, the more conveniently to beat the
Tabor of the Cossacks in pieces; which notwithstanding the Rain, they had
fortified with a broad deep Ditch, and lined with Musketeers in those places
where it was most weak and open, and had a Marsh behind them, which did
sufficiently secure them. By reason of Kmielniski his absence, they conferred
the command of their Army upon one of their Officers, called Dziadziali, a
person of remarkable cruelty. They had recourse to all remedies probable to
give them help, they wrote to the King, to implore his clemency, and to
testify to him the extreme desire which they had for Peace; but seeing their
Arms and Pens were both together in their hands, their Prince thought of no
other way, but of reducing them by force; which appeared also not difficult to
accomplish, by reason they began already to fall into divisions amongst
themselves. Some of the Polish Commanders were of opinion, that they should
drown the Camp of the Cossacks, by making a dam and stopping the Course of the
Water; but the advice to batter it down, was followed, and to this purpose they
brought great Cannon from Brody, a Fortress built by the deceased Grand General
Koniespolski: They made also Bridges above and below their Camp, for the better
communication of the Polish Forces, and raised many Forts and Redoubts in the
most eminent places, from whence they might make their Batteries.

The Fourth of July, the Cossacks surprised one of these Forts, wherein were
two pieces of Ordnance and Fourscore Polanders, whose Heads they struck off
with their Sythes, Arms, which their Foot ordinarily make use of instead of
Pikes. But General Hubald ran upon them, and drove them from it, and forced
them to leave the Cannon which they were carrying away into their Tabor. The
same day the Cossacks possessed themselves of a Hill, by which means they could
the more easily seek out Forage; but the Grand Ensign dislodged them, and
brought away Five hundred of their Horses.

The fifth they came out of their Camp, in great number, in appearance as if
they would give the Poles battle again, but they were driven back into their
Intrenchments after a strong encounter, and the loss of Four hundred of their
Men. Sokol and Piascozin, of the Polish side, were wounded in this conflict,
which was attended with a continual discharge of the Artillery on both sides,
and great destruction.

The Cossacks seeing themselves thus ill handled, betook themselves to
stratagems, and in the night following attacked the Polish Army with all their
Force; but their design was prevented first by the fall of the Rain, and then
by the vigilance of the King and his Generals, who doubled their Guards. At
this time Mehemet Czelebey, a Converted Tartar, who had been a long while in
the service of the Great General, and had been made a Captain by him, having
been sent out with a party to pursue the Tartars, returned into the Camp,
bringing back prisoner with him, a Tartar of quality, named Murtasa Aga, one of
the Cham's Kindred, who had been wounded at the Battle of Berestesko, and was
not able to follow the rest, and had offered Fifteen thousand Rixdollars to
Czelebey for his ransom; but this Polonised Tartar, preferred his Faith and
Promise which he had many years since engaged to the Great General his Master,
before all the Money and other considerable advantages, which this great person
of Tartary offered him, if he would return with him into his Country. He
reported also, that he had found by the way, more then Ten thousand Tartars,
either slain or wounded, which they had left behind them: An extraordinary mark
of their precipitous flight, their custom being to burn them, rather then leave
them in the power of their Enemies.

The Cossacks whose last design took no effect, were now more and more backed
in and incommodated; their only refuge was the passage which they kept through
the Marsh; by which they went out to Forage, and by which they might retreat.
But Colonel Balaban who was placed with Ten thousand Men on the other side of
the Water, began to constrain the Liberty of the Excursions; and it was
determined, that more Forces should be sent on that side to hinder them
altogether.

At length the Polish Artillery thundering against their Tabor, with more
execution then ever, they sent out three Deputies, Kresa, Colonel of the
Regiment of Czeherin, Hladki, and Percaslauski, to desire Peace; they applied
themselves first to the Great General, who severely reproaching them for their
cruelty and perfidiousness, told them, That they had rendered themselves
unworthy of the favor of his Majesty of Poland; and that they did not deserve
to be used as Christians, after that infamous Alliance which they had made with
the Turks and Tartars.

The King notwithstanding, by the advice of the Senators, admitted them to
Audience under a Pavillion set upon the Hill, from whence the Tartars had been
driven; where they fell down upon their faces, and presented a Letter in the
name of all the Cossacks, and often begged for Mercy, Mercy, repeating this
word at all the requests they made; and upon all occasions, kissing the Hands
and Garments of the Senators who were there present. His Majesty of Poland
having called his Counsel, answered them by the Bishop of Culm, his Great
Chancellor, That although their crimes were such, that they ought to have made
them loose all hopes of Pardon; yet his Majesty desiring to be conformable to
the Divine Goodness and Mercy, did impart his; and if they would give
sufficient proofs of their true Repentance, and perfect Submission, he would
pardon all what was passed, upon those conditions which they should receive in
writing the next day about Eleven of the Clock. Till which time, a Cessation of
Arms was granted as they desired. Cresa, their Principal Deputy, remained as an
Hostage, and the other Deputies returned upon the Seventh at the hour
appointed, to receive the Articles, upon which the King of Poland would grant
his Pardon and Abolition of their Misdemeanors.

It was demanded by these Articles, That they should first put Twelve of their
Principal Commanders in Hostage, till they could deliver up unto the King their
General Kmielniski, and Wihouski his Secretary.

2. That they should restore the Artillery, and the Ensigns which they had
taken in the War.

3. That they should give up the Standard belonging to the General of their
Militia, to be disposed of to whom his Majesty pleased.

4. That if they were not contented, that their number should be reduced to
Twelve thousand for the Guard of the Frontiers, this Article should be referred
to the next Diet.

5. That as to their Privileges which they might pretend to, those only
should be continued to them which were granted by the deceased General
Koniespolski in the year One thousand six hundred and twenty eight.

The Deputies returning to their Camp, and making known these Conditions of
Peace, brought back the next day this Answer.

That as to the first Article they would promise, to do their utmost, to put
Kmielniski and his Secretary into the Kings hands, and would yield to the
Second and third; but as for more, they could never agree to, nor hold to any
other Articles, then those of the Treaty of Zborow.

The King much offended at this Answer, redoubled his Batteries and resolved
absolutely to exterminate them, as they on the contrary would choose rather to
die, then to recede from that Treaty.

They answered to the discharges of the Polish Artillery, but not so often;
which gave suspicion that their Powder was spent: Some were so bold as to
advance so near to the Polish Camp, that they heard the orders which were given
to the Polish Soldiers; which being known, they were obliged to change their
orders; as also, the design they had formed of giving a general assault to
their Tabor: And so strongly did the Cossacks resist all the attempts of the
Polanders against them, that their valor had merited extraordinary
Commendations, if it had not been accompanied with many detestable cruelties,
as Fleaing alive, burning by degrees; and doing a thousand other mischeifs to
the Polanders who fell into their hands. So much did the proposing of those
Conditions, wherewith they were to buy their Peace, inspire them with Rage and
Fury, in which they were kept on by their Popes (for so they call their
Priests) who ceased not to encourage them with the hopes of the quick return of
their General, and the Tartars. But the inconveniences which they suffered, and
the long absence of Kmielniski undeceiving them from the false hopes they
sustained of a speedy assistance, they began to desire Peace very earnestly;
their Commanders who saw that it could not be effected, but to their prejudice,
resisted with all their power: And seeing that Dziadziali, whom they had
substituted in the room of Kmielniski, did lend an Ear toward an
accommodation, they forsook him, and set up Bohun in his place; who to
signalize the beginning of his new Generalship, upon the information he
received that the Palatine of Braclaw had passed the River with some Forces, to
shut up those Passages which the Cossacks made use of to go out to Forage, and
by which, they might at last retreat; he went out with a good number of the Old
Cossackin Militia, and two pieces of Cannon, to drive them back, and to
reinforce the Guards which they had placed in the Forts, made for the
preservation of the Passage: But scarce was he out of the Camp, when as the
jealousy and suspicion which they had a long time harbored, That the old
Soldiers and Officers had a design to retreat and leave the rest, began now to
break out, and a new raised Cossack, having published it aloud, That Bohun was
gone out to this intent. The noise of it immediately spread it self throughout
the Camp, and caused such a consternation, that every one began to fly in the
greatest disorder.

The Ways and Causeys which they had made in the Marshes near their Camp were
too straight, and many falling in, stuck fast in the Mire, although they laid
their Vests, Cloaks, and other garments to draw them out. Bohun perceiving this
confusion, came with his old soldiers to remedy it, but could not, and the
Torrent drawing them in also along with it, they were forced to follow the
example of the rest. The Palatine of Braclaw seeing the enemies Army come out
of their Tabor so precipitously, could not imagine what it meant, and thinking
at first that they came to fall upon him, he placed himself with the two
thousand men which he had only then with him, in a posture the most
advantageous to hinder his being encompassed in, but taking more notice of the
enemy a while after, he was better informed, and began to pursue them, but was
stopped by the force and confusion of the rout as they saved themselves; yet he
set upon them as soon as he could, being seconded by the Auxiliaries of the
Palatine of Plosko, who making a review at the same time when the flight of the
Cossacks began, was the nearest to pursue them; The rest of the Polish Army
which did not expect that their enemies should be so suddenly routed, and
consequently were not on horseback, except those who guarded the Camp, ran
straight to the Tabor of the Cossacks, where finding sufficient booty, they
employed themselves about it, instead of pursuing their enemies; the Cossacks
lost no less in this flight then twenty thousand men, either killed by the
Polanders, or lost in the Woods, Briers, Marshes, and Boggs; two thousand of
them retreating to a little hill within their Tabor, not in hopes of any
relief, but as men resolved to sell their lives as dear as they could; when
they saw themselves constrained to yield to the multitude of the Polanders,
some cast themselves into the River, others into the Boggs, and in one place
three hundred of them were in a body together, and defended themselves
valiantly against the great number of those who assaulted them, and set upon
them on all sides; yet that these also might not despair, and set too little
value upon their lives, the Poles offered them both that and any thing else
they had of value about them, but this rather incensed them the more; and
immediately they took out of their Pockets and Girdles, all their Money: or
whatsoever they had considerable, and threw it into the water, and after that,
fought till the last man, every one as it were resolving to fight singly
against the force of Poland; and what was very remarkable, one of them held out
three hours against all assaults whatsoever, for having got a little Boat in a
Pond in the Marshes, and covered himself with the sides of it, he avoided all
the shot which they made at him, and in answer, shot away all the Powder he had
at them; and with his Sith repulsed all those who attacked him. A Muscovite
who set upon him with the same weapon could do nothing, and for all his skill
hardly escaped from being cut off by the middle, next, a Gentleman of the
Country of Czechanou, and a German Foot-soldier seeing that the Muscovite
could not accomplish his design, went into the water up to the neck, and begun
the fight again, and were received with as much vigor by the Cossack, who was
now wounded with fourteen Musket Bullets, to the great astonishment of the
Army, and the King of Poland himself in whose sight this was performed; the
King who could not enough admire the valor of the man, called out that they
should give him his life, upon condition that he would yield, to which he gave
this resolute answer, that he cared not to live, but desired only to die like
a soldier, and at last was run through with a Pike by the hand of another
German, who came in to reinforce the assault.

The Polanders found in the Cossacks Camp, besides a number of Women and
Children, a very considerable booty, and forty pieces of Ordnance, and much
Powder, many Ensigns, and amongst others the Standard, which the King at his
election sent to Kmielniski as a mark of the confirmation of his Generalship;
and another which King Vladislaus sent to the Cossacks when he intended to
employ them in a war which he designed against the Muscovites; another which
the Cossacks took from the Poles the last 25 of June; the Sword which the Greek
Patriarch sent to Kmielniski, as an acknowledgement to him for his taking upon
him to defend the Greek Church. The ornaments for a Chapel and other rich
movables of a Greek Prelate, who styled himself Archbishop of Corinth, and was
the Resident of the Patriarch with Kmielniski, he it was that most of all
encouraged and kept on the Rebellion of the Cossacks and Russians, and was much
against any accommodation, he was killed in his flight with an Arrow shot by a
young man a Polander. They found also Kmielniski his Cabinet, wherein was the
Seal of the Zaporovian Army, and diverse Letters from the Grand Signior, the
Great Duke of Muscovy, and the Prince of Transylvania, with about thirty
thousand Rixdollars, which were designed for the Tartars; Vests lined with rich
Furrs, Arms in great number, and Provision in abundance; and even the Pots and
Spits at the fire, a sign that their flight was not at all premeditated.

This defeat cost the Poles not many men, and but one Captain of Radzevil his
Regiment of Foot, who was slain at the attacquing of the three hundred Cossacks
who retired into the Marsh. Besides those who were already sent to pursue the
Cossacks; the General of the Campagnia and the Duke of Wisnowitz with seven
Regiments were Commanded out to hinder them from rallying, who killed all they
overtook, a great number of them attempting to retreat by Dubno, three thousand
were cut in pieces by the Garrison of that Town, and diverse others as they
passed over a long Causey. The King leaving almost all the Auxiliaries at
Berestesko, marched also in pursuit of them toward Krzmienecz; but found in
all that journey nothing but spectacles of horror, the ways being strewed with
dead bodies, and the Woods filled with those miserable persons, who after their
defeat, fled into the thickest part of them, where they found no other
sustenance for many days, than the Barks of Trees, and most of them were so
weak, that their Legs were not able to serve them in their flight; the
indignation of the Polanders at length was changed into pity at the sight of
these Skeletons, and instead of pursuing them to destroy them, they did it to
give them their lives, and to persuade them to preserve themselves. The King
himself seeing them in this deplorable condition, caused Provisions to be
distributed amongst them, and assured them of pardon if they would leave the
rebellious Cossacks and return to their Houses; thus did his Polish Majesty
show his Clemency, and not rigorously put to the sword that rebellious people
whereby he must have necessarily depopulated one of the principal Provinces of
his Kingdom, which served for a Rampart to the rest, and must consequently have
ruined a number of Gentlemen, and chief of the Nobility, who having great
Estates there, could not have received their Rents, if the Country had been
unpeopled. The Peasants in Poland being a part of the Gentlemen's inheritance,
and by this means they being deprived of their Tenants, it would have been very
difficult for them to find others to serve them in the Tenure of Villenage, and
this is the true Motive which then and at other times has hindered the utter
ruin of the Cossacks, without which consideration, it would not have been
difficult to have destroyed them.

The King judging his presence necessary to terminate this War, and to complete
the Reduction of the Cossacks, made account to march with his whole Army to
Kiovia, and from thence to send his Forces and Orders necessary for the
accomplishing of this design. But the Nobility opposed it, alleging, That the
necessity of his Affairs did oblige him to return; and that part of the Army,
would be sufficient to perform what remained, That the Cossacks were scattered,
and in no condition to rally after this defeat; that if any of them should take
up Arms again, the raised Troops would be sufficient to hinder and render
useless all their attempts whatsoever, and in one word, that there could be no
pretense of leading the Nobility into a Country desolate and laid waste by the
continual violencies of the Cossacks and Tartars, and where they might be
famished; so that upon a general Council held at Orla, of all the Commanders
and Officers of the Army, it was determined, that those who would return should
be satisfied, which were the greater number; and his Majesty of Poland after he
had left his Instructions with the Great General Potoski, for the consummating
that which he had so happily undertaken, took his journey toward Warsaw,
having first had a promise from the Nobility of a new supply of Men and Money.
The King before his departure also received an account, how that the Cham being
informed of the defeat of the Cossacks, had hastened his retreat toward Crim,
and that the four thousand Turks who came to their assistance, having also
intelligence of it, had passed the Boristhenes with all diligence: This news
was accompanied also with that of the defeat of the Cossacks, in Lythuania by
Prince Radzevil.

The Cossacks to the number of twelve thousand, Commanded by Niebaba one of
their Generals, had placed themselves near to Loiowogrod, at the entrance of
the River Sesz into the Boristhenes, where after they had made Works to secure
to themselves the passage over those Rivers, their General left Forces to guard
them. Prince Radzevil, General of Lythuania, hearing of this, resolved to set
upon them, and to this effect, sent before him Major General Mirski with three
thousand chosen men, with Orders to pass the Boristhenes; and he himself
embarked with the rest of his Foot and his Artillery, while his Horse marched
by Land, at his arrival he set upon their intrenchments on one side, while that
Mirski to whom he had given the signal by the discharge of some of his Cannon,
was to fall upon the other; the Cossacks defended themselves bravely for an
hour and half, after which they were overthrown and cut in pieces. Niebaba
coming with his Army to the relief of his.

Prince Radzevil, although that Mirski were not yet joined with him, as having
not passed the River which parted them, neglected not to encounter him, and
after a sharp conflict, in which three of the principal Colonels of the
Cossacks and Niebaba their General was slain, overthrew their Army, killed
three thousand men, took many prisoners, and amongst the rest the Nephew of
Niebaba, the rest saved themselves in their Camp, which was not far from the
place of Battle, which they also suddenly abandoned, as also the City of
Lubiecz, and Czernobel near to it, who yielded up themselves without making any
great resistance to Gonsieuski, General of the Artillery of Lythuania; after
which Prince Radzevil took his way toward Kiovia, to put an end to the
remainder of the Rebellion in those parts.

General Potoski employed himself to the same purpose in Volhynia, where the
difficulty of getting Provisions having forced him to divide his Army into many
parts, he appointed their Rendezvous to be at Lubertowa, a Town which in the
heat of all the war had preserved it self by the convenience of its situation,
and number of its Inhabitants, and from thence to go and make an attempt upon
Pawolocz and Bialacierkiew, giving a strict Command, that the Officers should
order it, that their Soldiers should so behave themselves in that manner, that
the Peasants might by no means be constrained to quit their Houses, or to
destroy what Provisions were left. The Gentlemen also took all care to bring
the Peasants to their former duty, promising them by Letters and Messages, that
they should be most favorably dealt withal, if they would return to their
obedience.

In the mean time Kmielniski having with a sum of Money, appeased the Cham
and freed himself, returned into Vkrain to strengthen and confirm the minds of
those people, which the last defeat and his absence had very much shaken; and
taking the same course as formerly, in those places where he could not be in
person, by his Letters and Emissaries, he gave new heat to their courage, which
was very much abated, exhorting them to maintain the cause of the Public, and
putting them in mind how fortune was momentary and changeable, and if of late
she had declared her self in favor of the Poles, yet she had left the Cossacks
Strength and forces sufficient to renew the war and recover their losses, and
to feed their hopes, he gave out that one Ragoci in Poland was revolted, and
thereby had obliged the King to draw back the greatest part of his Army to stop
his progress, that the Flower of the old Cossackian Militia was gathering
together, and that in few days the Tartars would come and join with them again
to revenge their last defeat, and to keep up the hopes of this people still
more high, from time to time he dispatched several Embassies to the Cham, which
he accompanied with magnificent promises to induce him to afford him new
supplies, remonstrating to him that the security of both their fortunes
depended upon it, and that the ruin of the one would infallibly expose the
other to the Polish power; he sent also three Envoyes to the Ottoman Court, to
represent to them, that if the Cossacks were assisted by the Grand Signior,
they might be in a condition to make head against all the Forces of Poland, but
if they were abandoned, they must be necessitated to an accommodation, and in
the end to make war against himself.

Prince Janus Radzevil, to whom Hlebowitz, Palatine of Smolensko was joined,
having left Fronckewitz, Lieutenant-Collonel of the Hussars, with some Forces
about Czernihow, to hinder the excursions of that Garrison, went toward
Kiovia; after they had forced from those Quarters the Cossackian Colonels,
Antonio and Orkussa, and put their Forces into such disorder, that they were
constrained to burn their Tabor, and their Bridge, and fly into the Town;
neither did they stay there any time, for the terror of the march of the
Lythuanian Army spreading it self through the rest of the Cossackian Forces,
who thought to shelter themselves in the Country about, they quitted that
Town, which was one of their principal Retreats. The Inhabitants seeing they
were deprived of their Garrison, and all other means of defending themselves,
sent their Supplications to the Polish General by their Archbishop, and their
Archimandrit or Abbot of their chief Greek Monastery, requesting of him that he
would spare that City which the King had always the goodness to preserve, and
which during the last wars, had served for a place of refuge to the Polish
Nobility, which request was granted by Prince Radzevil, who only disarmed
them, to take away from them for the future the opportunity of doing ill.

Kmielniski hearing of the loss of Kiovia, doubled his diligence, and sought
out all means imaginable to bring a new Army into the Field, able to stop the
progress of his enemies, and the unfortunate posture of his affairs suggested
counsel to him full of fury and despair: in the middle of which, he found not
only his Cossacks, but a great part of the Peasants also inclined to try again
the fortune of the war, and among these latter, there were some who openly
declared, that it was disgraceful to them to be dejected for the ill success of
one Battle, and that those who overcame them now, they had formerly overcome,
and the same might be performed again; but if that Fortune should obstinately
declare her self for the Poles, there was still a place left them to retreat
into, the Country of the Turks, where they might live with more freedom then
in Russia, to which intent they had already wrote to the Bassa of Silistria.

So that many of the Peasants went every day to join with Kmielniski, and the
Cossacks began their incursions and violencies in many places, particularly
those who inhabit near the Niester and Wallachia who are more accustomed to
these Robberies then the other. General Potoski had sent out two thousand men
under the Command of the Starroste of Kamienecz his son against them, but
instead of sending him the recruits which he demanded, he called him back
again, judging it more convenient to to keep his Forces in one body, the
General sent afterward seven Squadrons toward Bialacierkiew to hear news of
the Cossacks, but instead of obeying their Orders, they fell to plunder a Town
called Pawolocz, and were met withal by two thousand Cossacks, and five hundred
Tartars not far from thence, who set upon them, and drove them to the Gates of
that Town, took away all their booty, and had utterly defeated them, had not
the Forces of the Duke of Wisnowitz arrived in time to their assistance, by
whose help they made head against those who pursued them, and drove part of
them into their Tabor, and part into Bialacerkiew, it was known by some Tartar
prisoners, taken upon this occasion, that there were but two thousand of them
with Kmielniski, but that in a few days four thousand others were expected, and
that the rest of those Infidels were gone to refresh their Horses in the
Pastures of the desert Plains, and had received Orders to be in readiness to
return upon the first occasion into Poland. This news made General Potoski to
delay his march, till the arrival of his Foot and Baggage; when deliberating in
Council, with his Officers what was to be done; they determined to seize upon
Chzastowa, a Town on the way to Kiovia, to facilitate their communication with
it and their joining with Prince Radzevil; while they lay expecting the Foot at
Pawolocz, which marched but slowly; the Plague took away in the flower of his
age Michael Koributh, Duke of Wisniwitz, who had given sufficient proof of his
Valor and singular Conduct in all this War, by which he was deprived of the
Revenue of a great Estate in Vkrain.

After that the Army had spent the five and twentieth of August in rendering
their last Devoirs to this great person, they marched the next day toward
Trylisicz, a place well fortified; this Garrison having sent a fierce answer to
the summons of the Polish General to surrender themselves, he Commanded
Priemski-General of the Artillery, and Commissary of the Army, and Berg,
Lieutenant Colonel to the Regiment of Prince Bogislaus Radzevil, with seven
hundred German Foot to attacque them; they lost threescore or fourscore men in
the approaches, with Captain Strayse, and Captain Wahl, but being relieved with
the Polish Foot, in two hours time they made themselves Masters of the Town and
Castle, notwithstanding the obstinate resistance of the besieged, among whom,
even the Women did good service, and fought with their Sithes; all here were
put to the sword without distinction of Sex or Age. The Governor of the place,
a Cossack, was hanged in the heat of blood; the Town was plundered, and what
could not be carried away, was with it reduced to Ashes, and this severity
wrought better effects then perhaps Clemency could have done, for the Flames
being perceived by those of Chwastowa, the three hundred Cossacks which guarded
that Town, forsook it, and the Inhabitants also followed their example,
although they might well have resisted the Poles, and put them to the expense
of a great number of men.

Prince Radzevil expecting the Kings Orders, and that the Polish Army should
come to him, kept himself always near to Kiovia, not without some danger; the
Enemy endeavoring by all means possible to surprise him, or at least to hinder
the General Potoski from joining with him. Upon the sixteenth of August Colonel
Nold being sent out by this Prince, discovered by the Windmil near to the Gate
of Kiovia, called the Gilded Gate, a great body of Cossacks mingled with
Tartars, which soon allarmed the Camp, and a party of Light Horse set upon them
with such courage, that after they had taken a Bridge which the enemies put
much trust in for the securing themselves, they killed a thousand of them upon
the place; some of the prisoners confessed that this body of three thousand men
was to have joined with a thousand more, with design of falling upon the
Lythuanian Army in their intrenchments.

Prince Radzevil after this advantage, set forward to join with the Polish
Army, after that he had left a sufficient Garrison in Kiovia, and furnished it
with all things necessary for its preservation: General Potoski having sent
fifteen hundred men before him, advanced with the rest of his Army as far as
Vasilikow, to facilitate their conjunction; Kmielniski finding himself unable
to hinder this, and foreseeing the damage he must receive from it, deputed
diverse to the General to Treat with him about an accommodation, and to desire
him to interpose the credit he had with the Senate and the Polish Army, to
prevent the effusion of so much blood as was ready to be spilled, and to bring
the Cossacks in favor again with his Majesty of Poland, assuring him they
would remain faithful in his service, and most Religiously observe the Treaty
of Zborow; these propositions of peace presented by Kmielniski, made small
impressions upon the mind of the Polish General, who being well informed of the
continual addresses which he made to the Port, and to the Cham, to obtain a
speedy supply, and consequently understood that all what he did, was but to
gain time and leisure to establish his affairs; he resolved without delay to
terminate this controversy by force of Arms. The Polish Army being now
considerably reinforced, by the conjunction of the Lythuanians, consisting of
nine thousand chosen men; Kmielniski although he had received a fresh supply of
six thousand Tartars, did not neglect to make another attempt toward an
accommodation, and the Palatine of Kiovia endeavored with diverse arguments to
induce the Generals to put an end to this War, rather by a general Pardon, then
by the continuation of so many cruelties; representing to them that the many
troubles which the soldiers had undergone in this Campagnia, and the Diseases
reigning amongst them, had diminished, and did diminish daily a great number of
them, so that the Generals Potoski and Radzevil, condescended to receive the
Cossacks deputed to come and desire peace. Kmielniski desiring that some one
might be dispatched to him, to confer with Vihouski his Secretary, and
intimate Friend, they sent to him Makouski, a Captain of Horse, with a Letter
to him from the General Potoski, but because he gave him not the Title of
General of the Zaporovian Army, this omission was taken for a great injury, and
made a disturbance among the Cossacks; but Makouski having appeased them by
giving them sufficient reasons for what was done; the conference began, in
which the Polish Deputy proposed, that Kmielniski should send away the Tartars,
and come himself to the Polish Camp and pay his respects to their Generals; he
was against the first of these propositions for a long time, whatsoever his
Secretary could do to draw from him his consent, but in the end he agreed to
one as well as the other, although his Officers and the Russian Peasants
expressed a great deal of repugnancy for the latter. But finding it not
convenient to continue this conference in the Cossacks Camp, lest that the
Tartars suspecting what they Treated of might attempt something against the
persons of the Commissioners, Vihouski did very much instance that it might be
removed to Bialacierkiew.

Makouski giving an account to the Generals of the Polish Army, of his
Negotiation with the Cossacks, it was thought expedient to send Commissioners
to Bialacierkiew as they desired, to this intent were deputed the Palatines of
Kiovia and Smolensko. Zowzieuski, High Steward of Lythuania and Cossacouski,
second Judge of Braclaw, whom they guarded with a great Convoy, of which five
hundred Horse only were permitted to enter the Town. These Commissioners
Treating with those of Kmielniski, agreed of all the conditions of peace,
excepting some few points which were afterward to be decided in the two Camps,
but were in great danger of their lives, first in the Army of the Cossacks,
where Kmielniski and his Officers had enough to do to defend them from the
violencies of the Tartars, and the Peasants, who could not endure any
propositions of Peace, suspecting always that one of their Articles would be to
reduce them to their former servitude. The Tartars also set upon them in their
return, and plundered part of their Baggage.

In the mean time General Potoski and Prince Radzevil, seeing that the Treaty
was almost concluded, removed from Hermanowka to Bialacerkiew, the place where
Kmielniski and the principal Commanders of the Cossacks were to renew their
Oath of Allegiance to the King and State, at the approach of the Polish Army,
the Cossacks seemed to be very much surprised, but they being certified that it
was upon no other design then to oppose the incursions of the Tartars, new
Commissioners were sent on both sides to conclude of what was left undecided at
the last conference.

But the Cossacks instead of that presented new propositions, as if they had
forgot what had been so lately determined, demanding the performance of the
Treaty at Zborow; that the Polish Army should leave the frontiers, and give
them liberty to maintain their confederacy with the Tartars, whom they
acknowledged to be the true defenders of their privileges; so that after the
Poles had reproached them of their lightness and infidelity, which must needs
proceed from the news of some new supply from the Tartars, or the false report
of the Grand Signior his sending some considerable Forces; they drew up their
Army, and committed the right wing to Prince Radzevil with his Lythuanians, the
left to Kalinouski, and reserved the main body for General Potoski. The
Cossacks and Tartars came also out of their Camp, as if they had no other
design but to observe the posture of the Poles; there passed diverse skirmishes
between them for three days, and diverse Companies of the Enemy hid themselves
in Thickets and close places, making frequent attempts upon the Polish Army,
annoying them sometimes in the Flanck, and sometimes in the Rear, which it is
thought they did to make the Polish Generals more tractable, and to obtain more
advantageous conditions of peace. In the mean time they being wearied with the
delays of Kmielniski, who pretended to disallow of all these attempts and
skirmishes; and being earnest with him to declare his mind, he sent them upon
the 26 of September, three Deputies to endeavor seriously the conclusion of the
Treaty; these were much more moderate in their demands, although they were very
different also from those agreed upon at Bialacerkiew; for after they had
concluded that the number of the Cossacks enrolled, should amount to twenty
thousand, they demanded also that they might have their Quarters in the
Palatinates of Braclaw and Czernihow, and this being refused, they insisted,
that at least the Polish Forces should not be quartered there during the time
that Kmielniski was employed in inrolling the Cossackian Militia; and that they
should give him for his own maintenance, the Territories of Czircassy and
Borowitza. Potoski gave them to understand, that this latter demand could not
be granted without express Orders from the King and State, but condescended to
the other, after that Kmielniski had secretly informed him that he insisted
upon it only to content the revolted Peasants, whom he thought not fit to
irritate so long as they kept together, and made so considerable a body, so
that there remained nothing but that he and his chief Officers should come and
make their submissions to the Polish Generals, which he was inclinable enough
to do, after he had received Hostages for his security, though diverse of his
Officers with great difficulty were brought to consent to it. Upon the 28 of
September, he and the principal Commanders of the Cossacks came to the Polish
Camp, where with much Humility, and the Tears in his Eyes (which he had always
ready to shed, when the necessity of his affairs required) he asked Pardon of
the Great General Potoski, and saluted Prince Radzevil, and the rest of the
Nobility with all respect. In his presence were the Articles of the Treaty
read, and being signed on both parts, and confirmed by Oath; all ended in an
entertainment which was given to those of his Train.

The Articles were these.

1. THat in consideration of the submission and acknowledgement which the
Zaporovian Army and its Commanders had made to be always obliged to serve the
King and State; This Army should be composed for the future of twenty thousand
men, which were to be chosen and Registered by their General and Officers, and
should have their Quarters in the Countey and Lands belonging to his Majesty in
the Palatinates of Kiovia, Braclaw, and Czernihow, but the Lands of the
Nobility should be free from Quartering of Soldiers.

2. That if any of the Subjects of the Nobility were Registered in the
Zaporovian Army, they should be bound to change their Habitations, and to
transfer themselves into the Lands belonging to the King in the Palatinacy of
Kiovia, but it should be free for them to sell their Goods, whither movables
or others, and in what part soever they were, without any hindrance or
molestation from their Landlords, the Starroste's or Substarroste's.

3. That they should begin to Register the twenty thousand Cossacks to be
retained, within fifteen days, counting from the day of the date of this
present Treaty; and that this List or Roll containing the name, surname, and
abode of each particular Cossack should be Signed by the General of the
Cossacks, should be sent to the King, and a Copy of a Copy be kept in the Rolls
of Kiovia; that those were not Registered or Matriculated, should still enjoy
the ancient Rights and Privileges of the Cossacks, but those who should be
excluded, should be bound to the same Duty as formerly, in respect of the Kings
Lands.

4. That the Polish Forces should have no Quarters in the Palatinacy of Kiovia,
in those places assigned to the Cossacks, nor should the latter pretend to any
Quarters designed for the Poles in the Palatinacy of Braclaw, and Czernihow,
after the Feast of Christmas, by which time they were to make up the Register.

5. That the Gentlemen of the said Palatinacies of Kiovia, Braclaw, and
Czernihow, should come into free possession again of their Estates or
Starrosties, and draw from thence their Revenues as formerly, only they should
not receive any Taxes or Duties from their Subjects, till such time as the
Register were finished, when it would be perferctly known who those were, who
were to enjoy the privileges of the Cossacks, and who not.

6. That the General of the Cossacks should have the Town of Czerin for his
proper maintenance, and that Bogdan Kmielniski at present in that charge, and
his successors should enjoy all Prerogatives belonging thereto, and dispose of
all Places and Offices in the Army, and should be under the protection of the
Generalissimo's of the Crown, to whom they should take an Oath of unalterable
Fidelity.

7. That the Greek Religion which the Zaporovian Army professes, should be
maintained in its ancient Liberty, and those Bishoprics, Monasteries,
Churches, and Ecclesiastical Revenues, which had been usurped during the last
War should be restored.

8. That those of the Nobility, either Catholics or Greeks, who had taken the
Cossacks part, as also the Inhabitants of Kiovia should be included in the Bill
of Oblivion, and consequently should be reestablished in their Estates, Rights,
Honors; and Privileges; and that any sentence given against them, by reason
of the last war, should remain Null and void.

9. That the Jews should keep their privileges of being Free Citizens in the
Lands belonging to the King and the Nobility; and that they should be permitted
to Farm their Estates and Rights as formely.

10. That the Tartars who were in the Kingdom, should immediately retreat,
without spoiling the Country, and should not be allowed any longer Quarters
therein in what place soever; that the General of the Cossacks should do his
utmost to engage them for the future in the service of the State; but if that
he could not accomplish it before the next Diet, he and his Cossacks should be
bound to renounce their friendship, and to make War upon them as Enemies to the
Crown of Poland; and that the Cossacks should not make any League, nor
entertain any correspondence with them, or any other Neighboring Prince; but
should remain in a perpetual and constant Fidelity and Obedience toward his
Majesty and the State, of which they and their Successors were to give proofs
upon all occasions when they should be Commanded.

11. That as there never was yet any Cossack enrolled for the guard of the
Frontiers of Lythuania; so should there not be any at present, but all should
remain as it was already agreed upon, within the Limits of the Palatinacy of
Kiovia.

12. That seeing the said City of Kiovia was a Metropolitan, and a seat of
Judicature, therefore there should be but few Cossacks Registered therein.

13. That for the greater security of this Treaty, both the Polish
Commissioners and the General of the Zaporovian Army with their Commanders,
should be bound by oath to keep it; after which the Polish Army should retire
into their Quarters, while the Soldiers who were to compose the Zaporovian
Army, might be chosen out and Registered; the Tartars should return into their
Country, and the Cossacks home.

That Kmielniski and the Zaporovian Army should send Deputies to the next Diet,
most humbly to thank the King and the State for the pardon which he had granted
them.

A short time after the conclusion of this peace, the Great General Potoski
died of an Apoplexy in the Town of Laticzow, worn out with years and the
continual wearisome labors of War; in which he served, first under the famous
General Zolkiewitz, he had been in a languishing condition since his last
imprisonment in Tartary; and his great courage made him neglect those Remedies
necessary for the re-establishment of his health; so desiring nothing else, as
he would openly declare it to his friends, but to die in the Wars, and to
finish his life in his Profession; his desires were at last accomplished, and
beyond the satisfaction of ending his life so gloriously, he had this also;
just at his death to terminate by his Valor and Conduct, a War so cruel and
ruinous to his Country.

FINIS.

