A TREATISE Touching the East-Indian Trade: OR, A Discourse (Turned out of
French into English) Concerning the Establishment of a FRENCH COMPANY For the
COMMERCE of the EAST INDIES.

To which are Annexed the Articles, and Conditions, Whereupon the said COMPANY
for the COMMERCE of the EAST INDIES is Established.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Mabb for Henry Brom at the Gun in Ivy-lane, 1664.

To the Reader.
NOt to Usher In this following Discourse with a long and Needless Preface, It
shall suffice that the Publisher thought it worth the Translating, both as an
Entertainment to himself, and as a further Service and Respect to his
Countrymen. You have the Scope of it in the Title, viz. A Discourse touching
the Establishment of a FRENCH COMPANY for the COMMERCE of the EAST INDIES:
which Discourse conteins, in short, an Earnest and well-couch'd Recommendation
of Commerce, by diverse Arguments of Utility, and Convenience as well Private
as Public; drawn from the Experience, and success of those Nations, that
have applied themselves to Traffic: Adjudging several Advantages in fine, to
the French above all other People in the World, in order to the Dominion of the
Sea, and settling of an Universal Trade; Wherein, our Neighbors (how
clear-sighted soever in other matters) may perhaps live to find their Mistake,
and that it will cost them more than the dash of a Pen to become our Rivals;
Especial at a time, when the Humor of the People runs so violently that way,
and upon a Point, which the most Absolute Sovereign of the Seas in the whole
Universe (CHARLES the Second, and the Great) has taken upon himself to carry
on (within the Bounds of Honor, and Justice) to the highest degree of
Improvement, and Reputation Imaginable.

To the Treatise above mentioned here are likewise Annexed the Articles and
Conditions themselves, as they were presented to his most Christian Majesty at
Fountain-Bleau, where they Received the Royal Sanction; and were forthwith
Imprinted at Paris; And the Reader may take further notice, that his most
Christian Majesty's Allowances are Inserted in the Margin.

Imprimatur

June 13. 1664. Roger L'Estrange.

A Discourse Written by a Faithful Subject to His Christian Majesty,
Concerning the Establishment of a French Company for the Commerce of the
East Indies.
Dedicated to the Whole French Nation.
AS it is a Matter of great Reputation, and Security to any State, to have a
People trained up in the Knowledge and Exercise of Arms; so is it of great
Utility, and Convenience, that they likewise addict themselves to Commerce, by
which means the Benefits of the whole World are brought Home to-their own
doors: Beside that by this Employment alone, are acquired the Two Things which
Wise men account of all Others, the most Necessary to the well-being of a
Commonwealth: That is to say; a General Industry of Mind, and Hardynesse of
Body, which never fail to be accompanied with Honor and Plenty. So that
Questionless, where Commerce does not flourish, as well as other Professions,
and where Particular Persons out of a Habit of Lazynesse, neglect at once the
Noblest way of Employing their times, and the fairest occasions of Advancing
their Fortunes, That Kingdom though otherwise never so Glorious wants
something of being Completely happy. But in truth, it is with Commerce, as with
the Liberal Sciences, that Man or State, that would improve either of them,
must be at Quiet; Peace being the same thing to a Community, which Tranquillity
of Mind is to each Individual. What can be more Importune, or Unseasonable,
then in the middle of a War either Foreign, or Intestine, when every Man's Duty
calls upon him to defend his Country; for People to be Undertaking of long
Voyages and Transporting themselves into Remote Parts, their Principal
Obligation and Business lying at Home* In such a Case as This, He that absents
himself from his Country, is in Construction a Desertor of it, and turns That,
which at another time, were an Honest, and Laudable desire of Benefit, into a
Criminal Avarice. The Broils and Troubles of France for these Hundred Years
and upwards, are so well known, that to tell the Story, were but needlessely to
revive the Memory of those Misfortunes, which we must strive to forget. It
shall suffice therefore to Note, that the State of France, having escaped so
many Tempests, and Rocks, was yet once again emplunged in a Civil War at the
Beginning of the Last Kings Reign, upon the Point of Religion, which Affair
being happily determined, and the People Reduced to their Obedience, without
any Violence, either to their Liberties, or Consciences; there succeeded an
Obligation to Engage in a Contest with Strangers, which proved to be One of the
longest Wars, that has been known in France since the Foundation of This
Monarchy: And though the Justice of the Cause: the Valor of the Prince and the
Wisdom of his Council, have never failed of being attended with Victory; Yet
certain it is, that these Advantages have not been obtained without Infinite
Care and Labor throughout the whole Body of the State. So that it is no
wonder, if the French having so much to do at Home, looked but little Abroad;
Especially, into the Business of Navigation, and Traffic, wherein our
Neighbors in the Interim have bestowed so much study, and diligence; and from
whence they have likewise reaped so much Reputation, and Profit. Some Private
Enterprises indeed have been set a foot, and without that Success, which the
Undertakers promised to themselves: But this will not appear Strange at all, if
we consider, that the greater Part of the Adventurers, having other Affairs
wherein they were more nearly Concerned, during our Troubles, did neither
vigorously pursue what they had begun, nor indeed so much as take the Peyns, to
keep the Frame of their Design in Order. But now that it has pleased God to
give France the Peace it has so long desired, and the enjoyment of that Peace
under the Government of a Prince, whose wise Conduct and Steady Application to
Business are at once the Wonder, and the Jealousy of all Europe: Now I say,
for our Countrymen not to put themselves forward toward the Recovery of a
Right which they can never loose, and toward the gaining to themselves, of
those inestimable Benefits, which their Neighbors receive, by the Settlement
of a glorious Commerce, were to administer just reason of Astonishment.

Now of all Commerces whatsoever throughout the whole World, That of the
East Indies is One of the most Rich and Considerable. From Thence it is (the
Sun being kinder to them, then to us) that we have our Merchandise of greatest
Value, and that which Contributes the most, not only to the Pleasure of Life;
but also to Glory, and Magnificence. From Thence it is, that we fetch our Gold,
and Precious Stones, and a Thousand other Commodities, (both of a General
Esteem, and a Certain Return) to which we are so accustomed, that it is
impossible for us to be without them, as Silk, Cinamome, Pepper, Ginger
Nutmegs, Cotton Clothes, O^ate (vulgarly Watting) Pourcelain, woods for Dying,
Ivory, Frankincense, Bezoar, etc. So that having an absolute Necessity upon us,
to make use of all these things, why we should not rather furnish Our Selves,
then take them from Others, and apply that Profit hereafter to our own
Countrymen, which we have hitherto allowed to Strangers, I cannot understand.
Why should the Portuguez, the Hollanders, the English, the Danes Trade daily to
the East Indies possessing there, their Magazins, and their Forts; and the
French neither the One, nor the Other? What does it signify to us, that we
have so many good Ports, and Vessels, so many Experienced Seamen, so many
brave Soldiers? To what end is it in fine, that we Pride our selves to be
Subjects of the Prime Monarch of the Universe: If being so, we dare not so much
as show our Heads in those Places where our Neighbors have Established
themselves with Power? Were it not in a manner better for us to be without
these Advantages then not to use them; and to rest where we are, for want of
Ability to go further, then for want of Resolution? Would it not be a Shame to
us, to make a difficulty of Attempting That in a State of Security, which other
People have carried on through all doubts, and Hazzards? And to stick at the
bare Crossing of those Seas, which Others ventured upon, even before they were
known? Is it, that we lack either Industry, to make use of their Inventions, or
Courage, to follow their Example? Would we have any thing more easy, then to
reap the fruits of Others Men's Travailes: or any stronger Assurance of a good
Event, then the Wealth, and Glory, which they enjoy, that have tried the
Experiment.

True it is, that there is a certain Glory, which is so Inseparable from the
Inventors of things, that it is entirely theirs without any possibility of
Communication. The Portuguez will be for ever Famous for their Discoveries in
the East, and even their Kings themselves think it no dishonor, to be thought
the first Projectors of That Enterprise. They say, that in the Year 1420. Henry
Duke de Viseo, Son of King John the First, being eminently skilled in the
Mathematiques, took up a strong persuasion, that there must be of necessity
more Islands in That Ocean, then were yet known, and so sent out Certain
Vessels upon the Search, which discovered the Isle of Madera: After which,
Others sailing along the Coast of Africa, made New Discoveries. Thus Design,
that had been so luckily set afoot, was however Interrupted by the Wars, during
the Reigns of Edward the Successor of John the First, and of Alphonsus: but
John the Second, who succeeded Alphonsus, (in persuance of his Predecessors
Beginnings,) sent out One Bartholomew Diaz in 1487. to skirt the whole Coast of
Africa, and He it was, that First doubled the Cape of Good-Hope; to which at
first he gave the Name of Cabo Tormentoso, because of the Storms, which are
frequent thereabouts. And this Name perchance would have continued, if the King
himself had not thought fit to Change it for One of a better Omen, (the Cape of
Good-Hope,) which was grounded upon the Hope he had, that this new Progress
would open a way to the Conquest of the Oriental Indies, an Acquisition, which
he thirsted for, with exceeding Passion. Yet before he would venture his
Shipping into so vast a Sea, diverse Persons were sent by Land to the Indies,
to enform themselves from the best Pilots of the Country, in order to the
Voyage; But King John Dying upon the Preparative, left the Consummation of this
great Work to his Successor Emanuel, who having sufficiently Instructed
himself, as to the carrying of it forward, dispatched away Four Vessels from
Lisbon in July 1497. under the Command of Vasco de Gama, who in May following
Arrived before Calicut having doubled the Cape of Good-Hope, notwithstanding
the Storms he met with; and the violent Importunities of his People, pressing
him to return. After Two Years Absence, he brought the News himself of his
Prosperous Voyage, and laid the Foundation of greater Hopes to Come. In the
Year following, the King sent thither again 14. Ships, under the Charge of
Pedro Alvarez, and after that, diverses other Fleets to secure* and Fortify
themselves in a Place, where they found so vast a Treasure; and thus it came to
pass, that when the King of Castile seized upon all the New Lands, upon the
West, the Portuguez did the same in the East, and This was it, that gave
Occasion to the Famous Partition made by Pope Alexander the Sixth, who drawing
an Imaginary Line, from one Pole to the Other, (to pass at a Hundred Leagues
from the Asores) Adjudged to the King of Castile all that which was on the
West Side of the Line; not meddling with any of those Establishments, which the
King of Portugal had upon the East, which since the Voyage of Vasco de Gama
have been Infinitely increased. Thus did the Constant Resolution of these
Princes surmount all Difficulties; bringing both Glory to themselves, and
Happiness to their Subjects. Thus did these new Argonauts address themselves
to the Conquest of the Real Golden Fleece: for in sine, the Portuguez are
Indebted to this Navigation for almost all they are worth. This it is, that has
made them Famous in the World, and raised them into an Eminent Reputation,
although One not only of the Smallest, but of the least Fruitful Kingdoms of
Europe. It is this Traffic, (which they have now been sole Masters of a
Hundred Years entire) that has put them in Condition to carry so high the
Undertakings which we have seen in our days, and they would find it a very
hard Matter to Cope, even with the Enemy at their Gates, if it were not, that
the inexhaustible Source of their Indian Treasure, and Trade from time to time
supplies them, for the Expense of so long, and so dangerous a War.

What has it been, but this very Navigation, and Traffic, that has enabled
the Hollanders to bear up against the Power of Spain, with Forces so unequal;
Nay and to become terrible to them, and to bring them down at last to an
Advantageous Peace? Since that time it is, that this People, who had not only
the Spaniards, Abroad; but the very Sea, and Earth at Home to struggle with,
have in a despite of all Opposition made themselves so Considerable, that they
begin now to dispute Power, and Plenty, with the greatest part of their
Neighbors. This Observation is no more then Truth, their East India Company
being known to be the Principal support of their State, and the most sensible
cause of their Greatness. In the mean while, who would have Imagined that the
Union of a few Particular Merchants, that but in 1595. bethought themselves of
the very Project, and did not Form this Grand Company till Six or Seven Years
after, should ever have raised them to that point of Opulence, where they now
stand? It is known, that Communibus annis, there has been yearly 30, or 35. per
Cent. clear Gain to the Sharers; and it is an Easy matter likewise, to make a
near Calculation of their Occasional Expenses, and yet all This deducted, when
they came to make a General Computation of the Estate of the Company in the
Year 1661. Reckoning what they might have in ready Cash, in Merchandise, the
value of their Shipping, Cannon, and what thereunto belongs, the Estimate upon
the whole, amounted to a Sum so Prodigious, that it almost exceeds all
possibility of Credit: Not accompting all this while, that this Company
possesses more Land in the Indies, then the States of Holland have in the Low
Countries; and This is it, that Maintains for them Fourteen, or Fifteen
Thousand Soldiers, to make good what they have got, beside Seamen, and other
People, which they employ up and down to the number of near Fourscore Thousand
Persons, all subsisting thereupon. So vast an increase of Wealth from so small
a Beginning would pass absolutely for Fabulous, if we did not both See, and
know, that at this day the Hollanders are the best monyed People of Europe; and
that in Their Country, an Inheritance is worth more, then in any Other part of
the World: An Estate in Fee commonly Selling there at 60. Years Purchase, and
Lands in Soccage, at 50; Whereas Money goes but at Three per Cent. (so much is
it Cheaper then other Goods:) And this does not proceed, I hope from the
Emprovement of their drayned Marshes into Pasturage; nor from the Culture of
their other Grounds (which are certainly none of the Best) but barely from
their Traffic, and chiefly from That of the East Indies.

About the same time with the Hollanders, did the English likewise advise upon
the same design, and Formed a Company at London, for the East India Trade.
This Company Set out Four Ships in the Year 1600, which succeeded so well, that
in a short space of time, the English made Twenty Voyages thither. This new
Society was powerfully Protected, and Encouraged, by his Majesty of England;
who in 1608. sent Sir. William Hawkins in the Quality of Ambassador to the
great Mogol (to demand a free Trade) in despite of all the Obstacles, which
both the Portuguez, and the Hollanders endeavored then to cast in the way. In
1615. His Majesty sent Sir Thomas Roe, and after Him other Ambassadors to the
Kings of Iapan upon the same Errand, who wrought so well upon the Humor of
those Barbarians, that they not only obtained their desires; but gained so far
upon the Affections of the People, that the Hollanders themselves, in order to
their better Welcome, would often pretend to be Englishmen. This Company
prevailed also with the King of Persia, for great Privileges in his
Territories, in Consequence of the Service they did him against the Portuguez
about the Siege of Ormus. But it had been well, if they had found him as just
in the Execution, as he was Easy in the Promise. However; be it as it will,
This Company has made it self very Considerable in the Indies, and has at
present diverse Money Tables there under Two Principal Directors, or
Presidents; the One of which has his Residence at Surat, and the Other at
Bantam, by whose Authority the Trade of those Parts is Menaged. Thus has the
Industry, and Valor of these People Established, and Mainteyned their Commerce
against all Opposition, and though their Enemies have done their utmost to
Crush their Design, and brought the difference even to an open and Bloody
War, they have gained nothing but shame by the Contest, without ever being
able to hinder their Course, and Progress, which indeed they had no Color at
all to Endeavor to obstruct.

The Danes it is truth, Menage not so great a Trade, in the Indies as the Rest;
neither are their Fleets there so Numerous; but some Concernment they have
likewise in the Voyage, and their Agents upon the Place; and from time to time
they send out Shipping thither. Their Business lies commonly in the Gulf of
Bengala, upon the Coast of Pegu, and in certain Isles of the South, where they
have rendered themselves Considerable.

In fine, the Famous Gustavus Adolphus King of Suede thought himself obliged,
as upon a point of Honor, and Greatness, that His Subjects also should Visit
the Oriental-Indies, and other Parts of the World; and in the very Instant,
that this Prince (whose mind was set upon Dominion, and Glory) was disposing
of his design to enter Germany, and Contriving the Ruin of the House of
Austria, he had likewise in his Projects the Forming of a Suedish Company, for
this great Navigation, Inviting his People to Interest themselves therein, as
by his Letters Patent, dated at Stockholme the 14th. of June, 1626. is made to
appear; but the War of Germany, and the Death of this Great Prince coming on
soon after, would not permit him to see the Accomplishment of this Design,
which since that time has been again renewed.

All this Considered, what would the French Nation have to say for themselves,
if they should now let slip the Opportunity of an Enterprise, that has rewarded
all that have ever Embarked in it, with Reputation, and Profit? If we have
neglected it hitherto, it may serve for an Excuse, that we have not been
hitherto in Condition to attend it, by reason of our Constant Troubles. But now
that we are in a State of Tranquillity, and Peace, what shall acquit us to
Posterity, it we deferr it any Longer? It would be very ill done indeed to envy
our Neighbors the Fruits of their Honest, and I awful Industry; but it would
not be well on the other side, to decline the same Means of Enriching our
selves, if it were but for the Conservation of our Common-Good, the Benefits of
Commerce serving as a Recompense of Their Labor, and Travail, while the
greater Part of Our People lie Lazing at Home, as of no Use, and without
Employment.

But Men are not easily persuaded to Engage upon new Adventures, they are
afraid, that things will not prove to their minds, and every man is unwilling
to make the first step. These thoughts doubtless might well enough have become
the Portuguez, that had a vast Sea before them, and were to pass into another
Climate, and under other Stars, without any knowledge of the Course they were
to steer. This Apprehension might have been pardoned also in the Hollanders,
whose design lay in a Country, where their Mortal Enemies were Masters, and
where they were in mere danger from the Portuguez, then either from Storms, or
the Barbarians themselves. But now that the former of these has led the way to
this Fortunate Land, and the Latter has disabused us, as to any fear of erill
from those that were there before us, we must be wilfully blind, not to agree
upon an Advantage so Certain upon the Account, and so easy to obteyn. For
whether France be more Potent, or not, then any other Nation, that Trades to
the Indies is not the Question; neither can it be disputed, whether the French
have not as good Commodity for this Traffic as any other People, if it be
considered, that we are possessed already beyond the Cape of Good-Hope, of the
Island of St. Laurence or Madagascar, the Largest Island of all That Sea, being
no less then Seven Hundred Leagues in Compass, and in the most agreeable
Climate of all India. The Air is so Temperate, that the same Clothes which we
wear here in the Spring, may serve there the whole year through; and Experience
tells us, that the Heats of France are more troublesome; then those of St.
Laurence. The Soil is proper for all sorts of Grain, and Trees, and asks
nothing but dressing to be Admirable. There is no need of carrying Provisions
thither, as to other Islands, for the support of the Colonyes; for the
Abundance of every thing being so great, that the Country produces enough for
it Self, and to Spare. The Waters are Excellent, the Fruits delicious, and
without Hyperbole, the Place may be Improved into a Paradise. Over and above
This, there are GoldenMines in such Plenty, that in great falls of Rain, and
Ravages of Water, the Veins of Gold discover themselves all along the Coast,
and upon the Mountains. The Inhabitants are of a Disposition tractable enough,
and with good Usage ready, and willing to be Employed in any service; being a
People Humble, and Obedient, and of a Humor far differing from Those of the
Country, and of the Islands further up in the Indies, who will not upon any
Terms Subject themselves to Labor: Whereas These on the Contrary, both love it
themselves, and take pleasure to see the Christians Work. The Country is shared
among diverse petty Kings, who are still making War One upon the other, and
from whose disagreements we might easily take a Rise to an Absolute
Establishment of our selves among them. Beyond this Place the Trading lies open
without difficulty into India, China, Japan, and more Commodiously yet to the
Coasts of Ethiopia, and Territories of the Emperor of the Abissins; (where
Commerce is scarce understood) to Sofola; where are the Richest Gold-Mines upon
the Face of the Earth, to Quama Melinda, to the Red Sea, and throughout the
Persian Gulf. In a word, there is not any where a fitter Place for a General
Magazin of all Commodities, to be brought from those Parts into Europe, then is
This Island. But this Convenience should not yet hinder us from Planting also
in other Places, where it may be expedient for the Good of our Affairs; and
such a Place we have in our Eye, where no Person as yet Inhabits, which we have
now in our Power to Seize upon, and where the greatest Commerce might be
Established, that has been yet known in the World. (Where this Place is shall
be declared in fit season) So that it is our Part now, not to let so many
favorable Concurrences slip through our fingers, and to loose the Benefit of
so fair an Occasion. We are apt to admire the good Fortune of Our Neighbors,
and it deserves it. But it is not enough barely to admire, unless we also
Emulate it; Especially, having so many Encouragements to promise our selves a
success, at least Equal, if not Superior to any, that have gone before us.
Besides there is a great part of the World, that remains still unknow, Vast
Regions, that are not yet discovered: So that although Others have had the good
Fortune to have preceded us, we may yet have the Honor to carry the Business
further then they have done. But as it seems necessary for the bringing of this
great design to Effect that we should follow the Example of other People, in
forming a Company among our selves for the Navigation of the East Indies, and
that we must needs do the Hollanders this Right to acknowledge, that their
Society is both the Richest and the best Read in the Mystery of that Commerce
of all; that have ever Meddled with it. It will not be amiss to look into the
Constitution of that Company, and the manner of their Proceedings, that any Man
may the better Judge, Whether we have any Reason or no, to doubt of doing as
much, as they have done before us.

THe War betwixt Spain, and Holland having Ruined one Part of the Hollanders
Commerce, without which they would have had much ado to subsist. Certain
Merchants of Zealand Associated among themselves in the Year 1592. To go and
trade in the East Indies; and particularly in such places, where the Portuguez
had nothing to do: but to avoid the Hazard of being too near the Line, they
resolved to search a Passage toward the North, and so to Coast about Tartary,
and Cathay, and from thence to fall into China, and the Indies. This Voyage not
succeeding to their wish, they joined themselves afterward with some Merchants
of Amsterdam, and All together Equipped a small Fleet of Four Vessels, which
they sent forth to India by the Ordinary way, under the Command of one
Cornelius Aoutman, who having lived long at Lisbon, had learned from the
Portuguez the Secret of this Navigation. In 1595. they departed, and at the End
of Two Years, and Four Months Returned, without making any Profit of their
Voyage. This little disappointment did not hinder them from forming at the same
time a Second Company, in the same Town of Amsterdam; and these Two Companies
being United, set forth a Fleet of Eight Ships, that went out in 1598. while a
Third Company in Zealand were making Ready for the same design. In the Year
1599. Certain Other Merchants of Amsterdam (the most part of them Brabanders)
framed yet Another Company apart from all the Rest, which sent also Four
Vessels to the Indies. In 1600, This latter Company set out Two more, which
Joined themselves to Six other of the First Company, and these Eight Ships
being gone, the Members of these Two Companies, not waiting for their Return
Equipped Thirteen Vessels (the First Company Nine, and the Latter Four;) and
this Fleet went to Sea in April 1601. putting the Profits of the First Voyage,
into a Stock for a second Equipage. There were at that time some Merchants of
Rotterdam, and North-Holland, that were Modelling of Companies separate from
the Rest (which Increasing in this manner gave greatly to fear, that one would
spoil the Other;) Whereupon the States foreseeing what disorder this Division
might cause, persuaded them to Unite all their Interest, and to send their
Deputies to the Hague, to Endeavor there to draw them all into one Company, in
which Proposition the Parties Concerned did acquiesce, and so there was
Constituted one General Company for the East-Indian Navigation, with a Grant,
or Privilege from the States, Expressly Inhibiting all other the Inhabitants of
the United Provinces to Traffic in the Indies, from the Cape of Good Hope, to
the furthest Part of China, for the Term of One and Twenty Years, to begin from
the 20 th. of March 1602. By this Grant, it was left free for all Persons
whatsoever to enter themselves into the Company for what Sum they pleased;
Provided, that they declared themselves, within Five Months; after which no
more should be received upon what Terms soever. In this Space of time, they
gathered together a Fond, or Stock of Six Millions, and Six Hundred Thousand
Livres money of the Country (which make Seven Millions, Nine Hundred and Twenty
Thousand Livres of France) and no Man since That, has been taken anew into the
Company at least without having bought the share of some of the First
Interessed, which they call BUYING OF AN ACTION. There were made also diverse
Rules, for the Maintaining of Order and preserving the Interest of Each
particular, which were Explained in the Grant. In the mean while, the First
Term Expiring in March 1623. it was continued for One and Twenty Years longer,
and in 1643. renewed again for 27. Years, in Consideration of a Million and Six
Hundred Thousand Livres given to the State; and they are now Soliciting to
renew their Privilege again for a further Term.

The first Sum of Six Millions, and Six Hundred Thousand Livres was Employed
upon the Equipping of a Fleet of Fourteen Sail, that set out in February,
1603. and after that, of Another of Thirteen that Departed in the December
following. Till then, the Persons Interessed, made no Benefit at all of their
Adventure, for being divided into so many Private Companies, they were feign to
lay out all their Gains upon a Stronger Equipage. But upon the Return of these
Two Fleets, the Profit was so great, that in 1605. the Company got Fifteen, for
a Hundred; and in 1606. Seventy five, for a Hundred. So that in this short
time, they wanted but Ten in the Hundred of Reimbursing themselves their
Original Sum. In this Interim, the Company did not slacken at all in their
Preparations, and Provisions. They Treated with the Indian Kings, built
Fortresses, and every where enlarged their Conquests, which vast expenses
notwithstanding, it appeared in May 1613. that every man was Reimbursed his
Principal, and had over and above, a hundred and sixty, Profit. As for example;
He that in 1602. put Four Thousand Tranks into the Stock of the Company, had
Received in 1613. Ten thousand and Four hundred profit, and yet his Original
good in the Common-stock. And this Gain has been so much Augmented since that
time, that there are few Years, wherein they get less, then 30. per Cent. In
1661. They gained 40. In 1662. there was no distribution at all, by reason of
Four ships lost, which they have never heard of since; beside the extraordinary
Charge they were at for the Seige of Cochin; but in 1663. they had 30. again
per Cent.

The Company at every Ten Years End makes a General Inventory of the whole
Business, and by That, which was made in 1661. it was found to be in Possession
of the Immense Wealth abovementioned.

This Company has not only Enriched Particulars; but the Advantages, which the
Body of the Re-Publique draws continually from it, are almost inestimable. In
the First Place, all Commodities, that are brought from the Indies into the
States Ports, pay at Least Seven in the Hundred, and before they come into
France, are unladen in Holland, where they pay all their Rights of IN and OUT
(before they come to us) arising to Six per Cent. and One per Cent. more for
the Duties of Convoy, which Seven per Cent. go clear to the Re-publique,
beside Two in the Hundred more for Factorage; and the Charge of Merchandises:
So that upon this Reckoning, we pay Twelve per Cent. more for Indian
Commodities, then they would Cost us, if we fetched them our Selves. Whence it
follows, that our Negociants, making the same Profit of these Merchandises,
which the Holland Company does, might be able to furnish us at Twelve in the
Hundred better Cheap, then Others; because we should save the Duties, that are
now paid in Holland; (an Expense that every Year draws Vast Sums out of
France, where are Consumed at least a Third Part of what the Hollanders bring
out of the Indies.

A Second Advantage, which the States draw from this Company, is, that upon
Every Renewing of their Grant, it makes them a Considerable Present. The Last
(as we have said already) amounting to no less then Sixteen Hundred Thousand
Livres.

In the Third Place, it maintains at least Fourscore Thousand Men, the Greater
Part whereof would otherwise be a Burden to the State.

The Last, and the most Important Consideration is, that this Company, in
weakening the Commerce of the Portuguez, who were a long time under the
Obedience of his Catholic Majesty, did also weaken the Spanish Monarchy
(their great Enemy) and by that Means made their way to a Peace.

They Equipp every year for this Voyage Twelve fair Ships; from Eight hundred,
to Fourteen hundred Tun, which depart at several Seasons; and every year
precisely at the End of June, there Return as many, or thereabouts. The
Company, and the States usually in the Month of May send out their Men of War
to meet them, Partly as a Convoy, and to defend them against their Enemies, and
partly to relieve them with Fresh Men, and other Necessaries, as they have
occasion. The Principal Place, which this Company has in the Indies is Called
Batavia, a Town, that they have built (in the Island of Java Major, not far
from Sumatra, they have there their Magazins, and Stores of all the
Commodities; which they bring into Europe, from the several Countries of the
Indies, of Japan, of China, and of Other Kingdoms. They have also Colombo in
the Isle of Ceylon, which they have lately taken from the Portuguez (This
Island furnishes the whole World with Cinamome.) In Fine, they possess diverse
other Places, even from the Gulf of Persia, to the Extremity of China, and
they have Reckoned a good while since, Seven and Thirty Magazins, and Twenty
Considerable Forts, which they had in the Indies.

For the Greater Advantage and Liberty of their Commerce, they have their
Agents about all the Kings of those Quarters, as the King of Persia, the Great
Mogol, the Kings of China, Japan, Cochinchine, and diverse Others. See now to
what degree of Greatness this Company is Arrived: a Society of Particular
Merchants, Low enough at First, both in Fortune, and every way Else; but now
Advanced, not only beyond their Hopes, but their very Pretenses.

But there is not any thing which a Company, of this Condition, by Union,
Conduct and Courage may not accomplish. This Truth being so clear, and the same
Advantages now offered us, shall we not make use of them? Or shall we rather
acknowledge to the World, that we want Unity, Address, or Courage? The Last
is a Reproach, which our very Enemies will never fasten upon us,; Nor with any
Color of Reason will it be pretended, that we want Address. For (to speak in
this Place only of Navigation) It is certain, that better Seamen cannot be
desired then ours are, and the Hollanders know That well enough, who make use
of the French more then of any other Nation, and find themselves better Served
with Them, then with their Own. As to the Point of Union (not to dissemble the
Matter) without doubt, we are there too blame, and it is a fault of our Nation,
which Certainly deserves our greatest Care to Redress. To say the Truth, What
a Shame is it, that the French; the People of all the World the most
accomplished, a Nation with whom Valor, Magnificence, Good Nature, Civilitie,
Learning, the Liberal Arts seem in a Manner, to have chosen their Abode. That
These People, I say, should be so hardly brought to endure One Another; that
their Societies should be so unconstant, their Agreement so difficult; that the
most hopeful Affairs in the World should perish even in their Hands, by I know
not what Fatality of this Lightness; without which discord among themselves,
it were almost impossible to resist them.

When the Hollanders began their Company, how many were there even of an
Ordinary Condition, that sold themselves to their very Household Stuff for the
furnishing of a Stock to begin withal; because of the Honor, and Benefit
which they foresaw, would accrue to their Country. And shall the French having
so many other Excellent Qualities fail at Last in so Material a Point, as to
be wanting in their Zeal, and duty to the Glory, and Well-being of the
Public. I dare promise my self This will never be; and since we are now in an
Age of wonders, that must give Remedies to all our Evils, and Renew our whole
Frame: Let us not leave the least Mark of that Ancient Blemish; but by a
Constant kindness among our Selves, and a true and dutiful Love of our
Country give the World to know, that our Great, and Incomparable Prince has
Influenced his People, and Inspired them with a Virtue, which they never had
before.

But what shall we do then? will some say? Our Business in the first Place,
must be (as is already said) to Compose a Society of diverse Persons, that will
unanimously Contribute to the Execution of our design; which Society shall
carry the Name of THE FRENCH COMPANY for the COMMERCE of the EAST -- INDIES.

Our next Work must be to Equip a Fleet, and to go directly, and make a Descent
upon our Isand of Madagascar, which we may do without any Resistance, and begin
there with a Considerable Establishment, which from time to time shall be
supported, and maintained by strong Colonies.

We must then resolve to carry thither, only men of Honesty and Courage, not
Criminals redeemed from the Gibbet, or the Galleys, nor Women condemned for
Debauchery or Lewdness. Part of these People shall be Employed in Tilling the
Ground, (which will be a matter of exceeding Benefit) while the Rest shall be
making themselves Masters of the Principal Posts of the Country, and securing
of Ports, whereof there are diverse in This Island, capable of Two or Three
Hundred Vessels, to Ride without danger. Thus much for the Praeliminaries of
our great Commerce.

I know very well, that this Proposition will not please all People, and some
will tell you perhaps, that the French have been at Madagascar already; and
What did they there? They will tell you too, that Monsieur Flacourt (who was
the Director of the Company, that was then made,) has sufficiently manifested
the Vanity of This Project; in a Relation that he has published upon This
Subject. Well! But are we now to learn, that a Business, that has Miscarried
at One time, may succeed at Another? How many great Enterprises, do we find in
Story, that have Required several Trials to bring them to Perfection. The
first Spaniards, that Planted in the Isles of America, were all slain; and yet
this disaster did not discourage the Undertakers from sending more. The English
Colonies in Virginia have been Four or Five times destroyed; and yet This has
not made them Abandon the Country. To come once again to the Example of the
Hollanders. The First step, they set toward their Indian Adventure
(endeavoring to find out a new Passage) was most unfortunate to them. The
Second time; it is true, they got thither; but they made Nothing of their Voyage.
Did they give it over for That? No, by no means. They returned a Third, a
Fourth time, and at last gathered with Interest the Fruits of their
Perseverance. But This is not all neither; for the World must know, that there
is a large difference, betwixt the Business of Monsieur Flacourt, and That
which is Now in Question. A Large Difference, betwixt a Company Composed of a
Small Number of Private Persons, and that wanted Stock for the Accomplishment
of so great a design, and the Company, which is Now in Proposal to be Erected.
For after all; we are not without hope, that the King himself, (who has so
great an Affection, and Tenderness for his People) Considering the Notable
Benefits, which this Enterprise will bring to his Dominions, will Himself I
say, lend his Royal Support, and rather then fail, even Enter into a
Participation in the Design: So that the Consequence betwixt Monsieur
Flacourts Affair; and This at present, holds no Proportion. And This must be
acknowledged too; that (the Misfortune Notwithstanding, into which he was cast,
by the Fault of the Company) he has been ever known to say; Nay, and Publicly
to Declare, and Print at the End of his Relation before Mentioned, that a
Considerable Settlement in Madagascar (which must be Vigorously begun, and
Wathchfully persued,) would bering an Advantage to the State of France beyond
Imagination: Considering the Goodness, and Fertility of the Country, the
Gentle, and Industrious disposition of the People, and the Commodious Situation
of the Island for the Entertainment of Commerce. And This which we deliver is
Supported by the Agreeing Testimony of so many Nations, newly come from Thence;
as Flemmins French, Hollanders, English; that to dispute the Point, were to
offer violence to Truth it self. Monsieur Flacourt did not so much as wish for
More, then One Lusty Ship to be sent every Year from France to Madagascar, to
carry on the Design. What are We to expect then, that propose no less then
Fourteen or Fifteen, at a Blow? The Transporting of Five Hundred Men thither
was the very utmost or His Desire, but We speak of Carrying as many Thousands.
The Disbursment of a Hundred and Fifty Thousand Livres upon an Equipage, was a
Sum that He had not the Confidence so much as to propose; but We have in our
Prospect, the Expense of many Millions. In a Word, His Reasonings were
proportioned, to the Abilities of a Company of Private Persons; but We speak of
Erecting a Company, whereof it is possible, that his Majesty Himself will not
disdain to be a Member; and by his Royal Participation, Influence it with a
Certain Character, peculiar to the Dignity of such a Constitution. So that the
Odds betwixt Our Model, and His is Evident, and that we shall be able to carry
our Business higher, then ever he could have raised his Imagination. But let
That go as it will; of the Isle of Madagascar a Man may safely say, that with a
very little Care to Fortify there, we may have not only one Place, but many,
and those of greater Value, then all that the Hollanders can pretend to be
Masters of in the Indies; take it either in regard of the Place it Self, or the
Convenience of Traffic. Surely it cannot be denied to be Incomparably more
Commodious, and Safe, then Batavia in the Isle of Java, where the Hollanders
have pitched their Principal Residence. More Commodious doubtless it is, as
being in a Gentle Climate, and having within it self whatsoever may honestly
serve either to the Pleasures, or Necessities of humane Life. Whereas on the
Contrary, there is scarce any thing to be gotten about Batavia; but the Company
is feign to fetch from afar off the very Rice, Meat, and Necessary Provisions
for Five and Twenty, or Thirty Thousand Persons, to their great Trouble, and
Expense. And then Madagascar is Certainly a Safer Place; for the Natives of
Java are a Brutal, Bold, Warlike, and Stubborn People: By Profession Mohammedan,
and consequently Haters, and Despisers of Christians. The Hollanders have for
their Neighbor, on the One side the King of Mataran, a Prince, that shows
himself now and then at their very Gates with a Hundred Thousand Men. On the
Other side they have the People of Bantam (a matter of Twelve Leagues from
Batavia) who have often done the same as the King of Mataran. Whereas the
Inhabitants of Madagascar, on the Contrary, are of a Meek and Quiet humor,
discovering withal a Singular Inclination to receive the Gospel. So that one
is more secure with a Hundred Men in Madagascar, then with above a Thousand in
Java. But This is not all yet, that the Place is more Delightful and Secure;
but it lies much better also for Traffic: for I cannot but take Notice of
another Inconvenience, which the Hollanders suffer, in having their General
Magazin at Batavia. It lies so far up in the Indies, that it makes their Voyges
long and dangreous, and a great part of them to no purpose. When you have
brought them within view of Madagascar, they have still a Third Part of their
Way further to Batavia. And when they are There, they must come back again the
same way they went, and with the same Winds, that would carry them into
Europe; only to Traffic in the Gulf of Bengala, upon the Coasts of
Coromandel, and Malabar, at Ceylon, Surat, in the Persian Gulf, and upon the
Coasts of Ethiopia; and after all This, they must back again with their
Merchandise for Batavia, and there at Last they make their Cargasons for
Holland. So that the very Situation of the Place gives them the Trouble of
passing the same way Two or Three times over, whereas by Planting our Principal
Magazin at Madagascar, all the doubling would be saved: For being There once,
let us go which way we will, either toward the Red Sea, the Gulf of Bengala,
China, Japan, or the most Remote Islands, we are never out of our way; but when
we shall have made our Markets, and Carried our Commodities to Madagascar,
every hour of our Passage will have brought us so much nearer Home. So that we
shall have nothing to Stop us, but foul Weather; None of this back, and
forward, this Turning, and Crossing, to make the way tedious. Take This along
with you too, that when you are once at Madagascar, you are upon as good a
Breathing-Place as you would wish, with all Conveniences about you, to refresh
your Men, and follow your Course at Pleasure: Whereas the Holders, after they
are once under way from Batavia, meet with no such Relief betwixt That, and
Home: (commonly a Seaven-Months Voyage) for want of which, they are so
miserably Harrassed with the Journey, that a long time it takes them to recover
it. And there remains yet another Inconvenience; (from which We are Exempt)
that is; When they are come into Our Seas, they dare not pass the Channel,
for fear of the English, with whom they are at Variance, upon the very point of
the Indian-Trade; but away they go on still to the Northward, and so about
Ireland, and Scotland (a Matter of Four or Five Hundred Leagues Compass) to
fall at Last into their Own Country by the way of the German Ocean (which is
the true reason of the Companies allowing an Augmentation of Three Months Pay,
to all the Officers and Seamen (upon this Voyage) above their ordinary Wages.)
So that they have both Extremities of Heat and Cold to Encounter in their
Return. And we are now to presume, that the Company puts upon Account all these
Rubbs, and Stopps in the way, which make the Navigation both more Hazzardous,
and Expensive, and Rate their Commodities accordingly. This is enough said, I
suppose to prove the Situation of Madagascar better then that of Java, and
Consequently, that the Matter in hand is worth our Care.

To Instance now in our Own Nation, the French make no difficulty at all to
adventure upon the American Isles, as St. Christopher, Martinique, Guadalupe,
and Others (where there are at least Thirty Thousand Persons) and yet these are
Places, where there is no Living without Succor from Abroad; and if the
English, and Hollanders with whom they Traffic, should not supply them with
Bread, Wine and Victuals; nay and with Slaves too, to order their Grounds,
they were not able to subsist Two Years to an End without Extreme Misery; which
would enforce them at last to quit their Hold. From hence it proceeds, that the
English and Hollanders get away all their Sugar, Tobacco and Indigo, with which
they furnish us afterward, at a dear Rate; so that the French are they that
reap the least Benefit of their own Labors. Taking This for Granted, what can
be clearer, then that we are under a Gross, and most unreasonable Prejudice,
in rather Choosing to send out Colonies into Places, Subjected to such
Inconveniences, then to Plant a Large and Fruitful Island, fitted with all
advantages, both for Plenty, Pleasure, and Commerce: And all This, because
Monsieur Flacourt failed in the business; Because a matter of a Hundred, or
Six Score Men Miscarryed in it. (Even by the fault of the very Company it self)
These People should do well to observe, that we are now upon another manner of
design; upon an Enterprise not unworthy of that great Prince, who will have the
Goodness to make Himself of the Party.

I must expect now to be Questioned, by what Authority I talk at this Rate,
and who made me an Undertaker? Truly, I shall not take upon me beyond my
Commission; but I think it may be very fairly presumed, that so accomplished a
Prince, as his Christian Majesty will never refuse to Comfort, and Protect his
People in an Affair of this Weight; or ever fall short of That Affection, which
the Kings of England have constantly Manifested toward their Subjects upon the
like Occasion. A Man may say indeed, that His Majesty's daily Acts are a
Security to the Contrary; and he that shall consider, that since the Year,
1658. the King has struck off Twenty Millions a Year in Taxes, and since That,
brought, down the Price of Salt: How that in the Scarcity of, 1661. (which
threatened us with an Inevitable Famine) he did out of his Proper Coffers
provide for the Importation of Prodigious Quantities of Grain, to relieve the
Necessities of his People, (and particularly of Paris, where the Number made
the Evil the more dangerous. He I say, that shall duly Consider, what we have
both seen, and tasted of ^his Kind, will never doubt of His Majesty's
Propension to further the Advancement of This Company to all purposes
Imaginable.

If there were nothing else of Inducement in the Thing, it would be sufficient
alone to prevail upon his Majesty to see, that the Establishment of this
Great, and Noble Commerce, by opening an Honest and Certain Way of Livelihood
to the whole French Nation for the Future, would insensibly wear out, and
banish all those other Ignoble, and shifting ways of Living, which in Our
days have been but too much in Practice, and Credit. That this happy Abundance
would bring us again to a Sincerity in our dealings, and put out of Countenance
that Trade of Wrangling, which the Insatiable Greediness of a Lazy sort of Men
has raised to the Highest degree of Iniquity. That it will be a sure way of
Employment for those that languish for want of Business, whose Industry is as
good as Lost, when it is not Exercised. And in conclusion, that it will be an
Indubitable Relief to a World of Poor; who have at present no other Cho^ce,
then either a shameful Beggary: or some Criminal Course to deliver themselves
from it. So that since the Thing in Question, has no less an Influence upon
the Interest, and Honor of the State, then upon the Profit of Particular
Persons: We may be confident of his Majesty's Royal Favor and Assistance
toward the Accomplishment of so Glorious, and Beneficial a Work.

TO come to the Point then, there must be first a Fond, or Stock, of Six
Millions to be laid out upon the Equipage of Twelve, or Fourteen fair Ships,
of Burden, from Eight Hundred, to Fourteen Hundred Tunn for the Convenience of
passing such a Number of Persons into our Isle of Madagascar, as may take
Possession of it in a handsome Fashion.

I would here propose that His Majesty might be humbly besought, to put in for
a Tenth part, and I persuade my self it might be readily Obtained.

I am further Assured, that there are diverse Persons of Eminent Condition in
this Kingdom, that would be willing to Venture Considerable Sums upon This
Bottom, in Case the Merchants, who shall first Associate toward this
Constitution, shall think it Convenient. And in this Case, I reckon upon Three
Milions, as good as Raised; so that we are Advanced the One Half already. And
for the Other Moiety, I would Recommend it to all Merchants, Burgers of Towns,
and in a more Especial manner to all that love the Honor of their Country,
and desire the Laudable Advancement of their Proper Fortunes, to bethink
themselves seriously of the Business, and to make their Zeal as Remarquable to
the Present Age, as the Reward of it will Render them in their Generations to
Posterity.

For their further encouragement, I have great Reason to believe, that his
Majesty after his Engagement for a Tenth in the first Expedition, will be
prevailed with to furnish more for the Second, Third, and Fourth, if it shall
be thought needful.

His Majesty may be also supplicated to remit to this Company, the One Half of
his Rights of Entry and Customs, throughout all France, for all Indian
Commodities Imported thither.

In fine, upon a strong presumption, that the King will show himself in this,
as in all other Cases; the Father of His People I flatter my self with a
strange hope, that his Majesty may be persuaded to take upon Himself, the
Risque of the First Eight or Ten Years; which if it comes to pass, let the
world Judge by that signal Engagement, how his Majesty stands Affected to this
Affair, and whether the Opinion, which I have entertained concerning it, be not
somewhat more then the Vision of a man, that dreams waking.

As for Private Persons, they shall have Liberty to Interest themselves in the
Company for what sum they please, till the Stock shall be Complete; after
which no more shall be Admitted: And for the speedier Raising of the sum, His
Majesty shall be desired, that Strangers (as to that Particular) may have the
same Freedom with Frenchmen themselves: by virtue whereof they shall stand
Naturalized, without need of any other Grace; Provided that their Engagement
exceed the sum of Ten Thousand Livres, in Consideration of which Interest,
their Kindred although Strangers shall be qualified to inherit their Estates.
And for further Security, His Majesty must be desired to Grant, that in case of
any Rupture betwixt This Crown and the States, whereof such Strangers shall be
Subjects, their Goods shall not thereupon be Seized or Consiscated, in
Consequence of the War.

This Company shall then have its Directors; and to take away all jealousy
from the Negotiants of being one Oppressed by Another; these Directors shall be
chosen out of the Body of the Merchants only, and the whole Stock put into the
Hands of One Person to be named on their Part. And for the greater
Encouragement of Strangers, and in Testimony of the Trust, that shall be
reposed in them, they shall be declared Capable of being Heads and Directors of
the Company; Provided, that they bring in an Interest Correspondent thereunto
and settle in France with their Families.

The King must be supplicated again to permit, that the Causes of the Company
may in the First Place be brought before the next Consulary Justice, and by
Appeal to the Parliament.

In fine, every man shall be free to Offer his Advice for the Good of the
Company: or, for the Security of any of the Persons therein concerned; and his
Opinion shall be received with Respect, and followed so far, as shall be found
Expedient. I have now delivered my thoughts upon This Subject, which have not
been hitherto unacceptable where ever I have imparted them.

But Fear and Distrust (those Two Ignoble Passions, and the Enemies of all
great Undertakings,) will perhap, have the Power to work upon some easy
Natures, by their ill grounded and mistaken Reasons; which (such as they are)
we shall frankly lay open, for the service of Those who otherwise might
possibly suffer themselves to be surprised.

The First Objection is drawn from the Ordinary Uncertaintyof Events, which is
the great Common-Placeof such as want Resolution, who will tell you, that A Man
can have no Assurance, that this New Navigation, will ever come to what we
Imagine: That Our Neighbors being already in Possession of the Indian
Commerce, where they are powerfully Settled, and Rooted in Familiarities with
the Natives, with whom they Trade, it will be a hard matter to bring them over
to us: And that in fine, being before-handed, and having great Magazins, and
Stores, they will appoint their Factors perchance to beat down the Market, and
under-sell us: So that we shall be quickly Reduced either to throw off all; or
Trade to Loss. All this is is easily answered, and we will do it in Order.

As to the First Objection, I reckon, that it can never Enter into the thought
of a Man of Courage. Have our Neighbors prospered in This Navigation, even
beyond their Hopes, and is it a Reasonable Question to ask, whether We shall
succeed, or No? It is without dispute, a point of false Prudence to doubt it.
How seldom is this same froward Wisdom in the Right! which requires more
Certainty, then the thing will bear; that would have the Future in Hand, and
cannot content it self, with a well-Grounded Probability. This was it, that
made so many of the Christian Princes to reject the Proposition of the Famous
Columbus (of which notwithstanding, they saw afterward, the Effects to their
Amazement (the first that boggled at the design being the Genoeses) He
discoursed the Business to the King of Portugal; but he had as good have said
nothing: And to as little Purpose was the Project broken to the King of
England; and to the French King too: (as some say) and the Favorable Audience,
that he had of Ferdinand, and Isabel, would have signified just as much as the
Rest, if a Private Man had not born the Charge of his First Expedition, by the
Advance of Sixteen thousand Gold Ducats, that were Employed upon it. The King
of Spain has the same Obligation also, for the Discovery of Peru to Three
Private Persons, that joined in the Design, which passed a while for an
Extravagant folly, till the Event made it appear to be an Act of Profound
Wisdom. In the mean time, the difference we here speak of, was not without
some plausible Appearance of Reason: the Thing being as then in doubt; but with
us it is another Case. The Gain is Certain, and the good Fortune which others
have had there already, tell us what we our Selves are now to expect. In one
word, if our design miscarry, it is our own Fault, and we cannot say, that the
Execution of it is not in our own Hands, without Offense to Truth, and Honor
at once.

As to the Second Objection, which concerns the Vent of our Merchandise; the
Conceit is Idle: for First, the Company may be sure of France; because (as we
have proved already) They may afford their Commodities at Ten or Twelve in the
Hundred, better Cheap then the Hollanders. (Which rises to more, then a Man
would Imagine, till he comes to Compute, that France alone consumes at least a
Third Part of what is brought out of India.) But besides, it will not enter
into my understanding, why Strangers should not as soon buy of ^s, as of our
Neighbors; Especially, when their Interest leads them to it; France being
placed in the very Heart of Europe, and Accessible on every side. I shall say
more, which is, that since Strangers are already under an Obligation of dealing
with us, for Four Principal Commodities, which we have in Excellence (and which
an Italian of great Authority, calls the Four Load-Stones, that draw other
Nations to us) That is to say, CORN, WINE, SALT, and HEMP; there is no doubt,
but they that Traffic with us for these Things, would be very well content to
take off our Indian Merchandise, as far as they have Occasion for it, all under
One. Which would be very much for the Merchants Ease to furnish himself with
whatsoever he can desire, at one, and the same Market. So that it is Rational
to believe, not only that our Indian Merchandise will not be left upon our
Hands; but that we shall have a Quicker Sale for it, then other People; and by
this Means Recover the great Traffic, which France had of Old before the
Portuguez found out the Navigation of the East Indies: for in those days, all
the Persian, and Indian Merchandise was brought by Land into Egypt, from Thence
by Sea to Marseilles; and There Distributed. In Consequence hereof, it is not
unlikely that our Neighbors whose best Card is their Commerce, will try all
the ways in the World to Cross us. And this is the Foundation of the Third
Objection.

In truth it may very well be, and that they will not stick even to pick their
own Pockets, rather then we shall fill ours, and show ^s a Thousand Tricks, to
make us sick of our Business. It is possible, that for a while they will be
content to set their Merchandise at an under Rate, to Loose a Little at
present, to get the more hereafter, and trifle away a Million or Two upon the
Experiment. But how long will this Frolic hold? or can any man Imagine, that
to do us a Mischief, they will resolve absolutely to ruin Themselves? After
all, The Consideration how far they would expose themselves upon this design to
divert and discourage us, serves only to Confirm me in my First opinion of
it. They are not a People to do great things to no Purpose; nor would they
throw away so much Treasure now, but in Order to the Conservation of their
Future Interest. Again; They would not stickle so hard for a small Matter, and
the very Industry they use to hinder our Commerce, proves the Benefit
Considerable, if we carry it. So that this Objection is so far from moving us
to relinquish our Enterprise, that on the other side it rayses both our Hopes,
and Resolutions to go thorough with it. To say all in a word, if so great a
Blessing does attend us, as his Majesty's Consent, that all the Loss, which
shall befall the Company, for the first Eight or Ten years may be made good
upon the stock which His Majesty shall vouchsafe to venture in the design.
What have we then to fear? Can it be, that a Party of Private Merchants (for
such are our Neighbors Companies) shall have the Power to sink a design, which
One of the Greatest Princes of the World has a mind to support? A Prince, who
by the Admirable order of his Conduct; the Just Administration of his Revenue,
and by his fatherly Goodness toward his People, has put himself into a
Condition, to undertake without Fear, whatsoever may be put in Execution with
Honor, and Justice. No, No, Our Neighbors are too wise to make so dangerous
an Experiment! Let us say rather, that they shall see us take part of their
Commerce, either with pleasure, as their Principal Allies; or however without
having it in their Power to harm us.

The Second Scruple objected by some Particulars arises from the Consideration
of certain unhappy Effects of our past Troubles. The Prodigious Expenses, which
the King was at, while he was forced to maintain a War in all the parts of
Europe; (which has now brought us however to the most Glorious Constitution,
that the State of France ever enjoyed) Those Expenses I say, having obliged His
Majesty to call for Supplies of money now and then from his People, have left in
them certain dark Imaginations and Jealousies, that the Stock of the Company
being a Public Treasure; upon the Kings next occasion, his Majesty might
perchance seize it as his Own. So that it would be a madness for Private
Persons to venture their Fortunes in a Bottom, which the King may make himself
Master of at Pleasure. But these are weak Heads God knows; and That they say,
is certainly unworthy, both of the Prosperity of Our Affairs, and the
Magnanimity of our Prince.

The King, they say, may perchance lay hand upon the Companies Stock, because
it is Public Money. But I say, that the King will never do it for that very
Reason. His Majesty has heretofore had great Wars upon his hands, his Treasury
drayned, and his Finances mis-menaged, to the great dissatisfaction of his
People: but in the middle of this Pressing Necessity can any man say, that the
King ever Fingered any of the Public Money: was his Majesty ever known to
Order the Receiver of Consignations to Empty his Coffers in the hands of his
Treasurers? Never had any Creature such a thought. For the Public Treasure is
a kind of Sacred Trust, and it were a sort of Sacrilege to abuse it, Why
should any man suspect the King capable of so profane a violence? And that he
should take That now too, when his Coffers are full, which in his greatest
Wants, he ever made a Conscience to meddle with? But it will be said again,
that the world is uncertain, and all that is in it, and that the greatest
Felicity imaginable cannot warrant it self from Misfortune. This is true, and I
think no man will dispute the Humor and Caprice of Fortune; but let us judge
of things by probability (if not, by somewhat more substantial.) We see, that
most of our Neighbors have their hands full at home; Others are weak, and
those, whom we have found formerly most to be feared, are now well enough
satisfied to be at peace with us. Let us consider on the other hand, the Power
of our Prince, and the unmovable Foundations of that Power. In his Menage of
Affairs of State, his Majesty is Assiduous, and Indefatigable. As to the
Ordering of his Finances, he looks after it Himself, and understands the whole
Business of his Revenue no man better. If we turn our thoughts now toward those
Blessings, which Heaven has showred upon his Royal Person, that Clearness of
Wit, Solidity of Judgment, Vigor of Body, Health, Youth; We have Reason to
believe, (if we may believe any thing in this World) that our good Fortune will
be long-lived, and that God will reward his Royalliety, and Justice, with a
Reign as Lasting as Happy, and not refuse to his Christian Majesty a Grace,
which Heaven has sometime bestowed even upon Pagan Princes, and Conferred upon
the Reign of Augustus. Away then with this Lewd distrust, that Embitters all
our delights, and troubles our Heads, with the Apprehension of Evils which are
never likely to concern us. Let it never be Imagined, that a Prince so Generous
and Just, after the Solemn Establishment of a Company, under the Seal of his
Authority, can ever have the thought to invade the Estates of Private Persons,
putting themselves under his Protection, and by so foul a violence to blast the
Glory of his Unspotted Reputation. In a Word, let not any man think, that his
Majesty's flourishing Condition can ever be Reduced to stand in need of so
hateful an Expedient, and after that, so Unprofitable. For in fine, (to leave
this Opinion nothing to say for it self) I dare affirm, that if the King both
wanted Money, and had a mind to seize it, the Estate of the Company would be yet
secure. For let us look into Holland, and we shall find wherein the wealth of
these Companies Consists. It Is true; they have a world of Merchandise Disposed
of up and down in their Magazines, both in India, and Europe, they have their
Shipping, their Canon, and their necessary Equipages; but for Money, alas, it is
the least part of their Riches; and indeed their Cash compared with the Rest,
is scarce Considerable. Now I pray you tell me, Were it not a pleasant Project
for a King of France that had need of Money, to make seizure of all these
Commodities, and that at Three or Four Hundred Leagues distance, for the great
Part. Put Case, that he were to raise an Army to prevent an Invasion, and
wanted Money upon that Pinch; or to pay off some Mutinous Troops; Were it not a
ready way think ye to send a Matter of a Hundred, or Sixscore Wagons to the
House of the Indian Company for so many Load of Cinamome, and Nutmegs? do
Princes use to pay their Soldiers, with Baggs of Pepper, and Cloves? No! no,
In such Cases, This will never do their Business. In a State of War there must
be Money in Kind, and not That, which makes Money in a time of Peace. Wherefore
since the Estates of this Company, will not lie in Cash, which is the only
Thing, that ^rinces at some times may have Occasion for: It is manifest that
this Apprehension of the Authority-Royall is nothing else, but a Chimera set
up, to oppose the growing Prosperity of this Nation.

There is Another sort of People, yet more unreasonable; But we shall answer
them with the Rest, and they will tell ye, (taking every thing at worst) that we
are not sure to be always at Peace with our Neighbors, and if there should
happen a War, how much the Companies Shipping would be exposed to the Enemy,
for they make a great Question, whether the State of France, would ever concern
themselves so far in the Quarrel, as their Neighbors do upon the like
occasion: For, say they, Traffic being the Chief, and almost the Only
Support of our Neighbors, it is their Interest to maintain their Commerce with
their Lives and Fortunes: Whereas France, that lives upon it self, and has
within it self so sure a Bottom of Strength, and Subsistence, will not think it
self much the Poorer, for the Loss of a Merchants Fleet. So that the Kings
business will be to secure his Frontiers, and look to his Garrisons, without
charging himself with Armado's to protect Us in our Trade. Sure these People do
not heed what they say, for they confute themselves with their own Objections.
Do they confess, that our Neighbors, in a Country, not so good as France, have
yet kept up Their Trading against all Opposers; and do they now Question
whether his Majesty will uphold Us in Ours? What color have they for a
Persuasion, that the stronger should not do That now, which they themselves
acknowledge to have been done already by the Weaker? Not that they make any
doubt of the Kings Power, they will tell ye; but perhaps there will not be so much
Care taken as might be. They are Ignorant then it seems or would be thought so,
of what his Majesty dos every day. I do not speak of his Universal Vigilance
over all his Dominions; but of the special care he takes for the Protecting of
his People in a Foreign Trade. They do not know I perceive, that it costs the
King at least Four Millions a Year, to entertain a Liberty of Ordinary
Commerce, both in the East and Western Ocean. And that it is upon this Account,
that his Majesty is now at the Charge of a Navy Royal, to suppress the
Corsares of Algiers: That it is, for this very End, that he Entertains another
Squadron, to defend our Merchants from the Pirates of Gallicia. They are
strangers doubtless to all these things, without which, it were not possible
they should fall foul upon so gross a Mistake. Is it not known, that his
Majesty does all This, for the support of a very Ordinary Traffic, and can
any man Imagine, that he will do less for the Maintenance of so much a
greater, and more Honorable Commerce? No man can persuade himself, that the
King would refuse the same Countenance and Assistance to the Interest of a
Company, wherein the whole State is Concerned, which at this very day his
Majesty is pleased to allow in Favor of Particular Merchants. We have seen in
times of War, what Peyns has been taken for the Providing of our Frontiers;
and a Battle fought sometimes, only to hinder the taking of a small Town, or
to secure a Pass upon a River. Much more then will his Majesty provide for the
safety of a Fleet, that has the Prayers and Wishes of all France engaged in the
Venture. In a Word; if Interest and Honor be the most Powerful Motives of
Humane Resolutions; and the Two Poles upon which are turned the Affairs of
Princes, as well as of Private Persons, there can be no Question, but the King
will Employ his Power upon all occasions to preserve the Company from danger.
For, that it is his Majesty's Interest so to do, is clear; not only in regard
of his Part in the Stock of the Company; but by reason of the Infinite Number
of Merchandises, and Merchants that this Traffic will draw into the Kingdom,
to the great Advantage of the Revenue of his Majesty's Farms, and Customs. So
that a man may rationally compute, that The Profit of this Commerce, when it
shall be once Established, will be better to the King, then the Two best
Provinces in his Kingdom. Nor is it less manifest that his Majesty is Engaged
in Honor, then in Interest; since without dispute, it is a point of Honor for
a Prince not to suffer his People, to be Crushed in a Design undertaken by his
own Allowance, and Authority. So that to ask, if the King will vigorously
maintain us both in Peace, and War, having so many Considerations to engage him
to it, would be but a kind of senseless, and unmannerly Question. If
Necessity, which many times forces great Actions from mean Persons has been
able to produce those fair Resolutions, which we admire in our Neighbors: How
much more shall the true Love of Glory and Justice operate upon the Souls of
Princes. The first are carried on by a kind of Violence: The other govern
their Actions by Choice and Reason. Those at the best, are but wise enough to
avoid mischieves; but these are the Ordinary Instruments of our greatest Good.
Let us trouble our selves no further then about our Fleets, since they are
under the Care of One of the best Princes of the Universe: and that Miraculous
Power, which subjects all other Powers to it self, and attends him where ever
he goes, shall Influence our new Navigators, and protect them both against
Enemies, and Storms. Neither let it be thought, that the Conquest which we
shall make in his Name, will be less his Majesty's Care, then his other
Possessions: or that he will ever endure to have his Lillies torn up, where
ever they shall have taken Root. There is a Certain invisible Chain that Lincks
together the several Parts of the World, though never so Remote, when they
belong to the same Master: So that it is not possible to shake the One, without
Violence to the Other. It is then upon the Resolution and Power of his Majesty,
that we may Confidently repose for the Issue of this Enterprise, which
beginning upon a time, when this Great Monarch is in Effect, the Arbitrator of
all Europe; when all Princes make it their Business to preserve his
Friendship, and avoid his displeasure. What Question is to be made; but that
the Reputation of his Greatness will carry Good Fortune and Success to our
Colonies?

Join your selves then my Masters, Join your selves my Generous Countrymen in
the pursuit of a Glorious Discovery, which has only been kept from you thus
long, by our past disorders. A Discovery that shall lead you to Advantages not
to be numbered, and which shall yet grow in the Hands of your Posterity. A
Discovery in fine, that shall carry the Fame and Terror of Your Arms into
those Quarters of the World, where the French Nation it self was never heard
of. No more therefore of these Reproachful Jealousies, which are so unworthy
of your ordinary Courage and Virtue: but go on boldly under the Banner of the
Invincible LEWIS, and be assured, that as the Awe, and Reverence, which his
Glorious Name Imprints upon Other Nations, leaves you Nothing to fear from
Strangers: So from Himself, you are certain to receive all the Comforts of his
Goodness, Munificence and Protection.

Articles, and Conditions, Whereupon the Trading Merchants of this Kingdom do
most humbly beseech his Majesty to grant them his Declaration, and the Graces
therein contained, for the Establishment of a Company for the Commerce of the
East Indies.
PARIS. 1664.
I.
Allowed.
FIrst, that his Majesty's Subjects of what Quality or Condition soever shall be
Taken into the Company for what Sums they please, without Loss either of
Nobility, or Privilege, his Majesty granting them in that Particular his Royal
Dispensation: Provided, that under a Thousand Livres no Share shall be
Admitted: nor any Augmentations, under Five Hundred; for the Ease of Accounts,
Divisions, and Sales of Actions; A Third Part whereof shall be paid down
presently, and go to the Furnishing of the First Expedition; and the Two other
Thirds within Two years after, by equal Portions, under pain of losing what is
already Advanced, to any man that shall fail of paying in his full proportion
within the said time: the money so forfeited remaining to the Benefit, and Stock
of the Company.

II.
Allowed. Only putting in Twenty Thousand Livres in stead of Ten.
That all Strangers (be they the Subjects of what Prince or State soever) shall
have free Admittance into the said Company; and such of them as shall have Ten
Thousand Livres in the Stock, shall be reputed as Natives without any further
need of Naturalizing; by which means their Kindred though Strangers too, shall
have a right of Inheritance to what Estates they shall be possessed of in this
Kingdom.

III.
Allowed.
That no Part or Portion belonging to any Particulars in the said Company of
what Nation soever, shall be either Seized by the King, or Confiscated to his
Profit; even although they be the Subjects of some Prince or State in open
Hostility against his Majesty.

IV.
Allowed.
That the Directors of the said Company shall not be molested, either in their
Persons, or Estates, for or concerning the Affairs of the said Company: nor
shall the Estate of the said Company be liable either to be made over or Seized
upon the Account of any debt due to his Majesty from any of the Particular
Members thereof.

V.
Allowed.
That such Officers as shall have 20000 Livres in the said Company shall be
dispensed their Residence: to which otherwise they are obliged by his Majesty's
Declaration of December last, at the Treasury-Offices, and other ^laces of
their Establishment: enjoying all their Rights, Allowances and Fees, as if they
were Present.

VI.
Allowed. Putting 8000 Livres in the First Place and 20000 in the Second.
That all such as shall have to the sum of 6000 Livres in the said Company,
shall enjoy the Privilege of Burgers in the Towns where they Live; unless
Paris, Bourdeaux, and Bayonne: in which Places they shall not acquire their
Freedom, unless they have the Interest of at least Ten Thousand Livres in the
said Company.

VII.
Allowed. Upon Condition that all those that have a mind to engage in the said
Company shall declare themselves, and subscribe at the first Assembly; and at
the same time choose 12 Syadicks to take care of what is to be done in order to
the settlement of the Company till the Directors shall be nominated.
That all such as shall be willing to enter into the said Company, shall be
obliged to declare themselves within Six Months to Commence from the Reading,
and Registring of the Declaration in the Parliament of Paris: after which time
no more shall be admitted. And They that shall have furnished their Parts, and
declared themselves accordingly, shall have liberty within Three Months after
the Registring of the said Declaration to Nominate and Establish one Moiety of
the Directors of Paris for the Chamber General of the said Company, and the
Rest shall be named within the aforesaid Term of Six Months.

VIII.
Allowed.
That there shall be established a Chamber of Direction-General of the Affairs
of the said Company in the Town of Paris only, to consist of One and Twenty
Directors, and no more: Twelve whereof to be of Paris, and the other Nine, of
the Provinces; to be Named and Chosen: That is, the Twelve, by the Persons
Concerned in the Town of Paris, and the other Nine by the Interessed Persons in
the said Provinces, every one in his Division; for every Town or Province shall
have a Right of Nomination, which shall be Ordered by the Chamber of
Direction-General after the settlement of it, in proportion of the Stock that
every Town shall have brought into the said Company, or otherwise, as shall be
thought Convenient; and for the future, the Elections shall be always made
after this manner.

IX.
Allowed.
In the mean while, till the said Company shall be Established as aforesaid, for
the first time, the said Nine Directors for the Provinces shall be chosen, and
named by the Interessed Parties in the said Towns and Provinces Respectively;
(but Provided, that it may not be drawn into Consequence for the time to come)
That is to say, One from each of the Towns of Rouen, Nantes, St. Malo,
Rochelle, Bourdeaux, Marseilles, Tours, Lions, and Dunkerque, or such other
Towns of the Kingdom, as shall have the most Considerable Interest in the
Company. And in case, that any of the said Towns shall be found without some
Interessed Person in it, there shall be Two named out of such other Town, as
shall be Chosen by the Six Directors named for Paris: And it shall be lawful
for the Parties Interessed in each of the said Towns respectively, to name
their Caissier for the Receiving of their Moneys, and Remitting them to the
Cassier of the Town of Paris; who shall be named for the first time by the said
Six Directors of Paris, and so to continue till the Chambers General shall be
Established.

X.
Allowed.
That none shall be Capable of being Directors, but Merchants Trading, and
without Offices, except such of the Kings Secretaries as have dealt formerly in
Commerce: Only it shall be lawful to admit Two Burgers into the number of the
Directors, although they have never meddled with Traffic: Provided, that they
be Persons that have no Offices, and that no more be taken into the said
Chamber upon any ground whatsoever; the Company being perpetually to consist at
the least of Three Fourths of Negotiating Merchants, and with out Offices:
Neither shall any man have a Vote in the Election of the Directors, unless he
has at least Ten thousands Livres in the Company: Nor be chosen a Director for
Paris without Twenty thousand Livres at least; nor for the Provinces under Ten
thousand Livres; all in the Interest of the said Company.

XI.
Allowed.
That it shall be lawful for the Chamber of Direction General to constitute
Chambers of Particular Direction, in such Numbers and Places as they shall
find most agreeable to the Interest and Benefit of the said Company; and
likewise to Regulate the Number of the Directers of the said Particular
Chambers.

XII.
Allowed.
That all the Accounts of the Chambers of Direction particular of the Provinces,
shall be sent from Six months to Six Months, to the Chamber of Direction
General at Paris; where the Accompt-Books shall be Viewed, Examined, and
Stated, and the Profits afterward divided by the said Chamber of Direction
General, as they shall think meet.

XIII.
Allowed.
That the said Chambers of Direction General, and Particular, shall name such
Officers as shall be found necessary for keeping the Cash, Books, and Papers of
Accounts, for Buying and Selling; for taking Care of all Provisions, and
Equipage; paying of Wages, and other ordinary Expenses every man in his Proper
place.

XIV.
Allowed.
That the First Directors shall continue in Power for the First Seven Years,
after which time there shall be Two Changed every Year at Paris, and One in the
Other Chambers; and the First, Second, Third, Fourth, and Fifth Changes of
those that go out, shall be made by Lot: And in Case of Death of any of the
Directors, within the First Seven Years, the other Directors shall have Power
to fill that Vacancy with a new Choice; and it shall be permitted to Choose the
same Director again, after six Years Respite from the Execution of his Office:
Nor shall it be lawful for Father and Son, or Son in Law; nor for Brothers,
and Brothers in Law to be Directors at the same time; and his Majesty shall be
further supplicated to Confer upon the said Directors Certain Titles of Honor,
and Privileges, that may descend to their Posterity.

XV.
Allowed.
That the Directors of the said Chambers General and Particular, shall Reside
by Turns, each man his Month, to begin with the Antientest, in each of them
severally.

XVI.
Allowed.
That the said Chamber of General Direction shall be Empowred to make Statutes,
and Rules for the Benefit and Advantage of the said Company, which in Case of
need shall be most humbly presented to his Majesty for the obteyning of his
Royal Confirmation.

XVII.
Allowed.
That the said Chamber shall make a General Account every Six Years, of the
Estate of the said Company, and no man shall be suffered to withdraw himself
unless by the Sale of his Action to some one or other of the said Company, who
shall always uphold and maintain the same Right, so that the Stock be not
diminished.

XVIII.
Allowed for Fifty Years.
That his Majesty will Grant to the said Company (to the Exclusion of all other
his Subjects) the Sole Power and Faculty of Traffic and Navigation from the
Cape of good Hope throughout all India, and the Eastern Seas: Nay even from the
Straight of Magellan, and the Maire throughout the Southern Seas, The Exporting
of Gold and Silver being a Thing never publicly permitted in any State, and
yet at present acknowledged to be necessary. It shall be allowed, by a
particular Permission, to remain in the Hands of the Directors of the said
Company.
for the Term of Fifty Years, to begin from the setting out of the First
Shipping from this Kingdom; during which time his Majesty shall be desired
expressly to inhibite all other Persons from entering upon the said Voyage, and
Commerce; under p^yn of Forfeiting all their Vessels, Arms, Munitions, and
Merchandise, to be applied to the Profit of the said Company. To which Company
his Majesty shall grant License to send Gold and Silver as much as shall be
thought needful, both into the Isle of Magdagascar; and the East Indies, and
other Places of the said Commerce, all Laws and Ordinances to the Contrary
notwithstanding.

XIX.
Allowed.
That his Majesty shall be likewise Requested to grant unto the said Company,
the Propriety, and Lordship of all those Lands, Places and Isles, which they
shall either gain from the Enemies of his Majesty, or otherwise make themselves
Masters of, whether as Abandoned, uninhabited, or in the possession of
Barbarians

XX.
Allowed.
That his Majesty shall comprehend in the said Concession, the Propriety of the
Isle of Madagascar, or Saint Laurence, with the Neighboring Islands, Forts,
Habitations and Colonies belonging unto any of his Subjects: Concerning which,
his Majesty shall be most humbly desired to permit the Company to come to a
fair Treaty, with those who may have formerly obtained the Grant thereof from
his Majesty; or if not, that Commissioners may be appointed for the Examination
of the Interest of all Parties therein concerned, for the Indemnisication of
the Proprietors, that the Company may quietly enjoy the same.

XXI.
Allowed.
That the Propriety of the said Isles and things belonging to the said Company,
may remain unto them after the Expiration of the Grant, to dispose of according
to their own pleasure, and as their proper Inheritance.

XXII.
Allowed: Even to all Privileges of Justic^ and Admiralty in matters
concerning the Sea Affairs throughout the whole extent of the said Countries.
That his Majesty shall vouchsafe to Give and Grant to the said Company, over
and above the Jurisdictions annexed to the Seignory and Propriety heretofore
Granted, for the said Isle of Madagascar and others round about it, full Power
and Authority to Establish Judges for the Exercise of Sovereign Justice,
throughout the whole Extent of the said Countries, and such other as they shall
subject to the Obedience of his Majesty; even over the French themselves who
shall there inhabit; Provided, always, that the said Company shall name to
his Majesty the Persons whom they shall choose for the Exercise of the said
Sovereign Justice, who shall swear Allegiance to his Majesty; and Execute
Justice, and Issue out all their Orders and Decrees in his Majesty's Name. To
which effect, his Majesty (if he pleases) shall Empower and Authorize them by
Patent or Commission under his Great Seal.

XXIII.
Allowed.
That for the Execution of Decrees, and for all Acts where his Majesty's Seal
shall be Necessary, there shall be one Established, and put into the hands of
him that shall preside over the said Sovereign Justice.

XXIV.
Allowed.
That the Officers constituted for the said Sovereign Justice shall be
Authorized to Constitute likewise such a number of Subordinate Officers, and in
such places as they shall think meet, to be by them supplied with Commissions
under the Name and Seal of his Majesty.

XXV.
Allowed.
That for Military Command, the said Company shall name to his Majesty a
Governour-General of the Country, and of such other Countries as shall be
subdued; whom his Majesty shall be humbly desired to Authorize with a
Commission and to receive his Oath of Fidelity. And in Case that the said
Company shall not be well satisfied with his Conduct, that they may be at
Liberty to name some other, to be likewise Empowered by his Majesty.

XXVI.
Allowed.
That his Majesty will be pleased to grant to the said Company the Power and
Authority of Settling Garrisons in all the Places beforementioned, and in such
other as shall be Conquered or Built; consisting of what Numbers the Company
shall think necessary: and therein to put Arms, Canon, and Ammunition; and to
cast Guns and other Arms in what place soever, and in what Quantity soever they
shall think needful; with his Majesty's Arms Imprinted upon them, and
underneath Them, the Arms of the said Company; which shall be Authorized to
provide for the safety of the said places as by them shall be thought
Expedient. The Officers and Commanders of the said places to be totally
dependent, and put in or out at the pleasure of the said Company; Provided
always, that they shall all swear Allegiance to the King, and after that,
take a Particular Oath to the said Company in Consideration of Trafsique and
Commerce.

XXVII.
Allowed.
That his Majesty shall vouchsafe to Authorize the said Company to send
Ambassadors in his Majesty's name to the Kings of India, and to Treat with
them, either upon Peace, or Truce, or even to Declare War with them, and to do
all other Acts which shall be deemed by the Company to be for the Advantage of
the said Commerce.

XXVIII.
Allowed.
That the Directors of the Chamber-General and Particular shall keep
Register-Books of all the Wages and Salaries, which they shall give to their
Officers, Servants, Clerks, Workmen, Soldiers and others, which Books shall
be good Evidence in Court, and serve for the Decision of Questions upon any
demand or pretension against the said Company.

XXIX.
Allowed.
That of all differences that shall arise upon what cause soever concerning the
said Company, betwixt Two or more Directors, or Interessed Persons, and any one
Particular, touching the Affairs of the said Company, the Circumstances and
Dependences shall be judged and determined by the Consulary Justice to the
exclusion of all others, whereof the Sentences and Judgments shall be executed
Sovereignly and without Appeal, as far as 1500. Livres; and in Cases of a
higher concern, the Judgments and Sentences shall be executed notwithstanding
all Oppositions and Appeals whatsoever: The Appeal to be brought before the
Ordinary Judges that are Properly to take Cognizance of the matter: to which
effect his Majesty shall be desired to Establish the Consulary Justice before
spoken of, in the Town where it is not; and wheresoever else his Majesty shall
find it necessary.

XXX.
Allowed.
That all Criminal matters wherein any of the said Company shall be a Party,
whether as Plaintiff or Defendent, shall be determined by the Ordinary Judges,
provided always that for no Cause or Pretext whatsoever, the Criminal shall
ever carry along with it the Civil; which shall be still judged as is
aforesaid.

XXXI.
Allowed.
That his Majesty shall have the goodness to promise to the said Company
Protection and Defense against all Opposers, and by force of Arms, to maintain
them upon all occasions in the entire freedom of their Commerce and
Navigation, and see them Repaired in case of any Injuries or Affronts offered
them. And in Case further of any design against the said Company, to appoint
them such Convoyes both Forward and Backward, at his proper Charge and Expense,
as may be sufficient to secure the Company not only over all the Coasts of
Europe and Africa, but even as far as India it self.

XXXII.
Allowed.
That his Majesty shall be pleased to Advance at present out of his own Cossers,
a Fifth Part of the whole expense for the Three First Expeditions, so that so
soon as ever the Person Authorized for the receiving of the monyes shall be
named by the Company, his Majesty shall cause to be delivered into his hand
Three Hundred thousand Livres, and upon his receiving of Four Hundred Thousand
Livres from the Persons Engaged, his Majesty shall cause to be delivered Three
hundred thousand Livres more, and so forward to Three Fifths, for the first
Year, which comes to one Fifth upon the whole; (his Majesty furnishing nothing
at all for the Two following years) by virtue of which Advance his Majesty will
give a Foundation to the Establishment of the said Company, which will be of so
great Advantage to the State.

XXXIII.
Allowed. Provided that the whole Estate of the said Company shall be valued
bona side by the Chamber of Direction General.
That his Majesty shall be Graciously pleased to L^nd the said sum to the said
Company, without Interest; and even without any Participation in the said
Adventure, his Majesty contenting himself with the Companies Obligation of
paying back the said sum without Interest at the end of Ten Years, to reckon
from the day whereupon the said Company shall have perfected their First
Capital Stock; and in case that at the end of the said Ten Year, it should
appear by a General Account then to be made, that the said Company had lost of
their Capital, that the whole damage shall fall upon That sum which his
Majesty shall have advanced. And his said Majesty shall be most humbly desired
upon valuation of the Estate of the Company (to see whether they have gained or
lost) not to reckon upon Immovables, Fortifications, Cannon and Ammunitions;
and to content himself with such account as shall be stated by the Company,
without bringing them to any further reckoning before the Chamber of Accounts,
or elsewhere.

XXXIV.
Allowed, as to the Exemption of all Duties; the valuation of commodities
unknown, by the Chamber-Generall, and the Regulation of the Rights upon them at
three per Cent. And in regard that the discharge of one half of the duties of
entry cannot be granted in manner as is desired, for the Reasons which have
already appeared upon the debate there shall be allowed instead thereof
acertain sum upon the return of each Vessel coming from the Indies, according
to the Regulation that shall be made thereupon.
That the Merchandises that shall come from the Indies and be consumed in
France; shall pay but half the duties charged upon them by his Majesty's Rates,
for his Rights of the Five Gross Farms; which Moiety shall be regulated at so
much per Cent; And for such Commodities as shall be sent into Foreign
Countries, or Countries exempt from Custom, whether by Sea or Land, they shall
pay no duties at all, either In, or Out: and shall be deposited in their
Storehouses of the Customs and Harbors of the Places where they Arrive; where
there are any such; and where there are none, they shall be Marked with Lead,
and laid up, till they are to be taken away, at which places an account of them
shall be given to the persons Interessed, or to the Clark of the said Five
Gross Farms signed by one of the Directors of the said Company: And upon their
removal elsewhere there shall be an Obligation of bringing back within a Certain
time a Receipt with Proof that they are Arrived: And as to Merchandises
unknown, and not as yet Rated, they shall pay Three per Cent. according to the
valuation that shall be made of them by the Chamber-General of the said Company.

XXXV.
Allowed.
That Wood, and other Necessaries for building of the Ships of the said Company
shall be Exempt from all duties of Entry; The Vessels and Merchandises free
from the Duties the of Admiralty and Wood; and the Munitions of War, Victuals,
and other things necessary for Victuallings and Embarquings requisite for the
said Company, shall be free from all Rights of In and Out, during the Term of
the present Privilege.

XXXVI.
Allowed.
That his Majesty shall order the furnishing of the said Company for their
Provisions and Equipages with the Quantity of a Hundred Measures of Salt, or
what other number the said Company shall have occasion for, in the Town of
Haure de Grace, by the Hand of the Clerk of the Store of that Town, and at the
Merchants Price: provided always, that the Company shall deal fairly in the
business, without abusing the Grant.

XXXVII*
Allowed.
That his Majesty shall permit the said Company to settle Ecclesiastics in the
said Isles of Madagascar, and other places where they shall plant themselves,
in such Number and of such Quality as the Company shall judge Convenient.

XXXVIII*
Allowed.
That his Majesty shall be most humbly desired not to grant any Letters of
Protection, Respit, Evocation, or Delay, to any that shall have bought the
Goods of the said Company, or Sold any thing to their Use and Service, that so
the Company may be always in Condition to compel their Debtors to make just
payment, according to the Form and Tenor of their Obligations.

XXXIX.
Allowed.
That his Majesty shall be most humbly desired, to vouch-safe that the Sieurs
Pocquelin Pere, Maillet Pere, Ie Brun, de Faverolles, Cadeau, Samson, Simonet,
Jabac, and Scot, Merchants; may present these Articles, and receive his
pleasure thereupon: This Establishment being of infinite Advantage both to his
Majesty's Kingdom, and all his Subjects, who shall redouble their Vows and
Prayers for the Long continuance of his Majesty's health.

XL.
Allowed.
That his Majesty be most humbly desired, by the Deputies abovenamed, to
vouchsafe, that in case any thing shall appear to be omitted in these present
Articles they may be allowed to deliver Memorialls of them, to what persons he
shall be pleased to appoint to make report thereof to his Majesty, and to be
made use of in his Declaration which shall be Issued in Consequence of this
present Petition.

Done and Resolved at the Assembly held by his Majesty's Gracious Permission at
the House of Monsieur Faverolles, Merchant at Paris, Tuesday May 26. 1664.
Examined and Concluded in Our Council, the last day of May 1664. Signed LOVIS
and underneath DE LYONNE.

FINIS.

