A SERMON Preached by the Late Eminent Mr. Steph. Charnock ON 2 COR. V. XIX.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Milbourn, for J. K. and are to be Sold by Langley
Curtis, in Goat-Court, on Ludgate Hill, 1680.

A SERMON Preached on 2 Cor. 5.19 God was in Christ, reconciling the World unto
Himself.
The Doctrine from these Words, was this; That God the Father, is the Chief
Author of the whole Undertaking and effecting our Reconciliation by Christ.
IT IS fit we should join Issue with God, in being Reconciled to him: We should
comply with God, in this great Ordinance. The Consideration of this Doctrine,
should work Relenting and Believing: Let therefore, the Design of God prevail
with us. In this alone we shall find Expiation of our Sins, the Grace of God,
Peace of Conscience: In a word, Whatever God (as Reconciled) can Give, or
Christ (as Reconciling) can Purchase. It Is tender Mercy, Bowels of Mercy,
whereby the Dayspring from on High has visited us. When we lay wallowing in a
Miry Sink, ready to be crush't by God's Righteous Hand, then he pitied us. So
that, we shall be the more dis-ingenuous, if we refuse this Amity: The Dignity
of the Donor, renders the Gift more valuable, than it may be in it self. The
Present of a Prince is more prized, than when it is bestowed by an ordinary
Person. The Gift of Christ, the Offer of Peace by him is Incomprehensible in it
self; and receives a Value from that God that has Prepared, and Offered it.

What Pleasure can any Man taste in Earthly Comforts, though he has a
Confluence of all manner of Delight, if he has no Share in a Reconciled God,
by a Reconciling Mediator? While he forces that God that is the Author of this
Peace, to stand over him, with a drawn Sword, pointed at his Breast?

Corn, Wine, and Oil, and whatsoever comes within the Compass of the delightful
Things of this World, are little in comparison of this Peace, and the Light of
God's Countenance. And,

1. Consider, something must be done on our Parts, something there is Incumbent
upon us: If all Men were Reconciled without Conditions, on their Part, the
Apostle might have held his Peace, and not added the other Clause; We pray you,
be ye Reconciled unto God. Then there would be no need of that Inference. But
in the Text, he speaks of a Fundamental Reconciliation; in This, of the Actual.
If all Men had been Reconciled to God, it would not have been Sense: For then
he would say, Ye are Reconciled; therefore, be Reconciled. It had been an
Exhortation to do that, which was already done to their Hands. If all Men are
Actually Reconciled, How come any to miss the Fruits of it? Why is it not
applied to All? Because all that are Called, do not comply with that Call; they
answer not God's Commands and Entreaties. The Purchase, and the Application of
it, are distinct. The Purchase is made by Christ alone, on the Cross, without
any Qualification in the Creature: But the Application is not wrought without
something in the Creature, concurring with it, though that also be wrought by
the Spirit of God. God ordained Peace for us; but yet there is some Work to be
wrought in us: The one is Grace in the Spring; the other is Grace in the
Vessel: The one is the Act of God in Christ; the other is the Act of God by the
Spirit. Though the Fire burns, if we would warm our selves, we must not run
from it, but approach to it. Something must be done by us.

2. This Qualification is Faith. As Infinite Grace in God qualified him, (if I
may use that Expression) for the effecting it; so Faith in us qualifies us for
the Enjoying it. Though Christ be the Purchaser, yet Faith is the Testator in
it, Romans 5.1.

This Inestimable Mercy is not conferred, but on Men that affect, value, and
consent to it. We must lay our Hands on the Head of this Sacrifice, and own him
to be ours. This is the Band that unites us to Christ the Purchaser, by Him to
God the Author of this Reconciliation. This gives us a Right to this Peace; and
will, at last, give us the Comfort of it.

3. The Order of Conveyance, is first our Acceptance of Christ, then of God in
and through Christ: We must first comply with the Means, before we attain the
End. Our Nearness to God, was purchased by the Blood of Christ, and is Actually
conferred by our Union with Christ. Ephesians. 2.13. But now, in Christ Jesus, ye
that were sometime afar off, are made nigh by the Blood of Christ. They were
made nigh by the Blood of Christ; but it was Actually conferred by their being
in Christ. Faith has Recourse first to the Atonement made by the Blood of
Christ, and by that Blood unto God. Romans 3.25. Whom God has set sorth to be a
Propitiation; but how? Through Faith in his Blood. This Blood alone quenches
the Consuming Fire of God's Wrath. By Christ we are Reconciled, by Him alone we
receive the Atonement, Romans 5.11. As God was in Christ Reconciling, so we must
be in Christ Accepting this Reconciliation. You are Christ's, and Christ is
God's. In the Apostle's Order, we must first be Christ's by our Acceptance of
him, as Christ was God's by his Calling and Commissioning him. As God goes out
to us by Him, our return must be by Him to God. He paid our Debts, made an end
of Sin, and removed the Wrath we Merited. God is our Judge, Christ is our
Mediator: By this Mediator we must be Conducted to our Judge. We have
offended the Lawmakers; we must first go to him, who is the Repairer of the
Honor of the Law. We must take the Redemption of Christ along with us, his
pacifying Blood, and represent it to God; by whose Authority we were under
Wrath. This is that, that upholds us before God. If we are not in Christ, as
satisfying, we shall still be as Stubble before the Consuming Fire. Think not
of standing sure by Absolute Mercy. Mercy is through Christ only: It breaths in
no other Air. We must first take hold of the Strength of God, before we can
make Peace with him: We must take hold of Christ, who is the Power, as well as
the Wisdom of God. There is a Direction how we must act, By taking hold; and
the End, That we may be at Peace; and the Assurance in that Method, And he
shall obtain Peace with me, Isa. 27.5.

To use some Motives.

First, There is the highest Encouragement, and Ground for Acceptance: There Is
no room for any hard Thoughts of God, after so signal a Discovery of himself.
He is not a God of unquenchable Wrath, but willing that his Justice should be
Appeased. He has taken all the Courses that were possible for Infinite Wisdom
to invent, for Infinite Power to effect, for Infinite Love to propose. What
greater Security can we have for our Blessing, than that he has made his Son a
Curse, that we might be Blessed by him? How should so much Love make us change
any unworthy Opinions of God, that we harbor in our Breasts. If the Father
has Contrived, the Son has Effected, the Spirit stands ready to Apply it to
every Believer: The Refusal of it, puts a Scorn upon all.

As soon as Adam sinned, the same Day God applies the Plaster of a Redeemer:
Not a Day did slip, for ought we know, not an Hour, before he made it known to
him. His Heart was in Travel, and he longed to be Delivered of this Gracious
Promise of a Mediator. He armed him with this Cordial, before he subjected him
to those standing Miseries. What Heart he had then, the same he has still. His
Kindness made him desirous to Publish this Promise; and, Can his Truth be less
zealous to perform it? The same Kindness that moved him to Assure it, he has
still to Effect it: He is still willing to apply it to every one that seeks it,
through his Son. The Wrath that we were under, is overcome by his Love,
through the Mediation of his Son; who has honored him more, than Sin
dishonored him.

By our Accepting of this, we Glorify God; and Honor him as much by our
Faith, as we have Dishonored him by our Sin. Thereby we own that Satisfaction,
that was as grateful to him, as Sin is Hateful. As he honored himself by the
Death of his Son, so he does Christ by giving forth the Fruits of that Death
also. He Delights in honoring Christ, and seeing us honor him. It
contributes to God's Delight, when we approach with Faith in his Blood. If he
made this Provision, contrived this Expiatory Offering before the World was
made, Will he not also Communicate it? Can there be a greater Motive to
overcome the Fears of Rebels, extinguish the Rebellion, hasten our Approach,
and quicken our Confidence?

Secondly, The Terms on which it is offered, are Just and Reasonable: Nothing
can be objected against the Conditions required. Can any Malefactor expect a
Peace with Arms in his Hand? Is it not a fit Condition, that we should Justify
God, since we are guilty Offenders? Can any thing less be required, than to
cast away our Weapons, to bewail our Crime, to receive his Son as our
Mediator, to serve him in Newness of Life? All which are desirable
Privileges. 'Twas in his Power to appoint what Terms he pleased, because he
was a free Benefactor; What could he appoint less, than Believing and Receiving
this Reconciliation? It is impossible we should receive any Benefit, without
it. It Is not fit it should be conferred upon us, except we ask it. There Is no
reason any should enjoy a Benefit, that does not think it to be so. All the
Self-Love of Men, could not have framed any reasonable Terms: They would have
thought of Rivers of Oil, and a Thousand of Rams, impossible things to Appease
God. But he commands us to lie humbly at his Feet, to reach out our Hands to
receive the Assurance he gives us.

What can be more easy than this? If Faith be difficult, it is not in regard
of it self; but from our Natural Enmity against God, and the Pride of our own
Wills. Faith is hard only, as the Law is weak through the Flesh. But nothing
could be more reasonable, nothing more easy in it self.

Ingenuous Amazement at this unexpected Kindness, should make us run more
swiftly to Embrace God, than ever we ran from him. We should subscribe to the
Articles, as God strives and presses us in the Method he has enjoined.

Thirdly, There is an absolute Necessity of this Compliance for our Happiness.
If you have not a Peace of God's Ordaining, never look for One of your own
Inventing. There can be no Fellowship with God, without it: And therefore, we
cannot be Happy, because we cannot Enjoy him, wherein all our Felicity does
consist.

Guilt and Purity cannot Converse together: What Society can Stubble have with
Fire, but to its own Destruction. We cannot see God's Face without it; and if a
Sight of God's Face be wanting, Felicity is at a distance. The greatest part of
Evil remains, though there be no positive Evil. How can Two walk together,
except they be agreed? What Intercourse can there be between a Guilty Rebel,
and a Frowning Judge? a Sinful Creature, and a Provoked God? When he hides his
Face, who can behold him? Job 34.29. But when an Agreement is made, there are
Mutual Endearments. We are Enemies to God by Birth; He is an Enemy to us by his
Law: The Enmity will remain on God's Part, if it remain on ours.

Strike up therefore a Treaty with God, since there is a Necessity for it, and
you cannot be Happy without it. Shall not God's Love melt us, and our own
Necessities move us?

Fourthly, Wrath is unavoidable, without our Compliance with God. If we will
not enter into these Terms of Reconciliation, the Heart of God, which before
was incensed by Sin, cannot but rise higher in Indignation. If we are resolved
to resist it, abused Love will be kindled into the hottest Wrath.

When Man, after his Creation, grew Perfidious unto God, then there rose a War
between them, which can be ended only by Him that has put an end to Sin. We
must all have endured, what Christ suffered, had he not stood in our stead: And
those that refuse the Grace proffered them, by the Great God must endure the
same for ever. If we do not receive him as a Friend, we cannot avoid him as an
Enemy. His Eye will behold us, his Hand will pass through the thickest Covering
of Darkness. Where he is not received as the Author of Reconciliation in his
own way, he will be the Author of Judgment in his own way. If the Satisfaction
to his Justice that he has provided, be slighted, then his Justice will be
satisfied on our own Persons. If we deny him the Honor of the Sufferings of
Christ, he will vindicate it by the Sufferings of our selves. His Law is in
full Force against us, and God is obliged to inflict Death upon the Sinners:
The Law is on Record. The Gospel also will be the Author of Damnation, to every
one that believes not. There Is no Discovery out of Christ, but of Wrath
prepared against the Day of Wrath, Romans 2.5. The Day wherein God is
unreconciled to his Enemies, is called not only the Day of Wrath; but, Wrath
against the Day of Wrath. His Feet will be as Pillars of Fire, to consume those
that refuse his Peace, Revel. 10.1.

Consider, then, that we are sunk under Infinite Guilt, and cannot rise up
without an Almighty Hand. We are drowned in an Universal Filth, and cannot be
cleans'd without an Infinite Purity. Sin is strong in its Accusations; our
Righteousness is imperfect to effect a Compensation for the Wrongs we have
done; our Duties are bespotted, and not fitted for a pure Eye. What Wrath is
due to all? There is but one way of Escaping, but one City of Refuge, to escape
the Edge of the Avenging Sword: Divine Justice will seize on all that are
without this Shelter. It will touch none that are under Christ's Wing; but will
be like a Consuming Fire to every thing else. One Spark of his Wrath, is enough
to consume Stubble: Hasten therefore to Accept of what God Proposes, lest Death
put a Period to any further Treaty.

Fifthly, All other ways of Reconciliation are Insufficient: To pretend to any
other way, is an Injury to the Divine Wisdom; as though his Contrivance were
not sufficient for his Creatures Restoration. Divine Mercy will not wrong any
of his Attributes, nor dishonor Christ. But if we do not receive this, we deny
Christ, the Efficacy of his Priesthood. Men are naturally studious of making
God a Compensation for their Wrongs, and a Satisfaction of their own coining:
They are unwilling to acquiesce in the Will and Wisdom of God.

Those Two great Things, that God advances by his Grace, Men oppose; his
Wisdom, by their Pride and Reason; his Authority, by the Perverseness of their
Wills. But, Do we need Reconciliation, or do we not? If we need it not, How
came we to be Friends to God, who were born Enemies? If we need, is it not
safest to enter into those Terms, that God has proposed, wherewith he is
satisfied? rather than stand to failing, and at the best, but uncertain
Methods; but are indeed absolutely false and insufficient. The safest way only,
is the Choice of wise Men. If other ways would do, it is the greatest Wisdom
to take that Course that God has provided; whose Wisdom sees further into its
Strength and Sufficiency, than any Creatures can.

Let us not then be such Fools, to refuse the Gospel-Method, except we can meet
with any thing that can be a sufficient Plea. Had all the Angels in Heaven, and
all the Men on Earth contrived another Way, it would have been ineffectual. God
never was in them, reconciling the World to himself. This one Mediator that
he has appointed, has done that, which neither Men on Earth, nor Saints and
Angels in Heaven, could do by their joint Intercessions. We can have no
Confidence in our Humiliations, Moral Righteousness, Services, and Duties: God
never was in them, as Reconciling. All that we can do by those, will be but
Enmity to God; whatever false Colors they are daubed withal, we cannot please
God without Faith. Where Righteousness is at the highest Elevation, it is but a
Creature; therefore, it is not a fit Object of Trust.

Though Adam might have ventured his Natural Righteousness as a Plea; yet
because it might have failed, it was not a fit Object of Trust. But since the
Fall of Adam, all Pleas of Corrupt Righteousness are insufficient in the Court
of Heaven.

Absolute Mercy, without Faith in Christ, offered by a God as a Reconciler,
cannot save us. As God could not (after the Sanction of his Law, in regard of
his Truth) pardon the Violation of it, without Satisfaction: So since he has
settled this way of Reconciliation by Faith, in the Blood of Christ, he cannot
(on the same score of his Truth) save any in a way of Absolute Mercy;
especially, those that refuse the Method that his Mercy has appointed. And as
it is against his Truth and Justice; so it is against the Honor of his Son:
For if he be at Peace with one by Absolute Mercy, Why could he not as well with
others, in the same manner? And then, What need is there of the Sufferings of
his only Son, to make up the Breach? If any thing else be chosen by any besides
this, God may say to such at the Day of Judgment, Go to your Reconcilers, that
you have chosen, and see whether they will make Peace for you, or no; as he did
to the Israelites, Judge. 10.14. Go, and cry to the Gods that ye have chosen;
let them deliver you in the Time of your Tribulation. A Dreadful, but a Just
Speech of the Eternal God!

Sixthly, God seeks it at our Hands, and is willing to receive us. God was not
only in Christ, reconciling the World; but he is in his Ambassadors, entreating
us; as though God did beseech you by Us.

This is all the Tenor of his Proclamation, Be ye Reconciled. If he had not
desired it, he would not have spent his Thoughts about it, nor been at any
Expense to effect it. He was not bound to it: He might have left us to sink
into the Depth of Misery, that we had merited; without exposing his Son to
Death, which we had not deserved. We had Contracted a Necessity of Death; our
Surety was no more bound to seek us out, nor God to make to Adam a Promise of
Redemption, than he was to make any of his Creatures. He might have raised a
new World, and filled it with new Inhabitants. It must needs be a thing of
vast Concernment, for which God seeks to us, and speaks to us in his Gospel;
who is infinitely more Glorious, than we are Vile. God did us not the least
VVrong, though he has born many of our Affronts. It is as easy for him to
breath us into Hell, as to breath out one kind Invitation. He has no more need
of our Friendship, than he fears our Enmity. He is no more benefited by us,
than the Sun by darting its Beams on a Grain of Sand.

That Soul surely is not sensible of the Misery that the War with God has
sunk him into, that refuses to receive Peace that he so tenderly and
importunately offers: Nor can he, without unconceivable Shame, look God in the
Face, after so notorious a Rejecting of it. He seeks it to Day; but, perhaps,
he will not to Morrow: For there is a Day, when he will pour out his Wrath on
the unbelieving World.

Now, that he is a great way off, his Thunder is at a distance, he sends us as
Ambassadors of Peace: He shuts out none, that shut not out themselves. Besides,
he is willing to receive us into favor; more willing to embrace us, than we to
receive him.

The Eternal Motions in his Heart, gave Birth to this gracious Design; and
they have the same force still: He will never forget them. They are the
Bublings of his own Heart; and will be alike forcible for the Reception of us,
as they were to give a Commission to Christ for us.

Oh, that every one of us were as willing to be at Peace with God, as God is to
be at Peace with us! He seeks to us; it is an Imitation of God, to seek to him.

That Is the First Branch of the EXHORTATION.

II. EXHORTATION.
BE at Enmity with Sin. God was in Christ reconciling Sinners, not Sin: He sent
his Son to reconcile Enemies, not their Enmity. Fire and Water can sooner
agree, than God and Sin; Peace with God, and Peace with Iniquity. A Traitor
may be reconciled to his Prince; but the Treason is still as hateful as before.

Indeed, this Enmity with Sin, is the best Sign of our Actual Reconciliation;
when we hate that which made the first Separation between God, and the Soul.
Christ Expiated Sin, but did not Encourage it: He Dyed not only to make Peace;
but he Dyed also to make us Holy, and purify a People to himself.

The Design of God, in the Manifestation of Christ in the Flesh, was to
destroy the Works of the Devil: The chief Work of the Devil; was to enter Man
into a League with himself, in his Rebellion against God his Maker. God aimed
at the Death of Sin, when he aimed at the Life of our Souls. The Ends of
Christ's Death, are not separated: He is no Atoner, where he is not a Refiner.

It Is as certain, as any Word the Mouth of God has spoken, That there is no
Peace to the Wicked.

An unspotted Conscience, and a pure Will, are the Benefits of this
Reconciliation: For this Reconciliation must be Mutual.

As God lays down his Wrath against us, so we must throw down our Arms against
him. As there is a double Enmity; the one rooted in our Nature, the other in
our wicked Works; so there must be an Alteration of our State, and of our
Actions.

The End of Christ's Reconciling us to God, was, to bring us back to him. We
cannot be linked in Peace to him, except we be transformed into the Image of
his Son.

How can we expect to be received into the Bosom of God, if we every Day dawb
our Souls? Can there be any Familiarity with God, when we daily lay Bars in the
way.

God was in Christ, Reconciling the World; because he was a Holy, as well as a
Gracious God: because he had a Detestation of Sin, as well as because he had a
Love for the Creature. He is of purer Eyes, than to behold the least Iniquity.

As before, God was sanctified in Christ, when he Reconciled the World; so he
will be in those that entertain it. There must be an Enmity with that, for
which the Son of God was made a Sacrifice: Else we shall act but Judas's Part
with God's Grace, betray it to serve our Lusts.

Be afraid therefore of offending God; not only because he has Power to hurt,
but because of his Love, whereby he has obliged you. The Peace that was broken
by the Disobedience of Adam, was restored by the Obedience of Christ: But our
Obedience is necessary for the Joyful Fruits of it. Psalm. 119. Great Peace have
they, that love thy Law.

III. EXHORTATION.
BE Industrious and Affectionate in your Services to God. Has God done so much
for us, and shall we put off God with a little Service, with the scantlings of
Duty? God has done his utmost to engage our Affection, and encourage our
choicest Service. There was not an higher way to Procure it, nor a dearer way
to Conferr it.

View the Creatures, and God's Goodness in them to Man, and it will raise a
Natural Love: But, What an Height of Love should we ascend to, that have an
higher Step to mount? The least Love, is more than is due to us; How much more
that Immensity of Love he has shown us? And, Shall we return but Drops for an
Ocean, when he has stopped the Torrent of Legal Penalties, that were deserved by
us? How should we combine all our Thoughts and Affections together, to serve
that God, who has made all his Thoughts conspire, to reduce us Honorably and
Successfully?

I am the Lord thy God, that brought thee up out of the Land of Egypt, etc. is
the Preface to the Decalogue, and an Incitement to the Israelites, to obey all
his Precepts.

God has been in Christ, Reconciling us to himself, is the Tenor of the
Gospel; and should be an Incitement to greater Service, by how much our
Spiritual Deliverance (the Antitype of it) is greater. We should serve God as
Friends: And as he has given us an higher State, so we should give him the
greater Honor.

Do all things therefore unto God, as Reconciled, without base Ends, and sordid
Designs. God had no other End, in being the Author of Peace, but his own Glory,
and Man's Good. We should have no other Design, but God's Glory, and our own
Welfare. Serve him then with Delight; a dull and sluggish Temper does not
become us, when we approach so hearty a Friend, that was so industrious to be
at Peace with us.

Next to that Delight God has in his Reconciling Son, is that he has in his
Reconciled Children.

IV. EXHORTATION.
LEt all your Approaches to God, be begun, and ended with a Sense of this, in
any Duty; especially, in Prayer. God in all his Communications to his People,
acts as a Reconciling God; we should eye him so, in all our Addresses to him.

As there is not one Mercy, not one Act of Grace God shows to us, but the
Spring is from this restored Affection; so there is not a Duty we offer to God,
but should do it in the Sense of this. What is not by and through Christ, will
not be accepted as a Duty. This Consideration should animate us in all our
Addresses. This is necessary to be acted by us, to make us humble; and to
consider what we were, before we were freely reduced; to make us believe, and
come with holy Boldness. And, What Ground can there be for Despondency, when we
have so many Tokens of his Heartiness in it?

This will make us more earnest, to fetch Fire from Heaven to inflame our
Souls: This will raise our Hope. For, What can be a greater Foundation for it,
than this?

We should think, before we perform our Duties, of the Love that God bears to
Christ; and this will be Ground of Confidence: for this Love was with a respect
to those that Believe.

Think much of the Virtue of Christ's Death, when he sprinkled the Mercy-seat
with his Blood. Turn God's Mercy-seat into a Throne of Grace.

Every Act about Christ, is a fit Argument in Prayer. God will never deny his
own Acts, nor the Ends of them, which made way for him to Communicate himself.

Christ, and God in Christ, is Entertaining, as well as Reconciling us. Let us
not therefore lift up our Eyes to Heaven; but then carry this Atonement by
Faith in his Blood, in the Hand of every Prayer to him.

V. EXHORTATION.
LOok for Grace and Strength from God in Christ. The Conduit of Grace and
Mercy, was unstopt in Christ; and by him, it flows freely down to Man. This is
the Foundation of all Regeneration.

In the 16, 17, and 18. Verses of this Chapter, having spoken of the
New Creature, Verse 16. he shows the Ground of it: It was all from this
Reconciler. Seek for Grace only on this Bottom; for Strength, and increase in
it only on this Ground.

It Is not the Consideration of God's Precepts, but of his Promises, and the
Application of this Reconciling Love by Faith, that is attended with a Vigorous
Benediction on the Soul, for the pulling up the Foundation of Enmity. The
Spirit is received by the Mediation of the Gospel, not by the Precepts of the
Law.

Men begin at the wrong End, when they would rise from Obedience to Faith: They
deal with God, as if he were gratified and appeased by them. But begin with
Faith, whereby we cast our selves on God in Christ, and receive Vigor for all
Spiritual Actions. Faith is the Principle, whereby we Obey; not the Effect of
our Obedience.

God is a God of Peace; then a God of Grace. We must look on God, as a God of
Peace, and then implore him as a God of Grace, and for all our habitual growth
in Grace. As he is a God of Peace, he works in us that which is well pleasing
in his Sight.

VI. EXHORTATION.
WHen there are any Risings of Enmity in thy Soul, go to God in Christ. As God
was in Christ, Reconciling the World; so he is in Christ, Reconciling the Soul.
Not that I think, that the whole Mass of Guilt returns on a Believer, on his
Fall; but the Particular Guilt of that Sin; for which we must fetch fresh
Applications of Reconciling Grace: We must go to God in Christ, for it.

As the First Application was from God in Christ, so must the Second and Third.
Christ is an Officer in Heaven, for this Purpose.

The Apostle writes to the Corinthians, some whereof were reconciled; yet he
beseeches them to be reconciled: That is, to renew their Reconciliation on
every New Breach; to regain the Favor they had forfeited by their Sins, for
which he had reproved them in the former Epistle.

This should be sued out every Day. What was the Foundation of our first Peace,
must be the Foundation of our Renewal of the same: The Course we took for the
First, will be successful for the Second. God was not out of Christ in the
first, he will not be out of Christ, when we need it again.

If God was willing and desirous to make Reconciliation by the Blood of Christ,
for all our Sins, when they lay before him in their Crimson Aggravations, much
more will he renew it on a particular Fall. But he may hide his Face, withdraw
the Comfort of this Peace for a long while, even for as long as we live.

Let none therefore presume on this: for the making up of our Enmity on a
particular Breach, belongs not to those that live in a Course of known Sin.
This is Inconsistent with a Reconciled State; which is to make up the great
Breach, the Breach of Nature.

VII. EXHORTATION.
HOw contented should those be in every Condition, that are Reconciled. This
Peace of God should bear Rule in their Hearts, and compose them under all
Emergencies, Phil. 4.6, 7. We may despise the Promises of the World that allure
us, and the Threatenings of the World that scare us. If this Peace guard our
Souls, it will render us Happy, when the World thinks us Miserable. If you have
not the Honor of the World, it will content us without it: Bear the Scorns and
Reproaches of the World, with it.

The whole World cannot secure you, if you have War with God: Nothing can defend
you from the Arrows of his Wrath.

But if you have this Peace of God, you are mounted above the Enmity of the
World. Let your Spirits be guarded by it, against tumultuous Passions. You may
well endure the Strokes of a Father, since you are not like to feel his Sword,
as a Judge.

VIII. EXHORTATION.
LEt us be reconcilable to others; not only where we offer, but to those from
whom we receive an Injury. God's Reconciliation should be our Rule of dealing
with others.

Hard Hearts, and uncharitable Dispositions, are unlike to God, that had a
Heart full of Tenderness. Such will not part with a Grain of their Right,
though God parted with his Son to work our Peace: And had he not been more
forward in it than we, we had perished for ever, Luke 6.36. God sets his own
Actions, as a Pattern for ours. If we are Irreconcilable to our Brother, we do
not imitate God; but reject this Blessed Pattern, and discover no sense of the
Kindness of God to us.

Since God has made Christ a Propitiation for our Sins; if God so loved us,
ought not we also to love one another? 1 John 4.10, 11.

The Son of his Bosom veiled his Glory, that he might be at Peace with us,
Entertain us, and Accept us into Favor: And shall we on every occasion, be at
Swords-point with our Brother?

Such a Disposition, such a Woolfish and Brutish Nature, is against the Tenor
of the Gospel.

Christ came to slay the Enmity between God and Us: It Is a crossing his
Design, to preserve it between Christian and Christian.

This is a keeping up the Partition Wall; a frustrating of Christ's Death,
which was to demolish it.

IX. and Last EXHORTATION.
Glorify God for this! Since God has sent his own Son out of his Bosom, let
us send our loud Praises up to him. When Heaven smiles upon the Earth, the
Earth blesses Heaven.

It Is to the Glory of God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, that though
all we have comes immediately from Christ; yet Christ, and All comes from the
Father. He is the Propitiation for our Sins; but he was appointed by the
Father: He came to Redeem us; but he was sent by God. He paid our Debts, as our
Surety; but he was Accepted by God. He was our Mediator, to bring us to God;
but he was Commissioned by Him to this purpose.

What Love had he for the Creature, though he abominated the Sin? In the midst
of his Indignation against his Iniquities, he had Bowels of Mercy for his
Person.

God had forecast the Prisoner into the Pit, where was no Water; and the
Captive was under a mighty Sea of Trouble. The Law of God was against him. The
Truth of God took part with his Law: His Bowels and Wisdom took a Way to
satisfy the Curse of the Law, that we might enjoy the Blessings of the Gospel.

We could plead nothing of our own Deserts; unless Perversity, Peevishness,
Disloyalty, Weakness, and Wilfulness, could pass for Desert: Then, indeed, we
had been unconceivable Meritors.

But seeing we could not merit it, nor contract Peace of our selves: How great
therefore, is the Depth of that Wisdom? And, How is that Goodness to be
adored, that found out a Refuge, when Heaven and Earth were at War?

There is no Sinner, but is born the Object of the Curses of the Law, and the
Scorn of the Malicious Devil. Jesus Christ was sent to pacify the Law, and
slay Satan our Enemy.

The Angels glorify God for this Peace; and, Shall we be out-stript by those
Beings, that are less concerned? God was Appeased through Christ; and through
Him we should offer up our Sacrifices of Thanksgiving to God.

If all the Sparks that have leapt out of the Fire since the Creation, and all
the Drops of Rain that have been distilled on the World, were turned into the
Tongues of Angels, they would come short of the Praises due to God, for this
Excess of Love!

O that our Praises of God for this, might be the Business not of a Day, or an
Hour, but of our whole Lives; since Eternity it self, is too little, to set
forth God's Magnificent Love!

FINIS.

