Alexipharmacon: OR, A FRESH ANTIDOTE AGAINST Neonomian Bane and Poison TO THE
Protestant Religion.

Being a Reply to the late Bishop of Worcester's Discourse of Christ's
Satisfaction, in Answer to the Appeal of the late Mr. Steph. Lob.

And also a Refutation of the Doctrine of Justification by Man's own Works of
Obedience, delivered and defended by Mr. John Humphrey, and Mr. Sane. Clark,
contrary to Scripture, and the Doctrine of the first Reformers from Popery.

If there had been a Law given, which could have given Life; verily
Righteousness had been by the Law: But the Scripture has concluded all under
Sin, that the Promise by Faith of Jesus Christ, might be given to them that
believe, Gal. 3.21, 22. By ISAAC CHAVNCY, M. A.

London: Printed for, and Sold by W. Marshall at the Bible in Newgate-Street,
1700.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THE Points Controverted in this small Treatise, are not of the least moment to
the Christian Religion, all Reducible to these two great Questions.

1. Whether our Lord Jesus Christ in his Suffering, bore the Personal guilt of
any or no? 2. Whether our Inherent Obedience to the New Law, be the
Righteousness by which a Believer is Justified before God?
The first Question comes to be discussed upon the Controversy about change of
Persons, Mr. Lob asserting, That the change of Persons between Christ and
Believers, consisted in Christ being made sin for us by the Imputation of our
sins to him in a legal Sense, and a Believers being made the Righteousness of
Christ by Imputation; and both by transaction of our Personal guilt and
punishment (due to us) for Sin, to Christ; and of his righteousness in bearing
sin and punishment, to us. This change of Persons the Scripture asserts in
plain Words 2 Cor. 5.21. This Mr. Lob asserts, Report, p. 13. and the Bishop
denies, and says, That the change was not in respect of the guilt of Sin,
because Christ bore the Personal guilt of none, and whatever Christ did or
suffered, the personal guilt of sin remains on Believers and can never be taken
away. But he tells us of a kind of Change that he is for, viz. That Christ was
punished, that we might not be punished, and this is all our stead that Christ
stood in; now if Christ stood not in our stead as Sinners, and he was not made
Sin for us, its to assert that which is Expressly contrary to Scripture, and
most irrational to men of Understanding as shall be made appear. And the Change
which is pretended by the Bishop is no change in the sense of the Spirit of
God, at best it can be but a partial change, neither as a Public person, nor
in the Room of the Sinner as such: It is such a change as when three persons
are condemned, and they are through the mercy of the Legislator to cast Lots for
their lives, one only to die; now be on whom Deaths Lot falls, dies that in
the event the other may not die, yet this Person dies but in Relation to his
own Sins, not upon the account of the others Sins: Many Instances might be
given of the like Nature, where a Man does or suffer for another, that the
other may not; and here is a change of Persons in respect of Punity and
Impunity, but Note, that its no true Change, if Desert remains on the Original
Transgressor; and the Sufferer suffer under no Desert, neither is such
Sufferings Punishment in any Law Sense, neither can that Person be ever
Righteousness, that stands in the Personal Guilt of his Sin unremoved; but
this is not the Place to enlarge on this Point.

I shall only Note, that in one thing the Bishop got the Weather-gage of Mr.
Lob, Mr. Lob having in express Terms renounced that Change of Persons, which
Dr. Crisp Asserts. The Bishop very honestly proves, that Dr. Crisp asserted no
other Change of Persons, then what Mr. Lob contends for, and therein he has
done Justice both to Dr. Crisp, and Mr. Lob; and truly its but a sorry Business
of any Man of Learning and Ingenuity, to inveigh highly against the Opinion of
another, as erroneous, when he himself is necessitated by his Principles to
hold the same thing, only a little differing in way of Expressions. Neither let
the Reader think, that I appear to Justify Mr. L's appealing to the Bishop,
for I was always against it, and declared to him, how much I and others was
offended at it, and at his nauseous fawning and flattering of him, as if he
intended to lay down his Faith at his Feet, for he could not but know the
Bishops settled Opinion in this Point (as I told him) by the Letters he wrote
to Mr. H. and Mr. W. yea, and to himself before his Appeal, and then if so,
what a piece of Pageantry was it in him to Appeal to the Bishop? but it must be
done, it seems the Wind of his Fantasy without any Reason hurrying him this
Way, the Issue whereof is that, were Mr. L. alive, he would see he is
inevitably run a ground; and therefore, although I cannot get him off as to that
matter yet, I hope to see the Truth safe, the main Thing which the Good Man
contended for, for I am not to defend Men who will have their Imprudencies and
Imperfections, but the good Cause he defended.

The Second great Thing I contend for, is the Righteousness of Christ, that it
is the only Righteousness that a Believer is justified by; Mr. Humphr. and Mr.
Clerk Assert our Justification by a Believers own inherent Righteousness, i. e.
by their Works of Obedience to the New Law, a Tenent that has an inseparable
Connection unto the former. I shall not detain the Reader any longer therein,
but refer him to the Treatise it self.

Lastly, I finding in the Bishops Treatise, a Presentation of the Independants,
brought in by the Presbyterians, for holding several Antinomian Principles
which the Rebuker calls Bane and Poison, in that Form of Prayer which he has
taught his Disciples. I have thought it requisite to Entitle my Book
accordingly Alexipharmacon, and though I take the Rebuker to be of too haughty
a Constitution (abounding in Choler) to be my Patient, yet I am not discouraged
from exposing this Preparation to Public Advantage, not doubting but some may
reap Benefit thereby; and hence I have endeavored also to correct the Druggs,
which the unskilful Rebuker has cast away with his profane Faugh, for Bane
and Poison; and show, that if they be but a little scraped and wiped from the
Dirt and Filth, which he and his slovenly Apothecary has put upon them, they
will become a Christians wholesome Food, and substantial Medicine, being the
Fruit and Leaves of the Tree of Life for the healing of the Nations, Rev. 22.2.

A Catalogue of Mr, Isaac Chauncy's Books, Printed for, and Sold by William
Marshall, at the Bible in Newgate Street.
1. NEonomianism Unmasked: Or the Ancient Gospel pleaded for, against the other
called, a new Law or Gospel, in a Theological Debate, occasioned by a Book
lately wrote by Mr. Dan. Williams, entitled, Gospel Truth stated and
vindicated, pri. 6 d.

2. The 2d part of Neonomianism un-mask'd, or the Ancient Gospel pleaded for,
against the other called, the New Law, wherein the following Points are
discoursed: 1. What the state of the Elect is before effectual calling. 2.
Whether Good laid our Sins on Christ. 3. Whether the Elect were discharged from
sin upon Christ's bearing them. 4. Whether the elect cease to her sinners from
the time their sins were laid on Christ. 5. What was the time when our sins
were laid on Christ. 6. Whether God was separated from Christ while our sins
were laid upon him.

To be had with his whole Works, and not single; any other Part may be had
single at the same Price set to them.

3. The 3d part of Neonomianism Unmasked: Or the Ancient Gospel. Wherein these
following Points are discussed: 1. Of a Change of Person between Christ and the
Elect. 2. Of the Conditionality of the Covenant of Grace. 3. Of the nature of
Saving Faith. 4. Of the free offer of Christ to sinners, and of Preparatory
Qualifications. 5. Of Union to Christ before Faith. 6. Of Justification by
Faith. 7. Of the necessity and benefit of Holiness, Obedience and Good Works,
with Perseverance therein. 8. Of intending our Souls Good, by Duties we
perform. 9. Of the way to attain Assurance. 10. Of God's seeing Sin in his
People. 11. Of the Hurt that sin may do to Believers. 12. Of Gods displeasure
for sin in the afflictions of his People. 13. Of the Beauty of sincere
Holiness. 14. Of Gospel and legal preaching. 15. Mr. John Nisbet's Reply to D
W. Price 2 s. 6 d.

4. A Rejoinder; to Mr. Dan. Williams's Reply to the first part of Neonomianism
unmaskt; wherein his Defense is examined, and his Arguments answered, whereby
he endeavors to prove the Gospel to be a new Law with Sanction, and the
contrary is proved, 1. By showing what a Law is. 2. By showing what the Gospel
is. 3. Several Arguments proving that the Gospel is not a New Law with
Sanction. 4. An Account given of the Beginning and Progress of this Neonomian
Error. Price. 6 d.

5. A friendly Examination of the Pacifick Paper, concerning the consistency of
absolute Election of particular Persons, with the Universality of Redemption,
and the Conditionality of the Covenant of Grace; where also the new Scheme is
clearly declared in several Questions and Answers about some great Points of
Religion. 1. In understanding what Christ did in the flesh for all. 2. What he
did in the Spirit only for his Elect. 3. As concerning the Law. 4. Of
Justification. 5. Whether Salvation be possible to all Men by the Law of Grace,
etc. Price 4 d.

Note. All these five Pieces are printed in Quarto, to bind together, and those
that will have them complete shall have them all bound together for 5 s.

6. Another very useful Book of Isaac Chauncy's, M.A. Being a System, or Body
of Divinity, Entitled, The Doctrine which is according to Godliness, grounded
upon the holy Scriptures of Truth, and agreeable to the Doctrinal part of the
English Protestant Articles and Confessors: to which is annexed, The
Congregational Church. Government. 1. Of a visible Gospel Church. 2. Of Church
Officers. 3. Of Church Ordinances. 4. Of Ordinances of Gospel Communion; And
first of the Seals. 5. Concerning the Keys. 6. Of diverse Duties which concern
the comfort of Church Communion, pri. bound 2 s.

A Catalogue of some other Books lately Printed for Will Marshall, and sold at
the Bible in Newgate Street.
1. A Discourse of Christian Religion in sundry Points. Preached at the
Merchants Lecture, in Broadstreet, by the late Reverend Mr. Tho. Cole, M. A.
and Student of Christ's College in Oxford. Price 2 s. 6 d.

2. An Answer to six Arguments, produced by Du-pin. Likewise a Refutation of
some of the false Conceits in Mr. Lock's Essay of Human Understanding. Price 6
d.

3. Stated Christian Conference, asserted to be a Christians Duty, 6d.

4. A new methodiz'd Concordance, Price 6 d.

5. A Compendium of the Covenant of Grace, as the most solid support under the
most terrible Conflicts of Death, tho armed with Desertion, decay of Grace, and
sense of Guilt, by Walter Cross, M. A. 6 d.

6. Bunyan of Election and Reprobation, Price 6 d.

7. Christianity the great Mystery, in answer to a late Treatise, entitled
Christianity not Mysterious; together with a Postscript Letter to the Author.
Price 1 s.

8. The young Man's Guide for Drawing, Limning and Etching, with printed
Directions, Price 1 s.

At the Bible in Newgate Street, you may be supplied with all sorts of Printed
Books of most Authors, Bibles, Testaments, Grammars, with all sorts of
School-Books, most sorts of Almanacks, OLD BOOKS New Bound of any sorts: Also
all sorts of Stationary Wares, as Paper, Pens, Ink, Wax, Bonds, Bills Funeral
Tickets, Printed at reasonable Rates. Also Dr. Daffy's Cordial Elixir;
Blagrave's Spirit of Scurvigrass, both purging and plain. Queen of Hungarys
Water: Bromfield's PILLS.

SOME REMARKS UPON The B. of W. s' discourse concerning the doctrine of
Satisfaction, in Answer to Mr. L. 's Appeal.
I shall not spend time in rectifying what the B. says concerning the occasion
of the present difference, believing the B. says nothing in this Matter but
what he had from one Party concerned, who gave him, as appears, a very unfair
and partial representation of these things, as they have done elsewhere; and
therefore because I will not actum agere, I refer the Reader to the History of
the Union, and of the causes of the Breach thereof, and counsel him as a Lover
of Truth, to believe no more of what the B. writes on this account than what he
finds is consonant to the said History.

. 2. I therefore pass over to the second Chapter of the Mystery of Antinom.
laid open; and first, I must take notice of the B. Concession.

That if there were no more in the controversy than what is contained in these
terms, Relative [or Connexive] Conditions, and Faederal, the controversy might
fairly and easily been accommodated.

I suppose this accommodation must have been by granting this disjunction to be
true, and according to the rules of distribution, That a condition is that
which is Axiomatically express^d by the connexive conjunction Si, If, and is
the Logical knitting together of an Antecedent and Consequent, but does not
necessarily import the connection of cause and effect, but of a usual or
requisite dependence; such as is between Antecedent and Consequent. e. gr. If I
go to the Exchange, I must go out of my own house; if I pass into Glory, I must
pass through the State of Grace; not that the state of Grace is any meritorious
cause of Glory, but that there is such a cause of both, and to which both
answer as effects equally, although one precede the other in order. But faederal
conditions are quite of another nature, of a covenant and moral nature; a
covenant, having but two parts, the condition and promise made upon the
performance of the condition, by the party required so to do, whereby the good
thing promised, upon the said performance of the condition is demandable by the
performer, as due debt to him. Hence it is the faederal nature of the condition,
not the greatness or smallness of the condition that makes it meritorious. If
God had said unto man in Paradise, Take up this leaf or that straw, and thou
shall live for ever, eternal life had been his due, upon his doing thereof, and
demandable by him, and the covenant made it so; viz. a due debt, ex pacto, i.
e. legally so; for a due debt is due in a law sense.

2. Now what hinders this desirable accommodation? It is the B's opinion that
there is a greater mischief in Antinomianism, [a Snake in the Grass] which
ought to be laid open, to prevent the mischief of it. Antinomianism the B.
knows in true notation of the word, and according to the sense of the Apostle
Paul, is a denial of the Justification of a sinner by our own works of the law,
the mischief that attends it is only occasional, by reason of men's corruption,
viz. The vileness of corrupt and reprobate minds in the abuse of the grace of
God therein, to embolden themselves, to sin, because grace abounds; which the
Apostle was aware of, and warns us against, Romans 6. It is not any fault in the
doctrine it self. Well, but what is the mischief the B. finds? It is (says he)
this, all this dispute about conditions on our part depends upon another; and
if that hold, this must follow as a consequence of it, and several other things
which Dr. Crisp saw very well, had a necessary connection with each other, like
a fair dealer in controversy, owned them all. Here I cannot but acknowledge
the greet ingenuity of the B. beyond many others, in not only owning him a fair
dealer in this controversy that he opposes him in, but in his after
vindication of him from those false imputations, which others of his
adversaries would fasten upon him so far, that he leaves him a mere Calvinist,
and no worse.

. 3. p. 74. B. I come therefore to the next thing in the first Paper, wherein
you say [i. e. Mr. L.] clears the dissenting brethren from the charge of
Antinomianism, Report, p. 13. Rem. p. 11. Your words are, [i. e. Mr. L. 's]
That touching a Change of Persons between Christ and believers, there is no
physical change, whereby Christ and believers do in stance become one another,
nor a moral change, whereby Christ should become inherently sinful, and
Believers thereby become immediately innocent, and sinless, but the change is
only in a legal sense by consent between the Father and him, putting on the
person, and coming into the room and stead of sinners, etc,

This is laid down for the truth of this change by Mr. L. but yet Mr. L.
peremptorily disowns Dr. Crisp's change of Persons, as well as Mr. W. Now the
B. does very fairly show and prove, that Dr. Crisp intended no other change of
Persons than what Mr. L. asserts to be the truth, and a clearing the assertors
from the charge of Antinom. Now says he, I shall make it appear that you have
not herein disowned Dr. Crisp 's sense of the change of persons; so far I
cannot but say, that the B. has done right to Dr. Crisp and Mr. L. and it is no
other than what I ever thought of the controversy, when on foot. I shall not
give my self the trouble of transcribing what the B. has done out of Dr.
Crisp's Sermons, to prove his assertion. See p. 2. p. 75, 76, 77.

. 4. This seems to be a great Mystery, but is really the foundation of
Antinomianism. That Christ had the personal guilt of our transgressions charged
upon him, and so he was as sinful as we. He should have added legally, or in
the eye of the law, the guilt of our sins, the personal guilt of every saved
one being charged upon him, the Reatus Culpae non perpetratio culpae; the debt,
non contractio debiti. This is the truth of the Gospel, which will stand as a
pillar of brass, when all the wit and malice of the opposers and banterers
thereof will be driven away as chaff before the wind. Here are two assertions
that we must stand by and defend the truth of against the B. and all other
opposers.

In the B.'s first Letter he tells us what the Report says, p. 5. That if
there be no change of persons between Christ and us, there can be no
translation of the guilt, nor a just infliction of the punishment of our sins
on Christ; i. e. there can be no proper satisfaction, which is truth without
exception. But the B. answers, That there is a twofold translation of guilt to
be considered. 1. Of the personal guilt which results from the acts of sin
committed by such persons. Now the translation of this guilt of sin on Christ
the B. all along denies, and endeavors to disprove, 1. Personal guilt can be
no other than the guilt of the Person that had committed the sin, for which he
is arraigned at the Bar of God's Law, e. gr. John has stolen, Thomas has
committed murder, and neither the guilt of John's theft, nor of Thomas's murder
was transferred to Jesus Christ; David's murder and adultery in the guilt
thereof was not transferred to Jesus Christ, nor the guilt of Peter's sin in
denying his Master. This is the meaning of the B. doctrine.

2. He gives his reason; If this guilt be translated, Christ must become the
very person who committed the sins, and so become an actual Sinner; yea, as the
Person that committed all the sins of those for whom he died.

I wonder so learned a man saw not the absurdity of this arguing, which he took
up from Mr. B. who never stuck at any gross arguments to bespatter the most
glorious Gospel truths. The force of the argument is thus unfolded, and made
very plain. If a debt be translated from one man to another, then he to whom it
is translated must be looked upon as the person that contracted the debt; but
the B. says, We must not look upon sins as debts, which we shall speak to in
its place; but let us use another instance, If a thing done by one man be
accounted to another, e. gr. a Representative in Parliament, is that thing to
be thought to be actually and personally performed by the persons to whom it is
accounted. The Representatives of the people in Denmark gave up the liberties
of the people to the King's prerogative, the people by them are accounted to
have done it by the Representatives, must therefore every Subject be said
actually and personally to have done it, when doubtless Hundreds of lovers of
the country hated and detested the Action, though as necessarily included
therein, as if they had actually done it. Many Instances of the like nature
might be given, though these are enough to demonstrate the falseness of the B's
odious consequence; and we may as well wonder that any that bear any reverence
to our blessed Savior, should not abhor such dirty and irrational consequences
as these are, especially when so expressly contrary to the word of God and
common reason. Isa. 53. 2 Cor. 5. 3. Hence these men dare not but say there is
a guilt translated to Christ: I pray what guilt? Is it not personal? Is there
any guilt in the world besides what is of one Person or another? But our B.
will find out a guilt that is not personal, which we will examine.

. 5. The other branch of his division of translation of guilt, is of Legal
Guilt, which he says lies in an obligation to Punishment by virtue of the
Sanction of the Divine Law. Now this guilt implies two things; 1. The desert of
Punishment which follows personal guilt, and cannot be transferred by change of
persons, etc. 2. The obligation to undergo the deserved punishment, here may
intervene a change of persons, etc.

Reader, Now observe what kind of guilt the B. will have Christ to bear: 1. He
says it is legal guilt, but what is that according to him? It Is the obligation
to punishment, and that is in the sanction of the law; i. e. it is subjectively
in the law, hence it is the guilt of the law that Christ must bear, and not the
guilt of any person. It Is true, that obligation to punishment is formally in
the law, and therefore obligation to punishment cannot be called guilt, but
guilt is of a person transgressing the law, not in the law transgressed. 2. He
says this guilt implies two things: What is the meaning of implies? Is it that
the laws obligation of a transgressor to punishment essentially contains in it
those two things? 1. An actual desert of punishment, and obligation of some
Person to undergo it. Surely not, for if the law had never been transgressed,
it had contained this in it; that if ever any do deserve it, they shall be
obliged to punishment. 2. Does it imply these integrally their desert of
punishment, and obligation to punishment are the parts of the forenamed legal
guilt, then the desert of punishment, as well as obligation to punishment; i.
e. no other than the fault must lie in the law, for it cannot be in more
subjects than one, and the B. must come under the force of this Dilemma, if he
will allow any such thing as guilt, that it is subjectively in some person, and
so personal, or in the law it self. Now there is no fault in the law, therefore
no guilt. 3. He says, desert of punishment follows personal guilt, but by his
favor it is personal guilt it self, the merit of punishment is in the fault,
the very (...) for what deserves punishment but sin, to which the law makes the
wages of Death due; not continuing in all things written in the law? The law
enquires no further than it finds the fault, wherein it has found the desert;
it is formally and essentially in it; it is true, the sentence follows this, but
the desert lies in the essential moral contrariety of the action to the
obedience of the law required it; the wisdom of God says, the taking away of
guilt is to take away sin.

4. He asserts, but has not proved, That personal guilt cannot be transferred
by change of persons: His strong reason is, For no man can cease to deserve
punishment for his own faults, nor deserve that another should be punished for
them. The assertion is, that personal guilt cannot be transferred; then
certainly no guilt at all; for there is no guilt but is personally contracted,
and personally adhering, and therefore Christ bore no guilt of Sin at all, most
contrary to Scripture, and the very known nature of a surety, which always is
in bearing the sin of the transgressor by change of persons. 2. He argues to
prove it, That no man can cease to deserve punishment for his own faults. An
excellent assertion: If so, I am sure God cannot cease to punish him, for he
renders to every one according to his deserts, he is a just God. 2. This
position throws down the whole satisfaction of Christ at one blow; for if
Christ has not taken off the personal desert of sin from any, he has not
satisfied the law; for if according to the B. he takes off the legal obligation
of any to punishment, he takes off the desert by the law. 3. It will follow,
that not only believers, but the glorified Saints in Heaven, are still under
the personal guilt and desert of punishment; and if so, they cannot be in the
favor of God, they cannot be (...), without spot before the Throne, they are
under the personal guilt of all their sins, and this is no spot of God's
Children, but an essential form of a Hellish State. The B. here has very
inconsiderately run himself upon the rocks, though with the rest of the
Neonomians he does so frequently charge those that are contrary minded with
Shallowness, Illiterateness, etc. It is one thing to sin and contract a
personal guilt, and another thing to lie under this personal guilt; sure bare
pardon of sin by him that has power to pardon, takes off personal guilt in the
B's sense, the obligation of the person to punishment, else after pardon the
law may take him up again, and would, even in men's proceedings by law; but in
God's there is not only the pardon of the sinner, but a just satisfaction to the
law, Romans 8.1.

. 6. The B. adds, -- Nor deserve that another should be punished for them. What
will not men of perverse minds say?

Whoever asserted that sinners deserved that Christ should suffer for them, I
wonder men are not ashamed of such gross impositions, quite contrary to the
known minds of others, but to the nature of the thing; for where did any debtor
or criminal deserve that another should suffer for him, either by his good
works, to deserve so much good of another, or by his evil works, to make
another, that is neither criminal nor accessory, guilty? How much less may it
be said of us that we deserved that Christ should be punished for us? The B.
says Christ was punished for us, the obligation of the law binding us over to
punishment, and that Christ took the punishment in our stead; was it because we
deserved it, or not? If it was not because we deserved if, it was not in our
stead; we say not that it was in the nature of our sins to deserve his
punishment, but in the grace, wisdom and justice of the Legislator. As the B.
says, it was of grace of God to find a ransom, it was of the grace of the Son
to give up himself unto justice for this end, it was to the honor of divine
justice to accept of his glorious satisfaction in the sinners room and stead;
here is nothing of the sinner's deserving that brought Christ's suffering for
the sinners, but the substitution of Christ, for this end, by the Father and
himself, though the sinner deserves punishment.

. 7. The second thing according to the B. implied in Legal guilt, is obligation
to undergo the deserved punishment, but because the execution of punishment
depends on the wisdom and justice of the Legislator, therefore here a change of
person may intervene. A. It behooves us to be exact with the B. here, because he
acquaints us with a curiosity in this point of change of persons, that of late
men have so shittlecock'd it up and down, that it is hard to find what either
side would have, but what they both agreed in, that they would not have it to
be what Dr. Crisp said it was. 1. What is the reason the B. distinguishes the
obligation to undergo the deserved punishment, and execution of punishment? Why
says he, not execution of deserved punishment? To me it seems to be a very
smatch of Socinianism; as if Christ did not undergo any deserved punishment,
but only a punishment without desert; i. e. only suffering, and not punishment
in any proper sense. 2. If obligation to undergo the deserved punishment be the
guilt only transferred to Christ, then it will follow, it is only the guilt of
the law is charged on Christ, not of the sinner; and it is plain the B. means
so, for he denies that the guilt of any person is charged on Christ. 3. He
says, this obligation to punishment is only in the law and its truth,
therefore he means that this law obligation falling on Christ, is all the guilt
that falls upon him, and here may be no change of persons; for though the law
obligation may fall upon John and Thomas, and John be never the better that it
falls on Thomas, because it falls not on Thomas for the sake of John: But he
says, that here a change of persons may intervene; how? between two persons to
undergo punishments? If so, it must be under one and the same law, not a change
from being under one law, to a being under another. 2. It must be a change in
respect of deserved punishment; for punishment cannot be without desert, it
becomes not the wisdom and justice of God that it should be be so. 3. If the
change be in respect of deserved punishment, we have gained as much as we
expect; for then the desert of the sinner, which is of his fault, and his guilt
is translated to Christ, because his punishment was deserved, e. gr. he bore
the deserved punishment of sin, of what or whom, of the law; nay, the law never
deserved punishment of any persons; nay, quoth the B. he bore no personal
guilt, then there is no change in respect of deserved punishment; Christ
suffered for us, but was not punished for any, he suffered no deserved
punishment? Hence no punishment at all, for all just punishment is due.

. 8. He says, The execution of punishment depends on the wisdom and justice of
the Legislator. It is true, therefore ought not the execution of punishment
answer the obligation to it? Is it wisdom and justice in God to oblige in his
law, to any punishment not deserved? And is it wisdom or justice in God to
oblige in his law to deserved punishment, and not to execute deserved
punishments? For if Christ's punishments were not deserved, they were mere
sufferings; and if so, no more to us than the suffering of a Martyr to us; if
deserved suffering, then, 1. According to some rule of justice. 2. Deserved by
himself, or some others; not by himself, and his own individual person, you
will say; therefore by some other. Hence if Christ bore deserved punishments of
others, he bore the guilt of sin, the Reatus culpae, that being the formal
desert of punishment, the law making it so, either of God or Man. He says, By
the wisdom and justice of God a mediator may be accepted in such a manner as
himself has determined, and upon acceptance of his Sacrifice the offenders may
be pardoned, and received into grace and favor of God on such terms as he has
declared in the Gospel, and in this sense is the guilt of sins charged on
Christ, etc. A. It is much that these men can take upon themselves a power of
directing God, and telling him what he may do, when God has never said that he
did or would do so, the true Explanation of the B's sense in this paragraph is
by the new-coin'd law, but we will take him in his own terms: And I say, in
God's execution of punishment it becomes the wisdom and justice of God to do it
according to a promulgated law, which the Legislator has in his wisdom and
justice made a manifest Norma Justitiae, to show forth his justice, and that
God may be justified as Judge of all the world, to deal righteously, and
therefore not to accept of a Sinner or a Mediator for them upon other terms
than is in his law expressed, and not upon other secret and unknown terms. 2.
How may God accept of a Mediator? Is it not in satisfying: for the sinner, in
bearing the sinners deserved punishment, and therein taking off the laws
obligation of the Sinner to punishment? God cannot otherwise do in wisdom or
justice. 3. He makes God's acceptance of a sacrifice to be an antecedent of
pardon only, not a satisfying and meritorious reason thereof. 4. How does God
accept. Christ's sacrifice, as a single noble act, done by him, wherein none is
concerned but himself; or a qualifying act to God himself, to make him able to
pardon? Or does he accept his sacrifice for sinners deserving punishment under
the law? Taking their deserts and punishment upon himself, then he is a
mediatorial sacrifice; otherwise; if the guilt lies upon persons unremoved, he
is neither a sacrifice for their sins, nor accepted of God as such. 5. Is it
according to the justice of God to accept a sacrifice for sinners, whose
personal guilt he never took away thereby, and pardon and receive them into
favor upon other terms afterward? Sure then the mediator is not accepted till
they have performed those conditions, upon which their pardon and acceptance is
laid.

. 9. In answer to the Reporter, p. 8. he takes occasion to tell him that the
Consideration of sins as debts is a wrong notion, and gives up the point of
Satisfaction to the Socinians. If it do, it does but as the B. and his right
Reverend Father Mr. B. has done, from whom he took up this divinity. It seems
the spirit of God did not so well consider of it as the B. has done, nor our
master the Lord Jesus, when he taught his disciples to pray so; I know it
sticks cruelly in the Neonom. stomachs that our Lord Jesus was so rash and
inconsiderate to make use of this word debt for sin; but why does this give
away the cause to Socinians? Because if sins be considered as debts, God may
freely forgive them (without disparagement to his wisdom and justice) without
any Satisfaction. But what if God will not? He has revealed this in his word,
that he will by no means acquit the guilty without satisfaction; we are not
speaking of God's absolute Power, but of his ordinate; neither are we speaking
of God's acting by his sovereign dominion, but by his acting in a way of
justice; because where there is sin, there is a law transgressed, and God's
dealing with the sinner must be in a way of justice, unless God repeal his law,
or dispense with it, as the Neonom. will have it, but we cannot admit thereof.
But, 2. Why cannot God upon the same reason forgive a criminal by his
prerogative, as well as a debtor? An earthly King may, why not the King of
Kings? 3. And why is not sin a debt in a proper sense enough? Is it not a debt
to God's justice, and made so by God's law, and treated as such in the very
point of Satisfaction? It Is such a Debt as must be satisfied, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.
1 Cor. 6.23, and 7.23. and elsewhere, must it of necessity be a money debt, and
no other? He says, I cannot but wonder at the learned author, that he does at
the same time assert our sins to be considered as debts, and the necessity of
vindictive justice; for what vindictive justice belongs to a creditor? I have
rather wondered at the learned Author, that he should be taken with such a
Delirium, as to suppose B. Stillingfleet to be for a Commutation of Persons in
sano sensu, having been sufficiently informed by his Letters of his Neonom.
principles, before he appeal to him, and flattered him so offensively as he
did. But ad rem, 1. The B. knew that similitude or metaphorical expressions are
not to be forced to run on four feet; for though sins be most fitly called debts
to the justice of God, yet God is not therefore a money creditor, but with
necessity of Vindictive Justice to a creditor; sure, imprisonment is vindictive
justice, or seizing on all that a man has; does not God in justice seize on
all a sinner has by his curse, and cast him into prison till he has paid the
utmost Farthing? Matthew. 5.26. Sure Christ's own Phraseology might be admitted
by us, but it seems not by this B. and some others; see further his Neonom.
spirit; he calls Christ's language, in calling sin debts to God, and ascribing
Vindictive Justice to such an adversary rude and inconsistent, and he can
hardly think such ever penetrated into these matters, but took up with a set
of phrases. I always found these Neonom. great boasters of their own wit, and
deep penetration into things; answer their adversaries still more by
contemptuous and approbrious language, than by any fair way of argumentation;
though I must confess I do not find this learned B. so addicted to this foul way
of treating those that dissent from him, as many others of the Neonom. kidney
that are far short of him in learning and gentility.

The main design of this discourse, in answer to Mr. Lob's Appeal, is to show
how much the good man was mistaken, as to believe that he, the B. was for
Commutation of persons in his sense, but he was for Commutation in Mr. W. and
the Neonom. sense. The meaning of all, that there has been such a sputter
about, and so much foul language, unbecoming Christians, much more Ministers,
lies in this one Question, whether Christ was made of God sin and curse for
sinners? And whether the said sinners believing become the righteousness of God
in him? The Commutation according to scripture lies here; that Christ instead
of the guilty sinner became sin and curse, and that the Sinner in Christ
becomes righteous and guitless. Now says the B. That the change was not in
respect of sin, asserting that Christ bore no personal guilt, but that he bore
only punishment, that we should not be punished upon our Faith and Repentance;
so that he must hold the Commutation of persons is not in respect of sin and
righteousness, (for that person that is taken from the guilt of sin in foro
justitiae, can never be righteous) but only in respect of punishment and
impunity. 4. That Christ was punished, that the sinner might not, but that this
change was not absolute, but conditional; and to be future upon terms to be
performed by one party, when he should have an actual Being in the world, when
he should perform the fixed conditions of Faith, Repentance, and good Works.
Again, he will not have it such a change as is between the surety and debtor,
but such a change as is between two private persons; one doing a good turn for,
on the behalf, and so instead of the other denying Christ to be a public
person, to be in his Mediatorship a surety, or legal Representative before
God's Tribunal of Justice; and this I find every where to be the Neonom.
Doctrine: But I shall assert, that the B's change of persons is none at all;
for if it be not of persons as standing in relation to the law, it is none at
all in a law sense; Christ bearing no guilt by law obligation, and the sinner
being freed from none thereby, this is enough to say of it here, my design
being to be short, I cannot fill up my paper with rehearsal of the very Words
which I have tired my self too much in already, nor enter upon a tedious
Litigation about Words or Sense of them; and if Dr Crisp or the Bp. have not
well expressed themselves, I leave those Words to themselves, and apply my self
only to the true sense and meaning of the Bp. in that point, which he mainly
prosecutes in this treatise.

Bp. p. 79. My business at present is about transferring our very faults upon
Christ, which Dr. Crisp calls the guilt of the fact. A. I need not here tell
the Reader that the Assertor does distinguish between the fact and the guilt of
the fact, the Culpa and reatus culpae; the Bp. himself has vindicated him from
the charge, of saying that the fact it self was charged on Christ, p. 77. Dr.
Crisp denies Christ to be the actual transgressor, but asserted that he had the
personal guilt of our Sins upon him, and built his whole Hypothesis upon it.
This then is the Question in short to be discussed, Whether Christ in his
sufferings bare upon him the personal guilt of Sin? The affirmative is the
truth in our judgment, let who will assert it; the Bp. holds the negative
throughout his treatise, as being the vertical point, upon which the whole
controversy of change of persons does turn.

. 2. I desire to speak as plainly in this matter as may be, and as briefly, and
shall pass over all the proofs that the Bp. has made, that this was the Dr's
judgment, with this concession that it was so, yea, and all the needless
remarks, interpretations and banters that he has upon what the Doctor has
said, and only take notice of the things of weight. But first it is necessary
to show how we understand this Question.

1. In what capacity Christ stood when he bore sin and punishment?

2. In what sense he bore sin?

3. What personal guilt is?

4. How Christ came to bear personal guilt?

A. As to the first, that Christ stood in the capacity of a public person,
representing the whole body of the Elect under the consideration of the lapsed
Estate and Condition in the first Adam.

As to the second, when we say Christ bore Sin, it is neither treason or
blasphemy, as our Adversaries would have it, because we speak in the language
of the Spirit of God; however, to prevent cavilling, we will vouchsafe to yield
to the Bp's term, personal guilt, which can import nothing but the committed
Sin remaining on the sinner's person and conscience, as a forbidden and
condemned fault by the law; neither do we say that Christ committed these Sins,
or was made to have committed them when our Sins were laid upon him, neither
that his Nature was physically or morally corrupted thereby. Lastly, We cannot
but adore the wisdom of God, in calling personal guilt Sin, because, 1. A bare
physical Act as such is not Sin, and as all killing is not sin, but Sin is a
physical Act clothed with a moral Exorbitancy arising from its relation to,
and comparing with the law of God, therefore, to say the substratum of the
physical act or defect, is transferred from one subject to another, is most
absurd; but the guilt of this fact, and its moral relation to the law, may be
transferred and taken away from the subject transgressor, as we shall make it
appear.

As to the third, the Bp. tells us what he means by personal guilt, and it is
very plain. David's personal guilt was of Murder and Adultery, so Peter's of
denying his Master. Now the Bp. will not have personal guilt ever to be taken
off from any, but that David continues in Heaven under personal guilt of Murder
and Adultery to this Day, and for ever.

Lastly, Christ came to bear Sin; 1. By God's call, and his acceptance,
voluntarily obeying his Father's command. 2. In submitting himself to a legal
way of proceeding with him when he came under the same law the transgressor was
under. 3. By a legal accounting and imputing our Sin to him, he coming in forum
Justitiae, and writing himself debtor in the room and stead of all the
insolvent debtors to the Law of God, Justice accepts of him as a sufficient
Paymaster. Hence in the law sense Christ was called by God, what he was not in
a natural sense, Romans 4. He was made Sin, who knew no Sin; and God calls things
that are not, as though they were, both in calling Christ Sin, and us Righteous.

. 3. Now we say that Commutation of Persons, was so far, and no more nor less
than God has made it to be in his legal way of proceeding in this great
mystery: That Christ should according to the Preordination and Constitution of
the Father, freely put himself under a judicial Process for the Sins of all the
Elect under the same law that they transgressed, and that Justice should deal
with him as if he had been the original transgressor; and in the stead thereof,
in transferring the charge upon him, and punishing him for Sin. Hereupon
follows the change, that he is made Sin, and we Righteousness in him, Justice
receiving full satisfaction for our Sins. Hence we shall not much trouble our
selves with the many odious Inferences that the Neonom. would draw upon this
glorious Mystery, nor the dirty Reflections on the unsearchable Wisdom of God,
the Truth being as fully and plainly made manifest in Holy Writ, as any
doctrine of Godliness.

1. It is plain that Sin was laid on Christ in some sense or other, the
Scripture being so express in it. 2. It Is granted on all hands the physical
part of the Act was not transferred to Christ; after which, that which remains
on the Sinner is the guilt of it, which is his relation to the law in the moral
sense, as a transgressor, and must be his (...), the laws condemnation of the
Fact making his guilt or desert of punishment. 3. The Spirit of God calls this
Merit or Desert, Sin, and shall we call it contrary to Scripture? Where does
the Scripture say it was not? It says again and again that it was, and what if
contrary to the Bp's reason? Are we to believe God or Man? Is the Bp's reason
the rule of our Faith? What if the same word be used in Scripture for Sin and
Punishment? I grant that one word in Hebrew is used for Sin, and the Sacrifice
for Sin sometimes; but when it is used for the Sacrifice, it is therefore used,
because Sin was judicially transferred to the Sacrifice; that it bore the Sin
of the Transgressor, so that it became the formalis ratio of its Suffering; and
therefore it is denominated from its most essential cause. To say it is a
tropical word, is not much to the purpose, it being such as expresses the very
nature of the thing as often in Scripture by a Metonimy, Sensus pornitur pro
sensili, a Grace of the Spirit put for the Object, Faith for the Object, and
Hope for its Object; so here Sin for the personal guilt of Sin, the Subject put
for an essential or proper Production: It Is a Metan. of another nature from
that, this is my Body, where Signum is put for Signatum, and its true the
Scripture does always denote the guilt of Sin by Sin, and the Bp. does concede,
that Punishment is not Sin, but a Consequent of guilt; we say it is more than a
mere Consequent, it is a merited effect, and Sin always deserves and merits
Punishment, though no Sinner merited, that a Surety should be punished for him;
this is by Gracious Surrogation or Substitution. And it is to contradict
Scripture, to make Punishment separable from guilt, and for good reason to; for
no just Law punishes any one but the guilty, whereby it is always said that Sin
lies upon him, i. e. the just charge of Sin.

. 4. Bp. Obj. But Punishment must have relation to Sin as to the same Person.
This is true, it must, and always has; Sin is inseparable from Punishment in
the same Person according to the just Terms and Constitution of any Law, by
which any Person is punished.

To this the Bp. says, he answers distinctly, that there are three ways our
Sins are said to have relation to Christ's Sufferings. 1. As an external
impulsive cause no more than occasional, no proper reason of Punishment; and so
for the Socinians. This I suppose he leaves to the Socinians, with whom Mr. B.
is one in this point. 2. As an impulsive cause becomes meritorious by the
voluntary Act of Christ's undertaking to satisfy Divine Justice for our Sins,
and not as his own. 3. As to the Personal guilt of our Sins.

These three ways of Sin's relation to Christ, we will consider. 1. The fact of
Sin, and from it the guilt of it is the proper meritorious cause of Punishment;
it is causa proegumena, internal always to the punished, let the Socin. and Mr.
B. say what they will, the punished is always the guilty Person, and he is
therefore punished, because guilty. 2. This Impulsive of ours becomes
meritorious; he says, how I pray? By Christ voluntary undertaking, etc. This
is very absurd, that Christ's free undertaking should make Sin meritorious, was
not Sin meritorious of Punishment of it self. What is the Sin of fallen Angels,
that Christ never undertook for? But he should have said that Christ's
voluntary undertaking brought the guilt and punishment upon himself, by his
coming under a Law Transaction; for he says, it was to satisfy Divine
Justice; and can Justice be satisfied by the Sufferings of a Person no way
guilty in the Eye of Justice? That Is strange Justice. But still says the Bp.
They are considered as our Sins, and not his; true, our Sins originally, but
his by a Law Transmission, else he could not be punished by the Law.

But now see how the Bp. after his brandishing by way of Opposition, is
necessitated to fall into rank and file with us. They are not Christ's Sins any
further than by consent he took upon himself to bear the guilt which relates to
Punishment, and so they come to be justly charged upon him. Now I pray what is
it that the Bp. says in the winding up of the Matter more than what we say;
for he says, 1. The Sins were ours, not his originally and primarily, and the
guilt remains in all those for which Christ died not. 2. These Sins of all
saved ones become Christ's in the guilt of them, through his free and voluntary
Intervention. 3. That he took upon himself that guilt which relates to
punishment; i. e. its proper law relation. 4. And so they come to be justly
charged upon him; here the Bp has given us the whole Point; for, 1. He allows
guilt to be distinct from Punishment; for Relata are contraria affirmantia; and
it is a true notion that guilt and punishment are proper relata constantia ex
mutua alterius affectione, and therefore distinct. 2. That Christ took upon him
to bear the guilt that relates to punishment; it came not from the Sinner that
Christ bore the guilt, but from God's Ordination and Christ's Submission to law
proceeding, and thence wrote himself Debtor to the Law and Justice of God
instead of Sinners, and was accepted as plenary Paymaster. 3. He owns that Sin
came justly chargeable on him; the charge of Sin on the Sinner is that whereby
he becomes guilty before God, Romans 3.19. for he that is justly punished, is
justly charged; as he says, charged upon him, must be in a way of Law
proceeding; and though God has made him to confess the Truth in Words, yet it
fully appears by his after Discourse, that he believes not a word of it in sano
sensu.

. 3. The third thing, wherein our Sins have relation to the Sufferings of
Christ, he says, As to the personal Guilt of our Sins, which he denies and
decries after he had in the same Breath owned Christ's bearing the guilt of our
Sins; now he will have Christ to bear the guilt of our Sins, but not the
personal; as if there were or could be any guilt that is not of one person or
another; or if there were some generical guilt found in individual Persons; his
Exceptions are,

1. The fault of the Sins are not laid on Christ. 1. Then its Law Relation was
not laid on Christ; and Christ being punished for no fault of himself or
others, was unjustly punished; nay, he says he was justly charged; Is any
justly charged, when charged with no fault?

2. He excepts against saying that laying Sin upon Christ makes Christ really a
Transgressor; but how is that said? It is in a legal Sense, not physical,
therefore Christ is said to be made Sin, viz. Such he was not before, nor was
in his own Natures, but was really accepted instead of the guilty Sinner, not
Romantickly and Fabulously, the Transaction was real, according to the nature
of it. As to the denial of Imputation, it is a gross Error in whoever it is, Dr.
Crisp, or Mr. B. the first mistakingly denies the sense of the word, but Mr. B.
denies the thing it self, the very Doctrine of Imputation of Sin to Christ, as
the Bp. the Righteousness of Christ to us, having these invective Words.

As the Papists have by no means more alienated the reformed from them
irreconcileably, than by obtruding as an Article of Faith, the Impossibilities
and Contradictions of Transubstantiation; so some erroneous Protestants have no
way Men made the Papists irreconcilable to us, than by holding forth the
Impossibilities and Absurdities of imputed Righteousness, as a most necessary
part of the Gospel. Meth. Theol. Part iii. Chapter 27. Page 322.

The great Argument propounded by Dr. Crisp very unwarily, he not seeing how
far it would run, but sufficiently improved by Mr. B. is this: That God has no
other Thoughts of things than as they are. -- So does he esteem and think of
things, and consequently of Sin; in Knowledge we must distinguish between
Things and Relation, and between one Relative and another. God thinks of things
as they are under diverse respects, God thinks and knows what we are by Nature;
yea, the most eminent Believer is by Nature a Child of Wrath as well as the
other; but he knows also what he is through Grace, what under a Covenant of
Works, and what under a Covenant of Grace; Sinners in the first Adam, Righteous
in the second. God calls things that are not, as though they were: God calls
his Son Sin, in a Law-sence, who never Sinned; and a Sinner, Righteous in
Christ, who never was Righteous in himself: He sees him as acceptable in his
sight, he having clothed him with his Righteousness, as if he were perfectly
Righteous in himself. God knows and sees all things as he is Omniscient, but
yet does not see reconciled Ones in their Sins, and Guilt of them, by the Eye
of his Justice: God saw Christ under Sin by the Eye of his Justice, when he was
under the charge of Sin, and his Person absolutely considered most pleasing to
him.

It is no way inconsistent with the Nature of God to know what any thing is in
its absolute Being, and what it is in this or that relation; to know a Creature
is a Man, and to know him to stand under the relation of a Father or a Son; to
know what he is Naturally, and what Morally; for this is not inconsistent with
Man's knowledge, much less with God's; therefore when God knows a thing, what
it is in one respect, and calls it another; it is to be supposed that he really
puts that respect or relation upon it; as when God calls a Man a Sinner in
respect of the Old Covenant, and Righteous in respect to the New; it is to be
supposed that the said Person has those opposite relations really upon him
first and last, and that the said relations are real, and not feigned, in their
respective way and manner of existing. So Christ Jesus in respect of Sinners,
in whose stead he stood relatively, as a Surety, was made truly Sin and Curse
in a Law-sense; reckoned by God to be really in that Relation, not feignedly;
And this is imputation of Sin to Christ; which term ought not to be rejected,
whoever it is that makes light of it, Dr. C. or Mr. B. or any other, but most
excellently expressive of the Gospel Mystery; as not imposing any thing on God
but what is most consistent with his Perfections: For as God can and has
brought his Son under a Law-relation, as a Surety Mediatorial, and as such to
stand instead of Sinners under a charge of Sin, for the Guilt of their Sins; he
judges as things are, when he accounts him, and calls him what he has made
him, Sin and Curse, in this Law-respect, and relation, how pleasing soever his
Person is to him, being singly and abstractly considered from the said relation.

. 6. The Bp. excepts against the taking of the immediate discharge of a Sinner,
upon Christ's bearing of Sin.

A. It is easy by general and indistinct charges to make Men's Opinions look
very absurd, if one Man speak not so exactly in a loose and popular Discourse;
are all the Drs. in the World to look upon it as their great Renown to carp at
his Words, that are Printed but just as taken from him, and not Corrected by
him? I think Learned Drs. do much undervalue themselves in so doing. But to the
Point in Hand, it is absurd indeed to say that all Sinners have an actual
discharge in themselves from the Dominion of the Law immediately upon the Death
of Christ, most being not then in Being in a Natural Sense, much less in a
Spiritual. But the Bp. knew well enough the distinction of the Protestants,
that Redemption is considered in Impetration and Application; that though the
Sacrifice and Propitiation of Christ was completed and perfect in its self, in
its Nature, and to all intents and purposes, Justifying, and Pardoning, and
Sanctifying Grace being fully treasured up therein: Yet this Grace is not
Applied, neither can it be Received actually by the Sinner, till, 1. He has a
Being Naturally. And, 2. Till he has a Spiritual Being, whereto he is Created
by the Spirit in Christ, and made capable of a Reception by a Spiritual Organ
bestowed on him. 2. He was not ignorant of this Question lately disputed, What
is the immediate Effect of the Death of Christ? We say the great Effects of the
Death of Christ, are two in General. 1. A Right to Life in Christ. 2. The
Application, Reception, or Possession of the Life purchased by Christ. The 1.
We say is the immediate Effect of the Satisfaction and Purchase of Christ; all
Redeemed Ones have a Right in Christ, i. e. latent and hid in Christ and his
Fullness, even before they are or do Believe; from which Pristine Fullness all
received Grace does flow; even Faith in it self in us. 1. Being in the Soul,
and acting on its Object; and those that have this hidden Right a jus ad rem,
yet they have not presently jus in re; they have not yet received and possessed
the Grace of Justification or Sanctification till they Believe through Grace,
but are in themselves under the Law, the Charge and Sentence thereof. This
Doctrine I know Mr. B. Disputes with all his might against, but was fully
Answered by Dr. O.

. 7. Another thing the Bp. Answers to, Is on the Nature of Guilt; that Guilt of
a Sinner is most truly reatus culpae, and not reatus penae, reatus culpae,
being that which is accounted Guilt in all Courts of Judicature.

To which he answers, there is a twofold Guilt to be considered.

1. Guilt of the Fact, as it is a Transgression of the Law.

2. A Guilt consequent to the Fact by Virtue of the Sanction of the Law. Those
which are the Foundation Assertions that the Bp. builds all upon, are two. 1.
That Guilt which was charged on Christ was reatus penae, or Obligation to
Punishment, not reatus culpae alicujus, not the Guilt of any Fault, or of any
Person committing it. 2. He asserts that the Guilt of a Personal Fault can
never be taken away by Transmission, no, not by Pardon it self: Hence we are
necessitated to enter the Lists with him upon these two great Points, though
something has been said before concerning them.

. 8. We have showed before, that the first distinction is between the Fact, and
Guilt of the Fact: The Fact is merely Physical, is inherent and inseparable
from the Agent, not transferrible at all, e. gr. The Act of borrowing Money is
inherent in the borrower, and not a Transgression of any Law; but to borrow and
not to pay is a Transgression of the Law enjoined by commutative Justice. Now
this is the Guilt of the Fact, when the Fact stands as a Fault in the Eye of
the Legislator by the preceptive part of the Law. 1. The first Relations of an
irregular Action, is to the preceptive part of the Law, being Disobedience.
Hence it is a great mistake to place the Sanction of the Law, only in its
Obligation to Punishment; this is but a part of the Sanction consequent to its
Obligation to Obedience; therefore the primary guilt of a Sinner lies in
Disobedience, his Fact standing in that Relation to the Law, it becomes
formally the Reason why the Sinner is obliged to Punishment, he in the said
relation of the Fact deserving it.

2. The Bp. is in the right, when he says, That Obligation to Punishment is
that which is in the Law, and only the expressed Will of the Legislator;
therefore it can in no true sense be called the Guilt of the Sinner: And hence
I must needs argue, that the Bp. placing all the Guilt charged upon Christ, in
the Laws Obligation of him to Punishment, does totally renounce the Doctrine of
Christ's being made Sin for any Sinner: For if he was not made Guilty, but only
Punished, he bore only the Law's Obligation, which must be only the Sin of the
Law, and not of the Sinner. But is the Law Sin? God forbid. Yet this Doctrine
plainly makes the Law Sin, because it obliges a Person to Punishment who in no
sense deserves it.

. 9. For the overthrowing this Hypothesis of Imputation of a Sinner's Guilt of
Fact to Jesus Christ, he examines how far guilt is separable from the Act of
Sin, p. 87.

1. As to the Guilt of the Fact; for he that has been an actual transgressor
can never be made not to have been so, and so the guilt of the Fact must
remain.

A. But methinks a Bp. should not impose such a fallacy upon us, that every
Schoolboy can look through; I suppose because he looked upon us as Men very
shallow, and of no penetration into matters. For though he that has been an
actual Transgressor cannot be said not to have been, because it is past, and
cannot be made otherwise than that it has been: Does it follow from this, that
therefore now he is a Transgressor. His Argument does run thus, A Man has been
an Actual Transgressor, therefore now he is, and ever will be; a Man has been
actually Sick or Poor, and therefore he is so now, and ever will be. It Is a
truth unalterable that this or that thing has been, but it follows not that
therefore it is now, and always will be so. It is a truth that all the Saints in
Heaven have been guilty of Sin, but are they therefore so now? Then Heaven is
full of guilty Sinners. He alleges the absurdity of making a Fact past, not to
be past; there is none asserts it; but that the Law may be fully satisfied for
the obliquity of Fact, we assert; and in that sense God is said to take away
our transgressions; for what is the end of Christ's satisfaction in being a
Sin-offering? Is it not to satisfy the Justice of God in a Law-sense, for the
exorbitancy of that Fact; for unless this obliquity be taken away before God,
the Sinner must be bound over to Punishment: And hence no Flesh could be saved,
but all the World must remain Guilty, Unjustified, and Unpardoned.

. 10. He excepts against considering Sins as Debts, which, he says, when once
paid are no longer Debts; but there is difference between the guilt of a Fact,
and contracting a Debt; for a Debt consists in a thing real, whose property may
be altered and transferred, but in criminal matters there is nothing capable of
being transferred which is a thing real, but the obliquity and guilt of the
Fact, is a privative and personal thing.

A. If Christ has directed us to consider of Sin as a Debt, such consideration
is most regular and justifiable. 2. If Obedience be that which is due to the
Law of God in the strictest consideration of Justice, then Disobedience is a
Debt, erg. Sin is a Debt. 3. If a Debt be no more a real thing, (but a
Privation) then other transgressions of the Law; then the obliquity may be
transferred in one as well as in another; but it is so, Erg. For a Debt is a
defect of Payment, and Privation of it; there is nothing but the Payment is
real. 4. In criminal matters no wrong subject is capable to be Punished in a
way of Justice, but he that is guilty.

. 11. He says, the Desert of Punishment which follows the transgression,
cannot be separated from it.

A. That which is mere consequent to a thing, may be separated from the
Essential Nature of the thing, at least in Consideration; but we have showed
that the Desert of Punishment is in the formal Nature of Sin: For Sin as such
is made by the Law to deserve Punishment, and that is absolutely false if the
Scripture be true which he says, Let what Grace or Favor soever be showed,
the desert of Punishment remains still. A. 1. In Man's Proceedings, a Man that
is Pardoned is taken from desert of Punishment; for it is a slander punishable
to call a Pardoned Thief a Thief; and the Law is silenced from dealing with
himas such, or calling him so: But here God's ways are not as Man's, when he
Pardons he also Justifies: He provides as well for a full satisfaction of his
Law, for the very obliquity and exorbitancy of the Fact. But he says a
Privation cannot be transferred. A. It Is, true a Physical privation cannot, but a
Moral may; and a Debt may by his own Concession; but a Debt is a Privation of
the Creditor's Money. I wonder an Ecclesiastical Man should not know it as well
as others, unless they call Men Debtors that owe them nothing. Again, the B.
says, No Sinner can deserve that one that was not a Sinner should suffer for
his faults. A. It is true, no Sinner can deserve that Christ should suffer for
him, no, nor any ordinary Principal Debtor can deserve that any Man should be
his Surety; but another in kindness to him may put himself under Obligation to
Pay, and Write himself Debtor in his stead; so though Sinners deserved
Punishment, yet not that Christ should be Punished for them; and therefore that
Christ is punished for their Sins, flows from the love of God, and kindness of
the Lord Jesus, from which he putting himself under Law-Proceedings, and
Suffers in a way of Justice for Sin, i. e. taking upon him the Deserts of Man's
Sin. Bp Nor can the Law, or Act of any Person, transfer the desert of
Punishment from him that was the actual Transgressor. A. Here Is miserable
Divinity, it is time sure to come to our Litany, Lord have Mercy upon us. A. 1.
Cannot a Law transfer a deserved Punishment to another that fully satisfies it?
Why does any one fully satisfy the Law for another, but that the Law should
have nothing to say to him, to Charge or Accuse him; which if so, his desert is
taken away. If a Child or Wife commit a great Theft, does not the Guilt in Law
fall on the Father or Husband; and is not the Personal Desert taken away by the
Father or Husband's satisfying the Law. 2. Can no Person? Cannot God transfer
the Guilt? It Is strange that the Scripture should be so mistaken in saying
Jehovah laid upon him the Iniquities of us all. All the Answers to this are so
frivolous, that they are not worth our trouble of Answering them.

. 12. B. The Turpitude as to the Act of Sin cannot be re moved from it. A. All
these things being inseparable, Sin remains in the best, yea, glorified Saints;
for Personal Guilt remaining and a Turpitude inseparable, as it must needs so
long as Personal Guilt remains, there can be no Sanctified one on Earth or
Heaven; for Guilt and Filth is permanent ever, never to be removed according to
this Doctrine.

Bp Wherever the Act of Sin is, it must be displeasing to God, but the
Turpitude, as it affects the Person of a Sinner, must have another
consideration. A. Is Sin displeasing to God? And can the Sinner be pleasing to
him so long as he lies under the fault of Sin, the desert and guilt thereof?
For suppose he is taken off from Punishment, can he be received into favor
with God? Does God accept Sinners in all their Guilt and Turpitude? 2. I
understand not how Turpitude of Sin, is distinguished from the Guilt of Sin,
the said Guilt being the Turpitude the Law finds, punishes for it, and
condemns it, even in Man's Law: And although Sin carries an inherent Privation
of good, and an internal pravity; yet there is none of this that has not
personal guilt in it which is (...), and so far at least was charged on Christ;
and so far a believer washed in the Blood of Christ, is purged from all his
Sins, and is perfectly Righteous in the sight of God in Christ, (though not in
himself,) notwithstanding all the inherency of remaining corruption in him,
after he is partaker of Regenerating and Sanctifying Grace.

Bp For God may see cause to forgive a Sinner, and receive him into favor,
although he still continues to hate and abhor the Sin. A. What cause can God
have to forgive a Sinner, and receive him into favor, besides his Free Grace,
and the Satisfaction of his Son which he has made to his Justice, in bearing
his Sin, and suffering for it? And this God does, and yet hates and abhors Sin;
for though Christ bore Sin, it was not in kindness to it, but to condemn it in
his Flesh: And though God loves and saves the Person of the Sinner, yet he
always hated Sin, both of the Elect and Reprobate.

13. Bp As to the Guilt of Sin, as it relates to Punishment, these things are
to be considered. He should have told us what Guilt of Sin he means, for
obligation to Punishment, he told us is in the Law, not in the Delinquent,
therefore his Guilt is not of Sin, but of the Law. I have not much to say to
the three particulars, provided they be rightly meant, viz. 1. Although a
Divine Justice require satisfaction for Sin, it is not necessary the actual
Transgressors should undergo the Punishment which they have deserved. [ i. e.
if another undergo their deserved Punishment by a substitution legally in their
stead in regard of Desert and Punishment] for then there would be no room for
Grace and Favor [which is not showed by God to any absolutely in a
dispensation, with Justice] but in such a way as may glorify Divine Justice.
2. That it is consistent with the Wisdom and Justice of God, to accept of a
Mediator [such an one as is a Surety] to interpose between the Severity of the
Law, and the Punishment of the Transgressor, upon terms agreeable to Divine
Wisdom and Mercy. A. 1. The Mediator ought to be between God and Man, in
respect of Sin especially, the cause of Punishment; for it is Sin that is
contrary to God's Law, Punishment of the Sinner is agreeable to God's Law. 2.
He speaks of terms upon which God accepted of a Mediator; I cannot understand
what he means by it, for Christ's Mediatorship was the condition of God's
acceptance of us. Christ, in respect of himself, was absolutely accepted, not
upon any previous conditions performed by him, or after-conditions to be
performed by us: Which latter I find he intends. 3. That such a Mediator
undertaking to make Atonement for our Sins, by Suffering in our stead and
Place, [as Sinners] may truly and properly be said to undergo the Punishment of
our Sins; and our Sins to be the Meritorious cause of it. [By no means in
Suffering only upon an occasional remote reason from Sin; but he must suffer
judicially, taking upon him a Legal Charge of Merit and Desert in the place and
stead of the Sinner.

Now he seems to suspect himself in this Doctrine of his to fall upon the
Shelves of mavelous inconsistency, and therefore endeavors to forestall the
following Objection.

If Desert adhere to Personal Guilt, [inseparably as before asserted] how can
our Sins be the Meritorious cause of another's Punishment? The Argument against
his Doctrine he cannot Answer, for where there is no Guilt, there is no Desert;
and where there is no Desert, there is no Punishment in legal Sense. He riggles
up and down under the pressure of this Objection, but cannot get it off.

I answer, that a meritorious cause may be considered two ways. 1. In a Natural
Course of things; and so Desert follows the Fact, so that the Sinner always
deserves Punishment, and no interposition, nor forgiveness, can take off the
Desert, etc. A. The subject Act to Sin is Natural, but the formal Nature of
Sin, as Guilt, is Moral, as it stands in Relation to the Law: So that supposing
that Ordine naturae, the Guilt or Desert follows the Fact, yet it is not in a
Physical course of things. 2. His after Assertion implies that no Sin is
pardoned in and through the Satisfaction of Christ, that whether the Sin be
Pardoned in a way of Grace, or satisfied for in a way of Justice, the Sin
remains in its full strength upon the Sinner for ever; for he that deserves
Punishment does so by the Law, for the strength of Sin is the Law, and
therefore must of necessity, for fear of Death, the Wages of Sin, be all the
Day long subject unto Bondage; this is a sad Gospel.

2. He says, As Desert implies only a just reason of Punishment, and so there
may be a Meritorious cause in extraordinary Cases, when the Legislator consents
that another bear the Punishment which others have deserved, Immerito quemque
punire est injuste punire, as John's. out of Cret. Immerito is (...), merito
(...) and in Cic. Jure and merito, are most commonly put together. A. Here we
have the cause given. The Question is in plain terms, whether Christ Died
merito for our Sins? He here plainly grants those things, 1. That Desert
implies a just reason of Punishment; then I argue, if Christ was punished
justly, then he Died with a just reason thereof; and there can be no just
reason of Punishment, but Desert; and if this was on Christ, it came from
Christ's own Personal Sins, or from ours: The Bp would not say from his,
therefore from ours. 2. He grants there may be a meritorious Cause in
extraordinary Cases, when the Legislator consents that another shall undergo
the Punishment: What Is that? 1. Was any Case more extraordinary than this we
are speaking of? 2. He must needs mean, that when the Legislator consents that
another shall undergo the Punishment, that then the said Person so undergoing,
stands under the Desert of that Person for whom he is punished. 3. He grants
the truth, and none can deny it, that Immerito aliquem punire est injuste
punire, it is (...) punire sine ratione in juditio. Nothing of Suffering can be
reasonable in Judicial Proceedings, unless there be a desert, therefore he
says that Cic. puts jure and merito together. Now this is the Mystery that the
Bp is to reveal to show how Christ was Punished for a meritorious Cause, and
yet stood not under any of our Personal Deserts.

. 14. He comes now to Answer what is said for Christ's bearing our Personal
Guilt; and the most that he says is, to resay what he said before, and is
sufficiently Answered already; but to do him right, we will briefly weigh his
strength: The first is, The injustice of Punishing any immerito; this is the
sum of it. His Answer lies chiefly in asserting that this is the Socinian way
of Arguing; and so we see the Antinomians join with the Socinians. But how the
same way of Arguing? May not one and the same medium be used truly and falsely?
How is it the same way of Arguing? Two Ships may Sail two contrary ways with
one and the same Wind; but that Answer which overthrows the Socinian, must
overthrow the Neonom. For the Position is true, and will be granted on all
hands. The Question between the Socin. and Antinom. is, whether Christ Died
merito. No, says the Socin. because he was an innocent Person in himself: The
Antinom. (as he calls in this, all Calvinists) says he Died merito; not upon
the merits of his own Sins, but under the merits of ours, in whose stead he
Died: Now comes in the Neonom. and says he was punished, but not for any
Personal Desert of himself or ours. Let the Candid Reader judge now, who is the
Socinian; this is enough to show his unfairness in this matter; and what he
talks after to this matter, is but repeating over and over what has been
brought to the test, and found very weak; but tells us still, that what he
says is very agreeable to the Natural Sense of Men's Minds, [he should have
said to the Natural Man that knows little of the Spirit] if they would allow
themselves the liberty of thinking; [yea, of thinking themselves out of
Scripture or any rational Understanding] and therefore I am aware still that
Neon. are the most thinking Men in their own conceits in the World, though I
find none more abusive and unfair in Argumentation.

. 15. Bp. But do we not by this means take away the proper Punishment of Christ
for Sins, and so overthrow the Doctrine of Satisfaction. A. I say you certainly
do. For, 1. How can you say Christ was properly Punished, is it for such
thinking Men as you are? That any Punishment is proper Punishment, which is not
deserved Punishment. 2. How is it possible that you say, that that Punishment
is Satisfactory to God's Law, which is not for the Sins which break the Law.
But the Bp says no, For I take away nothing but the Punishment that follows
Personal Guilt, and if this be not taken away, the Antinom. Sense must be
allowed. A. Say you so, stand aside all Protestants, your House is coming down
on your Heads: Well, we come upon this Dilemma, you must either deny that ever
Christ bore any deserved Punishment, or be Antinom.

I am sorry to see that my late esteemed Friend Mr. L. gave occasion to such
rebukes which he has received in the Answer to his Appeal; that in a fixed
Enmity to Dr. C. he condemned Christ's bearing the Personal Guilt of our Sins,
as false, blasphemous, and impossible; whereas he declares it as the Opinion he
contended for, That the Lord Jesus Christ voluntarily, on the Father's
invitation, coming under the Sanction of the violated Law, was justly charged
with the Guilt of our Sin; found Guilty, Condemned, Sentenced, and Executed as
such, even by that God which laid on him the Iniquity of us all. Now the words
of the Bp are these, If I do not misunderstand, both Dr. C. and you, you say as
much in consequence as he, -- And therefore you cannot disown the transferring
Personal Guilt upon Christ. This he sufficiently proves, and I cannot but
subscribe to the truth of the Bishop's Judgment in this matter; for this is a
fault and a great inconsistency, which I always disliked, to inveigh against
some as Erroneous, and yet saying those very things which they spoke.

For as the Bp says, What Guilt of our Sins could be charged on Christ; if not
the Personal Guilt? etc. See p. 28, 99, 100. I forbear repeating more in Honor
to my Deceased Friend. It is good to own and defend truth as truth, without
respect of Persons.

. 16. The second proposed by the Bishop for Answer is,

That without this translation of Personal Guilt, no advantage could come to us
by Christ's Sufferings, because a Man suffers only for his own fault, unless
the fault of another be laid upon. The Argument has great force in it: For, 1.
Without translation of our Guilt upon another, either a guilty Person must Die
in his Guilt, i. e. in his Sins, or he must be absolutely Pardoned without
satisfaction; in both these there can be no Benefit by Christ's Sufferings. 2.
Another Person's Sufferings will not profit me, unless it be in my room or
stead, and taken upon that Law-defect that belonged unto me. In Answer he
says, Here is no question but our Iniquities were laid on Christ, and that he
Suffered in our stead; but the Dispute is about the manner how, whether our
very Transgressions themselves were laid upon him, and how it does appear that
we cannot receive the Benefits of Christ's Sufferings, unless that were done,
which is supposed to be done. It is a great Argument with them, our Sins are
Debts, and they are reckoned to Christ as our Surety: To show how little force
there is in it, we need only these Considerations; 1. That there is no
sufficient ground for it in Scripture; as for that of Isa. 53.6. there is not
the least ground for it in the Text; for the words properly signify that he
made our Iniquities meet, and to fall upon him, i. e. as a Man falls upon his
Enemy when he meets him: So the Jewish Interpreters.

But does this Man say enough to take off the force of this place of Scripture?
1. He tells us that the meaning is he made our Sins to meet upon him; the words
are here, Jehovah made the Iniquities of us all to fall upon him, the word is,
(...) what is that but Iniquity? Is it ever taken for Sacrifice for Sin? Who
made them to meet? Jehovah the Legislator, God the Judge of all, and how can
Iniquities of many meet on one Person? Can it be any way but judicially? As the
Person is a Surety, chargeable, and charged with the guilt of many. But see
what a Sense he would sham off his Reader with. As a Man falls upon his Enemy
when he meets him; he should have said, as many Enemies falls upon a Man when
they meet him; for it was the Iniquities of many; but how could our Iniquities
fall upon Christ to hurt him, if the Guilt of them fell not upon him? And why
should Jehovah make many Sins fall upon Christ? Was there any reason for it in
Christ, or us, or in the Justice of God, to set such Millions of Mastiff Dogs
on Jesus Christ, on poor innocent Jesus? Or what Design of Wisdom was it, when
those Sins were neither to slay Christ, nor Christ to slay them? And this he
tells us was the Jews and Symachus his Interpretation; he knew what Opinion the
Jews were of concerning Christ, and this so eminent Prophecy of him; and he
might have told us what his Friend Grotius's Opinion was about this place; but
he acquaints us how the lxx render, He gave him up to our Iniquities; and is
not that against him? How could Christ be given up to our Iniquities? But in
bearing the deserved Punishments of our Sins? And Procopius, he says,
expresses it by (...), is not this as a Surety? And yet he says here is
nothing like Suretiship to pay our Debts for us. Now if the Bp. had pleased to
read out the Chapter, he might have seen two Verses more, wherein this Truth is
literally express; V. 11. He shall bear their Iniquities, (...), he shall take
their Iniquities as a Burden on his Shoulders to carry them away, as the
Scapegoat did the Iniquities of the Children of Israel: And the lxx renders it
(...), He shall take up their Iniquities upon him. And V. 12. (...), He shall
bear the Sin of many; shall the Spirit of God express it self to one thing so
fully and plainly, and all fly away at the Puff of a Bp. as Chaff before the
Wind? What is all that this learned Bp. has said to refute this Doctrine of
Christ's bearing our Sins, and satisfying for them as our Debts to Divine
Justice, but this? Here Is nothing like Christ's Suretiship to pay our Debts for
us, we will not take his Word for it, till he proves that Sin is not a Debt to
the Law of God, when Christ has told us it is. 2. Till he shows any other
credible way of bearing another's Faults, besides this way of Suretiship; till,
3dly, He shows and proves against the Apostle Peter, that there is no other way
of paying Debts, on purchasing or redeeming, than with plain Silver and Gold.

. 17. He proceeds to show us the great Harm of Christ's being a Surety to pay
our Debts of Sin, p. 107. 1. Then Christ has fully discharged our Debts
already. This is one Mischief of it, but God forbid it should that Christ
should do Harm in paying any Man's Debts; but to do it by halves is to pay some
only, and leave others for us to pay. How did he satisfy God's Justice if he
gave not full Satisfaction? God forbid that Christ should leave a Farthing for
us to pay. 2. The second Mischief is, that we have nothing to do toward the
Payment of our Debt; all that we have to do is to believe, and to be thankful;
for all this Transaction was long since past without Consideration of any Act
on our parts. A. Is it a Harm that Christ has done so much for us in way of
Satisfaction and Purchase? that he has left nothing of ours to put in for a
Share in this Honor; no, not our believing it self. I take it to be the Glory
of Christ, and the blessed Privilege of Believers, that he has provided for
Believers such a Furniture of Grace, that they shall believe on him, bear his
Image, walk in his Steps, to the Glory of his Name, in all Thankfulness, and
new Obedience. The third Mischief is, that it nulls all Faederal Conditions on
our part: but of this, more afterward. 4. That we cannot suffer for those Sins
that are already discharged. Is this such a Harm? It Is neither Reason or
Justice that we should pay a Debt to the Law which is already discharged;
Christ has born all the Sins of Believers in the deserved Punishments thereof;
hence the Sufferings of the Saints are not Penal, nor can be, but are Blessings
for their Good, purchased by Christ for them.

. 18. The Bp. says, There Is but one place of Scripture to be found to favor
this Sense of the Suretiship of Christ, viz. Heb. 7.22. It is easy to instance
in many places that favor it, and prove it, it being, as I may say, the very
Marrow of the Gospel; but as to this place, it expressly calls Christ a Surety;
and it is the more remarkable, as to our present purpose, that as the Spirit of
God has called Sins Debts, and Christ's Suffering a Price paid, and expressly
excluding Payment by Silver or Gold, so Christ is called (...), which, as
Lexicog. say, does primarily signify a Surety for Money. Hence it appears, the
Spirit of God makes much of the Metaphor, of Debt and Payment, to confirm our
Faith in this, that there is no better account of the Nature of Sin, than a Debt
to God's Justice; and no better account of the Sufferings of Christ, than that
they were a Payment of this Debt to the Justice of God. And what if it be but
in one place of Scripture? When a Truth is so fully and plainly expressed in
one Text, it is enough; there are many Truths of great weight are so, besides
the mavelous Concurrence of other texts of Scripture, to the tenor thereof.
But he says, this text speaks of a Covenant, not of the Surety of a Covenant.
A. What is it that makes a Debt is not a Covenant, or compact? But it is of a
better Covenant, i. e. a Surety to pay the Debts of the old Covenant of Works,
but brought in by a better Covenant, the new Covenant, being a Covenant of
Grace, answering the Ends of God's Grace more than the old, doing that which
the old could not do to save Sinners by a Righteousness which is not their own,
but better, in that it has a Surety that it brings in to engage unto God to
pay all our Debts due to the Justice of God from us under the old Covenant,
which had no Surety, Heb. 7.19. makes it better in nothing else but the
bringing in a better Hope, viz. the Surety. But he positively denies that
Christ was to pay our debts unto God. If so, what is the reason the Church
prays, Forgive us our Debts, when God's way of Forgiveness of a Sinner, as
asserted in Scripture, is by bringing in a Surety to pay his debts of Sin, Col.
1.14. In whom we have Redemption through his Blood, even the Forgiveness of Sins.

But what a Surety is it that he will have Christ to be? Sure it is the same
the Socinians will have to be only, i. e. a Surety to engage for God to us, not
for us to God, but a Surety only for the Truth and Faithfulness of God in his
Promises. See his Words, p. 110.

. 18. The Bp. takes notice of some dissenting Brethren, (he might better said
of Protestants dissenting from the Church of Rome, who talk much of Surety,
Righteousness, -- and of Christ's being our Surety as to the Payment of our
Debts, because the Debtor may be said to pay the Sum the Surety lays down for
him, and that God does account that Believers do pay that Debt of Obedience,
which Christ has paid in their Stead, because they are a legal Person with
Christ, and all this depends upon this mistaken Notion of Suretiship.

A. It is very sad that so plain Scripture should corrupt our Minds with
mistaken Notions, how shall we know we are mistaken or not in any then? Or that
we do know the Mind of the Spirit in them, if when we have a plain text,
expressing a Truth according to the plain and undeniable Sense of other texts
of Scripture, not only agreeing with, but essential to the Analogy of Faith? If
we must look on this received Doctrine to be a mistaken Notion, then surely
notwithstanding the Revelation that God has given us in his Word, he has left
us under Chymerian Darkness, and inextricable Laborinths in the great Points of
Life and Salvation; but what has he to say against this received Doctrine by
the dissenting Brethren, and all true Protestants? If once it be supposed that
we perfectly obeyed the Law in Christ, there can be no room for Remission of
Sins; for how can Sins be forgiven to them that have obeyed the Law?

I cannot answer this Argument better than in the very Words of Mr. R. Capel,
(whom none I suppose will call an Antinom.) in Vindication of Dr. Twiss, on
this Point. There is a double Acception of the Term Remission of Sins. 1. There
is a meritorious Justification, or Remission of Sins, this is of Sins before
they are committed. 2. There Is an actual Justification or Remission of Sin; and
this is not till after our Sin is committed, and we do believe all this, none
of these Exceptors do or can question. Those that lean much to the Doctrine of
Arminius and Vortius in this point, may see all this expressed in clear terms
by Vortius. So that it is one thing for all the Sins of all the Elect to be
pardoned to Christ for them, that was done before we were, or our Sins were;
another thing to be pardoned to them; Christ was made a Curse for us by
Imputation; for that the Father did impute all our Sins as a Judge, to Christ
as a Surety, and did exact all of him as guilty by that Law -- and this is (I
conceive) all the meaning of Dr. Twiss, and is, or at least ought to be, the
meaning of us all; and this a learned Man calls a mystical Justification,
because all the Sins of all the Elect are as laid upon Christ, so remitted unto
Christ, our Head and Husband; which Pardon and Absolution he took in our Name,
and keeps for our Use. -- See Capel of Repentance, p. 257, 258. For
Brevity-sake I shall add nothing further to the Answer of this Argument of the
Bp.

. 19. He adds, It does not follow, because a Debt may be transferred to a
Surety; that our Sins may be transferred to Christ; and his Reasons are, 1.
Because Sins cannot be transferred as Money. A. But does not the Spirit of God
sufficiently acquaint us, that it is a moral Debt, Sin is the Debt, our owing,
and not paying Obedience to the Law; and that Christ paid not Silver and Gold,
but his Precious Blood; but he says, That although the Sinner be said to owe a
Debt to the Law, yet that Debt lies in an Obligation to Punishment, which he is
liable to by the Guilt of the Fact. A. Now he owns the Sinner owes a Debt to
the Law; but that is not Obedience, but Punishment: But believe it, Punishment
is the Debt of the Law to the Sinner, the Wages of Sin (by the Law) is Death:
But that whereby the Sinner becomes a Debtor to the Law, is his Failure, in
giving due Obedience to the Preceptive Part of the Law; for its Obedience the
Law does naturally and primarily enjoin and expect from the Subject. Punishment
may be transferred by the Legislator's Consent. A. Punishment without Merit is
but suffering, and not legally inflicted, and cannot be done by a Legislator
without Dispensing with his Law.

Object. This Debt arises from Guilt of Fact, how then can any discharge the
Debt, without taking the fault? I answer, That taking the fault can signify no
more than being answerable to the Law for it, which must respect the Debt of
Punishment. Reader, But does not this quite overthrow all the Bp. has been
doing? For if Punishment (as always it is) be answering the Law for Sin, this
always implies that the punished Person bears the just Demerit of his Sin, else
why do the Law inflict Punishment? It Is not because that Man has not obeyed,
but disobeyed; wherein the Punished is only passive in suffering, though active
in contracting the Guilt, wherein lies the Demerit of Punishment, and makes the
Wages due from the Law; -- And he that takes away the Guilt of Punishment, does
satisfy the Justice of the Law. A. The satisfying the Justice of the Law lies
in inflicting deserved Punishment; for Guilt is not in the Law, as the Bp. has
said, but in a Person whom the Law has found guilty; therefore the Law is not
satisfied, by afflicting in general, but afflicting some Person that is found
guilty and faulty by the Law.

As to the Objection, That nothing is the Merit of Punishment but Reatrus
culpae, he answers so little, that it is not worth our Cognizance; and that
little is but a Rehearsal of what has been replied to already.

. 20. Bp. Suppose the Fault could be transferred, as a Debt may, how comes it
to pass that upon this Translation there must be a present Discharge? A. There
must be such to him that pays the Debt, and this given to him for the Benefit
and Use of the Prisoner when he will please to give it. Christ must be
justified from our Sins, and discharged, or else not raised from bearing them;
when he had satisfied Justice, all our Sins were pardoned to him; but another
Act of Grace is showed, in bringing home, and applying Pardon to; and therefore
for discharging us from the Law as Prisoners of Hope, through what Christ has
fully done and suffered.

B. This Doctrine tends to encourage Men to neglect, or careless Performance of
strict Obedience, which they owe to God. A. This is the Objection against the
Doctrine of the Grace of God, which Enemies to it made, and the Apostle Paul
answers, Romans 6. But the Bp. will not take his Answer; there he says it
naturally disposes Men's Minds to a passive careless Temper, and wait for
Supplies from above. A. The Grace of God never enclines the Heart to so ill a
Temper, but quite contrary, Tit. 2.11, 12. It is one thing, what a Man is by
Nature, and what by Grace; Men by Nature are naturally inclined to abuse the
Grace of God, but are not so by effectual Grace.

Bp. -- They depend upon Gord's working in them, to will and to do of his own
good Pleasure, without setting themselves to work out their own Salvation with
fear and trembling. A. The Bp. should have known that the Abuse of the Grace of
God is no just Argument against it; and if some Men do so, will he censure all
as such? God's working in Men to will and to do, and their working out their
own Salvation, are not Contradictions, if rightly understood; but to show us
that the Grace of God is first in all we do, that teaches and works in us to
work, both to begin and continue to serve God with all our Might; but with
Fear, lest we should give the Glory of all unto our selves in leaning and
depending on our own Strength. The Bp. might have spared the rest of his
Banter, it is not worth Paper and Ink to spend about it.

. 21. He makes a great Clutter against the dissenting Brethren, as if in their
Doctrine of the Free Grace of God, they would allow no Conditions upon any
Account; and says, here is something beyond mere Gratitude and Service, and
what is that? It Is a Connection in away of Duty, and Means in order to the end,
and not mere Connection in a way of Event so that those to whom God will give
Glory, he will give Grace to fit Persons for it. A. Hereby it is easy to see
what strange Monsters the Opposers of the Doctrine of Christ do ignorantly or
maliciously represent the Professors and Defenders thereof to be. Do they deny
a firm Connection between Grace and Glory? Do they deny the Necessity of
Holiness? Indeed not as a Faederal Condition of Happiness, but a Condition of
necessary Connection; and as he gallops along, he is pleased to fall upon some
Expressions of mine. Some may perhaps say, What is it but to make that Promise
to secure Life upon doing of our Duties? And if this be not to make the Gospel
a more overgrown and swinging Covenant of Works, than ever the old Law was, I
have lost, [not they] my Theological Measures, Neonom. p. 3, and 296. Reader,
Upon these few quoted Lines, picked up at a distance, not truly quoted neither,
he makes a large Harangue about Theological Measures, (which Words I applied
not to any but to my self) and say [they] The Standard of Theological Measures
is the Scripture. And so I say. And says he, St. Paul was as little suspected
of setting up a Covenant of Works, as any Penman in the New Testament. I think
so too. But he has said, 2 Timothy 1.19. God has saved us, and called us with an
holy Calling, not according to our Works, etc. I subscribe to the Apostles
Doctrine heartily, and it is expressly against the Bp's Doctrine, who would have
our Works the Foederal Condition of the Covenant of Grace, when the Apostle
says, who has called us not according to our Works; and what is the Genuine
Meaning thereof, but that though God has called us to Holiness, yet it is not
according to our Works, as a Covenant Condition thereof, so Tit. 3.5. but it is
the manner of these Men to quote Places for themselves, which are Diametrically
opposite to them? He makes a needless Sputter about working out of our
Salvation, and says we are told, Neon. part 3. and 296. No more is meant by
this than a continual maintaining a holy Jealousy of our selves, lest we
should fail of the Grace of God, by trusting in our selves, etc. Now does it
become a Bp. to be so false, in representing what he would expose; there is not
a word of, No more is meant by this, but that this is meant, it may contain
more; but this is every Believer's Duty laboriously to continue in all ways of
Holiness and new Obedience, but fear and tremble in Suspicion of his corrupt
Heart, which is apt to make his Obedience Hay and Stubble, in ascribing it to
his own Strength, and in making it his Righteousness for his Justification; and
if any will rationally argue against this Doctrine; I am ready to defend it, as
I am other Truths, which I have asserted that some have snarl'd and banter'd
at, but have not made any fair show of proving them Errors; and till they do
that, I shall not honor them so far, as to blot Paper about them.

. 22. What remains is only to draw odious Consequences upon this Doctrine of
laying our Sins on Christ, or his bearing the desert of Punishment for our
Sins. 1. There Is nothing for us to do, but only to sit still, and expect when
God will work in us. A. Does the Text say we must sit still? Does any one say
so? But the Scripture says, and the Saints have practiced, to be continually
waiting upon God in the Prayer, and all the means of Grace, to work in them, to
will and to do; and as God works it in them, he works them to it, knowing that
of themselves they are not able to think a good Thought; but herein being
enabled by Divine Assistance to do a good Work, they must keep a Watch over
their own Hearts, that they rob not God of the Glory of his Efficiency, and
take it to themselves. Bp. Paul gives another Sense when he persuades rich Men
to do Good, 1 Timothy 6.18. How another Sense? Does not the Grace of God persuade
and teach Men to do good Works? Does not the same Apostle tell us; that the
Grace of God, that brings Salvation, teach Men to deny Ungodliness, and to live
holily, etc. Again, Is laying hold of Eternal Life by good Works a swingeing
Covenant of Works? No, who said so? But there is a twofold laying hold of a
thing; one is by way of Right; that is, not in our Works themselves, but in
Christ; and a laying hold by way of Participation and Possession; that is, an
effect of the Covenant right in Christ; and so all Believers by the exercise of
Faith and Holiness, are continually maintaining their hold of Christ and
Eternal Life, given them in Christ; and the Theological Measure holds here,
that Paul has not by this Text thrown down what he taught of the Efficacy of
the Grace of God, but only prosecutes that Doctrine; that where it brings
Salvation, it teaches Men to do good Works; therefore he exhorts Timothy to
teach by the Word what God's Grace works by the Word and Spirit, neither does
he accommodate himself to rich Men, as if he intended they should be saved in a
Covenant of Works, which would be no better than Bargain and Sale of Eternal
Life.

Bp. -- The Foundation of the Covenant it self was certainly nothing but the
Grace of God through Christ. A. Foundation here is very ambiguous; I know the
Neonom. and Papists, and all will say so, when they say Christ purchased the
Covenant of Grace, i. e. the new Law, and deny him to be the Condition of it;
and therefore he speaks always in their Dialect cunningly; -- yea, and the
Foundation of our Hopes as to our obtaining the Benefits. A. If so then, how is
Christ the Foundation of such Hopes? Is it not Christ believed in, as the great
Obtainer of Right to Eternal Life, and the great Bestower of effectual Grace;
for without this Faith there can be no Hope, nor any purifying our self, as he
is pure.

. 23. -- Not as Works meritorious of a Reward, [so say the Socinians too] but
as Means which God has appointed in order to an end. A. I pray who denies all
this of the Calvenists? All which he calls Antin. but does he not trip up his
own Heels by this Concession? I say, and I am sure can prove, that the
Condition of a Covenant compact, let the thing required be little or more, it is
meritorious of the covenant Reward promised, and is meritum expacto; now then
if he concede that our Works are not meritorious of a Reward, he gives us all
we contend for, provided he yield that the Condition of a Covenant compact is
meritorious of the Reward, which all Men of Sense will acknowledge; well then,
what Place [after all this noise] is Works to have? He says, They are only
Means which God has appointed in order to an end. A. If this be rightly meant,
we will grant it, and yet hold our Assertion untouched; for though all Foederal
Conditions are Means, yet all Means are not Covenant Conditions; antecedent
things are Means of coming to consequent, but not always Foederal Conditions.
Now if he will say eternal Life is that end, I will say more, that he has not
Eternal Life who has not such a Faith, which has its Fruits unto Holiness;
and that this Holy Life belongs to, and is that Eternal Life begun in us. Bp.
As a Son that has an Estate promised him of the free Gift of his Father, but
yet he requires some Conditions to be performed by him before he comes to the
Possession of it; can any one think this to be Bargain and Sale between Father
and Son. A. The Comparison is too short to illustrate, much less to prove the
thing. For, 1. In this the Father will not enjoin any Conditions but such as
the Son has Ability to perform. As for Example; He will not enjoin a poor lame
Cripple to leap over a Hedge first, nor a Stone-blind illiterate Son to read a
Chapter in the Hebrew Bible. Now to say that our Case runs parallel, it is
false; for if God promise Eternal Life upon the condition of our good Works,
who are dead in Trespasses and Sins, it is to do it on an unperformable
condition; which becomes not the Wisdom of God. 2. And he says, Can any one
think this to be Bargain and Sale? A. Yes sure, there are such Fools in the
World. If all be so who believe not as the Bp. says, I would ask the Bp. if
his Father should tell him, Child, if thou will resign up thy Bishopric of
Worcester to thy Brother, I will give thee the Bishopric of Durham, would not
the Bp. demand the Bishopric of Durham as due to him from his Father upon his
Resignation, let the Father be Pater Patriae, the King, or any other?

. 24. Now he says, If these be Theological Measures, they had need to seek for
new ones. No sure, for the Bp. has saved us that Labor, he has found them
for us; but such as are but Trash by the Standard of Scripture and Reason. Now
he reckons he has paid off Theological Measures, but faith, he has not yet
done with them. Sure we may most safely take our Theological Measures from our
Savior, [yes surely, there is no doubt of it] for he knew best how far, and in
what Sense the Guilt of our Sins was transferred upon him, and whether there
followed an immediate Discharge upon it, without regard to Conditions on our
parts; the Question of the highest Import being put to him, what shall I do to
inherit Eternal Life? A. Where lies the Force of this Argument? It must be
here: If Christ had this Question twice put to him, What shall I do to inherit
Eternal Life? And his Answer was, Keep the Commandments, and thou shall live;
then the Guilt of our Sins were not laid on Christ [non sequitur] so he says,
as to him, Luke 10.25, 28. Had our Savior only a mind to banter him? No, what
was it then? He himself tells us, It was to convince him of the Impossibility
of his doing what was necessary for Eternal Life. He should have added under
the Covenant of Works; and therefore of performing a Covenant Condition
answerable to the Covenant of Works, whereby the Jews expected a merited
Reward, they sought Life by the Righteousness of the Law; and he acknowledges,
That it is not improbable that our Lord intended to convince him of his Folly,
who supposes he had kept those Commandments in the Jewish Sense of them. And
this is the true meaning of the Text, why therefore is this Text brought to
prove that Christ bore not the Guilt of Sins? Baculus stat in Angulo ergo
pluit. There Is as iittle consequence from the other, Mark 10.17. The same or
like Answer may serve, which he suggests himself. There was an immoderate Love
to the World in his Heart, which he was not aware of till our Savior put him
upon a severe Trial of himself, Go sell what thou have, etc. Upon this Trial he
showed himself, and went away sorrowful, notwithstanding all his seeming Desire
for Heaven, this was the true Reason, and no other; and Christ intended not
thereby to establish a Covenant of Works; and what he says after is to little
purpose; it is only to wrest the Sense of a Text from what he thought in his
Conscience it would bear. And so Luke 16.9. Make to your self Friends of the
Mammon. What, does he say of that? Not by way of Merit, or any foolish
Imagination of that sort, but in Obedience to the Will of God, who has made it
a necessary Duty. Do they speak otherwise who hold Christ bore their Personal
Guilt? I wonder a Bp. should trifle so shamefully. Again, he says, If these be
Theological Measures, what does our Savior mean, when he says, Luke 13.24.
Strive to enter? etc. A. He means, not that he did not bear the Guilt of Sin,
or any should strive in his own Strength, or strive as a Foederal Condition;
for he says, Many shall strive, [i. e. falsely in such a manner,] and shall not
be able; and who interprets striving here, of faint and weak Endeavors?
Certainly he would render all them that holds that Christ bore the Guilt of Sin
to be a pitiful sort of Christians, that have little or no regard to the
Command of Christ. Sure, if they were so, they would not many of them so
joyfully have suffered the spoiling of their Goods by the Bishops in the late
time of Persecution; and what led them to it but a Conscience of Obedience to
the Commands of Christ?

He says, One would think it impossible to enter into a Man's Head, to suppose
that a Man's own Righteousness should be excluded from being conjunct with the
Righteousness of Christ, if he look to V. 21, and 24. A. Christ does not in the
least oppose Man's Righteousness to his, nor make it conjunct with his, but
gives only a Character of such as be sincere Believers and Professors of his
Name, and will be found so at the last Day.

What he says of immediate Discharge has been spoken to before, that the
immediate Effect of Christ's Death was a Right to a Discharge; the Discharge it
self could not be before they have a Natural and Spiritual Being.

. 25. Bp. If there be no condition, how can they be satisfied that the Guilt of
their Sins are laid on Christ? A. In answer to this it is said, believe with all
thy Heart, etc. that must be a real receiving of Christ: He that has the Son
has Life, 1 John 5.11, 12. The Sinner first receives Christ, after sees and
knows he has received Christ himself, V. 13, and 20. And we own there may be
presumption, where there is an appearance of believing and knowing, only there
need not be such sputter as he makes about these matters, neither does it
profit his cause.

Object. But while we were Sinners Christ Died for us; so says the Apostle,
Romans 5. and others after him: Two things thereby signified, 1. That Christ Died
for us under that Consideration, for he came not to Save those that are
Righteous, but those that were Sinners. 2. That it was long ago that Christ
Died while we were in the first Adam, and in an unregenerate state, Sinners of
the Gentiles; to which he rejoins thus, How then must every Sinner believe that
Christ Died for him? A. Every Sinner under the Call of the Gospel, is to
believe in Christ for Life and Salvation, according to the constant tenor of
the Gospel; but to know Christ did bear his Sins, and die for him, results from
this Believing. He that has the Son, i. e. by believing, has Life. Receiving
is first before knowing that a Man has Received; and it is Gospel truth, that
Christ bore the Sins of every one that truly believes; and every one is an
Elect Person, whose Sins Christ bore: For if the Apostle spoke true, he that
makes sure his Calling, makes sure his Election. -- Then says the Bp. here is
Universal Redemption asserted in its full extent; and what is more, here is
Universal Election too; if all Men can believe that their Sins are forgiven. A.
Let us examine the Bp's fallacious Arguing. 1. The Gospel is indefinitely
preached to all under the Call thereof, and directed to all Sinners without any
exception; he that believes on the Lord Jesus, shall be saved; is this an
Argument that Redemption is Universal, or that all are Saved, or Elected: It Is
said as many as were Ordained unto Life believed, therefore it cannot be said
that every one does or can believe, John 12.39. 2. See how foully this Man
imposes by charging his opposites with saying, That all Men can believe that
their Sins are forgiven, p. 133. or to charge this, as p. 132. That a Man's
Sins are forgiven because he believes that they are forgiven, being laid on
Christ; whereas a Man believes because his Sins are forgiven and laid on
Christ; for Christ bearing our Sin is the Cause of believing, and not the
Effect. -- At least conditional Election follows upon it he says. We see he
suspected his first consequence, and therefore poacheth in another. This may
serve for a Professed Armin. but the Bp. I suppose would not have been
accounted so; the Argument is, because Men are Saved in and by believing on the
Lord Jesus Christ, therefore Election is upon foresight of Faith; but we say
Men are as absolutely Elected unto Faith as unto Glory: The controversy of
Conditional Election is not here to be entered upon, but we assert that it
follows more upon the Bp's Hypothesis than ours.

. 26. He adds, its ground enough of presumption as to all such as can believe
that their Sins are forgiven. A. Those that can believe their Sins are
forgiven, can believe through the Grace of God working it; nay, they have
attained to a great measure of Grace; How does presumption consist with, can
Believe?

B. What can hinder any Man more from Repentance, and forsaking his Sins, than
to be told that the first Act of Saving Faith, is to believe his Sins is
forgiven?

R. Where is any one that will teach an Unbeliever, to Believe his Sins are
forgiven in the state of Unbelief? But we find the Voice of the Gospel to the
Unbeliever, is to invite and call him to believe the Gospel; which says, that
this is a Saying worthy of all acceptance, That Christ came into the World to
save Sinners; that he bore Man's Sin, and was made Sin and Curse for them, and
that the Sinner should come in particular and apply himself to Christ for this
Pardon and Forgiveness that is in Christ; for with him is Pardon and Plentiful
Redemption. He is a Fountain opened for Sin and Uncleanness, and if a Fountain,
then not an empty Object of Faith, but full of Pardon, and of all the Grounds
and Reasons of a Sinner's Faith and Hope. Now how does such coming to Christ,
and closing with him in a free Promise, hinder Repentance, and embolden them
unto Sin? For the Apostle says, Sin shall not have Dominion over you, because
you are under the Grace of God in the Promise; and he shows Sin will reign over
a Man while he is under the Law.

-- But the Gospel Preaches Repentance in order to Remission.

R. It Preaches Repentance and Remission, to show, that where there is
Repentance to Life there is Remission; and where there is Remission received by
Faith, there will be Repentance in a Believing, coming to God through Christ.
The Soul cannot turn from Sin to God, but by a believing Repentance, neither
can any Repentance be unto Life, unless it be a turning from Sin to God through
Jesus Christ. Hence Faith and Repentance are frequently put for one another, or
in one the other included. When the Scripture speaks of the first Act of the
Sinners coming unto God, yea, not only the first act of true Faith, but all
other are inseparable from Repentance, as from other Graces, Love, Hope, etc.
Though both Repentance, Love, and Hope, are distinct Graces and Fruits of the
Spirit from Faith, and from each other. This, lastly, I affirm, as the truth of
the Gospel, that there can be no true Repentance antecedent in Nature to true
Faith, Faith being the first effect of Spiritual Life in one that is
effectually called. Bp Repentance is commanded, and Baptism commanded,
therefore they are conditions. R. The Antecedent is true, but the consequence
follows not, if he meant new Covenant Conditions. For all things, and Duties
Commanded are not therefore foederal Conditions: For that Grace which God works
by his Word and Spirit, is very absurdly called a Condition of a Covenant that
God makes with a Sinner. But observe, he makes Repentance such a condition as
Baptism; if so, what inseparable connection is there (as there should be in
this Case) between the condition and promise; for will any say that he that is
not Baptized shall be Damned? The Scripture says not so, besides the Seal of a
Bond is not the Condition of the Obligation, but only a Ratification.

Whether Mr. R. B. did Socinianize.
The Chief thing discussed by the Bp in his third Chapter, is whether Mr. B.
was a Socinian, from which Charge he makes as if he would Vindicate him; I
shall briefly examine how he acquits himself in this difficult undertaking. The
sum and substance of Mr. B's Opinion in this Point was, That our Sins were no
proper meritorious Cause of Christ's Sufferings, they were only premeritorious
or occasional Causes. For although the Bp would have Mr. B. mean something more
than occasional, by promeritorious, yet he acquits us with Mr. B's own
Explication of his meaning of premeritorious, that it is only occasional, which
the Bp says is no cause at all, and Socinianism; and yet he, good Man, would
defend him, though he finds it hic labor hoc opus, and fain to leave it re
infecta.

The first proof which he would make is from Mr. B's Confession, wherein all
that he says is no more than what a Socinian will say in this Point, That
Christ gave up himself a Sacrifice for our Sins, and a Ransom for us, in
suffering for us upon the Cross; which he does make (according to his way of
moulding of Doctrine) comport well enough with Socinian Principles. See what he
gives for Antinomianism. 1. That Christ satisfied God's Justice as in the
Person of all the Elect, this one Error, whereby he denies Jesus Christ to be a
Public Person. 2. That in a Law-sence, and God's account, they themselves did
satisfy in and by Christ. Here he denies Christ to have Suffered in our stead,
or to have made Payment to Justice for our Sins, either in a Law-sense, nor in
God's account; and therefore he made no payment for us, neither can we say we
satisfy in and by him: Whereas every Debtor can say so, who has a Surety that
makes payment in his stead, the Law accounting this payment to the Original
Debtor; neither is it untrue that he paid in and by his Surety, but an honor
to his Surety, and detraction from himself, when he says he paid in and by his
Surety. 3. That Christ's Sufferings were full and proper Executions of the
threatening of the Law to Man. Here he denies Christ's Suffering under the Law
that Man brake; and that his Punishment was no proper execution of the
threatening of the Law, and therefore no proper Punishment. 4. And so acquits
them ipso facto on the mere Suffering. Here he makes up his charge by ambiguous
Expressions -- without any further means of conveyance to give them right in it
by Application. 1. Here he insinuates that there was no Discharge of Christ
from the Sins of the Elect, which he suffered for: If so, no satisfaction. 2.
He makes as if some held that Men have an Actual and Personal discharge, before
their being by Grace or Nature; which is a false Charge, and a male Consequent
drawn by himself on the Doctrine: As if those that held Christ's full and
complete Satisfaction by impetration, denied application. 3. He would have us
believe it an Error that Christ purchased a right to Eternal Life for all the
Elect, as the immediate effect of his purchase; and that our right comes by
application, whereas our right lies in the purchase only; and our claim of that
right and possession is by application.

The Socin. Error he thus represents, That Jesus Christ did not undergo any
Penalty for our Sins, as meritorious, or promeritorious Cause, but only as
occasional: And does not Mr. B. say the same thing again and again in his
Writings, only he foacheth in his promeritorious; which if the Socin. either
did not use, or if they did, they would not deny it in the Sense Mr. B. uses
it, and as he has explained himself. And that he did not make any Satisfaction
to God's Justice for us, etc. there is nothing plainer in Mr. B's Writings;
both in his Methodus and Universal Redemption. He puts for Truth as follows.

That Jesus Christ as a Public Sponsor, did bear the Punishment deserved by
the Sins of the World, [he means of all and every Man] and made to his Father a
Satisfaction sufficient for all.

It is strange a Bishop of the Church of England should look upon this as an
Orthodox and Plain Confession to distinguish a Man from a Socinian; for it is
plain he prevaricates in speaking of Christ as a Public Person, for in the
Antin. charge, he makes it a marvelous Error to say Christ satisfied Justice in
the Person of all the Elect, so he must mean here, that Christ was such a
Public Person, that was no Representative or Surety, which is no public
Person at all. 2. In that he says Christ did bear the Punishment deserved by
Sin, he also prevaricates, for he does everywhere deny that our Sins were
imputed to Christ; that he suffered the Punishment of our Sins in any proper
Sense, and that Sin was but an occasional, no proper Cause thereof, and
therefore his Punishment was but Analogical, Equivalent to the Socinian's
Metaphorical. He cannot mean in respect of proportion in a Mathematical Sense,
for that would overthrow his whole Hypothesis.

Mr. Lob quotes enough to overthrow all that the Bp pleads on his behalf: He
shows that in his Methodus, he expressly declares that the Sufferings of Christ
were only a Natural Evil undergone by occasion, and the remote causality of the
Sins of Mankind, -- and that Christ's sufferings are only sufferings in an
Improper and Analogical Sense. These things says, the Bp, were long since
written. The chief Expression is, Christ's Sufferings had no proper meritorious
Cause, but yet Man's Sins were the Pro causa meritoria, etc. and says nothing
to defend it, p. 151. He considers whether Mr. B's own words do lay him open to
the suspicion of going too far toward the Socinians in this matter. Now let us
see whether Mr. B. has a fair deliverance at the Bp's Bar.

Bp In this case we must distinguish the Scripture Notion of Punishment from a
Strict and Philosophical Sense of Punishment. R. This is a strange distinction
of a Learned Bp; what means he by a Philosophical Punishment? Is it morally
Philosophical, i. e. such Punishment as belongs to the breach of a Moral Law?
If so, sure the Scripture Punishment cannot be distinguished from it; for that
is legal Punishment; but he says it is strict Punishment, i. e. according to
the exact tenor of a Moral Law; if he mean so, it cannot be excluded from
Scripture Punishment.

Bp The Scripture speaks in General of Christ's bearing our Sins, etc. but not
a word of strict and proper Punishment.

R. No sure, the Bp is mistaken greatly, when he might see in the same Chapter
that Christ was wounded for our Transgressions, was not that proper Punishment?
Does the Scripture say nothing of strict and proper Punishment, when it says
the Wages of Sin is Death, Cursed is every one that continues not in all
things written in the Book of the Law? Is not the Curse of the Law strict and
proper Punishment? If this be his Philosophical Punishment, there is much of it
in Scripture, and it cannot be distinguished from it. Bp. But of that which was
appointed and accepted in order to atonement for our Sins, as the impulsive
Cause, which become meritorious by his voluntary undertaking. R. The Bp would
suggest that there is some general improper acceptance of Punishment in
Scripture always used, in which sense Christ was Punished; because he says the
nature of the Expressions, that is, of the use of the word Punishment, does
imply as it were an impulsive cause; when indeed there was none but something
that God appointed and accepred in order to Atonement, but was not Punishment
in strict and proper Sense. But yet becomes meritorious by his voluntary
undertaking. R. That is as much as to say, there was nothing in Christ's
Sufferings themselves, that made them Meritorious, but something Antecedent to
them, viz. The Grace of the Lord Jesus Christ in giving himself to be a ransom,
but the ransom it self and what he suffered had no merit in it. Here the Bp
does basely Baxterize to cast Mr. Lob in this Cause. To which I briefly return,
that Punishment which was appointed by God, and accepted for full Satisfaction
to his offended Justice, was strict and proper Punishment, and of it self
meritorious, but Christ's Punishment was such. The Major is true, else the
Judge of all the World did not deal Righteously, in putting his Son to grief;
for if he put him not to as much as the Law required, the Law was not
satisfied; if he made only a show of Punishing him, and did not do it, then the
Scripture has given us but a kind of Romantic account of Christ's Punishment,
when indeed there was no such thing, nor any such cause as the Scripture
acquaints us with.

He acquaints us that Mr. B. not content with Scripture terms, falls to enquire
into the Nature and Reason of the thing it self, suggesting that he would dive
deeper into the thing than Scripture.

1. That Punishment is a Natural Evil inflicted for a Moral.

2. That the Name of Punishment is ambiguous, because it relates to Punishment
justly inflicted, and that which is not; the former Proper, the latter
Analogical. So that this Analogical Punishment is that which has a
representation, and looks like it; but is not so, Similia non sunt Idem; things
alike are not the same. And that which is improper is unjustly inflicted, ergo;
and hence, Christ's Sufferings would be unjust. But he says, the first and
most natural Sense of punishment, is when the Offender suffers for his own
fault; but there may be other reasons of Punishment which he calls Analogical,
and those from nearness of Relation, as Subjects for Princes, or Vicarious; and
why I pray must these be called Analogical and Improper Punishments? Because
it is Mr. B's pleasure: Why would it not be better distributed, (unless to serve
a turn). Punishment is either just or unjust: Just, is either that which falls
on the Person committing the fault, or on another Relation, or Sponsor that
suffers on his behalf, voluntarily subjecting to the Law in his Place; and what
need we Analogical, when Proper payment is made to the Law? Bp From whence he
inferrs, that since Christ did not Die as a Sinner, therefore his Punishment
could not be proper in the strictest sense. R. But if Christ Died for Sin, he
Died as Sinners Die; though he did no Sin, and in that sense was not a Sinner;
yet he Died for our Sins, as the reason of judicial proceeding against him; and
this being done by a just God, for the honor of his Law, it could not be but
proper Punishment: For all just Punishment is proper Punishment.

The Bp himself shows, that this will not hold Water; for whereas Mr. B.
distinguishes of Punishment by false imputation, and calls it unjust, but
Analogical; and the Punishment of another by consent he calls Analogical, but
not unjust, the Bp Answers, If the Punishment be just, the Cause must be just;
and Christ's could not be just with Relation to his own fault, for none is
supposed; therefore there may be a just Punishment for another's fault; and if
so, that [viz. the fault of another] may be truly said to be the Meritorious
cause of it, and the Punishment a proper Punishment, although for another's
fault. What can be said more directly and demonstratively against Mr. B. in
this Point? The Argument is this.

That Punishment which is just, must have a just cause of fault, either in the
Person suffering, or some other; and that cause is truly meritorious, and the
Punishment a proper Punishment. But the Punishment of Christ was such,
therefore a proper Punishment.

Having thus thrown Mr. B. on his Back, he endeavors to make some little
excuses for him; That which led Mr. B. in denying of it, was the Antinomians
making Christ to undergo the proper Punishment of our Sin, because our Personal
Guilt was according to them transferred upon him.

R. Hence it appears, that in the Bp's Judgment, Mr. B. was more excuseable in
being a Socinian, than in being an Antinomian; for he finding, (says the Bp)
this Principle to be the Foundation of Antinom. that this could not be true,
and therefore denied Christ's Punishment to be proper. But let me speak what is
truth, as to Mr. B. that I believe he had a further insight into this
Controversy than it appears the Bishop had; and would have told him, that
these two Principles are inconsistent, and overthrow one another; Christ's
Suffering was proper Punishment. And Christ bore no Personal guilt of any; so
that the Bp's Argument that refutes Mr. B. redounds back upon himself. So that
instead of fetching off Mr. B. they both fall irrecoverably together by one
blow; and it is easy to take notice how he buffets Mr. B. afterward, quoting
Mr. B's words upon this reason; he says, But then as you (Mr. Lob) truly cite
his words, he makes our Sins not to be the meritorious Cause of Christ's
Sufferings, but a kind of promeritorious or occasional Cause. Therefore he
means no more by promeritorious than occasional; and in the Bp's Judgment falls
under Mr. L's Charge. Yea, he says we must do him right, [is it to acquit or
condemn Mr. B? Sure to pass sentence against him,] So far as to take notice,
that in stating the Socinian Controversy, he makes it to consist in denying
that Christ did undergo any Penalty for our Sins, as the meritorious or
promeritorious Cause, but only as occasions; and yet here he makes the
pro-meritorious cause and the occasional the same; and he denies that our Sins
were the meritorious cause; but only because if we had not Sinned he had not
suffered. What is this any more, than an occasional cause? If the World had not
been created, Man had not fell; if there had been no Law, there had been no
Sin; and what says the Bp, truly he is necessitated to give Sentence against
Mr. B. though in as soft terms as may be. P. 156. These Expressions, I grant,
taken alone, yield too much to the Socinians, who do not deny our Sins to have
been a remote impulsive and occasional cause of Christ's Sufferings, but deny
them to be the meritorious cause of them. What can be more plain and full to
prove Mr. B. Socinianizing in these Points?

For all this, he will not give up Mr. B. to the Socinians; why? Because he
has writ of the Doctrine of the Trinity; that he might do, and yet be a Socin.
in the Doctrine of Satisfaction: But he has written of the Doctrine of
Satisfaction; yes, he has retained the word to make his Doctrine go down the
better, but has endeavored to destroy the thing to all intents and purposes.

Bp. These may be said for his Vindication, 1. By laying all the passages
together, he must mean something more by his promeritous Cause, than merely a
remote occasional Cause.

A. This supposition is very unreasonable when the Bp has told us, from Mr B's
own Mouth, what he means by his promeritorious Cause. It is not hard to
conceive what Mr. B. meant by promeritorious, it is only that Sin Antecedently
to Christ's Death was meritorious of Death; but this merit terminated there,
and never reached as a Cause meritorious of the Sufferings of Christ: This
merit the Bp says is antecedent to the Legislator's act in accepting a
Sponsor, and is but an occasional Cause; and what says he of an occasional
Cause? It Is really no Cause at all, etc. just as if a Man said, the Fire of
London was the occasional Cause of the Monument, p. 169.

Bp. Now no Man can say the fault antecedently was any more than an occasional
cause of the innocent Person's Suffering.

A. This is true in Mr B's sense, that the fault of the Offender makes him only
guilty and deserving of Punishment in general; but is not transferred to the
Sponsor to be any Guilt or desert of his Punishment; which is truly Mr. B's
meaning of his term promeritorious: And therein Mr. B. is consonant to himself,
in saying it is but an occasional Cause, and that Sin is a remote impulsive
Cause, viz. remote from Christ, though immediate and impulsive to Punishment. 2.
This is true in the Bp's Sense, who says, Christ suffered Punishment for Sin,
and bear the Personal Guilt of none, is to make the Sin of Man no more than an
occasional Cause: But the consistency of the assertion lies more on Mr. B's
side, because he knew it to be a great inconsistency to say, that Christ bore
proper Punishment, when he bore the guilt of no Sin.

Bp. But taking all together, when he is admitted to suffer in the place of the
Guilty, the Law with the Punishment makes the impulsive Cause become
meritorious; and it is the immediate Reason of his Sufferings.

R. This the Bp speaks as the truth, and intimates as if he would have it Mr.
B's Sense, but gives no proof that it is so; neither is it likely he should,
being not consonant at all to what Mr. B. everywhere maintains; and what if
the Bp says so, it is not consonant at all to the Tenet he defends that Christ
bore no Personal Guilt? For then how can the Guilt of any become the
meritorious and immediate reason of his Sufferings?

Bp. The only question then is, whether this can properly be called a
meritorious cause. A. That may be taken in two Senses. 1. In a strict and
proper sense; so your self deny that Christ merited by his own Sin. 2. In the
sense of the Law, [i. e. Sin was legally charged on Christ] and so that which
was the near impulsive cause [the fault of the Transgressor] may be truly said
to be meritorious as to his sufferings, because they made it an act of Justice,
which otherways had been an act of Power and Dominion. R. See now the Bp's
clear concession. 1. That what is here spoken of Christ, it is in the sense of
the Law, not in a Physical or Moral sense. 2. He makes the near impulsive cause
Sin, and here Sin in its merits or deserts, the immediate reason of Christ's
suffering; can that be any thing but the Guilt of Men's Persons? 3. Sin is such
a reason as may distinguish Christ's Punishment from an Act of Dominion, and
make it an Act of Justice. How is it possible that any Man that says this, can
say that the guilt of Man's Sin was not charged on Christ as our Representative
in a legal Sense, i. e. in a way of Judicial proceeding

Now does the Bp lay down this as Mr. B's sense? No, he dare not; for if he
did, Mr. B. (were he living) would say he had laid therein the Foundation of
Antinomianism.

Bp. The question between us and the Socinians, is not about meritorious, and
promeritorious Cause. R. I wonder the Bp should insinuate so great a falsehood,
when he knows the question between us and the Socinians, is whether our Sins
were the meritorious cause of Christ's sufferings, or occasional? And it is that
which has been at present under hand; Promeritorious being a word of Mr. B's
bringing in; it may be they might not think of it, to hide occasional under it,
as he does, to make Men think he did not deny all merit in this Case.

Bp. But the question is, whether Christ did really undergo the Punishment of
our Sins in order to be a Sacrifice of Atonement for them? And in this we have
Mr. B 's consent expressed on all occasions. R. I wonder the Bp can speak thus,
why does he not acquaint us then with his consent in one passage; if he has
any such passage, does he mean as he speaks? No, no more than the Bp, who could
not, as long as he held that Christ bore the personal guilt or desert of none.

It is now evident the Bp has said nothing to the purpose for vindication of
Mr. B. what has been said has been for a greater confirmation of the Charge,
and wounding his own Cause.

He says little further, but to excuse, 1. Liberty must be given to
Metaphysick Heads. 2. Tells a Story of Lubbertus and Mcacovius. 3. He tells us
of favorable interpretations, that are to be given to Persons, that keep to
the main point, as if this were but a trifling matter between the Socin, and us.

4. Mr. L. argues that Mr. B. speaks after the Unitarians. -- That Christ did
not undergo punishment properly so called, but in a popular sense of
Punishment. The Bp in answer does fill up p. 162, 163, 164, 165, 166. in
showing what slippery Gentlemen, the Writers of the Unitarian Doctrine are, but
nothing to Mr. L's Charge of Mr. B. therefore yields the truth thereof, and
agrees with Mr. L. in these words. Bp. you say, Rectoral Justice does
essentially respect the Law in its distributions, -- Whatever a Sovereign may
do in acts of Dominion. -- A Rector cannot justly inflict Sufferings on an
innocent person as such. Here I grant you have come up to the true state of the
Case between the Socin. and us; and therefore we shall leave it, and let the
Reader judge who is cast at the Bp's Bar.

But before I end, it is necessary to consider how the Bp. does reconcile his
two Principles.

1. That the Sin of Man was the immediate, impulsive and meritorious Cause of
Christ's Sufferigns: This he holds against the Socinians and Mr. B.

2. That Christ bore not the Personal Guilt of any Legally, but that all
Personal Guilt remains on the Sinner, and was not legally transferred to
Christ. For this he says, P. 167.

Bp. 1. We say, that Punishment may be justly inslicted, where there was a
Translation of Guilt by Relaxation of the Law, as to personal Offenders, and
admitting a Mediator to suffer in their stead.

R. No Guilt is translated by Relaxation of a Law, for that dispenceth only. 2.
If the Law be relaxed as to Personal Offenders, the doing of those things aster
the relaxation, is not Sin, which was so before; what needs a transferring to
another? 3. If the Precept be not relaxt (which they will be loath to say it
is) then the Penalty must; and if so, either to a part only, or to the whole:
If to the whole, what need is there of a Translation? If to a part only, then
part of the Sin only is transferred, and Christ Died only for some part of our
Sin, not all. Hence one part of our Salvation is owing to the relaxed Law, and
the other to Christ. Hence Christ did not satisfy the Law, in the proper and
strict Nature of it, and Christ's Sufferings were improper Punishments,
according to Mr. B. And here the Bp runs on ground.

Bp. He says, 2. Absolute Promises of the New Covenant, on which so much
weight is laid, (without comparing them with other places) speak no more of
Christ's Sufferings, than they do of any Conditions in us. Here our own
Qualifications and Performances, are made to have an equality of
conditionality, foederally with Christ's Sufferings; and if Christ's Sufferings
be meritorious, so are they too.

Bp. 3. The notion of Satisfaction lays the Foundation of Antinomianism, which
attributes unto God such a sort of vindictive Justice which requires an
absolute and perfect Satisfaction in the same kind for the Sins of Mankind. R.
How much this kind of satisfaction borders upon Socinianism in the true meaning
of it, it is easy to judge; and what little reason the Bp had to reject the
Principles that Mr. B. built upon is manifest, being a firmer Foundation for
his building; And after all that he has said against them, as too much
favoring Socinianism, he is fain to lay hold on them to support his own
Fabric. See here the pitiful shifts Men are put to that wander from the way of
truth.

Arguments to prove that Christ bore the Personal Guilt of all them for whom he
Suffered.
THAT the less intelligent Reeader may not be at loss for the truth, not so
easily finding it among the Controversal Difficulties of a Dispute, I have
thought good to make plain proof of this great Question in the affirmative.

And that we may prevent enlargements, I premise,

1. That by Personal Guilt, is meant the Guilt of every particular Person for
whom Christ Died; as of Noah, David, and Peter, etc.

2. I take Guilt and Sin, and the merit and desert of Sin, to be equivalent
terms in the sense of the Spirit of God; and though the Scripture use the word
Sin, and we most commonly say Guilt, this is exegetical, to show that we mean
not that the Subjective Physical Act of Sin was transferred to Christ; nor the
inherent. Moral Pollution: But whatever is in either, that is a Transgression
of the Law, the Law-relation of all Sin, so far as the Law condemns the Sinner
for it, was charged on Christ, i. e. Legally and Juridically in the Just God's
distribution of Justice. Then I argue,

Arg. 1. He that was punished for Sin, bore Sin in the Personal Guil, i. e. the
Legal Charge of it, as the reason of his Punishment; but Christ was punished for
it by the Concession of our opposites, Ergo, The Major is true. 1. Because God
is Just. 2. Punishment without a Reason is very unjust. 3. There was no reason
in Christ absolutely considered for his Punishment, therefore in some others;
therefore the Personal Sin of some or other. 4. Without a bearing of Sin in the
legal desert of some or other, he could not be justly punished by the Law.

Arg. 2. He that was made Sin for us, was made so by charging our Sins upon
him, bare Personal Guilt; for he was made that, which he was not in himself:
Now how could he be made so, but by an imputation of the Sins of others to him,
a legal proceeding with him in judicature; which could be no other than by
Judging and Punishing him for some Guilt that merits the Wages of Death? The
Answer the Socinians and others make to 2 Cor. 5.21. is that he was made Sin as
the Sacrifices were, because a Sin-offering is called (...): But I answer, 1.
It was essential to the Sin-offering to have the the Personal Guilt of the
Sinner charged upon it. 2. When (...) is used for a Sin-offering, it is (...).
3. The Prophet Isa. does only use (...) but (...) when he speaks of Christ's
bearing Sin, which last word is never used for Sin-offering. 4. He was made Sin
as we are made Righteous; now we are not made Righteous by being made
Sacrifices for Sin, but by imputation.

Arg. 3. He that bore the Curse of the Law to Redeem us from it, bore also the
Personal Guilt of our Sins; but Christ bore the Curse of the Law, Gal. 3.13.
For the Major it is as clear as the Sun, because Curse is inseparable from Sin;
the Law curses no where but where it finds Personal Guilt. Let these Men tell
me where a Curse falls upon the head of any one, but of such wherein there is
Sin in some legal sense or other.

Arg. 4. If the Priests and Sacrifices of old, the Types of Christ and his
Sufferings, had the Personal Guilt of Sin laid upon them, then Christ the
Antitype, in his Sufferings, had Personal Guilt laid upon him: But the
Antecedent is without contradiction, yea, and the Consequence; because the
Antitype is to answer the Type, in all things wherein it is a Type.

Arg. 5. If they that were Punished by the Law, did bear their Personal Sins by
the Law; then if Christ, was Punished by the Law, he also bore Sin by the Law.
But the Antecedent is true by the Scripture, both in them that are recorded to
have been Punished in Person for their own Sins, Lev. 20.20. and 22.9. and
24.15. Numb. 9.13. and 14.34. and 18, 22, 32. Ezekiel. 23.49. and in such as are
recorded to have been Punished or Suffer for others, Isa. 53.11. Ezekiel. 4.4, 5,
6. The Consequence must be true if Christ was Punished by Law, and was one that
Suffered for others; the proof whereof the Scripture is full of.

Arg. 6. If Christ bore not Personal Guilt, but every one's Personal Guilt
still remains, then the Spirit of God taught David to pray after his Sin in
vain, Deliver me from Blood guiltiness, O God. But David's Prayer was not in
vain, but was he delivered from his Personal Guilt of Blood? Or else he must at
this day be a Blood-guilty Murderer in Heaven.

Arg. 7. A Surety to God for Sinners, bears their Sins in being Punished for
them; but Christ was a Surety, Heb. 7.22. There Is no fence against such a Flail
as this one express place. 2. The Minor is quarrelled by our Adversaries, but
not Universally denied, yet they would make a seeming Evasion, that they will
have Christ a Surety for God to us, and not for us to God; and that Christ was
no Money-Surety for us, we being Criminals; and that Sin must not be looked on
as a Debt; the folly of all which has been made sufficiently manifest.

Arg. 8. If the Personal guilt of Sin was taken away by Jesus Christ, then
Christ must bear Personal Guilt: But the Guilt of Personal Sins was taken away
by Christ, as appears by 1 John 3.5. Heb. 9.26. He took away Sin by the
Sacrifice of himself: Sin cannot be said to be taken away, if it be not taken
away in the Personal Guilt. The Major appears from the Type of the Scapegoat,
Levit. 16.

Arg. 9. Where there is no Condemnation, there Personal Guilt is taken away, nor
nothing to be laid to the Charge of a Person; but there is no Condemnation, ( i.
e. Reason of Condemnation in the Eye of the Law) in a Believer, Romans 8. for
there is no Reason of Condemnation, but Guilt of Sin; and none takes off the
reason of our Charge of Fault to Law Condemnation, but Christ by bearing Sin
unto Punishment and Satisfaction, Romans 8.33, 34. For where there is the
Personal Guilt of Sin, there is Condemnation. Now this Freedom from Condemnation
was fully obtained and procured by Christ's Sacrifice, but the purchased Right
is not received and possessed till Application; till then a Sinner is shut up
and imprisoned under the Law, as to State and Conscience; but when he is in
Christ Jesus by Faith, he is fully instated in the purchased Possession.

Arg. 10. If Christ's Punishment was without his bearing of our Personal Guilt,
there was no change of Persons between Christ and us, according to 2 Cor. 5.21.
for as we were, so we remain to be guilty Sinners; and so long as we are so, we
cannot be righteous; we cannot be made the Righteousness of God in Christ, so
long as we remain guilty Sinners in our selves.

Arg. 11. Where Personal Guilt remains, there is no Acceptance with God; for
all our Acceptance, either of Persons or Services, is in Christ, God
professing he will not clear the Guilty.

Arg. 12. I might argue from all those places of Scripture that speak out this
Truth fully and expressly, which cannot have any rational Sense put upon them,
no less than three times in Isa. 53. and 1 Pet. 2.24. who his own self bare our
Sins in his Body on the Tree.

There Is no one Truth in the Scripture, that is more fully and plainly recorded
in the Old Testament and New. The Spirit telling us of a Believer's Sin
covered, not imputed, Psalm. 32. Romans 4. Of our being made nigh to God, and
Christ being our Peace, Ephesians. 2.13, 14, 15. Likewise Christ died the just for
the unjust, to bring us unto God, 1 Pet. 3.18. But this is enough to confirm
the weak, and to convince Gainsayers, and to lead all the Lovers of Truth into
the Mind of the Spirit in this great Article of our Faith.

The Presbyterian Articles against the Dissenting Brethren Answered.
I Had thought when I began this Task to have passed over the first part
altogether; for though I found it a very false History, yet I knowing from whose
Hands the Bp. had it, I did not think he was chargeable so much with the
falsehood, as with an unjust unwariness and partiality, to take up the Report of
a Difference, and to publish the History of it to the World from one Party only
concerned therein, I deemed therefore enough to refer the Reader to the true
History of the Union and Breach; but upon the review of the said false
Historical Account; and finding a fresh Presentment brought in against the
Dissenting Brethren from the late Union, by the grand Rebuker under diverse
Articles, for holding and publishing many poysonsome dangerous Heresies, of so
mischievous a Nature, that he teaches his tractable Reader a form of Prayer,
to use still before he reads them; to wit, that he may not suck in the Bane and
Poison thereof.

And finding the Bp. received the said Presentment very much like a Gentleman,
and sends forth his very Christian Summons for our Appearance to the high
Charges in these Words: The Accusation being now public, and the Nation is
concerned as to the Dishonor done to Religion thereby, although I had seen the
said Reproaches in the Presbyterians Hands, and found they had brought the said
Brethren under their Censure in their unrighteous way of proceeding, without
any hearing, I thought more expedient to slight than answer their unreasonable
Clamours, being abundantly conscious of my own Innocence in those Matters; my
great Mistake was in mistaking them, being at my Concurrence with them in the
Union, (for which I have deeply repented) but a mere Stranger to their Persons
Ways and Actions. And before I come to the particular Articles, it is necessary
to premise a few things; that now,

1. I think it necessary for my self to appear to the Accusations, and make
public Answer to them, but do not undertake that all I say is the Sense of my
Brethren in every Particular; I suppose they may concur with me so far, that
some different Apprehensions will make no Breach in our mutual Love and
Affections.

2. I apprehend it very unreasonable, as well as unchristian and ungenteel, to
charge those things for dangerous Errors upon a whole Party, which are
pretended to be taken from the Writings or Sayings of one or two only.

3. It is very traducing and slanderous; 1. Not to prove the Words charged for
Error in the Sense they represent them, on the Party that wrote or spoke them,
but to make an Accusation at large, and at random. 2. That they publish these
for Errors before they had disputed them with such as they charge, and proved
them so.

4. Let me ask our angry Brethren a few Questions for my Information. 1.
Whether they think in their Consciences, and in the sight of God, they have
dealt uprightly and sincerely with the Truth, and with their Brethren in this
Controversy? 2. Whether it becomes the Saints to appear such public bitter
Accusers of their Brethren, as appears by the foul-mouthed Rebuker, and others,
whosoever have been employed and applauded in this dirty Service? 3. Whether it be
for the Honor of the Nonconformists thus to bewray their own Nests? 4. Whether
they think not in their Consciences that many things they charge for Errors are
great Truths in some Sense or other? Therefore is it not very unfair to charge
in general and dubious terms, without any Distinctions or Explications? Does
this become learned Divines?

The Rebukers Articles which he brought into Court were, I find to the number
of 21, but it seems the judicious Bp. contracted them to Six, which he has
called us to appear to, looking upon the rest (I suppose) as frivolous,
illiterate or spiteful; the Six, with my respective Answers, are as follows.

Er. 1. That Pardon is rather the Condition of Faith, having a causal Influence
thereunto, then Faith and Repentance are of Pardon.

A. The Words were mine in transitu of a Discourse, and therefore it is very
unfair to expose them, without showing their Dependence. 1. I have shown, and
proved, and will stand by it, that Pardon, Faith and Repentance, belong not to
the conditional Part of the new Covenant, but to the Promisory. 2. That Pardon,
Faith and Repentance, although they are not Foederal Conditions, yet being
connected in the Promise, may have a Connection conditional given to them, as if
a Man believe he receives Pardon, in believing; if he repent, he will believe;
if he repent, and believe, he shall be saved; and I renounce not the Scripture
Language in anything, but desire to understand and explain it in its true and
genuine Sense. 3. I say, that if we talk of the Foederal Conditionality of
Faith to Pardon; Pardon is rather a Foederal Condition of Faith and Repentance,
than Faith of Pardon; I say, not that it is, but rather because distinguishing
Pardon aright into Active and Passive; I say, Pardon Passive received cannot be
without Faith to receive it, but Pardon Active must be before Faith. 1. Because
the Object that the Hand receives must be before the Instrument that receives
it. 2. The Grace of Pardon is in God to be bestowed before we receive it. 3.
There is Pardon in Christ for all that shall believe, Jo. 17.20. See what Mr.
Capel says on this point, It is one thing for all the Sins of all the Elect to
be pardoned to Christ for them; that was done before we were, or our Sins were,
another thing to be pardoned to them; Christ was made a Curse for us by
Imputation, for that the Father did impute all our Sins, as a Judge to Christ,
as our Surety, [the true notion of Imputation, that it is not an Act of Grace,
but a Judicial Act] and God did exact all of him as guilty by that Law, etc. 3.
Pardon in God and in Christ has a causal Influence on Faith and Repentance: 1.
Pardon is an essential cause of a pardoned Person, the Abstract being the
formal cause of the Concrete; pardoning Grace does effectually work all Graces
of the Spirit in us, the pardoning Grace of the Father, Son, and Spirit. 2. The
Gospel preached to Sinners, which is Pardon of Sin; the Gospel preached to
Abraham, is that which works Faith through the effectual Operation of the Spirit,
Act. 13.39. Romans 10.15. And it was preached to David by Nathan, 2 Samuel 12.17.
as done before his particular Repentance, expressed Psalm. 51. therefore if we
talk of Foederal Conditions, Pardon is rather such, than Faith and Repentance,
because it is in Nature as well as Time antecedent; and such an antecedent, as
has a causal Influence. And hence I also assert, that every necessary
antecedent, though with causal Influence upon the consequent, is not a Foederal
Condition.

Er. 2. That Sin it self, as opposed to Guilt, was laid on Christ, and Christ
was reputed a Criminal, not only by Man, but God.

A. As to the first clause, they should have pointed out the Person that said
it. If I spoke it, or writ it, I was asleep then; for when we say Sin was laid
on Christ, we speak not of it by way of Opposition unto Guilt, but by way of
Identity or Sameness with Guilt, in the Dialect of the Spirit of God, our use
of the Word Guilt, being but an apt Exegetical Term to express the meaning of
Sin in this Point, because the Physical Substratum of Sin cannot be transferred
to another, but the Law Relation may.

As to the second charge, 1. It will be easily granted by the Accusers, that a
Sinner's Debts to the Law are Crimes. 2. To say he was a reputed Criminal in
Law only, is by a received Sense to justify the personal and absolute
Innocence of Christ in himself. 3. I suppose they will not deny, that if Sin
was charged on Christ for the delivery of Sinners, it was done by God as his
Act, and not by the false Accusation of Satan or his Instruments; for the
Salvation of Sinners, by his bearing Sin, was never their Design; and it is said
God laid upon him the Iniquity of us all, Isa. 53.4. The term Criminal might
possibly be used by some or other, with a good Meaning, but I look not upon it
as proper, and I don't know that I have used it; if I have, I have better
considered of it. 1. Because though the Scripture says Sin was laid on Christ,
and that he was made Sin, yet it says not that he was a Sinner, or a Criminal.
2. Because his bearing Sin, and being made so, it plainly implies that he was
not so in himself, but made so by Law Imputation, and by standing in a Surety
relation to the Law for us. 3. A Sinner or Criminal does in an ordinary and
common Acceptance import a Committer, or Perpetrator of Sin, which Christ
never was not reputed by God so to be. Therefore herein God shows his wonderful
Wisdom, in teaching us to speak of Christ in this great Mystery with so much
Exactness.

Er. 3. That the Doctrine of Justification before Faith is not an Error, but a
great and glorious Truth, and therefore we believe that we may be justified
declaratively.

A. It is an Error, and it is not an Error; it is an Error to say Justification
by Faith is before Faith in time, and a contradiction in Adjecto, therefore I
never said so for Justification by Faith cannot be before Faith is in the
Receiver to receive it by: But that Justification is before Faith, is a
glorious Truth; and this I must affirm for Truth, that there is Justification
before Faith, if we distinguish of Justification aright, as of Pardon, and say
it is actively and passively to be understood; active Justification is in God
that justifies, Romans 8. the Grace of Justification a Gift to us. 2. Christ as
the Head and Representative of the Elect, was justified, and all the Elect
fundamentally in him, else Jesus Christ's suffering as a public Person, could
not have been, he was taken from Prison and Judgment. 3. Justification in
Application, is by Nature before Faith, because all Grace apprehends the Sinner
before he apprehends it, and is the immediate cause of a Sinner's apprehending
it. Again, the Grace of Justification is in nature before Sanctification, and
the Foundation of it by the consent of Protestants; and therefore it is said in
that Sense, that God justifies the ungodly; not that we should be ungodly, but
that he finds and takes us in that State; and so does the sanctifying Grace of
God in Regeneration, God does both justify and sanctify the ungodly, by his
active apprehending Grace, Phil. 3.12. As to the second clause I suppose none
can deny, that therefore we believe that we may be justified, Romans 10.10. and
elsewhere; and as to the last Word, wherein they lay the stress of the Error,
they might put it in unexceptionable Terms by adding a monosyllable, they
believe that they may be justified, and declaratively, they believe that they
may receive, and have Eternal Life, and that they may know they have it,
according to the express Words of the Apostle, 1 John 5.12, 13.

Er. 4. Union to Christ is before Faith at least by Nature; and we partake of
the Spirit by virtue of that Union, and there is a complete Union with Christ
before the Act of Faith.

A. For the first clause of the charge I own it, and have defended it as Truth,
and shall stand by it, and am ready to dispute it with the Accusers when they
please; in the mean time, let them tell me whether Faith be not a vital Act of
the Soul? If so, how came the Fruit to grow on the Branch before it was in the
Root, Christ Jesus? Again, if Faith be the Effect of Union to Christ, then
Union is the cause, and in Nature antecedent to it. There Is no need to enlarge
upon so plain a Truth, the second clause is as true, that by virtue of this
Union, or in this Union we first partake of the Spirit, because the Spirit is
the Spirit of Christ, Romans 8. The Spirit is the Bond of this Union; for, 3. I
know not whether it be mine in the terms expressed, but if it were, there was
something said to explain it; the Sense I am ready to defend it in is this,
that whatever Union Christ makes is complete in it self, such is vital Union in
Regeneration, where the Regenerated is altogether passive; and all Regeneration
is perfect, though the regenerated is not; every one conceived is perfectly
conceived, though the conceived is not perfectly grown; every one born is
perfectly born, though every one born is not perfect; so is every one born of the
Spirit, he has complete Life, though he is not complete in the Acts of Life;
compleatness of Life, and compleatness in exercising the Acts of Life, are to
be distinguished.

Er. 5. It is a great Truth, that God sees no Sin in a Believer, and Sin can do
no Hurt to a Believer; God is not displeased with his People, and is not angry
with the Persons of Believers for their Sins.

A. Here are the 12, 13, 14 of the Rebuker's Articles crowded together. As to
the first, I say, 1. They are the Words of Scripture, let the Exceptors show
and prove that the Spirit of God means quite contrary to what it says in that
Place; Number. 21.21. and that all other Places of Scripture that confirm this
Truth are false, and mean quite contrary; as when it says a Believer is
blessed his Sins, being covered, and not imputed, Psalm. 32.1, 2. This is
Poison; but the meaning is, He is blessed whose Sin is uncovered before God,
and his Iniquity imputed; when God says he does not remember our Iniquities,
you must read it, He does remember our Iniquity. Let them give a rational
Sense, of Jer. 50.20. Mic. 7.19. Jer. 31.34. Heb. 8.12. chapter 10.17.

But let them not take us to be so stupid, as to understand this of the Eye of
his Omnisciency, but in respect of the Eye of his Justice, Psalm. 51.9. when
they give us any probable Interpretation of the forementioned Places of
Scripture, so to prove the Word of God false, Number. 23. In the Sense we take it,
as I could never see yet the greatest of them ever did, we will acknowledge it
an Error, in the mean time let them give us leave to believe it, and receive it
as an Article of Faith.

The second Clause the Rebukers 13 is, That Sin cannot do any real Hurt to a
Believer.

A. Why is this charged upon the dissenting Brethren? Did they ever hear any
one of them assert it in Terminis; he that uttered it in the Ardency of a
popular Discourse was above 50 Years since, and is it Blasphemy or Heresy to
defend a good Man's Discourse by a charitable Interpretation? If they had a
Grain of Charity, they may easily see that he meant not according to that gross
Sense they would put upon the saying, that he intended not to countenance
Professors living in Sin, nor in respect of Grief, Sorrow and Darkness,
occasioned by a Believer's Fall into Sin, but his meaning was, 1. That their
Falls into Sin should not prejudice that State of Union to Christ, according to
Romans 8.35, 36, 37, 38. 2. That though Sin remain in them, yet they shall not have
Dominion over them, according to Romans 6.14, 15. 3. That though they fall, they
shall arise, according to Mic. 7.8. 4. That God will overruled all the Falls of
his Children for their Spiritual Good and Advantage, according to Romans 8.28.
and therefore he says real hurt.

The third thing here, which is the Rebuker's 14th, God is not displeased with
his People, i. e. their Persons. A. Why do they not explain what they mean by
God's displeasure; do they mean Paternal or Vindictive: If they mean Paternal,
in a way of Rebuke and Chastisment, who denies it? If they mean Vindictive, we
deny it. Again, why do they not tell us what they mean by God's People, do they
mean a Collection of Professing People, Church or Nation? Such may be the
general Defection of these from their Profession, never real and true, that
God's Vindictive Wrath may go forth against them, as often against his People
of Old. Lastly, God is never pleased with the Sins of his People, therefore
condemned all their Sins in the Flesh of Christ, Romans 8.3. But God is not
displeased with the Persons of his People, such as are called according to
purpose, because he loved them with an Eternal Love; and he is a God that
changes not.

Art. 6. Believers are as Righteous as Christ. A. Most know who is Charged
here, it is one that is gone to give up his Account to his Lord and Master: I
doubt not but it is with Joy, and that he has received a Crown of Glory that
fades not: Though the Rebuker has trampled upon his Bones and Memory, in his
Pride and Insolency; and not only upon his, but on those of that other Eminent
Servant of God that is at rest with him: And why? Because both of them in their
Lifetime served their Generation, in bearing faithful Testimony to the Truths
of Jesus.

I need say nothing to this Article: That worthy Servant of Christ spoke enough
to explain himself in that Position, in his Printed Sermons which he Preached
at Pinner's-Hall: The sum of it was, that he meant not in respect of
Sanctification, for there our best Holiness is imperfect, therefore he means
not in a way of Similitude to his Personal Holiness and Righteousness; but in a
way of equality, i. e. in respect of a Believer's relation to the Law, as
Christ has made full Satisfaction to the Law for a Believer, so he is as fully
discharged from the Law, and condemnation thereof, as Christ is, i. e. the Law
has no more to do to condemn a Believer, than to condemn Christ: His full
Original Discharge having been in Christ, the thing is made plain by an
illustration. A Rich Alderman pays a Poor Man's Debt of 10 l. and sets him at
liberty from the Prosecution of the Law, and Imprisonment; which done, the Poor
Man can be no more Prosecuted by the Law, than the Rich Alderman; being as
Righteous in the Eye of the Law as the Alderman: But he cannot say, he is as
Rich, as Wise, as Valuable in Estate or Person; or so Able to pay the Debts of
others as the Alderman.

I know Mr. M. was not the first that insisted on this Notion, I have read it
in Mr. Shephard of N. E. as I take it, in his Sound Believer; and I am sure the
Rebuker cannot call him an Antinom. As for my own part, I choose not to use the
Expression, (though it is in Mr. M's. Accept. a Truth) because many that are short
in Understanding, are apt to abuse it; and others to make an advantage thereof
to wreak their malice against the great Truths of the Gospel, as these Accusers
have done. But especially, because I apprehend the truth therein contained may
be delivered in less offensive words.

The Bp has pitched upon Ten of the Rebuker's Articles, and reduced them to
Six; there is about Eleven more which he thought had no weight or sense in
them. As,

Ac. 1. To talk of a Gospel threat, is at best a Catechresis; and nothing else
can save it from being a Bull; I suppose the Bp thought that no Scholar could
make an Error of it. I am the Man that wrote it, and I will stand by it as a
very favorable Reflection upon such as talk so improperly and impertinently.

Ac. As to the Elect, there was never any guilt upon them, in respect of the
Righteous Judgment of God, in foro Dei: But that which accompanied the Letter
of the Law, setting in with Conscience.

This Article it seems the Bp could make nothing of, nor I; indeed it being one
that M. W. has patcht up. For I deny not the Elect are under the Law, and
Children of Wrath according to it, till effectual calling; but that God's
Vindictive Righteous Judgment is ever executed upon them, I do deny.

Ac. 9. It is denied that God requires Faith as an indispensible Qualification
in them, whom he will justify for Christ's Merits. A. This smells of Mr. W.'s
qualifying Righteousness; all is Gospel with the Rebuker, which he hears from
his Oracle. Now to give a brief Answer here, because I have disputed this
Article with the Gentleman already. I do not deny that God requires Faith, and
will work Faith in all those that God will justify by Faith, but I deny that
God requires Faith indispensibly in all that he will justify by Christ's
Merits; for he justifies saved Infants by Christ's Merits, but who can say
Faith is required of them? Lastly, He does not require Faith in any as a
subordinate qualifying Righteousness, to Justification by Christ's, for such it
is the Gentleman would have, which I have formerly refuted, but all Men must be
Heretics with the Presbyterians, that say not after him.

Ac. 10. All that a Believer can pray for is, the further Manifestation of
Pardon, for he knows that all his Sins are pardoned. A. This is Ejusdem farinae
and Originis: 1. I suppose a Believer may know that all his Sins are pardoned,
or else the Scripture speaks much in vain. 2. Is it a poysonsome Error to pray
for a further Manifestation of pardoning Grace, and Confirmation in, and
Continuance of that Knowledge? 3. If a Man do not know his Sins are pardoned,
or does doubt of it, sure he will pray that he may be Partaker of pardoning
Grace, and be confirmed in the Knowledge of it; I know none of the accused but
do pray thus, and that daily, Forgive us our Trespasses, as we pray for daily
Bread when we have it in the House; for whatever we have of Spiritual or
outward good things, it is God must give unto us richly to enjoy it.

Ac. 15. Legal Convictions before Faith are no more than Sin, it is but a filthy
Conscience, etc. A. I believe all that Author and his second can do cannot make
any better of it. So says the Spirit of God, Tit. 1.15. and the Bp. knew that
the Articles of the Church of England said so, and therefore he inserts it not
as an Error.

Ac. 16. All imperfect Holiness is Sin. A. Who said so?

This is another dab of W.'s Spittle, which the Rebuker has likct up.

Ac. 17. Turn ye, turn ye, why will you die? Is but the Triumph of the Law over
a dead Sinner. A. I argued the meaning of that Place with D.W.'s, and showed
that it could be for no other end than to convince the Jews of their Inability
in themselves, (that trusted to their own Strength and Righteousness inherent)
to work out their justifying Righteousness and Salvation, and to bring them to
the Grace of God in the Promise; the Truth of which I am ready to discuss with
any of them.

Ac. 18. I cannot make Head or Tail of; he should have told us where he had it,
or how he came to dream of it?

Ac. 20. Christ's Incarnation was no part of his Humiliation. A. The terms are
falsely charged, there is no Man that says that Christ's Abode in the Flesh was
not his Humiliation, and what he suffered in it; but if he means the Divine
Nature's Assumption it self of Flesh this was an Act of Divine Power; I say,
the taking of our Nature; for he could not be humbled in the Divine Nature,
therefore he took Man's, that he might be humbled in it after his Assumption.
This was a wiser and more learned Man's Opinion than they that oppose it. If
the Rebuker had read Dr. Ames's Medulla, one would think he should have been
ashamed to put it down as a baneful and poysonsome Error, although Mr. W.'s did,
who it may be never heard of it till Mr. M. preached it. The Bp. here cast it
out, and as not consonant to the Rebuker's Form of Prayer.

Ac. 21. We coaless upon believing into one Mystical Person with Christ, which
is distinguished from Legal Union, which is before Faith. A. Sure the Rebuker
and his learned Master showed themselves mighty acute Divines here at last; for
they seem to take the mystical Body of Christ for a great Error; for that the
Error lies, in asserting that Believers are Members of the mystical Body of
Christ, if they mistake not Person for Body. 2. If they accuse any for saying
Believers make one mystical Person with Christ, they should have detected that
ignorant Person, and not charged it on their dissenting Brethren; surely they
are not such pitiful Wretches, as not to distinguish between the mystical Body
of Christ and his Person, and to talk of a mystical Person. 3. This mystical
Person must be distinguished from a legal Union before Faith. Where is this
Stuff put together? I challenge these Men to tell the Man, and quote the Place
where such a Mess of Nonsense is put together; if they do not, it must pass for
one of the horrid Defamations, wherewith they have bespattered their dissenting
Brethren, to render them odious unto the World. I suppose the Bp could make
nothing of it.

The Lord give them Repentance and Remission of these great Sins of the first
Magnitude, and that they persist not thus to fly in the Face of Christ and his
faithful Members, and that he leave them not to a reprobate Mind, as well as
such a persecuting false Tongue, whereby we shall be engaged to pray the 120th
Psalm against them.

A POSTSCRIPT.
BEcause we are so highly reproached by our Adversaries for Antinomians in the
great Point of Justication, I thought it very needful to transcribe some few
Passages out of the Writings of that renowned Servant of Jesus Christ Mr. Tho.
Shephard, whom none of our bitterest Opponents can call an Antinomian.

He shows how Christ redeems, 1. By Satisfaction. 2. By strong Hand. 1. By
Satisfaction, in paying a Price for us, 1 Cor. 6. ult. Hence Christ satisfies
Justice.

1. By standing in the room of all them whom Mercy decrees to save. A Surety
stands in the room of a Debtor, Heb. 7.22. As the first Adam stood in the
room of all Mankind fallen, so Christ stands in the room of all Men rising,
or to be restored again.

2. By taking from them, in whose room he stood, the eternal Guilt of all their
Sins, and by assuming the Guilt of all their Sins unto himself, 2 Cor. 5.22.
Hence Luther said Christ was the greatest Sinner by Imputation.

3. By bearing the Curse and Wrath of God kindled against Sin; for God is so
holy, that when he sees Sin sticking only by Imputation to his own Son, he
will not spare him, but his Wrath and Curse must he bear, Gal. 3.13. Christ
drinks up the Cup of all the Elect at one Draught, which they should have been
sipping, and drinking, and tormented with Millions of Years.

4. By bringing into the Presence of God perfect Righteousness, Romans 5.11. For
this also God's Justice required Perfection, Conformity to the Law, as well as
perfect Satisfaction, in suffering for the Wrong offered to the Lawgiver.
Justice requiring these Four Things, Christ satisfies Justice, by performing
them, and so pays the Price.

2. Christ is a Redeemer by a strong Hand. The first Redemption by Price
finished in Christ's Person at his Resurrection, the second is begun by the
Spirit in Man's Vocation, and ended at the Day of Judgment, etc. Sinc. Conv. p.
102, 103.

By Satisfaction I understand the whole Obedience of Christ unto the very
Death, both Active and Passive, by which we are justified, Heb. 10.10. Phil.
2.8. etc.

This Righteousness of Christ, is not that of the Godhead; (for then what need
was there for Christ to do or suffer?) but that which was wrought in the
Manhood: And hence it is finite in it self, though infinite in value, in that it
was the Righteousness of such a Person.

This Righteousness of God may be considered two ways. 1. Absolutely in it
self. 2. Respectively, as done for us.

Christ's absolute Righteousness is not imputed to us, as he is Mediator, Head
of the Church, having the Spirit without measure, etc. These things are applied
for our Good, but are not imputed as our Righteousness. Here the Objections
[such as these, if Christ's Righteousness be imputed to us, then we are
Mediators, Heads of the Church, etc.] vanishes.

2. The respective or dispensative Righteousness of Christ, which some call
Justitia fide jussoria, [Suretiship Righteousness] is that whereby Christ is
just for us, in fulfilling the Law, in bearing God's Image we once had, and
have now lost by Sin. And thus we are truly said to be as Righteous as Christ
by Imputation, because he kept the Law for us; and here observe, that the
Question is not, whether all that Christ did or had is imputed to us as our
Righteousness? But whether all that he did for us as a Surety, in fulfilling
the Law, be not in Substance our Righteousness? Because then we are justified
by his working Miracles, preaching Sermons, etc. Which is to cast
Stumbling Blocks before the Blind; so that though Christ does not bestow his
Personal Wisdom and Justice upon another, yet what hinders but that which
Christ does by his Wisdom and Righteousness for another, the same should stand
good for him for whom it is done? For thus it is among Men.

Christ's Essential Righteousness, Infinite Wisdom, Fullness of the Spirit
without Measure, etc. is not imputed to us, yet these have conspired together
to do that for us, and suffer that for us, whereby we come to be righteous
before God, Jer. 23.6. This Righteousness therefore imputed to us justifies us,
Romans 5.18. we are said to be made righteous in him, not the Righteousness of
God, whereby God is just, but whereby we are just, opposed to the Righteousness
of Man, called our own, Romans 10.3. Romans 1.17. Not Righteousness from him, (as
the Papists dream) but Righteousness in him. Sound Believer, p. 265, 266.

ERRATA.
PAge 14. l. 2. ab. ult. r. appealed. p. 15. l. 5. r. what necessary. p. 16. l.
13. r. not taken. p. 20. l. 5. ab. ult. r. ponitur. p. 23. l. 6. ab. ult. r.
not found. p. 24. l. 22. f. Men, r. more. p. 43. l. 13. r. to the Sinner. p.
49. l. 1. r. Gods. p. 61. l. 8. r. Acquaints. p. 69. l. 18. r. meritorious. p.
76. l. 7. r. so as to bare. l. 16.19.20. r. (...) and (...). l. 21. r. (...).
p. 87. l. 6. r. 23.21. l. 9. dele, at Sins. l. 21. r. so as,

To my old Acquaintance Mr. John Humphry.
Reverend Sir,
THE former Civilities that I have received from you, in sending your Books
concerning the Doctrine of Justification to me, which I always read, and
seriously considered, knowing you to be a Man of Thought, and plain-hearted,
sine fuco, which some Men are too much starched with. These, I say, first
engaged me in this Undertaking, for which I must crave your Excuse, [looking
upon this as the best Returns] that I am your Apponent in the Doctrine you have
delivered in the said Books, and labored strenuously to defend; for you know
the old proverbial Saying, Amicus Plato, Amicus Aristotiles sed magis Amica
Veritas; I hope you will not (nor Mr. Clerk, whom I join with you as one that
pleads the same bad Cause,) have any reason to complain of uncivil Treatment;
for if you find any thing pungent, it is not in relation to your Persons, but
to such things in your Tenants, which I conscienciously take to be very
pernicious to the grand Truths of the Gospel, that I have, through the Riches of
the Grace of God thankfully received, and not a little experienced the
Consolations in Days of great Trial and Temptation, and therefore cannot see any
reason from all that you or your Copartner in this Controversy has said, to
part with those great Doctrines which you oppose, nor any way approve of the
new Scheme which you and others have held forth to the World of late; I need
not tell you how contrary it is to the Doctrine of our first Reformers, to the
Experiences of the most eminent Christians, and how greedily swallowed by Men
of Popish, Arminian and Socinian Principles.

There was two things, especially of weight with me, that obliged me to this
labor. 1. The public Interest and Concern of the Kingdom and Gospel of Christ
in the World, which I desire to have a most special regard unto; insomuch, that
the least and most favorable that I can say of the Propagators and Promoters
of your Opinions in this Neonomian Doctrine, is, that they have been only
applauded Captains by Men of blinded Minds, and corrupt Principles, for the
conducting of the People back again into our Spiritual Egypt, which through the
tender Mercies of the most High, they began to be delivered from by the
Reformation; and if we once come to this, that the Doctrine of the Imputation
of Christ's Righteousness is as incredible a thing as the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, as your great General has asserted, and your self have
insinuated, we may say, Good night to the Protestant Religion; and to the
Papists or Atheists (as now most appears in the Issue) take all. I need not
instance how apt Men of your Principles have been to dispense with all the
parts of instituted Worship, insomuch, that it is a hard thing to know what is
Sin by your new Law; but I shall not expatiate as I could upon this Point. The
second thing that had not a little Influence upon me, was, the Commiseration
that I cannot but have to your own Soul, and the Souls of others, looking upon
your Deviation from the Truth in these great Points to be by Fundamental
Errors, and such as endanger the Eternal Life promised in the Gospel, if a Man
live and die in the Cordial Belief and Embracement of them, and may be justly
reckoned among the strong Delusions which God does judicially give up those to
who receive not the Truth in the Love of it. It may be you may have read a
Pamphlet, entitled, A true Relation of the chief Passages between Mr. Anthony
Wotton, [the first Propagator of Neonom. in England, so far as I can find] and
Mr. George Walker, An. Dom. 1611. usque ad An. 1615. by George Walker, for the
vindicating himself from some Imputations laid upon him by Mr. Thomas Gataker.
Wherein amongst other remarkable Accounts that he gives of the unsound
doctrinal Opinions which he faithfully opposed, and the most unfair Dealings he
met with from Mr. Gataker, and some others, in countenancing of Wotton's
Doctrine, and prevaricating in those Controversies. P. 25. He has this
Relation: One thing I cannot omit, which was a strong Motive to move diverse
godly People in London to abhor Mr. Wotton's Opinions; That was the sharp
Censure which that holy Man of God, Mr. Alexander Richardson, gave against them
on his Deathbed, and which Mr. John Barlow did report to diverse from his
Mouth. Mr. Richardson being ready to leave this World, Mr. Barlow, who had
often before resorted to him for Direction in his Studies, [as diverse young
Divines did, some of which he mentions, P. 6.) and Resolution of Doubts in many
Points of Divinity, was at that time present with him, and told him that he had
heard me the Sabbath before propounding the Doctrine of Justification, to be
laid open out of Romans 5. and to be maintained against Papists, Socinians, and
other Heretics; some of which were of late revived in the City, and withal
desired to know his Judgment concerning Mr. Wotton's Opinions, who denied
Christ's fulfilling the Law for Justification of Believers, and the Imputation
of his Righteousness, and held Faith to be imputed in a proper Sense without a
Trope. Mr. Richardson answered and said, Take these Words of me a dying Man; I
have read, and well weighed Mr. Wotton 's Papers, and Opinions, and I know them
to be so pestilent and dangerous, that whosoever lives and dies in the Belief
of them, shall never enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Commend me to Mr.
Walker, and desire him from me (as being my last Request to him) to be
courageous in the Cause of God, and for that saving Truth, which he has
undertaken to maintain against those dangerous and deadly Errors lately set on
foot by Mr. Wotton. This Message being delivered unto me before diverse
Witnesses, some of which are alive to testify it, did much encourage me, and
make me more bold to lay open the Abominations of Mr. Wotton's Opinions
publicly in my Sermons, without Fear or Regard of the Slanders and Revilings
of his factious and furious Disciples. This was An. 1613.

Now supposing that you will not lay much stress upon the Judgment of one of
the most holy, serious and learned Divines since the Reformation, as it appears
such weighs little with you; let me be so bold as to ask you one Question,
Whether upon the maturest Consideration you do believe you shall in your dying
Hour dare to venture your Eternal State upon the Bottom that you have laid? And
Lastly, Although I am so much dissatisfied in your Doctrine, that I must needs
acknowledge your plain-heartedness in the Defense of your Doctrine, (as also
Mr. Clerk's) yet you do not endeavor to cover and obscure the Meaning and true
Design of the Doctrine of Neonom. but have given it to us unmasked in its
proper Colors; Viz. That the genuine and proper Nature thereof lies in the
setting aside of the Righteousness of Christ, and the Imputation thereof, to
the Justification of a Sinner before God, and to advance the inherent
Righteousness of Man into the Room and Place thereof. Moreover I must
acknowledge you have done right to Truth in what you say of the Union that the
Nonconformists made between Presbyterians and Independants, that they were
extremely out in it. And likewise in the plain Proof that you have made, that
it is most absurd to hold and assert, that the Righteousness of Christ is
imputed in se, and in the Effects too, and that there can be no mixed Medium;
either we must hold that the Righteousness of Christ is imputed in se and per
se to us for Justification, or the Effects thereof only in our inherent
Obedience, for the Reasons you give with full Demonstration. To say no more of
this now, but only that I think you have effectually ended Discord upon that
Point; Sir, I shall no longer detain you from the ensuing Discourse, but
subscribe my self.

Yours in all Truth and Faithfulness, J. C.

THE DOCTRINE OF Justification Explained and Vindicated, etc.
CHAPTER I. Of the Doctrine of Justification, and the Neonomian Opposition
thereto.
Section 1. The Article of the Assembly.. 2. How opposed in the universality of
Grace, and qualification of the person justified.. 3. How Neonomianism agrees
with Papists and Quakers in Justification by Infused Righteousness.. 4. How
they oppose in Pardon of Sin and Imputing Righteousness.. 5. Their agreement
with the Papists in Justification by Works.. 6. The Papists Talk of a New Law..
7. Quakers Doctrine of Justification.. 8. The Socinian Doctrine of
Justification.. 9. The Arminian Justification.. 10. Inference.. 11. They
assert, Justification not for Christ's sake alone. 12. Neonomians affirm,
Imputation of the Act of Faith.. 13. They deny the Imputation of Christ's
Obedience and Satisfaction.. 14. How they account Faith a qualifying
Condition.. 15. Conclusion.

Sect. 1. ASsembl. conf. cap. 11.. 1. Those whom God effectually calls, he
also freely justifies, not by infusing Righteousness into them, but by
pardoning their Sins, and by accounting and accepting their Persons as
righteous: Not for any thing wrought in them, or done by them, but for Christ's
sake alone; nor by imputing Faith it self, the Act of believing, nor any other
Evangelical Obedience to them as their righteousness, but by imputing the
Obedience and Satisfaction of Christ unto them, they receiving and resting on
him and his righteousness by faith, which Faith they have not of themselves, it
is the gift of God.

To this Doctrine here delivered with the greatest Exactness, according to the
Word of God, is the Doctrine of Neonomianism diametrically opposite, as will
abundantly appear.

. 2. They say, Whom God effectually calls he justifies.] Mr. B. says, God
justifies all the World; and he and Mr. H. 'That Christ redeemed all the
World, in which there are Millions that were never, or will be effectually
called. 2. That God freely justifies.] This is fuller expressed in the Larger
Catechism, Q. 70. Justification is an act of God's free grace unto Sinners,
Romans 3.21, 23, 24. for the free Grace is demonstrated in the Object that
Justification falls upon. Justification considered in it self is an act of
Justice, but the Free Grace lies in bringing Justification upon a Sinner, as
such, not as qualified by righteousness of his own, under any Denomination
whatsoever; Christ died for the ungodly, for enemies, while yet sinners, Romans
5.6, 7, 8, 9. it is such chap. 3. that are said to be justified (chap. 4.5.) by
free Grace; it is such that have sinned, and come short of the glory of God, as
all, he says, have, both Jews and Gentiles; such as are described, from v. 10.
of whom none are righteous, no not one, but full of all sin and wickedness, as
expressed with the highest aggravation unto v. 19. Now our Neonomians say, its
of Free Grace, because Justification is an Instance of Grace; but by Mr. Cl's.
favor, it must be in the Justification of a Sinner, not of a just one; and
therefore its said freely by Grace, because he has nothing, nor brings any
thing in or from himself. 2. He says, Its in respect of what is required of
us, or in us, Faith is wrought in us, and its of Free Grace that he accepts of
Faith, and imputes it to us for righteousness: This by the Assembly is rejected
as False Doctrine; although Faith, and all the Graces of the Spirit, are of Grace,
yet neither Faith, or any of them, are our righteousness for Justification,
neither does God accept it as such, nor impute it: Mr. Cl. mightily perverts
Romans 4.16. therefore it is of faith; 'i. e. the righteousness before spoken of,
is such as he received by faith (he says not therefore it is faith) that it
might be of grace, because as Grace gives freely, so Faith receives freely,
and is not so proud as to call it self, righteousness, but gladly, humbly and
thankfully receives the gift of righteousness, which Grace bestows, and Justice
accepts and imputes to Justification.

. 3. Not by infusing righteousness into them.] The Assembly does here exclude
the Popish Justification, at which Mr. H. inveighs, and so does J. G. for
indeed there is but a pair of Shears between the Papists and Neonomians; for the
Papists mean only, That we have the righteousness for Justification by
infusion, and so says the other; they say indeed, Infusion is of
Sanctification, and it is so, and we say, Justification is only a relative
Grace, as it finds nothing in the justified, so it puts nothing; but the
Neonomians say, It must find a righteousness infused, and there implanted in
the justified, for which he is justified, or by which; its all one, as we shall
make appear anon; in a word, tho the Neonomians say. The infusion of grace is
not justification, yet they say, Grace infused is our righteousness for
Justification; and here they do concur with the Papists, Quakers and others in
confounding Justification and Sanctification together.

. 4. But by pardoning their sins.] The Neonomians will not have Pardon to be
any part of Justification, but an effect of it only; we affirm it to be an
essential part of Justification. [By accounting and accepting their persons as
righteous.] The Neonomians say, its by accounting and accepting their imperfect
obedience for righteousness; God's Justification is first of the Person, and
then of their Services, as Abel's, but their Justification is first of their
Services, and so it is always in legal Justification, never in that of Free
Grace; for in a mere Legal Justification, Persons cannot be accepted before the
Work done, but the Person is accepted for the Work sake.

Not for any thing wrought in them, or done by them.] The Papists, Neonomians,
Quakers, Socinians, Arminians, all say its for or by what is wrought in us, or
done by us, Pap. Cons. Trid. There is one only formal cause of Justification,
and that is the righteousness of God, not that whereby he is righteous, but
whereby he makes us righteous, with which we being endowed, are renewed in the
spirit of our minds, and are truly called righteous, and are righteous, etc.
Upon which Bellarmine says the State of the whole Controversy may be reduced
to this plain Question, Whether our inherent righteousness be the formal cause
of our own absolute Justification? which he maintains in the Affirmative, and
this is the Question in Controversy exactly, which our Neonomians plead for in
the like manner, tho some more obscurely and sophistically, but others more
honestly in speaking out plainly what they mean, such as Mr. B. Mr. H. and Mr.
Cl. Bellarmine also blames Kemnitius for dealing fraudulently in not
distinguishing between propter and per, saying with the Council of Trent, That
Christ's Righteousness is the propter, the cause for which we we are justified,
and our own inherent Righteousness is the p^r, the formal cause by which we are
justified. This Distinction Mr. H. having taken up from Bellarmine, makes very
much of. More of it anon.

. 5. Take one or two for all, to avoid tediousness to the Reader. Mr. H. in
Medioc. p. 42. Herein does appear the ground of reconciliation between the
Papists and us in this point; the sum of what he says is, Provided they say
that the works they plead for our righteousness, be the works of the new law,
and not of the old, we are agreed, and then tells us, That Gods judging a man
to have performed the condition of the Covenant (i. e. the New Law) is the
accounting and declaring him righteous, That righteousness which makes a man
righteous, and denominates him righteous, is that righteousness which does make
God account him righteous, and that is the righteousness which he does. Note
it, for it is express; and this he says is not the righteousness of the law of
works, but of the law of grace, which he says is a righteousness which he
does, but not work in doing, which is pretty absurd, that a man should do works
of righteousness and not work; but the meaning is, he does not work perfect
works (I will not wrong him:) But do not those that work imperfect works work?
Yea, says he, they that do absolutely sinful works, are called workers of
iniquity. A little after he tells us, Christ's Redemption was to bring in a New
Law -- for when Man fell it was impossible he should be righteous any more
unless there were a new Law brought in, by performance whereof he might attain
to that again which he lost -- now this was the main business of Christ's
Redemption, the procuring a new law, or another law with lower Terms, which
some men performing, they do thereby become righteous, and so have
righteousness, according to that Law imputed to them for Remission and life
eternal -- And thus you see what everlasting righteousness Christ brought in,
Dan. 9. and in his Piece, Of Righteousness, which comes forth with Episco.
Approbation, p. 3. It is true against the Papists, there is no such
righteousness inherent, as to render God appeased with the sinner, or that the
Conscience can rest on it [then it is good for nothing] as that propter quod he
is forgiven or saved [by his favor Bellarmine does not say it is] but that
Christ's righteousness is the propter quam. Therefore the Papists and they are
agreed in this sense. -- It is true also against the common Protestant,
[therefore the Neonomians are not Protestants, unless such as have causa
formalis of Papists] that there is not any righteousness without us that can be
made ours, so as we should be accounted righteous in another's righteousness,
or be that thing per quod we are justified, there is no such matter in reality,
but in notion only -- This righteousness, as imperfect as it is (wrought by the
Spirit) is that, and must be that which is the form per quam, he is accepted
and justified, we grant the righteousness of Christ is the meritorious cause
per quam we are pardoned and saved.

. 6. About the New Law there is little difference between the Papists and
Neonomians, tho the Papiste are on the surer side of the Notion, Mr. Fox Mart.
about the difference between Ancient Rome and present, p. 34. tells us, The
Church of Rome teach the People that there is no difference between Moses and
Christ, save only that Moses was the giver of the old law, but Christ the giver
of a new and more perfect law. And its most rational, that the new law should
be a more perfect law, and not a law of imperfection; we do not mend perfect
things, and if there be any reason for particular ends, its with those things
that more perfectly answer those ends, and therefore their remedying law ought
to be perfecter and most complete.

. 7. Next akin to these men are the Quakers in their most refined Doctrine,
put out in the name of Barclay, but I heard Mr. Keath, that was a Neonomian
Quaker, say, Barclay's Book was chiefly his work. Works are necessary to
Justification as well as Faith, James 2. both equally required to
Justification; works of the Law are excluded as done by us, Tit. 3.5, 6, 7. [
this is Mr. H. just] To be justified by Grace is to be justified or saved by
Regeneration, which cannot exclude Works wrought by Grace and by the Spirit, 1
Cor. 6.11. The law gives not power to obey, and so falls short of
Justification; but there is power under the Gospel by which the Law comes to be
fulfilled inwardly, Romans 8.3, 4. Works are the Condition upon which Life is
proposed under the New Covenant. Tho we place Remission of Sins in the
Righteousness and Obedience of Christ performed in the Flesh, as to what
pertains to the remote procuring cause, and that we hold our selves formally
justified by Christ formed and brought forth in us; yet can we not (as some
Protestants have done unwarily) exclude works from Justification, for tho
properly we are not justified for them, yet are we justified in them, etc.

. 8. The Socinians say, No other Imputation is in our eternal Salvation than
that whoever sincerely obeys the Commands of Christ is from them accounted of
God righteous, Socin. de serve. When God is said to impute Faith for
Righteousness, the meaning is, that God has so great a value for Faith, that
he esteems it for a Righteousness to Justification, Crel. on Gal. 3.6. And Mr.
B. says, I abhor the Opinion that Christ's righteousness given us is all
without us, Preface to Doct. of Chr. p. 3. but more of this in what follows.

. 9. The Arminians bring up the Rear, and I shall name the Man from whom I can
prove Mr. B. has taken up most of his corrupt Notions about General Redemption
and Justification, and its J. G. The Question in precise Terms is this, Whether
the Faith of him that truly believes in Christ, or whether the righteousness of
Christ himself -- be that which God imputes to a Believer for righteousness, or
unto Righteousness in his Justification, J. G. of Justification, p. 7. he
concludes it is faith -- As a Merchant that grows rich by such a Commodity, i.
e. he grew rich by the Gain and Return he made of that Commodity -- So we may
be said to be justified by the righteousness of Christ, and yet not have the
righteousness it self upon us by Imputation, or otherwise, but only a
righteousness procured or purchased by it really and essentially differing from
it, p. 12. This Righteousness of Christ is not that that is imputed unto any
man for righteousness, but is that for which righteousness is imputed to every
man that believes -- Paul neither eat his Fingers, nor spun out the flesh of
his hands into clothing, and yet was both fed and clothed with them [Here's
the true sense of being justified by the effects of Christ's Righteousness.] So
may a Believer be said to be clothed with the Righteousness of Christ, and yet
the righteousness of Christ not be his clothing but only that which procured
this clothing unto him. Chap. 7. p. 88. is to evince, That that which God
imputes for Righteousness in Justification is not the Righteousness of Christ
himself (in the sense refused in the First Chapter,) 'but faith in Christ. In
the conclusion of the Chap. he says, If God in the New Covenant of the Gospel (
i. e. the New Law) requires Faith in Christ for our Justification, instead of
the righteousness of the Law in the old, and this faith will not pass with him
in account for such righteousness, both his Commandment and Covenant for
believing, and the Obedience it self of believing, will become void, and of
none effect.

. 10. You see by these instances, that by this Doctrine the Neonomions fall
into that Sink of Error, that the highest opposers of the Gospel of Christ
have professed; its no doubt but they will cease inveighing against the
Quakers, as introducers of Popery, but rather applaud them, and bring them into
their Pulpits.

11. But for Christ's sake alone.] This they deny and say, Our Justification
passively taken, that which we do our selves through Grace is this our formal
righteousness, and that is the condition of our Justification actively taken (
i. e. the righteousness of Christ the meritorious cause) So that in a large
sense here is two righteousnesses for our Justification, Christ's and ours, p.
6. Mr. Cl. has a Chapter to prove how the Righteousness of Christ concurs to
our Justification, the sum of all is this, That by the Merits of Christ's
Death, he has purchased this Privilege for us among others, that sincere Faith
should be accounted for righteousness, and that God will account us righteous
if we be possessed thereof, p. 35. Christ has done his part, but has appointed
us a necessary part which must be done by our selves; this is not to supply any
deficiency in Christ [ i. e. he has done well enough for the part allotted him]
but it is that which subordinately is required of us as the condition of Pardon
and Life by his own Law or Covenant of Grace, and so far [as a part] 'it is
imputed to us for righteousness, Scr. G. p. 35. From what has been quoted
before, it is plain the rest also do hold, that Christ's Righteousness at best
does but concur to our Justification, it is not that only whereby we are
justified. See Mr. Cl. Chap. 13.

. 12. Not by imputing faith it self, the act of believing, or any other
Evangelical Obedience to them for righteousness.] All this the Neonomians in
all their Writings deny, Mr. B. in his S. G. def. p. 32. quaeries, Whether
Faith be imputed to us for righteousness, or Christ's Righteousness believed
on? A. A strange and bold Quaery -- Read over the Text and put but [Christ's
Righteousness every where instead of the word Faith] and see what a scandalous
Paraphrase you will make -- to have righteousness imputed, plainly signifies
to be reckoned or judged righteous, and it is strange that it must not be our
own righteousness that is imputed and reckoned to us as our own. The same say
Mr. H. and Mr. Cl. This Faith that is our righteousness they will have the same
with our Evangelical Obedience, as containing all in it. So Mr. B. Faith by
which we are justified is one moral act, containing many physical acts, even
our fiducial consent to the Baptismal Covenant, and Dedication of our selves to
God the Father, p. 42. Mr. Cl. Faith is our subordinate Gospel-righteousness,
he gives his reasons, p. 64. Mr. H. When a man performs the Evangelick
Condition, it is the Evangelick Law (or God by it as his instrument) makes him,
or constitutes him righteous, and being thereby so made, God must account him
so; this constitutive Justification preceeds Pardon and Life in order of
nature. J. G. denis that Faith justifies in relation to its Object, tho it
cannot be separated from it, but by virtue of the intervention of some Law,
Covenant or Decree, i. e. as a condition of the new Law in the Neonomian sense.
Mr. H. in his right. of God, p. 54. Our Effectual Calling does enter our
Justification, for the Works of it, Faith, Repentance, new Obedience, are
imputed to us for that righteousness that justifies us, and our Justification
and inchoate righteousness does enter, and is the infancy of Glory. I need not
blot Paper by quoting the Council of Trent; briefly, they damn any man that
says, that a man is justified without the righteousness that Christ did merit
for us, whereby he is formally just, and damn such as say, that a man is
justified only by the righteousness of Christ, or Remission of Sins, without
inherent Grace and Charity.

. 13. But by imputing the Obedience and Satisfaction of Christ unto them.] Mr.
H. in his Right. etc. p. 34. says to this part of the Assemblies descript. of
Justification, and seems to flatter them a little, and thinks their Catechism
may serve the People, yea, that a grosser sort of the knowledge of the
Principles of Religion is better for ordinary People than more exact, whereby
you may see what high thoughts and apprehensions he has of the exactness of
his gross Divinity. In Justification I acknowledge a forgiveness, and an
imputation of Christ's Obedience, but I do not acknowledge either as our formal
righteousness, Forgiveness is a benefit we receive, but not the formal reason.
I acknowledge Christ's righteousness imputed sub genere causae efficientis and
modum meriti, received by faith, but in the merit of it only. And I give
notice, that thinking More does say, that Christ's righteousness in se, is made
ours legally (tho he disowns it as physically and morally) that man must make
it justify us sub ratione causa formalis, which is an unadvised Position,
which I look upon as that (...) of our former great Divines, which gave the
rise to Antinomianism. Now what a happiness is it that so great a Divine is
risen up, to find out such an Error in the very heart of our Reformation, in
our great Divines, and indeed in our Protestant Religion, that we have been all
under a Cheat and Delusion in this grand Point of Life and Salvation, building
upon a wrong righteousness for Justification. Again he says, That we should be
justified by faith, was obtained by Christ's Righteousness or Performance; but
it is our Faith, not Christ's Performance, is imputed unto us for righteousness
in our s^astification, Christ's righteousness is that for which, not that by
which causa propter quam. not per quam, we have this benefit, that upon
believing we are justified: to the same purpose he has words above an hundred
times. Mr. R. B. God never judges falsely, but knows all things to be what
they are, and therefore he reputeth Christ's Mediatorial Righteousness and
Sacrifice to be the meritorious cause for which we are justified by the law of
Grace, so he truly reputeth our Faith and Repentance, and Covenantconsent to be
our moral qualification for the gift, and our holiness and perseverance to be
our moral qualification for final Justification, which qualifications being the
matter of the Law of Grace, and Condition of its Promise, is so far our
righteousness, therefore God may be said in this sense, to impute Righteousness
to us [i. e. our own] and to impute Christ's Righteousness to us [i. e. as to
the effects] 'to impute our faith to us for righteousness. See the end of
Controv. p. 257, 258. and 260, 261. Scr. G. d. p. 61.70, 71.

Socinus. No other imputation is in our eternal Salvation than that whosoever
sincerely obeys the Commands of Christ is from them accounted of God as
righteous, De Serve. This is the express sense of the Neonomians.

. 14. They receiving and resting on him and his righteousness by faith.] The
Neonomians say, to be justified by it as that which God has promised
Justification on, as the qualifying condition, and says the quae and qua is a
quibbling and juggling about a mere sound of words in a ludicrous Disputation;
he says it justifies not instrumentaliter, for that is the (...) credere in
specie; Faith in Christ does not justify qua talis, as that Faith, but it is
that qualifying condition which the Promise annexeth Justification to, Scr. G.
d. p. 42, 43.

Mr. Cl. chap. 12.. 8. From hence I infer, that justifying Faith is the same
thing in substance with Effectual Calling, Repentance, Regeneration,
Conversion, Sanctification. Renovation, etc. J. G. It is the common Plea, that
Faith justifies in relation to its Object, its not receiving, but lawful
receiving that justifies, and therefore it justifies by virtue of that law or
agreement men are under, i. e. as a Covenant-condition; therefore he
peremptorily denis that Faith justifies in relation to its Object, and our
Neonomians are one with him, see him Of Justification.

Bellarmine also spends much Paper, That Faith alone does not justify, but
that Fear, Hope, Love, and every Grace does the same.

. 15. Those Points wherein the Neonomians declare themselves diametrically
opposite to the Assembly, and other Protestants in the Doctrine of the
Obedience and Satisfaction of Christ, must be matter of another Treatise, it
being too much to come within the compass of these Sheets; likewise, there are
two Points which I have already publicly insisted on. 1. In showing the
Nullity of any New Law with Sanction. 2. To disprove their Universal
Redemption, and show the Absurdity thereof, tho more may be said of both (God
willing) hereafter. And the Assembly, and we with them, asserting the
Imputation of the active and passive Obedience of Christ to the Justification
of a Sinner, and the Neonomians denying the active righteousness to have any
influence on our Justification, no further than as to the fitness of his Person
to the exercise of his Mediatorial Office, falling in with Piscator, Gataker
and others in this Point, and cannot be handled here, but must be matter of
after-consideration in treating of Satisfaction. Let not the Reader take it for
granted that we grant Mr. Clark that Point, viz. the denial of the active
righteousness of Christ in our Justification, wherein he has spent a great
part of his Treatise.

CHAP. II. Of Justification.
. 1. Wherein we are agreed.. 2. Justification, what in Scripture acceptance..
3. What it supposes.. 4. God justifies actions.. 5. Such a fruit of
Justification before God.. 6. Of Rahab.. 7. Of Justification in foro
Conscientiae. 8. Of the Conditions.. 9. Of Commutative Justice. 10. Of a
Compact.. 11. Of Grace purchased.. 12. Of the Purchase of the Covenant.. 13.
Whether God be a Debtor.. 14. Particularly asserted against Mr. H.

. 1. I Shall not detain the Reader in criticizing on the signification of
Justification in the Hebrew and Greek Language, it amounting to what our
English word means, and our adversaries in a great measure agreeing with us
therein (tho differing enough in the modus (as appears in the foregoing
Chapter) that Justification is directly opposed to Condemnation, That it is a
forinsick or Law-Term, and that properly it is a Law-Sentence, distinctly and
per se understood. That God is the great Justifier. That the Person justified
is always upon the account of some righteousness of that Law that justifies.
That this righteousness must be legally his that is justified, i. e. imputed to
him without denial of it self; and that Justification is the sentential
pronouncing a person righteous and accepted by the Lawgiver, free from
condemnation, righteous in his sight, and enstated in all advantages that this
righteousness of his brings him into. Thus far I take it we are agreed, what
little wordy differences there is, we shall not concern our selves about, nor
trouble the Reader with.

. 2. Justification in Scripture, and in our usual and common acceptance, is
any Vindication of a Person or Action from a Charge or Accusation brought in or
alleged against them, and this in the largest sense wherein a man is said to
justify God, Psalm. 51.4. Its one man's justifying another, or vindicating their
actions, and this done by pleading for, or defending them, Job 27.5. and 33.32.
or practically, by doing the same thing or worse, Ezekiel. 10.51.55. Or a man is
said to justify himself, Job 32. Luke 10.29.

. 3. Justification being allowed to be a Forinsick Term, it must always suppose
a Forum or Court where it is. And all Justification must be supposed to be in
one at least, or all these Courts, Forum Dei, Mundi, Conscientiae, a true
Believer is sometimes justified in all, as to his State and Actions; sometimes
in one, and not in another. The Court, or Forum Dei, is where God sits as
Lawgiver, and righteous Judge of his Law, where every one that is saved must
find Acquittance and Acceptance. Forum Mundi, is of two kinds, 1. Common,
wherein the actions of men are judged of, either by Vogue and Reports of the
Vulgar, or by the Courts of Judicature among men. 2. It is more special in
Ecclesiis, to be tried and judged in a Church of Christ. 3. Forum Conscientiae,
where God sits a Judge, and brings the Sinner to the Bar, and Trial, and
accordingly Sentence of Condemnation or Justification passes upon a man, or on
his Actions. As to the first of these, all men are tried as unto their State,
and they are there juridically acquitted or condemned in foro Dei, i. e. legis,
either by a Judgment on their own righteousness, which is called legal
righteousness, or upon a Judgment on them according to the righteousness of
another, called Evangelical, because its of absolute promise to a Sinner, and
the freest Gift in the World. As to the second Forum, the Courts of the World,
the World many ways call Courts of Judicature, and will have Judgment upon men,
in the former Court the Judgment is always according to truth, but its not so
here, for a man may be acquitted there, and condemned here, both Persons and
Actions; nay, let me say, a person may be acquitted in foro Dei, and yet his
Actions justly condemned in foro humano, i. e. mundi, but then I do not say,
those actions are accepted in foro Dei, but are burnt for Hay and Stubble, as
men do justify themselves and others in this foro mundi very often; so does
God himself justify his children and their actions that are so condemned by,
and ungrateful to the World: God does as it were come into it, and vindicate
his accused Saints, where Satan takes it upon him as his Prerogative to accuse
the Brethren, when his Accusations run high, God looks upon his Honor engaged
to vindicate such, in those eminent, unaccountable, and condemned Actions which
they do for his Names sake. Here we read of God's own vindicating and bearing
Testimony to the actions of his children that looked strange in the eye of the
World. God's justifying those Actions before the World is called Justification,
and their Actions Righteousness; not that the persons were justified thereby,
but that they were approved fruits of Christ's Righteousness, received by
Faith; yea we find, when God comes into the Court of the World to declare
Persons or Actions, to be approved by him, its usually in some extraordinary
thing wherein they were Eminent, and suffered much thereupon, at least in their
good Name, if not otherwise.

. 4. In this case, God justifies the Act of Phineas, in taking upon him to
execute Judgment in the case of Zimri and Cosbi, the action lay condemnable in
Phineas, as a rash action, which proceeded from an usurped Authority, he being
not High Priest, nor having any particular Commission from Moses. This Action
God testifies to as a holy and righteous Act, (tho it looked so extrajudicial)
and should be looked upon as a righteous act to all Generations. Phineas was a
justified person long before, Numb. 25.12, 13. Psalm. 106.30, 31. So Abel
offered a more excellent sacrifice than Cain, was he not in an accepted and
justified state before God? for God first accepted Abel, and then his Offering,
and because his Offering, notwithstanding God's acceptance, was condemned by
Cain, and no doubt by his Posterity, he obtained witness that he was righteous,
(...), whereby he was witnessed unto, for God witnessed in foro mundi, to the
righteousness of Abel, i. e. to his Justification, in that he made it appear by
his manifested acceptance, undoubtedly Fire came down from Heaven and consumed
the Sacrifice; here the Apostle says, God testifying of his Gifts, and this
was a testimony of his Person that he was righteous, but this is not the
justification of his Person, for if he had not been justified in foro Dei, yea
Conscientiae too, he could not by faith have offered a Sacrifice so well
pleasing to God, wherefore to show to the World that he was an accepted person,
God testifies to his Services. So Enoch, he had some eminent Testimony from God
before his Translation, against all the calumniating and blaspheming Posterity
of Cain. So Noah also, in his Generation a Preacher of the righteousness of
faith, he had a Testimony in the Ark, and the Salvation that he and his House
had to both the Worlds and yet this Testimony was not that Justification which
he had before God, for he was heir of the righteousness of God by faith, (...),
he was become the heir, not upon building the Ark, but was so before.

. 5. God's appearing then to witness to the Ways and Actions of his People in
the World, which the children of men are still condemning of, and their Persons
and Profession for, is not their Justification before God, but an eminent fruit
thereof. Abraham when he offered up his Son Isaac, he exerted the eminent fruit
of a tried Faith, which the World would be apt to condemn as one of the
heinousest and most unnatural in the World, therefore God justifies this Action
of his, and therein recommends him for the most Eminent Believer, he not
staggering in his faith of the promise notwithstanding, believing that God
could raise his son from the dead, and if he should slay his son, that God
would do it rather than not fulfill his Promise. Now I dare appeal to our most
ingenuous Opposers, whether they think Abraham was not justified before this
great Action of his, and what can James his Justification be more than God's
declaring in foro mundi, that this strange action of his, wherein he was a
Wonder to the World, and for which he stood ready to be condemned by it, was
highly approved by him, and an eminent Fruit and Testimony of his Faith. It
appears by the context that James understood nothing but that a True Faith
brings forth Works, witnessing in foro mundi, to the truth of it, and James
2.10. and that the offender of the Law in one point, is guilty of all, and that
he that is saved by faith, is saved by a lively faith, such as will show it
self by works, and such as God will testify to by his Word or Providence, or
both, that they are wrought of God.

. 6. The like may be said of Rahab, The World would condemn her for a
treacherous Harlot in betraying her Native Country to destruction: But this
action of justified Rahab being a signal fruit of her Eminent Faith, is
signally owned by God himself, and her strange action justified to the World,
that when the Walls of Jericho fell, her house stood only, and she saved with
the Honor and Renown of an exemplary believer in the Church, yea God honored
her so far, as to come into the Line of the Messiah. Has not God gloriously
justified his Saints, i. e. by testifying to their Gifts and Services to the
World, whence else has been that eminent Spirit visible and astonishing to the
World, whereby they have not only rejoiced to suffer for the Name of Jesus in
the spoil of their goods, but in giving their bodies to death, and overcame all
the Reproaches and Blasphemies of their cruel enemies, by faith in the blood of
the Lamb, and Word of the Testimony: Was not that admirable Presence of God
with them, not only which we read of Heb. 11. but in other Martyrologies. The
Witness of God to their Gifts in and to the convincing the World, to which they
had never come, had they not been freely justified by God before. I am ashamed
to see that Men should think that the Saints in their great Services and
Sufferings should be of such servile and base Spirits, as to be bargaining with
God by their Works when they were frying in the Flames.

. 7. There is also a Justification in foro Conscientiae, which is received by
faith, and cannot be received but by faith, and its a closing in with the
judgment of God according to truth. Justification must be before any person can
receive it; the Assembly do most accurately tell us what Justification by faith
is, We say not, that no man that says he believes not his Justification is not
justified, nor every one that says he believes it, is justified, but we say,
That every one that believes truly is justified, and every one that is
justified, shall believe.

God's Justification of a Sinner, is his Juridical Sentence concerning his
Eternal State and Condition, which admits not of majus and minus in God, but
admits of different times of application, and of degrees of manifestation; it
finds nothing in the creature, nor makes any change but relative, wherein God
is first in relation, justifying and applying that Grace to us, and therefore
we are wholly passive, till by virtue of Union with Christ by the Spirit, the
Spirit of Life raising us from the dead, we are enabled to believe whereby we
make a sensible re-application of the Grace of Justification to our selves, and
being justified by faith we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ.
But more of this infra.

. 8. The Judge of all the World must judge righteously, i. e. according to his
righteous Law, for as that is norma officii to us, so it is of judicii to him;
now here is the Mystery, How God can justify a sinner according to most
perfect law, and do it freely (...). Mr. H. in his Medio. p. 5. has this
Quaery, The Gospel requires Faith, Repentance, new Obedience, how then are we
justified and saved by Grace? how is it free when it is not vouchsafed but upon
condition? This difficulty has made some run into the Extreme, that the
Covenant of Grace is without conditions. Resp. It is such an extreme Argument
against the Neonomian Doctrine, that all their Skill and Sophistry neither
has, nor can answer, and the Argument stands thus, If nothing does essentially
distinguish a Covenant of Works from a Covenant of Grace, but the
Conditionality of it, then a Covenant of Grace must have no Condition, and
whatever Covenant has a Condition, is a Covenant of Works; but there is nothing
can distinguish; because the Antecedent is true, therefore the Consequence.
There can be nothing in sense to invalidate either Proposition, for the
distinguishing formal difference between the one Covenant and the other, must
be Condition, and no Condition, where the true Opposition lies, for the
promise of both Covenants are life, therefore the special and formal difference
lies in conditionality, and none; now to say, it lies in the nature of the
condition, will appear most absurd. 1. If it be the littleness of the Condition
makes a Covenant of Grace; this I deny, for the promulgated Covenant of Works
was laid upon the least condition imaginable, the forbearing to eat in Apple,
but let us hear what Mr. H. will say to make a Covenant of Works a Covenant of
Grace, p. 5. I say readily the Grace of God and of the Gospel is free, and
therefore not conditional; well, but how, wherein is the freedom? In that it
accepts of the sinners Faith and Repentance, when he needs not, or when
according to the law he was not tied to it. Resp. Was the Man awake or asleep
when he said this, he says its free because God accepts of his Faith and
Repentance, that is the same freedom whereby I may be said to give a Man a Horse
when I accept of Money which he was to pay me for it: Is not a Covenant a
Bargain? Was it not so to Adam? Was it possible he should say, he need not
accept it? What does he make of his New-Law-Covenant? need not God keep it?
where was God's Faithfulness and Truth when he made that Covenant? does not
that bind him to accept our Faith and Obedience as the Condition? According to
the law he is not tied; Why will an honest Man speak so equivocally to justify
a cause his Conscience tells him, or ought to do, that it is naught, he says,
according to the law, I pray what law? the Old or New? Does he not say, that
Faith and Repentance is the Condition of the New Law? and is not God bound to
accept of them by that Law? Oh but he is not bound to accept of them by the old
law: It is just as if a Man brings the Money that I sold such a Commodity for,
and I tell him, I will not take the Money unless he will confess, I gave him it
freely, no says he, I make a tender of the Money with which I bought it, I
will neverly for the Bargain, and say you gave it me, when I bought it, to
which I reply, I am not bound by law to accept the Money. What law? the law
that the King and Parliament made for the Pole-Tax. H. Unless Man's Obedience
were perfect, but he is bound by the new law to accept imperfect. Obedience. H.
our Divines say usually, because its not of merit -- but this labors with some
defect of light, if man had performed the condition of the covenant of Works,
it might have bin said upon this reason that Life and Salvation had bin still
of Grace and Free, as not merited, while these considerations hinder merit. How
might Man's Obedience in the Covenant of Works be said to be of Free Grace?
because his were not proportionable to the reward; no more are good Angels
works to this day, there was Grace in making the Covenant on easy Terms, but
when the Covenant is made, the Reward is merited ex pacto, by the performed
Conditions: Hence the Apostle's reasoning remains unshaked, they that are
justified of debt, are not of grace.

. 9. Mr. Humphry makes a fearful bungling about this business, and lends us for
our help a distinction about merit, and says, There is a debt or merit of
Commutative Justice, and of distributive; it is impossible that any should
engage the Almighty in the former. Resp. But the Almighty may engage himself in
it to the creature, may there not be place for commutative Justice between a
superior and inferiouur? between a King and People all obligatory Covenants
upon terms of mutual performances are primarily fulfilled in a way of
commutative Justice; distributive Justice comes in for redress in case of
nonperformance of mutual agreements, or upon complaint thereof. Of the latter
[i. e. distributive Justice] there is a merit or debt upon compact or strict
retaliation; it is true, that there is nothing Man does, or can do in the state
of innocence could merit upon strict retaliation. Resp. I suppose he means by
his term of strict retaliation, rewarding just so much as the value of the
work, more, i. e. to reward man just as much as the value of not eating an
Apple, but the reward promised, was infinitely more, and it was promised upon
so small a Condition, therefore upon the performance of the condition, the
reward, as great as it was, would have become due ex pacto, and hence a true
debt. But he tells us what a Compact is.

. 10. Mr. H. A Compact may be twofold, Upon Terms equal or unequal: Upon terms
equal, we know the reward does become debt, and may he said to be merit;
notwithstanding by way of strict Retaliation, or upon account of equal benefit,
the performance of the condition would require no such matter. Resp. Equality
of Terms in an Agreement is, so much for so much, the mutual performance
whereof is strict retaliation. Tho the Term is foreign to the matter in hand,
for it belongs to revenge in giving a man as good, or rather bad as he brings.
I deny, that Compact upon Terms equal or unequal, do alter the nature thereof,
so that the Condition is not a Merit, and the Promise a Reward. He says, If I
agree to give a man 2 s. 6 d. for his days work, I must pay the debt tho the
Emolument be not worth half the money. Here he answers himself in his strict
retaliation, and tho the condition is worth little, yet it is the Compact that
makes the Debt upon the performance. And he says, If I promise a poor man a
shilling for leading my Horse to the next Style, its Alms, an act of Grace.
Resp. It seems here is but 18 d. difference between Works and Grace. An
agreement to give a man 2 s. 6 d. for a Days Work makes a Debt, but an
agreement to give a shilling for leading his Horse, is Alms; he allowed the
man's Days-work proved not to be worth above a shilling, and yet ex pacto, he
was indebted to him 2 s. 6 d. and why I pray, Is it not as good a Debt to the
poor man that he bargains with to lead his Horse to the next Style? he will
say, it was not worth so much in strict Retaliation, no more was the other
man's Days-work; if he had given the man the shilling, and afterward said,
prithee lead my Horse to the next Style, he would have said, ay Master, and
thank you too; but if he agree with him, when he has done his work, he could
demand the Wages as Debt, tho it may be he would thank him for so easy a
Bargain. He tells us, The first Covenant was upon Terms equal, and if man did
his duty, tho with the ability God gives him (as if I agree with a man to work
with my Tools) the reward is of Merit or Debt. Answ. If he means equal in
value, I deny that the First Covenant was so any more than the New Law
covenant: Ay, but if he means equal as to obligation in a way of commutative
Justice, i. e. that God is as much bound to perform his part after covenanting,
as Man to perform his, then I say the New Covenant is as equal as the old, for
each is but equality of obligation; but he goes on, When he gives us the
reward, which is eternal life through his Son, upon obedience which is imperfect
[that is upon a new covenant upon terms unequal] he gives it freely. R. Here it
plainly appears what he means by terms equal and unequal, that it is as to
intrinsic value, that a covenant of works are terms equal (wherein also he
contradicts himself) i. e. man's perfect obedience in the said covenant is so
much for so much, as good as the reward, its a days-work in it self worth the
Wages promised, whereas before he says it was not; but now he says, when the
wages are more worth than the work, its on terms unequal; but the terms unequal
do not change the nature of a Bargain to make it none; for there are different
Bargains, some better, and some worse; but is the new law covenant a better
Bargain or worse than that of the covenant of Works? I take it to be much the
harder, because of the incapacity of the Covenantee: Man in the state of
Perfection could much easier perform the condition of the covenant by perfect
obedience than he can now in his lapst state perform the condition of the new
law by imperfect, as may easily be demonstrated from these men's Principles,
they affirming, that the performing the condition is not by natural power and
strength.

. 11. But Mr. H. returns after this excursion in saying, p. 7. That the grace
of Justification is purchased by Christ, is apparent by Romans 3.24. The purchase
of Grace (being free in the exerting its self) is a contradiction; for what God
does by Grace, he does sua sponte, without motion thereto by externals, and its
merely of his own good will and pleasure, I will have mercy on whom I will: Our
Divines say, the covenant of Grace was not purchased, no not by Christ; but the
way of the execution of this covenant was in and through Christ and his
Purchase; that God might not infringe his Justice in the least in exerting his
Grace to the Salvation of Sinners. This Mr. H. opposes and says, If the
Notion of free did ly in the conception our Divines ordinarily frame, then
could it not be the fruit of Christ's purchase; for how can that which is
purchased in their sense, be free? Resp. There Is much more reason to say, how
can that which is purchased in Mr. H.'s sense be free? There Is less reason that
a thing purchased in the Original and Fountain should be free, than what is
purchased in the Streams; therefore Mr. H's. Answer cuts off his own legs; for
if the Grace of God be not free because it comes to us in and through Christ,
and as the fruits of Christ's Purchase, then when this gratia dans is purchased
how can that be free? He proceeds

13. Whereas it is this Grace certainly is the main fruit of Christ's
Redemption, viz. that the new Covenant should be established. Resp. Here it
appears that he asserts, That the Grace whereby the New Covenant was made, was
purchased grace, therefore not free by his own assertion, because purchased, he
says, Christ purchased the Grace of the New Covenant, therefore the covenant
and all in it: So you see, he will have Purchase in our sense, inconsistent
with Free Grace; but purchase in his sense more comprehensive, to be Free
Grace; but now he will have the freeness to ly in bestowing freely the works
which should make the reward due to him; To which I answer, its one thing to
justify for the Works wrought, and another to give them: Mr. H. calls this
latter, infusion of Grace and Sanctification; but Justification is declaring a
man righteous by the said Works.: Now if this Grace giving the condition be
purchased, then Faith and Obedience was purchased by Christ, contrary to Mr. H.
who says it comes only as the gift of election: Hence it appears, that he will
have Grace in the root to be purchased as to exhibition of the whole covenant,
but not as to the performance of the main part of it.

. 13. See then how the Grace of God is made free in the sense of the Apostle,
not upon the account that man cannot merit at God's hand, seeing God can be a
debtor ex pacto regimine gratiae paterno. Resp. God can be a Debtor to sinful
Man ex pacto, but then 1. Its upon pactum absolutum, not such a Covenant as
makes man's works meritorious. 2. It is in and through Christ only that God is
a Debtor in the way of Justice. 3. Its merely Free Grace that has brought
about the Sinners Salvation by Christ, and not purchased. by himself. 4. God is
not, nor ever will be a Debtor to sinful Man, to justify him for or by any
works done by him either here or hereafter. 5. Therefore whatever is the fruit
of Free Grace in us, is free in respect of us on whom it is bestowed; we do not
merit or deserve it in the least, neither does God reward any of his Children
regimine foederis operum, such as the New Law is and must be, which rewards us
upon our own fulfilling the condition, But upon the account here mentioned
(before refuted) which is a most direct answer, because we have showed the
indirectness and falsity of it -- And I declare, that God's Abatement of Terms,
and requiring a new Condition, is that which therefore makes it free, seeing it
is tendered and obtained without performance of the old. Resp. The changing of
Terms in a covenant does not make it free, if God had changed the terms of the
old covenant from perfect obedience to imperfect, it had not made it free,
because the condition is Works still, for here the change is but a change from
one compact to another, viz. Abatement of terms, and requiring new terms in the
room. What if a man gets his Creditor, (of whom he complains he has a hard
Bargain) to make another Bargain upon easier terms, this is a favor indeed,
but its justice, considering he had brought him under too hard terms before,
but yet he does not therefore give the commodity to him because he allows him
easier terms, but makes another Bargain upon other terms. So here, the new law
is as much a Bargain as the other, tho upon easier terms, which cannot be
admitted. He proceeds to refute Augustine, about the works of the law,
according to Paul's sense, which we shall examine when we come upon that Point.

. 14. We shall here gather the sum of what according to truth, is to be
asserted and defended against Mr. H. and the rest.

1. That the covenant of Works was not made with Man upon equal Terms, for his
perfectest Obedience could never be equal with the promised Reward.

2. That the New-law Covenant is upon as equal Terms, according to the nature
of the Law, and they differ not in nature from the old covenant being works, if
they differ in degree, its the covenant which has made it so, and the Promise
is as much a reward to the imperfection, as it was in the old to a perfect
condition, by God's constitution.

3. God is free, and can be bound by none but himself, and its his Grace to
covenant with the creature any way, but when God has freely, without purchase,
covenanted upon Terms of the creatures performance, he makes himself a Debtor
thereupon, let the Terms be perfect or imperfect.

4. In the pretended new-law covenant, where faith and obedience are the
conditions, Man merits ex pacto, and God become a Debtor to him as much as he
should have bin to Adam if he had stood, hence the Apostle cannot mean
justifying freely by grace in Mr. H's sense: But when we are said to be
justified freely by Gods grace, is meant, (...). That it is of the pleasure of
God's Will, not upon any external Motive, no not of Christ's Death, that God
exerts the Grace of Justification, he is gracious to whom he will.

2. It is free in that the Object of it, upon whom it falls, is a sinner
every way undone and miserable, without Works or Qualifications, much less
deserving of this Grace, and this is the chief meaning of the Apostle in Romans 3.

3. The providing, giving and bestowing Christ and his righteousness is an high
act of Grace, that a sinner may be justified at the Bar of Divine Justice, that
a sinner, according to the Mystery of his Will and gracious Dispensation may be
fully acquitted through Christ from the fiery Law, and discharged from all the
charges thereof by the highest Justice.

4. That as it was Free Grace every way to us, considered in our selves,
therefore a Covenant of Promise without conditions required on our part, hence
absolute; so it was a higher Covenant of Works to the Second Adam than ever the
First was under, and whereas Mr. H. objects and says, then we are justified by
the law: I answer, 1. Where did he ever see Justification but by a Law. 2. He
makes his to be by the new Law, which law we deny to be in rerum natura. 3. As
we are justified by the Grace of God, so it is in Christ Jesus, and a Believer
in Christ needs no New Law to justify him, he is justified by the Law in Jesus
Christ, and yet freely by Grace.

CHAP. III. Of Righteousness.
Sect. 1. Righteousness what, and of what kinds.. 2. Of Distributive Justice..
3. Distinctions in respect of Justice.. 4. God's Justice in Efficiency.. 5. No
Justifying Righteousness but perfect.. 6. Of the way of God's Execution of his
Justice.. 7. Righteousness again distinguished.. 8. Righteousness of
Justification and Sanctification.

Sect. 1. JVstitia est suum cuique tribuere, to give every one his due; so
Cicero. The Spirit of God tells us, its to render every one their due or right,
Romans 13.7. Prove. 27. And its either commutative or distributive; commutative
when persons mutually perform their Duty to each other which they are bound to
by any Law, Covenant or Agreement, whether they be superiors to inferiors, or
inferiors to superiors, or equals to one another; a due conformity in obedience
to a Law, is commutative Justice, Romans 13. done for Conscience sake, giving the
Legislator his due; but if he is pleased not only to bind me to Duty, but
promise a Reward upon performance, as I am bound to Obedience, so on the
performance thereof God is bound to Reward; whence if Man had stood, the
Covenant had bin fulfilled by way of commutation; its so between Magistrate and
People, being bound together by Covenant, and each observing his Duty to other,
its done by commutative Justice, and yet without any derogation from the
Authority and Grandeur, and just Prerogative of the Magistrate.

. 2. Distributive Justice or Righteousness, is Magistratick, for the
maintaining commutative Justice, by awarding it where its refused, or punishing
the breach thereof, or in vindicating just persons, which are falsely accused
upon that account, to render to men judicially according to their works. All
first conformity to Laws and Covenants is by commutative Justice; but upon
complaint of the breach of the Rules thereof, Distributive Justice takes place.
Hence God's execution of distributive Justice takes place upon the Fall of Men
and Angels.

. 3. Again, Righteousness is to be distinguished in regard of the subject, Its
either the Righteousness of God, or the Righteousness of Man; the Righteousness
of God is that which peculiarly belongs to himself, and that in his Sufficiency
or Efficiency; the Justice appertaining to God in his Sufficiency, is his
Essential Attribute, whereby he is eternally, infinitely and unchangeably
righteous; this is not a righteousness imputed unto us in Justification, but a
justifying righteousness, it is the just God that justifies.

. 4. God's Justice in Efficiency is the execution thereof, that his essential
Justice may shine forth to his Praise and Glory, The Execution of his Justice
is a transient Act, and is either Legislation, or execution of his Laws. God's
Legislation is his acting from his Sovereign Will and Pleasure in laying what
Laws he pleases on the creature; Laws are not purchased of God, any more than
Grace, therefore they that talk in that manner, seem neither to understand Law
or Grace. In God's Legislation, he has given Man but one Law for Life, in the
fulfilling where for not, Man is liable to be eternally saved or condemned; and
God never made, nor Christ purchased any Remedying Law to amend the faults
thereof, never abrogated or relaxt it, but it stands in its full Sanction
preceptive, remunerative or vindictive.

. 5. There neither is, nor ever was any justifying righteousness to Man, but
what is the perfect and complete righteousness of this Law, as imperfect
righteousness is renounced and condemned by this Law; so it will not stand for
Justification with any of God's Laws, neither is it Grace in God to relax his
Law, he cannot deny himself in the perfection of Justice.

. 6. The execution of this Law upon Man since the Fall, is in a way of mere
Justice, or in a way of exact Justice in consistency with Grace and Mercy. In a
way of mere Justice, to the Glory thereof, on the Vessels of Wrath; in a way of
Justice in consistency with all the designs of Grace and Mercy, by setting up a
Second Adam, and providing such a righteousness in him, as might fully answer
all the demands of the Law, which the Law should accept and and impute to the
Sinner, the Mediatorial and Surety Righteousness of Christ, and this is called
the righteousness of God, that we are made in Justification. Mr. H. denis it,
but we shall endeavor to prove it.

. 7. Righteousness of Man is to be distinguished, Either as it is of his own
performance for Justification, and so its the righteousness of the Law, and
rejected by the Apostle; Or as its performed by another, by Jesus Christ for
us, and this is called Our Righteousness, and is so by real Imputation and Free
Gift: This is our only Evangelical Righteousness.

. 8. Its also considered in respect of Justification before God, In this
respect all Fallen Man's imperfect Righteousness is filthy Rags; in respect of
Sanctification they are the fruit of the Spirit, and accepted in Christ, the
person being justified, and therefore Believers are often denominated righteous
in Scripture.

CHAP. IV. Of Imputation.
Sect. 1. What Imputation imports.. 2. How it differs from Justification.. 3.
Not to impute is to acquit.. 4. To attribute or ascribe, what.. 5. Legal
Imputation.. 6. The Second Sort.. 7. Imputation by Attainder.. 8. Neonomians
deny Imputation of Adam 's Sin.. 9. Imputation by way of Suretiship.. 10. A
Surety a Representative.. 11. The difference of Imputation by way of Attainder,
and by way of Suretiship.. 12. Neonomians deny Imputation of Sin to Christ.

Sect. 1. IMputation for the most part in Scripture is a Forinsick or Law Term,
as Justification is; the Greek Word (...), the Hebrew (...) and it is the
accounting things or actions to Persons which they did not do, or plead they
did not do; when a man's action comes to be lis coram Judice, the first Enquiry
is de facto, whether he he guilty of it or not guilty? the Judgment of the
Court by the Jury is the Imputation or laying Guilt upon him, or the acquitting
him, which is not only non-imputation of Fault to him, but imputing
righteousness unto him: The Sentence of the Judge on the Verdict of Guilty, is
Condemnation; on the Verdict of Not Guilty, is Justification. I find the word
so used, 1 Samuel 22.15. when Abimelek is accused by Doeg to Saul, for enquiring
of the Lord concerning David, he says, Let not the King impute any thing unto
his servant: (...) Let not the King lay it upon, or ascribe it to his servant
as a fault. LXX (...), Let not the King lay any thing to the charge of his
servant. This is rendered impute by our Translators, so 2 Samuel 19.19. Shimei
pleading with David for his Pardon, says, (...), let not my lord impute sin to
me. Likewise in the Plea of a righteous action, Lev. 7.18. If the Priest shall
eat the flesh of the sacrifice on the third day, God says, it shall not be
accepted, neither shall it be imputed to him that offers it; the Word is (...)
LXX is (...): So in offering any where but at the Door of the Tabernacle, blood
shall be imputed To impute is to lay any thing to the charge, so Minst. Lat.
Imputare aliquid alicui. Plin. Caedem alicui imputare. So Quint.
to that man that does it, Lev. 17.4. (...), LXX. (...); now these are the
words used for imputing in the Old Testament, and as the Sept. renders (...) by
(...), in the forequoted places, in the same sense the Apostles use it in the
New Testament, whence it appears that Imputation is a Law Term, and its used
when it comes to be argued in Law, whether this thing or action, whether
righteousness or unrighteousness is to be ascribed to a person, whereby he
stands just or unjust in the eye of the Law, and what the Judgment of the Court
is, is Imputation. Such Trials do especially concern two things, Right or
Actions, in matters of Right, or Claim, the Judgment of the Court imputes it to
the Plaintiff or Defendant; in matters of Fact the Judgment of the Court
determines it, or imputes it, as righteousness or unrighteousness.

. 2. Hence 1. Imputation differs from Justification, because its of right or
fact. Its a Judgment concerning things or actions according to law,
Justification in this legal sense, or Condemnation is, of Persons according to
Imputation. 2. Guilt is the imputation of fault to the charged person in the
most proper sense, reatus culpae, and the acquitting a person from Guilt when
charged, is the making him righteous, by removal of unrighteousness from him,
so far as the Law has to do with him. 3. A Man is not charged by one Law, and
acquitted by another, but his imputation is always according to that law where
he was charged, and therefore his Justification or Condemnation by the same; if
a Man be found guilty by one Law, he cannot be acquitted by another, tho
requiring milder Terms.

. 3. Not to impute a fault is to acquit, and of the same import as to impute
righteousness, and therefore where the Spirit of God speaks of non imputation
of sin, Psalm 32.2. Romans 4.8. 1 Cor. 5.19. it always therein asserts imputation
of righteousness; for he that is a sinner and has no sin imputed to him, or
charged upon him by the Law, is righteous, and found so by the Law, and indeed
all proper imputation is by the Law, for Sin is not imputed where there is no
law; therefore its properly the voice of the Law that imputes Sin or
Righteousness, where Actions or Claims of Right come to be questioned and
tried; what the law says, is says to them that are under it for judgment and
condemns therefore all transgressors, and makes them guilty before God, Romans
3.19.

. 4. To attribute, or ascribe, are larger Terms than to impute; when any thing
is imputed to a person, its attributed and ascribed, but every thing attributed
or ascribed, is not said to be imputed, because its spoken of in a Law-sense,
e. gr. we attribute Holiness. Justice, Power, etc. to God, but do not say we
impute them to God; we attribute Heat to Fire, hardness to Iron, but do not
say, we impute Heat to Fire, or hardness to Iron, because its naturally in them.

. 5. Legal Imputation of Sin or Righteousness is either of that which is a
Man's own, unto himself, or of that which primarily is his own and imputed unto
another. The first is, when a Man bears his own Sin, or stands legally in his
own righteousness; upon the first the law condemns him, upon the other it
justifies him; he is upon the first Judgment of the Law, found guilty or not,
to have right to the Claim that he makes, or to have no right to his Claim to
the Promise in a Law-Covenant. Hence imputation of righteousness fixes his
right to the promised reward. Imputation of sin cuts off his right to the said
reward, and brings him under the curse of the Law.

. 6. The second sort of legal Imputation is of a Man's own Sin or Righteousness
unto another. Its by way of translation, and its either of Sin or of
Righteousness. Imputation of Sin by translation, is when the Law imputes Sin to
any other than the Sinner, so that by that Imputation those others are legally
made Sinners. And this Imputation is twofold by way of Attainder, or by way of
Suretiship.

. 7. Imputation by way of Attainder is, when the whole Blood is charged with,
and stained by the Sin of the actual transgressor. Such was Achan's Sin, such
also Adam's First Sin; his sin was imputed to himself and all his Posterity; he
being not only a single person, but a Public Person. 1. Naturally, containing
all Mankind in him. 2. Foederally, Because God when he covenanted with him,
covenanted with a Kind; he covenanted but with individuals when he covenanted
with Angels. As Adam was when he stood, in respect of Mankind, sohe was when he
fell; Hence it was that all the Kind must needs fall in him, when Angels fell,
each one fell but for himself, as each stood for himself; but it was not, it
could not be so with Man; Adam therefore was the greatest Representative in
respect of the number represented by him, that ever was, and all Mankind sinned
in him; Sin did not come upon us by Propagation only (tho a sinner can
propagate none but a sinner) but by imputing Adam's First Sin to all his
Posterity, for judgment of imputation came upon all to condemnation of the
whole kind; else Adam's First Sin should affect us no more than any other of
his sins, and Adam's sins no more than the sins of any other of our
Progenitors; Hence Adam's sin came upon us federally, and by way of Imputation
as well as by Propagation and seminal Descent; for the Privation of the Image
of God by Adam's Sin, which was his moral Death, was a Public Loss, never to
be regained by any that have their standing only in him. Hence every Natural
Man is in him, stands under that first Privation, and therefore under that
first Guilt; and as every Man by Nature stands under that Guilt, he also is
under the condemnation. Wrath and Curse of the Law, Death passed upon all men,
in that all have sinned; the Apostle speaks but of Adam's sin. Romans 5.12, 16.
and of death passing upon all by that sin imputed by the law, as appears by the
following word, that all died in Adam, the Apostle is express, 1 Cor. 15.22.
Undestand it of which Death you please spiritual or corporal that in Adam all
died, it infers necessarily that Adam was a Public Person; for we cannot be
said to live or die in another's life or death, but as he is a Public Person,
verse. 49. we are said to bear the image of the earthly, i. e. in his Fallen
State, which shows that his Image was of a Public Nature to all his Posterity,
and his loss of God's Image, a Sin imputed to the whole kind.

. 8. I cannot stay to insist largely on the proof of the Imputation of Adam's
Sin, but is a Point of so great concern, that the denial of it overthrows the
Gospel in the true state thereof; I shall only acquaint the Reader, That the
Neonomians, together with the Socinians and Quakers, lay this denial in the
foundation of their rotten Doctrine.

Neonomian. We were not in Adam as a Public Person, or Representative by a
Covenant standing, nor his sin imputed to us further than we are guilty by a
natural in being or derivation, Scr. G. D. p. 86, 87. 112, 113. End of Controv.
95.

See his daring confidence. We were not in Adam as a public Covenanter, I
would ask whether God covenanted with Adam as the comprehender of all the Kind;
if he did, then Adam was a Public Covenantee instead of the whole Kind; and it
appears in that the Covenant reached Eve then in him, when the covenant was
made, Genesis 2, and if the covenant was made with her in him, then why not, by
the same reason, with all Mankind in him? He says Adam's sin is imputed no
further than we are guilty; we say, we are not guilty any further than his sin
is imputed; its imputation of Sin makes us guilty, not guilt that makes
imputation: He says also, no further than by a natural in-being; what then,
does not a natural in-being in Adam at the time of his Covenant, make him a
public Covenanter, when the whole Nature was in him? and so we were federally
in him, because naturally; but see how the Socinians concur, Socin. They are
greatly deceived who gather that all the posterity of Adam sinned in Adam the
Parent, and truly to have deserved the punishment of death -- for sins and
merits, such as are merely personal, go not out of the person which has
sinned, neither do Parents represent their Children. Although there may be some
hurt, and that not a little, to Children by their Parents sin, as indeed it
fell out in Adam 's sin; but the very Sin and Merit of Adam was not
communicated in, nor imputed to Adam's Posterity, and hence the Posterity of
Adam was not truly punished for Adam's sin, unless they imitated their Parents,
Schlicting on Heb. 7.10. Whereas it appears plainly, by Romans 5.12. that the
merit passed upon all by Adam's sin, for death passed upon all and the merit of
Death cannot be without imputation of sin, and it passed upon all that have not
finned actually, even Infants, before they are capable of imitation of their
Parents. Quakers, We do not ascribe any whit of Adam 's guilt to men, till they
make it theirs by the like acts of disobedience. Barchl. This is also Pelagian
Doctrine, That Adam 's sin is not imputed to his Posterity.

. 9. Imputation is also by way of Suretiship, and it is when the Sins or Debts
of one person, are by law charged upon, or imputed to another in order to the
Salvation of the Principal or personal transgressor. Here it is always
understood that the payment of a Surety is as good and acceptable to the Law as
that of the Principal. 2. That the Surety cannot become Play Master in Law,
unless he take the Debt or Sin upon him instead of the proper transgressor he
must be charged as transgressor, else the Law can make no demand upon him. 3.
He must freely offer himself to be a Surety, no person can be forced in any
case to be Surety for another. 4. When he has engaged himself in Suretiship,
the law takes him person for person, the principal Debt becomes his, and his
righteousness and payment becomes the Principals in a real legal commutation,
here is no natural or moral Change, but sponsorial and legal, nay, no logical
change, i. e. one relation is not changed into another, the Surety into the
Principal, nor Principal into the Surety; but in the Judgment of the Law the
Principal Debt becomes the Surety's, and the Surety's Payment is the
Principals. whereupon the Principal in respect of that Sin or Debt for which
Satisfaction is made, has the discharge in full, and is as perfectly righteous
as to that, as the Surety himself; he is not it may be so rich and honorable
as his Surety, but in respect of the Debt satisfied, the Law has no more to
say to him than to the Surety, An Alderman fetches a Prisoner, and with him
many more out of Ludgate, owing Five or Ten Pounds a piece, this little money
being all that is owing in the World by the poor Man, when discharged the Law
has no more to say to him than to the Alderman, and he is as righteous in the
eye of the Law, tho he will not pretend to be so great and so rich, or a
ransomer of others out of Prison, as the Alderman himself is.

. 10. He that bears the sins of others must be a Representative and Public
Person, that must personate or bear the persons of them whose sins he bears,
and must be either substituted by the Court, or if by some other, he must be
allowed to be capable and able to make Payment, must be accepted and dealt with
in the name and upon the account of the other, and becomes a Debtor or
Transgressor in and for the person he does represent in Court, and becomes a
Delinquent in the eye of the Law, the Law imputing sin to him makes him sin,
because he is supposed to owe nothing on his own account; he that does in foro
represent one or more, and stands not, nor acts for himself, but others, is a
public Person and Representative, as a Burgess or Citizen in Parliament, and
they that he represents are said to act in and by him. Its a contradiction to
common sense and reason, to say, that he that stands legally or civilly in the
place of another, to act his part, and in his name, should not be a public
Person, but men will throw down common sense and reason to establish their own
fond Conceits and Errors.

. 11. The difference between Imputation by way of Attainder, and by way of
Suretiship is, that this Imputation is in order to the Salvation of the Sinner,
but that is as to legal single effects only to the Sinners Destruction. 2. That
in this Imputation in the way of Suretiship, as there is Imputation of the
sinners sin to the Surety, so there is a re-imputation of the Surety's
righteousness to the sinner, but in Imputation of Sin by way of Attainder,
there is no re-imputation of righteousness to the first sinner. 3. The
Imputation does differ in the manner of transaction. In Imputation of sin by
way of Attainder, sin is transferred from the Representative to the
Represented; but in Imputation by way of Suretiship, sin is transferred from
the Represented to the Representative, and that is the reason, that tho we are
fitly said to sin in Adam because he was our Representative; yet its not so
fitly said that Christ sinned in us, because that we were never Representatives
to Christ; but its fitly said, we are righteous in Christ, because he is our
Representative, and that we satisfied in Christ, which saying does not rob
Christ of his Glory of Satisfaction, but gives it him, affirming that Christ
satisfied, and for us, and that God is well pleased with us through him; If a
man that has owed Money to A. and paid him by his Surety B. be charged that he
owes A. so much Money; he denis it, and says, I paid you by B. does he speak
true or false? does he not speak properly? does he hereby say, I paid you by my
own Money? No, he only says, that B. paid for me my Debt with his Money: But
we see how Neonomians will pick quarrel with common sense and reason, as they
do in their denial of this high and fundamental Point Of Imputation of Sin to
Christ, and charge it for an Error to say, we satisfied in Christ.

. 12. Neonom. Christ neither was a Sinner, nor reputed a Sinner by God. R. B.
End of Contr. p. 122. Christ took not reatum facti, nor reatum culpae [as if
there were any difference between them] He took reatum poenae, the guilt of
punishment [that's always in the fault, for nothing deserves punishment but
faults] Scr. G. d. p. 89. They dangerously affirm [meaning those he calls
Antinomians] that Christ took not only the punishment of our Sins, and that
guilt and reatum paenae, which is an assumed obligation to suffer the
punishment deserved by us, but all our very sins themselves, the very essence
of the sins of all the elect [a slander, and imposed expression that none ever
said] the reatum culpae, or guilt of fault and so he bore the sins of all the
Elect by real imputation [this is truth, which Mr. B. charge as one of his
hundred Antinomian Errors, Er. 18. p. 10. Again being made sin for us, is meant
a sacrifice for sin [so Mr H.] and used as a sinner [why should he be used as a
sinner, if sin was not charged upon him? sure very unjustly] If God imputed sin
to Christ, or accounted Christ a sinner, he must be by sin hateful to God, etc.
and Christ suffered for his own sins, etc. Scr. G. d. p. 30, 31. If Christ had
bin a sinner, in his individual person, these consequences might have held, but
Christ being by Law-imputation made sin in order to the Salvation of Sinners,
its otherwise, therefore does my Father love me, because I lay down my life for
my sheep. Is a rich person and honorable, hated in the Court, and detested,
because he enters himself Debtor for some Ludgate Prisoners?

Socin. The meaning of these words, 2 Cor. 5.21. is not that he was made sin
for us by God's imputation, but that he was made a sacrifice for sin, the word
made is a word of Election and Ordination, Pinct. Dial. to which Mr. Norton
answers thus, He was made sin for us as we are made righteousness, i. e. by
judicial imputation, without the violation, yea with establishing of Justice,
as he was made curse, Gal. 3.13. because he was the sin-offering in truth,
therefore be was made sin by real imputation. Nort. against Pinch.

Quak. We deserved those things that Christ endured, and much more for our
sins, but that God ever reputed him a sinner is denied, neither did he ever die
that we should be reputed righteous; by his being made sin for us must be
understood his suffering for our sins, that we might be made partakers of the
grace purchased by him, by the working whereof we are made the righteousness of
God in him. Barch. Apol. of Just. p. 376. Thus you see how Sister Sects run
hand in hand together.

Thus far of Imputation here, which should have bin continued to imputation of
Righteousness, The Imputation of Christ's Righteousness being the main Point
which the Neonomians oppose; but because it will be the main subject of our
ensuing Discourse, we pass it over in this Chapter.

CHAP. V. Of Imputation of Righteousness unto the Justification of a Sinner.
Sect. 1. Righteousness imputed, and what?. 2. Cardinal Bellarmine a
Middle-way-man, and so Quakers too, and Socinians.. 3. How consonant Neonomians
are to that Fraternity.. 4. They make inherent Holiness to be our
Righteousness.. 5. Why pardoned after justified, and of subordinate
righteousness.. 6. Of Legal and Evangelical Guilt.. 7. Of Mr. Cl's definition
of Justification, and of incomplete Justification in this life.

Sect. 1. THat Righteousness is imputed to the Justification of a sinner before
God, is held on all sides; but the great Controversy lies here, What
Righteousness is it? Is it our own inherent righteousness, or the righteousness
of another? the Neonomians with the Papists say, its our own which is the
formal cause of our Justification; we say, that Christ's Righteousness is the
material cause of our Justification, and Imputation the formal. Mr. H. excludes
the Merits of Christ from any of the essential causes, and makes it only modum
efficientis, something in the hand of the efficient, it may be an instrument,
but at the best its but causa ministrans, by way of efficiency, but enters not
that effect as any essential Cause. Mr. H. would find out some little
Difference between the Papists and himself, but its so little that he can
hardly render it visible. The Counsel of Trent says thus, There is only one
formal Cause of Justification which is the Righteousness of God, not whereby he
is Righteous, but whereby he makes us Righteous; viz. which he has bestowed on
us, whereby we are renewed in the Spirit of our minds, and are not only reputed
Just, but are truly called Righteous and are so -- and it follows, In this is
the Justification of the Ungodly, whilst for the Merit of that most Holy
Passion, the Love of God is shed abroad by the Holy Ghost in the Hearts of them
that are justified, and inherent in them, whence in Justification it self with
Remission of Sins this is together with it infused, etc. Sess. 6. c. 7.

Mr. H. agrees with them, that our inherent Righteousness is the formal Cause,
and that it is for the Merits of Christ, that this Righteousness is wrought in
us, that therefore it is called the Righteousness of God. Bellarmine in Defense
of the Doctrine of the C. of Tr. says, the State of this whole Controversy may
be reduced to this one Question. Whether or no the formal Cause of Absolute
Justification be Righteousness inhering in us? Which he endeavors to maintain
in the Affirmative. Mr. H. would have some difference from the Papists in that
they say Justification is by Infusion of Righteousness, whereas he says
Infusion of Grace is Sanctification, but Justification is by Grace infused; of
the two, I take the Papist to be rightest in constitutive Justification, and to
have less of Merit in it; whereas Mr. H. Justification is by Sanctification
wrought first, which carries more of Merit and less of Grace, for here
Justification appears at first sight to be ex condigno the good qualification
of the Subject. Yea the Papists go further then Mr. H. for he will not have
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness nor Remission of Sins to have any place in
Justification, which the Papists own to be Parts of our Justification, for the
Council of Trent do Anathametize those only that teach, that a Man is justified
only by Imputation of Christ's Righteousness and Remission of Sins, without
inherent Grace and Charity; yea I do not find that this Neonomian Doctrine
comes any whit short of the Popish Doctrine of Justification, nay it out-does
it in daring Contradiction to the the Gospel.

. 2. See what a Middle-way Man the Cardinal is if he go far enough. He gives
his Sense of Romans 3.24. Justified freely, i.e. from his mere liberality as to
our Merits, for we cannot deserve to be justified by any Work of ours, and this
Bounty of God is the efficient Cause, but we are justified by his Grace, i. e.
by a Righteousness given and infused by him [is not this Mr. H. exactly, what
does he trifle for about Infusion] and this is the formal Cause, we are
justified also by the Redemption of Christ, and this is the meritorious Cause,
Lastly, we are justified by Faith in the Blood of a Propitiator, and this the
disposing Cause; from hence we may learn that every sincere Neonomian is a
Papist in the Point of Justification, and that the Popish Doctrine of
Justification is the Middle-way between the Calvinists and Arminians. See but a
Taste, how the Quakers and Socinian fall in with this Doctrine of Justification
by Works. Quakers, Works and Faith are equally required to Justify, Works of
the Law are excluded as done by us, to be justified by Grace is to be justified
by Regeneration, which cannot exclude Works wrought by Grace, since the Law
gives not Power to obey and so fall short of Justification, there is Power under
the Gospel whereby the Law comes to be fulfilled inwardly, Works through the
Power of the Spirit is a Condition upon which Life is proposed under the New
Covenant. It appears from diverse Scriptures, that the Apostle excludes only our
own Righteousness, as being the Righteousness of the Law from being necessary
to Justification, Barcl. Socinian, There was never but one way of Justification
by Faith -- This Faith is nothing else but under the hope of Eternal Life to
obey the Commands of Christ, and this we apprehend to be understood in
Scripture wherever we read of Salvation promised to them that believe in
Christ. Socin. de offic. Chr. Them. 42.43. To believe in Christ is nothing else
than to obey God, according to the Rule and Prescription of Crist, and in doing
it to expect of Christ a Crown of Eternal Lise, Socin. de Servatori. To the
attaining Eternal Life not any Merits are required, but the obeying Christ's
Precepts, to which Eternal Life is the constituted Price, or Reward; not that
Obedience it self deserved it, but because it has pleased the most gracious
God to deal so with Mankind. Socin. Respon. ad Obj. cut.

. 3. Now let us see how Consonant our Neonomians be to this Fraternity in the
Doctrine, we'll take it from Mr. H. one of the honestest of the Pack and freest
from Juggling. Medeocr. p. 16, 17. Our Works do not Merit, because they are not
perfect [i. e. therefore do not Merit as related to the Old-Covenant, but Merit
notwithstanding, ex pacto in relation to the New-law-Covenant] but we are
justified by Works as we are by Faith, because Faith justifies only as
productive of Works [thence you see he places the Righteousness of Faith in it
self as a Work done, and that it justifies only so, and has no more justifying
Nature or End then the Fruits thereof] -- It is Faith as productive of Works,
that receive the Reward of perfect Righteousness [in that this imperfect stands
in the Room of perfect] but we are still to remember for Christ's sake.
[Bellarmine remembered that and the Council of Trent] God judges and will judge
all Men according to the Gospel, those who perform the Condition of it, he
accounts and pronounces righteous; those whom he accounts righteous are
justified; I will add that the righteousness of Christ which is the meritorious
cause of our Justification, and always comes under the efficient, cannot by the
same reason be the formal and material cause of it: It is not infusion of
righteousness with the Papist which is our Sanctification, nor the Imputation
of Christ's Righteousness with the Protestant, which is not to be understood in
genere causae efficiente, nor Remission of Sin with Protestant and Papist [you
see here how far he goes beyond the Papist] but to impute to a person his
performance of the New Covenant for Righteousness, or pronouncing him righteous
according to that Covenant, is the formal cause of his Justification. Med. p.
46. Here is to be remarkt that Mr. H. does peremptorily exclude from our
Justification the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, and Remission of Sins,
and places the whole of it in imputation of our own works for righteousness, as
active obedience.

. 4. These Men do as the Papists and the rest, make our inherent Holiness in
Sanctification, to be that very righteousness by which we are justified. Take
Mr. Cl's words wherein he fully expresses Mr. H's sense in differing from the
Papist about Infusion. Herein lies the true difference between Justification
and Sanctification: In Sanctification we are made holy, righteous and good, by
the infusion of those Graces into us; but in Justification we are only
accounted and declared such; in the one the change is but relative, and in the
other real. Come in Quakers, and shake this Friend by the hand as one of you,
you have quarrelled with the Pulpits a great while, and now you may ascend them
your selves when you please, and be not so angry at them, for you shall not
hear these men call your Doctrine Popish any more; but you will hear them call
all men that are not of your Opinion Antinomians briskly. See now the depth of
this distinction. Justification is not by infusion of Sanctification, but yet
Justification is by Sanctification infused. Is it not much more rational to
say, that Justification is by making a man righteous that was not so before;
for Justification of a sinner must be such: Besides, is it not much more
Evvngelical as to justifying the ungodly? as Bellarmine says. But these Men
say, We are first made righteous [that is godly] and then pardoned [he should
have said justified, for his Justification comes in between his sanctifying
Righteousness and Pardon] and not on the contrary, first pardoned, and then
righteous, Mr. C. p. 19.

Resp. Were ever such Absurdities asserted by Men of Reason?

1. We are first made righteous, and quatenus made so, are sanctified and not
justified; therefore Justification makes no man righteous, but finds them so;
but it declares Men, what? what it finds them, i. e. sanctified. Hence to
declare a Man sanctified is his Justification: and I pray now, how comes in Mr.
H's. causa formalis? how does Justification differ formally (nam ad formam
pertinet proprium and differentia) from Sanctification, when Imputation, or
God's accounting a man holy and sanctified is his Justification? Is not God's
Judgment according to Truth? Is it not certain that God accounts every thing to
be as it is, a holy man holy? If this be all your Justification, its no more
than as God justified at the Creation, he saw that every thing was good.

2. If we are first made righteous, and then justified because we are so, its
meritum ex condigno, whereon we are justified, all the World cannot hinder it.

3. First righteous, and then pardoned; What sense is in that? for a righteous
person needs no Pardon in that thing wherein he is righteous; for therein to be
righteous and want Pardon, is to speak Daggers, and the absurdest contradiction
in the World.

. 5. Well, But why must our Neonomians be pardoned when righteous and justified
before? because indeed their Righteousness and Justification by it is not worth
a Fig by their own confession; for Mr. Cl. says, -- for since subordinate
Gospel Righteousness is an imperfect righteousness, consistent with manifold
failings and infirmities, therefore notwithstanding that, there is need of
pardon, and that continually: This is also Mr. H's Doctrine, therefore I need
not transcribe his very words which are to this purpose in many places. Resp. I
find they are not fully agreed about the intervening Righteousness between
Christ and us, what to call it. Mt. Cl. calls it subordinate, and so does Mr.
B. but Mr. H. liking not that Name so well, had rather call it coordinate; but
I know not from the Notion of the thing duly considered, why they may not go
one step further, and call it the Principal or supreme justifying
righteousness, for that which has the principal place in any thing ascribed to
it, is the principal, but our own righteousness has the principal place in the
thing ascribed to it, which is Justification, therefore its the chief and
supreme righteousness: For they say we are justified by the imputation of this
righteousness only, and by no other, therefore all conducing righteousnesses to
the introducing this, are subordinate to it. Again, That which has its place
only in the external causes, and in the modality of their operation as to the
production of the effect, is much inferior to the essential causes that enter
the very effect, and are constitutive to it, but Christ's Righteousness by
these men is no more, and therefore must be a subordinate righteousness to
ours; ours being causa formalis justificationis, an essential cause, Christ's
being but causa protarch. a remote cause, adjuvant to the efficient, therefore
the righteousness of Christ can have no more than a remote causality in
purchasing the New Law, by the righteousness whereof we are justified, which is
no better indeed than causa sine qua non, its in ordine ad the justifying
righteousness, therefore subordinate to it. 2. He says, This subordinate
Gospel Righteousness is an imperfect righteousness. Truly I am sorry for it,
that Gospel Righteousness should be imperfect; I doubt there is little
dependence upon it, since the righteousness of the law that condemns us is
perfect, its little likelihood that an imperfect righteousness should save us
from it; ay, but they will say, its Christ's perfect righteousness must save us
from the perfect righteousness of the law condemning us. Say you so? and
therefore why should not this righteousness of Christ have the honor of
justifying us? it seems we are saved by Christ's righteousness, and justified
by our own, as if Justification were not Salvation: But is our
Gospel-righteousness imperfect? this is no Gospel, for its ill News; I must
tell these men its a rotten foundation they build upon, and their Building will
drop not being built on Christ, the Corner Stone in Justification. 3. He says,
Its imperfect, consistent with many failings and infirmities. Resp. I pray how
comes this to pass? is it from the Legislator that constituted such a Law,
whose condition is obedience consistent with sin; or is it from the Operator or
Worker under this Law? if from the former, then the Law makes it in fault, if
there be any; but if he has made a law with such condition of obedience
consistent with sin, then performance of such is no sin, nor needs a Pardon,
for sin is the transgression of the law the subject is under: Now if Believers
are under the New Law for Justification, and perform there what is required,
what need have they of a Pardon from a righteousness borrowed from another law?
If it be from the last, viz. the fault and defect of the operator of
righteousness, that his righteousness is not the performance of the condition
of the New Law, as required, then this New Law cannot justify him, our
Neonomians, in this Point, will be on Scilla or Charybdis in spite of the
World. In a word, 1. That righteousness that cannot justify us at the Bar of
the old Law, or Covenant of Works, is no justifying righteousness, but none of
our own righteousness, New Law or other, will not justify us at the Bar of the
Covenant of Works by the Neonomians own confession, therefore we cannot be
justied by any such righteousness. 2. Again, that righteousness which needs
pardon is no justifying righteousness, but is condemned by the law, for
whatever is pardoned is condemned by the law first, neither is that person
justified, who by the law is unpardoned, Pardon being an essential part of
Justification in Men's Courts, where many Indictments ly against a Man, if he be
quitted of some, and not of all, he is not discharged as justified; but here
its worse, I do not find that at the New Law Bar a man (as they say) justified,
is quite discharged from any Indictment at all, for there is none fully
pardoned; wherefore our Neonomians say that their Justification is not perfect
in this life. So Mr. Cl. Our Justification in this world is not perfect and
complete, etc. p. 18.

. 6. Mr. Cl. says, There Is a twofold guilt, Legal and Evangelical, Legal Guilt
is an obligation to eternal punishment; this is fully pardoned in
Justification, and can never return again, because Christ has taken it all
upon himself, and made full satisfaction to his Father's Justice for it, but
Gospel-guilt which is an obligation to Gospel-Punishment, i. e. fatherly
chastisements for sins after Justification, returns upon commission of new
sins, and is removed upon repentance, sometimes wholly, sometimes in part. This
is also Mr. H's Doctrine.

Resp. The distinction is naught, for we deny any Evangelical Guilt,
Evangelical Guilt, Threat or Punishment is a Bull, a downright Contradiction,
if we know what Gospel is, and they that will be ignorant, and call this
Assertion Antinomian Poison, let them be ignorant still, I thank God for the
knowledge of the Gospel so far, as that it is quite contrary to Guilt, Threat
and Punishment, or Obligation to it in the true legal sense thereof: Likewise
he should have distinguished of Guilt as usual, reatus culpae, and reatus
paenoe, the first properly Guilt, and that in judicio legis, vel judicio
conscientiae, if a Man be sub reatu culpae judicio legis, as they say the
justified ones are, he is unjustified, for the law cannot justify a man and
declare him guilty, i. e. not guilty and guilty at the same time. Obligation to
Punishment is not Guilt in the true sense of it; for we say a man cast in Court
is guilty of the charged Fault, and therefore the Law binds him over to
Punishment. We never say a Man is guilty of the punishment but deserves, he is
found guilty, and therefore the Sentence of the Law binds him to Punishment;
but he says, Legal Guilt is fully pardoned in Justification: Pardon is always
of a fault, and includes not punire: but is sin pardoned fully in Justification
as to an obligation to eternal punishment, then 1. Pardon is included in
Justification, contrary to what he asserts in the foregoing Page. 2.
Justification is perfect and complete, so far as the taking off eternal
punishment. 3. He cannot but own this to be the main part of Justification at
least, and this it seems is owing to the full satisfaction made by Christ to
the Justice of God, our righteousness of the New Law has nothing to do here in
the matter of Eternal State: Where are we now? what a Justification is this by
the New Law, wherein our eternal state is not concerned. Well! but our
Justification in this life is not yet perfect; not by Christ because he takes
off only eternal punishment, but temporal he has left to us to remove by
Repentance, performing the righteousness of the New Law, I hope this
righteousness falling in to help Christ's, it will produce perfect
Justification. No it wont, this righteousness takes away our Sins and
Punishment wholly but sometimes. and sometimes only in part, and what is the
reason? where is the fault? why it falls upon this New Law, which is always
fulfilling and never fulfilled; it will never justify any one till the last
day, and it cannot do it then without the perfect righteousness of the Old Law.

. 7. Let Us take Mr. Cl's Definition of Justification into consideration a
little, He says, The Definition of Justification so far as it relates to God
is thus, Justification is an act of God whereby he accounts us righteous at
present, and treats us as such, and will solemnly declare and pronounce us so
at the last day of Judgment.

Resp. He should have told us what act of God, whether immanent or transient,
whether an act of Grace or Justice, or both, he should have told us the object
of that act, whether a mere sinner or a righteous person? he will tell us anon,
its a righteous person, and he says, accounting him so at present, if this
accounting him be in a law sense, its but Imputation at most, and this is that,
and all that he does at present, he finds them holy and righteous, and judges
them to be as they be; but does not God declare them righteous at present,
neither in foro Legis, nor in foro Evangelii, nor in foro conscientiae? in none
of these at present, when then? the very Sentence of Justification is not till
the last day; so that indeed there is none justified till then; for a suspended
sentence keeps the person (whatever Opinion the Judge has of him) under the
Law, in Prison, and in continual fear of Condemnation; so that they are all the
day long for fear of Death subject to Bondage.

. 8. Hence he infers two things. 1. That Justification while we are in this
life is but partial, imperfect and incomplete, and that we shall not obtain
fully complete, entire and final Justification for all the effects of sin till
the Day of Judgment. To which I answer, Where there is but an imperfect,
partial Justification there must be a partial Condemnation; it cannot be denied
but the Apostle denis it, and says, there is no condemnatien to them that are
in Christ Jesus.

2. The law knows no such thing, a man is either perfectly justied for the same
thing, or perfectly condemned, there is no Medium betwixt Justification and
Condemnation.

3. If the New Law do not perfectly justify a person, then it condemns too at
the same time, that when ever the Parator of righteousness takes himself to be
justified, he is bound to believe himself condemned also; and whether will
stand good at the last Day he knows not, either his Justification or
Condemnation.

CHAP. VI. Of Pardon.
Section 1. Whether Remission of Sin belongs to Justification.. 2. Remission
distinguished by Mr. H.. 3. Of general Remission.. 4. Conditional Pardon
antecedent to a man's Justification.. 5. Actual Pardon subsequent to a man's
Justification.

Sect. 1. MR. Cl's Second Inference is, That Justification does not properly
consist in Pardon; afterward he says, a man is first righteous and then
pardoned; to which we have spoken something. Mr. H. makes a fearful pudder
about this Point, we will a little inspect his Notions, Mediocr. p. 44, 55. Our
Divines do generally place Justification in remission of Sins, and so do the
Papists, and so did I my self. Resp. Remission of Sins is upon good grounds
placed in Justification as an essential part of the Justification of a Sinner,
and I can boldly deny that sinner to be justified, whose sins are not forgiven,
and to separate them is as possible as to separate homo and animal rationale.
The Law, any Law, nay your New Law cannot justify a sinner and declare him
righteous, unless in that very act of declaring him righteous his sins are
taken away in foro legis, and this is God's Remission (tho not Man's) for his
ways are not as man's; and whereas Mr. H. makes remission of sins to be a
benefit after Justification as an effect of it, we say it is a benefit in
Justification, and the first thing in it in Nature; for its impossible any one
should stand righteous in the eye of any Law, that stands chargeable as a
transgressor thereof. But remission must not (says Mr. H.) be the formal
reason of Justification. Resp. The form of an Act, and the formal reason of
that Act are two things, the material reason of Justification is righteousness,
and the formal cause is imputation of that righteousness, Justification comes
in as the acquitting Sentence, opposed (as Mr. B. says) to condemnation, which
ex natura rei, must formally carry in it forgiveness of sins. He proceeds, To
forgive a man's sins and declare him rigeteous are two inconsistencies one with
another in the same respect. Resp. Cujus contrarium verum; in Justification of
a Sinner they are most consistent, and inseparable, that in declaring a sinful
man righteous his sins are also done away; its true, in man's way of Pardon
there is some inconsistency, because his is by dispensing with his Law, but
God's way of forgiveness is in and through the satisfaction of his Law; but I
must tell him, that here no Man is looked upon as righteous in the eye of man's
law that has transgressed it, till he is first pardoned, -- and therefore when
God pronounces a man just, it is according to the law of faith, when he
pardons his sins it is in respect of the law of works. Resp. Here are two Bars,
now he says elsewhere, he likes not two bars, I would fain know now at which
of these Bars a sinner is most justified, either by the law of Works, where all
his sins are forgiven, and therefore consequently must be made righteous; or at
the Bar of the New Law where he says, the man is declared just, but
imperfectly so, and therefore goes away with his sins upon his Back to the Law
of Works to have them pardoned: Is it not pretty Divinity then, to say a man is
declared righteous first at the Bar of the Law of Faith, and then all the
Bed-role of his sins are pardoned at the Bar of the Law of Works?

. 2. He comes to distinguish of Remission, Its either conditional and
universal, as it lies in the Covenant, and is the purchase of Christ, or
actual, as it lies in application thereof to particular persons upon
performance of the conditions. Resp. This Distinction is a great Point among
the Neonomians, Mr. B. makes much use of it in his Universal Redemption, the
Story is this, They feign that God finding the inconvenience of the law of
works, by reason of the Fall, his Son satisfied not the law broken, but
compounded with God as Lord above Law, that this law should be relapsed; says
Mr. H. Mr. B. says that it might be abrogated, which is more rational, tho it
is more downright Antinomianism, which scares Mr. H. Christ accordingly dies to
purchase a New Law, with condition of imperfect obedience instead of the
perfect, the propounding or promulgating this New Law to all the world is
universal remission, it being the offer of Remission on the condition of
imperfect obedience to all the World; in this sense all the world, they say, is
redeemed, justified and forgiven before they perform that condition. Now, if
any others, besides Neonomians should talk at this rate, they would be in
danger of being taken up and sent to Bethlem for Madmen. As if a Company,
suppose the E. India, set up their Bills for a Sale at a certain time after
prefixed, with the respective Prizes; if one or all should run about the City
before the day of Sale prefixed, and say, they had sold their Goods at such and
such Prizes, all men will call them Liars or Madmen. So, because God proffers
eternal life upon performance of a condition, therefore all men are redeemed,
justified and forgiven, i. e. say they, conditionally, and that is not at all
till they perform the condition; but Neonomians may talk nonsense, and
contradict by the New Law, yea and assert Justification before Faith, while
they call others Antinomians who do it, when they are the greatest Antinomians
themselves in the World. Now the noise that they make about the Merit and
Purchase of Christ, its no more than his purchasing the New Law of Works, and
they are justified by the performing the condition of the new law for the sake
of Christ's Merits, its only because, as Mr. H. tells us, that Christ by his
Merits was an efficient of the New Law; so that generally, in all they talk of
Christ's Satisfaction and Merits, there is some cheat or Amphibology. Mr. H.
indeed speaks out most honestly, in as good as telling us, that Neonomians are
Papists in the Point of Justification. But to proceed,

. 3. When Divines say we can do nothing our selves for procuring reconciliation
and remission, it is to be understood of conditional, universal remission.
Resp. What Divines understand so? they are not the Protestants, its only the
Neonomians who are no Protestants in the Point of Justification: These Divines
understand only, that we cannot purchase the conditional, universal Remission,
the Purchase of that it seems was peculiar to Christ; but as for particular
Remission, these men purchase, and Reconciliation too; Christ purchased that we
might purchase, and tho he purchased the new law, and promulgation of it, yet
he purchased not the performance of the Condition; for such hard terms they
will keep Christ too that he may not entrench on their Dignity.

. 4. Conditional Pardon is antecedent to a man's Justification, and contained in
our redemption, in whom we have redemption through his blood the forgiveness of
sins. Resp. Conditional Pardon is none, its no more than the offer of a Bargain
to any that will come to the Terms: As if I should offer to Let my House for
so much Money by a Bill over the Door, and then say, I have Let my House to
all the men in London. And its strange, that all men should be pardoned and
redeemed and not justified, but I think R. B. says they are justified, and I
am sure they may be as well justified as pardoned. However he owns Pardon in
Redemption, and this antecedent to Faith; sure then Justification (which with
us) is inseparable from Faith, is not Antinomianism. And is it possible any
Divine should abuse the Scripture so, as to wrest it to such a sense, that the
Apostle should by Remission there, mean such as is contained in universal
Redemption, Col. 1.14. whereas the Apostle speaks of Redemption in particular
application, for the words preceding, v. 13. are who has delivered us from
the power of darkness, and has translated us into the Kingdom of his dear Son.
verse 14. In whom we have redemption.

. 5. Actual Remission is subsequent to Justification, for we must be supposed
first to have performed the condition, and be pronounced righteous, and then
pardoned, when there is no remission then but does go before or follow
Justification, it cannot be made the very act it self of Justification. Resp.
Let us try a little for it: 1. He says, actual remission is subsequent to
Justification; now we are come into Mr. Cl's. road, he seems not to be so well
acquainted with the Mystery of the antecedent remission, and its so indeed, for
it seems it is but potential remission, its not actual, nay its a contingent
potentia, there is pardon, and none pardoned, the meaning is, that the New Law
made all the world pardonable upon a contingent condition.

2. We find a pretty odd invention, here is Justification beset with Remission,
before and behind, and yet no Remission in it; a man pardoned and not
justified, and then justified and not pardoned; and truly, if this subsequent
Pardon be no better than the antecedent, the Neonomian Justification is
destitute of Pardon before and behind too. I wonder all Protestant Divines do
not nauseate such Whims as these.

3. But is it possible that he should say, that pardon cannot be made the act
of Justification; surely these forget what they are talking of, is it not
conditional Pardon the New Law promises, how can there be Justification by the
New Law of him that performs the condition, but by pardon in the act of
Justification; for if the New Law says, believe and thou shall be pardoned,
the new law when it justifies the Believer must pardon him, and now we have
help at a dead lift, just now it was, that tho our new law could justify, yet
it could not pardon; but we are fain to go to the old Law Bar to fetch a
Pardon, and trouble Christ about it too, but we have found now that the new law
can pardon; for if it pardon all the World conditionally, it can pardon
particular persons actually, when they perform the conditions.

CHAP. VII. The Neonomian Doctrine of Justification Examined.
Section 1. Mr. H's. Definition of Justification.. 2. Imperfect Obedience not
to be accepted by God to Justification.. 3. Justification not without Life.. 4.
Of the Form of Justification. 5. What is the account of Christ's
righteousness.. 6. Christ's Merits put to account are imputed.. 7. Distinction
between Pardon, and bearing with our defects.. 8. A Pardon general, becomes
absolute.. 9. Justification by Infusion and by Imputation distinguished.. 10.
Of Justifying the Ungodly.. 11. Whether Old Law Righteousness or New be best..
12. Mr. H's. Mystery, which he says Dr. O. did not understand.

MR. H. defines Justification thus, It is an act of God's free Grace, whereby
God imputes to every sound Believer his Faith for Righteousness, upon the
account of Christ's Satisfaction and Merit, giving him Pardon and Life as the
benefits of it. Right. of God, p. 25.

Resp. For the Genus he refers the proof to the Assembly, but he represents
himself short of the Assembly, who say, Justification is an act of God's free
Grace unto sinners, for which they quote Romans 3.21, 24, 25. Now Justification
barely considered as such, is an act of Justifice, unless it be spoken with
this condition, and I find Mr. H's. Notion of it will not bear this connection;
for his Justification is of a person only, that is subjectively righteous, our
Justification and his are distinguished toto genere, for he says, the object
of his Justification is a righteous person, to such an one Justification is
due; its no act of Grace to justify such an one, a sound Believer. By Faith he
means Repentance and New Obedience, as the conditional terms of the New Law,
which being performed by any one, he is not justified by free Grace, but
legally he can challenge it by the New Law.

. 2. This Faith and New Obedience, tho imperfect, God accepts in the room of
perfect righteousness, not accounting it perfect. Resp. It is absurd to say,
God accepts it in the room of perfect; for if so, it should come in, in place
and room of the perfect in the Covenant of Works, God putting out that
condition, and putting in this, but this imperfect comes as terms in another
law, so it hinders not the terms of another. 2. No, why should God account it
perfect if it be as they say, but the law of God is perfect, and tho God
judges the righteousness morally imperfect in comparison of the righteousness
of the first law, yet he must reckon it a perfect condition of the new law, it
being as much as the law requires, and therefore a condition perfectly
performed, for else it can never be pleaded or imputed at its Bar; but he
says, he accepts it, if he accept it its by its self, or for the sake of a
better righteousness; now no law can accept any righteousness by its self, but
it must be esteemed by its self to be a full righteousness completely to answer
the demands of the said law; if the law accept it for or in the righteousness
of another, it thereby declares the insufficiency of the man's own
righteousness being such as the law cannot justify him for; but the
sufficiency of the other righteousness for which he justifies him, this now
will bring in Christ and his obedience into the new law, where our Neonomians
will permit him to have nothing to do, but only as a Legislator, as for his
Obedience and Satisfaction, it belonged to the old law only, with purchase of
the new-remedying law. Lastly, its Nonsense, that any law, or God in a law,
should impute Faith and Obedience for righteousness which is not perfectly so,
according to the law constitution, but he does it upon the account of the
Merits and Satisfaction of Christ: How upon the account? and is the Merits and
Satisfaction of Christ put in the Balance with our imperfect righteousness to
make it up? or is Christ's righteousness imputed to it that it cannot be,
unless imputed to the person? which he denies, how then must we understand this
Gentleman? for the Satisfaction and Merits of Christ is only effective, because
Christ was so kind as to purchase Merit, and satisfy God for the new law,
without which he could not have been justified by our imperfect righteousness,
and this is all they intend by it, for the Merits of Christ's sake, a plain and
facile simile may be given, A Man ows a great deal of Money to his Creditor
that is suing of him in Court, a friend of the Debtor and Creditor interposeth
and brings the Creditor to a Composition of 10 s. 5 s. or 1 s. in the pound;
these Writings brought into the Court, the Action is dismissed for the Merits,
Purchase and procurement of this person, who now brought the Debtor under the
new law of Composition, which if the Debtor do not pay he is suible upon his
Composition: Now this is all these men make of the Merits of Christ, its only
his bringing God to the New Law Composition.

. 3. Pardon and Life, he adds, as effects of Justification: We have already
showed what an absurd thing Justification is without Pardon, Pardon being
essential to it; but it seems to be as absurd, if not more, that there should
be Justification without life; for if by condemnation a man be dead in law,
then certainly, by Justification, wherein Condemnation is taken off, the person
is made alive in law. But Mr. H. will have a man to be justified, and both ly
under the guilt and condemnation of sin; for he adds to these which he calls
Benefits. a right to impunity; so that Justification lays but in the foundation
of impunity, they are not from under punity, Justification brings only an
expectation of Pardon, Life, Impunity hereafter, but none of these are in hand.

. 4. When I say, this Righteousness (or Faith) is the form, I understand it in
the sense as these Divines do, who say, Christ's righteousness is the form, or
Remission is the form, not the form of that Imputation, but of Justification
passively taken. Resp. Then the plain meaning is that Mr. Humph. understands
our righteousness to have that place in causality of Justification, which
others give to the righteousness of Christ; if other Divines say, that Christ's
is the formal reason of Justification, in the sense that they take Christ's
righteousness to be the formal cause in the person justified, he takes a man's
own righteousness to stand in genere causalitatis, this is Diametrical
Opposition, and therefore not only to be scrupled, but to be contradicted and
detested. Hum. Not the form of that Imputation, but of Justification passively
taken. Resp. Mr. H. confounds his Notion by his obscure Logic; for there is a
great difference between the form of a thing, and formalis ratio agentis, the
form is an essential cause, and enters the effect, the effect made up of the
vis of all the causes has existence from concourse of all the causes, the
formalis ratio is causa movens efficientem, and non ingreditur effectum, tho
the form does, which is another thing. Now Justification in the abstract is
forma justificationis in concreto, or in the person justified, and there is not
any other form, as Justitia is the form of justus, or of a man imputed just,
that the imputation makes him legally just, to be just and imputed so is one
thing in law, and to be justified is another. Now the justice of a man is the
form of the just man, and the formalis ratio of Justification, and this he
says is the form of Justification passively taken; this we deny, and for
Justification is active, but the justified is the passive, where Justification
it self is the form. Again, we deny that our righteousness is the formalis
ratio of Justification; Remission indeed belongs to the form it self, but the
formalis ratio of Justification is external to the form, and therefore to be
considered apart from it. This only by the way

. 5. I add at last upon the account of Christ's Merits, or through Christ, or
for Christ's sake, because this faith of ours or Evangelick Righteousness, has
so many defects in the best Christians, that if through the sacrifice of Christ
they were not pardoned, and through his Merits those imperfect duties which are
done accepted, it could not be imputed to us for Righteousness. Resp. Christ is
beholden to him to bring him at last, tho but at the fagg end of Justification:
But how comes Justification to be at last upon the account of Christ, for we
are formally justified upon the account of our own righteousness, i. e.
perfectly so, for what is formally existent is perfectly so, and that by our
own righteousness, i. e. upon the account of it, for the effect quod e causis
existit, is such upon the account of all the causes, but especially upon
account of the form; now he that is formally thus justified, must be upon all
accounts justified, and needs nothing to be added to it: Why then upon the
account of Christ's Merits? why, because Christ purchased a law of
righteousness which could not justify perfectly, but leaves the person
justified in a need of further righteousness for Justification, if the Merits
and Sacrifice of Christ must come in upon the account of which a man is
justified, then he is not justified before, and Christ's righteousness is the
justifying righteousness only; for our own leaves us unjustified by Mr. H's own
confession, i. e. it leaves us in such a case that no man of sense can say we
are justified; for by his own words, the righteousness of the new law is not,
cannot be imputed to us for righteousness, unless it be pardoned and accepted
in Jesus Christ, and therefore this law cannot justify any one upon his
inherent righteousness, for its most absurd to say, it can justify, when it
cannot impute its own righteousness by reason of the defects thereof.

. 6. I find Mr. H. is at a great loss in establishing his Notion upon a right
bottom, he seems to suspect that Christ may come off a loser by it, and he will
most fearfully. I do more especially signify thereby that Christ's
righteousness which cannot be imputed to us as a formal cause of our
Justification is and must be very carefully brought to our account, and granted
to be imputed, and the meritorious cause of our acceptance.

Resp. I am glad to see this saying, wherein he has overthrown his own
Doctrine, tho uttered in a great contradiction; for he says, Christ's cannot
be imputed, and then it must be imputed; but why cannot it in the first place?
That which is put to our account in Justification, whether as to the part or to
the whole of our righteousness is imputed, but according to Mr. H. the Merits
of Christ's is put to our account, and therefore the Merits of Christ (to speak
more distinctly) thus put to our account, are the materialis and formalis ratio
of our Justification; for if the merits of Christ be put to our account in
Justification, its but trifling to say, its only the effects, if one man pay
for another in part or whole, its the money it self paid that is put to his
account, and therefore imputed to him in Court; and indeed he ingeniously
confesses he learned of Mr. B. to mend his Notion, and allowed Christ's Merit
to be the material cause of our Justification; but that which he amends with
one hand he spoils with another, and thereby runs into grosser logical
Absurdities, saying, Because I make our faith the formal in Justification.
Resp. Very good, The matter is in one subject, in Christ, and the form in us
another; Causa per qua res est id quod est is in us, ex qua in Christ in a
legal act, Christ's righteousness is but generical, matter which is as much for
all the world as a Believer; but the formal part, the proprium and differentia
is in the subject, Man; this in law is always the meritorious part; Money in
general turns no Cause there, but its the Propriety that this or that man has
that does it; now its not Christ's righteousness in special that does the
business, but righteousness in general that Christ has brought in, as a
material part, but its man's righteousness in special that is the principal
essential cause, according to Mr. H.

. 7. After this I distinguish between this pardoning, and bearing with the
defects of our Faith, Repentance and new Obedience, which are the condition of
the Gospel Covenant, and so our Gospel Righteousness, or that which is Imputed
for Righteousness; and that General or Total Pardon, etc. Resp. If
Justification be upon performing these as a law condition, what need all this
talk about bearing with our defects? If the Gospel Covenant run in these Terms,
he that does what he can shall live; therefore Man doing what he can, leaves no
room for bearing with defects, he fulfils the Law in doing what he can. Again,
if this be imputed to us for righteousness by the law, and we discharged and
declared righteous thereon, it is enough. Where also observe what imputation
the Neonomians owns, its imputation of our own righteousness to our selves: And
such a righteousness as is none, because imperfect and sinful; but yet imputed
for righteousness to us, as if it were perfect; what is the reason then that its
found defective after imputation, if imperfect by imputation comes in the room
and does as well as perfect? Nay, what is the reason that this righteousness
that is such a paultrey one, which can do nothing (by their own concession) in
Justification without Christ's, must have the honor of being imputed to us? but
Christ must not, cannot be imputed, and why I pray? Because though its
acknowledged to be perfect and compleatest righteousness, yet it may not be
imputed to us for ours, because performed by Christ and not by us. I pray let
me ask, whether it would not more comport with the honor of God, the nature of
a Gospel and common Reason, to impute legally to a delinquent the payment of
another which is perfect full and complete, then to impute to him the payment
of his whole debt, for 10 per Cent. or 6 d. or 4 d. Nay, after this acceptance
how honorable would it be to the Court, to sue to the King for the pardon of
the Prisoner for paying so little.

. 8. But let us come to the other part of the distinction -- And that general
and total Pardon which the Covenant promises, and becomes Absolute upon
performing the Condition. Resp. Either the Neonomians have lost their
understandings, or think all other Men have, and so think they may impose what
they please upon them; for here he distinguishes betwixt a conditional Gospel
Covenant, and a Gospel Covenant upon conditions, a total Covenant and a
partial, a total upon conditions, and a partial absolute upon performance of
conditions, and all these one new law Covenant; a Covenant that pardons upon
conditions, and a Covenant absolutely pardoning upon conditions. The total
pardon, if that which pardons all the World upon conditions not performed, and
yet it damns them too for non performances, a pardoning Covenant that damns
all, for it remains not a pardon upon conditions when any one performs the
conditions, its then absolute; but did ever any one know that a conditional
Covenant when the condition is performed absolute, i.e. without conditions? if
any Man buy a House of his Neighbor for a Sum of Money, will he say after he
has paid his Money, my Neighbor gave me this House, for an absolute promise is
a promise of free Gift. He proceeds, The one of these is that very Grace, or
Act of Grace it self, as goes into that Act of Imputation, or Act that imputes
our Faith for Righteousness when the other still is the Effect or benefit
following justification. Resp. The Man is in a Wood: The one of these an act of
Grace, which of them? That which has conditional pardon without performance,
or that which upon performance becomes absolute, the total general, or the
partial, particular, which I know not, but one it is; that is an Act of Grace
going into the Act of Imputation: Imputation is an Act of Justice in strict
acceptance, because its never but of righteousness, though to bring
righteousness to a sinner, to whom the Law imputes righteousness is an act of
Grace, as Justification is, but it must not be his own righteousness, for that
excludes Grace.

. 9. He is a little cautious of Mr. B's. opinion, that Justification is the
making us righteous, but he says he will distinguish, there is a making a Man
just by infusion or by Imputation; that by infusion, is Regeneration, which the
Papists hold, and which we distinguish from Justification.

Res. The righteousness by which they will have a man justified is that of
Regeneration, and that of Works, the Papists way has more of Grace in it,
because theirs is Justification of the ungodly, as Regeneration is Sanctifying
the ungodly. Some he says are for Justification by pardon, and so a Man is
righteous by non-imputation of Sin, but he is not for this neither, because he
keeps pardon and non imputation of Sin for a consequent of Justification; he
will have a Man just in the Eye of the Law, and yet under the imputation of
Sin; well how will he have it to be? Its by imputation of what righteousness?
Christ's? no, its by Imputation of our Faith to us for righteousness. -- Our
Faith and Evangelical Obedience being imperfect and sinful, and we are
unrighteous in the Eye of the Law for all that, but God in his judging us
according to the Law of Grace, does allow of that, [i. e. Sin] for Christ's
sake, instead of all which the Law requires to our Justification.

Resp. Here you see what a parcel of righteousness this New Law righteousness
is, its imperfect sinful as to Sins of omission and commission and we are for
all this righteous in the eye of the moral Law, but God judging by the Law of
Grace, he allows all the Sin against his own Law for Christ's sake, Christ has
merited Gods allowing our sinful righteousness, i. e. Unrighteousness and
justified us for it, but seeing here is all this done by the Law of Grace, how
comes it to pass that it does not pardon these Sins, but they must go to
another Bar for Pardon? Why, because the Law of Grace, though it justifies the
performer it pardons no Sin, because no Law can suppose its own condition to be
sinful, but if there be Sin in the condition (as these Men say again and again
there is) the Law of Grace allows it, (its certainly an Antinomian Law) allows
that Sin that Gods most Holy Law condemns, God here must deny himself; and to
say he allows it for Christ's sake, is to make Christ the Minister of Sin, die
for allowance of Sin, and establishing of it by Law, and if God by a new Law
has established this sinful Obedience instead of all which the old Law
required, what need of asking pardon of the said Law? Gods abolition or
relaxation of the old Law, and setting us upon Obedience to a New Law, and the
performances thereof instead of what the old Law required, freed us from Sin
and there needs no pardon for not performing perfect obedience, for that would
have been sin in the eye of the new law, it requiring imperfect obedience,
imperfection and sinfulness being the formality of the condition, and therefore
it must needs forbid perfection as most contrary to it, and condemn all
glorified Saints.

. 10. By this may that expression of the Apostle he rightly understood, God
justifies the ungodly, not in sensu divlso, so that he that is so before his
Justification is no longer so afterward, but in sensu composito, our Faith or
Evangelical Obedience in regard to the law [he should have said the law of
Works] or in regard of those Works that are required by the law to our
justification, are no righteousness within its own nature [therefore
unrighteous] would justify us; but God constitutes it so by the law of the
Gospel, and according to that law imputes it to us for righteousness.

Resp. I need say no more to this, but that it is both in sensu diviso and
composito an ungodly interpretation, That God should make that righteousness by
an after law, which he had made moral unrighteousness by a former; and impute
that by one law for righteousness to Justification, which he had imputed by
another law for sin to condemnation: Is God as Man that he should ly, or as the
Son of Man that he should repent? The sense of the place is not difficult, it
is that justifies a sinner as such, or else its no act of Free Grace, that when
the Grace of Justification touches on the person of a sinner, he is no more
godly than when the Grace of Regeneration touches upon him; tho the Grace of
God lays hold on a sinner in both these respects, finding them ungodly in all
respects, yet it leaves them not so: His ensuing Supposition is very
impertinent, supposing that which never was nor never will be, viz. That a
Believer living regenerate can never be justified by the law of works, by his
own righteousness; No, he can be justified by no law, neither did God ever make
any law to account any man's unrighteousness, righteousness: I can call that
unrighteousness which the law of Works condemns, and God never intended by his
Grace, nor Christ never died to purchase such a Justification; far be it.

. 11. Mr. H. showing some disrelish of Mr. B. for agreeing with Bellarmine and
the Council of Trent in the Doctrine of Infusion, which he says he took up of
Le Blanc, That God does make men righteous by inherent Grace before he does
justify them. A thing that Mr. H. must grant according to his Principles, tho
he will distinguish nomine tenus only, as to the same thing, calling inherent
Grace in respect of Justification righteousness, and in respect of
Sanctification Holiness, according to a supposed disserent imputation. He
accordingly distinguishes of a threefold making a man just. 1. By Conversion
or Regeneration, and this Augustine and the Papists [he might have added Mr. B.
and the Quakers.] 2. By Pardon, and this is Mr. Wotton's. Or 3. By the
righteousness of God, and this is my Justification, I will call it mine.

Resp. As he understands the righteousness of God much good may it do him. I
desire it not, I know no sound Protestant will put in for a share in his
Righteousness or Justification, nor desire either like his. We will let him
alone to chide the Papists about infusion of righteousness, and let him clear
himself from being a Papist in the Point of Justification if he can; let us see
how he acquits himself, The Papists Opinion is, that the Grace of God infused
is the formal righteousness that justifies us according to the law of works;
they of Trent thought of no other; but our imperfect Faith and new Obedience is
a conformity to that which God has made a condition of life by the law of
Grace, and is our formal righteousness according to that law, being made so by
God when he imputes it to us for righteousness. By the Evangelical Law this is
our righteousness; we are made righteous, i. e. not guilty of the
nonperformance of the condition, according to Mr. B.

Resp. According to his own Quotation the Papists hold as Mr. B. and he, that
habitual righteousness is infused by God, so far as that a man endued therewith
may be accounted truly righteous; they do suggest that they do not intend a
perfect righteousness, but so much as may admit at least of an acceptillation,
which Mr. H. gives us to understand the Neonomians approve of, and Mr. Fox and
others tell us the Notion of a New Law was long ago among the Papists, and
there is no doubt now our Neonomians have so briskly Trumpt up that old musty
piece of Popery, they will willingly fall in Hand-and-Glove with them, and
rectify their flaws according to the Neonomian Edition, they will call their
works Evangelical, and calculate them to the height of the new Law, and carry
all their merits thither, seeing there is in all probability the fairest Market,
and they bear the best Price there, their unrighteousness will be called
righteousness, and his sins will be allowed, there is no need of so many
Indulgences, for one new-law-allowance will pass for all. Again, do not the
Papists speak of the same Works, Faith, Repentance, New Obedience? and what if
they say they are the measure of conformity to the Law of Works? do they say
they are justified by them absolutely considered? do they not say for the sake
of Christ's Merits? why may not they be as well justified by the old-law-works
for the merits of Christ's righteousness as our Neonomians, by a
new-law-righteousness through the merits of Christ's righteousness; for of the
two, I had a thousand times rather trust to Justification by an old law
righteousness through the merits of Christ, than to a new-law-righteousness
through our own merits; for Paul we know, and the old law we know, but as for
the new law and the righteousness thereof, we say, who are ye? and what is the
Evangelical? in plain English, it is a plain contradiction to the law of works;
when that charge all the world as guilty before God, this new law says sin
makes them not guilty, but is their righteousness; and the Evangelical Law
finds them not guilty of non performance of the condition. The Moral law says,
if a man kills another he is guilty of nonperformance of the condition, but
the Evangelical says, tho he kills a man, if he repent, and give some Alms,
his killing a man makes his other obedience but imperfect, which is the true
nature of the condition, and therefore he is not guilty of the nonperformance
of the condition.

. 12. There Is a mystery here which he says Dr. O. nor Mr. B. never gave its
due consideration, for Dr. O. says, There Is an imputation of a thing to us
that is ours, and that is judging it ours, and dealing with us accordingly, or
of a thing that is not ours, and that is by donation, and dealing with us
according to it made ours, our righteousness cannot, but Christ's righteousness
must be imputed to our Justification. To which he thus answers, As there is an
imputing to a man a thing that is his, and a thing not his, so there is an
imputing to a person that which is partly his, and partly not his, but that
which in the effect becomes his by imputation, this never sunk into the Dr's
mind.

Resp. Sure the Doctor was a very shallow man, that he could think of the
imputation of a thing that is ours, and of a thing not ours, and could not
think of a thing partly ours, and partly not ours, but the reason of his not
mentioning of it was because he did not think any man of consistent Brains,
would propose such a Justification. For says Mr. H. there are two things in
the matter, our Faith and God's Imputation -- Faith, Repentance and new
Obedience is one thing, and having it accepted is another. Now here lies the
mystery, its the making one thing two, our new obedience is ours, and
sanctification, but God's Imputation makes it ours for Justification, but its
being ours, does not God esteem and judge it ours? how comes it now ours? if
God esteem it our righteousness, how is it less ours than before? unless it be
in this manner, a man has a Cloth Coat on, this is his, another calls it a
Silk Coat, this is not his because he had no Silk Coat, but his Cloth Coat is
made a Silk Coat by another in imputing it Silk; but he tells us, God's
imputation brings nothing with it (in the effect, I say) that which was not
ours, i. e. the Satisfaction and Merits of Christ. Does the imputation of ours,
at the same time impute the Satisfaction and Merits of Christ? if so, then it
does bring something not ours, and then we are juftified by two
righteousnesses, by ours and not ours; or will he have this a single
imputation, and both these made one, by mixture partly ours and partly Christ's?
for this answers his Notion best, partly his, and partly not his; but he
excludes Christ's merits from imputation again and again. ergo the imputation
is only of that which is ours, and his Distinction is a Chimaera, and if Dr. O.
did not trouble his head with such Whims his Consideration is not to be blamed.
But he tells us, that which is not ours comes after imputation as an effect,
the Satisfaction and Merits of Christ; but they become not ours by imputation,
therefore one leg of his distribution is dropped off, for he says, there is an
imputation of a thing ours, and a thing not ours; this thing not ours, which is
Christ's satisfaction, he says is not imputed, but comes in as an effect of
this imputation of our own righteousness; but why must Christ's Satisfaction
come in the rear? because a man must be justified first, and then Christ's
Satisfaction must come in to mend the faults of his Justification, as a
remedying righteousness, the formal part of his Justification must be pardoned
and accepted, and before his Justification has released the man from
condemnation and unacceptableness to God, he must have the effect of his
Justification; hence this imputation of ours is the cause of our pardon and
acceptance by Christ's Merits, an imputation of our immoral righteousness the
cause of a perfect* But how can we have pardon through the Satisfaction of
Christ, and acceptance through his merits, without God's imputation of them to
us? for if by the rules of Justice in the New Law Court our righteousness is
imputed to us, how comes it to pass that when we come sinners into the old law
Court, we can there become righteous, free from condemnation, and accepted by
Satisfaction and Merit, and yet not have it imputed to us? this is most
extra-judicial, for a Court always imputes that satisfaction and merit to the
person discharged, which is paid into Court for it: It were easy to run
endlesly upon showing the gross absurdities of this Divinity; for they will
have the New Law to impute righteousness which they say is no righteousness,
and the Old Laws righteousness to be good and perfect, but not imputed; so that
indeed, according to their Doctrine, the sinner is ruined for want of
righteousness: Under the New Law is no righteousness, and under the Old Law
good righteousness but no imputation, without which a sinner can never be
justified; now if they would permit these two laws to meet and agree the
matter, something might be done, then the New Law might borrow the Old Laws
righteousness, and the Old, the New Laws Imputation.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Formal Cause of Justification.
Section 1. Mr. H's Distinction of by and for, according to Bellarmine.. 2. The
Distinction considered.. 3. Justification purchased by Christ.. 4. They advance
not God's Grace in Justification.. 5. Papists truer than Neonomians in the
Doctrine.. 6. They say the same with the Papists, and confess it.. 7. The
Errors and Weaknesses of their Opinions.. 8. Of Active and Passive
Justification.. 9. Of Condition and Duty.

Sect. 1. MR. H. for the better establishment of the Neonomian Doctrine has
taken up a distinction from his friend Cardinal Bellarmine. The Protestants
(says Mr. H.) have denied that Faith is our formal Righteousness; (Righ. p.
46.) the reason of the denial has bin much, because they have confounded the
causa per quam, and propter quam, by Faith says the Scripture we are
justified, by is id per quod causa formalis, but Christ's Righteousness is id
propter quod: Let us see out of whose Shop he took this Distinction, Bellarmine
(de just. lib. 2. c. 2.) having stated the Question. Whether Righteousness
inherent in us, be the formal cause of absolute Justification or not? In order
to his defense of it in the Affirmative, has this distinction, and charge
Kemnitius with fraudulent dealing in stating the Question, because he put id
propter quod, instead of per quam, says: If one will speak properly, he must
not use the Word propter, but per, when he will point out the formal cause of
Justification. If any one ask by what does a Man live? By what do the Stars
shine? By what is the Fire hot? It will be answered by his Soul, by the Light,
by the Heat, which are the formal causes; but if any ask wherefore did the
Emperor Triumph, wherefore did the Soldiers fight. It will be answered not by
giving the formal cause, but the meritorious and final, the Soldiers fight
that they may overcome, the Emperor triumphs because he overcame; so Kemnitius
if he had spoken without fraud and properly should have said, what is that by
which a Man is Justified; whether the Righteousness given to him of God, and
inherent through the Merits of Christ, or the Merits of Christ from without him
imputed? Now Bellarmine having so fully acquainted us with the distinction,
according to the full sense of Mr. H. I think it will be but loss of Paper and
Time to transcribe what Mr. H. says of it, again and again, being but all to
the same intention of the Cardinal.

. 2. This distinction duly considered is but one of the Papists shifts and
Evasions, for First, In all juridical proceedings causa per quam est causa
propter quam, for a Man's righteousness is that by which and for which he is
justified, and so his transgression is that by which and reason wherefore he is
condemned, and if meritorious righteousness of a Man's own or of another is
brought into Plea and be admitted, he is said to be justified by it, if it be
enquired how came such an one to be acquitted, the Answer will be by his
Innocence; how came such an one to be condemned, the Answer will as soon be by,
as for Wickedness, all Righteousness by which any one is Justified is propter
quam, its that by Reason whereof he is Justified, why does the New Law justify
him that has performed the condition, is his Righteousness the Justifying
condition, is not the Justification propter conditionem, if it does refuse to
Justify, because the condition is not performed, then it justifies not,
because it is not performed; in all conditional Covenants the promise is
performed, by reason of the performance of the condition. 2. Again, if this
Distinction were True as applied, then we should be said to be justified or
reconciled still propter sanguinem Christi, but we are said to be justified by
his Death. (...), is rendered (') by (') not, for, Romans 5.9. Are reconciled to
God, (...), By the Death of his Son, for dia with a Genitive Case signifies
per, with an Accusative propter, ver. 10. So, we have Redemption, (...), So,
Colos. 1.14.20. Is rendered through, but they that have knowledge of the
prepositions know by or through are the same, when a thing is done by, its done
through, See, Acts 20.28. the Church of God which he has purchased, (...), so
that its evident that the distinction will not hold to make Evangelick
Obedience causa per quam, and Christ's Obedience propter quam, because Christ's
Obedience is said to be per quam, when it is intended thereby to be the very
righteousness unto Justification, ergo, per quam and propter quam are of the
same import in a juridical sense; but that which our N^onom^ans and Papists aim
at is an immediate and mediare righteousness, that we are justified by one as
immediate for the sake of Christ's the mediate.

. 3. The Papists by this distinction would make way for a double righteousness
in our Justification; for the Council of Trent does anathematize those that
say, a man is justified only by the imputation of the righteousness of Christ,
or only by remission of sins, without inherent Grace and Charity. To this
purpose our Neonomian Mr. Cl. p. 35. That the merit of Christ's Death and
Sufferings [he excluding his active obedience] has purchased this privilege
for us among others, that sincere faith should be accounted for righteousness,
and that God will account us righteous if we be possessed thereof.

Resp. In both these we see Christ's righteousness is made the propter quam,
and our own the per quam, Christ's the meritorious of our Justification by our
own righteousness, whereby the ascribing any essential causality to Christ's
righteousness is out of doors: For

1. The Justification by our own (') is entire in all essential causes without
Christ's; for our righteousness imputed must be the material as well as the
formal part of our Justification.

2. It must be first imputed and we justified by it, for they make not only the
Condition but the Imputation thereof, and Justification thereby (') to be
conditional of our pardon and acceptance by Christ's Righteousness.

3. The very righteousness of our own is imputed, not Christ's Righteousness at
all, only the effects; cause and effects are opposita, therefore if the effects
only, then not the righteousness it self.

4. To say that Christ purchased Justification by our own righteousness, is but
to make Christ such a remote cause of Justification as Election is. Now to talk
that the condition by which we are justified is a formal cause, and yet to be
no cause, is nonsense, for a formal cause, although it be sine qua non, and so is
every cause, yet the four immediate causes are not only so, and this
distinguishes them as propter immediate causes, whose vis caters the effect,
when causa sine qua non, as to the effect, is only antecedent, or causa causae,
and enters not the effect spoken of.

But Mr. H. says, its a cause as well as a condition, it is both, if we made
our works to justify us sub genere causae efficientis, procatarct and so the
meritorious cause, it were to bring our works into the office of Christ's
Righteousness, and derogate from Grace.

Resp. So they do notwithstanding all they say, for if they thrust out Christ's
Righteousness from any essential part of our Justification, as they do, not
allowing it materiality or formality therein, they put our own Works into
Christ's Office; and nothing can be more derogatory to the Grace of God; they
say, they make it medus efficientis, causa procatarchtica, an external motive
to the efficient; the effect then in that respect falls on the efficient, but
the effect of the efficient is another thing: Supposing God justifies as Judge,
Christ's Righteousness by way of Merit falls upon him, and procures of him that
he takes our righteousness in payment. We may use this Similitude, a Man is
prosecuted before a Judge for an hundred Pounds, a Friend of the Defendant
tampers with the Jury and Judge, and procures of them that the Debtor pay but
10 l. I pray, whether is he justified by paying the 10 l. in Court, or by that
which the Judge and Jury received, which is not brought in Plea at all? so that
all meritorious righteousness is brought in Plea coram Judice, and accordingly
being imputed or not, Judgment passes. The Righteousness of Christ, whatever
it may purchase out of the Court of the New Law, its not allowed there as a
Plea, and is never, nay cannot be imputed (these men say) though pleaded,
therefore no Justification thereby, for no man is justified legally, but by
what is imputed.

. 4. But when we make it the formal cause only (of our passive Justification)
we do nothing thereby but advance God's Grace and Christ's Merits, as having
obtained for us, not only that God should require of us no other condition but
our Faith or inchoate Righteousness unto life, but also that he should
corstitute by his New Law this condition performed to be our righteousness, in
the room of that perfect one required of the old. p. 47. of right.

Resp. Note, 1. They do something besides advancing the Grace of God, because
it makes Justification due to us upon Debt, for he that has a formal
right-ousness of his own legally imputed to him, he may demand Justification as
due to him by the law it self, and this is not to advance Grace, but contrary,
if the Apostle speak sense, Romans 4.

2. It is not an advance of Christ's Merits, for it casts it out of Imputation
and Justification, and makes it but a causa sine quanon, it casts them out of
the essential causes, and it makes them but an adjuvant cause, or con-cause, a
coordinate (according to Mr. H.) it makes not Christ's Merits the only
righteousness; it makes our own righteousness the inchoate and foundation
righteousness, the Corner Stone of our Justification; and whereas the
Scriptures make Christ's, it makes Christ's Righteousness but to belong to
another law, whereby they say we are not justified and our own to that which
justifies, and the only justifying righteousness of the new law; it makes
Christ's Righteousness and our Pardon by it, to be a consequent of
Justification by our own, and that without imputation thereof extra-judicial,
but our own very righteousness to be imputed to us; it makes that righteousness
within its self and own nature, (says Mr. H. again and again) to be
righteousness legal for our Justification, and rejects Christ's perfect
Righteousness as to Imputation and Justification, which is contrary to the
Holiness and Justice of God.

3. He makes the Grace of God to consist in constituting a Law for
Justification, which is but part of distributive Justice, the exercise of a
Legislative Power, and not of Grace to Sinners.

4. The constitution of this inchoste righteousness is harder terms than the
constitution of the righteousness of the Covenant of Works, for Reasons before
given.

5. We see what their meaning is of Christ's Merits, its only that he purchased
a new Law, and we see what is the Neonomian Commutation that they have of late
made such a stir about, they are for a Commutation; what is that? its a
commutation of our righteousness, i. e. bringing into the room of the
righteousness of the law ( i. e. Christ's) in Justification, they deny it in
Dr. C's sense, i. e. that our sins were imputed to Christ, and his
Righteousness to us; for they expressly deny both the one and the other.

. 5. Mr. H. So as Adam, if he had perfectly obeyed, his obedience had been his
formal righteousness in regard of the law.

Resp. His Obedience had bin his material Righteousness, and this imputed to
Justification had bin his Righteousness clothed with the Form and End, and
unless we have a material and formal righteousness in regard to the same law,
we can never be justified. So is this ours in regard to the Gospel. Resp. The
Gospel is not a new Law, neither does it allow our own righteousness, for any
in our Justification; and is therefore Gospel, because it does not. He tells
us, both Protestant and Papist are both out in saying the Law is the rule of
that Righteousness which both say is the formal reason of their Justification.

Resp. It is the Neonomians are out, and worse than the Papists in this Point,
in that they will bring any other rule of Righteousness for Justification, the
Law of Works is only norma officii and judicii for Righteousness and
Justification. They are both out, for the Papists speaks for inherent Grace,
and his Works, so as he would have them meritorious, and perfect (pleading for
Merit and Perfection) but can never bring them to answer the law, but must
still pray forgive us our trespasses.

Resp. The Papists are righter and more rational here than Neonomians, if they
differ from them in Merit, they ought not, and Mr. B. asserts it in his End of
Controversies; but wherever the performance of the condition of a law requires
Justification by the law, there is Merit and must be; for such a Performer
deserves and merits Justification, and the remuneration thereof as much as
Adam's standing and performing the condition of the Law of Works, had merited
Justification thereby. Likewise, as to Perfection they are right, for that is a
man's Perfection which the Law makes so, and justifies a man by, the Law
matters not what other laws make perfect performance; the Old Law is no rule to
the New Law, that is a man's Perfection which the Law that justifies him says
is the performance of the condition. Mr. H. quotes Mr. B. for saying, the New
Law acquits a man from nonperformance of the condition; and what need such an
one pray for Pardon any more than they that say, they are justified in Christ's
Righteousness (the great Cry they make against Justification in Christ's
Righteousness, what need such an one pray for Pardon?) for if their
Justification in and by their own righteousness, be not as perfect discharging
from guilt by Pardon, as ours is in Christ's Righteousness, its not worth a
Fig, we desire no such trifling Justifications.

. 6. The Protestants on the other side plead for Christ's righteousness which
arswers the Rule; but this being without us (though it be upon the account
thereof) id propter quod, or cujus merito, we are justified; the Papists say
stiffly it can never be made formally ours, so as to be propter quod we are
justified, ^^d I must say the same, for the Truth is Truth.

Resp. Here you have Mr. H. plainly confessing himself a Papist in the Point of
Justification, and hence its no wrong to him to say he is a Papist upon his own
Confession, and the truth is the truth. He says with the Papists, that this
being without us cannot o^ imputed; can nothing but what is personally done by
us be Imputed to us? I find no Proof that he makes any where that one man's
righteousness cannot be imputed to another, and here it is only because it is
without us: What is more common than Sureties to pay the De^ts of insolvent
Persons? and that Christ made Payment and Satisfaction for Sinners is most
plain from Scriptures, though these men will deny that the Scripture says any
thing thereof, which denial will be tried by us whether there is any weight in
it? There are two great Points to be cleared in this Controversy:

1. Whether the Scripture excludes all inherent righteousness from the
Justification of a Sinner before God?

2. Whether the Righteousness of Christ be imputed to a Sinner for his
Justification before God? These Questions shall be maintained by us in the
Affirmative, God willing, in their due place.

. 7. Whereas Mr. H. Prides himself exceedingly in the singularity of his Notion
of our Righteousness being the formal cause of our Justification, any one may
see it in Cardinal Bellarmine and J. Goodwyn, from both whom its easy to show
how the Neonomians have taken up their Doctrine; as for the Notion it self it
labors under many weaknesses.

1. That Righteousness in it self is not the formal but the material reason of
Justification, that which induces the form is a legal Imputation; for if a man
be never so innocent and righteous, if the Court do not impute him so, he shall
not be justified, and if a man be never so unrighteous, if the Court impute
righteousness to him, he shall be justified; so its here, Imputation is the
legal form of Justification, and righteousness is but the material only.

2. He makes a formal reason without material; for if our own righteousness be
the formal reason where is the material? he will not make Christ's Merits the
material; for he brings in them sub genere causae efficientis, besides he
cannot, for it would be very absurd to place the matter in one subject, and the
form in another, therefore his formal reason is immaterial, and its indeed but
an imagenary Chymaera, both his New Law and his Formal Righteousness.

3. Our Righteousness if it be the formal reason of our Justification, its such
as per quam homo justus est, and that is in law always propter quod, for no law
justifies any one; but because he is righteous, his righteousness must
constitute him just, and the law esteeming him so, he is justified as legally
meritorious thereof: the noise Mr. B. J. G. and others make of the distinction
between constitutive and declarative Justification, is Popish, and has nothing
in it; constitutive Justification is no more than Imputation, it is that which
in law constitutes any one just and meritorious of declarative Justification.

. 8. Mr. H. makes a distinction of Justification, that its active and passive,
whereas Justification is but one, and it does not constitute properly a
physical effect, but a legal relation, it does neither find nor make any sinner
inherently righteous (for Justification of a righteous person finds him
inherently so, this Justification we speak not of) but Mr. H. will have a
passive Justification upon this account, because it finds the sinner righteous
inherently; he says indeed, the infusion of this preceding righteousness is
not his Justification, according to the Papists, but his Justification is for
the righteousness which it finds infused, and so its the formal cause of
Justification: He might with much better reason say, that Sanctification is
double, active sanctifying, and passive sanctified; but where there is the
cause working, there is the effect wrought, and the justified is but the
effect, and constitutes no distinct species of it. But we say, the Grace of
Justification of a Sinner, proceeding from Grace, is wholly in and from God,
and has no cause in a Sinner material or formal, nor is there any cause
external of that Grace, the moving cause only is the good will and pleasure of
God; he is gracious to whom he will; graciousness, pardoning Iniquity is only
from his Grace and for the glory of his Grace, which cannot be in the
Justification of a righteous person, but because, not simply Grace, but also
Justice shall be glorified in a sinner's justification, and God in his pardon,
will not clear the guilty, he has graciously provided and bestowed on the
sinner a righteousness accepted by the Law, and imputed to him, that he may
appear therein just, and so just in administration of righteousness as not to
infringe his Justice in the least, but to the highest honor of the Law standing
in its full force against the sinner, without the least Relaxation. This is
done quite contrary to the Neonomian Doctrine; therefore Gods Justification
falling upon a Sinner, makes actually a correlate to Gods justifying, and faith
is no more than the Sinners reception of this Grace; no part of that
righteousness by which faith or for which the Sinner is justified, neither is
it a grain of that righteousness which is imputed to him.

. 9. Mr. H. also has another distinction between condition and duty, which I
will not stay upon because its frivolous and it is because he will have the
duties of the Law to be performed by us, tho we be not justified by them, he
insists upon a Relaxation of the old Law but not a total Abolition, Mr. Bax.
Opinion is that its abrogated as much as the Ceremonial Law, wherein both
penalty and duty is taken away, and indeed Mr. B. is in the right according to
his notion, for the introduction of a New Law in the room of it and for the
ends that the old Law was established is certainly the nulling of the said old
Law, but how then can Mr. B. be secured from a just charge of Antinomian viz.
that moral duties are not required of us, which is more Antinomian than I ever
saw in any he charge with it, he has one poor shift, which is that the
duties of the old-Law are taken or spunged up in the conditions of the New; but
however the broken pieces are picked up, the Law it self is gone, and there is no
transgression upon that account, Mr. H. says the Law's only relaxed but his
relaxation is no better than a Crack in the middle of a Glass and heart of it;
and he has not told us how far this relaxation goes, and every man will be
ready to plead for his own sin that the Law in that respect is relaxt. But he
would have us believe, that the moral duties still remain, how relaxt or not?
If relaxt then at least to an indifferency, a man may do them or not without
any sin; but he says they are re-established in the New-Law, if so they are
re-established without the Relaxation and then the New-Law is as strict as the
Old, or with the relaxation, and then all duties are required with abatement as
to quality and quantity, with an allowance of sin, our posse or velle, and what
is more Antinomianism? But, says he, the Conditions are not Duties, It was
never affirmed by men of reason, that the Condition of a Law is not a Duty; for
that which is required of us upon pain of punishment is always a Duty, and to
the Condition of the New-Law the highest, because it has the Sanction of a Law
of the Highest, he that continues not in all things by way of performance that
it requires is cursed by it, if it be but imperfect obedience; it says, he
that continues not in imperfect obedience is cursed by it, therefore when the
Saints come to Heaven, and fall into perfect obedience they fall under the
Curse of the new law, or else its out of doors before they come there, or the
last day, and the World cannot be judged by it. Lastly, What are the conditions
of imperfect obedience? are they not Duties of Righteousness by the performance
whereof Mr. H. will have us justified? Yes, this cannot be denied, but the
distinction will hold with a quatenus, as they refer to the absolute, relaxed
Laws they are Duties, i. e. as they respect no Law, or a lawless Law; and as
they refer to the New Law they are Conditions and are not Duties. Hence its no
Duty to perform the Conditions of the New Law for Justification thereby, and
this is the Truth which we stand by, though inferred truly from Mr. H's Logic
and Divinity.

CHAP. IX. An Answer to Mr. H's Arguments against Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness.
Section 1. Arguments Artificial or Inartificial.. 2. His First Argument
against the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness answered.. 3. His Second
Argument Answered.. 4. His Third Argument Answered.. 5. Mr. H's Argument for
Faith and Obedience, being the formal part of Justification, First Answer.. 6.
The Assumption by parts.. 7. Argument the Second Answered.. 8. Mr. H's Third
Argument Answered, with his Fourth Argument.. 9. Of Constitutive Justification.

Sect. 1. NOw it is time to come to Examine the grounds of Mr. H. and Mr. C's
Doctrine, in this Point of Justification. And First, I shall treat of them that
are the reasoning Arguments, Artificial as called in Logic, the weakest in
Divinity, and then those that are pretended from Scripture, which in Logic are
called inartificial, but if grounded upon Divine Testimony, the best and
strongest.

. 2. Against the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, he argues thus. How can
God account our Sins to be Christ's and his Righteousness ours when really they
are not so, and Gods Judgment is according to Truth.

Resp. this is used again and again by Mr. B, to which I shall Answer, 1. By
retorting the Medium and not so tedious to put it into any other form, how can
God account our own New Law righteousness to be justifying righteousness, when
in its own nature its no righteousness (Mr. H. says so over and over) and Gods
judgment is according to Truth, now see the honesty of these Men, God must not
make a Judgment according to Truth in imputing Christ's perfect righteousness to
us, because it was not personally performed by us, and imputing our Sins to
Christ, because they were not actually committed by him, and yet God makes a
judgment according to Truth, in imputing our own paultry sinful righteousness
to us for our righteousness, when they themselves say its really no
righteousness. 2. Is not his righteousness ours? The Scripture says it is, and
our Sins made his; they say it does not, that we will try, God willing, but for
the present we ask what if God give us this Righteousness? What is freer than
Gift? and what makes a better propriety than Free Gift? Is not Gods Judgment
according to Truth, when he imputes that to us which he has given? Its the
Gift of Righteousness, Romans 5. E. gr. A poor debtor is sued in Court for an 100
l. and upon Trial he is found insolvent, and Verdict is going to be given
against him, the Judge throws him a Bag of 100 l. in Court and bids him pay the
debt, shall not the Court impute this to him a lawful Payment, and give him a
discharge, and is not the Judgment according to Truth? on the other hand
another has the like Trial, but is found insolvent, the Judge or some other
gives him a Bag of Counters, and bids him to pay his Creditor, he refuses the
Money, says its Brass; well says the Judge we will impute it to him for a
lawful tender and good Payment, we will make that which is no righteousness by
our imputation to be a legal righteousness, so the Creditor may take the Bags
of Counters and go shake his Ears, we call it good Money; now I appeal to these
Men whether this be a Judgment according to Truth? And let them weigh it well
and make application thereof, and if they cannot make a rational reply, let them
lay their Hands on their Mouth, and hold their peace for ever hereafter.

. 3. A second great Argument taken from Mr. B. is, That if it be so that
Christ's righteousness is imputed to us for Justification, then should the Elect
be immediately freed from punishment, and immediately justified before they
believed and repented, for no Terms could be Imposed on them in order to their
Justification and Glory, if they be accounted already to have fulfilled the Law
of Christ. And this is one (as he says) of the Antinomian consequences.

Resp. Let it be so, we say then First, If it be an Antinomian consequence,
what is the reason Mr. B. and Mr. H. are such Antinomians, to say all the World
are pardoned before Faith and Repentance, yea, whether they believe or no? Why
does Mr. B. assert two Justifications before Faith? 2. We reckon it no
Antinomianism to say, that Election perfectly freed the Elect from coming under
the execution of the Vindictive Wrath of God and Curse of the Law: Why else
should the Scripture say, who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect?
and whereas it may be said before Conversion, the Law will charge, for they are
under the Law, its replied, its Christ that died, yea rather is risen, having
fully satisfied the Law of God, that they shall not fall under the Execution of
the Curse of it, and they are secured before God both by Election and
Redemption, or else Christ died and rose again in vain; and as they have this
security, so they have an immediate right in Christ to the Life of Grace and
Glory; They want the application and the receiving of this righteousness, and a
possession thereof, which reception is by Faith that is not their own, but
purchased and given by Christ; which was never purchased and given for their
righteousness, but as an Organ of Spiritual Life, whereby a Man created in
Christ Jesus may be sensible, and have the comfort of what is freely given to
him of God; for by Faith a Man takes up the Peace which Christ has made, and
has access into the justifying Grace of God wherein he stands, and therefore
comes from under the Law in his own Conscience, and rejoiceth in the hope of
the glory of God. 3. As for imposing of Terms, its Idle, to think that Christ
should do what he did for Sinners in his Priestly Office, their Justification,
and Salvation, and then to impose an impossibility upon them, without the
performance of which all that he has done should be nothing to them; and do
Men talk Sense when they talk of imposing Terms upon Sinners for Eternal Life,
the Terms should be put upon them to be performed before they have Spiritual
Life in their mere natural Estate, and then to make their notion to stand on
its right bottom; they must be Pelagians, its Eternal Life that is begun in
Justification applied to the Believer and his Person by the Spirit, and its
received Vitally and Sensibly by Faith, when the Sinner is made a live by the
Sanctifying work of the Spirit, his Life of Faith is part of the Eternal Life
purchased: Can any Terms of Life be imposed on a dead Man, what Terms were
imposed upon Lazarus; if the roling away the Gravestone was the Term, it was
not imposed on him, it was on them that stood about the Grave, if they say God
will give these Terms, as they must say to save themselves from Pelagianism,
then the Term lies upon God, and its Idle to say they are imposed upon
incapable Subjects, neither is that Imposed upon me as a Term that cannot be
expected from me, unless by the donation of another, by any rational Man. 4.
The clause follows not according to Mr. H.'s Principles, who says Christ
satisfied the Law (tho I know what the Neonomians talk of, they intend no true
satisfaction) did Christ satisfy the Law in what Sense they will? Was it for
himself or for us? if for himself, then he offended it, this they will not say,
then for us; if for us, our Offense was taken of before God, thereby God was in
him by reason of his satisfaction not imputing our Trespasses; how can it be
otherwise but we must be accounted by God to have fulfilled the Law in Christ,
if Gods judgment be according to Truth, and why may not this satisfaction be,
and our fulfilling in Christ be before we had a being in the World? this was
actually performed for the Saints before his coming, long after most of them
were dead, why not for those that are to come before they have life? and why
may they not be called to a fellowship with Christ, and participation of the
righteousness of Christ in Satisfaction by Faith? when the day of their
Regeneration comes. This is the dangerous Doctrine that these poor blind men
are so afraid of.

. 4. There is another Argument of Mr. H's. which he takes to be Herculean, and
admires, and it looks as if it were out of his own Forge and he charge Mr. L.
to hearken to it. Animadv. p. 67. There is nothing can be imputed to us, but
either that which we have not, and then it is that we may have it, that is, to
have it made ours, or reputed as ours.

Resp. There is nothing can be imputed to a Sinner for righteousness but that
which he has not first, but is given (so says Mr. H.) and here is the
difference, he says, inherent Grace is given for righteousness, we say, the
obedience of Christ is given for our righteousness, which the Scripture says;
now it is given that it may be imputed ours legally, and its imputed that we
may be justified; it is not imputed that we may have it, but because we have it
it is imputed; Mr. H. herein goes against himself.

Or else if we have it, it must be imputed to some other end than to have it.
Answ. Yes, its imputed legally that we may be justified; we have it by gift,
prius natura, by gift of Grace, for we must have the righteousness before the
Law can judge we have it, because legal Judgment is according to Truth. Mr. H's
Justification runs thus far, that we must have a righteousness before it is
imputed, nay, and he says its by Gift too. Now if Christ did obey or suffer in
our persons, or as our legal person, so as in law sense we have, and are
accounted to have obeyed and suffered in him, then can his righteousness
(consisting of his Obedience and Sufferings) be neither imputed to us that we
may have it, or be made ours, or reckoned to us as ours, seeing we have it
already; it is ours, it is reckoned as ours, in that it was performed in our
persons; nor can it be imputed to us to any other end, or thing, but ad
justitiam, which is to the same end, and for the same thing, and can be no
other.

Resp. Mr. H. thinks this Argument irrefrigable, and that it will carry all
before it, but poor men (as most opposers of truth) have the unhappiness to
smite with the backs of their Swords, and cut themselves with the edge. Mr. H.
argues, if we have Christ's righteousness, we cannot have it by Imputation.

We do not say we have it by imputation any other than a legal allowance that
we have it, having it is antecedent to the legal allowance, it is not so in
their Principles? we have our own righteousness before it is imputed to us. But
if in a law-sence we are accounted to have obeyed and suffered in Christ, then
his righteousness cannot be imputed unto us, cujus contrarium verum, yea,
therefore its imputed unto us, for one man's payment is not reckoned and
imputed to another, unless the payment be made in his person in a law-sence; it
is ours, and reckoned as ours in that it was performed in our persons, he
says, therefore as such it is reckoned and imputed to us, nor can it be
imputed to us for any other end than for righteousness, we say and you say.

. 5. Mr. H's Arguments for Faith and Obedience being the Formal Cause of our
Justification, we shall examine in the next place, they are, as Mr. Cl. has
gathered them up, By the consent of all Divines, That righteousness which
denominates us righteous in the sight of God, must be the form or formal part
of our Justification; But neither Regeneration, nor Christ's Righteousness, nor
Pardon is that which justifies per modum causae formalis, and therefore it must
be Faith. Resp. 1. He should have added imputed, to the things enumerated in
the minor; for he says to Mr. C. he means so. 2. If he does mean so, he
puts the material and formal cause together, and therefore I shall deny his
Minor under the term of essential causes, which takes in his formal: As to the
major I except, that all the Divines do not hold that righteousness that
denominates us righteous before God is the formal cause, but insist on the
minors denial, that the righteousness of Christ does not denominate us
righteous before God, for so should the assumption be; the Syllogism as it
stands is false, having one medium in Major, another in the Minor. Dare Mr. H.
be so scandalous as to speak out his Minor as he ought by his Medium, That
Christ's Righteousness does not denominate us righteous in the sight of God,
its plain that he shifts it off by a wrong Assumption, and according to that
fault makes his Proof. And I only say, that there is no righteousness can
denominate us righteous in the sight of God, but what is fully satisfactory to
the Law that condemns us; but there is no righteousness fully satisfactory to
the Law that condemns us, but Christ's. let Mr. H. show any other if he can;
and as for the righteousness of the New Law which he pleads for, he
acknowledges that its no righteousness in its own nature, that it needs Pardon
at the Bar of the Old Law, and therefore it cannot denominate us righteous in
the sight of God.

. 6. He proceeds to prove his false Assumption by parts. 1. That Christ's
righteousness is not that righteousness whereby we are denominated righteous in
the sight of God: why? because says he, it is the meritorious case: I answer,
therefore it is, for no righteousness makes any one righteous coram Judice, but
a meritorious righteousness, not regenerating grace; see how he shifts, he said
in his Minor, not regeneration, i. e. inherent renovation; which he all along
asserts for our justifying righteousness; and now he has brought it to the
active infusion of Grace, as he quibbles with the Papists, and why not
Regenerating Grace? because that must precede Justification, and must not the
righteousness precede the Justification by his own Doctrine? and does not the
formalis ratio precede the effect; but what does regenerating Grace preceed? Is
it not regeneration it self, it being the working cause of it, but as for the
Grace of regeneration wrought, that is the very righteousness which he means,
and yet says in his Assumption not regeneration, this is but juggling, it is
not plain dealing. He goes on, not pardon for that comes after it, Mr. H. says
so I know no better authority for it, and I will believe it ad Graecas
calendas, I have showed the absurdity and folly of it, yea, and of his pardon
preceding Justification. And if none of these be the formal cause, i. e. the
Essential causes denominating us Righteous in Gods sight, it must be something
else: What Is that? The righteousness of God revealed in the Gospel, i. e. Faith
and Obedience. Mr. Cl. says something else. Imputation, its that which is the
form, one essential cause, in this they differ, but as to the matter they
agree; that Faith and imperfect Obedience, is the righteousness whereby we are
denominated righteous in the sight of God, and is not the Grace of regeneration
inherent; whether Faith be the righteousness of God, shall be examined anon by
its self, because Mr. H. puts so much stress upon it.

. 7. Arg. 2. Adam if he had perfectly obeyed, his Obedience had been his formal
Righteousness in regard to the Law, so is this ours in regard to the Gospel.
Again, works were the formal righteousness in regard to the Law, therefore
Faith is the formal righteousness of Justification by the Gospel. And two
things go to this formal Righteousness, Faith and the imputation of it.

Resp. It seems Mr. H. understands formal cause, matter formed, and that is an
effect not a cause, the materia formata, is the formal cause; I must tell him
his Notion is neither Divinity nor Logic. 2. What consequence is there in this
Argument, works were the formal cause of Justification as to the Law of Works,
therefore works must be the formal cause in relation to the Gospel, it follows
not but vice versa, and if the consequence be true, then there is no formal
difference between Law and Gospel. 3. Hereby he yields that New Law conditions,
are Old Law works, and consequently his Gospel is no Gospel, but a Law of works
which is contrary to Scripture, and accordingly Mr. Cl. says, Gospel works
must merit the reward, as works should have done in Adams Covenant; Mr. H's
reply is so weak, that its not worth taking Notice of.

. 3. Argum. 1. Justification has a form, and that must be some righteousness.
Resp. It may have a form, and yet Righteousness be the matter. What
righteousness is it whereby we are justified? I answer against Mr. Cl. and him,
that its no righteousness inherent in the justification of a sinner: He says,
its not regenerating grace infused, but imputed. Answer. What makes the
difference then between Sanctification and Justification? its nothing but the
diverse respect in Mr. H's. Divinity, and wherein lies that respect, is it not
in imputation? and this Logic he yields in his Notes,

Argument 4. Divines generally fix it upon some righteousness.

Resp. If some Divines speak improperly, it does not justify Mr. H. to do so;
but he says, a distinction is made of a genus and differentia, and therefore
righteousness must be the form.

Resp. Non sequitur, for genus is the matter, and but part of the form at most
sometimes, but the differencing part of the Definition is the form distinct
from the genus. Mr. Cl. says, the most plausible Argument of all (because it
is Scripture) you have omitted, we are justified by faith. This, says Mr. H.
is my id per quod that runs through all my Books, its true, and what would Mr.
H. have done to support his Notion, if the Cardinal had not helped him to this
id per quod, and id propter quod, he takes himself safe enough between the
Cardinal and Bishops. Well, Mr. Cl. is not so well pleased, I find, with his
formalis causa, but rather than break with Mr. H. he will comport with him;
especially finding him very uncertain and unsettled, sometimes our
righteousness is the formal cause, and sometimes the material, and imputation
the formal. Mr. Cl. has another denomination for our own righteousness, he
calls it our subordinate righteousness: Our Justification by Faith, or
accounting it to us for righteousness. will be considered anon.

. Cl. also gathering and applauding Mr. H's. constitutive Justification, let it
be a little inspected, Mr. Cl. says, That Mr. H. does clearly distinguish his
Opinion from the Papists in that he makes infused righteousness only
Sanctification, and imputation of the same to be Justification; its only to
distinguish up our own righteousness several ways: I would ask these Gentlemen
whether they do not hold the infusion of their righteousness, and Justification
upon it imputed; if they do, so do the Papist; for if the Papist did hold
making a man's righteousness inherent to be Justification, then must they hold
some merit of condignity to precede in the natural man; for a mere free gift as
such, is an infusion, cannot be Justification. I do not see but Mr. H's
constitutive Justification and the Papists is all one; for if they say, God
infuseth righteousness, and imputes righteousness, its the same thing, and God
cannot constitute any just by infusion but he must impute him so. I have said
this constitutive Justification, as they take it, can be no other than
Imputation if they will make it differ from declarative Justification. 2. The
constituting us as just does in order of nature go before accounting or using
us as just.

Resp. God neither constitutes any man just in and by his own righteousness,
nor accounts them so; But we can say, God first gives us Christ's righteousness
by his Grace, then accounts us righteous therein, Constitutive Justification
consists in three things, in making us just, accounting us just, and using us
as just, all these the Papists have, Therefore more fully, Justification is a
judicial act, and that by the law of Grace, God by that Law, and the act of
God's law, makes, pronounces, and by pronouncing makes a Believer a righteous
person, and being so made, accounts him so. Resp. The Scripture speaks of
Justification of a Sinner, and therefore says, its an act of free Grace,
Indeed Mr. H's. Justification can be no other than a judicial Act, its no way
consistent with Grace, because he says its by a Law and Act of it, whereby it
makes and pronounces a believer righteous, and it seems he is first
declaratively justified, and after imputed righteous, when God has pronounced
him righteous, then accounts him so, (...), the Cart before the Horse. Our
righteousness wrought in us by Vocation, and is the same materially, but not
formally, with this righteousness of Justification.

Resp. Now here is the reason why he sticks so hard for our righteousness, being
the formal part of our Justification, so that the same righteousness (as he
says materially the same) Sanctifies us materially, and Justifies us formally.
So as that, as Sanctifying it has no form, and as Justifying no matter. Now
this is a Quatenus with a witness, so in Mr. Cl's sense he does well, making
the matter real, and the form relative. These things Mr. H. in his several
middle-way Pages, and Letters repeats a hundred times, you cannot look into a
Page hardly, but you have the sum of his Doctrine; therefore it must not be
expected that I should follow him Page by Page, unless I should Tautologize as
he does.

CHAP. X. Whether Faith be our justifying Righteousness.
Section 1. Whether the Saints before Christ's did not look upon themselves as
righteous by their own righteousness.. 2. Abraham considered.. 3. Abraham
considered.. 4. Abraham 's Justification further considered.. 5. Of Subordinate
righteousness.. 6. Mr. Cl's. defense of a Subordinate righteousness.. 7
Opposition of Faith and Works in Justification, Mr. Cl's 2d. and 3d. Arg.. 8.
Mr. Cl. fourth Argument Answered.. 9. Argument 5, 6.. 10. More to Mr. H 's
challenge.

Sect. 1. MR. H's. Enquiry about the Saints before Christ's coming is, He would
know of any Man who is most Orthodox in his Complexion, whether he does or is
able to think that Enoch, Noah, Job, who were before the Law, Samuel, the Kings
and Prophets under the Law, or any Man or Woman whatsoever before the coming of
Christ, did ever imagine that they were righteous or accepted with God for the
Obedience which the Messiah should perform on their behalf when he came into
the World, and believing this was an Instrument of making him to be theirs etc.
And whether they did not look upon themselves righteous by their own
righteousness, their doing righteo^sn^ss, and to obtain favor by their upright
walking, and no otherwise in the World?

Resp. If Mr. H. means Men of the Orthodox complexion in his Eye, Neonomian
complexions, I believe but few, if any for ought I know but are of the Opinion
Mr. B. has declared himself, and diverse others of that Orthodoxy; but if he
means the true Protestant Calvinistical complexion, there is enough of them. 2.
I would know whether or no they did ever hear of a New Law, and if they
expected to be justified by their own righteousness, or whether they thought of
any other Law to be justified by, than the Law of Works? For there was not the
least Word of any other Law before the Flood or after, none can be pretended to
be, till Abraham's time at furthest. 3. Whether there was one Word of a
conditinal promise to Adam after the fall, and whether he thinks not that Adam,
Abel, Enock, etc. Were not saved by Faith in that absolute promise that the
seed of the Woman, etc. (who is the Messiah though not under the Name of Messiah
till Ages afterward) did they not believe in his righteousness, as that which
should break the Serpents Heads, i. e. all the power he had got over Man by the
unrighteousness he had brought him into? 4. If they did look upon themselves as
righteous without the Obedience of the Messiah (or by the Name which the Spirit
of God revealed him to them) why did they offer Sacrifice for Sin, did they
look at no Significancy or typicalness in them, were they not taught of God so
to do, and did he not show show them that they were typical of the great
Sacrifice the seed of the Woman should offer in the end of the World? Was it
not by Faith they offered them, Heb. 11. And what was that Faith, was it not in
a righteousness? for Noah believed in a righteousness and became heir of
righteousness which is by Faith, what was he Heir of his own Righteousness? did
they believe in themselves? The Apostle 's design is not to prove that Faith is
the Evidence of things not seen, the Substance of those things hoped for, that
those worthys lived in Faith and Hope, and dyed so not having received the
promise in performance, but saluted and embraced it by Faith. 5. Had Job and
his friends such Principles (though not of the Jews Church) chap. 19.27. I know
that my Redeemer lives, was there no Faith in his Words, is there no
righteousness in a Redeemer? and what were the Sentiments of his Friends in
this Doctrine, sure they were not Neonomians, Job 25.4. How can Man be
justified with God? or how can he be clean that is born of a Woman? Says
Bildad. A Neonomian would have easily resolved this Question, by performing of
the conditions of the New-Law; but alas they heard not of this New-Law, this
Nor-West passage to Heaven.

. 2. Let us consider Abraham, whether he did imagine himself righteous, by his
doing righteously, or looked to obtain favor of God thereby, and no otherways,
and whether his Faith was not Eminently carried forth to the Eying of Christ in
the promise. Christ says, Abraham rejoiced to see my Day, and saw it and was
glad, he saw it, and saw it, and rejoiced and was glad, John 8.58. And where
and how did he see it? was it not in the promise of his Seed? and what did he
see in it? was it not the blessedness promised? Genesis 12. and the Salvation by
Redemption and Righteousness, did he see nothing in Christ for his own Soul;
yes, you say he saw him as a Neonomian Cipher, to stand by his Justification by
his own Works, to the magnifying his own righteousness, but the Spirit of God
says; he was not justified by Works; how come Men to say he was? James says
he was, how, by approving the Truth of his Faith, for he was in a justified
State long before the offering up his Son, but his Faith was proved, and
approved of by God, and witnessed to, by this eminent Act of Obedience, God
testified to his particular Acts of Obedience, which the World was ready to
Condemn, and so to Rabab, so to Phineas his Act, that whatever the World judged
of these Actions, yet they were approved of God as righteous, and true
Obedience: Abel was an accepted person of God before his offering, then because
his person was justified, God witnesses to his gifts, that they were accepted
as being done in Faith; whereas Cain was an unjustified person, there is no
Sinner justified by his Works, but a Believers Works are accepted, because
their persons are accepted in another righteousness, in which their Works are
accepted afterward: Abel was first accepted, and then his Service.

. 3. Now we are upon Abraham, let us consider him a little further, did he
imagine himself righteous without the Obedience of Christ, and no other way
than by his own righteousness? What do these Men make of the Gospel preached,
is it not the preaching of Christ for righteousness, for Christ is made
Righteousness to us, 1 Cor. 1. The Gospel was preached to Abraham; what was
that? The Apostle tells us, Gal. 3.8. It was in the first promise whereby he
was converted to God in Vr of the Chaldees, Genesis 12. In thee shall all the
Nations of the Earth be blessed, and that this contained in it, that blessing
of righteousness which is after more particularly Explained, he was justified
as the Heathen, and believing Gentiles were to be justified afterward, and the
Apostle says these that are (...), i. e. of that kind of Justification, are
blessed with faithful Abraham, ver. 9. but such as are (...), that expect
justification from the Works of a Law are under a curse, for the Law i. e.
Justification by the works of the Law. is not of justifying Faith, theirs none
under Abraham's blesssing, expect Justification by the Works of the Law. Indeed
the Mystery was not so distinctly understood, Ephesians. 3.5. Yet they were saved
even as we, Acts 15. And how are we Gentiles saved? by becoming fellow Heirs of
the same Body ( i. e. mystical) and partakers of his promise in Christ by the
Gospel, Ephesians. 3.6. The which participation the faithful before Christ was, the
Gospel had preached to Abraham.

. 4. The great cry is that Faith, i. e. our working Faith, our Faith and
Obedience is our Subordinate Righteousness, or coordinate or Supreme, which
our Neonomians please, for Justification, because it is said Abraham's: Faith
was imputed to him for Righteousness, i. e. say, they his Gospel Works, not
Mosaical, or not according to the Old Law, but according to the New.

This assertion is most false, for these reasons. 1. There was no Mosaical Law
in Abraham's days. 2. There was no New Law exhibited to Abraham, for their
promise was absolute, Genesis 12. And cannot be pretended to be conditional. 3.
Its not consistent with the nature of Faith, which is the Evidence of something
not seen, or present, but Works and Faith as such is both seen in us, and
present with us. 4. If Faith be the very righteousness, then Faith believes in
Faith as righteousness. Does the Scripture bid us believe in our selves, or
believe in another. Faith believes in Faith, for our very righteousness by
these Men, which is most absurd, when they preach, they should bid Men believe
in themselves, did Abraham believe in his Faith? Was that his believing, or did
he believe that which was held out in the Promise? the same thing that God
imputes to us for righteousness, we do make the Object of our Faith for
Righteousness. Now then if God imputes our believing to us, then we believe in
our believing, these are inevitable Rocks this Doctrine will bring these Men
unto. 5. God cannot impute Faith as a Work, and in the Neonomian sense for
righteousness, it being as Mr. H. confesses again and again, no righteousness,
sinful, in need of pardon, for, 1. This would not be according to truth to call
evil good, nor to do it in a way of administration of Justice, as in
Justification, would it be just? But most unjust, God is a God of Truth and
Holiness, and the Judge of all the World, and therefore must deal righteously,
for though he pardons Iniquity, yet will by no means clear the Guilty. 2. Its
contrary to their own assertions, that Justification is an Act of Justice,
whereas such an Imputation and Justification as they speak of, would be far
from an Act of justice, and is a mere dispensation with justice, for where a
Law must be abrogated, or relaxed, there is an absolute dispensation with
Justice, and without one of these they confess there cannot be Justification by
their New Law. 6. This cannot be justification, because Sin is not pardoned in
it, nor the person accepted, Imputation of righteousness to the work, before
its to the person, and if the person must do good works before he is justified,
which is absurd, because the works he does are imputed to him, and he is
justified by 'em, as they say.

. 5. But let us hear what Mr. Cl. has to say for the Proof of this Position,
that Faith is our Subordinate righteousness ( i. e. in his sense an
interveening righteousness coming between Christ's righteousness) whereby we are
justified before we come at Christ, or pardon, both being consequent to our
Justification, by this New-Law-Righteousness which he calls Faith, see, p. 64.
His reason are these, 1. What else can be the plain and proper meaning of that
Phrase, it was accounted to him for righteousness? (Without putting it upon the
Rack of Tropes and Figures, and the like Engines of Cruelty, etc.

Resp. Does Mr. Cl. pretend to be an interpreter of Scripture, and will not
allow the use of a Trope or Figure, but to call them Engines of Cruelty, is to
say, where a Trope is said to be used in a Scripture, there is a wresting of
Scripture; I must tell him that a Tropical sense of many Places of Scripture,
is the true plain and proper sense and meaning of the Spirit of God, in many
most eminent Expressions, and for this he must expect to be watched in the
adjusting his Newfound righteousness, whether he does no where interpret
Scripture Tropically. What answer will he give the Papist in the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation founded on, This is my Body? Mr. B. says, its as credible
as the Doctrine of imputation of Christ's Righteousness: And what says Mr. Cl.
to the Covenant of Circumcision. Well let us make a little Impartial
Examination of this Expression, If Abraham were justified by works, Romans 4.2.
he has boasting, but not before God; not in the Presence of God for his
Justification, yea he may rejoice, that through Grace he has performed any
action by faith which God witnesses to, as James speaks of, but he dare not
plead it before God for Justification of his Person. Now he brings in
Justification by Faith in diametrical opposition to it; for the Scripture
says, Abraham believed in God, and it was accounted to him for righteousness,
so translated, the words in the Hebrew may run thus, He believed on Jehovah,
and he accounted it ( i. e. what he believed of him) for righteousness to him,
the Words are rendered by the Septuagint and the New Testament. Abraham believed
God, it was accounted to be unto righteousness. The Seed promised before was
the thing believed by Abraham, the blessing unto all Nations, which Seed was to
proceed from his and Sarah his Wife's Loins, this was the promise of God to
him, and this was accounted to him for righteousness; he believed Jehovah
graciously promising, and the thing promised, Jehovah imputed to him for
righteousness (...) he accounted the thing believed, not the Faith it self,
therefore the Targum has its (...) he believed the word of promise, and the
thing promised was imputed to him; in this sense the Apostle takes it, Romans
4.3. Gal. 3.6. where in both places he opposes a righteousness of faith, i. e.
which is believed on, unto a righteousness within which is no object of faith,
for it is within us, and an object of sense, he believed God in the Promise of
Christ, and this that he believed was reckoned to him; he argues presently that
this imputation was not to Abraham as a work of any kind, for to him that
works (as much as if he should say, O do not mistake me, I do not, nor does
the Scripture speak of Abraham's Faith as a work) the reward should not be of
grace but debt, but to him that works not, but believes on him that
justifies the ungodly, (as Abraham was when first justified, Josh. 24.) his
faith is esteemed to be unto (...), i. e. he believes upon the righteousness
which is imputed to him. And why may not Faith be taken objectively, by a
Metonomy, for the thing believed? for it is not unusual in Scripture, Christ is
said to be our hope, the object of our hope, 1 Timothy 1.1. and so the hope laid
up for us in Heaven, i e. the things hoped for, Coloss. 1.5. so looking for
that blessed hope, Tit. 2.14. the things hoped for; what is more frequent than
these Metonomies, yea proper, plain and elegant; in matters of sense or
perception its most frequent to put the object for the sense, and sense for the
object, Matthew. 6.22. the light of the body is the eye, and there the light is
for the eye, and after, the eye for the light; besides, its a rule, that when a
word in Scripture taken in the direct sense, will cross other Scriptures, and
the signification lies fair for the Analogy of Faith, then the true sense lies
in the Trope; as here, we are justified by faith, but how? as it lays hold on
the justifying blood of Christ, or else we contradict, Romans 5.9. being now
justified by his blood; now either Faith or the justifying Blood of Christ must
fall into a Trope; for which is it fittest, and to which does it suit best?
Paul Romans 4. argues strenuously against justification by works, and therefore,
against Justification by Faith as a Work. To this kind of Justification he
opposes that of Faith, its being accounted for righteousness; if faith be
understood as a work of righteosness, then the Apostle contradicts himself, and
makes justification by faith to be justification by works, and so disputes
vainly, making no opposition; but if in Justification by Faith the
righteousness is imputed to us, and that be the drift of it, then his
Argumentation has the greatest weight, the righteousness of Faith is Christ's
righteousness, and the righteousness of works our righteousness inherent,
wrought by us, or in us, utterly excluded from Justification.

. 6. Mr. Cl's Second Argument, Because the Apostle frequently opposes working
and believing, faith and works, Works as a perfect obedience to the Law, Faith
as a sincere obedience to the Gospel.

Resp. Then the Apostle should have opposed works and works, and distinguished
between Law-works and Gospel works; or when he had opposed Faith unto Works in
two Epistles so largely, he should have excepted Gospel-works, or said, I do
not mean Faith as a work; but to be short, for I shall not need to be long on
the remaining Arguments: We say only, that this Argument is against Mr. Cl.
because the Apostle still makes so clear an opposition betwixt Faith and Works
without any Exception.

Arg. 3. It is expressly called the righteousness of faith, Romans 4.11, 13. chap.
9.30. chap. 10.16. by faith, Gal. 5.5. Heb. 11.5.

Resp. This affects us not, The righteousness of faith, is but as the light of
the eye, the righteousness which is the object of faith, Romans 4.11. he received
the sign of circumcision, called the covenant of Circumcision by a plain Trope,
not cruel at all, the seal of the righteousness of faith: Is this a Seal only
that we are righteous, or is it a Seal of the righteousness of Christ promised
to Abraham, v. 13. there is a positive denial that the Promise was to Abraham
and his Seed through a Law, any Law, Old or New, but through the righteousness of
faith the proper and peculiar object in Justification, Romans 9.30. the
righteousness of Faith is opposed to the righteousness of Works the Jews
depended on. By Faith, is but righteousness received by Faith, or waited for in
faith, Gal. 5.5. we by the Spirit ( i. e. its assistance) wait for the hope of
righteousness) ( i. e. the righteousness hoped for) by faith, or from faith,
(...), its not called the righteousness of faith there; to what purpose quoted,
I know not, and Heb. 11.5. where it is said, by faith Enoch was translated,
what is Enoch's Translation here to his Justification which was three hundred
years before?

. 7. Argument 4. Because Faith is a conformity to the rule of the promise
(wherein the nature of righteousness does consist) viz. the Gospel or Covenant
of Grace, which requires only sincere believing, not perfect doing, Romans
10.8.10. and therefore tho it be not righteousness in strict Justice, according
to the law of nature ( i. e. works) yet it is righteousness according to the
favorable construction of the Gospel, i. e. God upon the account of Christ's
righteousness is pleased to accept of this for righteousness, so as to account
it, whence its called the righteousness of God.

Resp. The rule of the promise is an uncouth Term which I have examined
elsewhere, and therefore shall not now stand upon it, only, A rule of the
promise must be either by which it is made, or upon which it is performed;
there is no Rule God makes any Promise by, but his own good Will and Pleasure;
but its the Rule its performed by that must be a Rule in us, by which God
walks, i. e. the condition of the New Law performed by us, a Law indeed has
such a Rule, but no Gospel has; do and live, do is the Rule, and live the
Promise, to be performed upon our doing; and this is these men's Gospel or
Govenant of Grace, a downright Law; and where is it proved that Faith is a
conformity to this Rule of the Promise, or legal Condition? Romans 10.8. there is
something said of a believing the Word preached, but what is that to the Rule of
the Promise, and verse 10. with the heart man believes unto righteousness, etc.
who denies Faith, if it be true to be as sincere as any other Grace, but this
proves it not to be our righteousness; the words of the Text are against it, it
believes unto righteousness, it goes out of it self for righteousness, takes
not its self for righteousness, v. 11. the object, believed on, where this
righteousness is, is told v. 11 whosoever believes on him, but these men will
have believing unto righteousness, to be faith believing it self unto
righteousness. Well, when Faith has done its do to make its self
righteousness, yet it is not righteousness in the sense of the law of works
which is the true Rule of a Law-righteousness that God never abates in the
least of) yet it is Gospel-righteousness, according to the favorable
construction of the Gospel; God forbid that that should be our
justifying-righteousness, which strict Justice will not allow to be
righteousness: Here they bring in God's dispensing with Justice, and make him a
favourer of unrighteousness, in making it such for Justification; this is
Antinomianism with a witness, for God to favor sin, and justify him for that
which a just Law and strict Justice condemns for unrighteousness; the
righteousness of the new Law is condemned at the Bar of the old law; hence it
can be no better than the law of Sin and Death, and yet this unrighteous
condition must be fathered on God's favorable construction, yea, on Jesus
Christ's Undertaking and Performance; he undertook and died for this end, that
our unrighteousness should have the honor of justifying us, his was but
subservient to that end; it seems God would have it so, that his Son should be
made a Sacrifice to purchase the imputation of our own righteousness, for
righteousness unto justification, and therefore it is called the righteousness
of God, why, because its ours and not Christ's: Of this in another place.

. 8. That Faith is our Gospel-righteousness appears further from Romans 10. this
being the same with the Fourth, and answered there, I need say nothing to it.

Argument 6. There are but two sorts of righteousness, Legal and Evangelical,
but this is not legal righteousness, and therefore it must be Evangelical.

Resp. There is but one sort of righteousness, and that is legal, and its a
legal righteousness though graciously bestowed, that we are justified by, and
its impossible that it should be otherwise; its only the legal righteousness of
Christ made ours, which is our Evangelical, Christ's own righteousness, as it
respects the Justice of God and his Law, is Legal; as it respects a Sinner, is
graciously bestowed, its Evangelical. But alas, Mr. Cl. to prevent
misconstruction, after he has bin disputing for the work of Faith to be our
righteousness, yet we must not expect Mercy, Justification, Pardon,
Reconciliation or Favor with God, upon the account of our sincerity, Faith or
Obedience, as the procuring cause; but we are to look up to Christ, confessing
our best works to be but filthy rags in strict justice, etc.

Resp. One may see how frail a righteousness these men have feigned to
themselves; it is as the Spider's Web that they dare not lean upon it, tho they
will swagger and vapor with it to out-dare them whom they call Antinomians,
who will cleave immediately to Christ's righteousness alone as their only
righteousness without the intervention of these filthy Rags; their
righteousness must have Christ stand behind the Curtain to patch their ragged
raiment; their House cannot stand without Bellarmine's propter quod, their
Pageantry is all dead Images, unless one behind the Curtain move them, which no
body must see; here is no Mercy, Pardon, and Reconciliation for and by their
Righteousness, but Christ procured something of it, I know not what, but
Christ's Procurement was long ago, the Law is in their own hands now, he only
procured the New Law, they must shift as well as they can to perform the
Conditions; Christ did not purchase those, neither died he to forgive any fault
in their righteousness; but oh, their righteousness comes not up to the old
Law, what need they trouble themselves about that? Christ has fetched them from
under that faulty Perfection, and brought them under a faultless
unrighteousness of the Remedial Law, and faults their Righteousness must have,
or else it would be an adequate condition, but they must acknowledge their
unworthiness, and desert of all evil, and when we have done, God looks upon us
as righteous in a Gospel sense. I had thought in the beginning of this
Paragraph Christ had bin to have pardoned and mended the faults of our remedial
righteousness; but it seems here is some pretense to it only that Christ may
not think he is put off with nothing; but the completing of these rough
Garments to deceive, lies in their own doings; if we do this, God looks upon us
as righteous in a Gospel-sense, and pardons us, first justified and not
pardoned, and then pardoned and not justified: What a great matter of
Lamentation is it to see the corrupt minds of men thus vainly and mischievously
sport themselves with the rich Grace of God, and his strict Justice.

. 9. Before I leave this Chapter, let us talk a little further with Mr. Humph.
about his great challenge, if it be as he says, that no Man or Woman before
Christ coming, did Imagine they were righteous before God, or accepted for the
Obedience of Christ, it must follow that they had a hard task under the New
Law, for they wanted the propter quod, and both Mr. Cl. and he says their
righteousness wants pardon, and they must go to the id propter quod for pardon
and acceptance: Now I would Query, whether if they could not imagine Christ's
Obedience, to be their righteousness, how could they imagine that Christ's
Obedience could be the procuring cause, so that they were altogether destitute
of the id propter quod. I would know whether the Faith of Gods Children before
Christ, had no Eye unto Christ and his righteousness, in the Sacrifices and sin
Offerings which they offered daily; did they not look at them as shadows and
types of a better and more perfect Sacrifice, the Apostle says that the
righteousness of God (which we shall by and by show to be the righteousness of
Christ) was witnessed by the Law ( i. e. the Law of Moses) and the Prophets,
and if so, its strange that they should have no imagination of it, when as the
Apostle Peter, 1 Ep. c. 1.10. Says, the Prophets have Enquired after and
searched diligently for this Salvation prophesied of, Searching what and what
manner of times the Spirit of Christ which was in them did signify, when it
testified before hand the sufferings of Christ and the glory which should
follow: The Apostle Peter was clear in this Point, Acts 2.31 He says that
David foresaw the Resurrection of Christ, and spoke of it, and Christ himself
affirms this after his Resurrection to the two Disciples going to Immaus, that
he ought thus to suffer and enter into Glory, beginning at Moses and all the
Prophets, he expounded unto them in all the Scripture, the things concerning
himself? Now if Moses and all the Prophets, yea all the Scriptures should so
eminently and expressly foretell Christ's sufferings and resurrection, and why it
was? viz. to bear Sin and satisfy Gods justice, as the Prophet Isa. c. 53. and
David, and Jer. and all the Sacrifices of old, and his Redemption was also for
them, to the transgressions under the first Testament, Heb. 9.15. It is strange
that none of them from Adam to Christ, should in the least imagine their
acceptance with God should be for his righteousness, but that they should look
for Justification by their own righteousness only, and none others.

. 10. Mr. Cl. in the conclusion of his Book, undertakes to disprove the
Imputation of the Active righteousness of Christ, when as all a long his Book
he holds that Christ's righteousness Active or Passive, is not imputed but as
to Effects; now he can mean nothing by the non-imputation of Either, but as to
Effects: So that he must intend by the non-imputation of Christ's active
Obedience, of the Effect, and then either it had no effects or no effects, pro
bono nostro; now sure if I mistake not, he grants that whatever Christ was, it
was for our good, and therefore have some benefit by it, and God reckons it a
benefit, for that is their Imputation when we have a benefit, God reckons it so,
i. e. Imputes it to be what it is; surely if Christ active Obedience, did but
fit him to redeem us by passive, it was a benefit to us: His Incarnation was it
not a benefit? In their way of Imputation they may say, [after Mr. B.] because
he did not obey, that we should not obey.

Resp. Neither did he suffer, that we should not suffer; but Christ suffered
that we might not suffer penally, and obey that we might not obey legally; and
its strange that the second Adam should have actual righteousness for us, as
well as the first had actual sin; that all should not be repaired as to the
preceptive, as well as the vindicative part of the Law, which was fallen upon
us in the first Adam, by the second Adam. Why was he made under the Law? Was it
not for active as well as passive Obedience.

CHAP. XI. Of Justification by Works.
Section 1. The Neonomian Doctrine opposed.. 2. Who it is God justifies.. 3.
More fully Answered.. 4. Arguments against Justification by Works.. 5. Mr. Cl's
Proposition.. 6. Of the Jews Opinion about Justification.. 7. Whether Paul
means only Works of Moses's Law.. 8. Whether Paul disputes only against some
Works.. 9. Mr. Cl's Denial and Challenge.. 10. What Law the Apostle means.. 11.
How the Jews looked upon the Law.. 12. Of the Law of Faith.. 13. What Deeds of
the Law.. 14. What Works to be boasted of.. 15. Of meritorious Works.. 16. Of
justifying Works.. 17. Of the Jews Conceit of Perfect Obedience.. 18. 1 Cor.
4.4. considered.. 19. Mr. Cl. unfair in his Challenge.. 20. Of Romans 4.5.. 21.
Of Romans 2.20.

Sect. 1. OUR Neonomians affirm we are justified by works, not of the Old Law
(which the Apostle Paul every were excludes) but of the New Law, this is that
which we oppose, and say the Apostle does exclude all our works, even in the
state of Regeneracy, from Justification, and in this Point we shall take Mr.
Cl. because he seems to be most full in the handling of it, and take up that
Mr. H. says, in a more scattered manner here and there.

. 2. Chap. 10. He tells us who it is that God Justifies, not ungodly, (...)
according to Romans 4.5. No says Mr. Cl. the Spirit of God means the godly, and
he brings against the position of the Spirit of God in this place, that of
Exodus 23.7. Where the LXX uses the same words.

Resp. To which I shall answer, 1. That Mr. Cl. knows the LXX does not
translate the words according to the Heb. Text; but rather speaks to the drift
of the Text, which is to enjoin unto Men an impartial Execution of distributive
Justice, and therefore it renders it, Thou shall not justify the wicked for a
reward; and that is the plain Drift of the Text by what precedes, v. 6. Thou
shall not wrest judgment, and thou shall take no gift, v. 8. and the Hebrew in
the 7th verse is, I will not justify, i. e. will not have thee to justify,
for thou art but my Deputy, and I sit in the Assemblies and Courts of Earthly
Judges, and whatever Judgment contrary to Justice and Right thou passest, I
will call thee to an account for it. Then 1. This Text speaks of Man's
Judgment, not of God's immediately, but as supervising the actions of men. 2.
He might as well, or better alleged Exodus 34.7. where God proclaiming himself
a sin-pardoning God, says, he will by no means clear the guilty; but in pardon
of sin God does clear the guilty, and so the ungodly, in Justification of them
by the imputed righteousness of Christ which takes off the ungodliness in that
kind, tho man cannot provide for the Justification of an unrighteous person by
gifts or partiality in a way of Justice, yet God can by gracious and just ways
and means provide for the acquitting the guilty, and justifying the ungodly
justly. 2. It must be understood, Romans 4. according to the words in a strict
sense, God justifies the ungodly, while such, not to remain such. For Abraham
there spoken of, was such an ungodly vile Idolater, Josh. 24. Had Abraham
performed any New-Law righteousness before he came out of Vr? Mr. C. will
understand it, he says, in a strict Law sense, i. e. that he was a
transgressor of the law of works, so will I, and that is therefore to be
ungodly, and I know no ungodliness but such, and while he was such God
justified him, and he did no New-Law works before he was justified, for Heb.
11.8. for by faith, when he was called of God to go forth he went; so that he
had faith, and was justified before he obeyed the Call. 3. Its most consistent
with the Grace of God to justify the ungodly, and not in the least derogatory
from his Justice to justify a sinner in Gods way of Justification 4. As God
justifies none to be ungodly, nor justifies ungodliness, but that sinners may
be godly; so there is none can be godly before he is justified, he cannot
perform one godly Act, nor have the Spirit, the natural Man being a stranger to
God and Enemy to him. 5. Why may not God justify the ungodly, as well as
sanctify the ungodly, if God may give one gift to the rebellious, why not
another? if he may give Grace, why not all Grace? they will have Men justified
by works; who works in them to will or do? Who gives them this righteousness?
Does not this gift of God find them ungodly? They will say, yea undoubtedly,
then I will say, why may not God give Christ, to an ungodly one the gift of
righteousness, and justify him thereby, I hope if God can give one
righteousness, he can give another, unless they will limit his Sovereign Grace.

. 3.1. But more fully: And first Negatively, not by the Law, Gal. 2.16. viz.
the Law of Moses; and why so? is there any the least word of the Law of Moses,
its (...), by the works of a law, any law; when the Apostle speaks of Moses's
law, he annexeth the pre-positive Article, So Romans 3.20. its a law, from the
works of a law no flesh living can be justified; now this is not the Ceremonial
Law, by v. 19. but that law whereby all the world became guilty, Jews and
Gentiles, v. 9, etc. for the Gentiles were not guilty by Moses Law, neither
could the works of the New Law admit of an exception here; for its any law that
gives the knowledge of sin. Now if the New Law gives the knowledge of sin, the
works of it are here excluded, for that is no law that gives no knowledge of
sin. Hence all works of all Laws are here excluded, i. e. such as the
righteousness thereof required is our obedience performed by us; whence its
plain, that the Law of Works, the Ceremonial Law, and the New Law are equally
excluded. Now the next Verse has it, that the righteousness of God is
manifested without these excluded works, this is no new Notion, but witnessed
(...), by the law, i. e. of Moses and the Prophets. What Gal. 3.16. is brought
in for I know not, I find it not among the Errata's, but I think it must be
one, Hitherto also do belong these places, Job 15.14. chap. 25.4. Psalm 143.2.
which Places plainly and peremptorily deny righteousness in Man to be found
unto Justification; Mr. Cl. says, according to strict Justice, according to the
law of works, as Paul expounds it, Gal. 2.16.

Resp. The Apostle there does peremptorily protest against Justification by the
works of a Law, any Law whatever; and if he has an eye upon the Psalmists
words, he explains them so far as to us, why the Psalmist denies Justification
to any man living, is, because all works that Man can perform, must be referred
to some law, by the works of a law no flesh living could be justified. Let me
add what the Apostle says, If righteousness be by a law, then Christ died in
vain: Its strange the Apostle should so expressly and positively exclude the
works of a Law from Justification, and yet all this while intend that we are
justified by the works of a Law, and that he should never tell us, he does not
mean works of the New Law, nor so much as mention it.

. 4. From the forementioned places, these Arguments will arise against
Justification by our works. 1. Justification of a sinner or ungodly one as
such, cannot be by any works of a Law, performed by him, but Gods Justification
of any fallen Man is such, for the Major its plain, against Neonomian
Justification, unless they will say, that a natural Man may be godly while
such, or that which the old law calls ungodliness, the new law calls godliness;
yea, a man must be sanctified in their sense, before justified, while under
condemnation, and bound over to wrath. Again, the Text is clear, that Abraham
was ungodly when justified, both by History and the Apostles, for he could not
do any good, and all his obedience was after his Justification by Faith. Now
the Minor is as Evident, that Gods Justification of fallen Man is such, for if
we be justified by the works of a Law, its not consistent with Grace; for
justification singly considered, speaks nothing but Justice: And Justification
by the works of a Law performed by us, speaks nothing but Justice; but
Justification by Grace, is only as the Apostle says, when its without the
deeds of the Law performed by us.

2. That Doctrine that excludes the works of every Law, by which is the
knowledge of Sin, excludes the works of every Law performed by us; but the
Apostles Doctrine excludes the works of every Law that gives the knowledge of
Sin. Ergo the works of every Law, Old, New, and Moral Law, are excluded. This
Argument stands firm from Romans 3.20.

3. If the holiest Men have not expected to be justified by their own
righteousness, who have lived by Faith, then justification is not by works of a
Law: But the Antecedent is true, therefore the consequence. The consequence
appears, in that David had lived long by Faith, and in Holiness, when he
penned, Psalm. 143.2. And if he thought to be justified by New Law works, he
need not have said, Enter not into Judgment with thy Servant, unless he had
added, by the Old Law, but, Enter into Judgment with thy Servant by the New
Law, for in thy sight, New-Law works will justify any Flesh, Minor, David,
Job, Paul expected not to be justified by New Law Works.

4. Those works that will not make a sinner clean and pure in the sight of God,
cannot justify him; but no New Law righteousness, will take away Moral
Pollution in the sight of God, so as to make him clean. Ergo, the Major is so
clear as none can deny, for by Justification, the justified is purged and clean
from Sin in the sight of God; he can Enter into Judgment with God, upon the
account of the righteousness he is justified by. The Minor is true, 1. From the
confession of our Adversary, that its a sinful righteousness, its condemned by
the Moral Law, its not adequate to exact Justice, therefore it will not cover
Sin from the Eve of Gods Justice. 2. From so many express Places of Scripture,
Job. 15.4. He that is righteous before God, must be clean before God. Imperfect
righteousness, can never make us clean in the sight of God, Job. 15.4. Its not
to be found of man born of a Woman, i. e. mere man, nor in any flesh living,
Believers are flesh living, and born of women; Job says chap. 9.30. If I wash
my self in snow water, and make my self never so clean, yet shall thou plunge
me in the ditch, and mine own clothes shall abhor me; now will Job's
new-law-works justify him; he had been long a holy man, yet he often pleaded
his uprightness toward God, and his integrity against his friends charge, and
yet you see what his new-law-righteousness amounted to, chap. 40.4. and 42 6.

5. Let me add a Fifth Argument before I leave his Negative: If there was never
any Law given to fallen Man that could give Life upon the Terms thereof, then
there could be no righteousness to Justification by a Law; but the antecedent
is true, therefore the consequent, and both from Gal. 3.1. the Apostle's
unanswerable Argument against Justification by any Law. The words are very
plain and full to any one that can construe Greek.

. 5. He proceeds to his further Proof, in diverse Propositions, which are many,
so little to the purpose, that it would be lost time to follow them
particularly, but that there is in them many places of Scripture perverted from
their true Interpretation.

His first Proposal is, The whole scope of the Apostle is to assert and
establish Justification by faith, as the only way of Salvation to lapsed men.

Resp. What if so? Does it therefore follow that the Apostle teaches, that
Faith is the way of Justification by Works? or quite contrary, that
Justification by Faith is not by the works of righteousness which we have done,
but by these that Christ has done? This I gather, says he, from that place
Romans 1.17. The righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith, which
words I paraphrase thus, That the Gospel alone discovers the method and way
appointed by God, whereby we may become righteous in his account, viz. by faith
in Christ, and by continuance, increase and exercise thereof.

Resp. Its the Office of the Gospel, to teach Sinners the way, the truth and
life, who is Christ; there is no other righteousness that the Gospel can teach a
sinner to Justification, John 14.6. and that Faith lays hold on that way, is
the Gospel; to teach a man that he is to be justified by the works of a law, is
it Good News to a sinner? That this Text is grossly abused, appears,

1. Because the righteousness of God here spoken of, is a righteousness
revealed, and therefore not in us; for things already in us, are not said to be
revealed to us.

2. Its the righteousness of God, and not of Man.

3. Its an objective righteousness that is here spoken of, such as is made
known to our Faith by Revelation, therefore not Faith it self.

4. It appears by the Proof, in that the life of a just one is by faith feeding
upon another's righteousness, not his own. In a word, according to Mr. Cl's
sense, it should be this, The Gospel is the Method of God unto Salvation, for
therein is the righteousness of man revealed from faith to faith, viz. the more
a man believes in Christ, the more he believes he is justified by his own
works, and this is that he lives by, he lives by faith, i. e. by believing his
faith to be works.

He disproves Justification by works of a law as inconsistent therewith,
because all are sinners, and therefore none can be justified by their works,
and on the other hand, that they must be justified by faith.

Resp. One would think this man spoke now good Divinity, but his meaning is,
only that Justification of a sinner by the works of the old law, is
inconsistent, but not Justification by the works of a new law; whereas the
design of the Apostle throughout is to disprove the Justification of a sinner
by the works of a law, any law; he specifies not any one law in particular,
unless where he led to it, but when he opposes Works to Faith in
Justification, he speaks of law indefinitely excluding all works of any law
whatever, signified to us, Gal. 3.2. If there had been any law given, whereby
life is given, then righteousness had been by a law, but there was no such law
given.

. 6. The Apostle insists largely on this Dispute against Justification by
works, because it was a received Opinion among the Jews, that a man might be
justified by the works of the law, and it was retained by many of them, even
after they were converted to the faith of Christ, as appears. Acts 21.20.

Resp. The Apostle insisted largely and strenuously on this Dispute, in making
and proving the direct opposition between Justification by the works of any law
performed by us, and Justification by faith in the righteousness of another, 1.
Because the Jews were generally bigoted to a righteousness of some law to be
performed by them for Justification. 2. Because they were generally ignorant of
the righteousness of Christ, which made them go about to establish their own
righteousness in Point of Justification. 3. What he writes to the converted
Jews, he does, 1. In order to convince them of the danger of joining their own
righteousness in obedience to any law in Justification, with the righteousness
of Christ, and this was the danger of the Galatians. 2. He warns them of the
vanity of the continuance of the works of Moses's law in order to Salvation.
Now Mr. Cl. brings the words of James to Paul, Acts 21.20. to prove that the
converted Jews sought Justification by the works of the Law of works: To which
I answer.

1. That the unconverted Jews did none of them expect Justification by the
works of the law of works, for 1. They did not look upon their works as perfect
works (though they took the external obedience to be what the law mainly looked
for which Christ refutes) for they owned that their external works were mixed
with much imperfection and sin. Else 2dly. They could not own the Doctrine of
Sacrifices for sin, wherein they saw the sinfulness of their works, and were
convinced at least thereof, whether they saw by faith the Antitype signified by
them or no, and therefore could stand upon their works in themselves perfect,
in answer to the righteousness of that law, but the Justification by works
which they looked for, was by an imperfect righteousness (as the Neonomians do)
in obedience to the law of Moses, which they made their new law, as the
Neonomians do the Gospel, and therefore the Apostle says, that they sought it
as it were by the works of the law, it was Justification by works in their
sense, the Apostle preaches accordingly against works, as taken by themselves,
Romans 9.

Ans. 2. As for the converted Jews, spoken of, Acts 21. they where for the
observations of some things in the Obedience of Moses his Law, as necessary
means of Salvation, not abolished by Christ's coming in the Flesh; and as the
Apostles did not press harder upon them in that Point, than only to leave them
under an indifferency of using them or not, provided they laid not the stress
of their Justification thereon, as appears by Acts 15. So here the charge
against Paul, which the Apostle James would have him clear himself of, was,
that he contradicted the Apostles at Jerusalem in permitting the use of some
Jewish Ceremonies as indifferent for the present, by reason of the Jews
weakness, thou teach the Gentiles to forsake Moses: Now he showed by his
complying with James, that whatever he taught the Gentiles, yet he was not
against complying with the Jews, so far as to use yet some of Moses his
appointment, provided they made not such Actions of theirs the righteousness of
Justification, therefore tells the Galatians running on that Point, that if
they were circumcised, Christ could profit them nothing. Now this is clearly
the Point he withstands Peter in, and opposes the Galatians, in that he made
his Savior a Transgressor by his practice in judaizing contrary to the
Doctrine he had preached in Justification, by Christ's righteousness alone: As
for the others, they brought in another Gospel, not one, whatever they called
it. Hence the complaint against some believing Pharisees, Acts 15.5. was that
they taught the necessity of keeping Moses's Law unto full justification, the
conjoining our righteousness with his, or that his righteousness meritted ours;
and therefore they were to observe Moses his Law as their own righteousness
(the New Law with them) this Doctrine Peter opposes in his speech unto ver.
11. to which James agrees, and proposes an expedient, ver. 19, 20. so that
what the Pharisees attempted at Antioch, and what the Galatians were seduced
to, was only the necessity of the works of a New Law, as a sole or social
righteousness with Christ's for Justification, Pro. 9.3.

. 7. When he disputes against Justification by Works, he means only the Works
of the Law.

Resp. He should have told us what Law the Apostles means, Moral, or
Ceremonial, or New Law; or whether works of any Law whatever, which we
confidently affirm, and if he make Gospel works, Law works, he disputes against
them. And this proposition of his, he is large in proving with little Proof. 1
It appears, he says, by the Apostles, wary, close and restrictive way of
speaking, Romans 3.20. The restrictiveness of that place, we have spoken to; and
showed the place is positively against all works of any Law. Again, we have
showed that Gal. 2.20. Is an absolute exclusion of the works of a Law, any Law,
for as Mr. C. observes che works of a Law, are three times excluded; we shall
not actum agere as near as may be. Gal. 3. The design of the Apostle in that
Chapter, is to show, 1. That a believer of the Gentiles is blessed, i. e.
Justified by Faith with faithful Abraham, ver. 9. to prove this, he argues
thus; either by Faith, or by Works, not by works of a Law, any Law, for (says
he) he that is a sinner, and under a Law for Justification, is under a Curse,
nor cannot come from under it by the works of it: And that you may take an
instance of the Voice of any Law, take that of Moses, ver. 10. cursed is every
one that abides not in all things written in the book of the law to do them,
i. e. (...), Moses his Law. Because by a Law, any Law, no flesh living is
justified with God, or before God, manifest, because the just shall live by
faith, and shall draw the first breath of the life of Justification by faith,
and live that life always by it, which is not to get life by our own works, but
living by and upon the righteousness of another by faith, and thus he argues
from Moses's Law to every Law, that works of neither cannot justify; and when
he speaks of Moses his law, he seldom understands the mere Ceremonial Law, but
the Moral also, as recognized under Moses, and that of Gal. 5.4. (...), ye are
abdicated from Christ whoever of you are justified by the works of a law; in
Mr. Cl's. sense it is whoever of you are justified by the works of some law
only; so Paul opposes Christ himself to the works that are of a Law, Phil.
3.9. His own righteousness, he says, is such, viz. this he desires to be found
out of, but in Christ, viz. his righteousness by Faith, which he opposes to
his own, as that which he calls the righteousness of God, in opposition to the
righteousness of Man. He says indeed in one place, Works are mentioned in
general, Romans 4.2. Its true, but he takes not Notice how often Law is mentioned
in general, and so the works of a Law are general wherever spoken so of. But
he says, these words must be understood with a limitation too, and be meant of
the same kind of works.

Resp. And therefore the words import thus, if Abraham were justified by some
kind of works he has wherein to Glory, but why should some kind of works give
Abraham more cause of boasting than others? He will say, because some are great
and perfect, others little and imperfect, but I say there is no specific
difference between great and little of the same kind; besides he that attains a
great End by a small work, has more cause of boasting than he that attains it
by great work and Labor; therefore a Man may rather boast of the works of the
New Law, than of the Old, and then they are all works opposed by him to Faith,
for he says, the reward is to him that works, not that that Expression
excludes all works, for Paul could not be so absurd to express works by not
working.

. 8. If Paul understood himself, etc. We must grant and conclude that Paul
disputes only against the works of the Law.

Resp. No doubt he knew his own Mind, and was consistent with himself, and if
such plain Expressions are intelligible, he excludes all works of any Law what
ever, but he gives his reason why he means we are justified by works, when he
says positively, we are not justified by works, and that, he that works not,
but is ungodly. Because they were such works as did frustrate and evacuate the
undertakings of Christ, Romans 4.14. Gal. 5.4.

Resp. So do all works of a Law brought in for righteousness, for if the great
End of Christ's undertaking, was to be our Justifying-righteousness, then any
works brought into the room thereof frustrate Christ's righteousness, but that
was the chief End of Christ's undertaking, Romans 4.25, 2 Cor. 5.21. The words of
Romans 4.14. are, if they that be of a Law be Heirs, i. e. such as claim by the
works of a Law performed by them, Faith is made Void, i. e. its to no purpose
to believe on another for righteousness, Faith is made empty of the
righteousness of another, (...), and the Promise or Gospel is abdicated, for
the same thing cannot be Law and Promise, or Gospel, and the reason is given,
because you see the law of Moses works wrath, and where there is no law
there is no transgression, the law determines the transgression, and the sinner
to wrath for it, and this does every law whatever. The other Scriptures were
spoken to before.

2d Reason, They are such works as he opposes every way to faith, and also to
Grace, Gal. 4.4. therefore they are not faith, or any inherent grace, Gal. 5.4.
But he never opposes faith and Gospel-Works.

Resp. He always opposes Faith and all Works, in the Point of Justification,
because Works justify by themselves, but Faith by its Object only.

Because Gospel-works suppose Faith, or Grace, being the fruit of Faith, and
product of Grace.

Resp. A pitiful Reason, because a man that runs apace is supposed to see,
therefore a man runs by his eyes, and after this manner he applies, 1 Cor.
15.10. by the Grace of God I am what I am -- and labored more abundantly than
they all; ergo, Paul was justified by works, is not this a very learned
consequence?

I grant, says he, faith and works of the law are frequently opposed by the
Apostle.

Resp. Then faith and works of a law are not the same, in this he gives us the
Cause. Let us see his Concessions further:

I grant, says he, a mere profession of faith is opposed to works, James 2.14.

Resp. True Faith, fruitful in good works, is opposed to false faith that has
no fruits.

3. I grant that even Gospel-works are opposed to Grace, (tho not to faith)
both in Election, Romans 11.5, 6. and in Vocation, 2 Timothy 1.9.

Resp. Works of a law, by which a man claims Justification, are not
Gospel-works, but Legal, and they are opposed to Grace, both in Election,
Vocation and Justification; but as Election is not on the foresight of any
works or righteousness, no not of Christ's, and Vocation is not upon our
performance of any works, no more is Justification.

I grant, God chooses not upon foresight of good works, or faith in us,
neither call any because they have faith or good works, but that they may have
them, his Grace is antecedent to any good in us; but now the case is otherwise
in reference to those privileges which follow Vocation, for God justifies and
glorifies us, yet not as the meritorious cause thereof, but only as a way,
means and qualification, etc.

Resp. Well now the Case is altered, Grace goes no further than Vocation, there
it makes a stand, and man does the rest himself; but let us enquire a little
into this Mystery: Is a man effectually called and made holy, and yet not
justified? for he that is made holy in order to Justification, suppose
qualified and conditionated for it, is in order of Nature, holy before
justified, i. e. has the Spirit of Holiness, the Gift of Grace, and inherent
righteousness, whilst a child of wrath, and actually under the curse of the
law. 2. All Justification for Holiness, because it is the work of a law, is
meritorious righteousness; for there is no law justifies but because the
performance of the condition deserves it in Justice. Hence all Qualifications
and Means made legally, conditionally to the remunerative part of the Law are
deserving thereof, and meritorious, and undeniably so; for if the absence of
the Qualification and the Means, or Nonperformance of the Condition, does
merit or deserve the Wages of the Sin from the Law, enjoining the said
Qualifications or Conditions, then having, and performance thereof, does upon
the same Reason merit and deserve the Reward of Righteousness; but the
Antecedent is true, therefore the Consequent.

. 9. He proceeds with Confidence. 2dly. I do absolutely deny, that a true,
Gospel justifying Faith, and Gospel-Works, are ever opposed to one another, and
do confidently affirm the contrary, because I have examined all Places where
Faith and Works are mentioned, and do not find them, if any affirm, let him
prove it.

R. Mr. Cl's Confidence is no Proof, and his searching the Scriptures, and not
finding so plain a Truth, as that Justification by Faith, is opposed to
Justification by Works; argues, but judicial blindness, whereby God has
hardened his Heart, and blinded his Eyes.

1. As was said before all Gospel-works (as he calls his New Law Works) brought
into Justification by a Law are legal not Gospel, not accepted of God but
leaves a Man under a Curse.

2. Those that are Gospel-works are Fruits of the Spirit, through the Gift of
Grace, and Fruits of Faith, as they are Fruits of Christ's Righteousness,
believed in to Justification; and no cause of Justification in the least,
neither does the Believer claim Justification thereby, and hence called
Gospel-Works; but if he claim Justification by them, they are Works and opposed
to Faith, but loose the Name of Gospel, are Legal, dross and dung, and stink in
the Nostrils of God, neither are any such Works the gracious Gifts of the
Spirit, or true Faith or the good Fruit of it. For such seek Righteousness as
it were, by the Works of the Law, and obtain it not.

3. Now whereas Mr. Cl. here throws down his Gantlet in an Ambiguous manner, we
take it up in the true State of the Difference, and confidently affirm, that
Justification by Faith is positively opposed by the Apostle Paul to
Justification by any Works of a Law whatever performed by us, the proving of
which is the drift of this whole Dispute as now managed.

4. He says, there was no Coutroversie about any other Works, but the Works of
the Law.

Resp. There was no Controversy about any Works, but the Works of a Law, no
more is there now, Gal. 5.4. The Apostle says, They are abdicated from Christ,
and fallen from Grace, that are justified by a Law; so say we.

. 10. Proposition 4. This Law was the whole Body of the Mosaical Law,
consisting of precepts Moral, Ceremonial, and Judicial; what he says, under
this proposition, about the acceptance of the term Law, I think will not hold
all of it with his other Doctrine, for he says its taken. 1. For any written
Declaration or Revelation of the Will of God concerning our Duty. 2. Its
frequently taken for the Moral Law, as Romans 7.12. and Chapter 3.31. Mat. 5.17. Luke
16.17. 3. Its used Indefinitely, for the whole Body of the Law given to Moses,
and therefore he mentions it in such general Terms.

R. Because Law is used in so many Senses in Scripture, and those that would
introduce Justification by Works are apt to slip from one Law to another, and
say, as Mr. Cl. does, that though the Apostle deny Justification by one Law,
yet he intends Justification by Works of another Law; therefore the Apostle
excludes our Works of any Law whatever, as frequently in his Epistles as has
been showed, so in that express and plain Place, Gal. 3.21. If there had been a
Law given which could have given Life, verily Righteousness should have been by
the Law? And why is it spoken? It Is spoken as a Reason, that the Law of Moses,
(...), was not against the Promise; i. e. against Justification by the Promise
and Gift of Righteousness, no, the Law of Moses taken together was so far from
being against this way of Justification without the Works of a Law, that it
witnessed to it, as the Apostle expressly speaks, Romans 3.21. It did not
appropriate the Grace of the Promise to it self, but by the whole Tenor of it
witnessed to the Promise and Righteousness. The Law of Moses taken as a Law,
did justify none, Gal. 3.11. For says the Apostle, the Law ( i. e. as such)
is not of Faith, ver. 12. The Condition of it being Works, and therefore
Justification by the Law is not Justification by Faith, the Apostle saying
further, ver. 18. If the Inheritance be of a Law, than no more of Promise. ver.
19. For what end served the Law given by Moses? Answ. It was added, because of
Transgression, till the Seed should come to whom the Promise was made, i. e.
Christ, but why? added for two Ends. 1. That Sin might be distinctly known by
the Moral Part, as the Apostle by the Knowledge of Sin. 2. That by the
Ceremonial Law there might be a Typical Redemption and Satisfaction held forth
unto them, through which they might have a sight of Faith, and of the true
Sacrifice held forth unto them.

. 11. Proposition 5. The Law was looked upon by the Carnal Jews as a Covenant
of Werks, Mat. 19.16. Granting that it was; yet not to be fulfilled by a
perfect Obedience, but by imperfect, as appears by his Words, What good thing
shall I do that I may inherit Eternal Life? As much as to say, I have done Good
and Evil, I would know what that good thing is whereby I may be righteous to
Life Eternal. He depreciates the Law calling it a Ministration of Death and
Condemnation, 2 Cor. 3.7, 9. It was the true Sense of the Apostle, that the Law
of Moses or any other Commands of God, understood used, and applied as a Law
for Justification by the Works of it, is a Ministration of Death, and not of
Faith, and as a Ceremonial Law, which Heb. 6.19. is made nothing and by it self
perfect, it being Typical, and the Type absolutely considered, could not
purify them as to Conscience. The Apostle says, it was weak through our
weakness, Romans 8.3. We being not able to come to the Terms of this, nor of any
other; and Romans 6.14. says we, i. e. Believers are not under a Law, but under
Grace for Justification, as much as to say, you take the Doctrine of Grace to
be a licentious Doctrine but believe it, its the legal Doctrine that leads to
Sin, not the Doctrine of Grace; besides the Apostle shows plainly, that to look
for Justification by the Law of Moses, or of any other is to be Married to it,
which he shows Romans 7. is quite contrary to our Marriage to Christ, by Faith,
while we are in expectation of Justification by a Law, we are held in Bondage,
but being by the true Sense of the Nature of it Dead to it, it becomes Dead to
us; Now we are delivered from the Law, that being Dead wherein we were held,
and there is no other Husband comes in the room of the Dead Law, no new Law, but
Christ only. And the Opposition (says Mr. Cl.) is only between the Law of
Works and the Law of Faith, if he make the Law of Faith to be a Law of Works
then its no Opposition at all, because both are a Law of Works; and why I pray
is Justification by Faith, Justification by Works, does the Apostle speak any
where of a new Law or the Works of it? No he speaks of the Law of Faith. Let us
see then what is in that Expression, Romans 3.27, 28.

. 12. The Apostle having told us, how we are Justified freely by Grace, who are
Sinners in all respects, ver. 24, 25, 26. Infers, elegantly where is boasting
then? i. e. Of our own Righteousness, says its shut quite out a Doors. By what
Law? does any Law shut out boasting? No says the Apostle, does not Works? Nay,
they cause boasting what Law then? Such a Law, if you will have a Law, as the
Nature of Faith, its in the very Nature of Faith to shut out Works; therefore
we conclude, that we are justified by Faith without the Works of a Law; is not
Justification by Faith and Works here plainly opposed? Now that Law is taken
for the Nature of a Thing, many Instances might be given, but for the present
take Romans 7.23. so Romans 8.2. The Law, is the Nature of the Spirit of Life that
is in Christ. Let us see what Sense it will be in the Neonomian Interpretation,
where is boasting then? it is excluded, by what Law? Works, i. e. the Old Law
of Works, nay; but by the Works of the New Law Work, excludes boasting of
Works, boasting is excluded not by the Law of Works, but by the Law of Works;
therefore we conclude, that a Man is justified by Works without Works, not by
some, but by other Works.

. 13. Proposition 6. The Works or Deeds of this Law are such as are performed
by our own Strength in Obedience thereto, such as Adam had in the State of
Innocence, hence called their own Righteousness, Romans 10.3.

R. I enquire whether giving Strength and Power to perform Works hinders them
from being Works of the Law, or would it have hindered Adams had he stood, and I
marvel that any Man will say, that Adam in innocence had not Strength given him
by God, but whether he had or had not, it makes nothing to the Point in Hand,
which is the Consideration of the Respect or Relation that Works have to the
Law, which enquire not how a Man came by his Money, but whether it be Good and
Current, Romans 10.3. is falsely explained, as we shall show anon; neither does
the Spirit of God savingly strengthen us to the performance of any Works of our
own for Justification, and such as any Man claims by, are not Gospel-Obedience
nor performed by the Spirit.

. 14. Proposition 7. They were such Works as did admit of boasting, Romans 3.27.
Ephesians. 2.9. Romans 4.2. For what we do of our selves without the help of another we
may boast of?

R. Can it be supposed that any understanding Jews or Gentile, do think they
can do good upon a mere natural or moral Consideration without Help and
Strength from God. 2. How shall Men know they have supernatural Assistance, its
certain they have it not graciously, when they aim by their Duties to set up
themselves for justifying Righteousness. 3. The boasting spoken of in the
Places mentioned, is glorying before God sitting on a Throne of Justice
dispensing it by a Law, now that Person that does come with his own
Righteousness in his own Hand, and will say here are my Works, Faith,
Obedience, Repentance, Sincerity performed by me, justify me for them, or by
them, this is the glorying the Apostle excludes, and Faith always excludes, and
the Apostle says, Gods giving the Reward upon these Terms is paying of a Debt,
and not of Grace, for whatever is demandable upon our own Performances in a way
of Justice is not of Grace. The Apostle to Ephesians. 2. speaks v. 7. of God showing
forth the Riches of his Grace in Justification (as appears by foregoing
Context) of vile miserable Sinners, and says, its in his kindness to us through
Christ, and then v. 8. gives the Reason, For by Grace are we saved
(Justification being an eminent part of Salvation) through Faith (receiving
that Justification and Salvation) now least any one should call this Faith,
Works, as the Neonomians do, he positively excludes all Works, and not of
Works, not through Faith as a Work, and least any one should say, he is
beholding only to himself for his Faith; he tells us, its a Gift of God, and
its a Gift of Sanctification not of Justification as appears by the Text,
that is only the Object of Faith, the Righteousness of Christ.

. 15. Proposition 8. These Works [viz. of the Old Law] are meritorious, implied
in that Description, Romans 10.5.

Resp. The Description the Apostle gives there of Legal Works is such as
belongs to all Law-works, for there is no Law that enjoins personal Obedience
for the Condition, let it be more or less, but it makes the said Obedience
meritorious, and the promised Reward a Debt, Romans 4.4. and this Merit belongs
not only to the Law of Works at first, but to all Works of any Law for
Justification, these are the Works a Man may boast of, though he receive them as
Gift from another, for if a Man gives the Grace of God in Works, in payment to
the Law of God, he paies God you will say in his own Coin, but yet his
presenting them to God for Justification, in Satisfaction to a Law, is high
abuse of the Grace of God perverting to an end that God never intended. The Law
of Faith, which he tells of was never intended to be a Law of Works, for the
Apostle uses it in Opposition to Works, and to prevent the Mistake these Men
are run upon, viz. that they should understand the Work of Faith to be meant by
him, where he says, it is of Faith that it may be of Grace, because Faith
ascribes nothing to it self as fulfilling to any Law, it is said by the Law of
Faith, either according to the nature of true Faith, as has been said, or else
according to the Ordination of God, that we should be justified by Faith
without Works, Gods Ordination of thing as to the End, and Means, does not
always make it a Law of Sanction, God has ordained to give Faith, to give the
Spirit, to give the Relation of Children. Does God give them in a Law, Do this
and live?

. 16. Proposition 9. These Works are perfect and unsinning Works.

Resp. This is a great Mistake, that God has brought in sinning Works for
Justification, instead of perfect Works. 1. God never made a Law where sinning
Works, were the Condition of the Law, this would be contrary to his Holiness
and Justice. But if God makes a Law wherein he says do and live, let the doing
be more or less, perfect or imperfect, yet a Man doing the thing commanded, his
Work is rewarded as meritorious, and its perfect as to the Law, that it is to
be righteous in the Sense of the Law, and to be meritorious. He that performs
the Condition of a Law, and he never sins at all in the Eye of the Law,
therefore all justifying Righteousness in any Law is unsinning, therefore this
Plea will serve no more for Ejection of the Works of the Old Law, than for the
Ejection of the Works of the New Law out of Justification. Hence we see the
pretense of casting out the Works of the Old Law is frivolous and vain,
because they are performed by our Strength, which none can pretend to, no not
Adam in Innocence, or because they introduce boasting when the Works of any
Law do, when Justification is pleaded for thereby, they are meritorious, when
the Works of any Law are so, or they are unsinning and perfect, when the
Works, of any Law must be so, or else it justifies not.

. 17. Prop. 10. The Jews many of them did Conceit and Fancy that they could
yield perfect Obedience to this Law so as to need no Pardon. This he would
prove from, Luke 16.15. and Luke 18.9.

Resp. It is not to be granted, that a People that offered so many Sacrifices
for Sin, should think they could yield perfect Obedience to the Law of God.
That of Luke 16. proves not his Assertion, for Christ speaks only of the
Justification before Men by their external Actions, and he shows that neither
their external nor internal would justify them before God, and besides, he
tells them that which Men account Righteousness, God looks upon as an
Abomination. Nor that Chap. 18.9. for he there condemns, plainly looking for
Justification by Men's own Righteousness, and trusting to it. What does a
Neonomian do less then they, when he looks upon himself as Righteous to
Justification by his own Righteousness? thence he gives the Instance of the
proud Pharisee, and poor Publican, he says, the Publican of the two looked more
like a Justified Person, because he renounced his own Righteousness, and
applied himself wholly to the Mercy of God, as a poor Sinner not pleading any
works at all of any kind. 2. It is to be supposed the carnal Jews did look for
Justification by their own Righteousness, though they looked not at themselves as
Righteous in perfect performance of the Moral Law; for if so, they could not
have been so Zealous for Moses his ceremonial Law, the chiefest part whereof,
was the Levitical Priesthood and Sacrifices, they could not but know that the
very High Priest sinned, and offered first for his own Sins, and then for the
Sins of the People; yea, that Sin polluted their holiest things, and therefore
Sacrifices for Sin were offered for them, yea, all sprinkled with Blood. But
they having such apprehensions of their Justification, as the Neonomians have
of theirs; they fall under the severe remarks of the Lord Christ and his
Apostles.

1. They looked upon Moses his Law, as that which was their New Law for
Justification by imperfect Righteousness, in opposition to the Old Law, as
first given to Adam in Innocence.

2. They looked upon the Sanction of the Law of Works as to perfection, to be
abrogated or relaxed, that God would accept them for their sincerity in
Imperfect works; so Paul in his unregeneracy.

3. They looked to the Opus operatum in all Obedience to Moses his Law, for
because, 1. They looked for forgiveness by the Offering up of Sin Offering,
merely without looking to the Antitype by Faith. 2. They looked upon the most
material part of the Law of Works to be taken up into Moses his Law, their New
Law, now its Impossible but the New Law to them (if ever any such thing was
Exhibited and dispensed by Moses his Law, which indeed (being spiritually
understood, was the Jews Gospel) therefore says the Apostle, they sought
Righteousness, Romans 9. As it were, by the Works of a Law, though it was
impersest, yet the works of a Law, and never attained to a law of
Righteousness, and why? Because they went to Establish their own impertect
Righteousness, but sought not after a true perfect Righteousness which was not
their own, but Christ's, Romans 10.3.4. Now says the Apostle, these are engaged
in a great mistake, for they think to have a Justification by an impepfect
partial Obedience, but they become hereby Debtors to keep the whole Law of
Moses, Moral and Ceremonial, but such as seek such Justification by Law-Works,
either Legal or Evangelical, (for the New-Law must be such, else they were not
saved even as we) are abdicated from Christ, and fallen from Grace, Gal. 3.3,
4. As for the words of the rich Man, Luke 11.21. And as to Paul's sentiments in
his unregeneracy, Phil. 3.6. They are to be understood only as to common
account, and gross Actions, not that Paul thought he was perfect as to
Moral-Obedience, but that he was imperfectly righteous, by some degrees of
moral obedience, together with his Mosaical Expiation for Sin, and this is no
other than his New-Law righteousness, hence Romans 7.9. he was alive without the
law once, i. e. he once laid aside the thoughts of the spirituality and
exactness of the righteousness of the true law of God, and therefore cast it
off, but was wholly taken up with a New-Law righteousness, imperfect, and that
God would accept this to Justification; but when he came to see the true law,
and what righteousness he must be justified by, or perish eternally, then sin
revived, then he could see sin with a vengeance in himself, and died to all
Justification by his works, or by a law, of what kind soever it was.

. 18. There Is one place yet behind under the branch of Negative, 1 Cor. 4.4. I
know nothing by my self, yet am I not hereby justified.

Resp. This place is against Mr. Cl. for here are two things in it: He tells us
of a twofold Judgment of God that he looked for. 1. That of his Person. 2. The
regularity and sincerity of his Actions and Deportment. Whatever Censures Men
were ready to pass upon him, yet he had the testimony of a good conscience, as
chap. 1. but whatever his simplicity and godly sincerity was, he expected not
to be justified by it; but it might be said, your actions are condemned by men,
and there is none that does good and sins not, and so may you in discharge
of your Apostleship: He says, as to my actions, God knows what they are, and
he will testify to them before the World that condemns them, when he shall
come and lay open the secret and hidden things of darkness; therefore he
disowns plainly Justification by New-law-works, and he appeals plainly to the
Judgment of God, as to his ways and works, to be such wherein he is
Evangelically, through Christ, approved of God, as such as are regular, sincere,
and from a true Principle, renouncing Justification thereby, but desiring to
walk in all well-pleasing to God in Sanctification.

. 19. It is now time to look back a little, and take notice of the great
Challenge Mr. Cl. makes, I do absolutely deny true Gospel works and justifying
faith are opposed one to another; which is very unfairly made as to the Terms,
whereas, Justifying-Faith and Gospel-Works, as the fruits of justifying are
consentaneous, as Cause and Effects, and therefore as such, in their due place,
they are not opposite one to another; but let the Question be stated right, and
we will receive the Challenge, Whether the Scripture does not oppose faith and
works, as such, of all sorts in the point of Justification? We affirm that it
does, and a little Logick-Light here is not amiss, to consider that
distinguishing Properties of Opposites for dissentaneous Arguments are diversa
vel opposita, diversa's dissent only in a certain respect, may be in the same
subject at the same time; a man may be rich and wise too, in a different
respect, at the same time. But as for opposites, they do disagree both in
respect, and indeed really in their nature, and must have their proper
distinguishing Properties, which are, that they cannot be attributed to the
same thing, to the same place, and in the same respect, nor at the same time;
so that one of the opposites being affirmed, the other must be denied. Now
then, according to the true logical acceptance of faith and works in
Justification, they are opposed expressly, and they are contraria opposita unum
uni and adversa contraria affirmantia quae inter se velut e regione perpetuo
adversantur. Now then,

Arg. 1. If Faith and Works of a Law are not opposed in Justification, then a
Man may be justified by Faith and Works in the sense of the Apostle, and in the
same respect: But the consequence is not true, the minor is proved, that Paul
does not intend that any Man is justified at the same time, and in the same
respect, by Faith and Works too; for then all his dispute against one and for
the other, would be very unfair, to say a Man is not justified by the Works of
a Law, and yet that he is justified by the Works of a Law, let us take Romans
3.28. a conclusion drawn from the Exclusion of the deeds of a Law from
Justification, therefore we conclude that a Man is justified by Faith, without
the deeds of a Law. Let Mr. Cl. construe it better if he can: yes, says he,
his meaning is without the deeds of the Law of Innocence, but not without the
deeds of the New Law; i. e. the Law of Faith: Its strange the Apostle should
speak then Exclusively, of all works indefinitely; the Apostle might as well
have said, therefore we conclude a Man is justified by the deeds of a Law, and
it had been a more probable conclusion, seeing he just before had mentioned the
Law of Faith, by which might be understood only the Nature and Ordination of
Faith, as a receptive Grace of the objective Grace of Justification: It is
plain, the Apostle has not the least intention to understand the Fruit of
Faith, nor Faith as a Work of a Law, for if he had, he would not have said so
positively, therefore we conclude that a Man is justified by Faith, without the
deeds of a Law; and its impossible to speak any thing as opposites, if these
are not so spoken, they are not spoken as diversa, but one is affirmed of the
Subject, and the other absolutely denied, a Man cannot be justified by Faith in
the Apostles sense, and by Works at once; but if Faith justify as works, then
Works and Faith are the same in the Apostles sense, and to be justified by
Faith and by Works the same, and so the Apostle speaks nonsense.

Arg. 2. That which excludes Works of a Law in Justification, is opposed to
Works of a Law in Justification; but Faith excludes Works of a Law in
Justification: Ergo, and Minor, Its the Law, Nature and Ordination of Faith to
exclude Works, or it self as a Work, yea. Faith becomes useless in
Justification, its abdicated from Justification, if it puts in as a work of a
Law, yet it cannot be a Gospel work, nor can any other work be so, that puts in
for Justification; it is impossible any thing should have a jot of Gospel in
it, that is a deed of a Law for Justification, it is a legal work, it makes it
so. It is the greatest contradiction in the world to say, we are justified by
our Gospel works.

Again, to prove the Minor further, That which excludes the deeds of a law by
an essential proparty, is opposite to works; but the law, nature or ordination
of faith excludes the deeds of a law by an essential property, viz. boasting in
claiming the reward for the work done; this faith, or the law of faith does, it
renounceth all self-righteousness, and renounceth it self; as such it comes to
Christ, and for his righteousness, naked and empty; its not true faith unless
it be so, unless it take Christ only for himself, and his righteousness alone
to Justification.

. 20. Arg. 3. Faith also is opposed to works, Romans 4.5. where the righteousness
of faith is imputed to him that works not, but is ungodly; there faith is
opposed to works, but in the Justification of Abraham it was so, and is so in
every Believer, according to the Apostle, for Justification cannot be there by
faith as a work, for then it were false to say, righteousness is imputed to him
that works not, viz. for Justification; for if faith justifies as a work,
then God justifies him that works.

Arg. 4. If faith and works in the point of Justification evacuate one another,
then they are opposed, but faith and works do thus evacuate each other, Ergo,
etc. The consequence cannot be denied, where one destroys another they cannot
be together in the same subject, therefore contrary; for the Minor the Apostle
is clear, Romans 4.14. if they that be of the law be heirs, i. e. those that are
of the works of the law for Justification, (...), faith is evacuated, and the
promise abdicated; for faith making it self a work, is felo de se, and throws
off the free promise, and takes the reward as Debt, and not of Grace.

. 21. Arg. 5. That which is not of faith in Justification, is opposed to faith
in Justification, at least in genere disparatorum, but the law and deeds of it
is not of faith, i. e. he that works for Justification on legal terms, is not
one that is justified by faith: And what is these terms, the man that does them
shall live in them; now then, if its of faith to say, I am of the works of a
law, and I shall live in my faith, because its the term of a law, if so, the
law should be of faith, and faith of the law, contrary to the Apostle,
Galatians 3.12.

Arg. 6. There Is nothing more plain than the opposition the Apostle makes
between Justification by faith and works, Gal. 2.16. The Apostle says it was a
known thing to Peter and the Apostles, that a man is not justified by the works
of a law (if he meant an exception of the law of faith, why did he not express
it) but by the faith of Jesus; wherefore is this Antithesis, if no opposition
between faith and works in Justification? (he should have said in the Neonomian
sense, knowing we are not justified by the works of a law, but by the works of
the law of faith.) we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified
by the faith of Christ (now least any should say, this faith in Christ is a
work of the new law) he says, and not by the works of a law, for in thy sight
shall no flesh living be justified by them. Now I pray, were any saved under
the Old Testament, they will say presently, yes, by the works of the New Law;
nay, but the Spirit of God says positively, no flesh living was ever
justified, no not by a new law. Will any man dare then to venture his
Justification upon works of a law old or new? Does the Apostle say, we have
believed in Jesus that we may be justified by the works of the law of faith? So
he should have said to have expressed his meaning in these men's sense: No, he
says, to prevent all mistakes in this kind, not by the work of a law, and he
proves it: And he adds, for Conviction of Peter of his Error in complying with
the Judaizing Christians, if we, i. e. you and I, seek to be justified by
Christ, we are worse, are found transgressors, by endeavoring by our practice
to build People up in Justification by their own righteousness, the works of a
law, which we have destroyed by our Ministry.

. 22. Arg. 7. The opposition is full, Romans 2.20, 21, 22. where the
righteousness of a law is directly opposed to the righteousness of faith as two
righteousnesses opposite in Justification; there is an opposition: But in the
Justification of a sinner, the righteousness of faith and works are so opposed
in the said place for by the righteousness of a law, he said, shall no flesh
living be justified in the sight of God, he should have added his exception, if
he had intended men were to be justified by the righteousness of the new law,
and his reason is, that by a law is the knowledge of sin. i. e. conviction of
sin, but no remedy; for the law only makes a sinner guilty before God and his
own Conscience; but how then justified? Answ. It is by another righteousness
(the gift of God) which we have not performed, but which is received by faith,
therefore called the righteousness of God which is by faith, [without our
law-performances] but the righteousness of Christ who fulfilled the law, this
is that which is in and upon every Believer; But, says Mr. Cl. I infer, we are
not justified by the active righteousness of Christ (p. 46.) or his obedience
to the law of works imputed to us -- for then we are justified by the law or
Covenant of works, etc.

Resp. The same inference will hold if only the passive obedience of Christ be
imputed; for what was that but fulfilling the Covenant of Works in
Satisfaction. All that Christ did or suffered was obedience to the Covenant of
Works, and his righteousness is justifying to us before God in foro legis, the
difference of Law and Gospel lying here, in the Covenant of Grace, That our
righteousness for Justification is not of our own performance of obedience to
the law, for that is legal only; but our Gospel-righteousness is Christ's
perfect performance of the most legal righteousness, and this freely bestowed
on us, and received by faith.

CHAP. XII. Of the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness.
Section 1. Mr. H. insists on Justification by Works.. 2. He says, the
Imputation of Christ's righteousness is not found in Scripture.. 3. His Third
Argument against Imputation of Christ's Righteousness.. 4. Of Imputation of
Christ's passive Obedience.. 5. How far his Argument agrees with Socinus.. 6.
He seeks to avoid the Socinian Rock.. 7. Active and passive Obedience of Christ
imputed.. 8. His further inference.. 9. Christ came to procure a New Law.. 10.
Of the Protestant's Appeal.

Sect. 1. I Shall here take Mr. H. in hand, because I find he is most positive
in the denial of it upon all accounts, only he tells us of imputation of
effects, which are not imputable, and besides is a total denial of Imputation
of Christ's Righteousness it self. His Arguments are 1. Taken from the places
of Scripture that seem to evince the imputation of our own righteousness to us
for Justification. What he says of boasting and merit has bin spoken to
already, the latter he does after many Good Morrows, in a manner grant, whereby
his Doctrine is eradicated by the Apostle, He tells us, the large extent of
Christ's righteousness to all the world in procurement of a law of Grace, which
Doctrine I have showed the absurdity and vanity of elsewhere. It is manifest in
Scripture (Mediocr. p. 20.) that good works, holy duties, and performances are
accepted of God and rewarded.

Resp. It is true, but acceptance of good works does not prove justification
of their persons by them, nor the rewarding them; for Abel's person being
justified by faith, his services were also accepted in the same righteousness
he was justified by, and rewarded graciously in Christ; yea, his works were
witnessed to by God before the World; but such approbation of works as the
fruits of faith, is not Justification in God's sight, in the strict eye of his
Justice. That place of Matthew. 19.17. If thou will enter into life, keep the
commandments, where Christ answers him according to the true tenor of his
question, which was, what good may I do that I may inherit eternal life? Mr. H.
and Mr. Cl. must needs say, that he sought for righteousness by an old-law
righteousness, which does appear by Christ's Answer and his Reply. Indeed the
whole of Christ's Discourse seems clearly to evince that Christ confuted his
Confidence in his own righteousness, and convinced him of it, because Christ
gave him a Command that put him to the nonplus, and sent him away sorrowful,
and therefore is no proof of Justification, for he was not justified The
Apostle, Romans 2.7. speaks after the tenor of the Covenant of Works, which
requires perseverance in good works, not at all of works or doing, as
justifying righteousness; that of 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. speaks of Gods acceptance of
the services of the Apostles, and rewarding them in Christ, but nothing of his
righteousness for Justification, which was Christ's only that he desired to be
found in; that of Matthew. 25.34. has the same import, come ye blessed, etc. it
holds only God's owning and declaring the acceptance of the works and services
of the Saints, as performed by faith in Christ alone for the accepting their
Persons and Services; besides, it appears sufficiently by the context they
never brought their works to account for Justification. He brings in also Ezekiel.
18.26, 27. which is as little to the purpose. The Lord there answers a charge
the People had against him, in not dealing uprightly, equally and justly with
them, v. 25. which the Lord answers, That he always had and would deal with
them that stood upon their own righteousness according to the tenor of the law;
if you are able to stand the test of your own righteousness you shall be tried
by it, yea, I will deal not only righteously with you according to my law, but
condescendingly, if you are able to turn from sin to righteousness, and abide
in it, and not turn to sin again, but all this is to show them their folly in
trusting to their own righteousness and ability to perform it, for he says, v.
31. cast away all your transgressions, i. e. there is not the guilt of any must
ly upon you, and make you a new heart, and a new spirit; where he challenges
them to do that which no natural man can do; but because they stood upon their
own righteousness and natural abilities, God brings them to the test for their
Conviction, that they might fly to his Grace both for Justification and
Sanctification, which fully appears by the Promise, chap 36.25, 26, 27. where
both are said to be of God, and not of our selves. He alleges also the tenor
of the Law, he that does them shall live in them, i. e. says he, he shall be
justified in them.

Resp. Now its strange a man should be so absurd to bring the express tenor of
the Covenant of Works to be that of the Covenant of Grace, when its positively
affirmed, that this tenor of the law is not of faith, directly opposed to that
righteousness of faith, Gal. 3.12. Nay, he is not content with this downright
contradiction to the Spirit of God, he goes on. If you make a question, there
is another Text must convince you, The just shall live by faith, to live by our
faith is to be justified by it.

Resp. The man, I suppose, said these things by roat, not minding the Text, he
says there is another Text, but names not where, but its applied to the matter
in hand, Gal. 3.11. the very reciting whereof will be answer enough to him. The
Apostle was proving, a man is not justified by the works of the law, [perfectly
or imperfectly performed] is evident, for the just shall live by faith, i. e.
he that is righteous, is righteous by the righteousness of faith, and this is
the righteousness which his faith, as its food, feeds upon during his life of
Justification.

. 2. His second Argument is, ( Medioc. p. 19, 20.) When this very Phrase of the
imputation of Christ's righteousness is not found in Scripture. So says Mr. Cl.

Resp. That imputation of righteousness is found in Scripture, it cannot be
denied, as in the instance of Abraham, Romans 4. Now our adversaries will grant
us this Dilemma, that either it was Christ's righteousness was imputed to him,
or his own, not his own, because he was ungodly when justified, for when he was
ungodly, says the Text, faith was imputed to him for righteousness; what of
faith? sure it was no other than the thing he believed, Jesus Christ and his
righteousness, whose day of expiation he saw, this was imputed to him for
righteousness. For if Abraham saw Christ's day, it was the day of his Sacrifice
and Expiation; for this end he came into the world, and the Good News or Gospel
preached unto him was Christ in the Promise, Gal. 3.8. and the same
righteousness the heathen was to be justified by, Ibid. Faith wherever its said
to be accounted for righteousness, or wherever we are said to be accounted
righteous, its to be understood objectively, and put for the righteousness that
it does eye and lay hold upon. But 2dly, Is not Christ's righteousness said in
Scripture to be imputed to us? let us a little examine Scripture: First,
whether its not in Romans 4. where Imputation is often mentioned. The Apostle
Romans 4.21, 22. observes Abraham believing the promise, viz. of Christ, says,
therefore it was imputed to him for righteousness, viz. the thing promised, and
the thing believed, for he believed that God was able to perform what he
promised, therefore the thing promised was that which was imputed to him. Now
says the Apostle, do not believe you are told this, because it was peculiar to
Abraham, and none had it but Abraham, but its written not for him only, but for
us, that have the same Faith, Righteousness and Imputation, to us to whom it
shall be imputed if we believe, i. e. receive that righteousness by faith which
Abraham received, embracing the promises, viz. believing on him that justifies,
and on the righteousness of Christ by which we are justified; and then the
Argument stands thus, The death of Christ for our sins, and resurrection for
Justification, is the righteousness of Christ, this none can deny, but the
death of Christ for our sins, and his resurrection for or because of our
Justification, is imputed to every believer, as is plain in the Text, chap.
4.24, 25. and hence it follows, that all the Justification spoken of, and
imputation of righteousness, throughout the Chapter, is Christ's righteousness,
the Apostle asserting here and Gal. 3. that the Gentiles should be justified by
faith as Abraham was.

3. The Scripture says we are justified by his blood, Romans 5.9. and through
faith in his blood, Romans 4.28. therefore, They that be justified by the blood
of Christ, are justified by the imputation of his righteousness, but we are so
justified, by the places mentioned. Now then, none cna deny that Christ's
shedding his blood is his righteousness, and we cannot be justified by it
unless it be imputed to us, and if any thing else be imputed, then not that; if
Mr. Humph. will say, its effective only, its (...), in his blood, as in the
blood of a Sacrifice shed for us, where in the blood of the Sacrifice is
accepted, as if it were the very blood of the Sinner.

4th. That by which we have redemption is the righteousness of Christ, but the
death and satisfaction of Christ is that whereby we have redemption, and
therefore that redeeming righteousness is imputed to us, Rom 3.25, 26. Col.
4.14. but more of this by and by, for the Scripture is full of it, blessed be
God. Neonomian Doctrine, I am fully assured, is far from Gospel, as far as
Darkness is from Light.

. 3. His third Argument against the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, is,
If the righteousness of Christ be imputed to us (as if it were ours in it self)
it must be the righteousness of his active or passive obedience, or both, But
its neither.

Resp. We say both: He goes to prove his active obedience is not imputed, If it
be, then must we be looked upon in him as having committed no Sin, nor omitted
no Duty, and then what need will there be of Christ's Death?

Resp. The same consequent may be corruptly drawn upon imputation of his
passive, as he does: But the consequent follows not, for the Imputation of
Christ's active obedience, is upon supposal that the Law of God is not, nor
cannot be perfectly kept by us; for if we were perfect in our selves, there
would not need the Perfection of another to be imputed to us; for all
Imputation by Transaction, supposes the person not to be that personally, and
in himself, which he is made to be by Imputation; so Imputation of our Sins to
Christ, supposes Christ was not Sin in himself, but made so by imputation of
ours; therefore the Imputation of Christ's active obedience supposes us to be
sinners in our selves. 2. As Christ was the Second Adam, and made under the law
in all respects for us, so he was to come under it for us as to active
obedience, and to answer that way as well as the other, for it was needful that
he fulfill all righteousness for us; and the first and chief thing the Law
required, was active obedience; the Law is not satisfied without a performance
of the righteousness which it requires; there must be therefore a fulfilling of
the Law as to active obedience, else the righteousness, of Christ is lame and
imperfect. Its true, if the righteousness imputed were inherent, according to
the Neonomian Doctrine, then the inference might hold; if we are imputed
righteous for our internal righteousness, that would bring us under this
consequence; but our Imputation is of the active righteousness of another,
which makes us complete in Christ, and without spot in the eye of God's
Justice. Let me return the Argument upon him, If our active obedience to the
new Law be imputed to us for justifying righteousness, then must we he looked
upon in this righteousness as such as have committed no sin. I hope Mr. H. will
not say, that the righteousness of the new law is not active obedience: I say,
is it imputed or not? if imputed, the consequence follows, but to see the
baseness of these men, to draw odious consequences upon the Mystery of Christ,
when the same would follow with much more odium upon their own Doctrine that
they set up against Christ, their active obedience must be imputed to them for
righteousness, but Christ's must not be imputed to us. They say then, what need
would there be of Christ's Death? We say, as much as there is of paying the
wages of sin where the law is actually broken: The law requires two things, 1.
The death of the sinner. 2. The obedience of the sinner to the preceptive part
of the law, both which Christ has performed, and a Believer in him, as his
Representative, Priest and Surety; and whereas he says we must be looked upon
as such as have committed no sin; we must not be looked upon as such by our
selves; but there is no true Believer but is looked upon by God in foro
Justitiae, as if he had committed no sin; for if our sins stand in the light of
God's Countenance, in the eye of his Justice, we must needs be odious to him,
whence is it then that the sins of Gods children are cast behind his back, and
that they stand without spot before the Throne; and to conclude this Point, now
let him consider only one verse of Romans 5.19. As by the disobedience of one
many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one many shall be made
righteous. I would know of him what will become of so plain an Antithesis, if
obedience be not active obedience there meant.

. 4. If Christ's passive obedience be imputed, then must we look on our selves
as such who in Christ have suffered and satisfied the law, and born the curse
of it, and then how shall there be room for any pardon? a man that pays his
full debt by himself or Surety cannot be forgiven by the Creditor.

Resp. And here he would cover himself not to be seen a Socinian; we shall see
how well by and by. 1. He lays it down as a gross absurdity to say, we
satisfied in Christ, here and elsewhere often, to which we answer, that it is
not absurd for any man to say, I paid my Debt by another, viz. a Surety, for
the law looks upon it as the payment of his Debt, and he is discharged by it.
2. He makes not himself the Surety, for he ascribes the payment to the Surety,
and the Debt to himself; so the words are not honoring himself, but honor to
the Surety, therefore to say, Believers have satisfied the law in their Surety
Christ, is giving glory to him, and a proper usual Speech. But he infers with
the Socinians, that then there is no room for Pardon; indeed it is easy to see
how their mouths water at a plain Denial of Christ's Satisfaction, though they
do it interpretatively as much as the Socinians; you may likewise see the
Design in dividing Justification and Pardon one from the other. Its true, when
a righteous person is justified by his own righteousness (as in the Neonomian
Justification) there is no room for Pardon, for he has paid all his due, and by
his own Money; but it is otherwise in God's Justification of a sinner.

1. That is his Pardon, God pardons none but in Justification, we have
forgiveness through the blood of Christ, tho Man pardons often with injury to
Justice, but God declares his righteousness for the remission of sins, Romans
3.25. and without shedding of blood there is no remission, Heb. 9.

2. God's justifying sinners, ungodly, etc. by a righteousness given unto them,
is a pardon of them.

3. It is the highest, noblest Pardon in the World, where sins are nailed to
the Cross of Christ, when it is to the Satisfaction of Justice, as Grace, so
Justice are magnified therein: A true Believer, and brokenhearted sinner will
not speak in the proud Socinian or Neonomian Dialect, O Lord, we thank thee not
for, or expect Pardon, if Christ has died to satisfy; with them, either Gods
Pardon, or the Sinners Justification must fall to the ground; but bless God for
the noblest Pardon in the World.

. 5. But methinks this Argument is purely Socinian, for they say, there is
nothing more contrary to Gods forgiving freely than Satisfaction: But Mr. H.
that he might not seem to run a Tilt against Satisfaction, says indeed. The
Argument of the Socinian from Pardon against Christ's Satisfaction is not
valid, but it is good against imputation of it to us, as if we had satisfied.

Resp. And why is it not good against Satisfaction in the Socinian sense? he
gives no reason, for he says, that he that pays the full Debt by himself or
Surety, there is no room for pardon; and will not Mr. H. say, that Christ has
not paid the full Debt for him; if he will, let him pay what remains, or try
for Pardon for that which is not paid another way than by remission through his
blood; but what do they Socinians say more; if God be satisfied where is
Pardon? we say, God's Pardon is by way of Satisfaction to his Law; No, says
Mr. H. it is good against Imputation, so the Socinians hold too. I pray, did
Christ satisfy at all? if he did, was it in a law-sence? if so, was it for
himself, or for us? if for us, then the law says so, for us: For the Law of
God does not take Satisfaction in so blind a manner, as that God in his Law
knows not for whom it is; if God in his Law knows for whom it is, and accepts
it for us, then it is accounted to us, and imputed to us, as to all the ends
thereof in Law. The taking Satisfaction in Law for any offense against it for
any one, is the Laws Imputation or accounting it to him for whom it is made,
whether the satisfaction be given by himself who transgressed, or any one for
him; therefore if Christ satisfied for us, and this Satisfaction accepted by
God for us, God imputes it to us, as if we had done it our selves, therefore
Mr. H. must either renounce the Doctrine of Satisfaction, with the Socinians,
or own its imputed to us as fully (yea in this case we may say) more fully than
if we had made it our selves.

. 6. Let us see how Mr. H. would avoid the Socinian Rock, he says, Christ may
have wrought with the father (or made him that satisfaction as) to procure new
Terms, so that a man may be justified as a fulfiller of them, and yet need
pardon for nonperformance of the old.

R. Behold the Neonomian Satisfaction! 1. He makes not Satisfaction a payment
of a Debt owing to the Law by us, but only a procurement. a buying something of
God, whereas Satisfaction is for a wrong done. I may purchase a thing of a
person whom I never injured, or if I have the Money whereby I purchase a new
thing that refers not to the injury I did before, but to the new Purchase;
observe then, he makes Christ's Satisfaction only a New Purchase.

2. This New Purchase is of New Terms of Justification; hence God is not to
stand upon satisfaction to the Old Law, but to drop it, and bring the Sinner
under a New Law; Christ died not to satisfy the Law, but to translate us from
one Law to another, whence the old has no more to do with us, and thus all the
world are translated, therefore the Old Law is gone to all the World
unsatisfied.

3. A Man is justified on the new Terms, they being fulfilled by his own
righteousness, but not pardoned on these terms by the New Law; and this is one
of the greatest inconsistencies in the World, to say a man is justified by a
Law, and not pardoned; how is he just in the eye of that Law that does not free
from the charge of any transgression of it, But

3. He says, he needs Pardon for nonperformance of the old, if so, 1. The New
Law is not an Act of Indemnity in respect of sins against the old; for if a man
condemned by one law, be taken from under it to a new law, he is indempnified
from the old, else all pretense of advantage by the said translation is gone,
for he that stands under the terms of one law, condemned by it, and brought
under new terms to another, come now to be liable to the lash of two Laws,
whereas before he was under but one.

2. He says, this Pardon must be had at the Bar of the Old Law. I would know
of Mr. H. how? If he says, and will stand to it according to his own Argument,
he cannot, or else he must deny Christ's Satisfaction, which is this, That Law
which is satisfied for the breach of it, admits no Pard^n from the Legislator,
but the Old Law (say Neonomians in words) was satisfied for us, therefore there
can be no Pardon; yea, it was satisfied for us in our stead, and the
satisfaction accepted for us, yea therefore imputed to us, Here I have the
Neonomian fast in this Dilemma from their own Doctrine, let them free
themselves how they can. For if Pardon and Satisfaction imputed are not
consistent as to our Doctrine, then not in theirs; but they say,
notwithstanding their justification by their New Law, they must have Pardon for
the breach of the Old, and how? Not at all in their sense, if the Old be not
satisfied, or that Satisfaction not imputed; as much as to say, it is Money
laid down in Court indefinitely, but not accepted in Court for this and that
Man's Sins; hence Christ has satisfied for none, for all satisfaction as such,
is accepted as such; we come now to his attempt, to prove that neither the
Active or Passive Obedience of Christ is imputed.

. 7. For (says he) If that his Active and Passive Obedience be imputed, then
must God be made to deal with Man according to the Covenant of Works.

Resp. See how this Gentleman in all his Arguings runs his Head against a Post
and Pillar of Gospel Truth, his Argument is this, if Christ's Active and
Passive Obedience be accepted for us as satisfaction for the Law, then God
deals with Sinners in their justification, after the tenor of the Covenant of
Works; now he may assume either by taking away the Antecedent, or by taking
away the Consequent, he indeed intends both, first, by taking away the
Antecedent, viz. But Christ's Active and Passive Obedience is not accepted for
satisfaction, therefore he does not deal with Sinners in Justification
according to the Covenant of Works, therefore Christ has not satisfied the
Covenant of Works for us, the Law lies unsatisfyed. I would know how the Pardon
he speaks of is Subsequent to the New Law. Justification is had, is it by
dealing with us upon the account of satisfaction to the Old Law? He suggests
that it is, then pardoned Sinners are dealt with according to the Old Law, if
not justified. But to have him in his Consequences, he assumes that God deals
not with Sinners in Justification upon the Terms of the Old Law, or Covenant of
Works. To Answer, he deals with them in Christ, according to the Terms of the
Covenant of Works, but in themselves as sinners, justifying them in Christ
according to the Tenor of the Covenant of Works, it is mere Grace, the Mystery
of Grace is to save sinners in such a way, as may not only magnify rich Grace,
but Exalt Grace, and that in the highest manner. Now the Exaltation of Justice
cannot be but in the justifying a Sinner in the Eye of the strictest Law, by
the highest and most acceptable Satisfaction thereof, on this account, Christ's
Obedience was the most Legal, both active and passive that ever was; but that a
sinner is brought under this Obedience of Christ unto Justification, is mere
free Grace, he being thereby partaker of the distinguishing Grace of God, and
the free Gift of Christ and his Righteousness, without the intervention of any
Mediator, or Subordinate Righteousness of his own; hence it is, that his Faith
makes not void the Law, but Establishes it in the highest degree, in Exalting
Christ as his only, and most complete Righteousness, most legal in satisfying
the Law for us, as a Covenant of Works; he says, when nothing is more apparent
in Scripture then that by Grace it is that we are justified, and by Grace saved.

Resp. But will Mr. H. affirm that Grace does justify us without Justice? Does
not the Apostle say a sinner is justified by Grace, in and through Christ's
Redemption, that God may be just? Does not Mr. H. say Justification is an Act
of Justice, again and again? Does not this setting up our own righteousness in
performance of the Condition of the New Law, make his Justification an Act of
Justice, yea, and without Grace? What do these Men mean so often and positively
to contradict the Scripture and themselves, to draw their dirty Inferences upon
the Truth, with holding it in unrighteousness?

. 8. If nothing less then a Righteousness as does Answer and satisfy the Law
fully, will suffice for the sinners Plea to flee from Condemnation, he is not
judged by the Law of Grace, but by the Law of Works.

R. The inference has no danger in it; for 1. We know of no Judgment in
freeing any from Condemnation, but a Discharge in Christ from the Law of Works,
before which every Believer is discharged here and hereafter through Grace.

2. We know of no New Law, either to quit or condemn, a Law of Grace in that
sense is a Bull, Grace and a Law are directly opposite. 2. He here insinuates
as if Christ's satisfaction were complete and imperfect: If nothing else will
suffice for a Plea. 1. What can be better than a perfect satisfaction for a
Plea. 2. Either Christ's is not perfect, or else perfect will not do, without an
imperfect added to it, which indeed he means, that Christ's perfect satisfaction
must have our Imperfect added, to make our Plea complete. 3. What is freeing
from condemnation but Pardon of Sin? I pray, what righteousness does a
Neonomian flee to for the pardon of Sin? Do they tell us its Christ's, though they
be justified by their own? I would know whether they esteem Christ's
Righteousness full and complete for the pardon of Sin? Or do they plead for
some of their pardon at the Bar of the New Law, where they are justified, and
some of their pardon at the Bar of the Old Law, where they are condemned? But
this imputed righteousness is a mistake of the Protestants (poor Man I pity
him) and he has found the mistake, so it seems indeed by his Writing.

. 8. Christ came into the World to procure and tender a New Law, and in this
regard he is called our Law giver; not that he has given any other Moral rules
of Life to us, but that he has given the same Precepts, with Indulgence.

Resp. Now mark the Neonomian Spirit, but Two or Tree Lines off he was for
Justification only by Grace without Law, that he might dethrone Christ, but now
again, that he may Enthrone Man's Righteousness, he is altogether for Law, his
Language is half Ashdod, take him where you will. 1. He tells you what he means
by Satisfaction, which he says is procurement, Christ came into the World not
to satisfy the Law of God, which we had broken, but to procure a Law, a
remedial Law, a better Law to answer Gods Ends than the First; it was a great
mistake sure in Divine Wisdom to make such a Law at first as would not do. 2.
It was another oversight at least that Christ did not come to procure a right
law at first. 3. Its very strange that God would not afford a right law without
procurement, Laws are not used to be purchased or procured; Legislators make
Laws according to their pleasure, without procurement. 4. And wh^t's the World
the better? Christ has procured the putting the World under New-Law Terms, and
not satisfied the Old Law, and now they must perform the condition of the New
Law, and be pardoned by the old Law unsatisfied, else they cannot be saved. 5.
After all the noise about saving by Grace, its but by a law which requires
personal obedience in fulfilling the condition; this is the Grace of the Law,
and Law of Grace; a Law of Grace it is, such wherein Grace is no more Grace,
and the Law is no more a Law, that indeed a law of Grace is a Contradiction in
proprio adjuncto, a mere Hobgoblin. But how is these men's New Law compounded?
It is, they say, of Grace and a Law; and it lies In that he has not given new
Moral Laws of life to us, other than what was contained in the old law before;
but that he has given the same precepts with indulgence.

Answ. Well, Christ is not our Lawgiver according to purchase (for these Men
make Christ to have died for himself, to make himself a Lawgiver) to devise and
constitute any new Moral Precepts, but first to pluck down the old house, and
then to take the broken and scattered pieces, and make a new one; he takes the
Moral Materials of the old Law, cuts and hews them pretty much, makes the
Duties more indifferent, the sins forbidden Venial and allowable, yea
necessary, to come into the righteousness of the new law; for if the Condition
be not mixed of Morality and Immorality its good for nothing, it will not serve
this turn, therefore the old law with indulgence of sin is the New Law. I pray
let me know from the Wits of our Age, whether this be not Antinomianism? Now he
tells us, this is a law of indulgence, etc. the plain English of it is, that
its a Law of Dispensation with a Law of Justice, i. e. a lawless law; that all
the Satisfaction he means, is Gods Dispensation with Law and Justice, and a law
to call Sin by one law Sin, and righteousness by another; the truth is, the
whole Doctrine tends to deny God in his glorious Properties, and to change him
into the similitude of an Ox that eats Hay, interpretative, and if God does
not act now, and at Judgment, by this lay of Dispensation with Law, and
indulgence of Sin, he says, the main business of Christ's coming and
Redemption, is lost, that can be no other in his sense than to be Minister of
Sin.

. 10. You shall hear a Protestant [i. e. Neonomians, they are Papists,
according to the Profession of this downright Papist] in his Prayer, appealing
from the Tribunal of Gods Justice, to the Throne of his Grace, yet in his
Sermon telling the People, that it is nothing else but the perfect obedience
and satisfaction of Christ imputed to them that saves them, which is to bring
them back from the throne of Grace to the Bar of his Justice to be judged.

Resp. I am ashamed to read such a Banter of Christianity from any man that
professes himself a Christian, tho a Papist and Socinian. 1. Is it a good
Appeal or no for a sinner to make from the Tribunal of Justice, i. e. mere
Justice, where God beholds the Sinner as he is in himself, by his most
righteous law, a condemned transgressor, to the Throne of Grace (not that God
has two Thrones, Rev. 4.) but from it proceeds a Dispensation of Justice,
Thundrings, Lightnings, etc. of Judicial Proceedings to his enemies, and a
Dispensation of Grace to his Church, (there being a Rainbow round about the
Throne;) where Christ is a High Priest, who has satisfied the Justice of God,
and pleading his Satisfaction as our Advocate and Intercessor? did not David do
so, Psalm 51. 2. Is it not good Doctrine, and agreeable to the Appeal, to tell
the People that nothing else but the perfect Obedience and Satisfaction of
Christ imputed to them can save them: Is this to bring them back to the
Tribunal of mere Justice? is not this the Throne of Grace where Justice is
satisfied and appeased, where Christ the Satisfier is exalted to Gods right
hand to be a Prince and Savior?

I pray, what do Neonomians? do they first bring them to a law, suppose it were
a law of Grace, as they call it, to be justified by their own righteousness;
whither do they carry them then? is it not to the Tribunal of Justice to be
pardoned? So that if God in Christ pardoning iniquity on the Throne of Grace,
through the Shatisfaction of Christ, be the Throne of Justice divested of
Grace: Why are Neonomians to be pardoned there, after they are justified at
another Bar? But he is for the dividing Grace and Justice in a Sinner's
Justification, as the Socinians are, or rather abandoning Justice.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Righteousness of God.
Section 1. Works of a Law not Gospel.. 2. Mr. H. outdone the Papists.. 3. The
Righteousness of God what?. 4. An offer at Faiths being our subordinate
Righteousness.. 5. Mr. Cl. and Mr. H. Sense of the Righteousness of God.. 6.
Their Reasons given and Answered.. 7. Mr. Cl. Reasons why it is not Christ's
Righteousness, 2 Cor. 5.21.. 8. His second Reason.. 9. A distinct Consideration
of the said Texts.. 10. Christ's Righteousness is the Righteousness of God..
11.. 12. Romans 3.21, 22. examined.. 13. Romans 10.3.. 14. Mr. H. Explication of
Romans 10.4. examined.. 15. Mr. H. Explication of 2 Cor. 5.21. Examined. And. 16.
What he further faith on the Place examined.

. 1. IN the last Place, There is a Righteousness revealed in the Gospel, that
God goes by in his dealing with all the World, whereby it is that we are
Justified in Opposition to the Righteousness of Works.

Resp. If it be a revealed Righteousness, it is that which is the Object of
Faith seen without our selves not in our selves, for that need not to be
revealed, which every Man is naturally addicted to see and know. Again, it must
not be our Works in Opposition to our Works for Justification, for there is no
formal Opposition between Works and Works, nor material indeed which have the
same Subject, and Genns, and End; as for what he calls them by way of
Difference, it will not serve, he calls some Works, Works of the Law, some
Gospel-works, i. e. Works of the Law of Grace; now we have showed that there
are no such Gospel-works which put in for Justification, nor does the Spirit
Work such, and being both are the Works of a Law, they differ not specifically,
they are legal Works, Works of a Law performed for Justification are always
Legal never Evangelical.

. 2. This Revealed Righteousness is in Scripture called the Righteousness of
God, which the Protestants conceive to be the Righteousness of Christ without
us [all but Neonomians and Quakers] i. e. the Righteousness of Christ, which is
not ours by Performance but by Faith, but neither Protestants since Luther, nor
Papists since Augustine, have hit the Mind of the Apostle.

Resp. But the Scripture has hit it long before Luther, sure then, if they
were not Right, the Reformation was the Deformation in Doctrine; the Truth is,
many of the Protestants were out in this Point; all our Reformation so far as I
can understand Mr. H. and many Neonomians are gone, is not worth a Fig; and
here indeed Mr. H. boasts again and again, that he has outdone the Papists;
and I may truly say, that he and his Father B. has, and in this only they
differ from the Papists, that they go beyond them in Self-righteousness, and in
a most daring scornful Opposition to the Imputation of the Righteousness of
Christ.

. 3. The Righteousness of God and Grace opposed to Works, is nothing but the
Righteousness of the Covenant of Grace accepted for Christ's sake, instead of
the Covenant of Works.

Resp. It is not Christ's Righteousness accepted for us, for that alone is the
Righteousness of the Covenant of Grace, and then only God did not set up Christ
to set up our Righteousness, because it was impossible for us to have any other
to be justified by, that he might have the Glory of Being our Righteousness
alone, but he says, this Righteousness of ours must come instead of the
Righteousness of the Covenant of Works; to which we Answer, that its impossible
for us to be Justified by any Righteousness, but that which fully and exactly
answers the Covenant of Works, either our own, or another, the Righteousness
of another Law cant Justify us there. For if a Sinner be justified, it must be
by that Law which he has broken, and by none else; if they say Christ has
satisfied that Law for us, then we say that Satisfaction is a sufficient
Righteousness for our Justification, we look for no other Law to be justified
by, nor no other Righteousness for our Justification. He proceeds, Herein are
two Things comprised, the meritorious Righteousness of Christ, procuring the
pardoning Covenant of Grace, and our performing the Condition, only we are to
know how this Righteousness may be understood in respect to God, as it is all
one with his Grace, or with respect to us as its all one upon which this Grace
is vouchsafed.

Resp. This Neonomian Cheat is always to be noted in the Point of Satisfaction,
that all the Satisfaction they ascribe to Christ is only in making pay unto God
for a new Purchase, they will not have Christ to have paid any Arrears or old
Scores, the Law passes away in sententiam, and we found insolvent to this
perfect Law, therefore Christ buys another Law, upon that promises
Justification upon easier Terms, not so Holy, but sinful and immoral, and
therefore called the Law of Indulgence, yet justifies us upon those Terms, but
yet without Pardon which we must have of the Old Law, and because we have
fulfilled the New Law, God out of his Prerogative without any other
Satisfaction than the forementioned procurement Pardons, for they say
Satisfaction and Pardon are inconsistent as the Socinians do, and why do they
say Christ's Satisfaction is not imputed to us, because if they were not ashamed
to speak out they think there is none, yea and that they speak of is only
Christ's purchasing a new Law, which would be madness for to claim an Imputation
of to us, for that concerns us no further then a new Legal Bondage, if Christ's
Righteousness be not accepted for our Justification from the Old Law, and
imputable to us, its not desirable to be imputed to us to bring us under a new
Law and further Bondage. Besides, if Christ purchased this Law-making Power,
its for himself, and not for us, for they will tell you he did not Purchase the
Performance of the Condition, and when they say, we are justified by our Works
for the sake of Christ's Merits, their meaning is, because Christ purchased the
Law and Promulgation of it, just as if they should say, if Adam had stood, he
had been justified by his Works for the sake of God who made the Law, for if
there had been no Law there had been no Justification by it; so we are
justified say they by the Law of Grace, for the sake of Christ who merited the
Law and became Lawmakers; this is all they mean, and this is the Neonomian
Cheat in the great Point of Satisfaction, whereby they would by retaining the
Word, only without the Sense, cover themselves from the odious Name of
Socinians. Lastly, He makes Grace and Justice in respect of God to be all one,
so that to be justified by Works of our own, and by Grace is all one, and
Paul's Epistles are all Nonsense.

. 4. Mr. Cler. p. 64. tells us, He will offer his Reasons, why Faith is our
subordinate Righteousness; to the First and Second we have spoken sufficiently
already. The Third is, Because we frequently read of the Righteousness of
Faith, which he says is our Conformity to the Rule of the New-Law in sincere
Believing and imperfect Doing; the Places he mentions are, Romans 4.11, 13, Chap.
9.30. Chap. 10.6. Gal. 5.5. Heb. 11.5.

Resp. The Righteousness of Faith is the Righteousness of Christ apprehended
and received by Faith, for Romans 4.11. tells us, that Circumcision was a Seal of
the Righteousness of Faith, which Righteousness of Faith Abraham had being
uncircumcised, that the same righteousness may be imputed to them; and what
righteousness is that? it is that through which iniquity is forgiven, and Sin
covered, that it might not be imputed, and this is the righteousness that is
imputed without works. Hence I argue. That that righteousness through which
iniquity is forgiven, and sin covered, and is imputed without works, is the
righteousness of Christ, and not ours; but the righteousness of Faith,
according to the Apostle in that place, is such, as appears, v. 6, 7, 9, 10. Is
there any iniquity forgiven in the New Law Righteousness? no, they say, pardon
is consequent to it, its had of the old law: Is any Sin covered by it from the
Eye of God's Justice? no, they say, God sees their Sins by the old Law: Is
righteousness imputed without works? no, it cannot be, because its faith as a
work is imputed, v. 13. The Promise that he should be the heir of the world,
was not through a law [then not through any works of a law] but through the
righteousness of faith, therefore it was the the righteousness of Christ; the
righteousness of a law is excluded, therefore works; and its here also what the
righteousness of faith apprehends. That of Romans 9.31. and chap. 10.6 we shall
show by and by was the righteousness of Christ apprehended by faith: The
Apostle, Gal. 5.5. intends Christ's righteousness; for what should men do for
the hope of that righteousness which they have in themselves; for by faith,
all, says he, are one in Christ Jesus, true faith bringing forth love, as such
apprehends and waits for more and more comfort in the righteousness of Christ.
That spoken of Hebrews 11.7. is the righteousness of Christ promised, the Seed
of the Woman, that was the great Promise believed by the Antidiluvian
Patriarchs, and by the Death and Satisfaction of the Seed of the Woman
promised, they believed he should break the Serpents head; Noah became heir of
this righteousness which he received and lived comfortably in the enjoyment of,
by faith in the Promise.

. 5. Mr. Cl. brings for a further confirmation of this Argument, those places
which speak of the righteousness of God, which they bring as a great Block in
their way, and therefore take much pains to remove it: Mr. Cl. says, this
Phrase has been much mistaken by many, who have been led into error thereby,
and therefore he will endeavor to give the true sense of it; to this purpose
also Mr. H. we will therefore very diligently mark what they say. The places
are, Romans 1.17. and 3.21, 22. and 10.3. 2 Cor. 5.22. Phil. 3.9. We say, by the
righteousness of God is meant the righteousness of Christ, but these men say,
its our own inherent righteousness.

Mr. H. says, That our righteousness is called Gods in opposition merely to
that of works; let a man do what he can by his own strength, or by God's aid he
can never come to the law of works or Moses; God has therefore been pleased to
make us a new law, a law of faith, or grace, or new covenant, having lower
terms, in performance whereof the sinner, in respect of the law, may be
righteous, its a righteousness performed by Grace, which God mercifully
condescends to accept instead of that which is perfect, through the merits of
our Savior, and in regard of that acceptance (N. B.) or this good will its
called his, or the righteousness which is of him. Lo here is the true Key which
opens the Mind of the Apostle, therefore Mr. H. takes it to be the
new-law-righteousness which in these places is called the righteousness of God,
becouse opposed to the old-law-righteousness, because also wrought of God.

Mr. Cl's resolution is in a manner the same, That the imperfect
new-law-righteousness is the righteousness of God because it is of his
Institution; as for perfect obedience to the law, (which is legal
righteousness) that is righteousness in the strictest sense, and in strict
justice can be taken for no other, and therefore the reward must be debt: But
that an imperfect work, such as Faith and Obedience should be accounted
righteousness, must arise from the gracious Appointment, Designation and
Ordination of God, who has set up this Way and Method of becoming righteous
under the Gospel; and hence its said, reckoned, accounted, imputed for
righteousness, which Phrase imports Grace and Favor, as some note.

. 6. Mr. Cl's. reasons for his Opinion, are 1. Because the Phrase of submitting
to the righteousness (Romans 10.3.) of God seems to import, that this is a new
law, institution or way naturally we are not acquainted with.

Resp. The Text runs quite against him, being ignorant of the righteousness of
God; how does that appear? seeking to establish their own righteousness, they
submitted not to [yielded not to accept of] the righteousness of God.

1. God's righteousness and man's are here directly opposed to each others.

2. It is directly against Mr. Cl's reason, in that man need not be taught to
set up his own righteousness, they naturally adhere to it.

3. They did so closely adhere to it that they would not submit to the Doctrine
of Justification by the righteousness of another, viz. the righteousness of
Christ; see how the words will run in Mr. Cl's. sense, being ignorant of an
imperfect righteousness of their own performing, going about to establish a
righteousness of their own performing, they submitted not to a righteousness of
their own performing, which is Gods righteousness; besides, its not sense to
say, a man submits or not to that which is his own righteousness, but it is to
say, he submits to take the righteousness of another.

2. As the righteousness of the law is that which the law requires, Romans 2.26.
so this righteousness of God is that which God requires under the Gospel.

Resp. 1. The righteousness both under the Law and Gospel is the righteousness
of God; what the law requires, God by the law requires, and indeed God requires
but one righteousness under the Law and Gospel, and there is the righteousness
of the law, and the strictest righteousness; and if there must be a distinction
between the righteousness of the Law and Gospel, as our Neonomians make, its
most proper to call the perfect righteousness of the law, God's righteousness,
it being his more than an imperfect, sinful righteousness, which would be very
dishonorable to him to be called his; But Christ's righteousness is Legal, in
that it answers the Law and Gospel unto the Sinner, because it answers it for
him, and his peace with God is made thereby.

3. As the Sacrament of the Supper is called the Lord's Supper, because its his
Institution, and the Lord's Day because his Designation.

Answer, The Supper is not called the Lord's Supper, only because its his
Institution, but because our Lord's Body and Blood is showed forth therein to
be the righteousness of God for our Justification. Neither is the Lord's Day so
called from his Design of it, but because it is to remember the resurrection of
our Lord, who rose for our Justification, having accomplished justifying
righteousness for us. 4. Its opposed to their own righteousness, Romans 10.3.
therefore not any righteousness of their own, as is already showed, supra, from
Romans 10.3.

. 7. Next let us see how Mr. Cl. will prove that its not the righteousness of
Christ that is meant by the righteousness of God in the aforesaid places; he
says it cannot be for these reasons, p. 33. 1. Because the Apostle here
distinguishes, 2 Cor. 5.21. between God and Christ, the righteousness of God
is one thing, and being in Christ another; whereas, if they were all one, the
sense would be, that we might be made the righteousness of Christ in Christ:
And p. 65. The Apostle also, in most places where he mentions it,
distinguishes between God and Christ, Romans 3.22. Phil. 3.9.

Resp. This Reason is so frivolous, that it needs little answer, There is no
distinction at all in respect of righteousness, but an exact account thereof,
that the righteousness of God, which the Apostle speaks of Christ, that which
is in Christ, that the righteousness of God in Christ is that which is imputed
to us; we need not look far to the meaning of the Apostle in the Phrase, its
but in verse 19. God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not
imputing unto them their trespasses, i. e. in the righteousness of Christ God
was working out reconciliation, and non-imputation of sin, and if so,
imputation of Christ's righteousness, and he says, if the righteousness were
one, its that they might be made the righteousness of Christ in Christ; but I
pray, why may not Christ's righteousness be called the righteousness of God, as
well as our own, because they say, our own was God's Institution: Is it ours,
God's and ours too? and Christ's righteousness may not be God's and Christ's
too; but this reasoning is very absurd, more of this as we proceed; and as for
the other places, we shall come to them by and by.

. 8. P. 65. Reason 2. He always calls it, the righteousness of God, and never
the righteousness of Christ.

Resp. Mr. Cl. himself says, it cannot be understood of that righteousness
which is inherent in God, p. 33. I suppose he means of the Attribute of God's
Justice, because its something revealed in the Gospel, and he speaks true in
it, but why may not the redeeming righteousness of Christ be called the
righteousness of God?

1. Because it was the righteousness of the Person who is God, and Acts 20.28.
God is said to purchase his Church with his own blood, by a communication of
Properties; But 2. Why may not Christ's righteousness be called the
righteousness of God for the same reason that you say our righteousness is so
called, because it is the way and method through which he has designed to
justify us, Christ says, he is the way, and if so, then the instituted and
ordained way; now if this interpretation of the Text will serve for them, why
not for us? I am sure the righteousness we plead for is the most deserving.

Reason 3. He calls it, The righteousness which is of God, not which is in God
or Christ.

Resp. According to Mr. Cl. its not the Attribute of Gods righteousness, but
its the work of righteousness wrought by Go'd in the Person of his Son,
therefore its properest to express it as the Apostle, of God, and its often
enough said in Christ, therefore its not true. I find not any thing said
further, by either of them, to support this Notion. Mr. H. talks here and
there, in diverse places about it, but the substance of all is put together more
methodically by Mr. Cl. and with more modesty.

. 9. It remains now, that we take the said Texts into distinct Consideration,
and examine what righteousness is by them intended, which is called the
righteousness of God.

1. Romans 1.16, 17. The Subject the Apostle treats of is, the Gospel of Christ,
the glad tidings brought to Sinners of Life and Salvation in him.

2. This he gives an account of as the reason why he is far from being ashamed
of it, in receiving it for its appointed Ends, for his own Salvation, or in
preaching it for those ends unto others. 1. Because it is the power of God to
Salvation of every one that believes, both of Jews and Gentiles. 2. In this is
the power of God in effectual Grace seen, in that its the Doctrine of
Righteousness. 3. He shows its the Doctrine of righteousness by two things. 1.
In that this righteousness of God is revealed in it. 2. In that its the object
of a Believer's Faith from time to time, its revealed to his first faith, and
always of faith justifying afterward, he lives upon this righteousness from
time to time, as he proves from the Prophet, the just shall live by faith. Now
then its called the righteousness of God. 1. Because its a righteousness
provided by God before the foundation of the World in his wise Counsels, and
Covenant-Compact with the Son, as the Apostle says expressly, 1 Pet. 1.19, 20.
Christ as redeemer by his precious blood, as of a lamb without spot [this is
his righteousness] who verily [i. e. really as such] was foreordained of God
before the foundation of the world: It was then the Plot and Contrivance of
God, and therefore may well be called, the righteousness of God. This Purpose
and Grace to poor Sinners was first given us in the Person and Righteousness of
Christ before the World began, but was manifested since, and especially at the
first appearance of Christ in the flesh, actually to work out this
righteousness in abolishing Death, and bringing Life and Immortality to Light
in the said Gospel of Christ, which he was a Preacher of; this Head I might be
large in insisting on, from other places, as Ephesians. 1.6, 7, 8, 9. Prove. 8 30.
Heb. 10.8, 9. 2. It is the Righteousness of the Person who is God, Acts 20.28.
3. Its the only righteousness that God is well pleased with a sinner for, and
in which he makes his law honorable, Isa. 42.21.

3. God has called and anointed Christ thereto in righteousness, Isa. 42.6. i.
e. to answer my law and righteousness therein, and to perform the work of
righteousness, the Condition of the Covenant I have given thee for, so Heb.
8.3. chap. 5.5. and 9.12.

4. Its a Righteousness becoming the Grace of God, as the gift of
righteousness, Romans 5. and becoming the Perfect Justice and Law of God, and
therefore magnifies his Law, etc. and becoming the Wisdom of God, therefore
Christ is called, the Wisdom of God; and answers all the ends of God's Glory in
Man's Salvation.

5. Its the Righteousness of God, in regard of the stateliness and highness
thereof, as the Trees of Lebanon were called the Trees of Jehovah, Psalm. 104.16.

6. In a way of opposition to all men's inherent righteousness, which is humane,
man's righteousness only; this is God's righteousness, and be has made Christ
to be righteousness to us, 1 Cor. 1.30.

. 10. Now here is reason enough why Christ's Righteousness should be called the
righteousness of God, and that its plainly so intended in the Text appears.

1. Because its a revealed righteousness that Man saw not before, they can
easily see their own own righteousness, without Revelation they are addicted.

2. Its the righteousness of Christ that is the righteousness of the Gospel of
Christ, the Gospel of Christ is called so, because its the preaching Christ and
him crucified, 1 Cor. 3. and because its his Gospel whereby he comes and
preaches peace through his righteousness, Ephesians. 2.14, 15.

3. Its the righteousness of Christ, because its the great object of Faith in
Justification; for its absurd to say, our faith is the object of faith, its
something without a man first, that he believes upon; faith is the evidence or
Hypostacy of things not seen.

4. Its opposed to the Anger and Wrath of God revealed in the Law, v. 18. as
that righteousness which answers it.

5. The Apostle throughout this Epistle casts off, and abandons all
righteousness of ours as insufficient, therefore this must be the righteousness
intended.

6. The Text is plain, that the righteousness of God is spoken of objectively,
as to faith; for a thing is revealed that it may be seen, its revealed from one
act of faith to another, and it is confirmed by the words of the Prophet, the
just shall live by faith, on this righteousness believing in it, and feeding
upon it as their food of life, and therefore is not in themselves, but in the
Gospel there as revealed; for the import of the words should be, according to
those men, I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, it is the power of God to
Salvation, for therein [i. e. in the Gospel preached, not in our selves] is the
righteousness of God revealed, from one act of faith to another, to be seen by
it [it is not said that faith is revealed to be the righteousness of God, but
the righteousness of God in the Gospel,] because it is the power of God to
Salvation, is revealed to our faith, and to be that righteousness which is
Gospel righteousness, therefore not in our selves. 3. The preaching thereof, is
the power of God to Salvation, and that which a believers faith lives upon.

. 11. The next place, Romans 3.21, 22. The Apostle in the 9th verse says, he
proved both Jews and Gentiles under sin, viz. under the transgression of the
Moral Law, as plainly appears by his Proof unto v. 19. now says he, they are
under the law in that they are convict by the law, even the whole World, by
(...) that law, not the Ceremonial but Moral, against which all the
forementioned transgressions are committed, and Gentiles, who were never under
the Ceremonial Law, as well as Jews. Now, says the Apostle, seeing that by
this Moral Law the World is condemned, its impossible that any works of
obedience to any law whatever should; for if any other law comes to milder
terms, unless this law be rescinded, its impossible any man can be righteous
before God, hence he concludes, therefore by the deeds of the law, i. e. any
law, no flesh can be justified in Gods sight; whatever Law men may pretend to,
God will judge and try all by the Moral Law, for a sinner and transgressor of
God's law, can have the knowledge of sin by it, i. e. Conviction but no
Salvation by any righteousness of his performance: What then, must all the
World perish therefore for want of a righteousness? No, God has provided a
righteousness, [he does not say, God has repealed his Law, and made a new one]
the righteousness of God without a new law is evident, or made manifest in the
Gospel, which is witnessed by the Law, i. e. of Moses, in the Doctrine of
Sacrifices, and by the Prophets that have prophesied of Christ, v. 22. even the
righteousness of God, which is by the faith of Jesus Christ, viz. the
righteousness of Christ which faith lays hold on, which is by faith, i. e.
which we receive by faith, for it may be said, what is this righteousness of
God? says the Apostle, it is in Christ; how have it we in Christ? by faith:
Now, says he, its unto all, i. e. imputed unto all, and upon all, as a
covering or robe of righteousness by the faith of every Believer, by the least
as well as the greatest, by a Gentile Believer as well as a Jew; there is no
difference in the degree of righteousness, nor in the imputation of it, nor
application of it, all Believers are equally, and alike righteous in Christ's
righteousness which is the righteousness of God, and the reason added, for all
have sinned, and justified freely by Gods grace through the redemption that is
in Jesus Christ.

. 12. Now it appears that the righteousness of God is Christ's righteousness:
That righteousness that fully and completely satisfied that law which convicted
all the world as guilty, is the righteousness of Christ; but such is the
righteousness here spoken of, as is apparent by the whole Text. 2. That
righteousness which we have by faith in another to justification, is the
righteousness of Christ; but this righteousness is that which we have by and in
another; for faith is said to act upon what is without us, and not on that
which is within us. 3. That which is imputed to Sinners, devoid of any
righteousness by the law, or by any law, is the righteousness of Christ; but
this righteousness of God is so, ergo, the Propositions of these Syllogisms
lies plainly proved in the Text. 4. If all righteousness be here peremptorily
rejected, which is performed by us in obedience to any law, then the
righteousness here introduced, the righteousness of God, is Christ's
righteousness; but the Antecedent is true, v. 20. 5. If the righteousness of
Christ is our justifying righteousness, which the Apostle intends throughout
this Discourse, then God's righteousness is Christ's, but ergo, the Minor,
which is the Antecedent, is proved. The redemption and propitiation of Christ
is the righteousness by which we are justified, v. 24.6. That righteousness
which the law of Moses witnesses to, being the reason and sign thereof, is the
righteousness of Christ, as such: For what did the sacrifices for sin, but
witness to Christ's great propitiatory sacrifice? but the sacrifices of the law
all held forth, Christ offering himself a sacrifice for sin, and the Gospel was
therein preached. Now it is plain the Apostle brings in the law of Moses
witnessing to this righteousness of God.

. 13. The next place is Romans 10.3. The Jews had a zeal for God, and a blind
devotion, but were extreme ignorant of Gospel-Mysteries, being ignorant of the
righteousness of God, being ignorant of God' righteousness in the law, viz. the
perfection thereof, and going about to establish their own imperfect
righteousness unto justification, they submitted not to justification by God's
righteousness, being ignorant of Christ's righteousness; for it is expressly said
to be the righteousness of God, v. 4. Submitted not to the righteousness of
God; for Christ is the end of the law, for righteousness to every one that
believes. Take the Argument then, that Christ's righteousness is God's:

1. That righteousness which is directly opposed to our own in justification,
is Christ's righteousness; but God's righteousness here is so.

2. That righteousness which a man being ignorant of, though he know his own
righteousness, falls short of justification, is Christ's righteousness; but the
righteousness of God in the Text is such; ergo,

3. That which is the end of the law for righteousness, [i.e. answers the law]
is the righteousness of God; but Christ is the end of the law. This Argument is
so plain and fall in the Text, that it cannot be answered with any fair
pretense, though they make a blundering at it to no purpose; and you shall see
the Apostle opposes it, v. 5. to the righteousness of the law, consisting in
doing; and at once tells us, the righteousness of God, the righteousness of
Christ, and the righteousness of Faith, is but one righteousness, and opposed
to the righteousness of the law which the Jews established; thinking, as our
Neonomians do, that it was sufficient to justification to have some imperfect
sincere obedience to Moses's law, (For I bear them record, says the Apostle,
they have a zeal of God, that is their sincerity) which was the new law; for if
they were saved by the law of Grace, this was dispensed to them in Moses's law;
they knew not that God's law required perfect right, and its perfect right must
answer it. Hence it appears that they had the same opinion that the Neonomians
now have, that Moses's law, was a new law, requiring only obedience to the
moral part of it, so far as they could, and for their sins to offer sacrifice,
according to the ceremonial part; and resting therein, without faith in the
Antitype, they reckoned themselves fully righteous for justification: Hence,
upon the annual day of atonement, they reckoned themselves as innocent as Adam
in his innocence, i. e. as free from guilt, propitiation being made, till they
had contracted more guilt: Therefore the Apostle says, Heb. 10.1. That the law
being a shadow of good things to come, could never with those sacrifices, which
they offered year by year, make the comers thereto perfect; and the most carnal
of them reckoned themselves perfected by those sacrifices but for a time.
Therefore it is most absurd, to assert, that the carnal Jews, whom the Apostle
writes against, did endeavor after a perfection of the law of works; 1.
Because they offered sacrifices, and made atonement for sin. 2. Because, when
they did make atonement, they reckoned they contracted new guilt, and were
perfect but for a time: Therefore the Apostle says, Romans 9.30, 31, 32. they
attained not to the righteousness of faith, because they sought their
righteousness as it were by the works of the law, not directly by perfect
obedience, but by such as they had, and not by faith in Christ's obedience, for
the Apostle is express in it, for they stumbled at that stumbling stone, which
was Christ, as the Apostle proves, Behold I lay in Sion a stumbling stone, etc.
3. When they offered they confessed Sin.

. 14. Mr. H. gives his Explication of this place, Romans 10.4. thus, For Christ
is the end of the Law for righteousness, i. e. as I construe it, Christ by his
satisfaction, has procured that we should not he judged by the law of works,
and consequently, that righteousness or justification be attained if we do
perform the terms of the Gospel.

Resp. Can Mr. H. be so irrational, as to think in his Judgment and Conscience,
that this is a genuine Interpretation- Here lies in the Text very fairly these
two things, 1. That the righteousness of God is explained by him particularly
to be the righteousness of Christ -- have not submitted to, i. e. accepted the
righteousness of God: What is that? the righteousness of Christ, for Christ is
the righteousness that answers the righteousness of the law, and this is the
righteousness of God. 2. The Design and great End of the Law was righteousness,
and perfect righteousness, unto Justification of Man, perfect cannot be
performed by fallen man, therefore God has provided a perfect righteousness in
Christ and he is this end of the law to every one that believes, and herein,
by justifying him by this righteousness, God is just, and the justifier of him
that believes in Jesus; and its the righteousness of faith, because its not
for Justification by any thing that evacuates or relaxeth the law of God, but
establishes it in seeking for, and laying hold upon Justification by a
righteousness that fully answers the law. How will it hold in Mr. H's. sense,
That Christ by his Satisfaction has procured, that we should not answer the
law of works, or that he should not be the end of the law of works for
righteousness to a Believer; but that a believer's performance of obedience to
the new law, should be the end of the law of works, for righteousness, which is
a direct contradiction to the Text. For he faith, Christ is the end of the law,
what law? of all law, of works, in way of Satisfaction of the Moral and
concurring Ceremonial as an Antitype; he and his righteousness is shadowed
forth thereby; he says not that Christ is the end of a law for a righteousness
of our performing, for that would be a contradiction; to fay the end of a law
is righteousness, and then Christ is the end of it for another righteousness,
and not his own; he should have said, believing is the end of the law for
righteousness to every one that believes. Lastly, What righteousness is it to
take us from under a law, or relax it, or procure that it shall not be
satisfied at all, and that the offender shall be justified by another Law?

. 15. The next Text is, He has made him sin for us who knew no sin that we
might be made the righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. i. e. says Mr. H.
the immaculate lamb made a Sacrifice for our sins, that we may become righteous
with the righteousness of God, which he accepts through him; Christ as a
Sacrifice redeems us from a Law of Sin, and purchases for us a law of grace,
according to that law we have a righteousness which is a righteousness accepted
unto life through Christ. Medioc. p. 28.

R. So that Mr. H's. meaning must be, That Christ was made Sin under the old
law, that we might have righteousness by him under the new law, and that what
Christ did under the old law, amounted to no righteousness to us; But he must
be righteousness to us under the New Law, and then Christ was made under the
New Law, which these men will deny, and be our righteousness there; no, say
they, not himself be our righteousness, but procure that we should be our own
righteousness; then the true meaning is here, That Christ was made Sin for us
-- that we should be our own righteousness; but how our righteousness in
Christ's? is our righteousness Christ's? then it is that we may be made Christ's
righteousness, becoming ours by Imputation: Christ being made sin for us, he
glosses upon as the Socinians, i. e. Christ the immaculate Lamb was made a
sacrifice for sin. It is true, Christ is expressly said to be a sacrifice for
sin, but how? 1. As the true Sacrifice, not as a typical, Heb. 9.26. 2. As a
Sacrifice to bear Sin; not less, but more than all the Sacrifices of Old, and
therefore it is said to be made sin for us; he was not a sinner by nature,
neither was his nature corrupted by his being made Sin for us, therefore he was
made sin by legal imputation; made sin, because put under the law, the Priests
and Sacrifices of old had the sins of the People laid upon them, sin was
charged on them, their own first for which they sacrificed, then the sins of
the People; but Christ did not only bear Sin as the Sacrifice that was slain,
but as Escape Goat also, for one Type could not hold forth the fullness of
Christ's Righteousness; therefore the Apostle says, he did not only bear sin,
but bore it away, Heb. 9.26, 28. Now its a strange thing that these men should
spit at this Doctrine of Christ's bearing Sin, one of late calling it Poison;
another saying, he bore not our very sins, and all, that he bore only suffering
for sin; I would know, how any can suffer for Sin. in Law or Justice, and not
legally bear the charge of sin? And how Christ came to be a Curse, if he bore
not Sin?

2. He bore Sin because he bore the Curse of the Law, he was made a curse, does
curse come upon any but for sin? Is there any in the World but for Sin?
therefore whatever subject has the curse of the law, has also the charge of
sin, for they are inseparable.

3. How dare any man be so audacious as to give the Spirit of God the lie, in
that it has so often and peremptorily asserted, We have gone astray -- and the
Lord has laid on him the iniquities of us all, he has caused them to meet
upon him; will you say that is the punishment of us all, when the Spirit of God
speaks so distinctly of punishment, v. 5. and tells us the reason, because he
bore sin, he was wounded for our transgression, because sin was laid upon him,
so v. 8. for the transgression of my people was he stricken, and least you
should be at a stand in this Point, about Christ's bearing sin, its expressed
again, as the reason of Christ's justifying many, v. 11. for he shall bear their
iniquities. Nay, its added the third time, and he bare the sins of many; so
that Christ's bearing Sin distinct from Punishment, is no less than three times
in this Chapter. It is also fully expressed in the New Testament, totidem verbis,
Heb. 9.28. Christ was once offered [there's his suffering] for what? to bear
the sins of many, and 1 Pet. 2.24. He his own self bare our sins in his body on
the tree; and in multitude of places, in expressions that are tantamount to
these; and now to say, that Christ did not bear sin, and all things that the
Law calls Sin, let it be as filthy and as vile as you will (for its so, because
its (...), for all (...) is (...), and we know he was manifest to take away all
sin; now is there any thing which you call the filth of sin, is it (...), is it
not then (...), the transgression of the law? if it be, Christ bore it; if he
did not, then it stands yet in Gods sight? and the handwriting of the law is
against you, and you are not justified; and why is Christ's Sacrifice said to
be the purging of sin, (...), many things might be said to show how properly
its spoken see Dr. Owen. I must for brevity sake only say, that it imports
Christ's purging us by Sacrifice from all that the law of God calls filthy in
sin: Then its objected, Christ was unclean. Answ. Not morally polluted, but
legally unclean, while he was under our sins, as the Sacrifices were, and
therefore he suffered without the camp.

Obj. Then the Saints have no sin, who give sufficient evidence that sin
remains in them.

Answ. The Saints are without spot before God in Point of Justification, they
are justified from all sin and filthy spot in Gods sight. 2. Sin remains in
them, and will do in Point of Sanctification, which is not perfect in this
life, but all in their sins that is a burden to them, that is odious and
filthy, was laid on Christ by Imputation, or else Christ died in vain, or made
not full satisfaction for their sins, and they are yet in their sins, and bear
them, and so unjustified. This I have a little the more enlarged upon for some
reasons.

. 16. I pray note it, its not said that his righteousness might become ours,
nor that we might be made his righteousness, but that we might be made the
righteousness of God.

Resp. Its said, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him, and
what is the righteousness of God in him but his righteousness? in him, shows
where this righteousness of God is, its in him, the Apostle speaks not of two
Subjects, but of one that is Christ; and is it not said, that his righteousness
may become ours? what is more plain? 1. Its said, as Christ was made sin, viz.
by Imputation, for its a legal making, so righteousness is made ours. 2. As our
sins are made Christ's, not by his Corruption, but being imputed to him
juridically; so his Righteousness is made ours in Justification before God. As
he was made Sin in our sins, so we are made Righteousness, in the righteousness
of God that is in him: The Phrase in him, determines expressly what the
righteousness of God is, unless men will be wilfully blind to plain Truth.

Lastly, What he says is in uncouth Terms, he says Christ redeemed us from
the law of sin, I find not the Moral Law any where so called, but the law of
sin is the Bent, Propensity and Inclination of our natures to sin, and so used
Romans 7.23.

2. He calls mere procurement, Satisfaction, which we have excepted against
before.

3. Its no sense to say, that Christ was made Sin in making agreement of
procuring to obtain any good thing for himself or us.

4. Why does he talk of Christ's Procurement, when he denis that which is the
thing here mentioned, as the next end of Christ's being made Sin, which is,
that we should be made the righteousness of God in Christ.

5. If he has procured that we should not be judged by the law of works, then
he has procured the repeal of the law, then it cease to be norma judicii,
and what satisfied it.

6. He has procured a new law, what is that to the righteousness of it, which
they deny to be procured by Christ? the Parliament procures an Act to pay the
King Taxes, but we the People must pay the Money.

CHAP. XIV. Other Places of Scripture Vindicated from False Glosses.
Section 1. Mr. Cl's False Gloss on Isa. 45.24.. 2. His Gloss on Jer. 23.6.
Examined.. 3. The Branch is Christ Priest as well as King.. 4. 1 Cor. 1.30.
Examined.. 5. Romans 4.6. Examined.. 6. Phil. 3.9. Examined.. 7. Romans 5.19.. 8.
And Heb. 7.22. Examined. 9. Further of Christ's Suretiship.

Section 1. THE false Glosses of Mr. Cl. are first upon Isa. 45.24. Surely
shall one say, in the Lord I have righteousness and strength; which, he says,
are words of the Deity in opposition to Idols, and that the most rebellious
shall submit to him, and the seed of Israel shall confess they have
righteousness by him, i.e. of his bestowing upon them in the same manner as
they have strength; for as he strengthens us, so he makes us righteousness,
upon which he deals with us as righteous persons, and justifies us.

Resp. The words are the words of Christ who is called Jehovah in diverse places
by the Prophets, but that they are the words of Jehovah in the Person of
Christ, I am told plainly by the Holy Ghost, Phil. 2.10. and Christ, Jehovah
swares, that every knee should bow, and every tongue confess, as the Apostle
says, at the Name of Jesus, for he says, he is a just God and a Savior, so
is Jesus, and there is no God or Savior but he; there is no other Name given,
therefore this Homage that he calls for is to him as Jehovah, Savior, (...),
Acts 4.12. 2. Its him, the ends of the earth, i.e. the Gentiles should look to,
to be saved by. 3. The great thing that hereby we are assured of, and promised
irreversibly is, that at the time when the Gentiles shall submit to Christ,
they shall acknowledge that in Jehovah the Savior, Christ, they have
righteousness and strength, its a force to the Text to render (...) by (from or
by) for its plainly in Jehovah, for in Christ is our righteousness and
strength, and because here is two things named, its no reason to say they come
to us the same way, the fullness of Christ both of righteousness for
Justification, by way of imputation, and strength for Sanctification: Now
according to these Men, to say, in Jehovah I have righteousness, is to say, in
my self I have righteousness and strength; but it denotes that the
righteousness that we are justified by is in Jehovah, v. 25. and its that which
is in Jehovah, for in the Lord shall all the seed of Israel, i. e. the true
seed, he justified, and glory, they shall also give God the Glory of the
strength they receive in Grace; for as Christ is made of God the righteousness,
so he is made the Fountain, Head and Root of their Sanctification, and this is
a special Prophecy of the latter days, when the Vail shall be removed, and the
Glory of Christ shine more brightly than to the Jews of old, who sought for
righteousness in themselves for the most part, and lived upon a Neonomian
righteousness, Christ Jehovah says it should not be so when the ends of the
earth came to be his inheritance, then men should renounce their own
righteousness, and acknowledge Christ's righteousness alone to be their
justifying righteousness, yet that all Grace and Holiness is treasured up in
him. 1. Its the righteousness of God, such Paul calls so. 2. Its the
righteousness of Justification. 3. Its a Righteousness of God in Christ
Jehovah. 4. Its a righteousness made ours by Imputation. 5. Its the
righteousness that every true Believer is justified by, for such are the Seed
of Israel in the days of the Gospel. 6. It is that righteousness not only to be
received to Justification, but to be rejoiced in; they shall rejoice in Christ
Jesus, having no confidence in their own fleshly righteousness.

. 2. Mr. Cl. p. 31. The next is Jer. 23.6. He shall be called the Lord our
Righteousness, Much of the same import with the former, the words are very
general without assigning how: Here are four Verses treating of Christ: I
observe every passage refers to his Kingly Office -- v. 6. must be understood
in a sense correspondent to the rest. v. That he is the Lord that does execute
Judgment and Righteousness for us; and I deny not but it may refer to a being
our Righteousness in senses agreeable to Scripture, as to be the author of our
righteousness.

Mr. H. Its not appropriated to the Second Person, but to be understood of the
Gospel-goodness of God, whereby he imputes righteousness to us, when we have
none according to the law of Creation -- signifying that God has found out a
means to demonstrate his Justice no less fully (and his goodness more fully) in
saving us by this new law through his Sons Mediation, than if we had kept our
first Innocence, or underwent eternal Judgment.

Resp. I find Mr. H. talks by roat, I suppose he did not so much as turn to
Text when he wrote, for he speaks too, so absurdly, as that he manifests plain
Ignorance of the Text, as to say, that its not appropriate to the Son; and
indeed all that follows, but I find Mr. H. takes his blowing upon a Place of
Scripture to be enough to carry away all the Sense and Authority of it. I find
Mr. Cl. has looked much further into the Text, and so far contradicts Mr. H. as
that it is appropriate to Christ, but takes it to belong to his Kingly Office
what is their said; but is not so peremptory as to deny, but it may be
understood of Christ being our Righteousness in other Senses, we plead but for
one Sense, and that we shall endeavor to make good. The Prophecy, as Mr. Cl.
says, belongs to Christ who is often entitled (...) in the Prophets; and the
Prophet foretells at least the Days of his Incarnation and Exaltation, the
rising up of his Glory from small unlikely and contemptible Beginnings, Isa.
53.2, 3. he is called, Isa. 11.1. a Science (...), out of the Stemm of Jesse,
and (...) a Branch, or Sprout out of David's Roots, and he is called a Branch
especially in that he sprung out of the then obscure House of David as to his
Humane Nature, and sprang up in a State of Humiliation and Suffering, yet he
should arise to a glorious Throne, for he should sit upon the Throne of David
to Order and Establish it, etc. Isa. 9.9. I deny not, but the Kingly Reign and
Government is here spoken of, but this is not all that is said of him, when he
is entitled the Branch, we have not only his Kingly Qualifications spoken of
but his Prophetical and Priestly, Isa. 11.1, 2, 3, 4. As its said, he should
Judge in Righteousness, so its said, Righteousness should be the girdle of his
Loins, as the Highpriests; and so here he speaks not only of his Kingly
Justice, but of his Priestly Righteousness; for he says, as King he shall
Reign and Prosper, so he shall Work Judgment and Righteousness in the Earth;
(...), He shall Work Judgment and Righteousness, i. e. shall in the State of
his Humiliation Work out Judgment and Righteousness, or while on Earth, and it
seems to be the genuine meaning in that he had spoken of his Kingly Reign
before, and immediately speaks of Judah's Salvation and Security therein, and
the Reason of it should be that he should be called the Lord our Righteousness,
because he should be so famous not only for Reigning Righteousness, but also
for Redeeming; and it is in this respect the Righteousness of God, and then Gods
in Jehovab Christ, and then ours by giving it to us, and in imputing it to us;
for we find that not only the Kingly Righteousness as is ascribed to the
Branch, but also a Priestly, Zech. 6.13. and what is it that shall be done by
this Kingly Priest? The removal of the Iniquities of the Land in one Day, Zech.
3.9.

. 3. Hence we see this Branch is Jesus Christ, this Branch is set forth to be a
King and Priest, He shall bear the Glory, and Rule, and be a Priest upon the
Throne, Zech. 6.13. And he shall be such a Branch as to be the Stone of Israel,
i. e. the Corner Stone as the Lamb, Rev. 5. with seven Eyes, and should remove
and take away the Iniquity of the Land in one Day, i. e. by his Righteousness,
but you say, how comes he to be our Righteousness? God makes him so, read the
Text right, for (...) is not Passive in Niph, but Active, therefore its thus,
this is the Name which he shall call him, i. e. The Lord that would raise up to
David a righteous Branch, as King, and Priest, a Priest of the Tribe of Judah,
a Melchizedeck. This God shall put this Name upon him, the Lord our
Righteousness; let us go a little further yet, and the Spirit of God will tell
us the full intent and meaning of this great Name of Christ, see Jer. 33.15.
And there we shall find the very same Prophecy repeated with a little
Alteration, before God says, The Day is come, that I will perform the good
thing promised to the House of Israel, and the House of Judah, what is that, I
will cause the Branch of Righteousness (...) inde, by way of Eminency, the
Branch that shall flourish in all Righteousness, Kingly and Priestly, and
Israel shall be saved, etc. He shall be Jesus a Savior of his People by
Righteousness, and this is the Name by which she, i. e. Israel and Judah shall
be called, the Church, (...) Jehovah our Righteousness, Jehovah-zidkenu; now
this Place, I find is a Noli me tangere to some Divines, let the Men that look
upon the Place as so dangerous, read the Hebrew Text, and they must understand
a great Gospel Mystery, that this great Name whereby the Father has graciously
as to us, and honorably as to him should be put upon the Church, sure its to
show that the Righteousness of God in Christ is put upon the Church; that she
is made the Righteousness of Jehovah in Christ, and you will say, why so great
and sacred a Name on the Church, is not this the Name of God only, whose Name
alone is Jehovah? Yes, Jehovah is, but Jehovah-zidkenu is Christ's and the
Churches, and this is the new Name she is called by, which the Mouth of the
Lord has spoken, Isa. 62.5. but you will say, it seems too great for the Church,
and it makes Christ a Public Person, there is no doubt of the last, the Church
is called Christ, being one Mystical Body with him, 1 Cor. 12.12. But seems
it too great for the Church to be thus called? Its the new Name which the Mouth
of the Lord has given, and its a Name of a real Thing, God has made it
righteous in Christ's Righteousness, and why not as well as the Place on Mount
Moriah, which Abraham called Jehovah Jireh, and its said (says Moses) to this
Day, in the Mount the Lord will be seen, and so Moses Builds an Altar, and
calls it Jehovah Nissi, the Lords my Banner. Likewise Gideon calls an Altar
Jehovah Shalom, Judge. 6.24.

. 4. Mr. Cl. says, that 1 Cor. 1.30. seems to have a great Affinity to this,
for he is our Righteousness, and made unto us Righteousness is much alike.

Resp. Especially when God makes him our Righteousness, and calls him so, for
the Words are, Who of God is made unto us, Wisdom, etc. But he says, Christ is
not Wise and Holy in our stead, neither does it follow then that he is Actively
Righteous in our stead; but the meaning is, he is the procuring meritorious
Cause, by his perfect Obedience has satisfied the Law, and procured a new Way
of Righteousness by Faith, Sanctification.

Resp. The Words are not, Christ is Wise and Holy in our stead, but that Christ
is made of God to us what he is there said to be, whether Wisdom as a Prophet
to teach us, or Righteousness as a Priest, to Cloth us with the Garment of
Salvation and Robe of Righteousness; and that he is made of God to be what he
is in the diverse Ways and manner of Being or Conveying, what we have from him,
he is our Wisdom by way of teaching, Righteousness by way of Sacrifice,
Sanctification by being the Treasure of all Grace and Holiness which God
bestows, he is Redemption, in that all the Promises of Inchoation and
Consummation of Redemption are yea and Amen in him. But Mr. Cl. makes
Righteousness and Sanctification all one, and Christ being to us all these
Things one way by meriting and procuring, we have as much right to say too,
that Christ is all these one Way, viz. by Imputation, because we are sure he is
Righteousness to us by Imputation, but why is Active annexed to Righteousness,
he might have excluded his whole Righteousness by what follows, both Active and
Passive intentionally. But is not Christ righteous in our stead, when he
satisfied Gods Law and Justice in our stead? For what? For any wrong we had
done unto the Law of God; I pray, is not that our Righteousness which is
Righteousness in our stead; but these Men will have Satisfaction, and no
Satisfaction, only a new Bargain or Purchase; likewise a Satisfaction, but not
for us, so their Satisfaction which they will have Christ make is no Payment
for us nor accounted so by God, nor any Satisfaction to him for any wrong we
have done him, that which Christ has done is a Purchase of a Righteousness; he
says, we say Righteousness is the Purchase Money, accounted to us; so that
Christ is not only a Procurer and Bestower, but he has something to procure
and Purchase by, he has something to offer, now as God has made Christ, the
satisfying Price and Ransom-mony, so he is made of God Righteousness to us; but
with Mr. Cl. Righteousness and Sanctification is all one, this is hard dealing
with Jehovah our Righteousness, these Men are as the Jews of Old, that would
not be subject to the Righteousness of God.

. 5. Mr. Cl. Another is Romans 4.6. pressed to serve this Cause. As David describes
the blessedness of the Man to whom the Lord imputes Righteousness without
Works; say they, the Righteousness of Christ, but its clear, its not meant of
any thing in another Person that is imputed for Righteousness, but something in
a Man's self, by the whole Tenor of the Chapter, and by ver. 9. where he says,
Faith was reckoned for Righteousness; so that the Righteousness imputed here
spoken of is inherent, graciously accounted Righteousness, but in strict
Justice is not so, nor according to the Original Law, etc.

Resp. This plain Place which stands a Rock against all Popish and Neonomian
Attempts, he calls pressed into our Service, or Cause; no it comes in freely,
it is a Volunteer, and mighty through God to cast down all their Confidence and
Imaginations, where is the clearness in all this Chapter, or Psalm from whence
its taken? is it not clear for the Imputation of another Righteousness? Is
there any thing of self-righteousness? Faith is spoken of as accounted to
Abraham for Righteousness, but we have shown that, that which was imputed to
Abraham for Righteousness, was the Righteousness of the promised Seed; for the
Gospel, which is the Doctrine of Christ's Righteousness was Preached to him in
the Promise, and he by Faith saw Christ's Day of Expiation and Atonement, this
he reached by Faith, and it was imputed to him not Faith it self, not the Arm
that reached it, but the Righteousness it self. There Is a Plain Instance in the
Gospel, where what the Object of Faith does, is ascribed by a Metonymy to Faith
it self, Mat 9.21, 22. The diseased Woman touched the Hem of Christ's Garment,
and was made whole, and Christ says, Woman thy Faith has made thee whole. And
we see Mark 9.29, 30. where is the same Narrative, that Christ perceived that
Virtue was gone out of him, and yet says, ver. 34. Thy Faith has made thee
whole; now I would know of these Men, whether it was Christ's Virtue that
healed the Woman, or the Virtue of her Faith, Faith as an Act of hers that made
her whole? See Luke 7.39, 42, 47, 48, 50. Likewise the stung Israelites were
healed by looking on the Brazen Serpent, was the healing Virtue in the Brazen
Serpent, or in their own Eyes. Let us now examine then how clear it is, that
the Place is not meant of the Righteousness of another. The Apostle says, that
David describes the righteousness of the man to whom the Lord imputes
righteousness without works.

1. The Apostles design in the whole Chapter is to prove our Justification by a
righteousness which is not made up of works of our own, and the Neonomians say,
his design is to prove, Justification by works, are not these contradicentia?
the Apostle, negat ubique, they say, by some works only, the Apostle means
works of the old law, they the works of the new; Its strange the Apostle did
not except and secure works of the new law; but I suppose, as for the works of
the new law he never heard of them, thence his altum silentium about the new
law and its works too. He says David was justified, or Justification was with
a righteousness without works, and yet David might plead his own works to
Justification, as well as any Neonomian.

1. He was no carnal Jew that sought Justification by the law of Works, as
appears by Psalm. 51.

2. If there was any Justification then by New-Law works (as indeed there was
not then or now) David sure must be under the New Law for Justification, and he
must needs know the works thereof, whereby he expected to be justified; and
therefore I thus argue, If David knew he was justified by works, and blessed
therein, then he deals falsely, or the Apostle greatly mistakes him, in saying
that David proves the blessedness of the man, etc. the consequent is of
absolute necessity, and the assumption must, tollere anteced. ut tollat conseq.
for they were both inspired, and therefore could not deceive themselves nor us
in this great Point.

Arg. If David proves a righteousness without his own works, either old or
new-law works, then it must be works of another that he intends, for there is no
righteousness without works of some or another; if he plainly mean the
exclusion of his own works, then he must mean some righteousness of another,
and not his own, as appears by this Psalm. 31. and also 51. Now we shall prove
that David means the Righteousness of Christ, and not of the New Law.

1. That righteousness by which sin is forgiven is not New-Law righteousness,
but Christ's, and without our works, but the righteousness is such here. The
major is proved from the Neonomians themselves, who say, there is no forgiveness
in Justification by Works, but forgiveness is consequent of it, for that they
go to the old Law Bar, that the righteousness whereby sin is forgiven is the
righteousness of Christ, because its expressed by blood, remission is not
without blood, and forgiveness being one Medium by which the Apostle proves
Justification without works.

2. That righteousness which covers from the eye of God's Justice in the law,
is a righteousness without our works, and another, and no^ of the New Law, but
such is the righteousness here spoken of,; such as covers sin from the eye of
God's Justice in the Law, such covering David meant, as appears Psalm. 51.9.
Hide thy face from my sin, and blot out all mine iniquity; now its such
righteousness as will take off the Eye of Divine Justice from our sins, yea
cancel and blot out iniquity. Now as to the major it appears by the Neonomian
Doctrine, that their righteousness in Justification does not cover sin; for
they say, its a sinful righteousness, and needs pardon, therefore their
righteousness cannot cover sin, which is sinful in it self, and there can be no
righteousness but Christ's that can cover sin; Men's own righteousnesses are far
from being such covering.

3. That righteousness through which God imputes not sin to any chargeable
therewith is a righteousness of another, but this righteousness without works
is such, Ergo. The minor is plain by the Apostle, for what the Apostle
rehearses from the Prophet, is David's description of this righteousness
without works. The major is clear from what went before, no man has
righteousness enough to cover his own sin. Neither can God not impute sin where
he sees sin to be more than righteousness, God must impute Sin where Sin is
seen uncovered by righteousness; therefore if there be a righteousness through
which God imputes not sin, its certain its not ours, but Christ's only.

4. That Righteousness through which God imputes not Sin is justifying
Righteousness, and Christ's alone, but the Apostle speaks of such a
Righteousness. Now the major is plain, that Christ's Righteousness is that
through which God imputes not sin, for he says, Cor. 5.9. God was in Christ
reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses.

. 4. And so likewise, Phil. 3.9. is of the same import [they have one answer
for all] This Place should have been handled in the former Chapter, but Mr. Cl.
missing it there, led me out. Here Mr. Cl. says, Paul disclaims only his legal
righteousness which he had before Conversion, not his Gospel Righteousness,
viz. his Repentance, Faith, Love, Humility, etc. And its the same thing Mr. H.
says, Med. 31. and tells us, the Protestants are mistaken in their
interpretation. 1. Because the righteousness of God is not the same with the
righteousness of Christ, as has been observed.

R. That we have disproved, and proved it a false Assertion, and proved, that
the righteousness of God is the righteousness of Christ in all the
forementioned places, and is as easily proved here, for the righteousness which
he opposes to his own righteousness, indefinitely, without any exception, is
Christ's, that I may be found in him, in Christ, not having mine own
righteousness, therefore in Christ, is another, which righteousness of mine
own working is (...), legal, as all righteousness of our own by which we seek
Justification is legal, it cannot in any sense be called Evangelical, therefore
Paul would be found in Gospel righteousness, which is Christ's only, and this is
God's righteousness which we receive by believing, (...).

2. You are to know that this righteousness which Paul calls his own, in this
Text, is the righteousness of a Jew and Pharisee, not his own as a Christian,
this appears from the Verses before v. 4. and this appears further from Romans
10.1, 2.

R. The righteousness of a Jew or Pharisee was a new-law righteousness, for
they were all Neonomian. Paul could not look upon himself as Perfect, but as to
his moral conversation, comparatively blameless; he was sincere, for he had
great zeal, and verily thought he did God good Service in persecuting the
Church. But Mr. H. should have looked to the beginning of the Chapter, where he
bids them beware of absolutely profane, of evil workers, that carry on
mischievous Designs under fair Shows, and lastly, of the concision, (...),
those that were so fond of their new-law Notions, so as to cast off Christ, or
cut themselves off from him, but we are of the true circumcision, whereby all
our fleshly Conceits are cut off, and worship God in the Spirit, rejoicing in
Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh, a fleshly conceit of our own
righteousness, in which I had more ground to rejoice than any; and accordingly
he tells how exactly he had conformed to Mose's Law, and performed the
condition of it as much as any Pharisee of them all, and had as much reason to
expect Justification by this new imperfect righteousness as any that now do,
but Christ had now taught him better things, what then I counted gain, I now
count loss for Christ, I find I had nothing that advantaged while I was
ignorant of Christ, and therefore I find now, that not only my Pharisaical
righteousness was loss to me, but any present self-righteousness, even now at
this time, (...), I do now esteem all things to be damage, for the excellency
of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, etc. and account them dung that I may
gain Christ, and he tells us what he means by that, that I may be now found in
him, what in respect of holiness, yea especially in respect of righteousness,
not having now my own righteousness, viz. that of the works of the law, (...),
that which is legal, for so all his righteousness that a man seeks
Justification by is (...), it is of a law, but what is the righteousness he
would be found in? (...), that righteousness which I have by the faith of
Christ, the righteousness which is of God, for such is that by faith, the
righteousness which God gives, and Christ has, in whom it is, and I do
receive by faith; this whole verse treats of his Justification and the
righteousness thereof, and the following verses treat of the the Sanctification
he looks after in Christ; and v. 9. there its certain that Paul opposes the
righteousness of Christ not only to the righteousness of the law, but to his
own righteousness in the largest consideration, any thing of his own now: What
he says to Romans 10.1. is answered before. The Christians Faith, and new
Obedience, out of doubt, by God's help, are his righteousness.

Resp. These men will hold their Conclusion, let the Scripture say what it
will. Then the import of the Apostle must be thus, That I may be found in
Christ not having mine own righteousness, which is of the old law, but my
righteousness of the New Law through faith, the righteousness which is of God
by faith.

Paul's righteousness as a Jew and Pharisee was one thing, and Paul's Faith and
Obedience, which is his righteousness as a Christian, is another. To which I
answer, 1. That Paul's righteousness after Conversion is here directly opposed
to the righteousness of Christ, for he would not be found in his own, but this
righteousness of Christ, to be found in it, i. e. by judicial Enquiry, his own
righteousness cannot be holiness, or the having it, for he does not, nor would
say, he would not be found having of holiness.

2. There can be no Gospel-righteousness of our own that stands in competition
with the righteousness of Christ for Justification, for then its legal and
fleshly.

3. A man's own righteousness, whether before or after pretended Conversion, is
his own, of the same nature and kind, whatever he himself may think of it.

4. If it was Paul's Judgment that his works was only changed from one law to
another, and thought that he was now to be justified by his Gospel-Works, he
was as far from the Kingdom of Heaven as before; for one law can no more
justify a man by his own works than another, therefore rejects all
righteousness of a law.

5. He is very full in expressing what righteousness he would be found in, in
no righteousness of his own, for all such is legal, in the righteousness of
Christ, in him, this he tells us is the righteousness which faith lays hold on,
and this is the righteousness of God, which God imputes to Justification, and
the sinner receives by faith.

6. He intends not any thing here of Sanctification in this v. but speaks
singly and by it self, of it in the next; neither does he call it his
righteousness, but in this ver. sets aside all his works, tho he shows his
value of them in their place, yet as for any place in Justification, he counted
them but Dross and Dung. He adds the Words of our Savior, except your
righteousness exceeds the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, which is
against him, for no man's righteousness exceeds theirs, which stand in his own
for Justification before God: It must not be our own that can, it must be
Christ's alone, for no other exceeds theirs.

. 7. Mr. Cl. The next Text is, by the obedience of one shall many be made
righteous. Romans 5.19. Here Mr. Cl. and Mr. H. both exclude Christ's active
obedience, as having nothing to do. Mr. H. says, this is perfect Antinomian
Faith, and excludes Repentance quite out of this life. I must tell him, I am
sorry he understands Repentance no better; those that he calls Antinomian knows
how to reconcile Christ's Perfections and their Duties together, I see, better
than he does, as if Christ being a perfect Second Adam, did exclude Grace from
us, where it is of his fullness for righteousness and holiness that we receive
and exercise Grace, but so much only by the way, as a Mark upon the Dirt that
he often throws on the Protestants and Reformers, and upon the Lord Jesus
Christ himself; I must confess, that I answer him with more mildness than he
deserves. As to the exclusion of the active obedience of Christ, there is no
ground for it in the Text, but quite contrary; the design of the Apostle in the
2d part of the Chapter, from v. 12. is to show how Sin and Death entered by the
First Adam, and how Righteousness and Life entered by the Second Adam. He
accordingly compares them together as contraries, shows that the first was a
Figure of the other, in his general nature, but after shows notwithstanding
their agreement in a general nature, how greatly they differ specifically, sin
entered into the World by the First Adam, by imputation of his Sin and by
Propagation; so Righteousness by Imputation, and Life as the Promise annexed
unto the Second Adam. The First Adam was a Type or Figure of the Second.

1. In that the First was a Public Foederal and Seminal Head, to all his
Posterity, so the Second was to all his; and therefore upon the Fall of Man
from the Perfection of the Law, the Second is made under the Law, and stands in
all the Perfection of it, as a Public Head to all his spiritual Seed: Now that
Christ's active obedience is not excluded in the Text, appears by the plain
Antithesis of the First Adam's disobedience, to the Second's obedience; for
where disobedience and obedience are set one against another, then as the one
is actual sin, so the other is positive obedience; for if only passive
obedience be here meant, then it should be said, as by one man's disobedience
many were made sinners, so by the Sufferings or Satisfactions of one many were
made righteous.

2. The First in the Figure was a Public Person, in respect of his actual
obedience or disobedience to the Law of God, therefore the Second Adam must be
a Public Person also in respect of his active obedience, or else he answers
not to the Figure.

3. Christ could not be without active obedience as the Head and Root of his
Church, the Root must be actually holy, or else the Branches cannot be so.

4. It was essential to his High Priesthood to be holy, harmless, etc. as such,
and a High Priest is a Public Person, and stands for the People, I could be
very large in proving that Christ's active obedience belongs to that
righteousness of Christ by which we are justified; but I shall not have room
here. Mr. Cl. makes as if he would exclude Christ's active obedience only from
righteousness, but it is the passive also which both he and Mr. H. strikes at,
for he says, As by Adam's sin all his posterity were brought into a state of
sin, so that by the Merits of Christ's sufferings they are brought into such a
state as that they may be made righteous.

Resp. i. e. They are brought into such a capacity by Christ's purchasing a new
law, that they may possibly be righteous by their own righteousness; So that
Adam by his sin brought his into a state of sin, but Christ by his
righteousness does procure a possibility of a righteousness for his; so that
the Second Adam comes short of the First in Conveiance, whereas the Apostle
has much more, Romans 5.17. If by one man's offense death reigned by one, much
more the grace of God, and the gift by grace, has abounded unto many, v. 15.
So if by the offense of one, death reigned by one, much more they which receive
abundance of Grace, and of the gift of righteousness, shall reign in life by
one Jesus Christ.

. 8. Mr. Cl. Christ is called the Surety of a better Covenant Heb. 7.22. Whence
some infer, that he has paid the debt of obedience to God for us; Interpreters
generally assign two ways wherein Christ is a Surety, 1. By undertaking for God
to us, or his becoming Security for God, that he should make good his Covenant
to us on his part. 2. By undertaking for us to God, that we should perform the
Condition of the Covenant, the first the Polonian Merchants, Grotius and
Hammond are for; the Protestants generally stick to this latter, that Christ is
our Surety, by undertaking for us to God; that we shall fulfill the Condition of
the Covenant by yielding that obedience that is required of us therein.

Resp. Mr. Cl. tells of the Merchants that they the Neonomians do trade with,
and indeed most of their Commodities have Polonian stamps, not to treat so
large as to handle all that might be said of the Suretiship of Christ, it being
the very Hinge of our Salvation; though the Neomonian, as well as the Polonian
Merchants make very slight of it, and Mr. H. in Particular, because he says,
its but once used in the New Testament. I say it is therefore a Pearl of great
Price, for I could Instance in several (...), which the Spirit of God has used
in the Old and New; which do express singular Truths and Mysteries not common,
I shall only Note some things generally that are Truths I will stand by, as 1.
That Christ is not a Metaphorical Surety, but the most proper Surety that ever
was, and the Exemplar of all Sureties. 2. That the Word (...), signifies a
Surety for Debt. 3. That is a Surety of the better Covenant, i. e. of the
Covenant of Grace, not that he was a Surety of the Performance of that
Covenant, but that he is the Surety in that Covenant, that is bound to pay the
Debt that we owe to the Justice of God in the Covenant of Works which we have
broken; and he is not such a Surety, as to be bound to the Justice of God, that
we should pay the Debt [the Lord have Mercy on Neonomians] but he has
undertaken to pay the whole Debt for us; every Farthing, if he had been such a
Surety as Mr. Cl. speaks of; we were in a miserable Condition. I know the
Neonomians do mostly incline to be with their Polonian Merchants, in Mr. Cl.
first Point mentioned as to God's Suretiship to us, but it is no great Matter
where they be, the second Particular being worse than the former; for Christ to
be engaged to God, that we shall pay the Debt that we owe to the Law of God by
Adams fall and our Sin; i. e. that we shall satisfy Gods Justice for the wrong
done, and that we shall perform perfect Obedience to the Law; thus much Man
must pay, tho a poor insolvent wretched Creature, and Christ has engaged to
see it done, but not to pay any thing of the Debt himself: And indeed I can
prove this to be the true Account of their Doctrine; for they say, Christ has
procured and merited of God a new Law, whereby the old Law is relaxed or
repealed (not paid or satisfied) a new one is set up, the Condition whereof we
performing we shall be justified, but procured not, nor merited the Condition
to be performed by us. Now I would fain know, whether Christ was a Surety for
that which he never Purchased, is Christ a Surety, that we shall perform the
Condition of the Covenant, and never merited Faith and Obedience, what a kind
of Surety will they have Christ, to engage for our Performance, and not take
care that we should have the cum quo? But Mr. Cl. seems not to be quite
satisfied with this second Way. He adds a Third to mend the Matter a little, at
least to put a gloss upon it, viz. 3. To discharge that Debt of Suffering,
which we did owe the Law for the Transgressing of it.

Resp. Ay Sir, now you say something, you bring a Surety with Money in his
Hands, we use indeed to say, that a Man should never be bound for another,
unless he resolve to pay the Debt; Christ knew well enough how Poor we should
be, when he undertook this Suretiship: Well, let us see whether Christ clears
the score for us, or whether he does leave a considerable part of the Debt for
us to pay our selves: It may be, that which the Law is primarily and mostly
concerned at, and that for a wise Neonomian End, viz. That if he should pay
all, the Sinner would prove an Idle Antinomian, and Shabby-fellow, having
nothing to do himself, and nothing to pay; therefore Christ indeed paies some
of the Debt, but lays up the Sinner in a Workhouse to pay the rest at his
Fingers ends; For says Mr. Cl. Now take it in which of these Three Ways you
will, yet there is nothing of his paying the Debt of Active Obedience.

Resp. A very sad Story indeed, a great noise of a Surety, that would pay the
whole Debt of the poor Man in Prison, and when the Matter is strictly enquired
into, he has only prevailed that he should not be whipped so often in Bridewel,
though agreed that he should have the Lash too pretty severely sometimes; but
as for the greatest Part of the Debt he must Work it out, at least so far as a
new Law of his which he has procured and made does require. Well, when all
comes to all, here is nothing done to free the Sinner, but he must pay all the
good Money by the Sweat of his Brows, for Active Obedience to the Law is indeed
that which the Law sets a High value upon, being the first and main Thing that
it designs and aims at; and it does expect not only to be satisfied for
Disobedience but must be obeyed, yea and it must be paid by perfect Obedience
too not by imperfect: Now says our Neonomian, Christ was no Surety to pay any
of our Debt of Active Obedience; how then, has he made no Provision in this
Case? Yes truly, he has done something that may help a little, He has taken
down the old strict Law that kept the Sinner at continual hard-work, and
brought in a new easy remedying Law, then he makes choice of his own Work and
business and his own Time, and work at leisure, only must have the Lash now and
then, and besure that he Work when he is going to Die, and the Condition shall
be performed and the Debt paid. Now I only briefly argue, if Christ was a
Surety, it was to pay all our Debt in Active and Passive Obedience or none; for
Christ paid not by halves, though the Passive Obedience is hardest, yet the
active is hardest to do, the damned can suffer, and shall, but can pay nothing
of the debt by active obedience to the preceptive part of the Law. Well, Christ
was a Surety to pay all our Debt by active and passive obedience, for else his
righteousness would be imperfect, the law left unsatisfied, and we most certain
to perish that could never pay, there is no obedience of the Saints that
satisfies the Law, Christ performed that as a Public Person in their Stead, as
well as he bore the passive too, whence the payment of the Debt was full and
complete; but the Neonomians will have this part of active obedience left for
us to pay, and our active obedience shall be imputed to us for righteousness,
though Christ's shall not: So to gather up these men's Suretiship of Christ it
is thus, Christ in his transaction with the Father agrees with him, 1. That he
would pay one half of the Debt, and we should pay the other and the best half
too. 2. That seeing therefore if we should grow insolvent as not to be able to
make the payment of our part in current Money according to the first Law, that
he would purchase a new law, and not satisfy the old, but repeal it, and the
new law should make all our Brass Money current, and that God should take that
Money for our part, and for his accepting it he becomes Surety for God to us,
and thus they come to agree with the Polonian Merchants.

. 9. The Word used Heb. 7.22 is (...) it signifies, praes satisfactionibus
obnoxious, one made liable to make satisfaction for another, and therefore
sponsor and fide-jussor; Praes we are told was an ancient Title of a Surety
being one that answered the cause of the Commonwealth, to which he was bound,
for any it had a complaint against, therefore he was asked by the Magistrate
when he appeard, number praes sit, he answered Praes sum, which imported two
things, 1. That he appeared praes sum quia prae sum, i. e. coram, I appear
before you. 2. That he appeared not for himself, but for another, in his place
or room, as a public Person, and Representative of the person or persons for
whom he appeared; what he did he did in the person of him that was represented
by him, and so owns himself either fide-jussor on his behalf, or sponsor, for
that the person charged should give satisfaction, or he himself would do it;
but when the person represented is apparently insolvent, and never likely to be
otherwise, the Sponsor's obligation is not upon conditional terms, if the
Principal do not, but he becomes bound absolutely to pay the whole Debt; Christ
was thus an absolute Surety for Man insolvent to God in his Law and Justice, to
pay the whole Debt due from Man to God: For it was clear to both the Father and
the Son, that upon the foreseen Fall Man would be an absolute Bankrupt, and
never able to pay a Farthing of the Debt; hence says Dr. Gouge, Christ was a
Surety to God for Man, of whom the Law required two things, 1. Perfect
obedience to the Laws Precepts. 2. Full satisfaction for sin, both these Christ
performed, Romans 5.19. 2 Cor. 5.21. Gal. 3.13. according to whose judgment we
hold the Doctrine of the Suretiship of Christ. Then from what has been said,
we may conclude. That the Suretiship of Christ does eminently belong to his
Mediatorial Office, whereby he has absolutely engaged himself in the Covenant
of Grace, to stand and appear for, to answer for us, and satisfy all the
Demands of Justice in the Law, according to the full, true and perfect tenor of
it, on the behalf of all the Elect, and has answered, satisfied, and does
appear for them accordingly. I shall speak to this Description particularly, in
Brief. 1. This Suretiship eminently belongs to his Mediators Office, because
hereby he Mediates to make up the Difference between God and Man; and was
called to it by his Father. 2. Because it belongs to his Priestly Office, as
the Text shows, in so much that his Father constituted him Surety, by that Oath
whereby he made him Priest after the Order of Melchizedeck, ver. 20, 21. And by
so much, he was a better Surety and Priest than any of Old, in that God never
swear that any of them should be Priests for ever after the Order of
Melchizedeck. 3. It essentially belongs to his Mediators Office in making
Reconciliation, as might be amply shown, if these and other Places be
considered, Heb. 2.17. Ephesians. 2.17. Col. 1.20, 21. Romans 5.10. 2 Cor. 5.18. 2. In
that he is a Surety of the better Testament, because its that better Testament
that his Mediators Office, more eminently and fully, according to the Tenor of
the Covenant of Grace shines forth in, called the New Testament, Heb. 9.15. The
fuller and clearer, and most lasting Revelation of Christ, where he is set as
the only High priest over the House of God, and the Surety thereof, here in
better Testament or New Testament, is an express Opposition to the Old
Testament Dispensation, which was the Exhibition of the Covenant of Grace more
legally and vaild, and under temporal Promises; and therefore the Apostle calls
faulty, compare Heb. 8. with 2 Cor. 3. wherefore Christ is called the
High Priest and Surety of this better Testament, the Covenant being therein
more perspicuous and manifest; wherein Christ has his Constitution and
Establishment as Surety to his Church. 3. He has become Surety by Covenant
engagement unto God, if thou shall make thy Soul an Offering for Sin, etc. Lord
I come to do thy Will, etc. all this is by way of Covenant-Agreement, freely
engaging on both sides; therefore he is Surety by this Covenant, and not for
himself; but for Sinners, Debtors to Gods Law, therefore a Public Person. 4.
He is to stand for others to represent them before God, for what Promises are
made to him is to them in him; and its i. e. what he does is for them, what he
engages to pay is in their Persons and Room. 5. He promises absolutely to pay
their Debts, and all the Debts and Demands of that Law both as to Active
Obedience and Passive, both as to Obedience and Suffering, the Debt of
Obedience to the Preceptive Part of the Law, and the Debt of Punishment as to
the vindictive Part of the Law, and in order thereto to write himself Debtor,
to bear their Sins, and to be made Sin by Imputation, and this he does not
conditionally, if they don't Pay, but absolutely knowing they could never Pay,
nor upon Terms of their performing the Condition of a New Law; but by absolute
Obligation to perform the Conditions of this Law which they had offended and
broke, and by bearing this Sin and Curse of this Law, and reconciling them to
God in respect of this Law, and that not by giving an equivalent but by paying
the same, according to the true intent and meaning of the Tenor of the Law. 6.
This Engagement he performed as to us in Time, but to God that dwells in
Eternity, there is no Time, nor Succession; Christ was set up from Eternity,
Prove. 8. as Surety, a Thousand Years are to God but as one Day, and much less,
therefore Christ's Execution of his Suretiship on Earth in the Days of his Flesh
was Eternally before the Lord; hence he is said to be slain from the Foundation
of the World; hence the faithful before his coming had a full (...), or
Remission of Sin through this Covenant Relation of Christ, there was not a
(...) or passing them by for Remission, till Christ was actually Slain, but
they had the Virtue of his Death as fully as we, Heb. 4.15. 7. He continues our
Surety that has paid, standing and pleading his full Satisfaction for us,
therefore is our Surety now since Payment, carrying his own Blood into the
Holiest of all, and there making Intercssion for us.

CHAP. XV. More Places of Scripture Vindicated from False Glosses.
Section 1. Of Daniel 9.24.. 2. Of Ephesians. 1.4.. 3. 2 Cor. 5.19. examined.. 4.
Of Gal. 5.7, 8.. 5. The Sense of the Apostle James.. 6. Mr. H. and Mr. Cl.
Answered.

Section 1. MR. Hum. interprets Daniel 9.24. thus, He shall make reconciliation
for iniquity, and so shall bring in an everlasting righteousness, i. e. he
should by his death procure a Covenant or Law of Grace; by our performance
whereof (without the law) we are righteous and must be saved. It Is that is our
righteousness, if Christ had not procured for us this New Law we could not be
saved.

Resp. Let us see how Mr. H's. Gloss will hold with the Text, for I am sure it
holds not with the Analogy of Faith, Seventy weeks shall be distributed [(...)
in which word lies the Key of the Prophecy, not to our purpose now to speak
to] upon thy People [i.e. the Church of the Jews here] and upon the City of thy
Holiness [or Holy City] to finish transgression, to make an end of sin [these
Events seem in our English to be the same, but they are not in the Original,
the first is most agreeable to the Margent] (...) to restrain transgression, i.
e. by the Reformation of Ezra and Nehemiah, in the compass of these 72 Weeks,
but to make an end (...) make an end of sins or sin offerings, by the offering
up of Christ within the 72 Weeks] and to make expiation for sin [true, not
typical, and perfect Expiation by the Expiation made by the Blood of Christ]
and to bring everlasting righteousness [(...) to bring in eternal
righteousness, or the righteousness of ages Lxx (...): We shall go no further
in the Prophecy, This Prophecy is generally owned to belong to the first coming
of Christ, and in this Verse the time is set in a mysterious manner to the
coming of Christ, his offering up and erecting the Gospel Church, the Angels
the Events that should fall out in this compass of time, especially toward the
latter end, in the Sacrifice of Christ, wherein he should make an end of sin
(...) the abolishing Sin by the sacrifice of himself, Heb. 9.26. wherein he
also finished all sin offerings. 2. He should put it away by making atonement
and Expiation, Lxx. (...), to blot out, and atone for transgression. (...) in
pih. signifies to make Expiation and Atonement by Sacrifice, even to the
blotting them out, and full satisfaction to Divine Justice, for then sin is
expiated when the Debt-Book is cancelled; thus the blood of the Sacrifice was
sprinkled on the Book of the Law, and on all the People, so that there is
plenary satisfaction in the blood of Christ, and thereby a righteousness
everlasting brought in, i. e. preached, called (...), Rev. 14.6.2. Thereby
revealed and made manifest, freed from the Vails and Shadows of the Old
Testament, for tho it was given us in Christ before the World began, and lay
obscured long under the Old Testament Types, yet now was made manifest by the
appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has abolished Death [(...), nulling or
abandoning death] and brought life and immortality to light through the Gospel,
the Apostle seeming plainly to allude to these expressions of Daniel, the
bringing in of righteousness, is plainly no more than the bringing the
sacrifice and satisfaction of Christ for everlasting righteousness, opposed to
the righteousness of the legal Sacrifices, which was but temporary, offered
every year, but this Expiation of Christ was one offering and the righteousness
of Ages; or if it carry any thing distinct from preceding Events, that it be
not to be understood of the passive obedience of Christ, the Spirit of God
expresses to all the fullness thereof; he adds this to signify the active
obedience of Christ, which is also everlasting, and to be understood always as
a complement of that perfect righteousness of Christ.

In Answer to Mr. H. I say, 1. Christ himself is the everlasting righteousness,
its not procured, but its that which procures. 2. The Righteousness of Christ
is here prophesied of, not the righteousness of our selves. 3. Its the
Righteousness that expiates the old transgressions, and therefore here is
nothing of a New-Law spoken of. 4. Justifying righteousness is such as
satisfies the Law broken, and therefore there must be at least Expiation in it.
5. Its very absurd, and contradictio in adjecto, to talk of a Law of Grace, if
thereby be meant a law for Justification; and again absurder, to talk of
performing the condition of a law without law. 6. How is new-law-righteousness,
for its but imperfect obedience, and therefore will be quite wipt away at
death; for when things that are perfect are come, those that are imperfect are
done away; you will say, it may last in a perfect righteousness, than the New
Law will turn into he old; for they make imperfection to be a proper adjunct of
the works of the New-Law, and appropriate to it to distinguish it from the old
law. So that here they are justified by the New Law, and in Heaven by the Old
Law: What a stir do these men make with the Law? and how do they shift and
shirk from one law to another, swerving from Faith and Truth, to laws singly,
making themselves great teachers of the laws, but understanding neither what
they say, nor whereof they affirm, I would fain know whether Daniel was
justified by his own New Law righteousness? it seems he did not understand that
that kind of Justification was then a-foot, and its a Wonder the Angel Gabriel
could come to tell him, that in a few years hence the Messiah should come and
bring in old self righteousness again for Justification, which is so choice and
precious a Commodity, that it shall cost him his blood to purchase, Would not
Daniel be amazed at it, that a man so beloved as he was, was ignorant of it,
but that very day, as v. 16. According to thy righteousness, I beseech thee,
let thy anger and thy fury be turned away; a Neonomian will Gloss thus, i. e.
according to our righteousness of the New Law, v. 18. We do not present our
supplications to thee for our righteousness [ i. e. say the Neonomians, the
righteousness of the Old Law, not of the New] but for thy great mercy, that,
say they, is the Law of Grace, so they will have their Belly-full of law
shortly.

. 2. Mr. H. gives a wild Gloss upon Ephesians. 1.4. According as he has chosen us in
Christ. before the Foundation of the World; he says, the Election of Grace is
the Election of Grace, and Gods choosing us, is the taking the Way and Method
of Grace, and not of Works, a choice way of saving.

Resp. Ay indeed its a choice way to save by Grace, and not by Works, but to
save by Grace and yet by Works is a Contradiction in Paul's Logic. Election is
in Christ, how according to common Notion of Election is over hard to conceive,
but take it in this Notion, and here is even Daylight, if you take it for the
Law of Grace, the Law is the Will of the Lawgiver, and that is all one with the
Gospel, there is no difficulty in it.

Resp. This Man is so fond of his New Law, that ask him of what Place of
Scripture you will, what it means, and he will tell you its the New Law, what
is Election? The New Law, what is Redemption? Purchase of the New Law? How are
you justified by the Righteousness of the New Law; how shall you be judged by
the New Law? what is the Gospel? the New Law; may not these Men be fitly called
Neonomian, that thus New Law it, its hard to conceive how Election is in
Christ, why? Because he cannot conceive Christ to be a common Person or Head of
the Elect, and that Christ as such was chosen, and the whole Body in him; but
tell him, that we are chosen in the New Law, and the Difficulty is removed; and
you see what he makes of the Gospel, it is the Lawgiver, I think its Time to
give over talking with Men whose Wits go a Wool-gathering, once more though

. 3. 2 Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ reconciling the World to himself, not
imputing their Trespasses, and has committed to us the Word of Reconciliation;
the Word is, the Gospel declaring to the World this purchased Pardon, the
Pardon is General, a standing Pardon, an Act of Grace; yet if any will have
Benefit by it, he must look into the Act, and see how he is to be qualified.

Resp. The Gospel, he says, is the Declaration of the New Law, the making of
which was an Act of general Pardon, for all the World; and for this Pardon
Christ atoned, none could obtain this but Christ; and here all the Rogues and
Whores in the World continuing so, are pardoned at once; now the silly
Antinomian talks only of the Pardon of Believers before Faith, now a Neonomian
does Antinomize to Purpose, and Mr. H. is willing Christ shall have the Honor
of saving Peter, so far as he saved Judas, and so far it is from the Love of the
Father in sending his Son to fulfill the Law, how? By no Obedience to it, or
Satisfaction for wrong done to him in it, and in this Sense he will allow Grace
is without Condition; i. e. as much as Creation is Grace, and God's giving a
Law at first; it is true, whatever Act God puts forth at first to a Created
Being, in a way of Nature, or Jurisdiction, or Mercy; it may be said to proceed
from his Sovereignty, but it cannot shine forth in a way of Grace, unless it be
the bestowing some good Thing in a way of Speciality, Peculiarity, and in
Distinction from others; not to do something in general, for all the World in
common, this is not that which will bear the Name of Grace; likewise,
considering that what he calls a Law of Grace is but an Exhibition of a Law of
Works; for it is but, do believe; God had made the first Law as much a Law of
Grace, as this, had the World been as full of People as since, and more, for it
had been easier to perfect Man to perform than now, an un-performable condition
is to lapsed man. This is Grace without conditions (he says) even as much as
the first Covenant; for God made that Covenant without Man's causing it, the
Condition was lege constitura, in the law enacted, the previous causes of a
law, whether it proceed from the mere pleasure of the Legislator, or obtained
from him by Petition or Purchase, are not considered in the law by the Subject,
its the tenor of it that he looks at, and is concerned in it, therefore the
making a law, the proper nature whereof is to be conditional, and promulgatting
of it to all the world, is no Pardon; therefore he soon trips up the heels of
his General Pardon, in saying, If any come to look for benefit by this Pardon,
Act of Grace, Law, Covenant, Testament, (any thing, a declaration of the will
of God, as he says, which being a law is not therefore Grace) he must read it,
and see the conditions or terms that God requires. And are not these conditions
required of all the World? are they therefore pardoned because they are
required of them? its required of every man (he says) to believe, repent, walk
sincerely in order to the benefit, if these be the conditions of the Covenant,
then not free, because working conditions are required of all the World, which
by the World are unperformable. The main of the Text he cannot see, he is so
dazzled with his New Law, v. 18. All things are of God [even the reconciliation
of the World, as well as its new Creation, and therefore the righteousness by
which reconciliation is made, is of God, and therefore saith] reconciling us
[by Expiation and Satisfaction, for so the word (...), signifying reconciling
by an Expiatory Sacrifice] to himself [the enmity was between the Sinner and
God, and God in this Grace is the first mover of Reconciliation] by or in Jesus
Christ [in whom the righteousness of Satisfaction is] giving to us the word of
reconciliation [i. e. the Gospel in which this reconciliation is preached,
whereby the Sinner seeing the preventing love of God in the mystery of
Reconciliation, by the Impetration of Christ, he may have the application of
this Grace also by Faith, for this is the great doctrine that reconciles the
heart and brings him to believe. This he repeats v. 9. showing only
exegetically, that we who are to be saved are the world in the sense of the
Scripture in this truth, by an usual synecdoche of the choice part being put
for the whole, and the whole for the better part not imputing their Trespasses]
show which is the great thing done in reconciliation of a Sinner to God, its
non-Imputation of sin, which contains Imputation of righteousness, for wherever
sin is not Imputed to condemnation, righteousness is Imputed to Justification
so here its manifest that its not our own righteousness that is Imputed to
Justification, but his only by which reconciliation is made, and sin not
imputed, whence it follows also that our sins were Imputed to Christ, or else
there could not be the non-Imputation of them unto us.

. 4. Mr. Cl. makes a long Discourse to acquaint us, that Paul and James do both
mean Justification by Faith to be Justification by Works; that Paul in denial
of Justification by works only, means works of the law; then, I say, he
excludes all works, for all works performed for Justification are works of the
law, and to say that such are Gospel-works, is to say, the Sea burns. And that
James speaks of Abraham's Justification before God by Faith in conjunction with
Works; That Paul makes a perfect exclusion of all works of any law from
Justification, i e. works of our own performance has been sufficiently made to
appear; what he alleges for Paul's meaning, p. 70. may be a little spoken to,
and undertakes to tell us, from Gal. 5.5, 6. compared with chap. 6.15. that
Paul intends works as well as faith when he rejects works from Justification: I
must say as I have said, If Paul was of their mind, it is strange that in Two
Epistles he had not acquainted us what he meant, when he shall only intend
Jewish Services which the Gentiles are not concerned in, and perfect works of
the Moral Law, which none ever performed, since the Fall, but Christ alone,
that he should mean Gospel-works, and not tell us, what were the Gospel-works
which he meant, when Gospel-works whereby any man seeks Justification, are
law-works, and therefore contradictio in adjecto. The Apostle to the Galatians,
v. 4. makes a solemn Protestation, that whoever is [i. e. professes to be]
justified by law [by his own works of a law] has abdicated Christ, and fallen
from Grace, where there cannot be a law of Grace; for to assert a law in our
Justification by our performance of the works of it, is to fall from Grace; now
it is strange that he did not specify the Law and Works that he intended we
are justified by. Mr. Cl. says he did, in his specifying Love and the New
Creature. Verse 6. in Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but faith that works by love; the Apostle had said before, as
for us our expectation of righteousness is only by faith, for its nothing that
avails at all in Christ but a true faith, and that is true which works by
love, which brings forth goodfruits, and one of the more eminent is instanced
in, which is love; now he does here set by all the other Graces and Duties, in
comparison of faith, because it has a peculiar nature of receiving a
justifying righteousness from without, and in denying and rejecting it self, or
any doing by us for that end; hence he says, its not any works of the
circumcision, that is of those that profess Justification by Works in the
Jewish Religion, nor of the works of the uncircumcision, i.e. works of the
Christian Religion, that signifies any thing, but true Faith only; this is the
plain meaning of the Apostle. As for Chap. 6.15. it signifies nothing as to our
adversaries. v. 14. He showed how his glorying was always in the Cross of
Christ, both unto Justification and Sanctification; for to be in Christ,
implies both, and he desires and looks for no other ground of rejoicing than
the Cross of Christ; neither is there any other ground to any one, Jew or
Gentile; there is nothing in either that is to be valued but the new Creature,
which is the life of Justification and Sanctification, both which is by being
in Christ Jesus, he being to every Believer whatever he is for Righteousness
and Life; so that here is nothing to exalt the new creature to righteousness
for Justification, but to exalt Christ Jesus to be all and in all to the new
creature for righteousness in Justification; and as the Head and Root of
Holiness in Sanctification.

. 5. And now it will appear what the sense of James is, The main Scope of the
Apostle in chap. 2. is, to exhort to the impartial exercise of Charity to the
Saints, and after many Arguments, v. 14. he tells us, not to exercise Love and
Charity is a sign of a false Faith, such as will not save us, as plainly
appears by, v. 15.16, 17. Even as the Apostle Paul says, true faith is that
which works by love; so he says, that which does not work by love in the
exercise of true and faithful charity is dead faith, being alone, i. e. having
no fruits but an outward Name and Profession only; and further, v. 18. How,
says he, will thou demonstrate to another person that thou have faith, thou
say to another, I have faith, but says that other, demonstrate it to me by
thy works, that it may appear to me by thy works, I will show thee my works,
whereby thou shall conclude I have faith, and justify me and my profession
before all men that have a question or doubt thereof: Thou believe it may be,
by an historical or dogmatical faith, as to some things, so do the Devils: But
(v. 20.) will thou know, O vain man, that faith without works is dead, i. e.
will thou have demonstration of it, how dead? It is not justifying faith, and
therefore not saving, for all true, saving faith is justified against all
objections men can make against it. 1. He instances in Abraham, the obedience
of Abraham to God was a ground of men's justification of Abraham as a true
Believer, provided his action was good obedience which seemed so unnatural,
wherefore God himself witnesses to his obedience, as good, and an eminent
effect of true Faith, therefore he was justified by works, not as to his state
before God, for he was in a justified state before, but first, provided his
obedience were good, all men must justify Abraham to be an eminent Believer.
Again, God bore witness to Abraham's obedience as good, therefore Abraham was
justified to be a true Believer from his works. So that Abraham was justified
as to his faith, as true, good and eminent, by his, or from his obedience;
therefore the Apostle says, thou see how his faith co-works with his works,
i. e. he did these actions in faith, and faith carrying him on to such works,
his faith was perfected thereby, i. e. as a Tree that has its fruits growing
upon it, all true faith thriving and flourishing in that manner. He insists
upon Abraham's again, and tells us, That the Scripture was fulfilled, [or is
proved to be true] in two great things. 1. That it says, he was justified by
faith, i. e. he believed God, and it was counted to him for righteousness; what
was imputed, his faith? No, it was the blessing in the Promise, the Lord Jesus
Christ and his righteousness, that he believed. 2. The Scripture says, his
faith worked by love, therefore it was not a dead faith; he was called the
friend of God, he was from the greatness of love he had to God, ready to yield
any obedience to God, thence the Apostle denies not, that he was justified by
faith only, as to his Person, but that God declared and witnessed also to his
obedience, as approved of by him, which in the sense the Apostle is speaking
of, was a Justification as to his Faith, and the goodness of it in his
particular acts of obedience, v. 24. you see therefore that a man is justified
by works, [a man may have an approbation of his works, and a commendation from
God for them] and not of his faith only [God may commend and approve of a man's
works as well as his faith, for indeed it is a Justification by way of
commendation and approbation of a man's faith and works which the Apostle James
here speaks of.] Likewise v. 25. Rahab the harlot was she not justified by
works [i. e. did she not approve her self to be a true Believer?] when she
received the messengers, and had sent them out another way. The World would be
apt to condemn this action of Rahab, as treachery to her Native Country, and
therefore God justifies her in this particular action, that it was good, being
done in faith, God witnesses to it in his Word, and justifies her as a
Believer, in foro mundi, by this eminent act of her, v. 26. whence having given
these instances, he concludes, as a body without a spirit is dead, so is faith
without works dead; and that was the thing which he undertook to prove, that
faith, i. e. supposed or professed, is dead, if it be fruitless; hence, he
says, Believers have been justified to be so by God, in giving Testimony to
their works, as true fruits of saving faith. Wherefore we may conclude, that
James and Paul are agreed in all. 1. That James speaks of faith in general, a
Profession of Christian Faith, and that such Profession is empty and profitable
to our selves and others, as also dead in it self, if it is not justified by
good works; so the Apostle Paul often speaks of saving faith, and our Savior
Christ, that we can have no better Argument of each others truth of faith than
the fruit growing upon the tree, this is without question to v. 19. 2. He
proves it in that they were true Believers, had a double Justification. 1: By
Faith only, and here he concurs with Paul concerning his Justification before
God, v. 23. and yet he had such a faith as wrought by love, for the Scripture
calls him the friend of God. 2. That there is a Justification of a Person as to
a particular act, as well as his Person and State, and therefore the instance
of Abraham's offering his Son, and Rahab is brought in, and this is that
Justification which the Apostle Paul speaks not so much of, but the Spirit of
God does in several cases, as Abel and Enoch, God testifying some way to their
Services in foro mundi, and so Job, whom God justified against the unjust
charges of his Friends; so Phineas his zeal for the glory of God in the matter
of Cosbi, that seemed a rash and mutinous piece of Usurpation. God justified
him in it, declared his high approbation thereof. Hence James speaks of faith
that accompanies salvation, at large, and condemns that as false and
hypocritical, that is not fruitful. 2. He speaks of Justification at large,
which is by faith in foro divino, before God, and in foro humano, before Men;
by works and fruits of faith, that in foro divino, is by faith only without
works. 1. In that he says, no works of ours can answer God's law, v. 10. He
that keeps, or pretends to keep, the whole law, and offends in one point, is
guilty of all; whence arises this unanswerable Argument, They that cannot keep
the whole law of God without offending in out point, can never be justified
before God by works, but none can do so, Ergo. 2. He asserts Justification by
faith before God in the instance of Abraham's faith, using the same Expression,
and does not deny this to be true Justification, and full before God, but only
Abraham brought forth the fruits before Men, from his faith working by love he
is called the friend of God; thus God justified him in his obedience as a true
Believer, Ergo, he concludes, as all true faith, so true justifying faith has
such fruit. 3. James shows how God often bears witness and approves of
particular actions which men are ready to condemn, such as Abraham's offering
up his Son, and Rahab's giving up the City, and such a Testimony that they
performed it by faith in Christ and his Righteousness; for no other are
approved of by God as Gospel-Works, and thus you have the full scope of James,
not contradicting the Apostle Paul at all, but speaking only of another
Justification in foro humano, in the effects that Men see, and the approbation
that God gives.

. 6. Hence I answer Mr. Cl. who says, the same Justification is intended by
Paul and James, I say, James intends the same Justification before God, in foro
Dei, aut ^egis, when he speaks of Justification by Faith, but he intends not
the same when he speaks of Justification by works; he intends, as Paul does, so
far as he speaks of Justification by Faith, but when he speaks of the same
persons justification by works, it intends only Gods declaration of his
approbation of the particular Acts of obedience and bearing witness thereto, of
the true faith in foro humano by word or evidences, as in that whole of Hebr.
11. And in diverse other Scripture James speaks of Justification of a man's
person; It is true and here its ascribed to his faith, the righteousness he
receives by faith is imputed to him, but the faith is not all the approbation
that he has, not all his Justification he is also justified coram hominibus.
He does not say works were imputed to him for righteousness? But he and his
works for his person, then his obedience being accepted by God in Christ, God
witnesses before men to his faith and obedience, and to his faith by owning
his obedience. So that he speaks both of the Justification of his person and of
his faith too but in diverse respects.

2. Can his faith save him, Implying, that tho faith without works cannot save,
yet faith with works will; for Saved, and Justified, both belong to the same
Subject.

R. True, but that does not prove that Justifying and Saving is in all respects
the same, for there may be works as well as faith in that respect saving,
because both accompany Salvation, but its not therefore that Saving in all
respects is Justifying, for there is saving in sanctification and glorification;
and tho faith without it be such as in time produces works will not save upon
any account, yet it follows not that works do justify before God.

3. He speaks of the person of Abraham being Justified, and there was a
concurrence of his works with his faith in his Justification.

R. There was in foro humano, for he could not appear unto men that he had
faith but by works, if Abraham says he is a believer and righteous before God,
another man will say show me such works as will argue it to me? So Abraham
shows his obedience, and his faith concurrs to it for he could do such works
but by Faith, and God witnesses to them Heb. 11. coram hominibus.

4. He rejects being Justified by Faith only.

R. 1. He cannot be Justified by Faith that is dead and barren. 2ly, He cannot
be Justified before God and man too without works. 3ly, There was not any held
a man's Faith was justified by his faith but his person, and that his faith was
justified to men by his outward demeanor in exercising visible graces.

5. The reason that he coucheth in that Similitude, v. 26. shows, that he
speaks of the Justification of the person. viz. That such a faith cannot
Justify because its dead.

R. The words are, as the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without
works is dead. These words show only what was the drift of the Apostles
discourse from the 14 v. viz. to show that faith which brings not forth good
works is not true, it will not save, it will not profit, it is no better than
reprobates may have, it is not Justifying before God or Man. Now then for Mr.
Cl. Pairs of Antith. he says, A man is justified by works, as James says, a
man is Justified without works of the law, i. e. says he, A man is Justified
by such works as are in the nature of living faith, but not by such as are
works of the law.

R. All works and faith it self as a qualification are works of a Law, and
whereby no flesh living shall be justified, Gal. 3.11. and tho the Apostle
speaks of, and owns Abraham's Justification by faith before God as Paul does
Romans 4. yet he no where says a person is justified by works before God, if he
had said so he had directly contradicted the Apostle Paul, but the
Reconciliation is thus, a believer is not Justified by works before God, but he
is justified by works of faith or fruits of it before man. 2d. Pair, A man is
Justified by faith, and a man is not Justified by Faith only. Reconc. A man is
Justified by that faith that includes works, but not by that faith that is
without works. Recon. A man is Justified by faith objectively which produces
works before God, and man is not Justified without works before man. The 3d,
Pair is thus, A man is Justified by Faith and a man is Justified by Works, I
reconcile thus, a man is justified by that faith which brings forth works, and
a man is justified by those works.

R. Recon. a man is justified before God by faith, a man is justified before
man by works. By all which it appears that Paul and James are agreed in the
nature of true Faith and Justification by it in the sight of God; but only
James speaks of Justification in a larger sense, to wit, Justification in foro
humano, as well as Divino, and therefore he ascribes a kind of Justification to
works, so that a man cannot be Justified by Faith alone, in the largest sense,
seeing he cannot be Justified before man without works. Now if he had meant as
our Neonom. do, he must have ascribed all Justification to works only, for they
hold our Justification by Faith to be no otherwise than as a work. Mr. Cl.
seems to boast himself in expression of the Psalm. 106.3. 1. concerning Phineas,
where (...) is used the same root, which is used of Abraham 's Faith, Genesis
15.6. Where the thing that Abraham believed in the Promise, God Imputed to him
for righteousness as the Apostle expounds Gal. 3.6.8. for he saw Christ in that
Gospel preached to him as our Savior witnesses, and as the word there is an
Active signification. It is a Passive in Niph. with the Psalm. it plainly
referrs to the particular Act of Phineas. It is said, that Phineas stood up and
executed Judgment and the Plague was stayed, and it was reckoned to (...) for
Righteousness, for a noble righteous just Act, to all Generations, its not said
that the Lord accounted it him for the righteousness of his person before God,
but God bore witness to the seasonableness and justice of the action in staying
of the Plague, and such an effect being thereof, all men have since judged it a
righteous just Act to all Generations. So that the word is not used
impersonally but personally and passively, and the Act which he performed is
the Nominative Case, neither is (...) used impersonally but the thing that God
promises and he believes is the Nominative Case.

CHAP. XVI. The Righteousness of Christ is the only Righteousness whereby a
sinner is Justified in God's sight.
Section 1. The Transition, and Subject asserted.. 2. Argument 1.. 3. Arg. 2..
4. Arg. 3.. 5. Arg. 4.. 6. Arg. 5.. 7. Arg. 6.. 8. Arg. 7.. 9. Arg. 8.. 10.
Arg. 9.. 11. Arg. 10.. 12. Arg. 11. 13. Arg. 12.. 14. Arg. 13.. 15. Arg. 14..
16. Arg. 15.

Sect. 1. HAving written hitherto in way of defense, against the Adversaries of
our Justification by Christ's Righteousness, and having in some measure (as I
trust) the mind of the Spirit, I dare not let these Adversaries pass without
using the Sword of the Spirit, to the wounding their Doctrine even in its very
Vitals, by home thrusts and downright blows. For the Lord Jesus Christ who is
come forth upon his white Horse, with a Bow and a Crown, will not return till
he has conquered all the Enemies of this glorious Righteousness of his, and
triumphed over them. I have cheerfully through grace taken this Service in hand,
under the Captain of my Salvation, through whose strength and assistance I hope
for success to his praise and glory. I shall in the first place prove that the
Righteousness of Christ is the only righteousness that a Sinner is justified by
before God, and the Arguments are these briefly:

. 2. Arg. 1. That is the righteousness only that a sinner can be justified by,
which fulfils that law which he has broken; But Christ's Righteousness is such:
For the minor our adversaries would have us believe that they mean so, however,
they often talk of satisfaction to the Law, their sincerity therein will be
tried in due time. As to the major its indubitable to any man of sense, that
its not another law can excuse him from the condemnation of the law which he
has broken; nor a righteousness of another law, especially such as is
imperfect and faulty, that will serve the turn. God never abandoned nor relaxed
his original Law, (though others as branches in positive laws for a time being,
may be) but that was perfectly fulfilled in Christ.

. 3. Arg. 2. That Righteousness which merits the Justification of a Sinner
before God, is that righteousness only by which, and for which he is justified
before God; but the Righteousness of Christ is such, Ergo. For the minor our
adversaries grant it, that Christ merited and purchased our Justification, i.
e. by works of our own, and that our Righteousness and Justification are
effects thereof, and therefore there needs no further Proof here; but we must
come to the major which pincheth hard upon them; but it appears to be true, 1.
Because there is no legal Discharge of an accused person, without a meritorious
righteousness appearing; Now these men, with the Socinians say (some at least,
and others do but lisp at it, Mr. B. says it downright, he knowing it to be
inseparable from the Popish Doctrine) that their righteousness is not
meritorious, being imperfect, if it be not, its no justifying righteousness; I
will stand by it, that there is no righteousness can claim Justification but
upon the merit of their action in the performance of the preceptive part, and
if they be justified by the new law, they must be justified by the merits
thereof; but we assert that the righteousness must answer the old law broken,
and it must be, as in Justice it does so satisfy that law, that it lays claim
to Justification by virtue of those merits, and no other righteousness will
pass there, but what is such.

. 5. Arg. 4. The righteousness typified by the Priests Sacrifices of old, was
the righteousness whereby a sinner is justifi d in the sight of God; but the
righteousness of Christ a-alone is such, Ergo. For the major our adversaries,
Mr. Bellarmine and Mr. H. say, that Christ's Righteousness is the thing for
which id propter quod, not as the End but as an Instrument of the Efficient,
and a meritorious cause, and our Faith and Obedience is the per quam, which
they say does not denote Merit, and in the Protestant sense per quam denotes
only instrumentality; but indeed here is these men's Commutation, they make
Christ's Righteousness the Instrument, and that remote enough too, and our own
righteousness the Formal Cause of Justification, which in truth is their
meritorious cause; upon their own Positions the major must be granted. The
minor will be very demonstrable upon these reasons, That the Righteousness of
Christ is only such, the id propter quod, and per quod a sinner is justified in
Gods sight. 1. i. e. The righteousness by which we are justified, is not two,
but one, and Christ's is that, as the Scripture affirms. 2. That for which a man
is meritoriously justified in tribuno legis, is that by which he is justified;
so the law knows no difference in those terms, for it does nothing by any
righteousness but it does it for that righteousness. 3. The Spirit of God
therefore uses the Greek Prepositions, promiseuously in this case, as has in
part been showed. 4. No Sinner therefore can stand in Judgment, but by and for
this Righteousness of Christ.

. 5. Arg. 4. The Righteousness typified by the Priestly Sacrifices of old, was
the righteousness whereby a sinner is justified in the sight of God, but this
was the Righteousness of Christ only, Ergo. The major and minor are so clear
that no Christian that has read the Scripture with any understanding, can deny
either; if any shall say, its not easy to defend it, there is the whole Epistle
to the Hebrews, yea, the whole Scripture to prove them; all the Devils in Hell
cannot cast down this Fortress, and I leave it therefore to the intelligent
Reader, let him search the Scriptures, they testify of it.

. 6. Arg. 5. That Righteousness which is a ransoming and redeeming
righteousness from a legal Bondage is the justifying righteousness of a sinner
before God, but Christ's Righteousness is that alone which is a redeeming and
ransoming righteousness, Ergo. The minor is true, none that call themselves
Christians dare to fly so audaciously in the face of Christ, and deny plain
Scripture, to deny this, if they do, there is enough to prove it, to the meanest
Christian; The major therefore, I will prove beyond all contradiction; That
righteousness which meritoriously discharges the sinner from his Bondage under
the Law, the condemnation and curse of it, is justifying Righteousness; but
Christ's Righteousness is such, Romans 8.34. Gal. 3.13. and diverse places, for a
discharge of a person from under the Bonds, Imprisonments, and Curse of the
Law, is his Justification, and the righteousness for which he is discharged is
his Justification:

. 7. Arg. 6. That Righteousness which only can justify a Sinner against the
Law, is the Righteousness whereby a Sinner is Justified in the sight of God,
but Christ's Righteousness is such. Ergo, I suppose the major is undeniable,
except men will cavil at the Sun at noon day, and will any have the face to
say, as to the minor, 1. That God has not purer Eyes of Justice than to behold
Iniquity, 2. That he exercises justice by halves and not in the strictest and
exactest manner, 3. Will they say their righteousness is so perfect, as to
answer Gods Law? The Neonomians say no. How will they dare to say then they are
justified by a Righteousness which is not answerable in perfection to the Law,
but they will be justified by another Righteousness the worst they can think of
by a Law coined adequate to Antinomian and licentious Principles? 4. A Sinners
unrighteousness is such, that the Law could never look upon him for to be
righteouss in the sight of God in his own righteousness, because, he has been
once a transgressor. James says, If a man transgress but in one Point he is
guilty of all. The Saints in Heaven tho glorified with Perfection, yet having
been sinners and transgressors of the Law, they could not stand Justified out
of Christ's righteousness, It is one thing to have perfection of Sanctification
as to the present standing and performances, and another thing to have
perfection of Justification, wherein the least believer here on Earth are as
perfectly Justified and as righteous before God as the glorified Saints in
Heaven. See Col. 1.22. Ephesians. 6.27. Rev. 14.4.5.

. 8. Arg. 7. That Righteousness which repairs all our unrighteousnesses lost in
the first Adam, is the only righteousness whereby we are Justified before God:
but Christ's righteousness is such and no other righteousness. Ergo, as to the
major, for all other righteousness comes short of what we lost in the first
Adam, our unrighteousness was our breach of the preceptive part of Gods Law,
this was our unrighteousness, our loss and punishment was also very great, in
respect of moral original righteousness, and coming under the wages of sin
which is death or liableness thereto by the Law in all acceptations. Now Christ
as a second Adam brought in a righteousness upon both these accounts. 1. His
perfect complete active Obedience in opposition to Adam's Sin, obedience to
disobedience. Romans 5.14. If through the offense of one many be dead, much more the
grace of God and the gift by grace [which is Christ's obedience] which is by
one man, has abounded unto many. So in every v. to the end of the chapter
Christ's obedience was not only to save us from punishment but to take of all
the spots of sin in the sight of God. Will Neonomian righteousness, take away
Original sin in the sight of God, bring us into the perfection of the Law in
the sight of God, repair the preceptive part of God's Law? Nay, will it do any
thing to take us of from punishment? No, they say not, if not its worth nothing.

. 9. Arg. 8. That Righteousness whereby a Sinner is at peace with God,
reconciled to him, and has access unto his presence with boldness, is the
Righteousness whereby he is Justified: but the Righteousness of Christ is such,
the minor is evident. Romans 5.1, 2. Ephesians. 2.13, 14. Romans 5.10. Col. 1.20. The
major appears, Justification is our reconciling peace with God Ground of
boldness of access in Faith and Prayer. Romans 5.1. Heb. 4.15, 16.

. 10. Arg. 9. That Righteousness which Christ pleads in Heaven for us, is our
Justifying righteousness, but it is his own righteousness which he pleads in
Heaven, for us. Ergo, This righteousness is our Justification righteousness.
Does Christ plead our righteousness or his own? Not ours sure, he pleads for
acceptance of our services through his righteousness, he entered into the holiest
of all with his blood. What was it to procure? A Justifying righteousness of
ours for him to plead before his Father?

. 11. Arg. 10. If there be no name of any other, nor Salvation in any other
among men besides Christ's, than there is no righteousness for Justification of
a Sinner but Christ's; but the antecedent is true, Acts. 4.12. the place so
full and express there is no disputing it. But our Neonomians will deny the
antecedent; for this is the stone that is set at naught by our new Gospel
builders; they will say that there is justification righteousness in men, and in
the name of themselves and their own righteousness they shall be Justified; but
then I say, there is another name, and salvation in some other among men, if
that justifying righteousness is our salvation only. For what is in Christ, is
it not in them? And tho Christ purchased it, the salvation is in them not in
Christ.

. 12. Arg. 11. If Christ be the end of the law for Righteteousness to every one
that believes, then his righteousness is the only Justifying righteousness,
but Christ is so, the Antecedent is true, Romans 10.4. all the aim and design of
God in his law in making it, is that it may be answered in righteousness,
Christ is this end as to all saved ones, and as to believers; he said not, that
we are the end of the law by our own righteousness, or that Christ merited that
we should be the end of the law, or should be the righteousness of a new law,
but Christ is so; if their had been any other end for righteousness, he would
have told us of it. The consequence needs no proof for whatever fully answer
the end of the law in active and passive obedience for us, is justifying
righteousness in the eye of the law, it looks for no more; but the Neonomians
will say, here is the old law meant, and Christ answered that, I say, then if
he did justify us as to Old law righteousness, a fig for the New law and the
pretended Justification thereby.

. 13. Arg. 12. That righteousness which in a lively manner is held forth in the
seals of the Covenant, and as seals of the righteousness of faith is justifying
righteousness: but that is the righteousness of Christ, Ergo. For the minor
that's plain, the washing with water held forth his washing us from our sins in
his blood; the eating the bread and drinking the wine, it is to signify our
feeding upon the Body of Christ by Faith, on which he bore our sins, and
drinking of his Blood which he shed for the remission of Sins. As to the major
its plain they hold forth Christ to be our justifying righteousness, Act. 2.38.
and that we live upon this righteousness (as the Lord's Supper holds forth in a
spiritual eating the Body and drinking his Blood,) do we show forth our own
death or life of works or his? that they should be seals of our own
righteousness and not of Christ's.

. 14. Arg. 13. If no righteousness but a Suretiship, and Preistly righteousness
can justify a Sinner before God, then Christ's righteousness alone can do it,
but nothing but a Suretiship and Priestly righteousness can, etc. The minor is
proved because we are Bankrouts have nothing to pay, neither in our selves by
nature, nor bestowed on us, that which the holiest man has in sanctification
bearing no proportion to our sins and God's demands, therefore it must be the
righteousness of a Surety, that is holy, harmless, etc. that pays a
righteousness for us adaequate to the demands of the Law. The consequence will
hold because there was no other Surety to God for Sinners, but Christ; he has
engaged to pay for us, and has paid and his payment accepted. His Blood was
shed for many for the remission of sins, he was the great high Priest, and as
such he was a Surety. Heb. 7.21.22. chapter 2.17.

. 15. Arg. 14. If there be no Gospel righteousness in respect of a Sinner but
Christ's righteousness, then Christ's righteousness is our Justifying
righteousness; but there is no Gospel righteousness. The minor is thus proved,
The righteousness by which a Sinner is Justified is Gospel. 1. Because its not
wrought by himself but by another for him. 2. Because its given to him freely;
its a Law righteousness in respect of Christ: Now when by our graces and duties
we claim Justification as due to us upon performing conditions, we make all our
works legal and put them in the room of Christ's righteousness for
Justification. The consequence is clear because a Sinner can be saved only by a
Gospel righteousness, that of Christ that is offered him, and he receives as
the Gospel glad tidings, for its good news and Gospel to any man, to hear of
one that is able and willing to pay his debt for him.

. 16. Arg. 15. If there be no life to be given to a Sinner by the righteousness
of any law performed by him, then the righteousness of Christ is the only
righteousness that he is justified by; but there is no life to be given to any
Sinner, by the righteousness of any law performed by him, Ergo. The antecedent
is fully proved by the Gal. 3.21. where Law is used indefinitely, in both parts
of the Texts as well the last as the first, and it should have been rendered
thus, if there had been a Law given which could have given Life, then
Righteousness had been by a Law; therefore this place is fully exclusive of
justifying righteousness by a new Law, and God never made such a Law. The
consequence is clear if all other Law righteousness but Christ's be excluded,
then Christ's righteousness is that alone by which a Sinner is Justified. These
Arguments are strong and enough to prove what we assert, and against all the
World if the Scripture and Reason enlightened thereby may take place. The
Scripture is so full of proof, that these Sixteen might be made Sixty, but
brevity is called for, by the circumstances that attend Printing.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness.
Section 1. Christ's Righteousness is Imputed to us, and Paul says so.. 2.
Argument 1.. 3. Arg. 2. and 3.. 4. Arg. 4.. 5. Arg. 5.. 6. Arg. 6.. 7. Arg. 7..
8. Arg. 8.. 9. Arg. 9.. 10. Arg. 10.11.

Section 1. OUr Adversaries say they own the Imputation of Righteousness to
Justification; but they say, its there own, not Christ's: Now we shall prove
that Christ's Righteousness is Imputed. They say, its no where said that
Christ's Righteousness is Imputed. We say, it is in all that is said by the
Apostle Paul, so plain, that all but he that will shut his Eyes perversely must
see it. I shall but give brief hints of it, 1. The Apostle Paul, Romans 4.
speaking so often of Imputation, gives us plainly to understand, that he means
no Imputation but of Christ's Righteousness to Justification; for his Discourse
in the 4th chap. is continued from ver. 25. of the 3d to prove the Doctrine of
Justification by the Propitiation, Blood and Righteousness of Christ; and shows
how Faith honors this Righteousness, and wrongs not the law by it, but
establishes it. In the 4th chapter he goes on to exclude all Justification by any
works, and shows in Abraham and David, they took Christ's Righteousness. viz.
that spoken chapter 3.25. by Faith, for their Imputed righteousness, unto
justification and remission, and covering of them from the Eye of God's
justice; wherefore Christ is called our Propitiation, in allusion to the Golden
cover of the Ark, that hid the Law and was the mercy seat; now briefly to show
that by Imputation so often mentioned in this chap. he meant the Righteousness
of Christ to our Justification he tells us ver. 22. that what God had promised
to Abraham, viz. the Righteousness of Christ, which he was fully by Faith
persuaded of, was Imputed to him for Righteousness; now says the Apostle, it
was not written for the sake of Abraham only, but for us also to whom it shall
be Imputed, i. e. the Righteousness in the Promise; if we believe on him, that
raised up the Lord Jesus Christ from the dead, who was delivered for our
offenses and raised again for our Justification i. e. if we believe in God,
through the full perfect and complete righteousness of Christ, for our
Righteousness could not have been full and complete without his Resurrection,
and his Justification as a public head of all the Elect; who raised was
Justified, as having wrought out a full and complete Justifying righteousness
for them, they are encouraged and invited to take it for their Righteousness by
Faith, and they might assure themselves of the Imputation thereof; and proceeds
in the next chap. to say, that having taken this Imputed righteousness by
Faith, they are said to be justified by Faith, and to have peace with God, and
access unto the grace of God through the said righteousness.

. 2. Arg. 1. Now then I Argue, if Christ in the promise be Imputed for
Righteousness to Abraham and every believer, and the Apostle says so, then the
Imputation here spoken of, is the Imputation of Christ's righteousness; but the
antecedent is true, from Gal. 3.21, 22. its plain, that it was what God had
promised to him was Imputed to him. The consequence needs no proof, for it was
Christ was promised, and he saw Christ's day in that promise, and the Promise
of Christ was the Gospel preached to him.

Again, to prove the Apostle means the Righteousness of Christ is imputed, If
the delivery of Christ for our sins, and raising him again for Justification,
was the Righteousness of Christ for Justification; then this is that which was
imputed not to Abraham for righteousness only, but also to every Believer by
the Text; and therefore the minor is fully there proved; and I think as to the
major, that none can deny the Life, Death and Resurrection of Christ to be his
complete Righteousness.

. 3. Arg. 2. He that was made of God righteousness to us is made by imputation
of his righteousness to us; but Christ is made so of God, 1 Cor. 1.30. but
says Mr. Cl. he is made righteousness as he is made Wisdom. So Righteousness,
Sanctification and Redemption, but it follows not only that he be made of great
advantage to a Christian, but these several ways, that he is not one thing as
the other; he is not a Prophet as a Priest; and if he should mean made
righteousness in Mr. Cl's. sense, then he should be but made sanctification
twice taken, for Mr. Cl's justifying righteousness is but Sanctification; its,
he is made the Spring, Head and Root of Sanctification, and legally made
righteousness to us.

Arg. 3. Again, If we be made the righteousness of God in Christ, [where its
plain this righteousness of God is in Christ] then the righteousness of Christ
is imputed to us, but we are made the righteousness of God in him, Ergo. the
antecedent is proved by, 2 Cor. 5.21. as to the major, the Neonomians say, the
righteousness of God is our own righteousness: We say, nay, the righteousness
of God is said to be in Christ, and we are made so by imputation, for Christ
could not be made Sin for us, but by Imputation, and if it is meant of a
Sacrifice for Sin, even such were made Sin by Imputation, and therefore we are
made the righteousness of God in Christ by Imputation.

. 4. Arg. 4. Again, If Christ has merited our Justification, Christ's Merits
are imputed in themselves to Justification; but Christ has merited our
Justification: The minor is granted by these Gentlemen: They tell us, that
Christ's Merits are id propter quod, we are justified for the sake, or rather by
reason of Christ's Merits; but they mean not that Christ purchased the Sinner's
performed condition of the New law, but that he procured of God a new law for
man to perform the condition of: Now this is no more to be the cause of
Justification, than God in making a Law was a cause of Sin; for sin is not
Imputed where there is no law; and where there is a Law, there will be
Justification or Condemnation: Christ merited a Law and made one, therefore for
the sake of Christ, we are Justified by this Law; here is Christ's law causa sine
qua non with a Witness. As to the consequence, if Justification be an effect of
Merits, and it be a Juridical effect, then Merits which is the cause, must be
imputed to the person on whom these effects must fall: What moves the Court or
Judge to justify this or that person, his own Merits or the Merits of another?
Not his own, but the Merits of another: Then these Merits are imputed, for it
quickly and plainly appears what is imputed to any, whether merits of
Condemnation or merits of Justification, for Justice goes by nothing but Merit;
and therefore men's own righteousness cannot justify-because it cannot Merit:
And do not our Neonomians speak as the Socinians in this point, and mumble as
if their mouths were full of plumbs? Now therefore, if Christ's Merit be brought
into Court, as a meritorious cause of the Sinners Justification, they are
imputed to him for his Justification as if he had merited himself.

. Arg. 5. They say, Christ's Merits cannot be Imputed, but the Effects are
Imputed. And I Argue, If Christ's Righteousness be Imputed, its Imputed as a
cause of Justification, or in the Effect; [It should be as an Effect or the
Disjunction is ridiculous] but its not Imputed in the Effect, Ergo. In and as
the Cause, for the Effect is not the Cause but contrary, its another thing; so
that to say Christ's Merits are imputed, and so imputed to the person Justified
is nonsense. But what are the effects imputed? All the Benefits purchased by
Christ. For is Justification an effect imputed? Sure not. Is Justification
imputed to Justification? Sure that is most absurd. Is Mortification imputed to
Justification? That looks very odd. Is Vocation and Adoption, or Glorification,
all or any of them Imputed to Justification? for they are Effects of Christ's
Merits. But suppose they say, some of these or all, are to us imputed for
righteousness unto Justification; I then Query, Whether the Righteousness
performed by us in the new law Justification, be merited by Christ as an
Effect? Do not I see them sneak away now and give no Answer, but upon another
Subject, they will tell you that Faith and the condition of the New law, was
not purchased by Christ, but are by the gift of Election only. And now I pray
what is become of Justification, by Effects of Christ's Merits? They will say, we
are Justified by Imputing the Spirits operations to us for righteousness. Now
this cannot be,

1. The Spirit never was incarnate, nor his Office to work a Righteousness for
Justification; this was peculiar to Christ.

2. The fruits of the Spirit, when they come to be exerted, are called our
works, and justly so, because Graces exercised, or Duties performed by us are
so, these are all renounced as such by the Apostle Paul. Phil. 3.8. and
elsewhere.

3. What the Spirit does in Justification, its office is by way of Application,
it takes of Christ's, and gives it to us; it applies and brings home to a sinner
the Impetration of Christ, as Righteousness unto his Justification; hence the
Spirit is said to justify, 1 Cor. 6.11. in bringing to the Soul the Grace of
Justification, and enstating him therein by faith, as he sanctifies by bringing
in the Grace of Sanctification. Now then, if Christ's Righteousness cannot be
imputed in the effect, and is imputed at all, then as the cause meritorious of
Justification.

But they say, God cannot impute Christ's Righteousness to us, because we did
not perform it, and God is a God of Truth, he cannot impute that to us which we
did not. To which I answer,

1. That God does not reckon we performed Christ's Righteousness.

2. God may give us his Son for righteousness, Romans 8. and give us this
righteousness, Romans 5.5.

3. He may accept it for us on law terms, as our righteousness to
Justification, and all this is according to Truth and Righteousness imputing it
to us in a Law Sense.

4. The Argument will fall upon Neonomian Justification, for that is to call
that righteousness which is unrighteousness, and not according to Truth, as
has been showed: Mr. Cl. makes it a great Argument that the active
righteousness of Christ must not be imputed, because Christ did not obey that
we should not obey, and where is the Antinomian that says so? but we say, that
Christ did and suffered all that the law required of him as a Second Adam, and
our Surety, and his obeying in doing is no hindrance, but a Gospel ground and
reason of our doing and obeying: As Christ did not suffer that we should not
suffer, but not suffer the Penally, so Christ's doing was not that we should not
obey Evangelically, but that we should but not obey legally, with expectation
of our Justification by our works, or from a law, for that is to be under a
Law, and not under Grace, and to sin instead of obeying, Romans 6, etc.

Lastly, If Christ's righteousness be taken as a meritorious cause in a
sinner's Justification, it is imputed as such to the person justified; the
effect of this cause is the sinner's Justification, which is his proper
Discharge, and this is not Imputation, but Judgment upon it, and Delivery in
Law, and suppose the effects of Merit could be imputed, the cause and reason
thereof must be first imputed; for the Law does nothing in way of Condemnation
or Justification but upon a meritorious cause imputed unto Condemnation or
Justification; and how absurd is it to say Condemnation is imputed, but its
proper to say, the sin that merits it is imputed.

. 6. Arg. 6. That Righteousness which is accepted in law unto Justification is
imputed to the person justified, but Christ's Merits are accepted of God to the
Sinner's Justification. The major must be owned for Truth by the Neonomians,
otherwise they could not assert their Justification by Works. The minor has
been counted sound Divinity by most Protestants, and many Papists; but whether
it be or be not, the Scripture affirms it roundly; see for a taste, Ephesians. 5.2.
chap. 1.6. for an acceptance in law, must be an imputation of Merit to
Justification, and can be upon no other account, either of a man's own, or of
another's for him, the law looks at the value of his Money or Works that he
brings into Court, not how he came by either, whether by Gift or otherwise.

. 7. Arg. 7. That righteousness through which Sin is not imputed to
condemnation is the righteousness through which a man is imputed righteous unto
Justification: But Christ's righteousness is that through which sin is not
imputed to condemnation, Ergo. The minor is very clear from Romans 8.1.34. who is
he that condemns, it is Christ that died, chap. 4.6, 7, 8: Blessed is the man
whose sins are forgiven, to whom God does not impute sin; and this is told us
is a righteousness without works, that which comes on Jews and Gentiles, that
which covers Sin from the Eye of God's Justice, therefore that which lies in
the Death and Resurrection of Christ, v. 24, 25. likewise 2 Cor. 5.15. God was
in Christ reconciling the world, i. e. justifying, for God reconciles none but
by Justification; reconciliation is essential to it, and therefore non
imputation of sin; for while a man lies under a law charge of sin he is
unrighteous, till he be imputed righteous by the law. The major is evident from
what is said in proof of the minor, for non imputation of sin to a sinner is
essential to his Justification, which can be no otherwise then by a covering
righteousness; and when a law imputes sin, the same law must justify by
imputing to him an adequate and satisfactory righteousness.

. 8. Arg. 8. The Sins of Sinners under the old Testament were Imputed Typically
to the High Priest and Sacrifices, which is very easy to make appear, Ergo.
The Sins of all saved sinners are Imputed really to Christ, and his
righteousness to them. See 1 Cor. 5.21. Romans 3.25. Heb. 9.15.

. 9. Arg. 9. That which cannot be pleaded for Pardon or Justification unless it
be Imputed, is when its pleadibly imputed unto Justification: But Christ's very
righteousness is pleadible, etc. Ergo. The minor I suppose these Gentlemen dare
not deny, for I find tho they will not have it their immediate righteousness by
imputation, yet they will have it for some remote and as a reserve at a dead
lift, when conscience sees that neither the New Law, nor the righteousness
thereof will serve the turn. Now that Christ's righteousness is not pleadible
without Imputation to us, neither by Christ in heaven nor by us on earth its
plain, for if Christ be never so righteous, his plea is answerered in saying
thou art righteous for thy self; I never imputed thy righteousness to these,
let them plead for their own Justification. If they plead it with God, the
answer is, Christ is righteous for himself; his righteousness not imputed to
thee, no more then the righteousness of one of the Angels; and therefore
Christ's righteousness being pleadible its imputed; without Imputation its not
pleadible for us or by us.

. 10. Arg. 10. That righteousness which is a Suretiship righteousness must be
imputed, else its of no value to the offender; but Christ's righteousness is a
Suretiship righteousness, he being a Surety his righteousness must be such. And
as for the major its plain that the justice that accepts one person to be
Surety for another, does impute or account the righteousness of the Surety to
that other, or else it accepts not, the Surety is rejected now that Christ was
accepted as a Surety is beyond all question, Heb. 7.22.

. 11. Arg. 11. The righteousness of the second Adam is an Imputed
righteousness, for 1. as Adam was a Public person that had a Covenant standing
for all his Seed, so the 2d Christ was, and had for his. 2. As Adam 's Sin came
by Imputation upon his Seed so Christ's righteousness on his as fully appears
from Romans 5. But this I must not now enlarge upon, the Apostle is so full and
plain therein, that I never could see any thing said to oppose, that could have
weight with any learned and rational Interpreter, if unprejudiced against Truth.

CHAP. XVIII. What Interest and concern Faith has in our Justification.
Section 1. Of the Nature of Faith as spoken of.. 2. What this Faith is?. 3.
And how we are said to be Justified by Faith.. 4. Arg. To prove that Faith is
not our Righteousness.

Section 1. HAving proved Christ's Righteousness to be the only Righteousness
for a Sinner's Justification in Gods sight, and that this Righteousness is
certainly Imputed to every one that believes; we shall in the last place
enquire, what concern and intrest Faith has in our Justification? I shall not
speak of Faith accompanying Salvation at large (as the Apostle does Heb. 11:
Wherein he also comprehends Justifying, (among the other Senses there spoken
of) but only of Faith as it referrs to) Justification and the righteousness
thereof.

. 2. Justifying Faith is a gift of God, whereby a poor sinner believes in God
unto eternal life through Jesus Christ. 1. It is a gift of God, in respect of the
grace of God and the work of the Spirit, Ephesians. 2.8. 2. It is a purchased benefit
for an Elect person. 2 Pet. 1. 3. It Is a Gift to a Sinner; there is no grace
lives tell Faith, then Christ lives in him; its to a poor undone broken Sinner.
4. This is a gift of grace to believe in God and Christ; 1. To be persuaded of
the truth of the Law, his certain curse under it, impossibility of coming to
the works thereof; That its a saying worthy of all acceptance, that Christ came
into the world to save Sinners, whereof Paul says, he was one of the chiefest;
not that he was righteous subordinately to Christ's to qualify him for it: This
is that which is properly called fides, but its hard to distinguish this from
the Faith of a natural man and hipocrite; therefore, 2. There is believing in
i. e. resting upon God and Christ, resting on the faithfulness of God in his
promise of a good thing to us, as for eternal life, and for righteousness in
Christ; now faithfulness belongs to persons; truth unto things, when the Soul
does not only believe the thing promised true, but believes him faithful who
has promised, and from thence does stay himself and his Soul acquisce in it.
This is properly fiducia, trusting in God. 3. There Is a particular application
of Christ in the promise and the Soul unto God in Christ, believing that all
the promises, especially those that concern eternal life and justification by
Christ's righteousness, are yea and Amen in him, made and performed in him.

. 3. Hence, by Faith we are said to be justified. 1. Because the righteousness
of Christ is the object of our Faith; it is that we believe to, and come unto
believing, Romans 10.10. We believe unto righteousness. 2. By Faith a man is
devorced from the Law and legal righteousness, and comes into a new marriage
relation to Christ for righteousness and life. Romans 7.3. Because its that grace
only whereby a man can go out of himself, and fetch in the righteousness of
another. 4. It is that grace which from the very law of its nature which it
has through grace, does always deny it self any thing of righteousness for
Justification and gives all the glory of righteousness unto Christ alone. 5. In
that it does fiducially rest and depend thereon believing. 6. It dwells upon an
object of righteousness which is not seen, by sense or reason, yea it is the
hypostasis of Christ's righteousness in the Soul; Christ lives as it were in
our Faith, take away Christ from it, and you leave it a dead nothing or worse,
it returns to unbelief. 7. Because by this Faith the Soul sees God at peace
with him, and he has peace in himself, and the controversy is at an end
between God and him, through this Imputed and believed righteousness. 8. The
justified one as he draws his first breath of the new man in believing unto
righteousness, so he lives upon this righteousness in all his Christian course,
in that Christ's righteousness may be called the righteousness of Faith, for
Meat and Drink. John 6.51, 53. 9. Faith has hereby all justifiable ways to
God, Christ is thereby his way unto the Father, he can have access to the grace
wherein he stands, comes through this righteousness with boldness to the Throne of
grace, and receives remission of sins, and every good, and perfect gift, God
having not spared his Son, but given him for us, hence he will not withhold any
good thing. 10. As it receives all grace in and with justifying grace, so it
gives and ascribes all to free grace in the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, both
the gift of righteousness and faith it self, and the life eternal given to such
a poor wretch in and through Jesus Christ. 11. In that this grace being filled
with Christ's righteousness, is leading to all fruits of Christ's righteousness
imputed and believed, all which appear in the exercise of all holy affections,
graces and duties to the mortification of sin and growth in obedience and
conformity to Christ.

. 14. Now having showed the Excellency of this Grace in its Nature and Kind, we
must show you that it is not Christ, nor must not take his Throne or Crown from
him, yea abhors nothing more if true, but will keep a Believer always a poor,
humble, broken, and contrite hearted Sinner. Therefore we assert, and Christ
with his whole Word will stand by us in it, that our Faith as a Grace of the
Spirit or Work of ours is not imputed for Righteousness to Justification; I
shall but Name a few Arguments convincing enough, and show thereby the way to
others to do the same.

1. Faith is for the Honor of Christ our High Priest upon the Throne, if it
takes to it self justifying Righteousness, it takes the Crown from his Head,
and sets it upon his own for the great end of Christ's Humiliation and
Exaltation, was the working out of this Righteousness.

2. If Faith be our Righteousness, then Faith is its own Object, when you bid
Men believe unto Justification, you must bid them believe in themselves; and
bid them by Faith go to their Faith for Righteousness and Life, what is Absurder?

3. If God impute Faith it self as a Work to Justification, then Faith must be
imputed as meritorious of Justification. For, 1. Christ's Righteousness is so
imputed. 2. No Righteousness can be imputed otherwise to Justification, but
such as is meritorious of it, Justification being a Law-act.

4. Faith making it self Righteousness for Justification by a Law, makes it
self altogether Legal as much as any Works whatever, insomuch, that it is not
an evangelical Work, so that it ought not to justify as a Work by their own
Rule, that we are not justified by the legal works, but we have proved all
their Works legal.

5. That that cannot cover Sin, and take off the Imputation of it cannot be
justifying Righteousness and take off the the Imputation of Sin, for faith did
not die for Sin, or was made a Sacrifice for it to bear the Sin of many.

6 The Priests and Sacrifices of Old were Types of Christ's Righteousness for
Justification of a Sinner, not of the Sinners righteousness; and the faithful
looked upon themselves as sinners Typically justified in the Righteousness
Typified, and not in their Faith as a Work done.

7. If our Faith in it self be our Righteousness, then our unbelief is, for
that Faith must believe that Christ's Righteousness is not imputed to us for
Justification, this his high unbelief according to the Scripture.

8. If Faith say it justify as a Work, then Faith excludes it self, the very
Nature of it; the Neonomian say, the Law of Faith is the New-law, if so, then
it excludes it self, for the Law of Faith excludes boasting, and Works of a
Law; i. e. the very Nature of Faith, if it be good, is so.

9. If Faith justify as a Work, then Faith justifies not without Works, for if
it be a Work it self, and justifying as such, then it justifies not without
Works, because it is a Work, contrary to Romans 4.6.

10. If Faith be Imputed for Righteousness, then the Blood of Christ is not,
but we are to be justified by the Blood of Christ, and the Scripture says, we
are, by Faith in his Blood.

11. If Faith Justifies as a Work, then no more is ascribed to Faith than to
other Graces in the concern of our Justification; but the Apostle ascribes more
concern to Faith than other Graces; and then why does he oppose Faith to Works?
Is it not, that its more the Office of Faith as to Justification, the Neonomian
say, it is the same with other Graces, etc. So Mr. Cl. Justifying Faith is the
same thing in Substance with Effectual Calling, Repentance, Regeneration,
forming Christ in the Soul, the new Creature, etc. Is not a great deal of the
Scripture in vain, has not Paul wrote two Epistles in vain, where he makes it
his Main Business to beat down Justification by Works, and oppose them to one
another, and now he tells us, that Faith and Gospel Works [ i. e. legal] are
all one.

12. That which justifies as a Righteousness, justifies eternally, Dan. 9. but
Faith cannot justify eternally, because Faith cease in Heaven, but justifying
Righteousness does not, yea all the Righteousness of the New-law must cease, 1
Cor. 13.10.

14. That which is not the faederal Condition of the Covenant of Grace, cannot
be our Righteousness in it self; but Faith is not the faederal Condition,
because Faith is promised in the Covenant, given by Grace purchased by Christ,
part of Eternal Life, a means to lay hold of the Condition; but I shall not
enlarge upon this now, only make one Quotation at last. Mr. R. Capel, who wrote
of Temptation, says, speaking of the Conditions of the Covenant. In this
Matter I am of the Opinion of Kendal, that the Covenant (he means of Grace) was
not made with us, but with Christ [this was the Assembly's Judgment] for us;
and for the main, I am clear of Opinion, that the Covenant of Grace cannot
stand with any Condition of ours at all, for that I wish the Learned to consult
Junius. To deliver my Opinion, Adam casting himself out of his Estate, the
Covenant of Works fell void: Then it pleased God to fill up this Room with a
New Covenant, commonly called his last Testament, wherein he bequeathed Grace
and Glory on no other Condition that I know of out of the Scriptures, but the
Death of the Testator, i. e. Jesus Christ, that as the First Covenant was built
on the Righteousness of the first Adam, so the Second was built on the
Righteousness of the second. It is beyond my Brain to conceive, that God should
immediately make a Covenant with us, who were Children of Disobedience and of
Wrath, who could not be capable of any such Covenant or Conditions, but it was
with Christ for us, Adam lost his Righteousness, the Foundation of the first
Covenant, but the Righteousness of Christ the Second can never be lost, and
therefore the second Covenant or rather Testament, can never be broken or
disanulled, Condition of the Covenant, p. 260.

Errata.
PAge 38. line 2. read partaker. p. 39. l. 32. r. relaxed. p. 42. l. 23. r.
Justice. p. 43. l. 36. r. we could not. p. 46. l. 17. r. per quam. p. 48. l.
16. r. Is it by Imputation? p. 49. l. 22. r. God justifies. p. 50. l. 34. r.
their sins. p. 57. l. 34. r. the only. p. 64. l. 23. dele; r. bottom they must
be Pelagians. p. 66. l. 2. r. is it not so? p. 72. l. 27. dele ^. p. ibid. l.
28. r. (...). p. 73. l. 40. r. Christ's righteousness and us. p. 78. l. 27. r.
would not be. p. 79. l. prope antep. dele no. p. 85. l. 16. r. Gal. 3.21. p.
86. l. 21. r. Gal. 3.21. p. 87. l. 3. ab ult. r. for Savior. self. p. 88. l
23. r. Gal. 3.21. l. 37. r. is manifest. p. 99. l. 16. dele not. p. 100. l. 3.
dele and l. 6. r. yea. 123. l. 13. r. addicted to it, l. 35. r. should not be.
p. 126. l. 10. r. righteousness twice. p. 133, l. 13. (...) l. 31. false
Hebrew. p. 134. l. 20. r. (...). p. 148. l. 17. r. (...), l. 29. r. (...) for
(...). l. 34. dele the before events. p. 149. l. 5. r. (...). p. 155. l. 6. a
fine, r. unprofitable. p. 158. l. 6. ab ult. r. (...). 159 false Hebrew. p.
160. l. 6. ab ult. r. Arg. 3, The righteousness for which, and by which a
sinner is justified.


