A REJOINDER TO Mr. DANIEL WILLIAMS HIS REPLY To the First Part of Neomianism
Unmasked.

WHEREIN His Defense is Examined, and his Arguments Answered; whereby he
endeavors to prove the Gospel to be a New Law with Sanction: And the contrary
is proved.

By ISAAC CHAVNCY, M. A.

LONDON, Printed for H. Barnard, at the Bible in the Poultry. MDCXCIII.

A REJOINDER TO Mr. Daniel Williams his REPLY.
Reverend Sir,
YOU say you are misrepresented, in my saying, You hold the Vacating or
Abrogating the Old Law.

A. This is no false Charge or Misrepresentation, for if the Sanction be
changed, as you expressly say, both in the former Book and in this, the Law is
vacated, it cease to be Norma Judicii, and what Passage you refer to in p.
198. of your former Book, relieves you not. P. 198. where you say, The holiest
Action of the holiest Saint needs forgiveness: For upon your Hypothesis, there
is general Pardon purchased conditionally, which Faith and sincere Holiness
entitleth us to. The old Law itself is laid aside, as that which will never
trouble the Believer; Christ has satisfied that for him, but it is the new Law
which the Believer must be tried by; which is the Gospel Law, and has another
Sanction to the preceptive part of the Law which the Covenant of Works had
prescribed. P. 6. This new Law, you say, fixes new Terms, viz. True Repentance
and Faith unfeigned, to be the Terms of Pardon; which Terms, you say, the
Covenant of Works admits not, so that the Terms or Conditions being changed,
the Sanction is changed: What remains then but a new Law, the righteousness of
which must be our justifying Righteousness, for there is no Justification by any
Law without fulfilling it, by performance of that very Righteousness by our
selves, or another, which that Law requires. And though you say, we are bound to
the Duties of the Moral Law, yet you say, the use of Faith and Holiness, in
respect of the Benefits, is not from their conformity to the Precept [so that
Conformity to the Precept of the old Law has nothing to do as Righteousness in
the new Law] but their Conformity to the Rule of the Promise, which can be no
other than the Rule of the new Law. Hence it is manifest, That with you this
new Law is distinct, both in Precept and Sanction; therefore it is out a doors.
Lastly, none can deny, But that how good soever the Precept of a Law is, if the
sanction be vacated or changed, so that it cease to be Norma Judicii, it
cease to be a Law; and where a Law cease to be Norma Judicii, there is no
trial to be made thereby of Men's Actions, no Judicial Proceedings thereby, nor
Justification or Condemnation by it; whatever we are, in respect of another
Law, our Righteousness must be judged of and tried by the Law in Force; and
this is your plain Judgment. See p. 131. you say, If Men have nothing to do for
Salvation, then Christ has no Rule to judge them who lived under the Gospel.
So that Men under the Gospel are judged by a Rule of doing, which is your Rule
of the Promise. And again, ibid. Consider the description of the last Day, and
you will find God Saves and Damns with respect to Men's Neglects and Compliance
with the Gospel. You say, it is true, the Sanction of the Law of Works is
removed, p. 135. Your granting, That we deserve Wrath, in respect of the
Covenant of Works, and that the Law is a Rule of Duty, etc. is nothing, for
it is not mere satisfying that Law will save us, or the Righteousness thereof,
but a Compliance with, and obedience to a new Law. You say, The Law cannot
hinder our Relief by Christ, from the Sentence: Christ stands between us and
that Law, that we may be saved by another. Forgiveness, you say, is not by
sinless Obedience [we say, it is by Christ's, which s sinless Obedience] but it
is by our imperfect Obedience that must follow. You say also in this Reply, p.
23. Were not the Gospel to be a Rule of Judgment (norma Judicii,) I cannot see
how that can be a Judgment Day, it must be only an Execution Day; for by the
Law of Adam no Believer could be acquitted; that Law must be altered by the
Lawgiver, to admit Satisfaction (which is a strange Expression, as if Christ
could not satisfy Adam's Law, without altering it, the Law must be vacated if
Christ satisfied and fulfilled it, cujus contrarium verum est) "and it is by
the Gospel only he has enacted the way how this Satisfaction shall be applied:
And that way enacted is your new Law that comes in the room and stead of the
old Law, vacated. Therefore, I beseech you, consider your own Reputation more
than to say, I misrepresent you, in saying, You hold that which your Words
show, your Scheme must contain, and you know in your Conscience is your
Principle.

Again, you charge me for misrepresenting you, whenas you say; Christ's
Sufferings are the Foundation of our Pardon; that our Sins are forgiven for
Christ's Sufferings. By my saying, Your Fundamentally is only a remote
causality Causa sine qua non, by something else besides them.

R. You know, whatever you say, to palliate it, that you mean Christ's
Righteousness is our legal Righteousness; but our Faith and Obedience, our
evangelical Righteousness, which you own under the Name of a subordinate
Righteousness, and is not the Inference of causa sine qua non, p. 20. Very
natural, when you say, For the Sufferings of Christ our Sins are forgiven, and
explain it thus: Without them Sin cannot be forgiven. How can a Causa sine qua
non be more plainly expressed; as thus, The going out of my Door is the Causa
sine qua non, of my going into Cheapside. How so? without going out of my House
(which is in another Street,) I cannot go into Cheapside.

You say, It Is strange that any one should infer, That you deny the
Righteousness of Christ, to be the sole meritorious or material Cause of our
Pardon, which in Judicial Acts are the same.

Rej.All this may be, and your contrary Sense to us still the same.

1. It Is one thing to be a meritorious cause of Pardon, and another thing to be
our very sole justifying Righteousness. I can say Christ's Righteousness is the
sole meritorious Cause of Sanctification, for which we are sanctified, as well
as for which we are forgiven; and yet we are sanctified by the Spirit: and so
for which we are adopted. Hence you will say, Christ's Righteousness is the
meritorious Cause for which we are pardoned and justified by the Gospel-law,
the Condition whereof you make Meetness (what is required of Sinners is only a
meetness to receive the Effects) this Meetness is the Evangelical
Righteousness; this is the Condition we shall be tried by at the last Day, and
this is the Law Condition upon which we receive the effects of Christ's
Righteousness; not the righteousness itself neither: And is not this Meetness a
material Cause in the Gospel Law of our receiving these Effects? Why then has
it not ^he same Place in respect of the new Law as Christ's Righteousness has,
in repect of the old Law, so that there must be at least two Righteousnesses
requisite to our complete Justification, one Righteousness to answer the Old
Law, and another to answer the New? And indeed here Christ's Righteousness is
made by you most properly the subordinate Righteousness, because it is in
ordine ad, it is only in order to another Righteousness. In the most favoura^le
Sense, you make the Righteousness of Christ to merit ex condigno, and
Evang^lical to merit ex congruo, for all Law Meetness is meriting, either in
respect of the re^unerative or minatory part of the Law. All that you say over
and over helps not, nor covers you from those that know your Dialect; nor your
saying, That Christ is the foundation of your Plea: I may found a Plea or
Argument upon a thing that is not my Plea, or at least my chief Plea, and how
do you found it? Why, for the sake of Christ, accepted against excluding bars,
you say; whereby you have Permission now to come in with your Evangelical
Righteousness. You speak here just as in your other Book, to this Point, and I
understand you still as I did then, and you know you mean as I have represented
your Meaning, but you would not have the People understand what you mean; and
therefore you throw in an abundance of Expressions, thereby to hide your
Opinion, but instead thereof they lay it open. What is more plain than this?
Repl. p. 3.

The Terms of the Gospel by the Promise do make us capable of being justified
and saved for the Merits of Christ. Now here is your true sense of being
forgiven for the Merits of Christ, i. e. when we are made capable by the
righteous Meetness of another Law, we shall be absolved in the old Law sense,
by the righteousness of Christ. And mark that all along, its forgiveness only
comes from Christ's Merits; there is no positive righteousness of Christ, in
active Obedience, is reckoned to us; this positive righteousness whereby we
stand just in the Eye of the Law, in your sense lies wholly in Conformity to the
Rule of that Promise, which is the new Law righteousness: And you use the word
Merits still, in the way of procuration, not satisfaction. You say we are
justified only by Christ's Merits, as the sole procuring cause or righteousness
for which we are justified [to which you should add, that the Reader might take
your full sense] by the righteousness of the Gospel Law.

That which you call the fifth Misrepresentation, and is your fourth, I am not
convinced of, but that my Inferences are truly drawn, according to your natural
sense and meaning of what your Expressions and what your Principles must bear,
1. That you make the great end and use of Christ's Righteousness to secure us
from the old Law, Mr. B. calls it our legal Righteousness: and therefore our
Justification is not an immediate effect of that Righteousness, but of our
evangelical Righteousness. 2. That he merited only that we might Merit, i. e.
that he procured our Justification by evangelical Righteousness; you will not
call it Merit; call it what you will, its a Law of Meetness; and a Law meetness
I think, gives a claim and challenge of Pardon; and if we should pray in your
Dialect, we should pray thus, Lord, I am meet to be pardoned for the
Righteousness of Christ. 3. That you make Faith and Repentance the meritorious
cause of Pardon and Glory by the new Law, and that is true, for all conformity
to, and compliance with the conditional Preceptive part of a Law gives right, a
legal right to Remuneration, and the benefit becomes a reward of Debt; and if
so, the meetness is a Merit, ex Pacto. All these, tho you say, you disown, yet
in what you declare, you say but what you said before, and from whence the same
Consequences will follow, viz. That God requires a meetness in a Sinner for
Justification, and that this meetness is a federal condition.

1. You say, Christ satisfied Justice and merited Pardon and Glory, i. e. he
satisfied Justice in respect of the old Law, and merited Pardon and Glory, to
be bestowed as Rewards of Obedience to another Law: And that

2. The Sinner thus partaking of them, is as Fruits of his Death; and this is
all done for his sake.

3. You say, God in Christ has declared a way and order how he will dispense
his Benefits; this way is by another Law, in which he acts in a way of
distribution of Justice, upon performance of Law conditions, p. 4. And
therefore you say, Gospel conditions have no other use to our Interest in these
Benefits, than a compliance with this stated Rule of the distribution of Pardon
and Glory, p. 4. Adam's obedience had no other use, than a compliance with the
stated Rule of Gods distribution of Life promised, and Pardon and Glory is no
other than Life promised. So that you make your Law to be every whit the same
in specie, with a Covenant or Law of Works; the condition works out the reward
of Debt; but this is all the difference, that Man fell under the first Covenant
of Works by Creation, but under the second by Redemption; he was redeemed from
the Curse of the old Law that he might be justified by another Law Covenant;
and this is your plain meaning, as you say: And these things you do but say
over and over again in this Book, as in the former. And what does this
conditional Grant of these Effects import, but that we should have
Justification, Adoption, etc. upon the performance of obedience to another Law?
Which is as much as to say, Christ purchased another Law, and Obedience to it
must let us into Pardon by Christ. This purchasing conditional Grants and
Propositions, is a new sort of Divinity, suiting the highest degree of Arminian
Doctrine, and will strike at the nature of absolute Election, which gives ground
of suspecting you also in that Point, as well as what you say of the savability
of the none Elect; though I acknowledge you often assert absolute Election; but
how well that Principle will comport with indefinite Redemption, upon a
conditional Grant, let the rational judge. You go on again, and say, as from
Chap. 10. Page 84. of your first Book. When Sinners are pardoned, the whole
meritorious cause of that Pardon, is that atonement; and what is required of
Sinners, is only a meetness to receive the Effects. You need quote no more, to
give us an account of what you mean in these things; if the Reader desires to
be further confirmed in the truth of my representation of your Principles, let
him read page 4, 5. of your Reply.

You quote Passages in p. 30, 31. of my Book (for the first Head) from whence
you say, I endeavor to render you one, that thinks Faith or other Graces did
merit the pardon of our Sins; which you say, is contrary to your declared
Judgment.

Rep. I grant you deny Merit; and I profess, Sir, I would not willingly wrong
you by any false Imputation; but this I tell you, it signifies not much to deny
a Name to a thing whose Nature requires that Name if it be named aright; a
federal condition performed, does bring a Man into the claim of the benefits
promised as Debt, your own word gives the performance of the condition the
meritum ex congruo, merit of meetness; and you making this meetness federal, I
know not how it can be avoided but it will be Merit.

You quote Proofs, that you do not call this meetness Merit, but you call
Christ's Righteousness the Merit, as this; there is a Righteousness for which a
Man is justified, and that is only Christ's: But you will say, there is a
Righteousness of meetness upon which a Man is justified for Christ's
Righteousness, i. e. the qualifing condition of the Person whom this Mercy is
promised to, he must have a Conformity to the Rule of the Promise; and its by
this we are justified for the righteousness of Christ. To what purpose is it to
deny Repentance and Faith, to be meriting Righteousness; when according to your
Scheme, it can be denied in no other sense than in respect of the Covenant of
Works? The satisfaction of the breach whereof, you acknowledge to lie in the
Righteousness of Christ conditionally, i. e. for all that shall conform to the
Rule of the Promise, which Rule is the preceptive part of the new Law; which
Conformity you call, with others, subordinate Righteousness, intituling us to
another Righteousness; it is this Righteousness, you say, we shall be judged by
at the last day. Now Sir, I say, that Righteousness which Believers shall be
acquitted by in the day of Judgment, that is the Righteousness that they were
justified by, and the Righteousness of that Law which they shall be judged by.
Let us but a little consider how near this subordinate Righteousness comes to
the Papist's Notion of Merit, and if their Merit be not as small a thing as
your meetness and new Law conditions of Justification by Christ's Righteousness.

Hear what S. de Clara our Countryman tells us.

Meritum est Actio libera acceptata ad aliquod premium.

Meritum de congruo est Actio libera ex congruitate quadam acceptata ad premium.

Meritum de condigno, est Actio libera ab Homine in gratia elicita qui ex
Justitia acceptatur ad premium.

Merit is a free Action, accepted to some Reward.

Merit of meetness is a free Action, which by reason of some congruity or
fitness is accepted to a Reward.

Merit of worthiness is a free Action of a Man performed in Grace, which from
Justice is accepted to a Reward.

Now the Question is, 1. Whether that personal Qualification, which you require
of meetness for Justification by Christ's Righteousness, be not exactly the
Papists Merit of Congruity? Upon which is their first Justification. 2. And the
sincere imperfect presevering Obedience be not their Meritum ex condigno, or of
Worthiness? Which is their second Justification.

See the first Justific. the Council of Trent, Decr. 5.

The beginning of Justification of the Adult, proceeds from preventing Grace
which inviteth to dispose themselves, consenting and cooperating with it
freely, etc. The manner of this Preparation is, to believe willingly the divine
Revelations and Promises, and knowing ones self to be a Sinner, to turn from
the fear of God's Justice to his Mercy, to hope for Pardon, and to begin to
love him, hate Sin, purpose to be baptized, etc. Decr. 7. Justification
follows this Preparation. Decr. 8. When a Man is justified by Faith, and
gratis, it ought to be understood, because Faith is the beginning, and the
things that preceed Justification, are not meritorious of Grace, And in another
F. they condemn those that say, A Man may be justified without Grace, by the
strength of Human Nature, and the Doctrine of the Law. What is it that you say
of your Doctrine of Meetness, which they will not say in behalf of your
congruity? And Scotus tells us, That an act is not meritorious precisely,
because it comes from Grace, but because it is accepted of God, as worthy of
eternal Life, as you say it is the Promise made to that meetness gives the right.

Concerning meritum de congruo, merit of meetness, Bellarmine disputes, lib. 1.
c. 21. and concerning that de condigno, lib. 5. de justificatione, the merit of
Meetness he ascribes to the Works of him that is to be justified, a partibus
justificandi, i. e. that meetness for Justification by Repentance and Faith,
previous to Justification and capacitating for it, or disposing to it. The
other, viz. Merit of Condignity, is ascribed operibus justificati, to the
evangelical sincere Obedience of one justified by the first Justification,
whereby he merits the second Justification* and though you will not own the
Name Merit, yet in your Scheme, your first Justification by Meetness, or upon
Meetness, and the second upon persevering imperfect Obedience, is the same
Justifications that Bellarmine means, for the Jesuit says thus, The
perfection of our Righteousness and Justification is not from Faith but from
Works, for Faith does but begin Justification, and after it has assumed to
itself Hope and Charity, it does perfect it. Bellar. de Justif. l. 1. c. 20.
And again he says, de merit. Good Works merit without all doubt, yet not by
any intrinsic Virtue and Worth in them, but by virtue of God's Promise, and is
not this as much as you say again and again, It is the Promise that gives Right
to Benefits upon our Conformity to the Rule of the Promise, p. 104. And Calvin,
inst. l. 3. s. 12. They are forced to deny the intrinsic worthiness of Works,
and grant the Righteousness of Works is always imperfect, while we live here,
and wants forgiveness whereby our Failure in Works may be made up. He makes it
appear, That a Promise made with a Condition of a Work, brings this to pass,
that he who performs the Work is said to have merited the thing promised, ex
pacto, and may challenge his Reward as Debt in Law.

It signifi^s not much whether you suppose the first Grace to be saving, or
mere moral Endowment; the Council of Trent condemns them that say, ^ Man may be
justified without Grace, by the strength of Human Nature, and the doctrine of
the Law: If you make the first Grace a qualifying meetness for Justification,
in order thereto, it is the Papists Doctrine.

Thus you see your sheltering your self under the absoluteness of the first
Grace, will not do: And, 1. Does God give the first Grace absolutely? then all
other Graces conditionally, for the first Grace comes from the same foederal
Condition that all does. 2. The giving the first Grace is the giving eternal
Life begun. 3. Either the first Grace is through Christ or not; but it is
strange to say, That Christ gives inherent Grace to one that is not united to
him (but as his designed Head, as you phrase it) and to one in a State of
Condemnation: And should make a change in his Nature before a change of State.
4. Then Sanctification, (if Faith be any part of it) must be before
Justification, contrary to the best Protestants, and what you have said.

Your 8th Exception is, That I say it is the Doctrine of Imputation that you
banter; and you tell us what you say of it in your Book, where, when I come to
the Places you quote here, you will see my Remarks on your Sayings: And so as
to the ninth and tenth, it will be spoken to in its proper place: And as to the
el^v^nth and twelfth, I am of the same Mind I was, I shall not spend Time in
Vindication; and I leave the considerate Reader, who understands himself,
whether I do not give a very fair account of your Opinion, whereof, by the
Quotations of yours, out of your former Book, you give sufficient Confirmation.

As to the stating Questions in difference between us, you do it not fair: The
first you say is, Preface 2. l. 1. Whether the elect are required to believe,
that they may be justified? This, you say, I deny.

R. You should have quoted the Place: I say there are Commands in the Ministry
of the Gospel unto Sinners, to believe and obey the Gospel, that they may
partake of Justification by Christ's Righteousness, but not to perform it as a
moral condition, that ther^by they may be qualified for Justification, or made
meet for it as you say.

2. You say it is not whether the Gospel be such a Law, that the Acts of
Obedience to it stand in the place of Works, so as for them we are saved; but
whether the Gospel assure Salvation for Christ's Merits, to such as obey it,
and their active exclusion of Salvation to such as disobey it?

This you say you affirm, and I deny; I Will tell you what I say: The Gospel
cannot be a Law commanding Obedience as a federal condition of the Promise, but
upon performance of it the Promise must be a reward of Debt; and if the Promise
be Justification for the Merits of Christ, then its due as Debt upon the said
Obedience; and though you say, Justification for the Righteousness of Christ, yet
that Justification must be the reward of Obedience required in that Law.

3. It is not whether we are justified by our Faith as an Act of ours, as if
they [you mean Repentance too] as Works or Qualifications, were a Jot of that
Righousness for which, or by which, we are justified: This I deny.

Rep.Who says you say its that Righteousness of Christ, to which you annex your
for, or by? but for and by this Righteousness we come to be justified by our
Faith and Repentance, the Duties required in another Law, which you tells us is
the Gospel Rule [ i. e. your Law] That a Man must be a penitent Believer whom
God will justify, for the righteousness of Christ: This you say you affirm and
I deny, and that with good reason, that our Faith and Repentance must be
previous, qualifying Duties to our Justification. So that a Sinner must repent
and believe in a state of Condemnation, before he is justified: and its no more
than this, that for Christ's Righteousness which is our legal Righteousness, we
shall be justified by or according to our Evangelical.

4. Your next Particular is the same; and I say as before, God does not
justify us as a judicial Act for any Duty or Act, though wrought by the Spirit.

5. You say, It Is not whether we are justified upon believing before any Works,
which follow the first Act of saving Faith.

R. No, for the Papists own their first Justification to be so; but you say,

If Faith should be ineffectual to Acts of sincere Holiness, and to prevent
Apostasy and utter Ungodliness, would we not be subject to condemnation by
Gospel Rule? This you say you affirm, and I deny.

R. Let us examine this then, and see what you affirm.

1. That there is a possibility true justifying Faith may be ineffectual, and so
there may be a falling away.

2. That till Faith has brought forth sincere persevering Obedience we are not
fully and certainly justified; we must be justified by the second
Justification, before we be secure.

3. That Apostasy and utter Ungodliness is prevented by a Gospel Rule of
Condemnation that we are made subject to; its a fine way to prevent Apostasy to
lay us under a Rule of Condemnation, you mean a Sentence: For my part I can t
see these things hang together, nor know what you mean by a Rule of
Condemnation, but in the sense of the Law working Wrath, which is quite
contrary to the nature of a Gospel.

6. You say and we say, That Holiness and good Works are necessary to
Salvation; but that I deny they are indispensable means of obtaining the
Possession of Salvation through Christ.

R. If I say they are necessary, it is enough, though I may not own them to be
indispensible means in your sense, as a Law condition is an indispensible means
of the Reward; and if they be indispensible means, the Thief upon the Cross
could not have been saved, and hundreds more, that I doubt not, but God saves
in the like manner.

7. It is not whether Justification, Adoption and Glorification be Acts of Gods
free Grace, which I affirm.

R.But you said otherwise, That forgiving, adopting and glorifying, and the
conveyance of every promised Benefit, given on Gods Terms, are judicial Acts of
God as a Rector, i. e. As you after say, That Grace is so dispensed, by way of
judicial rectoral Distribution of Rewards, etc. Pref. of the 1st Book.

But the Question is, you say, Whether it pleased God to leave himself at
liberty to justify the Unbeliever, while such, and glorify the Unbeliever and
Wicked, and al^o to damn the penitent godly Believer; this Mr. C. affirms, and
I deny.

R.You should have showed the place where I said it, that your Charge might
have fastened by a Demonstration. I marvel you blush not at such things as these.

1. Where have I that Expression, of Gods leaving himself at liberty? Its one
of your Terms of Art, not mine.

2. That he justifies the Ungodly, is what the Spirit of God says; and
therefore I may.

3. But I say in justifiing him, he sanctifies him; and whatever a Sinner is,
he is justified as such, not as made holy and sanctified, unless you will confound
Justification and Sanctification as the Papists and Quakers do.

4. But when did I say, That God does glorify an Unbeliever, and a wicked Man;
or damn the penitent and godly Believer? Or that in the Covenant of Grace he
has made any such Exception, that he may or will do so? I suppose that you
must mean by leaving himself at liberty.

"This, you say, is these Men's free Grace, while they deny the Gospel Rule or
Law. These Taunts and Falsehoods are well enough, it seems, in your Mouth; its
suitable to the rest of the Prittle Prattle in this Preface.

8. You say the Question is not, Whether God has not as to us absolutely
promised and covenanted with Christ, that the Elect shall believe, and all Men
believing be pardoned, and so persevere in Faith and Holiness to eternal Life;
which I affirm, Pref. p. 5.

R. Here then you allow that there is an absolute Covenant of Grace (for
whatever distinction you would make between the Covenant of Redemption and the
Covenant of Grace, there is no Man of sense can deny, that the Covenant of
Redemption is a Covenant of Grace) and if God has absolutely promised to, and
covenanted with Christ, that the Elect shall believe and be pardoned, this must
stand absolute to the end of the World. But by your favor, though I am for the
absoluteness of the Covenant of Grace, yet it was not absolute but conditional
to Christ; that Faith and Pardon and Perseverance, as promised to Christ for
the Elect were conditional, and the condition was, that he should make himself
an Offering for Sin, bear it, and make full satisfaction to the Law by his
Righteousness Active and Passive, and make Intercession for Transgressors, and
therefore though you affirm here, yet I deny.

But the Question is (you say) whether there is a Covenant which requires our
true believing consent to the Terms of it, to the condition of Pardon and
Glory, and supposes this true consent in the actual bestowing these Benefits?
This Mr. C denies, and I affirm.

Res. 1. I deny that there is any more Covenants of Grace than one, and say,
That the Covenant between the Father and the Son, was that original Contract
which was displayed and made manifest in the Gospel of the old and new
Testament, and in whatever is required in this Display is absolutely promised.
For if there be two Covenants wherein the same things are promised, and to the
same Persons, the first absolute and the second conditional, the one must
certainly be vacated by the other. For if I promise to a Person, or to another
for him, to give him a House freely, and afterward make a covenant Bargain with
him, that he must pay me 20 l. or 20 s. per annum, the first Covenant is
vacated; or if I am bound to stand to my first Promise, the second Agreement
falls to the Ground. 2. Likewise observe what you affirm, That God has made
Terms as a Condition, i. e, federal of Pardon and Glory. So that here is
brought in a Covenant of Works, to intervene betwixt the absolute Covenant, and
bestowing the Benefits, absolutely at first promised. Now Men may see plainly
what you mean when you talk so much of Pardon for and by Jesus Christ; this
Pardon is one of the Benefits bestowed in your new Law judicially, by way of
remuneration to the performance of the Terms of Duty required.

9. It is not whether Faith be the only Grace by which we receive and rest on
Christ for Justification, and that it is Christ received by Faith does
justify, which is the sense of the Protestants, when they say we are justified
by Faith alone; this I affirm.

R. Yes you do in your sense, i. e. That Christ justifies here, as much as is
needful as to legal Righteousness; but there is another Righteousness, viz.
Evangelical, that puts in for a snack, viz. that of the new Law. And you do
much misrepresent the Protestants, for they say, Christ's Righteousness is all
our Righteousness, of one kind and another that we are justified by, a
Righteousness without us, and not by any within us, any Act or qualification
whatever. But the Papists say with you, the Council of Trent does anathematize

Those that say a Man is justified without the Merit of Christ, by which Christ
did merit for us, or is formally just by that, Anath. 10. And they curse also
any one that says, that he is justified only by the Imputation of the
Righteousness of Christ, or only by Remission of Sins, without inherent Grace,
Anath. 11.

But let us have the Query then; It is, you say, Whether he that can truly
believe to Justification, must be in part a convinced, penitent, humbled
Sinner; and this you affirm, and say I deny.

R. You should have told the Place and my Words. Its possible I may deny it in
your sense, and I will prove how that you must deny it in my sense, i. e. that
legal Convictions and Humiliations are no federal conditions of Faith; for you
say, That the first Grace is absolutely given; and if so, there is no federal
conditions of it. Why do you not bring in hearing the Word, as a federal
condition of Faith, for it comes by Hearing? Why do you not bring in a Man's
having his Senses and Understanding, and many more things?

And now you talk of Humblings, let me mind you what you say, Page 15. You tell
us of the Sum of the Popish Principles our Divines oppose. 1. They think that
by Attrition (or a selfish legal fear of Punishment) Men do, ex congruo (or
meetness) merit Charity and Faith, which be the beginning of Sanctification;
and that this begun Sanctification is all our first Justification.

1. What do you say less than they, setting aside the word Merit, and they say
as to that de congruo its scarcely so? Nay some are against Meritum de congruo,
as being any Merit but only a disposition and meetness of the Subject, such as
you would have, and we may put their Attrition to your Humblings, as a meetness
for Faith. See what the Council of Trent says, Can. 8. When Paul says, a Man
is justified by Faith and gratis, it is to be understood because Faith is the
beginning, and the things that precede Justification are not meritorious of
Grace: See now how you abuse the Papists. Nay I Will tell you more, for I would
give the Devil his due; you abuse the Papists in charging them for making this
begun Sanctification all their Justification. The words of the 7th Canon of the
Council of Trent are, That Justification follows Preparation, which is not
only remission of Sins, but Sanctification: And therefore they make not only
Sanctification begun to be our first Justification. And in the 10th Anathema,
they curse them that say, A Man is justified without the Righteousness by which
Christ did merit for us. Now I think you ought to ask the Papists forgiveness
for slandering of them.

Rhemists on Romans 2.3. they grant, That the beginning of our Justification,
which they call the first, is merely of Grace; neither can we do acceptable
Works before we be justified, but in the second Justification, which is, the
increase of former Justice a Man may merit by good Works. So again they say,
Works done of Nature before or without Faith, cannot merit; but Works done by
God's Grace, may and are joined with it, as Causes of Salvation; and in these
Points the Protestants oppose them. I could fill a Volume with it if need were,
but its enough to say, you are mistaken in telling us what the Protestants
oppose them in.

You say also that I say, That Pardon is rather the condition of Faith, nay
Pardon is the cause of Faith.

R. I say rather, for if a federal condition must lie between giving and
receiving, giving is the causal condition of receiving, and not receiving of
giving.

2. The Object must be before the Act of the Organ, Pardon is the Object
applied by Faith; Application before there is an Object, is contradictio in
adjecto.

3. The Promise of Pardon is the Ground and Reason of our believing, therein is
the Grace brought, therein does the Truth and faithfulness of God appear; and
the Apostle says, Faith comes by hearing this Word of Promise, i. e. is
wrought by it, Romans 10. And he opposes the Works of the Law, and the hearing
of Faith in Justification Gal. 3.2, 5. And what is that acceptance but of
Faith, which the Apostle speaks of, 1 Timothy 1.15? And what does it accept, but
that faithful Gospel saying there mentioned, That Christ came into the World to
save Sinners, and the chiefest? Its the Grace of God working in this Promise,
that has wrought Faith in the hearts of thousands

4. We say with all soundest Protestants, That Justification in Nature is
before Sanctification and the Cause of it, and therefore of Faith, because
Faith as a Grace wrought, is a part of Sanctification. Its enough for you, to
hold up that you call Error, and give it Name, and so let it go.

10. It is not whether Sanctification taken strictly do follow Justification;
this I affirm.

R. If you affirm this, you should not make so strange of my saying, Pardon is
the condition of believing. What you hide under strictly I concern not my self;
Sanctification is Sanctification, and if Justification goes before it, you
allow it to be conditio ordinis at least. Therefore I conclude, Pardon is
rather a condition, yea I say not merely of Order, but such a condition as is
an influential Cause. But go on, stating your difference.

But whether effectual Vocation make a real habitual change in the Soul, and
that this Vocation is in order of Nature before Justification: This Mr. C. and
the Letter, and I affirm, with the Assembly.

R. As to the Letter, I must tell your Answer to it is short and ungenteel; and
as he did Bellarmine, who said Bellarmine thou lie; when you say, it was
rather to serve a turn than to argue; it spoke Truth weakly, and other things
erroneously and ignorantly, etc. It justifies a necessity of dealing a little
more roughly with Men of your Country and Kidney. But to our Point in hand; it
need not be enquired, whether you take effectual Vocation in the active or
passive Sense, seeing you say its such as makes a real habitual change in the
Soul: And seeing it makes such a change, it must be a change of Sanctification,
and this, you say, is before Justification; how can that be, when you had said
before, that Justification is before Sanctification strictly taken? What kind
of Sanctification, I pray, is effectual Calling? Is it not so in a strict
sense, when you say its a real habitual change in the Soul? Is this not turning
from Darkness to Light, raising us together with Christ or being born again?
But all this must be done before the Relative change; a Man must be free from
the reigning Power of Sin, and alive from the Dead without Jesus Christ our
Lord. See what the Assembly says in the larger Catech. Q. 67.

That effectual calling is the Work of Gods Almighty Power and Grace, whereby
out of his free and especial Love to his Elect, and from nothing in them moving
him thereto, he does in his accepted time, invite and draw them to Jesus
Christ, etc. and they are hereby made able and willing freely to answer his
Call, and to accept and embrace the Grace offered and conveyed therein, i. e.
then they are effectually called, when they have embraced the pardoning Grace
of God offered and conveyed; which shows the previousness of that Grace working
the effectual Calling consummated in believing and embracing the Gospel
offered; the Gospel Grace in the Promise, is always that which works first upon
the Sinner, moves his Heart, and draws it forth in believing.

11. It is not whether our sincere Faith and Love, etc. are imperfect, and so
can be no meriting Righteousness; which I affirm.

R. You affirm they are imperfect, and so do I; but not therefore that they can
be no meriting Righteousness; for the Merit of Righteousness does not depend
upon the perfection of the Duty or Service in it self, but its perfection in
relation to the Law that requires it; if the Duty required be never so weak,
little, and lame, if I have such a degree as the Law requires, its perfect as
to that Law: The Law requires a poor Man to pay a Shilling to a Tax, its as
good obedience as another Man's that is required to pay twenty. Many Instances
might be given, the Papists say, Merit lies not in the value of the Action, but
in Gods Acceptance. The Council of Trent says, Our Works are meritorious of
eternal Life. Quia a patre acceptantur per Christum, yea, says S. de Clara,
Actus meus dicitur meritorium quia elicitus seu Imperatus a gratia ex pactione
divina acceptatur ad premium. Deus ab aeterno ordinavit hujusmodi actus esse
dignos vita eterna quando eliciuntur a gratia habituali; non igitur tota ratio
meriti a gratia ipsa. So Scotus, Actus non est meritorius praecise quia
perveniens ex gratia, sed quia acceptatur a Deo tanque dignus vita aeterna. But
where is the Question then?

Whether Faith and Love, etc. are disobedient even in a Gospel account, and so
incapable of being Conditions of any of its promised saving Benefits?

R. In the sense of the Papists they be not, but be accepted of God for this
end, to be federal conditions of a Law Covenant; they are perfect in that kind
and relation, and merit the Benefit; but we say, though any of our Gifts of Grace
or Duties are accepted in Christ, yet they are not accepted to any Merit or
Worthiness of any other Grace; federal conditions and worthiness of all Grace
and Blessings bestowed on us, are only in Christ; and hence Faith and Charity
and other Gifts of Grace, though they have a conditional connection one to
another, yet they are all of Promise, and cannot be federal conditions of any
promised saving Benefits.

Mr. C. says, I am against the Articles of the Church of England and the
Assembly; I am sure he'el never prove it, and I profess the contrary; but I am
sure he is against all the Confessions of Faith that we own as Orthodox.

R. How your Principles agree with the said Articles and Confessions, upon
Impartial Examination, let others judge; it is not your saying, your profess the
contrary, will satisfy the World, when res ipsa loquitur; especially when you
have the Confidence to sugges^ such a false thing of me in the same Breath,
That you are sure I am against all the Confessions of Faith that are orthodox
(but indeed you say, which we call orthodox) that we, I suppose, are, you and
your Schematists; and then what they account orthodox, I shall not trouble my
self. You go on and say, In the Strength of Christ you will sustain the utmost
Persecution at the Hands of these angry Men; and while God enableth me, they
shall not overturn the Gospel by their unscriptural Abuse of the blessed Names
of the Righteousness of Christ, and free Grace and the Gospel way of
Application.

R. Enduring Persecution is no Infallible Argument that a Man's Principles are
good; if it were, Papists and Quakers then have more to say for the
justification of their Principles than ever you had, or are like to have; and
let the wise judge, how near akin yours is to theirs: And whereas you
insinuate, as if you had suffered Persecution from the angry Men (as you call
them) who have conscientiously contended earnestly for the Faith. Impartial Men
will (if they do weigh and consider duly what you have done and said in these
Matters) determine which side has been the Persecutors, if Reproaches and
false Imputations be Persecution, and God will judge one Day whether you be a
Champion (as you would be accounted) for Christ or against him; the Day will
reveal it; its not enough to brave it out before the World, a Judgment at Man's
Day will not serve our Turns; he that judges you and I is the Lord, and
therefore consider what you do, while you call so much upon the Name of God and
Christ, to countenance your confident undertakings in this Affair.

You say, there is a Mystery in it that one Explication of a Text should be
pretended for a Reason against my whole Book, and so countenance all Dr. Cr.
Errors, which they profess they dislike.

Rep. There Is no Mystery in it, that any faithful Minister or People should not
only be highly jealous of, but exceedingly blame such a Book, and the Author
which shall rob them of so high an Article of their Religion as the true Nature
of the Doctrine of Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, and for the maintaining
himself therein, must wrest so eminent a Portion of Scripture out of their
Hands as to its genuine and plain meaning, upon which thousands of the most
eminent Saints in all Ages have lived, and do live; no, be you confident, they
will not lose that sense of that Portion of Scripture ( Phil. 3.) which you
oppose; they will tug hard for it first, and it will stand in the Hearts and
Prayers of God's Children maugre all Opposition. And whereas you say, you hear
Augustine is of your Mind, He tell you what an Author of none of the least Name
tells me, concerning Austin's Opinion: Thus Augustinus breviter ostendit ab
Apostolo, etc. Austin briefly shows from the Apostle Phil. 3.9. that whatsoever
is of his own Righteousness is excluded there; and that Paul speaks not of the
Law of Circumcision or Uncircumcision, but of the Precepts in which it is said,
Thou shall not covet. Lydeker. de discr. legis and Evangel.

You proceed to vindicate yourself against the Charge of not being against the
Articles and Confession, and pitch upon the Doctrine of Imputation for an
instance wherein you know you differ from them; and your stating your Judgment
in that Point sufficiently evinceth, though you do it after that perverse
manner which is usual with you, to make your Principles look sound.

You say, You will state that Case, viz. of Imputation. 1. It is not whether
Christ was a public Person, as a Mediator in his Undertakings, and so
transacted all for Sinners, that they might be pardoned and saved by his
undertaken Satisfaction and Merit: This I affirm; but whether we are so
represented in Christ, as that we are in Law Sense; they that undertook to
atone and merit; this I deny.

R. What do you mean by a public Person, as a Mediator? Did he stand in such a
Capacity as to represent, undertake for, and stand in stead of the Elect? were
they federally in him as his Seed? for so the Assembly say they were. See
Confess. c. 8. sect. 1. He was made the Head and Savior of his Church, the
Heir of all things: Unto whom God did from all eternity give a People to be his
Seed. So Larg. Cat. The Covenant of Grace was made with Christ, the second
Adam, and in him with all the elect, as his Seed: But you say he only
transacted for Sinners as a Mediator; but do you mean such a Mediator as is a
Surety; if so, the Persons for whom he is a Surety are federally in him, for he
takes the Debts upon him, stands in their room and stead, and they federally in
him accounted, and to all Intents and Purposes he is entertained, as
comprehending all their Debts in him. A Man may be a Mediator, and treat with
both Parties at Variance; but not take the whole cause upon, so as to treat and
engage, and make Payment in the Room of the offending Parties. But let us hear
what your Question is.

Whether we are so represented in Christ, that we were, in Law Sense, those
that undertook to atone or merit? this I deny.

R. I will appeal to all Men of Sense in the World, whether they can tell by
your stating this Question, whether you own or deny Christ to be a public
Person, representing the Elect. He is a public Person as Mediator, and
represents so as no body ever said any person did represent another: viz. That
we are, in Law Sense, they that undertook to atone and merit. A person comes to
be bound, as surety, to a Creditor for an hundred Debtors in Ludgate; he
becomes Debtor, and is accepted in the room of all and every one, they all pay,
and are discharged in him: Does the Law reckon that all these Men were
Sureties, or that they atoned or merited? but that in the Surety's Atonement
and Merit, they being all represented by him, their persons are accepted, and
their Debts paid. Does any Body look upon the Debtor to be the Surety because
the Surety stands bound? Or because the Surety pays or undertook to atone and
merit? I would fain know whether this be not perverse perplexing a Question
instead of stating of it?

3. You go on, stating thus: Nor whether Christ was a Surety for us, in a Bond
of his own, to pay our Debt to the full (or more) that we might in a due Time
and way be released? This I affirm.

Reply. If Christ came under Obligation to pay our Debt absolutely, he
represented not as if he obtained our release but conditionally, upon future
Terms to be performed by us or some others; for then his Suretiship was not for
us, but to purchase Conditions for us.

But whether we were joint Parties in one and the the same Bond with him, and
so we were actually acquitted when he made satisfaction? therefore God could
enjoin no Terms of Application to us for Justification and Glory, nor suspend
the same upon those Terms. This I deny.

R. What mean you by joint Parties in one and the same Bond? do you mean the
Bond of Debt to the Law, by reason of the Obligation of Doing and Suffering?
there we stood bound as Principles, and not being able to discharge, Christ
became bound as Surety; we were never bound as Sureties nor Christ as the
Principle. But if you mean that both were bound to pay the same debt, we do
affirm it.

2. What do you mean by an actual Acquittance? Is it not meet that he that has
his Debt satisfied, should have an actual Acquittance, or their Surety for
them? there is no Man pays a Debt, his own or another, but he will have an
Acquittance, according to the Terms of Payment, if they were such as you
suppose, viz. to purchase a Discharge upon other Terms. But you say, If Christ
were actually acquitted, and the elect in him, God would not come upon new
Terms with the Sinner for Justification and Glory; this is as much as to say,
Christ paid a Fine for Sinners, that they might be brought to lower Terms with
the Justice of God by a milder Law. How false are you, when you tell us, Your
meaning is, That Christ's Righteousness is our only justifying Righteousness?
whereas here you own, That it obtained not our full Discharge, but only the
bringing us under new Terms; upon which Justification and Glory are suspended;
is not the Performance then of those purchased Terms, our immediate justifying
Righteousness?

3. That which you affirm in this first part is pretty unintelligible, but
according to my Understanding it amounts to no more than that Christ dyed pro
bono nostro only, which is consistent with all the Socinian Notions of
Imputation. But as that which you say you deny, I want it to be unriddled; viz.
That Christ was joint Covenant Party with all the elect, in Adam's Covenant, so
that they are legally esteemed to make Satisfaction, and yield Obedience in his
doing thereof.

R. You seem here to suggest as if some did hold, That Christ was under Adam's
Covenant, so as the rest of his Posterity was, and consequently fell in him, as
they did. Or do you mean that all the Elect in Christ satisfied the Law, as all
Adam's Posterity brake it in him? and this I suppose you deny. Now, as unto
this Point, if I have hit your Meaning, I will tell you what a great Divine
says in answer to a Socinian: The first Adam was by God's Institution a
public Person (having showed that God's Pleasure is the first Rule of
Righteousness) hence in him sinning the World sinned. The second Adam is not
only by God's Institution a public person, but also an infinite Person,
because God: This public Person doing and suffering was as much as if the
World of the Elect had suffered. If the first Adam, a finite Person, was by
God's Institution in that Act of Disobedience, a World of Men, why should it
seem strange that the second Adam, being an infinite Person, should be by God's
Institution in the course of his Obedience, as the World of the Elect? He being
infinite, there needed no more than God's Pleasure to make him the World of
Men, yea ten thousand Worlds. That which is infinite knows no bounds, but
God's Will. The kind of his Obedience was legal, the same in Nature and Measure
which we, by the first Covenant stood bound unto. This his Obedience to the Law
was more acceptable to God than the Disobedience of Adam, was detestable; yea
more acceptable than the Obedience of Adam (understanding both as public
Persons) had he continued in the first Covenant. Nort. against Pinch. p. 6.

4. That which you affirm of the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness here, is
no more than what you say every where, importing no more than as to its
Effects; but your Expression is strange, in saying Christ's Righteousness is
reputed by God, as that which now plead; for our Impurity, etc. which seems to
import that it does not actually plead, but that God is willing to reckon it a
kind of Plea: So that the Imputation you here intend of Christ's Righteousness
is to Christ himself, and not to the Sinner: But you tell us what you deny,

You say its this, That it is imputed as our formal Righteousness, and so we
may truly plead, that we our selves, as Elect, did legally by Proxy as our
Christ, satisfy and merit all, and without the Interposal of the Gospel Rule,
we have a legal Title to glory by Adam s Covenant: This I deny, as that which
exclud^s Forgiveness, makes Christ's Sufferings needless, denies any proper
satisf^ction, and destroys Christianity.

Rep. Here 1. You seem to deny Christ's imputed Righteousness to be our formal
Righteousness, for Christ's Righteousness we reckon to be, as it were, the
Matter of our Justification, and being imputed by an Act of Grace, becomes our
formal as well as material Righteousness; for if it become not by Imputation
our formal Righteousness, its not our perfect Righteousness; for Matter and
Form are the essential Causes of the Effect.

2. That we in Christ, satisfied the Justice of God, I know no sound Protestant
but will affirm, and that legally. Mr. B. says over and over, Christ's
Righteousness was our legal Righteousness, but you will deny, that we legally
satisfied in Christ: May not a Debtor plead that he legally paid the Debt in
his Surety, though not with his own Money?

3. You cast Reproach upon the Suretiship and federal Headship of Jesus Christ,
by calling him a Proxy and Attorney, as our Surety and Representative. A Proxy
is Vicarious, an inferior Person that is employed to do Business in the Name and
by the Authority of a Superior, so that he is his Vicar or Substitute. But is
a Father, that pays a Sons Debts, and purchases an Estate for him out of his
mere Love, Pity and Compassion, the Sons Proxy? Or if a Man purchase an Estate
for his Heirs for ever, is he a Proxy to the Children yet unborn? And yet their
Estate is bought and paid for in him, the original Right and Title lies in him
the Purchaser. Or a rich Man, who undertakes for the Debts of an hundred poor
Prisoners in Ludgate (suppose the King, or another great Person) out of mere
Pity and Commiseration, is he their Proxy? Is he not their Benefactor and
Patron? I wonder how you can speak these things without suspecting your own
Spirit, when you do so manifestly cast Dirt upon Jesus Christ; may not I justly
say you banter the Doctrine of Imputation?

3. But you say Christ cannot satisfy and merit for us, without the Interposal
of a Gospel Rule; the meaning whereof is, That Christ has not legally
satisfied for us till we have done something in conformity to the said Rule,
that may give validity to the satisfaction of Christ, and make it pleadable as
such; so that Christ has neither satisfied nor merited, till we make up the
Complement whereby it becomes legal.

4. What mean you by a legal Right to Glory by Adam's Covenant? If you mean by
Christ's satisfaction and obedience to Adam's Covenant, we have our legal Right
to Glory, we say it; for Christ is the end of the Law for Righteousness to
every one that believes, and through his Righteousness we have a Right to Glory
by Adam's Covenant; Christ's Righteousness is our legal Righteousness, as it
respects the Perfection and Justice of God in that Covenant; and its our
Evangelical Righteousness, as its in the behalf of, and bestowed upon undone
Sinners.

But you say this Doctrine excludes Forgiveness; Why? Because it brings in
Forgiveness merely upon Christ's Righteousness alone: But how makes it Christ's
Sufferings needless? when it lays all upon the Righteousness of Christ, imputed
as the Matter and Form of our Justification? Or how does it deny proper
satisfaction, when it makes Christ's Righteousness all the satisfaction? And
your Doctrine makes it but an improper and remote satisfaction, yea and
imperfect. And lastly, you say, it destroys Christianity: This is so gross a
Charge, as that it is to be exploded with Detestation; if the Imputation of
Christ's Righteousness, as our legal and evangelical Right and Title to Life
and Salvation, destroys Christianity, we may burn our Bibles. But you go on.

5 You affirm, That all sinned and dyed in Adam, and in Christ are all made
alive, owning Christ's influence, both real and public, as before explained.

R. All this is nihil ad Rhombum, you own not hereby the Imputation of Adams
Sin to his Posterity; but that Sin and Death are only Effects of Adam's first
Sin, i. e. influential; you own not that all Men were legally condemned in
Adam, as a public federal Person, standing in their stead: In the same manner
you always speak of the Righteousness of Christ, as influential to our
Forgiveness; and that the imputation of it is only bestowing the Effects. But
whether we were in Christ before Faith, as we were seminally in Adam, before we
were born; which his federal Headship did suppose the being thus in Christ
before Faith; I deny.

R. You here grant our seminal being in Adam; and that Adam's federal Headship
supposed it, and therefore we were seminally and federally in Adam before we
were born. Why speak you it not positively, whether it was so or no? That we
were federally and seminally in Adam, and that our Sin and Death was in him;
there we lost original Righteousness, and thence the Imputation of his very
first Sin to all his Posterity, by virtue of our federal standing in him, and
by reason of our being seminally in him, the corruption of the whole Nature was
in him, and naturally descended to us? If it be so, why are not the Elect as to
Righteousness and Life in the same manner in the second Adam, federally and
seminally before they believe, i. e. before they are born again, in him
federally, as to Righteousness, and seminally as to the new Nature, Christ
being their Righteousness and Sanctification, whereas the Apostle runs the
Parallel so fully and plainly as he does, Romans 5?

But all this is but shuffling the Cards to make People believe your Principles
are what they are not; most of whom cannot tell what you hold, when you have
darkened and confounded the Question, by your manner of stating it: You say, I
object against you the denying of the Doctrine of Imputation; why do you not
deny the Charge, but only distinguish so upon it as to confirm it? If your
Principles are Truth why do you not speak them out (but fill us with your
cloudy Expressions and Distinctions, which you charge us for) why speak you not
plainly, That you deny the Suretiship of Christ, as you know you do? That you
deny Christ to be a public Person, in the Sense as the soundest Protestants
have always held him to be; which last you do here in effect positively do,
That we were neither federally nor seminally in Christ before Believing: Which,
if so, I am sure you must deny the whole Doctrine of Imputation, and what you
pretend to can be no more than what the Socinians do. And how can you say you
are not against the Confession, and I am, when the Assembly says, Confess. c.
8. sect. 1. That Christ is ordained of God the Head and Savior of his Church,
See Pinchin the S^cinian, and Mr. Norton's answer, p. 353. Dialo, I grant that
all M^nkind are one with Adam, by a natural Union, as proceeding from the same
Root; but I fear Mr. Forbes does stretch out our natural Union with Ad^m to a
personal, to the end that he might make Adam's personal Action to be ours by
imputation. Norton, The scope of Mr. Forbes is to prove the Imputation of
Christ's Passive Obedience, and that only in his Dea h, to b^ the Matter of our
Justification, etc. We consent to Mr. Forbs, as to the Argument taken from the
Comparison, but dissent from him as concerning the Restrictions, the Reason of
the Comparison being founded upon the Conditions of the Persons and Divine
Institution, it holds betwixt such Acts a^ the first and second Adam acted as
public Persons: Adom therefore being in that Act of Disobedience, only a publ
ck Person, hence that Act only is imputed unto his Seed. But Christ b^ing in
all his Acts of Obedien^^ a public Person, hence therefore all the Acts of
Christ's Obedience are imputed to his Seed. As upon supposition, Adam's
continuing in Obedience (because he had then continued a public Person) all
the Acts of his Obedience, even to the finishing of perfect Righteousness, had
been imputed to his Seed, according to the nature of the Covenant of Works,
unto their attaining of Jus^ification by the Law. The Uni^n between Adam and
his Posterity was not personal, nor only natural, but mystical: It was a
Conjunction of the Person of Adam, and all contained i^ his Loins, in one
Spiritual Body, by the Insti ution of God, whereby he was as their Head, they
as his Members, to stand or fall with him standing or falling

Mr. Norton sums up Pinchin's Errors under three Heads. 1. In his denying the
Imputation of the Sin, of the Elect unto Christ, and his suffering the
Pun^shment due thereunto, contrary to 2 Cor. 5.21. Gal. 3.13. Isa. 53 5, 6.
thereby leaving the Elect to perish in the^r Sin. 2. Denying that Christ, as
Go^-Man Mediator, obey^d the Law, and therewith that he obeyed it for us, as
our Surety, contrary to Gal. 4.4, 5. Matt. ^.17, 18. Heb. 10.7. compared with
Psalm. 40.8.7.8. Romans 3.31. thereby rendering (...) and insufficient Savior, and
spoiling the Elect of Salvation. 3. Denying ^he ^ation of Christ's Obedience
unto Justification, contra^y to Romans 5.19. Phil. 3.11. thereby ^avi^g a^l that
are ungodly under an impossibility of being justified. 2. Destroying the very
being of a Sinn^r'^ Ri^ht^^^^n^^^, by taking away the O^edienc^ of Christ unto
the Law, and Imputation, which are the Matter and Form i. e. the esse tial
Ca^ses of Justification. 3. Placing a Sinner's Righteousn^ss (...) Atonement or
Pardon of Si^, such as in effect does man f^stly not only d^ny itself to ^e the
effect of it, (...) ^enieth, yea defieth the very b^ing of the M^d^ator, by
Obdience of Christ t^ the Law for (...)* The first holds u^ in a^l o^r Si^^,
and c^nti^ueth the (...) Wrath of God abiding upon ^s. The (...) away your
Savior. The ^hir ^ takes away our R (...) and Just ficat^on. W at (...) the
^n^^y of Jesus, Grace and Souls (...) more? And I am sure thi^ (...) sp^ak^ as
(...) ^oly ^f these Do^t^in^^, which he o^poseth, a^ you (...); yo^ and more.


etc. unto whom he did from all eternity give a People to be his Seed, and to
be by him in Time redeemed, called Justified, Sanctified, Glorified. In the
same manner they speak in the Larg. Catech. Q. 30, 31, 32. as above rehearsed.
And in the short. Q. 18. man's sinfulness consists in the guilt of Adam's first
Sin.

In the 39th. Page of your Book, you pretend to some Answers, to what I affirm
in some things: As that I deny the Covenant of Redemption to be a distinct
Covenant from the Covenant of Grace. I own it, and make good my denial
elsewhere, therefore will not actum agere.

You blame me, p. 40. for saying, p. 29. That Pardon is not promised to Faith
and Repentance, as things distinct from the Promise, but Pardon is promised
together with Faith and Repentance to the Sinner. And herein you say, I
confound a Promise of Grace, and promises made to Grace, and affirm the Gospel
Covenant is but one Promise.

Repl. 1. I do affirm, That the Promise of the Gospel in its Original Grant and
Comprehensive Nature is but one, as the Promise of the Covenant of Works was
but one, viz. Life. So in the Covenant of Grace it is Life, the Spirit of God is
express in it, 1 John 2.25. (...), This is the Promise which he has promised
us, even eternal Life. And 1 John 5.11. (...), This is the Record (or
Testimony) that he has given us, Eternal Life, and this Life is in his Son.
Now Eternal Life contains all Justification, Sanctification, Adoption and
Glory. 2. I affirm that in this Promise is Justification, Faith and Repentance
promised. 3. That in this Promise Justification, Faith and Repentance are
inseparably conjoined. 4. That in and under this Promise are multitudes of
Gifts bestowed in a way of connection one to another, and have their particular
Promises pointing distinctly to them; but these Gifts are no federal Conditions
one of another. 5. I say, If you speak of these Gifts of Righteousness and
Life, as in a way of conditionality, it is Christ's Righteousness is the proper
federal condition of Life, and Pardon is rather the Condition of Faith and
Repentance than they of Pardon. I say so again, 1. If Giving be the Condition
of Receiving, it is true; but Giving is the Condition of Receiving, for Faith is
but the Sinner's receiving Pardon: Is not the giving of Pardon then rather the
Condition of Faith, which is the receiving of it, than Faith of Pardon? Luke
1.77. A^ts 10.43. So for Repentance: The Cause is rather the Condition of the
Effect than the Effect of the Cause; but Forgiveness received by Faith is the
Cause of all true Evangelical Repentance. See this saving Repentance and
Remission, b^th given by one Hand of Promise, Acts 5.31. preached together by
Commission, Luke 24.4^. How strange soever you make of this Divinity, it is
built on the Rock Christ Jesus, and you cannot shake it, nor all the Devils in
Hell. You say, I wretchedly mistake the Nature of the first Promise, as if it
excluded all Terms of our Interest in the Blessing of it.

Rep. I know not what the first Promise is, if it be not a Blessing; and if the
first Promise be absolute to us (as you say the first Grace is) then it
excludes all Terms to be wrought by us, to interest us in the Blessings of it,
unless you intend that a natural Man is to perform these Terms in his natural
State; and then the first Grace is not absolute: And as for the first Promise,
concerning the Seed of the Woman, it was absolute, and saved our first Parents
as such, for it was all their Gospel as I know of, and therefore they by it had
Remission, Faith and Repentance, without bringing the two last into a federal
Condition: For if God had intended to bring them in as such, it is most likely
he would then have mentioned them as such, Adam just coming out of a Covenant
with federal Conditions.

In answer to what I say of a Legal Grant, you say it is out of my Element. Be
it so, others may not judge it so, though you do: Mr. Antinomian says, a Grant
may be legal two ways, either by free Gift, from a Person's good Will and
Pleasure; and so God's giving us, both Grace and Glory is legal, because it
gives us an undoubted, unexceptionable Right. And a legal Grant is a Law
Covenant Grant, when the Gift is bestowed upon the performance of federal
Conditions, as Grace and Glory is bestowed in and for Christ and his
Righteousness; both these Grants we have first in Election, choosing us in
Christ; and in the eternal Compact between the Father and the Son. You say what
I speak of, Tit. 1.2. will appear not to be eternal, but before many Ages, and
not to exclude Gospel Conditions. If Christ be our great Gospel federal
Condition, I say it does not; for God's Purpose and Grace was given us in
Christ, and were to be bestowed in and through him. But who told you that
(...), was but before many Ages, it is sure before the Times or Ages of the
Wo^ld; and what can be supposed to be so but Eternity, when Christ rejoiced in
the Sons of Men, Prove. 4. And I think I have a good Interpreter on my side:
Beza says, on Tit. 1.2. In his Judgment the Word (...) cannot be referred to
the first Promise, made to Adam, Cen. 3. much less to that of Abraham: But,
says he, Ante tempora seculorum; before the Ages of the World, does denote all
series of Time or Ages, i. e. before this World was, according to Joh^ 17.2,
etc. In this Sense runs the Assembly's Notes, Poole's Anot. continued.

What I say of the Gospel's being no Law with Sanction, I shall not trouble the
Reader with here, but handle it in its proper Place; and therefore pass by all
you say, p. 43, 44 and 45.

As for what you speak about that Position of Mr. B. I leave the Learned to
judge, whether you have salved it: I shall hardly set that and other things in
a g^eater L^ght, unless you provoke me thereto, as you insinuate by further
Endeavors to set other Men in the Light or Dark, to as great Reproach as you
can cast upon them.

You say I m^ke Mr. R. B. to speak orthodoxly, by saying, p. 22. When once a
Transgressor is sentenced by a Law, he falls into the Hands of Perogative, and
the Prince may do with him what he pleases ( i. e. either execute him or
pardon him) God a so might have put Repentance into the Condition of the Law of
Works, and said, If thou do not eat, or repent of thy eating, thou shall have
thy Reward: You should have added, the Reason of my so saying; it was upon your
saying, The Law of Works admitted no Repentance: I tell you, If God had
intended Salvation by a Law of Works, wherein Repentance should have been a
Condition, he might have put it in at first; but God never intended to accept
Repentance as a federal Condition of any Covenant, nor our imperfect Condition:
And so I say again, with a non obstante all that you have or can say against
it; And I must stand to that Rule which Mr. Norton takes from Cham. de
descensu, tom. 2. l. 5. c. 12.

This great Principle is all-a-long to be kept in Mind, and occasionally to be
applied, as in Answer to this Question.

Q. What is the supreme and first Cause why Justice requires, That Sin should
be rewarded with Punishment due thereunto, according to the Law?

A. The free Constitution of God, the principal and whole Reason of this
Mystery depends upon the good Pleasure of God; for who can deny that God could
have saved Man in another way? But he would save him thus, and no otherwise
than thus. This serves not only as a Sword to cut, but as a leading Truth to
loose the Knots of Carnal Reason. The good Pleasure of God is the first Rule of
Righteousness, the Cause of all Causes, the Reason of all Reasons: And, in one
Word, all Reasons in one Reason.

And how does this make the following Saying orthodox? viz. Being that Christ
the Mediator, and Faith in Christ are only means of the Restoration of Men to
God by Holiness and Love, therefore it must be said from the Nature of the
thing, Faith, Holiness and the Love of God, are more necessary to Salvation
than either Faith in Christ or the Sacrifice of Christ himself.

Now if I had said that this Position were God's Constitution, viz. that
Holiness and Love to God wrought in us, should be more necessary Means of
Salvation than Faith in Christ, or the Sacrifice of Christ, you had said
something: Or that it were the Constitution of God, That Christ in all things
should not have the Pre-eminence, whether in genere causarum, mediorum vel
finium, Col. 1.18, 19, 20. Therefore to say Holiness in Grace or Glory is more
necessary than Christ Mediator, is to magnify the Creature above Christ,
himself. But because you say you would not have spoken the Words yourself, but
endeavor to explain them as charitably as you can, I do not think it
convenient to give you any further trouble about them; but I must remark, That
it is not so fair in you to charge all upon me as my Sense, which is spoken by
an Interlocutor in a Dialogue.

AN ENQUIRY, Whether the Gospel be a New Law?
SIR,
YOU begin thus. Reader, Though I did not once call the Gospel a Law in all my
Book, only in my Preface called it a Law of Faith; yet because the whole of Mr.
C 's Book runs on this, I shall insist most on this Head.

R. Whether you called the Gospel a Law or no, it matters not; I know you kept
your self here, as in many other Points within your Trenches, yet he that reads
your Book is very blind, if he sees not this to be the Cornerstone of your
whole Scheme: And by your now appearing in a Defense of that Principle, as your
professed Opinion: You have not only dealt more heartily with your Reader than
in your former Book, but also justified me to the World, in these things. 1.
That I endeavored faithfully to represent your Opinions, and did so in this
Point. 2. That I wronged you not in saying, Your Art lay in concealing your
Tenants from your less intelligent Reader, under Ambiguous and Equivocal
Expressions, which I called by a plain English Name that you seem to be
offended at. 3. In that I treated you under the Appellation of a Neonomian
(which is an Antinomian in the truest Sense) in that you have in this Reply
professedly owned yourself as such, and subscribed to the Truth thereof, which
for your own Reputation I would not have had you to have done.

In handling this Question, I shall in the first Place remark upon your stating
the Question; and show its true state.

2. I shall answer your Arguments, to prove the Gospel a new Law.

3. I shall show what Law and Gospel is?

4. I shall give my Arguments to prove, That the Gospel is no new Law.

5. I shall show the Beginning and Progress of this great Error; viz. That the
Gospel is a New Law.

1. The stating of the Question.
SIR, you tell us, 1. In what Sense you hold the Gospel not a Law; and from
thence it follows, That in a Sense it is not a Law, and therefore in mine it
may not be a Law.

1. You say, You do not hold that the Gospel includes nothing besides this Law.

R. Here is your old Tricking again: The Question is about the Gospel being a
Law, and you say it includes som^thing that is not a Law; it includes the
Covenant of Redemption and absolute Promises, as if the Qu^stion were, Whether
a Scabbard were a Sword? And you say, The Scabbard includes a Sword: But, by
your Favor, a Law, as such, cannot include an absolute Promise, for there is no
Promise but conditional in a Law; but yet an absolute Promise may include a
Law, as that, I will write my Laws in your Hearts. There may be (you say)
Prophecies, Histories, Doctrinals, etc. yet these may be called Adjuncts. Of
what? You should have told us whether of Law or Gospel, or of the Gospel as a
Law. The Histories of Christ are Gospel, and the Prophecies of him, and
whatever in Doctrinals brings good News to Sinners, belongs to the Promise and
Exemplification thereof.

2. You say, p 19. Nor do I judge it a Law, in that Sense our Divines six on
S^cinians and Arminians.

R. No, you apprehend our Divines abuse them, but yet it hinders not but that
you may judge it a Law, in the Sense of the Socinians and Arminians: I have
told what yours is, let the Reader judge whether it be so or no; for they hold
Justification by Acts of Obedience to this Law but as you do: Nor do they hold
that we are justified thereby, as Adam should have been by perfect Obedience.

3. You say, Nor do I tak^ it in the Popish Sense, which the Socinians and
Arminians espouse.

R. The Popish Sense of Merit is renounced by the Socinians and Arminians, as
well as by you, and as much, for ought I can see. The Popish Sense is very
plain from the Council of Trent, Anath. 20. Cursed is he that says the Gospel
is a Promise, without a Condition of observing the Command: And this, I am
sure, is your Sense. You proceed,

4. "It is not a Law that supposes a moral ability in Sinners to perform its
Precepts, etc.

R. Its an unreasonable Law that requires Duty of those that have no ability to
perform; and that Law that makes a Condition, and promises Ability, concludes
not the Subject till the Power is given; and, when all comes to all, it is but a
comprehensive Promise both of the Duty and Benefit to be received by it. You
say,

5. Its not a Law that extinguisheth the Law of Nature, which has its special
Precepts.

R. If the Law of Nature be the Law of Adam, you say it vacates it: for if it
strip it of its Sanction it cease to be a Law, for Sanction is the Law's
Ratification as such. Again,

6. Neither does this Law require any thing of us as a Condition of Christ's
coming into the World, nor of the first Grace to the Elect. This the Covenant
of Redemption secures to the Catholic Church by Promise.

R. Whoever talked of our doing any thing, as a Condition of Christ's coming
into the World as our Redeemer, but believe it (as weak as you say Mr. C. is ^
I Will presume to tell you, that you are bold to attempt to prove the Gospel to be
a Law with Sanction: If you allow that the first Grace is absolutely given, and
what is given by electing Grace is secured by Election to the Elect; its an
inconsistent Principle that Redemption secures nothing but conditionally, for
where the absoluteness of any thing is secured, it is secured so as to cease to
be conditional.

6. Nor is it a Law of Obedience, whereto it renders any promised Blessing a
Debt; all is free though sure; its free as to procurement or Price, yet it is
as sure by Promise as if it were by Debt: The Price was Christ's Obedience and
Sufferings, all comes of Gift, yet in that way which God appoints to give it.

R. This amounts to thus much, That now you have dwindled your Law quite away;
for that Obedience that renders not the Promise a Debt, can be no Law with
Sanction: for by the same Reason that the Punishment is due to me upon
Disobedience, the Promise is due upon Obedience. You say, Its sure by Promise,
so every promissory Covenant makes Blessings sure; but that which is sure and
free, cannot be by Law Conditions.

P. 20. You give us a very long and confused account of your New Law, the sum
whereof is, That upon Believing and Persevering in sincere Faith and Holiness,
Life and Salvation is promised, and upon nonperformance Death and Damnation
threatened. The Sense is, Do and live; the very same Essentials as to Matter and
Form; the Matter, the Duties and Promises, or Sins and Punishment; the Form is
the connection of these together by the Sovereign of Authority of a Law giver.
You say, That you mean by saying, The Gospel is a Law, that God in Christ
commands Sinners to receive Christ with a true operative Faith.

R. We grant the Gospel does so command, but is it a Condition required of the
Creature, to be performed in and by his present Abilities? Must he have this
first Grace given before he perform the Condition, and by him that commands it?
Yet must this Command be a Law with Sanction? No, this Command carries with it
to the Elect nothing but a gracious Offer and Invitation, and effectual
operative Means to bring a poor Sinner from under a Law with Sanction, to Life
and Salvation: Romans 5.1. The Wages of Sin is Death: He lies under this
Law-condemnation. Joh. 3. He is condemned already: The Gospel calls him not to
come under another Condemnation, but it calls him to the Gift of God; What Is
that? Eternal Life through Jesus Christ; besides God's Commands in the Gospel
are gracious, its to such Duties which the same Grace promises, and there is no
middle between being under the Law and under Grace, under a gracious Command
and a legal, they are adversa sine medio.

You say, upon their believing they shall be united to Christ; therefore they
must first do something before Union to Christ, that they may have the Benefit
of Union, make the Fruit good, and then the Tree afterward, contrary to one of
the fundamental Maxims of our Lord Jesus Christ. You proceed and say, it
threatens, if any dye unbelieving, impenitent, etc. they shall be barred from
these Benefits.

R. The meaning is, They shall die under the Condemnation of the Law they are
in already; as much as to say, a Physician offers a Sick Patient a Remedy, he
refuses it, and dies of his Disease, will you say the Physician brought him
under a Law, with Sanction? Many such Instances might be given; The King sends
a Pardon to all the condemned Prisoners in Newgate, suppose it be upon
condition of Acceptance; some one accept not, will the Court now try him upon a
new Law? No; there is no further Trial, he is executed upon the Sentence before
received: And so are all those Places to be understood that say, He that
believes not shall be damned: If you say by what Law: I say not by a new one,
but by the Old Law. I own, as I believe there are degrees of Glory, according
to the degrees of the Vessels of Honor greater or lesser; so there are degrees
of Wrath, which the Law will execute according to the degree of Sin; and the
Law will look upon rejection of Christ, as the highest degree of Disobedience:
Therefore are those Expressions, It shall be more tolerable for Sodom than for
Corazin; some shall be beaten with fewer, some more Stripes; some counted
worthy of sorer Punishments than others; but all this is by the Law, not by the
Gospel: And Unbelief and Impenitency are Sins Judged and Condemned with all
their Aggravations, severely enough, by that Law, you need not doubt; there
needs no new Law to do it. Your referring yourself to the Assembly will cast
you, for they never intended any such thing, that the Gospel is a Law.

You say, 1. Here Is the Essentials of a Law, God is our Ruler and we his
Subjects.

R. Are Ruler and Subjects the Essentials of a Law? that is strange Logic: The
Ruler in his legislative Power is the efficient: and so in his executi^e, in
application of it to its Ends, and the ruled are therefore called Subj cts,
because under Subjection to both; the Law is essentially distinct from both.
Put go on.

His Will revealed in a way of Government, here is the Precept that binds to
Duty; here is a Promise made to them that comply, and a Threatening denounced
against such as rebel.

R. These look like Essentials of a Law of Works, such was Adam's Law, there
was God's Will for Duty in a way of Government revealed, a Promise to him if he
complied, and a Threat denounced, in case he did not: Now then, that Law which
has all the Essentials of a Covenant of Works, is a Covenant of Works; but
your new Law, by your Description, has all the Essentials of a Covenant of
Works.

Therefore you say 2. This is a Law of Grace, and its made by our Redeemer for
fallen Man.

R. Say you so? 1. That which is made and executed in a way of Judicial
Proceeding, is not a Law of Grace; for Grace and judicial Proceeding is
diametrically opposite: But you say it is a Law in a way of Government, by a Law
therefore of Judicial Proceeding. 2. You say its made by our Redeemer: Is it
made with our Redeemer? I suppose you must mean so, because you say for fallen
Man; then Christ covenanted in our stead, which you deny elsewhere, and he is
to perform the Conditions for us. 3. You say, All the Benefits of it are
founded on Christ's Righteousness, as the immediate Cause of them.

R. And where are the Duties founded in Man's Natural Power and Will? No; you will
say in Election absolutely as to the first Grace: Well then, here is the
Benefits secured in Redemption, absolutely I hope, and the first Grace in
Election: Now if you can tell us where to get Security for after Graces and
Perseverance, we should have this whole Covenant absolutely secured. Effectual
Ability to perform the Duty ( i. e. the first Duty) is provided for, you say,
in Election: But is after Duties provided for there? if so, election is the
sole Covenant Condition for Duty and Redemption for Benefits: Thus you may
mangle the Grace of God.

Again, you say, God does not fix on these Terms for any Worth in them, or
Profit to him.

R. Its true he did not fix on Adam's Terms for any Worth in them; what
proportion could the forbearing an Apple bear to eternal Life, or what Profit
would it have been to God, if Adam had let the Apple hang on the Tree, or
persevered all his Days in Holiness?

Mr. W. The Gospel is the Instrument or Sign by which this Will of God is
expressed; this is not the Language of God in Adam's Law.

R. An Instrument in this Sense is a Law, Deed or Conveyance, engrossed or
enrolled, which is but a small adjunct to the Law. The Scripture of the Old and
New Testament are called Instruments, because they are the enrollments of this
Will of Christ and his Testament ratified by his Death; and you say the Gospel
is a Sign, the Seals of the Covenant are Signs, but the Covenant of Grace is
not a Sign, unless you mean it signifies God's Will and Pleasure in Government,
and so did Adam's Law, and was the Language of it.

Mr. W. It sixeth that Rule of the Promise, which Mr. C. p. 33. is at a loss to
know.

R. And so are more than I: for you say, Its not the Promise nor the Precept,
where to find a Rule for the Promise in the Law, I know not, if it be not in
Promise or Precept, will you say its the connection of Precept and Promise? if
so its the Rule rather of the Law, forma perquam lex est; is it God's Rule to
dispense by, or our Rule to claim by? it may be you mean both, Precepts and
Promises are desparata at least, therefore what your new Term is, I suppose you
do not know what it is yourself, no more than your other new Rules of Sin,
which is (...), and misery, (...).

Since in stead of clearing the Oustion you have confounded it, I will take the
true state of it from a Man that would speak his Mind more intelligeably in
these Matters.

The Question stated.
Scrip. G. Justific. Contr. 17. My true Sense is, That the Covenant of Grace is
such a Law, as that the sincere Acts of Faith and Obedience, and perseverance
therein are the Conditions upon which eternal Life and Salvation is promised,
with a Penalty of eternal Death, threatened upon the nonperformance; only I say
that sincere Faith and Repentance are the moral qualifying Conditions of the
Continuance of our justification and enjoyment of Heaven. And this is a true
Account of the Notion how yourself understands the Gospel to be a new Law; as I
could prove from your own Expressions, even to every word here in this Account,
you might therefore have spared yourself and me the labor about your confused
stating the Question.

R. Before I answer your Arguments, I shall promise a few things:

1. It being a great End of our Lord Jesus Christ, in the Covenant of Grace, to
restore fallen Man, and in so doing to magnify the Law, he makes full
atonement for the breach of it, brings in Everlasting Righteousness, procures
New Obedience to the perceptive part of it, teaches it by his Grace, and works
it by his Spirit; and whereas in the Covenant of Works, Obedience was the Way
to, and Condition of the Promise, he makes the Promise the Way to, and
Condition of Obedience, commanding no more than what he has promised.

2. When we say the Gospel is not a New Law with Sanction, we deny it not to be
a Testament that has its ratification in the Death of Christ the Testator,
wherein also the Law of Works had its Sanction, in respect of Penalty, for all
those that shall be saved by him, as to satisfaction for their sins.

3. That Rule and Government which Christ exercises over his Church, as it
comes to him by right of Redemption, so that Obedience we give to him is part
of that Eternal Life which he has purchased and restored to us, and both his
government and our subjection thereto is of Promise, and none of the least
Blessings and Privileges of the Covenant of Grace.

4. As the Matter of all Precepts, requiring Sanctity and Obedience of Heart
and Life, moral and instituted, absolutely considered, primarily belong to the
first Law of Works, and so are binding in a natural relation unto Unregenerate
and Regenerate, as they are the Commands of God the Creator, and the least
Transgression requires a Punishment due to the Breach of the whole Law; So our
Obedience becomes Gospel-Obedience, 1. From our being restored to it in Christ,
the second Adam. 2 In that it flows from a new Life given, we must live before
we can do. 3. From the end of performance, it is not for Life, as a Law-Reward
of it, but for the sake, honor, duty to, and enjoyment of Christ, and in the
most grateful returns of his grace and love to us. 4. It Is performed from
higher Motives and Obligations, viz. that great Love wherewith God has loved
us, constraining us to the highest love and expressions thereof to him.

5. As for all Sin and Disobedience (even Impenitence and Unbelief) to any
Commands of the Gospel, it is condemned by the Law; and every one under the
condemnations of Impenitence, Unbelief, rejection of Christ, or disobedience in
a Natural Estate, are therein under the Law; but there is no condemnation to
them that are in Christ Jesus, I^ mean to their Persons, though all their Sins
also are condemned by the Law.

2dly. I proceed now to your Arguments.

Mr. W.'s Arg 1. The Gospel is called a Law, by the Spirit of God, Isa. 42.4.
Mic. 4.2. Romans 3.27. Chapter 10.31. Jam. 1.25. and 2.12. Psalm. 19.7. Gal. 6.2. Romans
8.2.

R. As to the places quoted out of the Old Testament, as Isa. 42.4. Mic. 4.2.
Ps. 19 7. I have shown, that (...) signifies Doctrine, and Instruction, and
sometimes is taken for the whole revealed Mind and Will of God in the Word, and
it is called by the Name of Law, as a part for the whole, both Law and Gospel,
in that place, Isa. 42.4. a Prophecy of Christ; it is a Promise, that the Isles
shall wait for Christ's Doctrine, and receive all Commands from Christ, whose
Precepts may be called Laws, though of another nature than a Law with Sanction;
the preceptive parts of the Gospel are often called Laws, especially in the Old
Testament; but this makes not the Gospel itself a Law, though it contain many
Precepts. That of Mic. 4.2. Psalm. 19.7. has the same answer; those places
explicate themselves by the Word of the Lord: The law shall go forth of Zion,
and the word of God from Jerusalem. So that Law signifies no more than the Word
preached, both Law and Gospel; it were easy to show how it is used at large in
the Proverbs and Psalms, and elsewhere, not under any distinct consideration of
Law or Gospel. We have showed the Covenant of Grace is exhibited only in a way
of promise and free-gift unto sinners, as such, takes them into Covenant with
God, not upon any terms of their doing, perfect or imperfect, performed in
their own or another's strength, though it takes them into the Kingdom where
Christ: rules and governs them, and from which Kingdom goes forth all the Word
of the Lord, both Law and Gospel. Lastly, The Old Testament speaks often
prophetically of the Gospel in its own Terms and Dialect, as by Priests,
Sacrifices, etc. Isa. 66.21. c. 56.7. c. 6.7. Ezekiel. 40. c. 41, 42.

That of Romans 3.27. where the Apostle says, that boasting is excluded; by what
Law? By the Law of Faith, it may be taken for an ordinary rhetorical figura
dictionis, called Anadiplosis; and Beza says, the Apostle does here, de
industria (...), say, the Law of Faith, instead of Faith, because the
adversaries of Grace were always wont to have the Name of the Law in their
mouths, for which reason our Lord calls Faith, a Work, Joh. 6.29. and on which
place he says, they are plainly ridiculous, who from hence will argue, that
Faith is a Woe k, and that therefore we are justified by Works. But if any that
contend for a further account of the meaning of this Expression, 1. It is the
Doctrine of Justification by Faith in Christ's Righteousness which he opposes
to all Law-Righteousness, as Romans 4. or other Doctrine that teaches contrary.
2. It may be taken for the nature of Faith, the power and efficacy of it; the
nature of it and its power in the Soul, is to make a Man renounce all inherent
righteousness; in the same sense is Law taken, Romans 8.2. the Law of the Spirit
of Life that is in Christ Jesus, viz. i. e. the nature, power, and efficacy of
it. So Romans 7. The Law of Sin is no more than the power and prevalency of it,
whereby it captivates us. Jam. 1.25. The Law of Liberty is no other than the
Gospel-Doctrin of Freedom by Jesus Christ, ( Joh. 8.36.) from the Law Moral and
Ceremonial for justificaion, yea, he speaks to them as such (says Beza) on
whom no Yoke of Ceremonial Bondage was laid, (as Peter, Acts 15.10.) yea, such
as the Moral Law could not retain as Servants under fear, but the Spirit of God
forms them into free and voluntary Obedience. Hence it is plain enough, that the
Apostle opposes the Gospel to a Law with Sanction, which enforces obedience
from the threats thereof. So Beza carries, c. 2.12. This Epithet of Liberty,
says he, is very fitly added, [Having showed he spoke of the Moral Law before,
which he called the Royal Law in its full Sanction, as appears from v. 8, 9,
10.] for seeing we are made free by the Son, by a much better right the Lord
requires of us the Fruits of Righteousness, rather than of those who remain
under the Tyranny of the Law of Sin, etc. So that from these Expressions of
James, here is so little pretense for a Plea to make the Gospel a Law with
Sanction, that the Apostle seems strenuously to argue against it.

I wonder that place is mentioned, Romans 9.31. the Law of Righteousness, is
plainly the Law of Works; for it was Righteousness by this Law they sought
after, but lost their labor, not seeking after a Righteousness to satisfy the
Law by Faith in Christ.

You argue also from Gal. 6.2. This is spoken of a particular Precept, [which
are frequently termed Laws or Instructions] Bear one another burdens, and so
fulfill the law of Christ, or his Command, yea, from an Obligation so to do (an
Obligation to Obedience and Thankfulness is sometimes called a Law of Love.)
And what was the obligation? Christ bore our burdens. Isa. 53. Therefore we
should bear one another burdens, as he carried our griefs and sorrows: Be
followers of Christ as dear children. Beza and others refer it to John 13.34,
35. A new commandment give I unto you, that you love one another as I have
loved you, i. e. I give you a new Motive and Principle to act Obedience from:
and this is contrary to a Principle and Spirit of Bondage and Fear from a Law
with Sanction; and this New Commandment is called the Old, as to the Matter of
it.

Mr. W.'s Arg. 2. Men's behavior toward the Gospel is expressed by words that
denote it to be a Law. Romans 10.16. 2 Cor. 9.13. 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. 1 Pet. 4.17.

R. You said, though the Gospel be a Law with Sanction, yet it contains in it
absolute Promises. This I deny, as a contradiction. But I affirm, that an
absolute Promise may contain in it Law-Precepts, as that Promise, I will w ite
my laws in your hearts; the Gospel sets up the Law-Precepts as Rules of
Sanctity and Obedience, and calls for a conformity to them from better Motives
and Principles; yet upon bette^ Promises, not such as provoked to obedience, by
rewarding the work performed in our own strength, but such as promised the very
obedience it self. Therefore no body denies obedience to the Gospel, and
subjection to it from the grace of Adoption, as Children, not as Slaves under
the rigor of a Law. Those places that speak of taking vengeance on them that
obey not the Gospel, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. 1 Pet. 4.17. they show only that the curse
of the Law will fall more heavily upon them for disobedience to God in the
Gospel, Impenitency and Infidelity being Sins the Law of God does condemn and
judge; and Christ will come at the last day clothed with Law-Vengeance, which
is called flaming fire, and will proceed against all sinners, those that are
ignorant of God, and those that are disobedient to the Gospel, and judge them
by one and the same Law, though some that have added to their other sins the
rejection of Christ, and so lie under aggravations of their sins, and are
become more inexcusable, may be accounted worthy of sorer degrees of
punishment, and judged thereto by the same Law.

Mr. W.'s Arg. 3. Justification is a Judicial Act, therefore it must be by a
Law.

R. You should have formed your Argument, and then it would have run thus: It
Justification be a Judicial Act, then the Gospel must be Law; but Justification
is a Judicial Act: Therefore, 1. I deny the Consequence of the Major; for it
may be a Judicial Act in respect of the first violated Law; first a gracious
Act of imputing Christ's righteousness to us that may answer the demands of
that Law, and then a Judicial Act of acquitting us from the condemnation of it,
accounting us in this manner righteous by this Law; and therefore there is no
need of another Law for our justification, though it be a Judicial Act. You say
in Justification is a right to Impunity: and can any thing but a Law give this?
but I tell you, it must be the Law that is offended, must discharge in a way of
justice from punishment, and not another Law, unless the Pardon be by
prerogative or repeal

Mr. W.'s Arg. 4. The Gospel gives a right to its Benefits upon believing.

R. The Gospel gives nothing but benefits to sinners; Faith is one of the great
benefits, and there is a connection of benefits of different nature in the
Gospel-gifts, but our right to all as a federal condition is in Christ, and
it is safe enough to speak of Gospel-Worthiness and Rewards, but they are
founded in Christ, not in any Law-Righteousness of ours.

Mr. W.'s Arg. 5. If God have no Gospel-rule, besides Election and
distinguishing Mercy, to confer glory by, th^n God will not, nay cannot save
the non-elect, though th y should believe in Christ. Say not they will not
believe, has not God declared he will save them i^ they believe?

R. First, Here you change the terms, putting Rule for Law, and God's Rule for
Man's; therefore you conclude not the Question. 2. You make a Pro syllogism.
Your Argument should regularly run thus: If God has Gospel-rule, besides
Election and distinguishing Mercy, to confer glory by, th^n the Gospel is a
Law; but God has other Gospel-rules to confer glory by, besides, etc.
Therefore, 1. Your Consequence is denied; for if you will have God's way of
conferring grace or glory to be a rule to him, the particular application
thereof depends wholly upon his good will and pleasure and the manner it self,
and that is the rule of all rules; and so the rule of conferring grace and glory
is all one: But suppose God's manner of conferring glory be the rule you mean,
God never propounded but two ways of doing it, one in a way of free grace and
absolute promise, and the other in a way of debt to us by a rule of justice;
now your Consequence will sink, for God's rule in bestowing grace and glory
upon sinners, is to do it in a way of free grace by promise and gift, and not
in a way or by the rule of a Law or distributive Justice. 2. For your Minor
it is this, That God has a Gospel-rule, besides Election and distinguishing
Mercy, to confer glory by; which you prove thus, If God has not, etc. then he
cannot nor will not save the non-elect if they believe: But he will save the
non-elect if they believe; therefore, this Argument necessarily supposes, that
God has a Rule of Salvation altogether independent on Election and
distinguishing Mercy, whereby others may be saved if they will; and you take it
for granted, that the non-elect will believe, for you say, say not they will
not believe. Your Minor is flatly denied, for that general Proposition, He that
believes shall be saved, concludes not that a non-elect person shall believe or
be saved, it is false Logic so to do; there is no more in it than in this
Proposition, Every Man is a rational Creature, therefore if a Horse be a
rational Creature, he is a Man. This connex Proposition has a verity in the
connection, but determins not any truth in the antecedent or consequent, that a
Horse will ever be a Man or a rational Creature. So here, he that believes
shall be saved; therefore then, if the non-elect believe they shall be saved;
if Judas believed he should be saved, but this says not that Judas will believe
or be saved. Yet you say, has not God declared he will save them if they
believe? I say, no where, he has not said, I will save a non-elect person if
he believe, more than he has said a Horse shall be a Man if he can use reason
or speak, or a Man shall be a Horse if he have four feet. There Is hundreds of
such Instances: The fire consumes all combustible matter; if I throw my Coat or
Cap in^o the fire it will be burnt; but this does not determine that I will
throw it into the fire, or that it will be burnt, but rather the contrary that
there will be neither one nor the other: Therefore how bold and illogical is it
for you to conclude, that God will save the non-elect upon an imperformable
condition? for whatever has no other foundation than an impossible condition,
can never be; but the salvation of the non-elect can be founded upon nothing
but an impossible condition; for it can have no other condition, according to
you, but believing, and this is impossible, because, according to you, also
Faith is from Election, and therefore it is a contradiction to talk of saving
non-elect, or God's making a Rule to save them upon supposition of their having
that which he never intended to give them. The general Proposition runs thus,
All Men that shall believe shall be saved; a general contradiction here will
not divide truth from falsehood, Viz. No Man shall believe therefore no Man
shall be saved; but to divide truth from falsehood and fix it on a subject, the
contradiction must be special or proper, and then that general Axiom and
Application, specially or properly, makes this Syllogism, All Men that believe
shall be saved; some Men shall shall not believe, as non-elect, or Judas,
therefore some Men shall not be saved.

Now see how well you agree with the Assembly in this Point, chapter 10.. iv. they
say non-elect ones, though they may be called by the Ministry of the Word, and
may have some common Operations of the Spirit, yet they never truly come unto
Christ, and therefore cannot be saved.

You say Forgiveness is an act of Sovereignty, and how you will reconcile that
to what you say before and after. I know not. 1. That it is a judicial Act by a
rule of Judgment; if so, it is not in that respect a sovereign Act, wherein God
is free to give faith and forgiveness to whom he will. And, 2. You say, he has
not left himself free to give forgiveness to whom he will of the adult, without
faith, and therefore God must come under a Law to give forgiveness in the way
of a Law, whereas the same sovereign grace that enclines him to one does also
to the other, and both faith and forgiveness are the free gift in the Promise,
in a way of showing forth his righteousness.

Mr. W.'s Arg. 6. The Apostles, with all the Saints, may be arraigned, as
fallen from Grace, and turned from the Gospel, if it be no Rule, according to
which God applies Christ's Righteousness, How should Peter, say, Repent and be
baptized?

R. I see no Consequence here at all; the Argument, to me, seems to run thus:
Either the Gospel is a new Law with Sanction, or else the Apostles are fallen
from Grace: And what is the reason of this forced Argument? The Apostles
preached, That Men should repent and be baptized. I hope you will make Baptism
too to belong indispensably to the new Law, as a Condition; but I pray, does
the Gospel, requiring and calling for Gospel Duties, make the Gospel a new Law
with Sanction? Are not Gospel Duties from Gospel quickening and enlivning a poor
dead Sinner to obey, the Gospel Commands of Christ to an Unbeliever? He does
not deal with him as a Person under a moral Power to answer them, and therefore
putting him under trial by his natural strength, as all Laws do; but Gospel
Commands are as Christ's Voice to Lazarus in the Grave, Joh. 5.25. I pray by
what Law are dead Men capable of coming to Life? The Gospel is the power of God
to Salvation, not the power of Man. You allege the Gaoler's words, Act. 16.36.
What shall I do to be saved. I wonder you should insist upon the words of a Man
that knew not Christ, and knew no other way of Salvation than by doing. Paul
indulged him not in this Opinion, but taught contrary, exhorting him to believe
in the Lord Jesus Christ, which the Apostle always opposed to doing; Faith
being a Grace that excludes works of any Law, yea, it self as a work; it will
ascribe all to Christ and free Grace: It Is new Doctrine, that a Command to
believe, should be a Command to work for Life, as the obedience to a Law, when
it calls Men from under the Law; and it says, That a Believer, is not under
the Law, but under Grace: It should have said, you are not under the old Law,
but you are under the new Law. You instance in Gal. 2.16. (...) there, does not
denote a priority in time of Faith to Justification, but of the end of Faith;
we should believe, for this end, that the Grace of Justification by Christ's
Righteousness alone may shine into our Hearts, by the light of Faith, that we
may have Peace with God in our Consciences through the Lord Jesus Christ; and
so we do not only in our first believing, but in all other Acts. And this
hinders not but that God's gracious Acts prevent ours and causes them; God's
love let forth to us constrains us, and is the reason of our loving him.
Justification may be considered as terminating on our Persons, and terminating
on our Consciences; in this last sense the Apostle speaks; but note what is the
Antithesis, And not the Works of a Law. If he had not meant the Works of every
Law, he should have distinguished, and said, Not by the Works of the old Law,
but by the Works of the new Law: It Is strange he should keep the Galatians in
the dark, about the Works of the new Law; it was but Works that they looked for
to join with Christ in Justification. I am confident this very distinction
would have satisfied all the Neonomians of his time.

Mr. W.'s 7th Arg. The Gospel is at least part of the Rule by which Christ will
judge the World; this must be a Law if it be a Rule of Judgment.

R. Your Argument is, That Rule, by which God will judge the World, is a Law,
but the Gospel is a Rule by which God will judge the World; therefore, I deny
the Minor.

1. You say, Part of that Rule; I pray what is the other part? Will the Rule of
Judgment have two parts? Do you mean the old Law will be another part? Or will
God judge some by the old Law, some by the new?

2. It Is not likely that God will judge the World by any more than one Law, and
that, the Law of Creation, and that by which he governed the World; that Law
which has been the Standard of Righteousness from the beginning of the World
to the end.

3. It Is likely to be that Law that all the World are become guilty by; they
shall not be guilty by one Law and judged by another.

4. It Is likely to be that Law that Men's Consciences accuse or excuse by.

5. It Is likely to be that Law that will reach Jews, Christians, Infidels, and
all that never had the written Law or Gospel.

6. If the Gospel be a Law then, to try by, it must cease to be a Gospel, for
it will bring execution of Indignation and Wrath, no good Tidings; I suppose
you will not say, the Sentence, Go ye cursed, is Gospel. Well, you say,

The Work of that day is not to try Christ: No sure, I believe not; but Christ
must sit upon his Throne judging the World. Nor whether Christ's Righteousness
was imputed to all that Believe; but will be to decide the cause of all Men, to
silence all Apologies, etc. 1. I suppose you mean to decide Believer's state,
which has been undecided till then. 2. To prove that the rest of the World had
not Faith. As for the first sort, I would know whether their Trial will be
before the Resurrection or after? Before it cannot be, they must be raised
first; and those that die in Christ shall rise first. And its said, B^essed and
happy are they that have part in the first Resurrection; and how shall they be
raised? Incorruptible, in Glory, like to Christ at his Appearance immediately
carried up into the ^ir to meet the Lord. Is it likely that now they are
Clothed with all this Glory, at the Resurrection, they shall come to stand a
Trial for Justification? Surely their state will be fully decided, before
Christ will raise them in this Glory. But you say, their Faith must come to
trial whether it has been sincere; but undoubtedly that will be fully resolved
before the Resurrection; or how shall the Elect be gathered from all Parts? And
how shall Christ distinguish the Saints from others to raise them in Glory?

But you will sa^, this Trial will be by the new Law at the Resurrection of the
Unjust. 1. Shall they not be raised in Dishonor, with their Consciences
accusing them by the old Law? 2. How few, in comparison, will there be of the
Millions of wicked that can be justified by the new Law that never heard a word
of it? 3. Those that have heard of it, never owned it, or were under it; they
must be tried by a Law that nature has brought them under. 4. All their Sins
against God's Offers and Commands are judged by the old Law; for in the moral
Law, God is declared a God that shows Mercy unto thousands. 5. The Offers of
Mercy rejected, are but Aggravations of the Sins of those that are condemned
already, and make them more inexcusable. In this sense the Men of Nineveh, and
the Queen of the South, shall rise up in judgment against some, and condemn
them; not that their Actions shall be a Law to try by, but that they will be
matter of Aggravation to such as had greater means of Grace than they had.
Rejections of Pardon do not bring condemned Persons to a new Law to Try them
by; it leaves them but under the former Law and Condemnation, with a greater
Torment upon their Minds and Consciences. For my part, I look upon your whole
Hypothesis, about the day of Judgment, to be very raw and indigested, in that
you suppose it will be like Man's Assizes when all Men shall be brought to a
personal Trial, good and bad, all in mixture, and Believers as well as
Unbelievers must be Arraigned, and hold up their Hands at the Bar, and stand
upon their Delivery; whereof some upon a formal Trial shall be justified,
others condemned.

I come to show what a Law is, and what Gospel is.
What a Law is.
The word Lex is with some a Ligando, because it binds to Duty and Obedience;
with others it is a a Legendo, Quod omnibus ad legendum exponitur public in
soro quod dicebatur promulgatio legis. Isidor.

(...) Aristot.


because among the Romans, when a Law was made, it was exposed publicly, that
all might read or know it; and this was called the promulgation of the Law,
(...), a tribuendo aut distribuendo, because it gives every one its due, by
commanding and forbidding, upon a Penalty expressed or understood. Hence it is
not only regula justi and injusti, (which describes but the preceptive part)
but its regula sancita whereby Justice does proceed in a way of distribution to
justify or condemn, and thereby suum cuiquet ribuere, to give every one his
due, if Wages of Sin be due, to pay it; this is the primary and strict sense of
(...): in a larger sense it is take for Doctrine, a Custom or Usage, (...) comes
of (...), Instituit, docuit, monuit, etc. and is often used for Doctrine or
Institution in the Proverbs and Psalms; sometimes for the Law of God strictly
taken, sometimes for the Law of Moses, and sometimes for a particular Law or
Precept, as Exodus 12.49. Sometimes for the Doctrine of the revealed mind of God
in his word, Psalm. 1.19. and 119. And sometimes for a Manner and Custom, as 2 Samuel 7.19. In which Significations its by the Hebrew dirived from (...). They
have also diverse other words for particular Statutes, Precepts, Commandments;
in treating of which, I shall not detain the Reader.

2. A Law in general is an explicit Injunction of Obedience by a rightful
Power, with a Penalty annexed. Duty may be owing where its not by any positive
Law prescribed on Penalty. There are these things necessary to a Law. 1. That
there be a legislative Power lodged somewhere: That it be Sovereign, whereby
the first Reason of the Law is the good Will and Pleasure of the Lawgiver. 2.
That this Sovereign Power be rightfully exerted, or else the Law is but an
Usurpation. 3. That the Subject under this Law be capable of performing it, or
else the Law is tyrannical. 4. If a Promise of Reward to Obedience be expressed
or employed, it becomes a Law-Covenant: But concerning the Nature of that more
may be said elsewhere.

3. In a Law there is but two Parts, the preceptive part and sanction; which is
binding the Subject to Duty, upon the Authority of the Lawgiver, and on pain
of Curse denounced for the Transgressions thereof. You often reflect on me for
being ignorant of what Sanction is; I must tell you, I understood Sancire
before you began to study, at five Years old, as you say you did; and if any
one speak of Life and Death distinct from the Precept, its you, when you talk
of continu ng the Duty and removing the Sanction to another Law; for the
removing the Sanction from a Law, is the taking away all the binding Nature of
it; and these things are inseparable from a Law with Sanction. 1. Every such
Law requires perfect Obedience to the conditional Precepts of whatever kind
they be; if the Law require of me a small Matter or a great, it abates not one
jot or tittle of what it requires, and my performing that is perfect obedience
to the said Law. If the King's Law require one shilling Poll-Tax of me, eleven
pence three Farthings half farthing will not pay my due, nor be accepted.
Hence, 2. whereas the Law requires the full Duty without the least Abatement,
so if I make the least Default of what it requires, I fall under the Curse of
it; and he that is thus by the least Default, whatever his compliance or
obedience is besides, is under a Curse unavoidably, the whole Penalty falls
upon him. Thus much for a Law in general, whether Divine or Human, none allows
an imperfect Performance of Conditions required in the said Law, but condemns
it.

4. The Law of God is a strict Injunction to Man of Obedience to all his
revealed Mind, and Will, upon pain of Death. The Original Record of this Law
was in Man's Heart, concreated with him; Adam had by Nature the things
contained in the Law, Lex Adamo data fuit naturalis vel p^sitiva, illa in
imagine D^i involvebatur and in cord scripta, Romans 2.14, 15. Lex positiva
consistebat i^ prohibitione arboris scientiae boni and mali, Genesis 2.17. L^i.
a few dark Remains whereof continue in fallen Man in his sinful Condition:
This not only comprehended those Precepts which the Jews call the Law of
Nature, which are Eadem apud omnes homines in omni tempore and omni loco. Which
are the same among all Men, and in every Place: But it requires exact Obedience
to any particular, or more peculiar Precepts that God afterward should require
Obedience by, of any one Person, or sort of People, even God's extraordinary
Commands such as to Abraham of offering up his Son. Again, it does not bind
only to the external Acts of Obedience but to the internal, and the Principle
from whence it flows, Mat. 5.21, 27. c. 22.37, 38, 39. This Principle and
internal heart Conformity Man had at the first; All Prescription of Duty
belongs to the Law, as Voet. disput. tom. 4. 24. And this we must hold, if with
all the Reformed we will maintain the Law's Perfection, as containing in its
compass all Virtues and Duties of Holiness. Wits. 197. de foed. Hence whatever
is a Transgression of ours in a Defect of Obedience to any of God's Precepts,
that were or should be given, the very least, though but in a defect of Faith
or Love to God in the Heart, is condemned by God's Law: Will any Man say that
God has commanded Faith and Repentance at any Time to Man, and that was not
employed in the Law at first given to Man, does not that Law condemn every
Disobedience, Impenitency and Unbelief* and if it condemns the Sins it commands
the Duties. The Law of Creation condemned all Sin, which could not be but by
the Fall, and hence commanded all contrary Duty, and therefore Repentance in
case of Sin.

5. This Law was twice solemnly promulgated, 1. To Adam in Paradise, in which
Promulgation God did bring him upon the trial of his Obedience in one
particular Precept or Prohibition, as a part of his Revealed Mind and Will; and
likewise declared the Penalty of the Breach of the whole Law in that sin. 2. On
Mount Sinai, which Law was but a recognizing and transcript of the said
Original Law, writ in Man's Heart, but so as to be expressive of the fallen
state of Man; in which Law, though but a brief Summary in ten Heads what was
that moral Obedience God at first required of Man, yet therein its abundantly
declared, That Man by a moral Obligation was bound to observe whatever God
enjoined as a Duty to Sinners in Faith and Repentance, and in all Matters of
instituted Worship under the Old or New Testament, in the first Table, and most
especially in the first and second Commandments: Though those particular
Commands as to the Mosaical Institution were alterable, yet they being the
revealed Mind and Will of God, for the time being, Men lay under a moral
Obligation as the Principle and Foundation of that Obedience. So wherever God
commands and requires any Duty in the Gospel, the Law primarily obliges us to
Obedience, De comminationibus si quae sunt in foedere pratiae videamus, si
accurate rem putare v^limus, etc

Though the Gospel seems to have Comminations in it, yet if we accurately
consider the Matter, the Covenant of Grace has no peculiar Comminations; all
Comminations or Threats belong to the Law; which Law, a^ to all its Parts does
accommodate, and suits its^lf to the Covenant of Grace, Wits. de foed.


and will revenge all Disobedience and Imperfection, if we are not secured from
its Curse in some way of perfect Satisfaction and Obedience; there needs no
other Law with Sanction to try and execute a Transgressor by: This is the Law
by which all the World becomes guilty before God; by which he governs the
World, condemns every Sin in the very regenerate, and every impenitent
Unbeliever; and by this Law, and it only Christ will judge the World. Neither
does the greatness and Aggravation of any Sin, remove it to the trial of
another Law, as in refusal of Gospel Remedy, but leaves Men the more
inexcusable under a higher degree of punishment inflicted by the same Law: And
whereas that Place, Romans 2.16. is alleged to prove the Change of the
Law-Sanction, and that it is not the Law of Nature but the Law of the Gospel by
which Christ will judge the World: The allegation is grounded on a manifest
Mistake, for mark what is said, v. 16. In its next coherence it belongs to v.
12. (for v. 13, 14, 15. are shut in by a Parenthesis) and then the sense is
plainly thus, as many as have sinned in the Law shall be judged by the Law, in
the day when God shall judge the secrets of Men by Jesus Christ, according to
my Gospel, (...), i. e. according as I have preached, That Christ shall judge
the World by the Law; for he says two sorts of Men shall be judged by the Law,
such as had never no Law, but what was written in their Hearts, and such as had
the written Law; and Christ shall judge them both, according to the Truth of
the Gospel which he had preached, Acts 17.31. and this is according to the
account Mr. Beza gives of the Text.

6. Hence the Law of God is but one from first to last, indeed in this one Law
there are many Precepts, ten in the Mount Sinai Law, and those ten contain
multitudes of Duties in other places of Scripture more particularly expressed:
And upon this Foundation of Obedience is built all the Ceremonial Laws and
Judicial, which had but a Temporary Sanction; and no more has the instituted
Gospel worship, and are but Branches that fall off, but our Obedience to them
for their time is Moral, because they are the Command of God, and that Moral
Duty to conform to the revealed Mind and Will of God, remains and will be our
Glory in Heaven, though particular Circumstances and Actions wherein this
Obedience is now ordinarily expressed, will cease: Hence it was not needful that
Christ should exert his perfect Obedience in those Circumstances and Actions
which do attend all the Varieties of States, Stations and Relations that we are
in, (...), The Law is the whole Rule of Obedience which God gave to the Church
under the Old Testament. It was a perfect and complea^ Rule of Obedience, which
God required of his Church, the moral Law ^he Foundation of the whole both
Ceremonial and Judaical. By virtue of that Covenant made with Abraham it was
accompanied with a Power and Efficacy enab^ing unto Obedience. The Law ln it
self as merely preceptive and commanding, administered no Power and Ability unto
those that were under its Authority, no more do the mere Comm^nds of the
Gospel. Under the O. Testament, it enforced Obedience from the severity of its
san^tion. D. O. of Just. p. 4 13, 144.
neither would it have been essential to Adam's perfection if he had stood, nor
will it be to glorified Saints. To conclude the Law of God is perpetual, and
its an eternal Truth, do and live, as that the Soul that Sins shall dye, Not
one jot or Tittle of the Law shall pass away till all be accomplished, Heaven
and Earth shall pass away first, Matt. 5.18. not that it is vacated when
fulfilled, but established: And our Savior tells us, That he that will break
one of the least of these Commandments, and teach men so, shall be called the
least in the kingdom of Heaven; What must they then be called, who tell us, God
has vacated this Holy, Righteous and Good Law, and brought in another in the
room of it that dispenses with little Sins, and makes them not of a damning
Nature.

II. Concerning the GOSPEL:
What Gospel is.
1. The English Word Gospel comes from Good, God, or Ghost, and Spell, which
signifies a Word or Saying, so that Gospel is as much as a Good Word, a
comfortable Word or Saying of God, The Word comes of (...) been, and (...)
nuntius, and est laetum vel foelix Nuntium.
or the Spirit, (...), the proper Signification of it is a good Message, or
joyful News; and so its used by Aristophanes and Appian, and in that Sense
(...) is used Mat. 11.5. Romans 10.15. Luc. 2.10, 11. The LXXII. use it expressly
for good Tidings, 2 Samuel 4.10. and so Isa. 52.7. The Gospel that we are to
believe as the Glad Tidings of the Kingdom of Heaven, Mar. 1.15. Luke 2.10. The
Publication of Christ's Doctrine, 1 Cor. 4.15. Romans 1.1. The Gospel of Ages or
eternal Gospel, Rev. 14.6. I know no place that it is used otherwise than for
acceptable News, and glad Tidings, and no where in the Sense of a Law or
Law-Covenant; and it can be no otherwise, because to whom are these glad
Tidings brought, but to poor Sinners, that are fallen under the Law, become
guilty before God, utterly hopeless and helpless in themselves? and by the said
Law, or any Law that requires the least degree of Holiness as a federal
Condition of Life and Salvation. Christ himself Luke 4.18. from Isa. 61.1.
tells us who he came to preach Gospel good Tidings to, it was to the poor,
brokenhearted, Captives, Blind, Imprisoned. The Hebrew Word (...) is of the
same signification, and (...) Chald. and Sir. See Isa. 40.9.

2. Now then the Gospel is the Manifestation of the Grace of the Covenant, the
good News and glad Tidings of Life and Salvation, promised in the Covenant of
Grace to Transgressors of the Law, that lie under the Curse of it, and was
promulgated immediately after the Fall (before the Sentence was passed) by way
of Promise, without the least mention of a New Law or Law Conditions to be
performed by Man to invest him in the said Promise: The Promise was to Christ
and of Christ, That he should destroy the Work of the Devil, and spoil
Principalities and Powers, and give Life to to the World, that the Devil by his
Subtilty and Malice had plotted to destroy; and as he thought had effected the
total Ruin and Destruction of. The like Promise was to Abraham 430 Years
before the Law. The manner of this Salvation was soon exemplified in
Sacrifices, in Adam's Family, as Types of Christ the great Sacrifice for Sin;
they were continued in the Families of the Faithful both before and after the
Flood, and in Abraham's and the Patriarchs till the Church of Israel was
erected and organized in the Wilderness, when the whole Ceremonial Service was
established, the Economy whereof was but an entire Type of Christ and the
Gospel in the Tabernacle and Temple, state of the Church; so that the whole
Service was no more than their Gospel, wherein Christ was daily preached to
them: Which Gospel of theirs labored under much faultiness, comparatively to
what it was afterward at the Appearance, and by the Ministry of Christ and his
Apostles, 2 Timothy 1.9, 10. compared with Ephesians. 3.5, 6.

1. This Gospel brings Life and Immortality to Light by the Promise, which was
not so clearly discovered before Christ's Incarnation and Ministry, Ephesians. 3.5.
He appears to be the great Sacrifice so long fore-typified, as likewise the
great Priest that was to come, after the Order of Melchisedeck, and the great
Prophet Moses prophesied of: To him gave all the Prophets Witness, and John the
Baptist pointed him out, As the Lamb of God that took away the Sins of the
World; and that he had received the Spirit without Measure. The History of
Christ's Life, Doctrine, Death and Exaltation are eminent Proofs of these glad
Tidings, from whence the four Evangelists are rightly named. The Witness and
Ministry of the Apostles contain likewise the same, whereby there is the giving
the Knowledge of Salvation, Luke 1.77. and that through this Knowledge we should
have all things pertaining to Life and Godliness, 2 Pet. 1.3.

2. The Promise of the Gospel to us, contains all good News, being free and
absolute to Sinners (such 2 Timothy 1.15. 1 John 5.11. chapter 2.25.) of Christ and of
Eternal Life and Salvation in him. 2. Promises of the first Grace freely and
graciously bestowed on us as of Faith, Ephesians. 2.8. the Spirit, Luke 11.12, 13.
the new Creation, Ephesians. 2.10. and free Justification, Ezekiel. 36.25. the new
Heart, 26. a Promise to make us to walk in his ways, and that we shall be his
People, ibid. a Promise to be taught of God, Joh. 6.45. Isa. 54.13. Yea the
bringing us into a true Gospel Obedience to the Law, Jer. 31.33. the making
Christ our Wisdom, Righteousness and Sanctification, 1 Cor. whereby Obedience
to God's Law is graciously given us, Psalm. 119.29. the promise of Perseverance,
that we shall not depart from God, Jer. 32.40.

3. The Promises made to Christ, and of Christ, wherein our absolute Salvation
is wrapped up, so as to be a Covenant, Isa. 42.6. c. 49.6. c. 53.11, 12.
Promises to him of the Throne and Dominion of David, in a spiritual Sense, such
as concern his priestly and prophetical Offices, as Heb. 7. Ps. 10. To instance
in all would be long.

4. All the Names of Christ, as Messiah, Jesus, Emanuel; the account of his
Natures, of his Offices, of his Office in general, Mediator, Redeemer, Savior;
of Christ in particular, of his Prophetic, Priestly, Kingly Offices; his
exercise of them, and his excellent Spirit which he showed therein, full of
Meekness, Compassion, Wisdom and Zeal. All this is Gospel, and good News to
Sinners.

5. The gracious free Invitations that are made to Sinners, as Isa. 55.1. Mat.
11. lat. 2 Cor. 5.1. with Promises for Encouragement. Here Is high and rich
Gospel.

6. The Promise of Principle and Strength to perform every Duty required; of
his Spirit, to work in us to will and do; of God's Love shed abroad in our
Hearts to constrain us, of life itself; and that he will be the Resurrection
and Life; of Love, springing from the Love of God; of making us good Trees,
that we may bring forth good Fruit, is all wonderful Gospel.

7. All the Discoveries Christ has made of his Father; his eternal Election,
his transacting with him in a Covenant-way, showing us the Mystery of the
Father, revealing him, by his glorious Designs to glorify his Justice and
Mercy in such a way of Salvation; his Designs to magnify his Law, and make it
honorable; to exalt his Son Jesus to be a Prince and Savior, and give
Remission of Sins; to exalt his free Grace in this salvation by a free
justification, adoption, sanctification, and glory; and in doing this, Justice
should lose nothing of its due, is all great and glorious Gospels.

8. That in all these great and precious things, there is such a connection
together that one encourages and leads to another, Promise leads to Duty,
and Duty to the receiving of Promises, Grace leads to Glory, and that
Perseverance is as infallibly settled in electing Grace, and as absolutely as
the first Grace. This is admirable Gospel.

9. The great and clear discoveries that are made of the evil of sin, of the
dangers sin leads to, and sinners are in and running into, by continuing in
sin, and laying open the strict nature of the Law, that it dispenses not with
the least sin, it requires still perfect righteousness and holiness, and
sentenceth the sinner to eternal death and damnation for it; and therefore it is
impossible, that any flesh living, by ordinary descent from Adam, can be
justified by the Works of the Law; it is a gracious and necessary piece of
Gospel to take off a poor sinner from the love of sin and fondness of his own
righteousness, which every sinner by nature is apt unto, and to set up the Lord
Jesus as the only Name whereby he can be saved, and to show, that he is able
and willing to save to the uttermost, whereby a sinner becomes dead to the Law,
and married by faith unto Jesus Christ. This is in the glorious Gospel of God
and our Savior: It is the light of it that shines into the heart does this.

10. It is good News and glad Tidings, that the grace of God in the Gospel does
not make void the Law, but establishes it, Romans 3.31. Neither is the Law
against the Promise, Gal. 3.21. though that he that is under a Law for
justification, is under a Curse, and that by the economy of the grace of
Christ in the New Covenant, the Law and Gospel do sweetly harmonize: 1. In that
the Law has been fulfilled in Christ as to all righteousness, it has a full
Sanction as to every believer in the active and passive obedience of Christ;
their delivery from the curse of it being by this, that he was made a curse for
them; all their sins are condemned in his flesh, he bearing them on the Cross;
the Law has its end as to all righteousness and complete perfect holiness in
Christ; believers are all complete and perfect in Christ as to the Law. 2. It Is
good News, that Christ's death was not only the satisfying of the Law and
Justice of God on the account of our sins, and, together with his active
obedience, the merit of grace and glory; but that this same death of Christ was
the Sanction and Ratification of all the Grace of the New Covenant, as a
Testament, being by the death of the Testator, and as a Law to Christ, which he
lay under by his Father's injunction to perform. And this is the Sanction
spoken of H^b. 8.6. and more fully explained, c. 9.15 16, 17. compared with c.
10.7. 3. It Is good News to a believer, that God has provided a way for him to
come into an acceptable obedience through Jesus Christ, to the Law of God, Lex
attemperata foederi gratiae and juxta illud inscripta cordi electorum jubet ea
omnia quae in Evangelio proponuntur, fide non ficta amplecti and convenienter
isti gratiae and gloriae Vitam suam insti tuere. Quando ergo Deus in foedere
gratiae promittit p^ccatori electo fidem Rescipiscientiam and consequenter
vitam aeternam, tum Lex cujus obligatio nunquam potest solvi quaeque ad omne
officium sese extendit obstringit hominem ut illi veritati assentiatur,
promissa illa bona magnifaciat, Impense desideret, quaerat, amplectatur. Wits.
de Foed. p. 198.
because the Grace of the Gospel causes him to love the Law and the Commands
of Christ in the Gospel-way of performance. He says, Oh how do I love thy law;
Oh that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes; and he desires, that now
God would grant him his Law graciously: see Psalm. 119. For the grace of God in
the Gospel writes the Law in his heart in a true love to God with all his
heart, and a love to the Law of God, to the holiness, justice and goodness of
it, and his great desire is now, that in Christ Jesus, and conformity to him,
God's Law may be honored, and therefore he looks upon the very performance of
holy Duties accordingly, as his benefit and privilege by the grace of the
Gosp^l* Christ is sanctification to him, he is created in Christ Jesus to good
works, he is redeemed from all iniquity, Tit. 2.12, 13. and taught by the grace
of God to deny all ungodly and worldly lusts, etc. from love and thankfulness
to Christ to keep his Commandments; and this New Gospel restored Principle of
obedience is the New Commandment spoken of Joh. 13.34. 1 John 2.7, 8. 2 John 5.
not that it was materially a New Command. 4. Lastly, It is great and good
Tidings, that Jesus Christ is set on the Holy Hill of Zion; that he is King,
Head and Governor to his Church; and that he has provided particular right
Laws, Rules and Precepts for them to walk by, according to the original design,
purity and intention of God's Law; and that now the Law of God goes no longer
out of Mount Sinai, but out of Mount Zion, and the Word of the Lord from the
heavenly Jerusalem, Isa. 2.2, 3. Mic. 4.1. Heb. 12.18, 22, 23. And it is Gospel,
that all Power is not only given to Christ in his Church as King thereof, but
all Power in Heaven and Earth is committed to him, as to governing Providence,
and that he shall judge the World at the last day. These things are all the
good Tidings of the Gospel, ratified in the Covenant of Grace, graciously,
freely and fully bestowed on us in the Gospel, and upon no federal condition of
our own performance, either before or after conversion.

Arguments that the Gospel is not a New Law with Sanction.
Arg. 1. If Law and Gospel are specifically distinct, then the Gospel is not a
Law, nor the Law a Gospel, but Law and Gospel are specifically distinct,
therefore the Gospel is not a Law. The consequence of the Major is undeniable
to any one that understands the nature of Genus and Species. The revealed
offers of salvation were never but by two ways to Man, by Works and by Grace,
that is called Law, this Gospel, and they are contra distinct, sub proximo
genere, and adversa, as much as homo and brutum sub animali; and the Law can no
more be called Gospel, or the Gospel a Law, than a Man may be called a Brute,
or a Brute a Man.

1. Law and Gospel Grace are opposed expressly by the Spirit, Joh. 1.17. The law
was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. Here is not a Law
and a Law opposed, Evangelium non esse legem, sed ab ea plurimum distinctum tum
ipsa arguit appellatio quam ponderat, Theophyl. in Praef. Matthew. and Eusebius. l.
1. in praeparatione Evang. c. 1. Tum manifesta Antithesis quae est, Joh. 1.17.
Romans 10.5, 6. Tum utriusque discrimen situm in patefactionis ordine natura,
promulgatione, ministerio in forma seu differentia promissionum in effectis,
adjunctis efficacia, officio utriusque in applicatione ad objecta: tum
constitutus Ecclesiae purioris consensus quae semper Evangelium a lege
discrevit quemadmodum, Cyril. Alex.
but a Law and Grace essentially differing; for an old Law and a new do not
differ essentially, but secundum adjuncta only, in the like manner and for the
same end; Christ and Moses are opposed, Christ as a Son, to Moses as a Servant,
one being a Minister of the Law, the other of the free grace of the Gospel,
Heb. 3.5, 6. As Mediators, one of a legal administration, that veiled the grace
of the Gospel; Christ such a Mediator of the New Testament, who brought life
and immortality to light through the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1.10 Upon the account of
this specific difference of Law and Gospel, it is that Mount Sinai and Mount
Zion, or Jerusalem that is above, the heavenly are opposed to the earthly in
that Spiritual Allegory of Hagar and Sarah, applied Gal. 4.24, 25. which
opposition between these Mounts is fully and admirably managed by the Apostle,
Heb. 12.18, 22. To this let me add the specific difference that is made
between those that are under one and under the other, Romans 6.14. There are some
under the Law, and some under grace; he says not some under an old Law, some
under a new; but what is the condition of them under the Law? sin reigns unto
death; but as to those under Grace, grace reigns through righteousness [ i.
e. of Christ, not of works of our obedience to any Law] unto eternal life.
Lastly, The opposition made between the Works of the Law and the Grace of the
Gospel, is in the point of justification; the Works of the Law, or any Law, are
peremptorily rejected by the Apostle in the point of justification; so that if
Grace justified in a way of Works, Grace and Works here could not be opposed:
See those two famous places that peremptorily reject all Works of what kind
soever, of what Law soever, from Justification, Romans 3.20. Gal. 2.16. where its
said by the Works of a Law, (...). no Flesh living shall be justified: It is
reasonable to think, that if the Apostle had intended we should be justified by
any Law, Alexand. in c. 40. Isa. Hieron. l. 1. Contra Pelagianos and plurimorum
ubi opus adduci possunt testimonia. Christop. Pelargi Jesuitismu, p. 71.
Impres. An. D. 16^8.
that he would not have told us by what Law-Works? Would he have spoken so
universally of all Law-Works? Are not all good Works, toward God and Man,
commanded in the Law? But are some Works of one Law and some of another? This
Remark of mine, obout leaving out the prepositive Article, showing that the
Words of all Laws are indefinitely here meant, you would blow away as a Cobweb:
Your words are, Upon such Cobwebs, in the face of the plain scope of the Bible,
does this Cause stand. Cobwebs are fit enough to catch Flies in; but I never
fear an Adversary that spits at Arguments instead of answering them. Where Is
the Argument, you say, because in a few places the Article is not put in? [You
should have said (...).] Therefore the Apostle excludes every sort, when he
plainly excludes only one sort, as appears by the whole Context; nay, when at
the same time another Species under that general, Romans 3.27.

R. Therefore Ver. 20. We have the general of all Laws, there is no
Justification by the Works of a Law; and know you not that which is denied to
the Genus as such, is denied to the Species; and though he mentions a Law of
Faith, v. 27. in the sense or senses which have been above mentioned, yet it is
manifest that he absolutely denies Justification to Faith as a Law-Work; for
else, why had he not excepted Faith as a Law-Work, when he excludes all Works?
And when he shows all Works are excluded, he says, where is boasting then?
Says he, it is excluded by the Nature and Power of true Faith, which will
always lay the Creature low, and exclude all matter of Boasting that may be in
us; he says not, we are justified by Faith as a Work of the new Law; but
says, that Faith stands up against all such Works, and Law-Justification; and
this is witnessed (...), by the Law and the Prophets, i. e. by the Mosaical
Ministry, as well as the Prophets, were the prepositive Points at Law, in a
peculiar sense; but what is it that is witnessed? It Is that the Righteousness of
God is manifested, (...), without a Law, any Law for Justification by Gospel
grace. You mistake if you apprehend we make this our great Argument, to prove
that the Gospel in its nature is not a Law with Sanction; it is the plain scope
and design of the Apostle, in all those places where he disputes against
Justification by Works, that we argue from, and make use of this observation,
as a corroborating Argument, that his plain intent is to exclude, not only the
Works of the moral Law, but the Works of any Law; for the Apostle deals with
the Galatians, which hankered after Circumcision, and under pretense of
observation of some of the Mosaical Ceremonies, would have introduced the Works
of the Law to share in the Matter of their Righteousness: And, therefore, by
using Law in the largest and most comprehensive sense, he casts out all-Law
Works as conditions of Justification; and this is the sense Mr. Beza has of
the Apostle's Scope on Romans 3.20. St. Paul having proved the World to be guilty
before God, and liable to his Wrath, he concludes that which he undertakes to
prove, viz. That no Man could be justified by the Works of any Law; for having
disproved one part of the disjunct Proposition, he establishes the other, viz.
Seeing we are not justified by a Law; therefore, only by Faith in Christ alone,
Christ apprehended by Faith, as the Gospel teaches that we are both justified
and saved; therefore, that the Gospel is the power of God unto Salvation to
every Believer; which was the state of the Question, as laid down in the
beginning of the Epistle. He tells us what does further show or demonstrate
these things duly considered; that in this Verse, by the nameing the Law
without an Article, all Doctrine is understood, whether Written or not* which
does command or forbid any thing, as the series of his Arguments, and that
effect which he ascribes to the Law, in discovering Sin does prove; you may see
much more in him to this purpose: The Works of the Law are called the doing of
those things, Haec autem diligenter considerata manifesta indicant in hoc ver
siculo, appellatione legis sine Articulo, intelligi omnem doctrinam scriptam
aut non scriptam, quae aliquid aut jubeat aut interdicat, etc.
which the Law commands, as they are done by us, or not done by us, not as
simply commanded by the Law. Now I suppose you will not call this learned Man's
arguing here a Cobweb. It were easy to show upon what probable Reasons the
Prepositive is added or omitted, in other places of the Epistles where Law is
mentioned, which to avoid prolixity I must now omit. It Is enough at present
that it is left out in these eminent places, where Justification by any Works
of any Law, is utterly denied and condemned. It Is frivolously objected by you,
that the omission of the Article here, argues not; because the Socinians would
improve the leaving out of, Joh. 1.1. against the Deity of Christ; and say the
word was a God, not the God; a God by office, (as one preached at P. H.)
whereas its in that Text an Argument against them, and there is doubtless a
great force in it; for as Mr. B. says by the first words, the word was in the
beginning, the eternal Essence of the Son is asserted. 2. By the next, The Word
was with God, (...) (where the Article is expressed, and the Person of the Son is
distinguished from the Person of the Father, God without separation. And in the
third Enunciation, he affirms, That the Word was, ( i. e. ver. 1. Et
essentialiter Deus) Patri, (...), ess^ntially God, the same in Essence with the
Father; and if the Article had been added, and it had been (...), it had
affirmed the Son to be the same Person with the Father. It Is no small matter,
therefore, in the declaring this divine Mystery, that the Article is first
added, and then afterward omitted, to show Christ is God, though not God the
Father. See what an Argument yours is, because the Socinians will make a false
Inference from the leaving out, Joh. 1.1. Therefore it must be Socianism to
argue from Romans 3.20. because the Prepositive is left out, and Law used
indefinitely, that all Laws are understood, and Justification by all Law-Works
are excluded. And whereas, you say, the Text speaks directly of the Law of
Moses; if you mean thereby the moral Law, it was essentially the same with the
Law of Innocence; and the denial of Justification by one, is also a denial of
Justification by the other; and so by all Doctrins, requiring duty, as Mr. Beza
says. What you say of Gal. 3.11. militates against your self, whereas you say,
Was every Law given 430 years after Abraham? Is not the Apostle express, in the
3 first Chapters, that that Law was the Jewish Law? [Do you not mean Moral and
Ceremonial, and Judicial? For of these parts were the Jewish Law] or at most
the Law of Nature together with it.

R. Were not these all Laws of Duty that God made, and all comprehended in the
Law of Nature, requiring universal obedience to God in all things, that he
should ever Command?

But observe that Justification by Christ, which is the same always in the
Apostle's sense as Justification by Faith, is opposed to Justification by the
Law of Moses, which was the way the Jews looked after, partly by Sacrifice,
partly by their Obedience to that Law in the preceptive part; and thus they
followed after that Law of Righteousness, Romans 9.31. and attained it not,
because they sought it not by Faith, sed (...) quasi operibus legis, as it were
by the Works of the Law, v. 32. Mr. Beza, refuting Erasmus on that place,
says, Erasmus wrongs the Jews, in that he thinks that they looked upon the
Salvation they had, to have been by Works only, the Grace of God excluded; for
the contrary to this Assertion appears by the Prayer of the Pharisee, that the
Jews had no other Opinion of Merits and Grace, than now our Sophists have,
which conjoyn Free Will with Grace, and Faith with Works. And indeed this was
the Stumbling Block. I might go through Paul's Epistles to evince this, That
all sorts of Works are opposed to Grace in Justification, quasi e regione
perpetuo adversantur. And this is the Point he deals so roundly with the
Galatians about, viz. Their Judaizing, in joining Works with Faith in
Justification; not so much the Ceremony of Circumcision, which at another time
he admitted of, but because of the reason why now the Galatians thought
Circumcision so necessary, viz. as a Work of the Law; therefore he testified,
That if they were circumcised, Christ would profit them nothing; and thereby
they were obliged to keep the whole Law for Justification; because obeying it
in one point would not serve, they could not be justified partly by Christ, and
partly by some partial obedience to the Law; and there was as much reason to
plead for a Mosaical imperfect obedience, to join with the Sacrifices in
Justification, before Christ, as there is now for an Evangelical imperfect
obedience to conjoyn with Christ's Righteousness now, and more.

Lastly, Grace and Free-gifts is by all Men opposed to all conditional claim,
upon performance of a Duty required by any Law; and the Apostle always makes
this Debt, Romans 4.4. Let the conditional part be never so small, it is a Debt ex
pacto. Hence the Apostle places both eternal Life and the Righteousness by
which we are justified, all in free Gift to us, Romans 5.15, 16, 22. Yea he
directly opposes the Gospel gift of eternal life (which comprehends Grace and
Glory) to any Law with Sanction, v. last, i. e. any Law that pays Death as the
Wages of Sin; The Wages of Sin is Death, but the gift of God is eternal ^ife
through Jesus Christ, etc. Now if your new Law makes Death the Wages of any
Sin, then the Gospel gift of eternal Life is opposed to it.

You say, p. 25. "The Benefits are not given us for our Faith, but upon
believing.

R. For and Upon, in a Covenant sense, are the the same; to convey an Estate
upon the payment of 5 Shillings is a Bargain, and good ex pacto, though the
Estate be worth hundreds. You say, If a Man says, I will give you a thousand
Pound, provided you will come and fetch it; is it not free Gift? I suppose its
reckoned so by him that is able and willing to fetch it. But the Case may be
so, that if some Men offer me a thousand Pound, I will not fetch it to have it,
and then I may not be able. One may offer a thousand Pound to a Man that lies
with broken Arms and Legs in the bottom of a deep Well, provided he will come
and fetch it, especially when he knows no Body can set his Limbs and help him
out. And how often do you say the first Grace is ablolute? And to say the same
thing is absolute in the power of another, and make it a condition by Law with
Sanction unto me, is the greatest absurdity in the World. And I tell you, that
if a rich Man offers a hundred Pound to a poor Man, Lame and Blind, and in
Prison, and the King makes a Law he should come and fetch it, or else be
hanged, it would cease to be a Free-gift.

Arg. 2. That which is a Law with Sanction curses every one under that Law,
with an irretrievable Curse upon the first Transgression of the said Law; but
the Gospel does not bind any one under a Curse irretrievable, by the Gospel,
upon the first Sin, or many Sins committed against the Grace of it; therefore
the Gospel is not a Law with Sanction.

The Major is very manifest, That there is no Law pardons a Transgression of
itself: It is a universal Maxim concerning not only the Law of Creation, but of
all Laws, Gal. 3.10. from Deuteronomy. 27.26. the Apostle says, He that is under Law
is under a Curse, provided he does no^ all things that are written in the Book
of the said Law that he is under: therefore first he says, (...). in the
second place, (...). Suppose you speak of your New Law, the Condition whereof
you make Faith and sincere Obedience; lowered Conditions and imperfect
Obedience: And these are the all things contained in the Book of this Law; then
immediately upon the Publishing and Promulgation thereof all Unbelievers are
irretrievably condemned by that Law. The Wages due by that Law to every
Unbeliever, upon his first unbelief* is Death: And the said Law cannot relieve
him, because he has not done whatever was writ in the Book of this Law; its
true one Law may relieve us in respect of another, in some sense at least as to
the Curse of it, but no Law relieves from its own Curse, therefore if the new
Law curses Unbelief, it curses the Unbeliev^ irr^treivably, upon the first
Act of Sin in that kind.

The Minor is plain, because the Gospel do (...) reliev^ from the Curse that
lies upon Men for Unbelief (being in its proper Natu ^a Transg^^^sion of, and
Disobedience to the first Law) there is no Sin or Curse but th ^osp^l gives
^^e^^f, though aggravated by the rejection of a Remedy; all Laws with S^^ct^on,
give the due Recompense (constituted by that Law) to the Transgressor of it in
any one Point, therefore sin is always, in respect of that Law against which it
is, unpardon^ble, for therein the nature of that Sin is adjusted, and the
Punishment that is made due to it. Hence therefore if the Gospel be a Law with
Sanction, every one that appears upon Trial to have transgressed it after its
Promulgation, less or m^re is under the Curse of it, and that Person which any
Law has once cursed, it can never bless; therefore this Position puts
thousands under a most certain, hopeless and helpless Condition by the Gospel.

Arg. 3. That which is a Law with Sanction, if it contain a Promise of Benefits
upon Obedience, is a Covenant of Works; for upon the same Grounds that the
Punishment is the Wages due in case of disobedience: Upon the same is the
Benefit due, in case of Obedience; the same Law make^ one a D^bt as well as the
other, for whatever is of Law is of Debt, either upon the account of Sin or of
Righteousness; the Law was the same upon both accounts to Adam, Life had been a
Reward, and Wages due as well as Death: Therefore the Apostle argues so
strenuously against all kind of Works, Romans 4.4. (...), to him that works
there is a Reward; not (...), not of Grace bu^ of D^bt; and he excepteth not him
that works according to the new, but to him that works, whether according
to the Old or New Law; the Reward to him that works by any Law, is Debt by
the said Law.

Arg. 4. If the Gospel be a Law, its either the same Law with the Law of
Nature, or a distinct Law from it: But its neither the same Law nor a disti^ct
Law from it, therefore no Law with Sanction. The Necessity of the Consequence
in the disjunction cannot be doubted by any Man of Reason.

The Minor is thus demonstrated. 1. Its not the same Law with the Law of
Nature; this you will not say, because you call it a New Law: And if it be the
same Law, then you have no Pretense to evade all the Consequences that will be
d^awn upon you from the Doctrine and Arguments of the Apostle Paul; therefore I
doubt not but I am secure of you as to this part of the Dilemma.

Therefore I come to the second, That which must be essentially the same Law
with the Old Law, is not a distinct Law from it, but your New Law must be
essentially the same with the Old Law, therefore is not distinct from it.

Your new Law can have no Essentials distinct from the Old Law, for if it have
the same Essentials its the same, the same Matter and Form, and the same
integral Parts wherein they consist. The parts of a Law are Condition and
Promise, in case of Obedience, and Threat in case of Disobedience, the
connection of these makes the Form; all this you will allow. Hence there is the
same Law-Nature in one as in the other, and therefore its a Law in the same way
and manner, and a Man under it must be dealt with in a Law way and manner:
Obedience to God was commanded there, and so here; Disobedience to God
forbidden there, and so here; Life promised there upon Obedience, and Death
threatened there upon Disobedience, and so here: And what Obedience is there
which is not commanded in the Old Law? And what Disobedience that is not
forbidden there? But you will say the Old Law commanded perfect Obedience, and
the new imperfect. A. The New Law would not certainly command what the Old Law
forbad; but the Old Law forbad all Imperfection in Obedience, and cursed it. 2.
Whatever the degree of Obedience is that any Law requires, its perfect, in
regard of that Law that requires it. 3. It should be strange if God should make
that which is imperfect, sinful, condemned Obedience by one Law, to be perfect
Obedience, and justifying by a New, and so set Law against Law. Lastly, as to
the Promise, its the same, for it was everlasting Life, both in the old
Covenant and the new; the manner of having it by Works or by Grace, alters not
the nature of the thing itself. A House in itself is the same whether I
purchase it or it be given. From all which I conclude, This pretended New Law
is no other than the Old Law furbished up again, that in itself it must be
essentially t^^ ^ame, the Works and Justification by them, that if there be
some little difference i^ ^odalities it makes no essential Change, than is in a
Man that wears one colored Suit of Clothes one day, and another on another
Day. I argue, That Covenant that bestows the Grace of the Promise without a
previous Condition, is not a new Law; but the Covenant of Grace bestows the
Grace of it without previous Conditions performed by us. Therefore it bestows
eternal Life unconditionally; ergo, for it bestows the first Grace (according
to yours) unconditionally, which is Eternal Life, Joh. 17.3.

Arg. 5. If there be no need of a New Law, God is so wise he will not make a
New Law, if there be no need of it or use for it, then the Gospel is no New
Law: But there is no need or use of a New Law.

Minor, There Is no need or use for it, neither in respect of Law or Gospel
Dispensation of Justice or of Grace. 1. There is no need or use in respect of
Law or Justice, because the old Law is a sufficient Rule for distributive and
commutative Justice, it condemns every Transgression and Disobedience
eternally, it has provided Curse and Condemnation enough for the greatest and
most aggravated Sin, for unbelief in the least and highest degree; and so for
Impenitency: All the World is guilty by this Law, God rules the World by it,
and will judge it by it, there is not the least or greatest Duty but is here
commanded, which is or shall be the Will of God, not only in way of moral Duty,
but in all Matters of instituted Worship under the Old and New Testament.
Lastly, in respect of Justification and Reward, if God had intended to have
given Life as a Reward of the Works of any Law, he could as easily have done it
by the Old Law, and sure would never have made a new one to have done it by. 2.
There is no need of a new Law in regard of the Dispensation of the Grace of the
Gospel: Because what the Gospel does its in way of delivery of Man from the
Curse of the Law that they lie already under; and here there is no need of Law,
because its done all in a way of free Grace, Pardon of a condemned Prisoner
must come merely from the good will of the Prince, its inconsistent with his
Prerogative to be bound to it by a Law; therefore God reserves this
Prerogative, he will have Mercy on whom he will have Mercy. And its needless in
respect of the condemned person, because there is need of nothing but a free
Off^r of Grace and Mercy to a condemned Prisoner, if he refuses it its at his
own peril, its his choosing; but to remain in statu quo, under the Law, that he
was condemned by, and to be executed according to it. You Will say, there is need
of a new Law in respect of new Obedience. A. I say no; for God's Law is still
perfect in respect of the Rule of Obedience. 2. The Gospel requires no other
Obedience materially than what the Law required. 3. The Gospel makes provision
in the dispensation of free Grace for all Obedience the Law requires, for the
perfection of it in Christ, for our Conformity to it through its Promise,
teaching and new creating, and writing that Law anew in our Hearts which the
Fall had blotted out. Well, to conclude this Argument, the Apostle expressly
says, Romans 3.21. Now without Law, (...), the Righteousness of God is made
manifest, being witnessed by the Law and the Prophets, i. e. by the whole Old
Testament, as the Jews were wont to divide it; and therefore says (...), etc.
for Distinction from Law, in the Sense that he took it in, when he says,
without Law: new Obedience is obedience to the Law, from a new Life,
P^inciples, Strength, and for new Ends.

Arg. 6. That which is inconsistent with the Grace of God in the Gospel, is not
to be admitted; but that the Gospel should be a Law with Sanction, is
inconsistent with the Grace of God in the Gospel. Ergo, The Minor is easily
made manifest, 1. From the Nature of a Law, that is to enforce's Obedience;
where a thing is freely given, its expected it should be freely received and
not enforced. 2. Its inconsistent with showing Mercy to poor, lame, blind
Cripples, to offer them Relief upon unperformable Conditions. Yea, its also an
abuse of Justice to make a Law, That lame Men should walk before their Limbs be
restored: I pray did Christ heal the Diseased, restore the Lunaticks, raise the
Dead, cast out Devils, by a Law? 3. If it be consistent with the Grace of the
Gospel to act by a Law in saving Sinners, it must be before Regeneration or
after; not before, for then they will come under no Law, they are out in
Rebellion against all Law, nay they are already in the Custody of the Law, and
therefore not capable of coming under the Terms of another. 2. Their Salvation
must lie in Delivery of them from the Custody and Curse of that they are under;
which cannot be by making Terms with them, but with the Law offended that
detains them; therefore it must be mere Grace without a Law, that must open the
Prison Doors to them. 3. You say the first Grace is absolutely and freely
given, therefore the Sinner can come under no terms of Law in order to the
bringing him into a state of Grace, for terms of a Law laid upon any supposes
a Power and Ability in them to perform the said terms, if they will, and that
they can both will and do if they will. It is not a new Law after Regeneracy,
for then Grace begun would cease to be free Grace afterward: Christ is not only
the Author, but the Finisher of our Faith and Obedience, our perseverance and
standing in Grace would not be so secure as its beginning, the Grace of the
Covenant would not be homogeneous, one part would be free and absolute, the
other conditional and upon Terms; but the Operation of the Spirit and Promises
of after-grace, they are all of the same nature from first to last, as God
begins so he perfects and compleats the new Man; he works all our Works in us,
all-a-long, in the same way and manner as they are begun.

Arg. 7. If the Gospel be a new Law, it was made as soon as the old Law was
broken: And, as new as it is, it must be that Law by which the Patriarchs
antidiluvian and postdiluvians were saved. This consequence, I suppose, cannot
be denied, because we are saved even as they, and the Gospel was preached unto
them. But there was no such new Law from Adam to Paul's time: 1. The Gospel was
not delivered to our first Parents in the terms of a Law, but absolutely so to
Abraham. The Apostle is most express in it, That there was no Law given to his
time, that could be a Gospel, i. e. that could give Life to Sinners, Gal. 3.21.
If there had a Law been given which could have given life, verily Righteousness
had been by a Law: And now I pray except not at my reading (...) a Law,
indefinitely understanding any Law, for our Translators render it so; and I
must tell you they should by the same reason have rendered (...) in the same
manner, and then the Text had been uniform in the Translation as in the
Original, if there had been a Law (any Law) given, which could have given Life,
verily Righteousness had been by a Law: Therefore your new Law was not g^ven
before Paul's Time, but the Gospel was, therefore the Gospel is no Law with
Sanction.

Luther on this place says thus. Though those Words of Paul be never so p^ain,
yet the Papists have this wicked Gloss always ready, That he speaks only of
the Ceremonial Law: But Paul speaks plainly, and excepteth no Law, whether
Moral or Ceremonial, or any other: Wherefore their Gloss is not worth a Rush.
And contrariwise we affirm, That there is no Law, whether Man's Law or God's
Law that gives Life; therefore we put as great a difference between the Law
and Righteousness as between Life and Death, between Heaven and Hell; and the
Cause that moves us so to affirm, is, That the Apostle says, The Law is not
given to justify, to give Life and to save, but only to kill and to destroy,
contrary to the Opinion of all Men naturally, etc. This Difference of the
Offices of the Law and the Gospel keeps all Christian Doctrine in its true and
proper use.

This Witness of Luther I can set against all the Testimonies you bring from
any whatever, who hold or have held the Gospel a Law with Sanction, as you do;
diverse may speak of it under the term of a Law of Faith, or understanding by
Law the Precepts of the Gospel; but if they plead, that the true and proper
nature of the Gospel is a Law with Sanction, as you do, I do renounce their
Opinion, and do oppose them therein, as I do you, it being as such
fundamentally destructive to the Gospel, and the whole nature of the Grace of
it.

And on Gal. 4.4. -- Christ being made under the Law, is not a Lawgiver, or a
Judge after the Law, but in that he made himself subject to the Law, he
delivered us from the Curse thereof. Now whereas Christ under the Gospel gives
Commandments, and teaches the Law, or expounds it rather, this pertains
not to the Doctrine of Justification, but of good Works. Moreover, It is not the
proper Office of Christ (for which he came into the World) to teach the Law,
but accidental, as it was to heal the weak, etc. -- Wherefore the true proper
Office of Christ is to wrestle with the Law, -- to conquer and abolish Sin and
Death, -- to deliver the faithful from the Law and all Evils -- Let us learn to
put a difference between Christ and a Lawgiver, -- that when the Devil goes
about to trouble us under his Name, we may know him to be a very Fiend. --
Christ is no Moses, he is nothing else but Infinite Mercy, freely giving. On
Gal. 2.20. Now as it is the greatest knowledge and cunning that Christians have
thus to define Christ, so of all things it is hardest. I my self in this great
light of the Gospel, wherein I have been so long exercised, to hold the
distinction of Christ which Paul gives so deeply, has the Doctrine and
pestilent Opinion, that Christ is a Lawgiver, entered into my Bones. You young
Men therefore are in a far happier condition, for you are not insected with
those pernicious Errors wherein I have been so muzled and drowned from my
youth, that at my hearing the Name of Christ, my Heart has trembled and quaked
for fear, for I was persuaded, that he was a severe Judge; wherefore it is to
me a double trouble to correct and reform this Evil: 1. To forget, cond^mn and
resist this old-grounded Error, That Christ is a Lawgiver and a Judge. 2. To
plant in my Heart a new and true persuasion of Christ, that he is a Justifier
and a Savior. Ye that are young may learn with much less difficulty to know
Christ purely and sincerely, if you will.

Arg. 8. If the Gospel be a new Law, then we must have a double Righteousness
for our justification; but we have not a double Righteousness for our
justification, therefore the consequence is good, 1. From most of your
Concessions, that we have the righteousness of Christ, and that which you call
subordinate. [You should rather have said as Dr. Owen argues, that Christ's
righteousness is the subordinate, it being in ordine ad, in order to our
justification by a new Law.] Mr. B. and others speak more distinctly and say, a
legal and evangelical righteousness; but, in truth, it must be two legal
righteousnesses: For, 2. There Is no Law but must have a p^culiar distinct
righteousness from that of any other Law, whereby a Man under it must be
justified, and all the righteousness that serves for justification by another
Law, has nothing to do in our justification by the said Law; and therefore
there must be two distinct Righteousnesses and two distinct Justifications, as
there are two distinct Laws. Unless you say the old Law is vacated, which is a
contradiction; if you do but own, that Christ is the end of that Law for
righteousness to every one that be^ieved, and then it cannot be vacated, for a
Law vacated and a Law in force is a contradiction, and a Law fulfilled to every
jot and tittle to every believer remains in force. Therefore it remains, that
we have two righteousnesses for justification, and both legal, because all
Law-righteousness is legal; Christ's single righteousness is indeed legal in
respect of the Law, and ^vangelical in respect of sinners, it being to them the
gift of righteousness; so with us the same thing differs only respectively. 3.
There must be as distinct righteousness for justification, as there is
unrighteousness for condemnation; but each Law has its distinct
unrighteousness for condemnation.

The Minor is easily proved, that we have not two righteousnesses for
justification, for if we have, 1. Christ's righteousness is not enough for our
justification unto life, contrary to the Scripture. 2. All the Popish Doctrine
will unavoidably come in at this gate, which is wide enough for it. 3. Our own
Works, call them what you will, let them be Faith and sincere Obedience,
imperfect Holiness, etc. must come in for a share in our justification,
contrary to Tit. 3.4, 5. and an hundred places of Scripture besides, nay, for
the whole of our justification by the new Law; for the righteousness that
answers that, must be distinct from the righteousness that answers the old Law;
to enervate this Doctrine, many have wrote to very good purpose, in particular
that most worthy Divine, Mr. Traughton in his Lutherus redivivus, a Book worth
every Christian's having.

You say, p. 25. Has the Gospel Covenant no Sanction? what think you of Heb.
8.6?

R. You might have said Heb. 9.15, 16. I said not, that the Gospel Covenant
has no Sanction: it has a Sanction, as a Testament in the Death of Christ, in
which the Law is satisfied for us, and upon which the better, absolute and
clear Promises are founded; and herein was that (...) placed, the establishment
of the Promises of Life and Salvation, on the sure Conditions of Christ's
Righteousness, and not of our Performances.

You say, What will become of Dr. Owen 's Law of Justification, p. 167.

R. His Law of Justification is the Law that Christ came under, in doing and
suffering, the fulfilling God's Will for the justification of a sinner; this
was the Law that was in his heart; for the Doctor's words are, Not that he did
as a King constitute the the Law of Justification, (as you say) for it was
given and established in the first Promise, and he came to put it in execution.

You say, It Is one thing to be justified for Faith, and another to be justified
by it.

R. I say so too, if it be in the Apostle's sense, by Faith be in opposition to
by Works; but if you make Faith a Law-condition, then this by becomes for, and
it signifies just as much as being justified by Works. And thus Mr. Bulkly in
your own Quotation is against you, for he says, If we make the Commandment of
Believing to be legal, then the Promise of Life, upon the Condition of
Believing, must be legal also. And so it must needs be upon your Hypothesis,
that the Gospel is a Law. You often say, the Gospel-Law is not a Law of Works,
and that Paul says so, p. 26. What is so said either by the Apostle or you,
the Gospel is denied thereby to be a Law with Sanction or Law-Covenant, for if
there be no Works as Condition of it, there is nothing but Promise; but where is
your sincere, conditional, imperfect Obedience, if there be no Works? It Is
absurd to say the first Grace is a Condition required of us, because you grant
it absolute.

You tell us what Dr. O. says on Ps. 130 p. 230. This is the inviolable Law of
the Gospel; i. e. believing and forgiveness are inseparably conjoined, which
has nothing of your sense in it. Concerning Faith's being the Condition of a
Law with Sanction, he says nothing; he means no more but that they are
connexed by God's constitution. So there are many things connexed in the
Promise, as Faith and Forgiveness, Faith and Repentance, Faith and Love,
Justification and Sanctification and Glorification. I could quote you a hundred
places out of Dr. O. where he militates against this very Principle of yours:
See Dr. O. of Justify. p. 407. The Apostle speaks not one word of the
Exclusion of the Merit of Works, only he excludes all Works whatsoever. -- Some
think they are injuriously dealt withal, when they are charged with maintaining
Merit -- Yet those that best understand themselves and the Controversy, are
not so averse to any kind of merits, knowing that it is inseparable from Works.
-- Those among us who plead for Works in our Justification, as they use many
distinctions to explain their minds and free themselves from a co-incidence
with that of the Papists, they deny the name of Merit in the sense of the
Church of Rome, and so do the Socinians. See more, p. 408, 409. where he shows
all Works before and after Grace are excluded.

What you quote out of my honored Father's Book, I see nothing contradicts me,
if rightly understood; had not your Doctrine been contrary to his, (though I hope
I should defend the truth, according to my light and conscience, though against
my own Father) I should never have given you the least opposition; but it is not
Human Authority must turn the Scales in these Matters. You quote Men's transient
Expressions that speak of a Gospel-law and Conditions in a sense that may be
born with, when they approve themselves clear in all main Points: others
speaking in such a Dialect in Sermons and Practical Discourses; To show that
such things as God has conjoined, Man is not to sever. As for the two great
Divines, besides D. O. I mean Dr. Goodwin and Mr. Clarkson, I know them to be
expressly against your Notion of the conditionality of the Covenant, and by what
you quote out of them, it appears to be so. See Dr. Goodwin's Judgment about
Condition, Whether Faith be a Condition, Sermon XXII. p. 301. I would have this
word laid aside, I see both Parties speak faintly on it; Perkins on the
Galatians, and another. -- There is danger in the use of it, a Condition may be
pleaded. 2. In those Expressions, if a Man believes he shall be saved, import,
that he that does so, shall be saved in the event, which the Elect only are, to
whom he gives Faith. -- My Beloved, the nature of Faith is modest, it never
makes plea for it self; if it were a Condition, a Man might plead it before
God; and the making it a Condition, seems to me, to import as if there were an
universal Grace; and that it is the Condition terminateh it to this Man and not
to that. What Mr. Clerkson says, is nothing to your purpose; for he says, The
first Blessings of the Covenant are promised absolutely, and subsequent
Blessings, are in some sense Conditional. -- Not that God makes a conditional
Bargain with us, but because divine Wisdom has made a connection between these
Blessings that they shall never be separated, etc.

Lastly, I shall give an Account of the beginning and progress of this
Neonomian Error.
This Doctrine was first forged by the Pharisees of old, who did not believe
themselves justified by perfect Obedience to the moral Law, their owning the
Sacrifices and other Types (their Gospel) being a sufficient evidence that they
acknowledged themselves great Sinners, and far enough from perfect Obedience;
they only thought that Obedience that they did perform, was through the
merciful Nature of God accepted to Justification of Life, and their Sins
expiated by Sacrifices.

For not only the Scriptures give us full assurance of this to be truth, but it
were easy to show what the Opinion of the ancient and latter Jews were, in this
Matter. 1. They placed their Righteousness, not in perfect Obedience, but in
sincere. So Paul, before his Conversion, Act. 26.5.9. Chap. 23. 1. Romans 10.9.
The Jews went to establish their own Righteousness and their imperfect
Obedience, as such, in conjunction with the attoning Sacrifices for their
Justification. And R. Menahem says, Scito vitam Hominis in praeceptis; Know
that the Life of Man, in the Precepts, is according to the intention that he
has in doing them; But they say, Faith is the cause of Blessedness, and,
therefore, the cause of eternal Life. Thus the Author of Sepher Ikkarim. And
that Faith justifies as Righteousness itself; for, says the same Author, Our
Father Abraham was praised, by reason of his Faith; for it is said, Genesis 15. He
believed God, and it was accounted to him for Righteousness. And that this
Doctrine was that which Paul contendeth with the judaizing Christians about, and
the false Teachers among them, I doubt not in the least, and am very apt to
believe, that it was these Neonomians that laid that Charge upon Paul's
Doctrine; that it was a Doctrine of Licentiousness, and made so great a Cry
against it, for Antinomianism; or as being destructive to the Righteousness of
the Law and Obedience thereunto.

Philip, a Presbyter and Hearer of Hierom, on Job 42. tells of a Heretic, then
living, that held this Opinion, That the Gospel was a Law, Christop. Pelarg.
The next I find it charged upon, is Pelagius, as one of h s grand Heresies. And
from the Pelagians, says Dr. Leydecker, the Papists have taken up this
Principle. The Council of Trent, Anath. 20. Cu^se all that say the Gospel is a
Promise without condition of observing the Commands. And Anath. 21. They Curse
those that say, Christ is given for a Redeemer, and not a Lawmakers. And Anath.
26. They Curse them that say, The just ought not to expect a Reward for their
Works. Peter a Soto tells us, the Catholic Church does hold, That Christ gave
a new Law. The same says S. De Clara. It is generally h^ld by all the Jesuits.
Bellarmin in his Controv. de Justif. contends, That the Gospel, as such, is a
Law; and that it contains proper ^aws, with Threats and Promises, and requires
Obedience as the Condition of Life, and of the accomplishments of Promises,
which are so conditionated; and that Merits cannot be otherwise defended, which
the Papacy holds. Gregory de Val^ntia tells us, They reject the usual
distinction of Law and Gospel, viz. That the Law Promises are conditional, the
Gospel Promises free and absolute. Tom. 2. Controv. Disput. 7. Q 6. Le calls it
a Fiction. Mr. Fox, in Act. and Mon. Impr. 7. p. 34. vol. 1. gives this
following Account of the Papist's Opinion in this Point, They say, Moses was a
giver of the old Law, Christ of the new. Thus, imagine they, the Gospel to be
nothing else but a new Law, given by Christ, binding to the Promises the
Conditions of our doings and deservings, no otherwise than to the old Law; and
so divide they the whole Law into three parts, the Law of Nature, the Law of
Moses, and the Law of Christ, to the fulfilling whereof they attribute
Justification. And thus they lead the Consciences of Men in doubt, and induce
many Errors, bringing the People into a false opinion of Christ, as though he
were not a Remedy against the Law, but came as another Moses to give a new Law
to the World.

Dr. Barns, who suffered Martyrdom in Henry VIII.'s time, An. Dom. 1541.
vigourously opposed the Popish Bishops in this Point; as appears by his
excellent Treatise of Justification.

In defending Justification, by Faith alone, according to the true meaning of
the Apostle Paul, has these Passages.

It were but lost labor for Paul to prove that Works did help to
Justification; for that the Jews did grant, and required no m^re; but that
which they stood upon, was, that Works might not be clearly excluded. But here,
peradventure, it will be said, that Paul condemns the Works of the old Law, but
not of the new Law; Are you now satisfied in your Consciences? Think you, that
you have now assoyled Paul's Argument? Think you to be thus discharged before
God? Go boldly to the Judgment of God, with this Evasion, and doubt not but
then you shall find St. Paul stiflly and strongly against you, and your new
Works, as ever he was against the Jews and their old Works. Briefly, what Works
can you excogitate to do, which be not in the old Law, and of the old Law?
Therefore he speaks of all manner of Works; for the Law includes all Works
that ever God instituted, the highest, best and most of Perfection; what Works,
in the new Law, have you better than those of the old Law? and^. -- But grant
that there be certain Works of the new Law which be not of the old; yet have
you not, nor can prove that these shall justify; for there can be no more
goodness in Works, than were in the Works of the old Law, for they were to Gods
Honor, and the Profit of the Neighbor, and yet you grant they cannot justify.
St. Paul disput^s against them that were Christened, and had Works of the old
Law and of the new; yet concludes, that Christ alone justified. Mark his
Argument; If Righteousness comes by the Law, then is Christ dead in vain, etc.
where he proceeds to enervate this Doctrine of Neomianism.

From the Papists the Socinians took up this Doctrine, as Dr. Leidaker shows,
styling them, Our new Pelagians. They do indeed (says he) exclude Ceremonial
Works, and Works of the Jews, who oppose the Gospel, but when they may seem to
differ from the Roman Catholics in the Doctrine of Merit, they answer; Socin.
says, Paul treats concerning perfect Works of that Law, and seeing none can be
justified by them, the Law requiring perfect Obedience; therefore the Apostle
says, We are justified by faith and obedience, so far as a man is able to
perform them.
That Paul excludes Works of the Law not interrupted by Sin ( i. e. perfect
persevering Works) or merits, not those that are performed according to the
mild Law of the Gospel: And he takes notice how Dr. P. Barrow, a Divinity
Professor in England, was among the first of ours that deserted the true
Doctrine, and an assertor of this Doctrine, That the Gospel is a new Law, showing
that no Man was ever justified by a perfect observance of the Law, but by that
Observation which depends upon Mercy, and includes pardon of Sin the regenerate
do perform that Law; in his Treatise de p^aestantia legis, c. 13. This Dr.
Barrow, the Arminians, when they began to spring up, highly applauded, says
Dr. Leidaker; His Words are, Similes habent labra lactucas; He says, they
changed the very Decalogue into a Covenant of Grace, confounding it with the
Gospel, asserting a Covenant of Works; saying, That notwithstanding the giving
Christ, God might have set up again a Covenant of Works, but he would not,
because of the weakness of the Flesh: Therefore in the room of the rigid
Covenant of Works he substituted a milder Covenant, mixed with goodness and
grace, in which Faith with imperfect Obedience to the Law might be accepted for
perfect Righteousness unto Life. These Doctrins Arminians began to vent, but
Episcopius taught them openly, whom Curcellius also followed as his Master, and
more lately Dr. Limburgius; who asserts, That the Scripture no where teaches
Christ's Righteousness is imputed to us; and says, This Error (so he calls the
Doctrine of the imputation of Christ's Righteousness) arises from a false
Opinion, That Christ gave full Satisfaction to vindicative Justice for all the
Sins of the Elect, and bore their Punishment in their stead, and fulfilled the
Law for them: That the Gospel contains no Precepts, but in respect of the Elect
are mere Promises, etc. Which Doctrine of Limbergius are (says the said learned
Author) tantum non Sociniana: He shows how this Man excludes all Works from
Justification, but only the Works of the new Law. He shows how the
Remonstrants, the Dutch Arminians took up with this Doctrine; how it prevailed
in France, which after the endeavors of Meliterius and Corducus, Camero's
triplex foedus, gave the greatest occasion to, which Cocceius and his followers
opposed: And lastly shows how it has prevailed in England, in opposition to
which the Labors of Dr. Owen, in his Treatise of Justification, and of Mr.
Troughton, in his Lutherus redivivus, is highly commended by him.

From all which it does appear, That this is no new Error, but an old ones ever
since Christ's and the Apostles times, and has been a leading Principle to all
Doctrins, contrary to the free Justification of a Sinner by the Righteousness
of Christ alone, apprehended by Faith: And the foundation of the Doctrine of
Free Will, and the natural Power and Ability of fallen Man, to do good Works
that are pleasing unto God, and in some way or other, in part or in whole,
rewardable.

He that will see a full account of this Doctrine, from tho Positions of the
Jesuits, and a c^ear Refutation thereof, and all their Arguments they bring
for it, even more than you do, let him read, the learned Dr. Christopher
Pelargus, loco xii. de Evangelio, in his Jesuitismus, printed Ann. D^m. 1608.

Diverse Passages in your Reply and its Preface, wherein you lie open, I have
omitted remarking upon: 1. For brevity sake. 2. Such as concern others, I leave
to them. 3. As to all material Points, in difference, you will see my mind
elsewhere. I shall only note, how weak and absurd the Reason is, you give, for
your desiring the Testimony of so many to your Book, viz. Because the People do
often value Names more than Arguments. Q. D. The People must be lead by an
Implicit Faith, as in days past; Populus vult decipi, ergo decipiatur. Can
Protestants think this Reason is for their Honor and Safety? But I spare you;
and do assure you, my Design has not been for Contention, in contending for
what I have thought to be the Truth; but my cordial Desire is, that all may
issue in the Unity of the Spirit of Truth and Peace, and what collateral
Expressions have fallen from my Pen, from first to last, that are justly
disrelished by you, or any other that fears the Lord, ascribe it to human
Frailty, which I am liable to; and usually may be seen in Contests of this
Nature, how just soever they be. Excuse my plainness of Speech throughout, and
allow something to every Man's natural Temper and Disposition. Sir, I am
willing to be, notwithstanding all that has passed,

Your faithful Friend and Brother in the Lord, J. C.

BOOKS Printed for Henry Barnard, at the Sign of the Bible in the Poultry.
EXamen Confectionis Pacificae: Or, a friendly Examination of the Pacifick
Paper; chiefly concerning the consistency of Absolute Election of particular
Persons with the Universality of Redemption, and the Conditionality of the
Covenant of Grace: Wherein also the New Scheme is clearly declared. By Isaac
Chancy, M. A.

The old Man's Legacy to his Daughters: Wherein the hidden Mysteries of Faith
and Experience are briefly discussed and laid down, in a plain and familiar
Dialogue; in six several Conferences betwix the Author's two Daughters,
Elizabeth and Margaret. To which is added, Some Choice Discoveries of the
Author's most excellent Experiences; in two Parts. Written by N. T. deceased,
when near Ninety Years of Age, for the private Use of his Daughters aforesaid;
and now made public, at the request of many, by an Admirer of Grace and Truth.

The Banqueting House, or, a Feast of Fat Things: A Divine Poem, opening many
Sacred Scripture Mysteries, profitable for all who would attain to the Saving
Knowledge of God and of Jesus Christ. Written by Benjamin Keach, Author of War
with the Devil.

Chirurgus Marinus: Or, the Sea-Chirurgion; being Instructions to Junior
Chirurgick Practitioners, who design to serve at Sea in this Employ. In two
general Parts: The first Part contains necessary Directions, how the Surgeon
should furnish himself with Medicines, Instruments and Necessaries fit for that
Office; together with a Medicinal Catalogue, and an exemplary Invoyce. The
second Part contains the Chirurgions Practice at Sea, both Chirurgical and
Physical; which practical Part serves as well at Land as at Sea. By John Moyle,
Sen.

The third and last part of Neonomianism Unmasked, in answer to Mr. Dan.
VVilliams's first Book: Is now in the Press, and in a few Days will be
published.


